

E-text prepared by Audrey Longhurst, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE PORT OF MISSING MEN

by

MEREDITH NICHOLSON

Author of _The House of a Thousand Candles_, _The Main Chance_,
_Zelda Dameron_, etc. 1907







Then Sir Pellinore put off his armour; then a little afore midnight they
heard the trotting of an horse. Be ye still, said King Pellinore, for we
shall hear of some adventure.--Malory. To the Memory of Herman Kountze




THE SHINING ROAD

Come, sweetheart, let us ride away beyond the city's bound,
And seek what pleasant lands across the distant hills are found. There is a golden light that shines beyond the verge of dawn,
And there are happy highways leading on and always on;
So, sweetheart, let us mount and ride, with never a backward glance,
To find the pleasant shelter of the Valley of Romance. Before us, down the golden road, floats dust from charging steeds,
Where two adventurous companies clash loud in mighty deeds;
And from the tower that stands alert like some tall, beckoning pine,
E'en now, my heart, I see afar the lights of welcome shine! So loose the rein and cheer the steed and let us race away
To seek the lands that lie beyond the Borders of To-day. Draw rein and rest a moment here in this cool vale of peace;
The race half-run, the goal half-won, half won the sure release! To right and left are flowery fields, and brooks go singing down
To mock the sober folk who still are prisoned in the town. Now to the trail again, dear heart; my arm and blade are true,
And on some plain ere night descend I'll break a lance for you! O sweetheart, it is good to find the pathway shining clear! The road is broad, the hope is sure, and you are near and dear! So loose the rein and cheer the steed and let us race away
To seek the lands that lie beyond the borders of To-day. Oh, we shall hear at last, my heart, a cheering welcome cried
As o'er a clattering drawbridge through the Gate of Dreams we ride! CONTENTS


CHAPTER
     I  "Events, Events"
    II  The Claibornes, of Washington
   III  Dark Tidings
    IV  John Armitage a Prisoner
     V  A Lost Cigarette Case
    VI  Toward the Western Stars
   VII  On the Dark Deck
  VIII  "The King Is Dead; Long Live the King"
    IX  "This Is America, Mr. Armitage"
     X  John Armitage Is Shadowed
    XI  The Toss of a Napkin
   XII  A Camp in the Mountains
  XIII  The Lady of the Pergola
   XIV  An Enforced Interview
    XV  Shirley Learns a Secret
   XVI  Narrow Margins
  XVII  A Gentleman in Hiding
 XVIII  An Exchange of Messages
   XIX  Captain Claiborne on Duty
    XX  The First Ride Together
   XXI  The Comedy of a Sheepfold
  XXII  The Prisoner at the Bungalow
 XXIII  The Verge of Morning
  XXIV  The Attack in the Road
   XXV  The Port of Missing Men
  XXVI  "Who Are You, John Armitage?" XXVII  Decent Burial
XXVIII  John Armitage





CHAPTER I

"EVENTS, EVENTS"

Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion. --_Troilus and Cressida._


"The knowledge that you're alive gives me no pleasure," growled the grim
old Austrian premier. "Thank you!" laughed John Armitage, to whom he had spoken. "You have lost
none of your old amiability; but for a renowned diplomat, you are
remarkably frank. When I called on you in Paris, a year ago, I was able
to render you--I believe you admitted it--a slight service." Count Ferdinand von Stroebel bowed slightly, but did not take his eyes
from the young man who sat opposite him in his rooms at the Hotel Monte
Rosa in Geneva. On the table between them stood an open despatch box, and
about it lay a number of packets of papers which the old gentleman, with
characteristic caution, had removed to his own side of the table before
admitting his caller. He was a burly old man, with massive shoulders and
a great head thickly covered with iron-gray hair. He trusted no one, and this accounted for his presence in Geneva in
March, of the year 1903, whither he had gone to receive the report of the
secret agents whom he had lately despatched to Paris on an errand of
peculiar delicacy. The agents had failed in their mission, and Von
Stroebel was not tolerant of failure. Perhaps if he had known that within
a week the tapers would burn about his bier in Saint Stephen's Cathedral,
at Vienna, while his life and public services would be estimated in
varying degrees of admiration or execration by the newspapers of Europe,
he might not have dealt so harshly with his hard-worked spies. It was not often that the light in the old man's eyes was as gentle as
now. He had sent his secret agents away and was to return to Vienna on
the following day. The young man whom he now entertained in his
apartments received his whole attention. He picked up the card which lay
on the table and scrutinized it critically, while his eyes lighted with
sudden humor. The card was a gentleman's _carte de visite_, and bore the name John
Armitage. "I believe this is the same alias you were using when I saw you in Paris. Where did you get it?" demanded the minister. "I rather liked the sound of it, so I had the cards made," replied the
young man. "Besides, it's English, and I pass readily for an Englishman. I have quite got used to it." "Which is not particularly creditable; but it's probably just as well
so." He drew closer to the table, and his keen old eyes snapped with the
intentness of his thought. The hands he clasped on the table were those
of age, and it was pathetically evident that he folded them to hide their
slight palsy. "I hope you are quite well," said Armitage kindly. "I am not. I am anything but well. I am an old man, and I have had no
rest for twenty years." "It is the penalty of greatness. It is Austria's good fortune that you
have devoted yourself to the affairs of government. I have read--only
to-day, in the _Contemporary Review_--an admirable tribute to your
sagacity in handling the Servian affair. Your work was masterly. I
followed it from the beginning with deepest interest." The old gentleman bowed half-unconsciously, for his thoughts were far
away, as the vague stare in his small, shrewd eyes indicated. "But you are here for rest--one comes to Geneva at this season for
nothing else." "What brings you here?" asked the old man with sudden energy. "If the
papers you gave me in Paris are forgeries and you are waiting--"

"Yes; assuming that, what should I be waiting for?" "If you are waiting for events--for events! If you expect something to
happen!" Armitage laughed at the old gentleman's earnest manner, asked if he might
smoke, and lighted a cigarette. "Waiting doesn't suit me. I thought you understood that. I was not born
for the waiting list. You see, I have strong hands--and my wits are--let
us say--average!" Von Stroebel clasped his own hands together more firmly and bent toward
Armitage searchingly. "Is it true"--he turned again and glanced about--"is it positively true
that the Archduke Karl is dead?" "Yes; quite true. There is absolutely no doubt of it," said Armitage,
meeting the old man's eyes steadily. "The report that he is still living somewhere in North America is
persistent. We hear it frequently in Vienna; I have heard it since you
told me that story and gave me those papers in Paris last year." "I am aware of that," replied John Armitage; "but I told you the truth. He died in a Canadian lumber camp. We were in the north hunting--you may
recall that he was fond of that sort of thing." "Yes, I remember; there was nothing else he did so well," growled Von
Stroebel. "And the packet I gave you--"

The old man nodded.

" --that packet contained the Archduke Karl's sworn arraignment of his
wife. It is of great importance, indeed, to Francis, his worthless son,
or supposed son, who may present himself for coronation one of these
days!" "Not with Karl appearing in all parts of the world, never quite dead,
never quite alive--and his son Frederick Augustus lurking with him in the
shadows. Who knows whether they are dead?" "I am the only person on earth in a position to make that clear," said
John Armitage. "Then you should give me the documents." "No; I prefer to keep them. I assure you that I have sworn proof of the
death of the Archduke Karl, and of his son Frederick Augustus. Those
papers are in a box in the Bronx Loan and Trust Company, in New York
City." "I should have them; I _must_ have them!" thundered the old man. "In due season; but not just now. In fact, I have regretted parting with
that document I gave you in Paris. It is safer in America than in Vienna. If you please, I should like to have it again, sir." The palsy in the old man's hands had increased, and he strove to control
his agitation; but fear had never been reckoned among his weaknesses, and
he turned stormily upon Armitage. "That packet is lost, I tell you!" he blurted, as though it were
something that he had frequently explained before. "It was stolen from
under my very nose only a month ago! That's what I'm here for--my agents
are after the thief, and I came to Geneva to meet them, to find out why
they have not caught him. Do you imagine that I travel for pleasure at my
age, Mr. John Armitage?" Count von Stroebel's bluster was merely a cloak to hide his confusion--a
cloak, it may be said, to which he did not often resort; but in this case
he watched Armitage warily. He clearly expected some outburst of
indignation from the young man, and he was unfeignedly relieved when
Armitage, after opening and closing his eyes quickly, reached for a fresh
cigarette and lighted it with the deft ease of habit. "The packet has been stolen," he observed calmly; "whom do you suspect of
taking it?" The old man leaned upon the table heavily. "That amiable Francis--"

"The suggestion is not dismaying. Francis would not know an opportunity
if it offered." "But his mother--she is the devil!" blurted the old man. "Pray drop that," said Armitage in a tone that caused the old man to look
at him with a new scrutiny. "I want the paper back for the very reason
that it contains that awful indictment of her. I have been uncomfortable
ever since I gave it to you; and I came to ask you for it that I might
keep it safe in my own hands. But the document is lost,--am I to
understand that Francis has it?" "Not yet! But Rambaud has it, and Rambaud and Francis are as thick as
thieves." "I don't know Rambaud. The name is unfamiliar." "He has a dozen names--one for every capital. He even operates in
Washington, I have heard. He's a blackmailer, who aims high--a broker in
secrets, a scandal-peddler. He's a bad lot, I tell you. I've had my best
men after him, and they've just been here to report another failure. If
you have nothing better to do--" began the old man. "Yes; that packet must be recovered," answered Armitage. "If your agents
have failed at the job it may be worth my while to look for it." His quiet acceptance of the situation irritated the minister. "You entertain me, John Armitage! You speak of that packet as though it
were a pound of tea. Francis and his friends, Winkelried and Rambaud, are
not chasers of fireflies, I would have you know. If the Archduke and his
son are dead, then a few more deaths and Francis would rule the Empire." John Armitage and Count von Stroebel stared at each other in silence. "Events! Events!" muttered the old man presently, and he rested one of
his hands upon the despatch box, as though it were a symbol of authority
and power. "Events!" the young man murmured. "Events!" repeated Count von Stroebel without humor. "A couple of deaths
and there you see him, on the ground and quite ready. Karl was a genius,
therefore he could not be king. He threw away about five hundred years of
work that had been done for him by other people--and he cajoled you into
sharing his exile. You threw away your life for him! Bah! But you seem
sane enough!" The prime minister concluded with his rough burr; and Armitage laughed
outright. "Why the devil don't you go to Vienna and set yourself up like a
gentleman?" demanded the premier. "Like a gentleman?" repeated Armitage. "It is too late. I should die in
Vienna in a week. Moreover, I _am_ dead, and it is well, when one has
attained that beatific advantage, to stay dead." "Francis is a troublesome blackguard," declared the old man. "I wish to
God _he_ would form the dying habit, so that I might have a few years in
peace; but he is forever turning up in some mischief. And what can you do
about it? Can we kick him out of the army without a scandal? Don't you
suppose he could go to Budapest tomorrow and make things interesting for
us if he pleased? He's as full of treason as he can stick, I tell you." Armitage nodded and smiled. "I dare say," he said in English; and when the old statesman glared at
him he said in German: "No doubt you are speaking the truth." "Of course I speak the truth; but this is a matter for action, and not
for discussion. That packet was stolen by intention, and not by chance,
John Armitage!" There was a slight immaterial sound in the hall, and the old prime
minister slipped from German to French without changing countenance as he
continued:

"We have enough troubles in Austria without encouraging treason. If
Rambaud and his chief, Winkelried, could make a king of Francis, the
brokerage--the commission--would be something handsome; and Winkelried
and Rambaud are clever men." "I know of Winkelried. The continental press has given much space to him
of late; but Rambaud is a new name." "He is a skilled hand. He is the most daring scoundrel in Europe." Count von Stroebel poured a glass of brandy from a silver flask and
sipped it slowly. "I will show you the gentleman's pleasant countenance," said the
minister, and he threw open a leather portfolio and drew from it a small
photograph which he extended to Armitage, who glanced at it carelessly
and then with sudden interest. "Rambaud!" he exclaimed. "That's his name in Vienna. In Paris he is something else. I will furnish
you a list of his _noms de guerre_." "Thank you. I should like all the information you care to give me; but it
may amuse you to know that I have seen the gentleman before." "That is possible," remarked the old man, who never evinced surprise in
any circumstances. "I expect to see him here within a few days." Count von Stroebel held up his empty glass and studied it attentively,
while he waited for Armitage to explain why he expected to see Rambaud in
Geneva. "He is interested in a certain young woman. She reached here yesterday;
and Rambaud, alias Chauvenet, is quite likely to arrive within a day or
so." "Jules Chauvenet is the correct name. I must inform my men," said the
minister. "You wish to arrest him?" "You ought to know me better than that, Mr. John Armitage! Of course I
shall not arrest him! But I must get that packet. I can't have it
peddled all over Europe, and I can't advertise my business by having him
arrested here. If I could catch him once in Vienna I should know what to
do with him! He and Winkelried got hold of our plans in that Bulgarian
affair last year and checkmated me. He carries his wares to the best
buyers--Berlin and St. Petersburg. So there's a woman, is there? I've
found that there usually is!" "There's a very charming young American girl, to be more exact." The old man growled and eyed Armitage sharply, while Armitage studied the
photograph. "I hope you are not meditating a preposterous marriage. Go back where you
belong, make a proper marriage and wait--"

"Events!" and John Armitage laughed. "I tell you, sir, that waiting is
not my _forte_. That's what I like about America; they're up and at it
over there; the man who waits is lost." "They're a lot of swine!" rumbled Von Stroebel's heavy bass. "I still owe allegiance to the Schomburg crown, so don't imagine you are
hitting me. But the swine are industrious and energetic. Who knows but
that John Armitage might become famous among them--in politics, in
finance! But for the deplorable accident of foreign birth he might become
president of the United States. As it is, there are thousands of other
offices worth getting--why not?" "I tell you not to be a fool. You are young and--fairly clever--"

Armitage laughed at the reluctance of the count's praise. "Thank you, with all my heart!" "Go back where you belong and you will have no regrets. Something may
happen--who can tell? Events--events--if a man will watch and wait and
study events--"

"Bless me! They organize clubs in every American village for the study of
events," laughed Armitage; then he changed his tone. "To be sure, the
Bourbons have studied events these many years--a pretty spectacle, too." "Carrion! Carrion!" almost screamed the old man, half-rising in his seat. "Don't mention those scavengers to me! Bah! The very thought of them
makes me sick. But"--he gulped down more of the brandy--"where and how do
you live?" "Where? I own a cattle ranch in Montana and since the Archduke's death I
have lived there. He carried about fifty thousand pounds to America with
him. He took care that I should get what was left when he died--and, I am
almost afraid to tell you that I have actually augmented my inheritance! Just before I left I bought a place in Virginia to be near Washington
when I got tired of the ranch." "Washington!" snorted the count. "In due course it will be the storm
center of the world." "You read the wrong American newspapers," laughed Armitage. They were silent for a moment, in which each was busy with his own
thoughts; then the count remarked, in as amiable a tone as he ever used:

"Your French is first rate. Do you speak English as well?" "As readily as German, I think. You may recall that I had an English
tutor, and maybe I did not tell you in that interview at Paris that I had
spent a year at Harvard University." "What the devil did you do that for?" growled Von Stroebel. "From curiosity, or ambition, as you like. I was in Cambridge at the law
school for a year before the Archduke died. That was three years ago. I
am twenty-eight, as you may remember. I am detaining you; I have no wish
to rake over the past; but I am sorry--I am very sorry we can't meet on
some common ground." "I ask you to abandon this democratic nonsense and come back and make a
man of yourself. You might go far--very far; but this democracy has hold
of you like a disease." "What you ask is impossible. It is just as impossible now as it was when
we discussed it in Paris last year. To sit down in Vienna and learn how
to keep that leaning tower of an Empire from tumbling down like a stack
of bricks--it does not appeal to me. You have spent a laborious life in
defending a silly medieval tradition of government. You are using all the
apparatus of the modern world to perpetuate an ideal that is as old and
dead as the Rameses dynasty. Every time you use the telegraph to send
orders in an emperor's name you commit an anachronism." The count frowned and growled. "Don't talk to me like that. It is not amusing." "No; it is not funny. To see men like you fetching and carrying for dull
kings, who would drop through the gallows or go to planting turnips
without your brains--it does not appeal to my sense of humor or to my
imagination." "You put it coarsely," remarked the old man grimly. "I shall perhaps have
a statue when I am gone." "Quite likely; and mobs will rendezvous in its shadow to march upon the
royal palaces. If I were coming back to Europe I should go in for
something more interesting than furnishing brains for sickly kings." "I dare say! Very likely you would persuade them to proclaim democracy
and brotherhood everywhere." "On the other hand, I should become king myself." "Don't be a fool, Mr. John Armitage. Much as you have grieved me, I
should hate to see you in a madhouse." "My faculties, poor as they are, were never clearer. I repeat that if I
were going to furnish the brains for an empire I should ride in the state
carriage myself, and not be merely the driver on the box, who keeps the
middle of the road and looks out for sharp corners. Here is a plan ready
to my hand. Let me find that lost document, appear in Vienna and announce
myself Frederick Augustus, the son of the Archduke Karl! I knew both men
intimately. You may remember that Frederick and I were born in the same
month. I, too, am Frederick Augustus! We passed commonly in America as
brothers. Many of the personal effects of Karl and Augustus are in my
keeping--by the Archduke's own wish. You have spent your life studying
human nature, and you know as well as I do that half the world would
believe my story if I said I was the Emperor's nephew. In the uneasy and
unstable condition of your absurd empire I should be hailed as a
diversion, and then--events, events!" Count von Stroebel listened with narrowing eyes, and his lips moved in an
effort to find words with which to break in upon this impious
declaration. When Armitage ceased speaking the old man sank back and
glared at him. "Karl did his work well. You are quite mad. You will do well to go back
to America before the police discover you." Armitage rose and his manner changed abruptly. "I do not mean to trouble or annoy you. Please pardon me! Let us be
friends, if we can be nothing more." "It is too late. The chasm is too deep." The old minister sighed deeply. His fingers touched the despatch box as
though by habit. It represented power, majesty and the iron game of
government. The young man watched him eagerly. The heavy, tremulous hands of Count von Stroebel passed back and forth
over the box caressingly. Suddenly he bent forward and spoke with a new
and gentler tone and manner. "I have given my life, my whole life, as you have said, to one
service--to uphold one idea. You have spoken of that work with contempt. History, I believe, will reckon it justly." "Your place is secure--no one can gainsay that," broke in Armitage. "If you would do something for me--for me--do something for Austria, do
something for my country and yours! You have wits; I dare say you have
courage. I don't care what that service may be; I don't care where or how
you perform it. I am not so near gone as you may think. I know well
enough that they are waiting for me to die; but I am in no hurry to
afford my enemies that pleasure. But stop this babble of yours about
democracy. _Do something for Austria_--for the Empire that I have held
here under my hand these difficult years--then take your name again--and
you will find that kings can be as just and wise as mobs." "For the Empire--something for the Empire?" murmured the young man,
wondering. Count Ferdinand von Stroebel rose. "You will accept the commission--I am quite sure you will accept. I leave
on an early train, and I shall not see you again." As he took Armitage's
hand he scrutinized him once more with particular care; there was a
lingering caress in his touch as he detained the young man for an
instant; then he sighed heavily. "Good night; good-by!" he said abruptly, and waved his caller toward the
door. CHAPTER II

THE CLAIBORNES, OF WASHINGTON

--the Englishman who is not an Englishman and therefore doubly
incomprehensible.--_The Naulahka_. The girl with the white-plumed hat started and flushed slightly, and her
brother glanced over his shoulder toward the restaurant door to see what
had attracted her attention. "'Tis he, the unknown, Dick." "I must say I like his persistence!" exclaimed the young fellow, turning
again to the table. "In America I should call him out and punch his head,
but over here--"

"Over here you have better manners," replied the girl, laughing. "But why
trouble yourself? He doesn't even look at us. We are of no importance to
him whatever. We probably speak a different language." "But he travels by the same trains; he stops at the same inns; he sits
near us at the theater--he even affects the same pictures in the same
galleries! It's growing a trifle monotonous; it's really insufferable. I
think I shall have to try my stick on him." "You flatter yourself, Richard," mocked the girl. "He's fully your height
and a trifle broader across the shoulders. The lines about his mouth are
almost--yes, I should say, quite as firm as yours, though he is a younger
man. His eyes are nice blue ones, and they are very steady. His hair
is"--she paused to reflect and tilted her head slightly, her eyes
wandering for an instant to the subject of her comment--"light brown, I
should call it. And he is beardless, as all self-respecting men should
be. I'm sure that he is an exemplary person--kind to his sisters and
aunts, very willing to sacrifice himself for others and light the candles
on his nephews' and nieces' Christmas trees." She rested her cheek against her lightly-clasped hands and sighed deeply
to provoke a continuation of her brother's growling disdain. The young gentleman to whom she had referred had seated himself at a
table not far distant, given an order with some particularity, and
settled himself to the reading of a newspaper which he had drawn from the
pocket of his blue serge coat. He was at once absorbed, and the presence
of the Claibornes gave him apparently not the slightest concern. "He has a sense of humor," the girl resumed. "I saw him yesterday--"

"You're always seeing him: you ought to be ashamed of yourself." "Don't interrupt me, please. As I was saying, I saw him laughing over the
_Fliegende Blaetter_." "But that's no sign he has a sense of humor. It rather proves that he
hasn't. I'm disappointed in you, Shirley. To think that my own sister
should be able to tell the color of a wandering blackguard's eyes!" He struck a match viciously, and his sister laughed. "I might add to his portrait. That blue and white scarf is tied
beautifully; and his profile would be splendid in a medallion. I believe
from his nose he may be English, after all," she added with a dreamy air
assumed to add to her brother's impatience. "Which doesn't help the matter materially, that I can see!" exclaimed the
young man. "With a full beard he'd probably look like a Sicilian bandit. If I thought he was really pursuing you in this darkly mysterious way I
should certainly give him a piece of my American mind. You might suppose
that a girl would be safe traveling with her brother." "It isn't your fault, Dick," laughed the girl. "You know our parents dear
were with us when we first began to notice him--that was in Rome. And now
that we are alone he continues to follow our trail just the same. It's
really diverting; and if you were a good brother you'd find out all about
him, and we might even do stunts together--the three of us, with you as
the watchful chaperon. You forget how I have worked for you, Dick. I
took great chances in forcing an acquaintance with those frosty English
people at Florence just because you were crazy about the scrawny blonde
who wore the frightful hats. I wash my hands of you hereafter. Your taste
in girls is horrible." "Your mind has been affected by reading these fake-kingdom romances,
where a ridiculous prince gives up home and mother and his country to
marry the usual beautiful American girl who travels about having silly
adventures. I belong to the Know-nothing Party--America for Americans and
only white men on guard!" "Yes, Richard! Your sentiments are worthy, but they'd have more weight if
I hadn't seen you staring your eyes out every time we came within a mile
of a penny princess. I haven't forgotten your disgraceful conduct in
collecting photographs of that homely daughter of a certain English duke. We'll call the incident closed, little brother." "Our friend Chauvenet, even," continued Captain Claiborne, "is less
persistent--less gloomily present on the horizon. We haven't seen him for
a week or two. But he expects to visit Washington this spring. His
waistcoats are magnificent. The governor shies every time the fellow
unbuttons his coat." "Mr. Chauvenet is an accomplished man of the world," declared Shirley
with an insincere sparkle in her eyes. "He lives by his wits--and lives well." Claiborne dismissed Chauvenet and turned again toward the strange young
man, who was still deep in his newspaper. "He's reading the _Neue Freie Presse_," remarked Dick, "by which token I
argue that he's some sort of a Dutchman. He's probably a traveling agent
for a Vienna glass-factory, or a drummer for a cheap wine-house, or the
agent for a Munich brewery. That would account for his travels. We simply
fall in with his commercial itinerary." "You seem to imply, brother, that my charms are not in themselves
sufficient. But a commercial traveler hardly commands that fine repose,
that distinction--that air of having been places and seen things and
known people--"

"Tush! I have seen American book agents who had all that--even the air of
having been places! Your instincts ought to serve you better, Shirley. It's well that we go on to-morrow. I shall warn mother and the governor
that you need watching." Shirley Claiborne's eyes rested again upon the calm reader of the _Neue
Freie Presse_. The waiter was now placing certain dishes upon the table
without, apparently, interesting the young gentleman in the least. Then
the unknown dropped his newspaper, and buttered a roll reflectively. His
gaze swept the room for the first time, passing over the heads of Miss
Claiborne and her brother unseeingly--with, perhaps, too studied an air
of indifference. "He has known real sorrow," persisted Shirley, her elbows on the table,
her fingers interlocked, her chin resting idly upon them. "He's traveling
in an effort to forget a blighting grief," the girl continued with mock
sympathy. "Then let us leave him in peace! We can't decently linger in the presence
of his sacred sorrow." Captain Richard Claiborne and his sister Shirley had stopped at Geneva to
spend a week with a younger brother, who was in school there, and were to
join their father and mother at Liverpool and sail for home at once. The
Claibornes were permanent residents of Washington, where Hilton
Claiborne, a former ambassador to two of the greatest European courts,
was counsel for several of the embassies and a recognized authority in
international law. He had been to Rome to report to the Italian
government the result of his efforts to collect damages from the United
States for the slaughter of Italian laborers in a railroad strike, and
had proceeded thence to England on other professional business. Dick Claiborne had been ill, and was abroad on leave in an effort to
shake off the lingering effects of typhoid fever contracted in the
Philippines. He was under orders to report for duty at Fort Myer on the
first of April, and it was now late March. He and his sister had spent
the morning at their brother's school and were enjoying a late _dejeuner_
at the Monte Rosa. There existed between them a pleasant comradeship that
was in no wise affected by divergent tastes and temperaments. Dick had
just attained his captaincy, and was the youngest man of his rank in the
service. He did not know an orchid from a hollyhock, but no man in the
army was a better judge of a cavalry horse, and if a Wagner recital bored
him to death his spirit rose, nevertheless, to the bugle, and he drilled
his troop until he could play with it and snap it about him like a whip. Shirley Claiborne had been out of college a year, and afforded a pleasant
refutation of the dull theory that advanced education destroys a girl's
charm, or buoyancy, or whatever it is that is so greatly admired in young
womanhood. She gave forth the impression of vitality and strength. She
was beautifully fair, with a high color that accentuated her
youthfulness. Her brown hair, caught up from her brow in the fashion of
the early years of the century, flashed gold in sunlight. Much of Shirley's girlhood had been spent in the Virginia hills, where
Judge Claiborne had long maintained a refuge from the heat of Washington. From childhood she had read the calendar of spring as it is written upon
the landscape itself. Her fingers found by instinct the first arbutus;
she knew where white violets shone first upon the rough breast of the
hillsides; and particular patches of rhododendron had for her the
intimate interest of private gardens. Undoubtedly there are deities fully consecrated to the important business
of naming girls, so happily is that task accomplished. Gladys is a child
of the spirit of mischief. Josephine wears a sweet gravity, and Mary,
too, discourses of serious matters. Nora, in some incarnation, has seen
fairies scampering over moor and hill and the remembrance of them teases
her memory. Katherine is not so faithless as her ways might lead you to
believe. Laura without dark eyes would be impossible, and her predestined
Petrarch would never deliver his sonnets. Helen may be seen only against
a background of Trojan wall. Gertrude must be tall and fair and ready
with ballads in the winter twilight. Julia's reserve and discretion
commend her to you; but she has a heart of laughter. Anne is to be found
in the rose garden with clipping-shears and a basket. Hilda is a capable
person; there is no ignoring her militant character; the battles of Saxon
kings ring still in her blood. Marjorie has scribbled verses in secret,
and Celia is the quietest auditor at the symphony. And you may have
observed that there is no button on Elizabeth's foil; you do well not to
clash wits with her. Do you say that these ascriptions are not square
with your experience? Then verily there must have been a sad mixing
of infant candidates for the font in your parish. Shirley, in such case,
will mean nothing to you. It is a waste of time to tell you that the name
may become audible without being uttered; you can not be made to
understand that the _r_ and _l_ slip into each other as ripples glide
over pebbles in a brook. And from the name to the girl--may you be
forever denied a glimpse of Shirley Claiborne's pretty head, her brown
hair and dream-haunted eyes, if you do not first murmur the name with
honest liking. As the Claibornes lingered at their table a short stout man espied them
from the door and advanced beamingly. "Ah, my dear Shirley, and Dick! Can it be possible! I only heard by
the merest chance that you were here. But Switzerland is the real
meeting-place of the world." The young Americans greeted the new-comer cordially. A waiter placed a
chair for him, and took his hat. Arthur Singleton was an American, though
he had lived abroad so long as to have lost his identity with any
particular city or state of his native land. He had been an attache of
the American embassy at London for many years. Administrations changed
and ambassadors came and went, but Singleton was never molested. It was
said that he kept his position on the score of his wide acquaintance;
he knew every one, and he was a great peddler of gossip, particularly
about people in high station. The children of Hilton Claiborne were not to be overlooked. He would
impress himself upon them, as was his way; for he was sincerely social by
instinct, and would go far to do a kindness for people he really liked. "Ah me! You have arrived opportunely, Miss Claiborne. There's mystery in
the air--the great Stroebel is here--under this very roof and in a
dreadfully bad humor. He is a dangerous man--a very dangerous man, but
failing fast. Poor Austria! Count Ferdinand von Stroebel can have no
successor--he's only a sort of holdover from the nineteenth century, and
with him and his Emperor out of the way--what? For my part I see only
dark days ahead;" and he concluded with a little sigh that implied
crumbling thrones and falling dynasties. "We met him in Vienna," said Shirley Claiborne, "when father was there
before the Ecuador Claims Commission. He struck me as being a delightful
old grizzly bear." "He will have his place in history; he is a statesman of the old blood
and iron school; he is the peer of Bismarck, and some things he has done. He holds more secrets than any other man in Europe--and you may be quite
sure that they will die with him. He will leave no memoirs to be poked
over by his enemies--no post-mortem confidences from him!" The reader of the _Neue Freie Presse_, preparing to leave his table, tore
from the newspaper an article that seemed to have attracted him, placed
it in his card-case, and walked toward the door. The eyes of Arthur
Singleton lighted in recognition, and the attache, muttering an apology
to the Claibornes, addressed the young gentleman cordially. "Why, Armitage, of all men!" and he rose, still facing the Claibornes,
with an air of embracing the young Americans in his greetings. He never
liked to lose an auditor; and he would, in no circumstances, miss a
chance to display the wide circumference of his acquaintance. "Shirley--Miss Claiborne--allow me to present Mr. Armitage." The young
army officer and Armitage then shook hands, and the three men stood for a
moment, detained, it seemed, by the old attache, who had no engagement
for the next hour or two and resented the idea of being left alone. "One always meets Armitage!" declared Singleton. "He knows our America as
well as we do--and very well indeed--for an Englishman." Armitage bowed gravely. "You make it necessary again for me to disavow any allegiance to the
powers that rule Great Britain. I'm really a fair sort of American--I
have sometimes told New York people all about--Colorado--Montana--New
Mexico!" His voice and manner were those of a gentleman. His color, as Shirley
Claiborne now observed, was that of an outdoors man; she was familiar
with it in soldiers and sailors, and knew that it testified to a vigorous
and wholesome life. "Of course you're not English!" exclaimed Singleton, annoyed as he
remembered, or thought he did, that Armitage had on some other occasion
made the same protest. "I'm really getting sensitive about it," said Armitage, more to the
Claibornes than to Singleton. "But must we all be from somewhere? Is it
so melancholy a plight to be a man without a country?" The mockery in his tone was belied by the good humor in his face; his
eyes caught Shirley's passingly, and she smiled at him--it seemed a
natural, a perfectly inevitable thing to do. She liked the kind tolerance
with which he suffered the babble of Arthur Singleton, whom some one had
called an international bore. The young man's dignity was only an
expression of self-respect; his appreciation of the exact proprieties
resulting from this casual introduction to herself and her brother was
perfect. He was already withdrawing. A waiter had followed him with his
discarded newspaper--and Armitage took it and idly dropped it on a chair. "Have you heard the news, Armitage? The Austrian sphinx is here--in this
very house!" whispered Singleton impressively. "Yes; to be sure, Count von Stroebel is here, but he will probably not
remain long. The Alps will soon be safe again. I am glad to have met
you." He bowed to the Claibornes inclusively, nodded in response to
Singleton's promise to look him up later, and left them. When Shirley and her brother reached their common sitting-room Dick
Claiborne laughingly held up the copy of the _Neue Freie Presse_ which
Armitage had cast aside at their table. "Now we shall know!" he declared, unfolding the newspaper. "Know what, Dick?" "At least what our friend without a country is so interested in." He opened the paper, from which half a column had been torn, noted the
date, rang the bell, and ordered a copy of the same issue. When it was
brought he opened it, found the place, laughed loudly, and passed the
sheet over to his sister. "Oh, Shirley, Shirley! This is almost too much!" he cried, watching her
as her eyes swept the article. She turned away to escape his noise, and
after a glance threw down the paper in disgust. The article dealt in
detail with Austro-Hungarian finances, and fairly bristled with figures
and sage conclusions based upon them. "Isn't that the worst!" exclaimed Shirley, smiling ruefully. "He's certainly a romantic figure ready to your hand. Probably a
bank-clerk who makes European finance his recreation." "He isn't an Englishman, at any rate. He repudiated the idea with scorn." "Well, your Mr. Armitage didn't seem so awfully excited at meeting
Singleton; but he seemed rather satisfied with your appearance, to put it
mildly. I wonder if he had arranged with Singleton to pass by in that
purely incidental way, just for the privilege of making your
acquaintance!" "Don't be foolish, Dick. It's unbecoming an officer and a gentleman. But
if you should see Mr. Singleton again--"

"Yes--not if I see him _first_!" ejaculated Claiborne. "Well, you might ask him who Mr. Armitage is. It would be amusing--and
satisfying--to know." Later in the day the old attache fell upon Claiborne in the smoking-room
and stopped to discuss a report that a change was impending in the
American State Department. Changes at Washington did not trouble
Singleton, who was sure of his tenure. He said as much; and after some
further talk, Claiborne remarked:

"Your friend Armitage seems a good sort." "Oh, yes; a capital talker, and thoroughly well posted in affairs." "Yes, he seemed interesting. Do you happen to know where he lives--when
he's at home?" "Lord bless you, boy, I don't know anything about Armitage!" spluttered
Singleton, with the emphasis so thrown as to imply that of course in any
other branch of human knowledge he would be found abundantly qualified to
answer questions. "But you introduced us to him--my sister and me. I assumed--"

"My dear Claiborne, I'm always introducing people! It's my business to
introduce people. Armitage is all right. He's always around everywhere. I've dined with him in Paris, and I've rarely seen a man order a better
dinner." CHAPTER III

DARK  TIDINGS

The news I bring is heavy in my tongue.--Shakespeare. The second day thereafter Shirley Claiborne went into a jeweler's on the
Grand Quai to purchase a trinket that had caught her eye, while she
waited for Dick, who had gone off in their carriage to the post-office to
send some telegrams. It was a small shop, and the time early afternoon,
when few people were about. A man who had preceded her was looking at
watches, and seemed deeply absorbed in this occupation. She heard his
inquiries as to quality and price, and knew that it was Armitage's voice
before she recognized his tall figure. She made her purchase quickly, and
was about to leave the shop, when he turned toward her and she bowed. "Good afternoon, Miss Claiborne. These are very tempting bazaars, aren't
they? If the abominable tariff laws of America did not give us pause--"

He bent above her, hat in hand, smiling. He had concluded the purchase of
a watch, which the shopkeeper was now wrapping in a box. "I have just purchased a little remembrance for my ranch foreman out in
Montana, and before I can place it in his hands it must be examined and
appraised and all the pleasure of the gift destroyed by the custom
officers in New York. I hope you are a good smuggler, Miss Claiborne." "I'd like to be. Women are supposed to have a knack at the business; but
my father is so patriotic that he makes me declare everything." "Patriotism will carry one far; but I object both to being taxed and to
the alternative of corrupting the gentlemen who lie in wait at the
receipt of customs." "Of course the answer is that Americans should buy at home," replied
Shirley. She received her change, and Armitage placed his small package
in his pocket. "My brother expected to meet me here; he ran off with our carriage,"
Shirley explained. "These last errands are always trying--there are innumerable things one
would like to come back for from mid-ocean, tariff or no tariff." "There's the wireless," said Shirley. "In time we shall be able to commit
our afterthoughts to it. But lost views can hardly be managed that way. After I get home I shall think of scores of things I should like to see
again--that photographs don't give." "Such as--?" "Oh--the way the Pope looks when he gives his blessing at St. Peter's;
and the feeling you have when you stand by Napoleon's tomb--the awfulness
of what he did and was--and being here in Switzerland, where I always
feel somehow the pressure of all the past of Europe about me. Now,"--and
she laughed lightly,--"I have made a most serious confession." "It is a new idea--that of surveying the ages from these mountains. They
must be very wise after all these years, and they have certainly seen men
and nations do many evil and wretched things. But the history of the
world is all one long romance--a tremendous story." "That is what makes me sorry to go home," said Shirley meditatively. "We
are so new--still in the making, and absurdly raw. When we have a war, it
is just politics, with scandals about what the soldiers have to eat, and
that sort of thing; and there's a fuss about pensions, and the heroic
side of it is lost." "But it is easy to overestimate the weight of history and tradition. The
glory of dead Caesar doesn't do the peasant any good. When you see
Italian laborers at work in America digging ditches or laying railroad
ties, or find Norwegian farmers driving their plows into the new hard
soil of the Dakotas, you don't think of their past as much as of their
future--the future of the whole human race." Armitage had been the subject of so much jesting between Dick and herself
that it seemed strange to be talking to him. His face brightened
pleasantly when he spoke; his eyes were grayer than she had mockingly
described them for her brother's benefit the day before. His manner was
gravely courteous, and she did not at all believe that he had followed
her about. Her ideals of men were colored by the American prejudice in favor of
those who aim high and venture much. In her childhood she had read Malory
and Froissart with a boy's delight. She possessed, too, that poetic sense
of the charm of "the spirit of place" that is the natural accompaniment
of the imaginative temperament. The cry of bugles sometimes brought tears
to her eyes; her breath came quickly when she sat--as she often did--in
the Fort Myer drill hall at Washington and watched the alert cavalrymen
dashing toward the spectators' gallery in the mimic charge. The work that
brave men do she admired above anything else in the world. As a child in
Washington she had looked wonderingly upon the statues of heroes and the
frequent military pageants of the capital; and she had wept at the solemn
pomp of military funerals. Once on a battleship she had thrilled at the
salutes of a mighty fleet in the Hudson below the tomb of Grant; and soon
thereafter had felt awe possess her as she gazed upon the white marble
effigy of Lee in the chapel at Lexington; for the contemplation of heroes
was dear to her, and she was proud to believe that her father, a veteran
of the Civil War, and her soldier brother were a tie between herself and
the old heroic times. Armitage was aware that a jeweler's shop was hardly the place for
extended conversation with a young woman whom he scarcely knew, but he
lingered in the joy of hearing this American girl's voice, and what she
said interested him immensely. He had seen her first in Paris a few
months before at an exhibition of battle paintings. He had come upon her
standing quite alone before _High Tide at Gettysburg_, the picture of the
year; and he had noted the quick mounting of color to her cheeks as the
splendid movement of the painting--its ardor and fire--took hold of her. He saw her again in Florence; and it was from there that he had
deliberately followed the Claibornes. His own plans were now quite unsettled by his interview with Von
Stroebel. He fully expected Chauvenet in Geneva; the man had apparently
been on cordial terms with the Claibornes; and as he had seemed to be
master of his own time, it was wholly possible that he would appear
before the Claibornes left Geneva. It was now the second day after Von
Stroebel's departure, and Armitage began to feel uneasy. He stood with Shirley quite near the shop door, watching for Captain
Claiborne to come back with the carriage. "But America--isn't America the most marvelous product of romance in the
world,--its discovery,--the successive conflicts that led up to the
realization of democracy? Consider the worthless idlers of the Middle
Ages going about banging one another's armor with battle-axes. Let us
have peace, said the tired warrior." "He could afford to say it; he was the victor," said Shirley. "Ah! there is Captain Claiborne. I am indebted to you, Miss Claiborne,
for many pleasant suggestions." The carriage was at the door, and Dick Claiborne came up to them at once
and bowed to Armitage. "There is great news: Count Ferdinand von Stroebel was murdered in his
railway carriage between here and Vienna; they found him dead at
Innsbruck this morning." "Is it possible! Are you quite sure he was murdered?" It was Armitage who asked the question. He spoke in a tone quite
matter-of-fact and colorless, so that Shirley looked at him in surprise;
but she saw that he was very grave; and then instantly some sudden
feeling flashed in his eyes. "There is no doubt of it. It was an atrocious crime; the count was an old
man and feeble when we saw him the other day. He wasn't fair game for an
assassin," said Claiborne. "No; he deserved a better fate," remarked Armitage. "He was a grand old man," said Shirley, as they left the shop and walked
toward the carriage. "Father admired him greatly; and he was very kind to
us in Vienna. It is terrible to think of his being murdered." "Yes; he was a wise and useful man," observed Armitage, still grave. "He
was one of the great men of his time." His tone was not that of one who discusses casually a bit of news of the
hour, and Captain Claiborne paused a moment at the carriage door, curious
as to what Armitage might say further. "And now we shall see--" began the young American. "We shall see Johann Wilhelm die of old age within a few years at most;
and then Charles Louis, his son, will be the Emperor-king in his place;
and if he should go hence without heirs, his cousin Francis would rule in
the house of his fathers; and Francis is corrupt and worthless, and quite
necessary to the plans of destiny for the divine order of kings." John Armitage stood beside the carriage quite erect, his hat and stick
and gloves in his right hand, his left thrust lightly into the side
pocket of his coat. "A queer devil," observed Claiborne, as they drove away. "A solemn
customer, and not cheerful enough to make a good drummer. By what
singular chance did he find you in that shop?" "I found _him_, dearest brother, if I must make the humiliating
disclosure." "I shouldn't have believed it! I hardly thought you would carry it so
far." "And while he may be a salesman of imitation cut-glass, he has expensive
tastes." "Lord help us, he hasn't been buying you a watch?" "No; he was lavishing himself on a watch for the foreman of his ranch in
Montana." "Humph! you're chaffing." "Not in the least. He paid--I couldn't help being a witness to the
transaction--he actually paid five hundred francs for a watch to give to
the foreman of his ranch--_his_ ranch, mind you, in Montana, U.S.A. He spoke of it incidentally, as though he were always buying watches for
cowboys. Now where does that leave us?" "I'm afraid it rather does for my theory. I'll look him up when I get
home. Montana isn't a good hiding-place any more. But it was odd the way
he acted about old Stroebel's death. You don't suppose he knew him,
do you?" "It's possible. Poor Count von Stroebel! Many hearts are lighter, now
that he's done for." "Yes; and there will be something doing in Austria, now that he's out of
the way." Four days passed, in which they devoted themselves to their young
brother. The papers were filled with accounts of Count von Stroebel's
death and speculations as to its effect on the future of Austria and the
peace of Europe. The Claibornes saw nothing of Armitage. Dick asked for
him in the hotel, and found that he had gone, but would return in a few
days. It was on the morning of the fourth day that Armitage appeared suddenly
at the hotel as Dick and his sister waited for a carriage to carry them
to their train. He had just returned, and they met by the narrowest
margin. He walked with them to the door of the Monte Rosa. "We are running for the _King Edward_, and hope for a day in London
before we sail. Perhaps we shall see you one of these days in America,"
said Claiborne, with some malice, it must be confessed, for his sister's
benefit. "That is possible; I am very fond of Washington," responded Armitage
carelessly. "Of course you will look us up," persisted Dick. "I shall be at Fort Myer
for a while--and it will always be a pleasure--"

Claiborne turned for a last word with the porter about their baggage, and
Armitage stood talking to Shirley, who had already entered the carriage. "Oh, is there any news of Count von Stroebel's assassin?" she asked,
noting the newspaper that Armitage held in his hand. "Nothing. It's a very mysterious and puzzling affair." "It's horrible to think such a thing possible--he was a wonderful old
man. But very likely they will find the murderer." "Yes; undoubtedly." Then, seeing her brother beating his hands together impatiently behind
Armitage's back--a back whose ample shoulders were splendidly silhouetted
in the carriage door--Shirley smiled in her joy of the situation, and
would have prolonged it for her brother's benefit even to the point of
missing the train, if the matter had been left wholly in her hands. It
amused her to keep the conversation pitched in the most impersonal key. "The secret police will scour Europe in pursuit of the assassin," she
observed. "Yes," replied Armitage gravely. He thought her brown traveling gown, with hat and gloves to match,
exceedingly becoming, and he liked the full, deep tones of her voice,
and the changing light of her eyes; and a certain dimple in her left
cheek--he had assured himself that it had no counterpart on the
right--made the fate of principalities and powers seem, at the moment, an
idle thing. "The truth will be known before we sail, no doubt," said Shirley. "The
assassin may be here in Geneva by this time." "That is quite likely," said John Armitage, with unbroken gravity. "In
fact, I rather expect him here, or I should be leaving to-day myself." He bowed and made way for the vexed and chafing Claiborne, who gave his
hand to Armitage hastily and jumped into the carriage. "Your imitation cut-glass drummer has nearly caused us to miss our train. Thank the Lord, we've seen the last of that fellow." Shirley said nothing, but gazed out of the window with a wondering look
in her eyes. And on the way to Liverpool she thought often of Armitage's
last words. "I rather expect him here, or I should be leaving to-day
myself," he had said. She was not sure whether, if it had not been for those words, she would
have thought of him again at all. She remembered him as he stood framed
in the carriage door--his gravity, his fine ease, the impression he gave
of great physical strength, and of resources of character and courage. And so Shirley Claiborne left Geneva, not knowing the curious web that
fate had woven for her, nor how those last words spoken by Armitage at
the carriage door were to link her to strange adventures at the very
threshold of her American home. CHAPTER IV

JOHN ARMITAGE A PRISONER

All things are bright in the track of the sun,
  All things are fair I see;
And the light in a golden tide has run
  Down out of the sky to me. And the world turns round and round and round,
  And my thought sinks into the sea;
The sea of peace and of joy profound
  Whose tide is mystery. --S.W. Duffield. The man whom John Armitage expected arrived at the Hotel Monte Rosa a few
hours after the Claibornes' departure. While he waited, Mr. Armitage employed his time to advantage. He
carefully scrutinized his wardrobe, and after a process of elimination
and substitution he packed his raiment in two trunks and was ready to
leave the inn at ten minutes' notice. Between trains, when not engaged in
watching the incoming travelers, he smoked a pipe over various packets of
papers and letters, and these he burned with considerable care. All the
French and German newspaper accounts of the murder of Count von Stroebel
he read carefully; and even more particularly he studied the condition of
affairs in Vienna consequent upon the great statesman's death. Secret
agents from Vienna and detectives from Paris had visited Geneva in their
study of this astounding crime, and had made much fuss and asked many
questions; but Mr. John Armitage paid no heed to them. He had held the
last conversation of length that any one had enjoyed with Count Ferdinand
von Stroebel, but the fact of this interview was known to no one, unless
to one or two hotel servants, and these held a very high opinion of Mr.
Armitage's character, based on his generosity in the matter of gold coin;
and there could, of course, be no possible relationship between so
shocking a tragedy and a chance acquaintance between two travelers. Mr.
Armitage knew nothing that he cared to impart to detectives, and a great
deal that he had no intention of imparting to any one. He accumulated a
remarkable assortment of time-tables and advertisements of transatlantic
sailings against sudden need, and even engaged passage on three steamers
sailing from English and French ports within the week. He expected that the person for whom he waited would go direct to the
Hotel Monte Rosa for the reason that Shirley Claiborne had been there;
and Armitage was not mistaken. When this person learned that the
Claibornes had left, he would doubtless hurry after them. This is the
conclusion that was reached by Mr. Armitage, who, at times, was
singularly happy in his speculations as to the mental processes of other
people. Sometimes, however, he made mistakes, as will appear. The gentleman for whom John Armitage had been waiting arrived alone, and
was received as a distinguished guest by the landlord. Monsieur Chauvenet inquired for his friends the Claibornes, and was
clearly annoyed to find that they had gone; and no sooner had this
intelligence been conveyed to him than he, too, studied time-tables and
consulted steamer advertisements. Mr. John Armitage in various discreet
ways was observant of Monsieur Chauvenet's activities, and bookings at
steamship offices interested him so greatly that he reserved passage on
two additional steamers and ordered the straps buckled about his trunks,
for it had occurred to him that he might find it necessary to leave
Geneva in a hurry. It was not likely that Monsieur Chauvenet, being now under his eyes,
would escape him; and John Armitage, making a leisurely dinner, learned
from his waiter that Monsieur Chauvenet, being worn from his travels, was
dining alone in his rooms. At about eight o'clock, as Armitage turned the pages of _Figaro_ in the
smoking-room, Chauvenet appeared at the door, scrutinized the group
within, and passed on. Armitage had carried his coat, hat and stick into
the smoking-room, to be ready for possible emergencies; and when
Chauvenet stepped out into the street he followed. It was unusually cold for the season, and a fine drizzle filled the air. Chauvenet struck off at once away from the lake, turned into the
Boulevard Helvetique, thence into the Boulevard Froissart with its colony
of _pensions_. He walked rapidly until he reached a house that was
distinguished from its immediate neighbors only by its unlighted upper
windows. He pulled the bell in the wall, and the door was at once opened
and instantly closed. Armitage, following at twenty yards on the opposite side of the street,
paused abruptly at the sudden ending of his chase. It was not an hour for
loitering, for the Genevan _gendarmerie_ have rather good eyes, but
Armitage had by no means satisfied his curiosity as to the nature of
Chauvenet's errand. He walked on to make sure he was unobserved, crossed
the street, and again passed the dark, silent house which Chauvenet had
entered. He noted the place carefully; it gave no outward appearance of
being occupied. He assumed, from the general plan of the neighboring
buildings, that there was a courtyard at the rear of the darkened house,
accessible through a narrow passageway at the side. As he studied the
situation he kept moving to avoid observation, and presently, at a moment
when he was quite alone in the street, walked rapidly to the house
Chauvenet had entered. Gentlemen in search of adventures do well to avoid the continental wall. Mr. Armitage brushed the glass from the top with his hat. It jingled
softly within under cover of the rain-drip. The plaster had crumbled from
the bricks in spots, giving a foot its opportunity, and Mr. Armitage drew
himself to the top and dropped within. The front door and windows stared
at him blankly, and he committed his fortunes to the bricked passageway. The rain was now coming down in earnest, and at the rear of the house
water had begun to drip noisily into an iron spout. The electric lights
from neighboring streets made a kind of twilight even in the darkened
court, and Armitage threaded his way among a network of clothes-lines to
the rear wall and viewed the premises. He knew his Geneva from many
previous visits; the quarter was undeniably respectable; and there is, to
be sure, no reason why the blinds of a house should not be carefully
drawn at nightfall at the pleasure of the occupants. The whole lower
floor seemed utterly deserted; only at one point on the third floor was
there any sign of light, and this the merest hint. The increasing fall of rain did not encourage loitering in the wet
courtyard, where the downspout now rattled dolorously, and Armitage
crossed the court and further assured himself that the lower floor was
dark and silent. Balconies were bracketed against the wall at the second
and third stories, and the slight iron ladder leading thither terminated
a foot above his head. John Armitage was fully aware that his position,
if discovered, was, to say the least, untenable; but he was secure from
observation by police, and he assumed that the occupants of the house
were probably too deeply engrossed with their affairs to waste much time
on what might happen without. Armitage sprang up and caught the lowest
round of the ladder, and in a moment his tall figure was a dark blur
against the wall as he crept warily upward. The rear rooms of the second
story were as dark and quiet as those below. Armitage continued to the
third story, where a door, as well as several windows, gave upon the
balcony; and he found that it was from a broken corner of the door shade
that a sharp blade of light cut the dark. All continued quiet below; he
heard the traffic of the neighboring thoroughfares quite distinctly; and
from a kitchen near by came the rough clatter of dishwashing to the
accompaniment of a quarrel in German between the maids. For the moment
he felt secure, and bent down close to the door and listened. Two men were talking, and evidently the matter under discussion was of
importance, for they spoke with a kind of dogged deliberation, and the
long pauses in the dialogue lent color to the belief that some weighty
matter was in debate. The beat of the rain on the balcony and its steady
rattle in the spout intervened to dull the sound of voices, but presently
one of the speakers, with an impatient exclamation, rose, opened the
small glass-paned door a few inches, peered out, and returned to his seat
with an exclamation of relief. Armitage had dropped down the ladder half
a dozen rounds as he heard the latch snap in the door. He waited an
instant to make sure he had not been seen, then crept back to the balcony
and found that the slight opening in the door made it possible for him to
see as well as hear. "It's stifling in this hole," said Chauvenet, drawing deeply upon his
cigarette and blowing a cloud of smoke. "If you will pardon the
informality, I will lay aside my coat." He carefully hung the garment upon the back of his chair to hold its
shape, then resumed his seat. His companion watched him meanwhile with a
certain intentness. "You take excellent care of your clothes, my dear Jules. I never have
been able to fold a coat without ruining it." The rain was soaking Armitage thoroughly, but its persistent beat covered
any slight noises made by his own movements, and he was now intent upon
the little room and its occupants. He observed the care with which the
man kept close to his coat, and he pondered the matter as he hung upon
the balcony. If Chauvenet was on his way to America it was possible that
he would carry with him the important paper whose loss had caused so much
anxiety to the Austrian minister; if so, where was it during his stay in
Geneva? "The old man's death is only the first step. We require a succession of
deaths." "We require three, to be explicit, not more or less. We should be
fortunate if the remaining two could be accomplished as easily as
Stroebel's." "He was a beast. He is well dead." "That depends on the way you look at it. They seem really to be mourning
the old beggar at Vienna. It is the way of a people. They like to be
ruled by a savage hand. The people, as you have heard me say before, are
fools." The last speaker was a young man whom Armitage had never seen before;
he was a decided blond, with close-trimmed straw-colored beard and
slightly-curling hair. Opposite him, and facing the door, sat Chauvenet. On the table between them were decanters and liqueur glasses. "I am going to America at once," said Chauvenet, holding his filled glass
toward a brass lamp of an old type that hung from the ceiling. "It is probably just as well," said the other. "There's work to do there. We must not forget our more legitimate business in the midst of these
pleasant side issues." "The field is easy. After our delightful continental capitals, where, as
you know, one is never quite sure of one's self, it is pleasant to
breathe the democratic airs of Washington," remarked Chauvenet. "Particularly so, my dear friend, when one is blessed with your
delightful social gifts. I envy you your capacity for making others
happy." There was a keen irony in the fellow's tongue and the edge of it
evidently touched Chauvenet, who scowled and bent forward with his
fingers on the table. "Enough of that, if you please." "As you will, _carino_; but you will pardon me for offering my
condolences on the regrettable departure of _la belle Americaine_. If you
had not been so intent on matters of state you would undoubtedly have
found her here. As it is, you are now obliged to see her on her native
soil. A month in Washington may do much for you. She is beautiful and
reasonably rich. Her brother, the tall captain, is said to be the best
horseman in the American army." "Humph! He is an ass," ejaculated Chauvenet. A servant now appeared bearing a fresh bottle of cordial. He was
distinguished by a small head upon a tall and powerful body, and bore
little resemblance to a house servant. While he brushed the cigar ashes
from the table the men continued their talk without heeding him. Chauvenet and his friend had spoken from the first in French, but in
addressing some directions to the servant, the blond, who assumed the
role of host, employed a Servian dialect. "I think we were saying that the mortality list in certain directions
will have to be stimulated a trifle before we can do our young friend
Francis any good. You have business in America, _carino_. That paper we
filched from old Stroebel strengthens our hold on Francis; but there is
still that question as to Karl and Frederick Augustus. Our dear Francis
is not satisfied. He wishes to be quite sure that his dear father and
brother are dead. We must reassure him, dearest Jules." "Don't be a fool, Durand. You never seem to understand that the United
States of America is a trifle larger than a barnyard. And I don't believe
those fellows are over there. They're probably lying in wait here
somewhere, ready to take advantage of any opportunity,---that is, if they
are alive. A man can hardly fail to be impressed with the fact that so
few lives stand between him and--"

"The heights--the heights!" And the young man, whom Chauvenet called
Durand, lifted his tiny glass airily. "Yes; the heights," repeated Chauvenet a little dreamily. "But that declaration--that document! You have never honored me with a
glimpse; but you have it put safely away, I dare say." "There is no place--but one--that I dare risk. It is always within easy
reach, my dear friend." "You will do well to destroy that document. It is better out of the way." "Your deficiencies in the matter of wisdom are unfortunate. That paper
constitutes our chief asset, my dear associate. So long as we have it we
are able to keep dear Francis in order. Therefore we shall hold fast to
it, remembering that we risked much in removing it from the lamented
Stroebel's archives." "Do you say 'risked much'? My valued neck, that is all!" said the other. "You and Winkelried are without gratitude." "You will do well," said Chauvenet, "to keep an eye open in Vienna for
the unknown. If you hear murmurs in Hungary one of these fine days--! Nothing has happened for some time; therefore much may happen." He glanced at his watch. "I have work in Paris before sailing for New York. Shall we discuss the
matter of those Peruvian claims? That is business. These other affairs
are more in the nature of delightful diversions, my dear comrade." They drew nearer the table and Durand produced a box of papers over which
he bent with serious attention. Armitage had heard practically all of
their dialogue, and, what was of equal interest, had been able to study
the faces and learn the tones of voice of the two conspirators. He was
cramped from his position on the narrow balcony and wet and chilled by
the rain, which was now slowly abating. He had learned much that he
wished to know, and with an ease that astonished him; and he was well
content to withdraw with gratitude for his good fortune. His legs were numb and he clung close to the railing of the little ladder
for support as he crept toward the area. At the second story his foot
slipped on the wet iron, smooth from long use, and he stumbled down
several steps before he recovered himself. He listened a moment, heard
nothing but the tinkle of the rain in the spout, then continued his
retreat. As he stepped out upon the brick courtyard he was seized from behind by a
pair of strong arms that clasped him tight. In a moment he was thrown
across the threshold of a door into an unlighted room, where his captor
promptly sat upon him and proceeded to strike a light. CHAPTER V

A  LOST  CIGARETTE CASE

To other woods the trail leads on,
  To other worlds and new,
Where they who keep the secret here
  Will keep the promise too. --Henry A. Beers. The man clenched Armitage about the body with his legs while he struck a
match on a box he produced from his pocket. The suddenness with which he
had been flung into the kitchen had knocked the breath out of Armitage,
and the huge thighs of his captor pinned his arms tight. The match
spurted fire and he looked into the face of the servant whom he had seen
in the room above. His round head was covered with short, wire-like hair
that grew low upon his narrow forehead. Armitage noted, too, the man's
bull-like neck, small sharp eyes and bristling mustache. The fitful flash
of the match disclosed the rough furniture of a kitchen; the brick
flooring and his wet inverness lay cold at Armitage's back. The fellow growled an execration in Servian; then with ponderous
difficulty asked a question in German. "Who are you and what do you want here?" Armitage shook his head; and replied in English:

"I do not understand." The man struck a series of matches that he might scrutinize his captive's
face, then ran his hands over Armitage's pockets to make sure he had no
arms. The big fellow was clearly puzzled to find that he had caught a
gentleman in water-soaked evening clothes lurking in the area, and as the
matter was beyond his wits it only remained for him to communicate with
his master. This, however, was not so readily accomplished. He had
reasons of his own for not calling out, and there were difficulties in
the way of holding the prisoner and at the same time bringing down the
men who had gone to the most distant room in the house for their own
security. Several minutes passed during which the burly Servian struck his matches
and took account of his prisoner; and meanwhile Armitage lay perfectly
still, his arms fast numbing from the rough clasp of the stalwart
servant's legs. There was nothing to be gained by a struggle in this
position, and he knew that the Servian would not risk losing him in the
effort to summon the odd pair who were bent over their papers at the top
of the house. The Servian was evidently a man of action. "Get up," he commanded, still in rough German, and he rose in the dark
and jerked Armitage after him. There was a moment of silence in which
Armitage shook and stretched himself, and then the Servian struck another
match and held it close to a revolver which he held pointed at Armitage's
head. "I will shoot," he said again in his halting German. "Undoubtedly you will!" and something in the fellow's manner caused
Armitage to laugh. He had been caught and he did not at once see any safe
issue out of his predicament; but his plight had its preposterous side
and the ease with which he had been taken at the very outset of his quest
touched his humor. Then he sobered instantly and concentrated his wits
upon the immediate situation. The Servian backed away with a match upheld in one hand and the leveled
revolver in the other, leaving Armitage in the middle of the kitchen. "I am going to light a lamp and if you move I will kill you," admonished
the fellow, and Armitage heard his feet scraping over the brick floor of
the kitchen as he backed toward a table that stood against the wall near
the outer door. Armitage stood perfectly still. The neighborhood and the house itself
were quiet; the two men in the third-story room were probably engrossed
with the business at which Armitage had left them; and his immediate
affair was with the Servian alone. The fellow continued to mumble his
threats; but Armitage had resolved to play the part of an Englishman who
understood no German, and he addressed the man sharply in English several
times to signify that he did not understand. The Servian half turned toward his prisoner, the revolver in his left
hand, while with the fingers of his right he felt laboriously for a lamp
that had been revealed by the fitful flashes of the matches. It is not an
easy matter to light a lamp when you have only one hand to work with,
particularly when you are obliged to keep an eye on a mysterious prisoner
of whose character you are ignorant; and it was several minutes before
the job was done. "You will go to that corner;" and the Servian translated for his
prisoner's benefit with a gesture of the revolver. "Anything to please you, worthy fellow," replied Armitage, and he obeyed
with amiable alacrity. The man's object was to get him as far from the
inner door as possible while he called help from above, which was, of
course, the wise thing from his point of view, as Armitage recognized. Armitage stood with his back against a rack of pots; the table was at his
left and beyond it the door opening upon the court; a barred window was
at his right; opposite him was another door that communicated with the
interior of the house and disclosed the lower steps of a rude stairway
leading upward. The Servian now closed and locked the outer kitchen door
with care. Armitage had lost his hat in the area; his light walking-stick lay in the
middle of the floor; his inverness coat hung wet and bedraggled about
him; his shirt was crumpled and soiled. But his air of good humor and his
tame acceptance of capture seemed to increase the Servian's caution, and
he backed away toward the inner door with his revolver still pointed at
Armitage's head. He began calling lustily up the narrow stair-well in Servian, changing in
a moment to German. He made a ludicrous figure, as he held his revolver
at arm's length, craning his neck into the passage, and howling until he
was red in the face. He paused to listen, then renewed his cries, while
Armitage, with his back against the rack of pots, studied the room and
made his plans. "There is a thief here! I have caught a thief!" yelled the Servian, now
exasperated by the silence above. Then, as he relaxed a moment and turned
to make sure that his revolver still covered Armitage, there was a sudden
sound of steps above and a voice bawled angrily down the stairway:

"Zmai, stop your noise and tell me what's the trouble." It was the voice of Durand speaking in the Servian dialect; and Zmai
opened his mouth to explain. As the big fellow roared his reply Armitage snatched from the rack a
heavy iron boiling-pot, swung it high by the bail with both hands and let
it fly with all his might at the Servian's head, upturned in the
earnestness of his bawling. On the instant the revolver roared loudly in
the narrow kitchen and Armitage seized the brass lamp and flung it from
him upon the hearth, where it fell with a great clatter without
exploding. It was instantly pitch dark. The Servian had gone down like a felled ox
and Armitage at the threshold leaped over him into the hall past the rear
stairs down which the men were stumbling, cursing volubly as they came. Armitage had assumed the existence of a front stairway, and now that he
was launched upon an unexpected adventure, he was in a humor to prolong
it for a moment, even at further risk. He crept along a dark passage to
the front door, found and turned the key to provide himself with a ready
exit, then, as he heard the men from above stumble over the prostrate
Servian, he bounded up the front stairway, gained the second floor, then
the third, and readily found by its light the room that he had observed
earlier from the outside. Below there was smothered confusion and the crackling of matches as
Durand and Chauvenet sought to grasp the unexpected situation that
confronted them. The big servant, Armitage knew, would hardly be able
to clear matters for them at once, and he hurriedly turned over the
packets of papers that lay on the table. They were claims of one kind and
another against several South and Central American republics, chiefly for
naval and military supplies, and he merely noted their general character. They were, on the face of it, certified accounts in the usual manner of
business. On the back of each had been printed with a rubber stamp the
words:

"Vienna, Paris, Washington. Chauvenet et Durand." Armitage snatched up the coat which Chauvenet had so carefully placed on
the back of his chair, ran his hands through the pockets, found them
empty, then gathered the garment tightly in his hands, laughed a little
to himself to feel papers sewn into the lining, and laughed again as he
tore the lining loose and drew forth a flat linen envelope brilliant with
three seals of red wax. Steps sounded below; a man was running up the back stairs; and from the
kitchen rose sounds of mighty groanings and cursings in the heavy
gutturals of the Servian, as he regained his wits and sought to explain
his plight. Armitage picked up a chair, ran noiselessly to the head of the back
stairs, and looked down upon Chauvenet, who was hurrying up with a
flaming candle held high above his head, its light showing anxiety and
fear upon his face. He was half-way up the last flight, and Armitage
stood in the dark, watching him with a mixture of curiosity and
something, too, of humor. Then he spoke--in French--in a tone that
imitated the cool irony he had noted in Durand's tone:

"A few murders more or less! But Von Stroebel was hardly a fair mark,
dearest Jules!" With this he sent the chair clattering down the steps, where it struck
Jules Chauvenet's legs with a force that carried him howling lustily
backward to the second landing. Armitage turned and sped down the front stairway, hearing renewed clamor
from the rear and cries of rage and pain from the second story. In
fumbling for the front door he found a hat, and, having lost his own,
placed it upon his head, drew his inverness about his shoulders, and went
quickly out. A moment later he slipped the catch in the wall door and
stepped into the boulevard. The stars were shining among the flying clouds overhead and he drew deep
breaths of the freshened air into his lungs as he walked back to the
Monte Rosa. Occasionally he laughed quietly to himself, for he still
grasped tightly in his hand, safe under his coat, the envelope which
Chauvenet had carried so carefully concealed; and several times Armitage
muttered to himself:

"A few murders, more or less!" At the hotel he changed his clothes, threw the things from his
dressing-table into a bag, and announced his departure for Paris by
the night express. As he drove to the railway station he felt for his cigarette case, and
discovered that it was missing. The loss evidently gave him great
concern, for he searched and researched his pockets and opened his bags
at the station to see if he had by any chance overlooked it, but it was
not to be found. His annoyance at the loss was balanced--could he have known it--by the
interest with which, almost before the wall door had closed upon him, two
gentlemen--one of them still in his shirt sleeves and with a purple lump
over his forehead--bent over a gold cigarette case in the dark house on
the Boulevard Froissart. It was a pretty trinket, and contained, when
found on the kitchen floor, exactly four cigarettes of excellent Turkish
tobacco. On one side of it was etched, in shadings of blue and white
enamel, a helmet, surmounted by a falcon, poised for flight, and,
beneath, the motto _Fide non armis_. The back bore in English script,
written large, the letters _F.A._

The men stared at each other wonderingly for an instant, then both leaped
to their feet. "It isn't possible!" gasped Durand. "It is quite possible," replied Chauvenet. "The emblem is unmistakable. Good God, look!" The sweat had broken out on Chauvenet's face and he leaped to the chair
where his coat hung, and caught up the garment with shaking hands. The
silk lining fluttered loose where Armitage had roughly torn out the
envelope. "Who is he? Who is he?" whispered Durand, very white of face. "It may be--it must be some one deeply concerned." Chauvenet paused, drawing his hand across his forehead slowly; then the
color leaped back into his face, and he caught Durand's arm so tight that
the man flinched. "There has been a man following me about; I thought he was interested in
the Claibornes. He's here--I saw him at the Monte Rosa to-night. God!" He dropped his hand from Durand's arm and struck the table fiercely with
his clenched hand. "John Armitage--John Armitage! I heard his name in Florence." His eyes were snapping with excitement, and amazement grew in his face. "Who is John Armitage?" demanded Durand sharply; but Chauvenet stared at
him in stupefaction for a tense moment, then muttered to himself:

"Is it possible? Is it possible?" and his voice was hoarse and his hand
trembled as he picked up the cigarette case. "My dear Jules, you act as though you had seen a ghost. Who the devil is
Armitage?" Chauvenet glanced about the room cautiously, then bent forward and
whispered very low, close to Durand's ear:

"Suppose he were the son of the crazy Karl! Suppose he were Frederick
Augustus!" "Bah! It is impossible! What is your man Armitage like?" asked Durand
irritably. "He is the right age. He is a big fellow and has quite an air. He seems
to be without occupation." "Clearly so," remarked Durand ironically. "But he has evidently been
watching us. Quite possibly the lamented Stroebel employed him. He may
have seen Stroebel here--"

Chauvenet again struck the table smartly. "Of course he would see Stroebel! Stroebel was the Archduke's friend;
Stroebel and this fellow between them--"

"Stroebel is dead. The Archduke is dead; there can be no manner of doubt
of that," said Durand; but doubt was in his tone and in his eyes. "Nothing is certain; it would be like Karl to turn up again with a son to
back his claims. They may both be living. This Armitage is not the
ordinary pig of a secret agent. We must find him." "And quickly. There must be--"

"--another death added to our little list before we are quite masters of
the situation in Vienna." They gave Zmai orders to remain on guard at the house and went hurriedly
out together. CHAPTER VI

TOWARD THE WESTERN STARS

Her blue eyes sought the west afar,
For lovers love the western star. --_Lay of the Last Minstrel_. Geneva is a good point from which to plan flight to any part of the
world, for there at the top of Europe the whole continental railway
system is easily within your grasp, and you may make your choice of
sailing ports. It is, to be sure, rather out of your way to seek a ship
at Liverpool unless you expect to gain some particular advantage in doing
so. Mr. John Armitage hurried thither in the most breathless haste to
catch the _King Edward_, whereas he might have taken the _Touraine_
at Cherbourg and saved himself a mad scamper; but his satisfaction in
finding himself aboard the _King Edward_ was supreme. He was and is, it
may be said, a man who salutes the passing days right amiably, no matter
how somber their colors. Shirley Claiborne and Captain Richard Claiborne, her brother, were on
deck watching the shipping in the Mersey as the big steamer swung into
the channel. "I hope," observed Dick, "that we have shaken off all your transatlantic
suitors. That little Chauvenet died easier than I had expected. He never
turned up after we left Florence, but I'm not wholly sure that we shan't
find him at the dock in New York. And that mysterious Armitage, who spent
so much railway fare following us about, and who almost bought you a
watch in Geneva, really disappoints me. His persistence had actually
compelled my admiration. For a glass-blower he was fairly decent, though,
and better than a lot of these little toy men with imitation titles." "Is that an American cruiser? I really believe it is the _Tecumseh_. What
on earth were you talking about, Dick?" Shirley fluttered her handkerchief in the direction of the American flag
displayed by the cruiser, and Dick lifted his cap. "I was bidding farewell to your foreign suitors, Shirley, and
congratulating myself that as soon as _pere et mere_ get their sea legs
they will resume charge of you, and let me look up two or three very
presentable specimens of your sex I saw come on board. Your affairs
have annoyed me greatly and I shall be glad to be free of the
responsibility." "Thank you, Captain." "And if there are any titled blackguards on board--"

"You will do dreadfully wicked things to them, won't you, little
brother?" "Humph! Thank God, I'm an American!" "That's a worthy sentiment, Richard." "I'd like to give out, as our newspapers say, a signed statement throwing
a challenge to all Europe. I wish we'd get into a real war once so we
could knock the conceit out of one of their so-called first-class powers. I'd like to lead a regiment right through the most sacred precincts of
London; or take an early morning gallop through Berlin to wake up the
Dutch. All this talk about hands across the sea and such rot makes me
sick. The English are the most benighted and the most conceited and
condescending race on earth; the Germans and Austrians are stale
beer-vats, and the Italians and French are mere decadents and don't
count." "Yes, dearest," mocked Shirley. "Oh, my large brother, I have a
confession to make. Please don't indulge in great oaths or stamp a hole
in this sturdy deck, but there are flowers in my state-room--"

"Probably from the Liverpool consul--he's been pestering father to help
him get a transfer to a less gloomy hole." "Then I shall intercede myself with the President when I get home. They're orchids--from London--but--with Mr. Armitage's card. Wouldn't
that excite you?" "It makes me sick!" and Dick hung heavily on the rail and glared at a
passing tug. "They are beautiful orchids. I don't remember when orchids have happened
to me before, Richard--in such quantities. Now, you really didn't
disapprove of him so much, did you? This is probably good-by forever, but
he wasn't so bad; and he may be an American, after all." "A common adventurer! Such fellows are always turning up, like bad
pennies, or a one-eyed dog. If I should see him again--"

"Yes, Richard, if you should meet again--"

"I'd ask him to be good enough to stop following us about, and if he
persisted I should muss him up." "Yes; I'm sure you would protect me from his importunities at any
hazard," mocked Shirley, turning and leaning against the rail so that she
looked along the deck beyond her brother's stalwart shoulders. "Don't be silly," observed Dick, whose eyes were upon a trim yacht that
was steaming slowly beneath them. "I shan't, but please don't be violent! Do not murder the poor man,
Dickie, dear,"--and she took hold of his arm entreatingly--"for there he
is--as tall and mysterious as ever--and me found guilty with a few of his
orchids pinned to my jacket!" "This is good fortune, indeed," said Armitage a moment later when they
had shaken hands. "I finished my errand at Geneva unexpectedly and here I
am." He smiled at the feebleness of his explanation, and joined in their
passing comment on the life of the harbor. He was not so dull but that he
felt Dick Claiborne's resentment of his presence on board. He knew
perfectly well that his acquaintance with the Claibornes was too slight
to be severely strained, particularly where a fellow of Dick Claiborne's
high spirit was concerned. He talked with them a few minutes longer, then
took himself off; and they saw little of him the rest of the day. Armitage did not share their distinction of a seat at the captain's
table, and Dick found him late at night in the smoking-saloon with pipe
and book. Armitage nodded and asked him to sit down. "You are a sailor as well as a soldier, Captain. You are fortunate; I
always sit up the first night to make sure the enemy doesn't lay hold of
me in my sleep." He tossed his book aside, had brandy and soda brought and offered
Claiborne a cigar. "This is not the most fortunate season for crossing; I am sure to fall
to-morrow. My father and mother hate the sea particularly and have
retired for three days. My sister is the only one of us who is perfectly
immune." "Yes; I can well image Miss Claiborne in the good graces of the
elements," replied Armitage; and they were silent for several minutes
while a big Russian, who was talking politics in a distant corner with a
very small and solemn German, boomed out his views on the Eastern
question in a tremendous bass. Dick Claiborne was a good deal amused at finding himself sitting beside
Armitage,--enjoying, indeed, his fellow traveler's hospitality; but
Armitage, he was forced to admit, bore all the marks of a gentleman. He
had, to be sure, followed Shirley about, but even the young man's manner
in this was hardly a matter at which he could cavil. And there was
something altogether likable in Armitage; his very composure was
attractive to Claiborne; and the bold lines of his figure were not wasted
on the young officer. In the silence, while they smoked, he noted the
perfect taste that marked Armitage's belongings, which to him meant more,
perhaps, than the steadiness of the man's eyes or the fine lines of his
face. Unconsciously Claiborne found himself watching Armitage's strong
ringless hands, and he knew that such a hand, well kept though it
appeared, had known hard work, and that the long supple fingers were such
as might guide a tiller fearlessly or set a flag daringly upon a
fire-swept parapet. Armitage was thinking rapidly of something he had suddenly resolved to
say to Captain Claiborne. He knew that the Claibornes were a family of
distinction; the father was an American diplomat and lawyer of wide
reputation; the family stood for the best of which America is capable,
and they were homeward bound to the American capital where their social
position and the father's fame made them conspicuous. Armitage put down his cigar and bent toward Claiborne, speaking with
quiet directness. "Captain Claiborne, I was introduced to you at Geneva by Mr. Singleton. You may have observed me several times previously at Venice, Borne,
Florence, Paris, Berlin. 