




Transcribed from the 1896 Frederick Warne & Co. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





A LADY OF QUALITY


Being a most curious, hitherto unknown
history, as related by Mr. Isaac Bickerstaff
but not presented to the World of
Fashion through the pages of
The Tatler, and now for the
first time written down
by
Francis Hodgson Burnett

   Were Nature just to Man from his first hour, he need not ask for
   Mercy; then 'tis for us--the toys of Nature--to be both just and
   merciful, for so only can the wrongs she does be undone. CHAPTER I--The twenty-fourth day of November 1690


On a wintry morning at the close of 1690, the sun shining faint and red
through a light fog, there was a great noise of baying dogs, loud voices,
and trampling of horses in the courtyard at Wildairs Hall; Sir Jeoffry
being about to go forth a-hunting, and being a man with a choleric temper
and big, loud voice, and given to oaths and noise even when in
good-humour, his riding forth with his friends at any time was attended
with boisterous commotion. This morning it was more so than usual, for
he had guests with him who had come to his house the day before, and had
supped late and drunk deeply, whereby the day found them, some with
headaches, some with a nausea at their stomachs, and some only in an evil
humour which made them curse at their horses when they were restless, and
break into loud surly laughs when a coarse joke was made. There were
many such jokes, Sir Jeoffry and his boon companions being renowned
throughout the county for the freedom of their conversation as for the
scandal of their pastimes, and this day 'twas well indeed, as their loud-
voiced, oath-besprinkled jests rang out on the cold air, that there were
no ladies about to ride forth with them. 'Twas Sir Jeoffry who was louder than any other, he having drunk even
deeper than the rest, and though 'twas his boast that he could carry a
bottle more than any man, and see all his guests under the table, his
last night's bout had left him in ill-humour and boisterous. He strode
about, casting oaths at the dogs and rating the servants, and when he
mounted his big black horse 'twas amid such a clamour of voices and
baying hounds that the place was like Pandemonium. He was a large man of florid good looks, black eyes, and full habit of
body, and had been much renowned in his youth for his great strength,
which was indeed almost that of a giant, and for his deeds of prowess in
the saddle and at the table when the bottle went round. There were many
evil stories of his roysterings, but it was not his way to think of them
as evil, but rather to his credit as a man of the world, for, when he
heard that they were gossiped about, he greeted the information with a
loud triumphant laugh. He had married, when she was fifteen, the
blooming toast of the county, for whom his passion had long died out,
having indeed departed with the honeymoon, which had been of the
briefest, and afterwards he having borne her a grudge for what he chose
to consider her undutiful conduct. This grudge was founded on the fact
that, though she had presented him each year since their marriage with a
child, after nine years had passed none had yet been sons, and, as he was
bitterly at odds with his next of kin, he considered each of his
offspring an ill turn done him. He spent but little time in her society, for she was a poor, gentle
creature of no spirit, who found little happiness in her lot, since her
lord treated her with scant civility, and her children one after another
sickened and died in their infancy until but two were left. He scarce
remembered her existence when he did not see her face, and he was
certainly not thinking of her this morning, having other things in view,
and yet it so fell out that, while a groom was shortening a stirrup and
being sworn at for his awkwardness, he by accident cast his eye upward to
a chamber window peering out of the thick ivy on the stone. Doing so he
saw an old woman draw back the curtain and look down upon him as if
searching for him with a purpose. He uttered an exclamation of anger. "Damnation! Mother Posset again," he said. "What does she there, old
frump?" The curtain fell and the woman disappeared, but in a few minutes more an
unheard-of thing happened--among the servants in the hall, the same old
woman appeared making her way with a hurried fretfulness, and she
descended haltingly the stone steps and came to his side where he sat on
his black horse. "The Devil!" he exclaimed--"what are you here for? 'Tis not time for
another wench upstairs, surely?" "'Tis not time," answered the old nurse acidly, taking her tone from his
own. "But there is one, but an hour old, and my lady--"

"Be damned to her!" quoth Sir Jeoffry savagely. "A ninth one--and 'tis
nine too many. 'Tis more than man can bear. She does it but to spite
me." "'Tis ill treatment for a gentleman who wants an heir," the old woman
answered, as disrespectful of his spouse as he was, being a time-serving
crone, and knowing that it paid but poorly to coddle women who did not as
their husbands would have them in the way of offspring. "It should have
been a fine boy, but it is not, and my lady--"

"Damn her puling tricks!" said Sir Jeoffry again, pulling at his horse's
bit until the beast reared. "She would not let me rest until I came to you," said the nurse
resentfully. "She would have you told that she felt strangely, and
before you went forth would have a word with you." "I cannot come, and am not in the mood for it if I could," was his
answer. "What folly does she give way to? This is the ninth time she
hath felt strangely, and I have felt as squeamish as she--but nine is
more than I have patience for." "She is light-headed, mayhap," said the nurse. "She lieth huddled in a
heap, staring and muttering, and she would leave me no peace till I
promised to say to you, 'For the sake of poor little Daphne, whom you
will sure remember.' She pinched my hand and said it again and again." Sir Jeoffry dragged at his horse's mouth and swore again. "She was fifteen then, and had not given me nine yellow-faced wenches,"
he said. "Tell her I had gone a-hunting and you were too late;" and he
struck his big black beast with the whip, and it bounded away with him,
hounds and huntsmen and fellow-roysterers galloping after, his guests,
who had caught at the reason of his wrath, grinning as they rode. * * * * *

In a huge chamber hung with tattered tapestries and barely set forth with
cumbersome pieces of furnishing, my lady lay in a gloomy, canopied bed,
with her new-born child at her side, but not looking at or touching it,
seeming rather to have withdrawn herself from the pillow on which it lay
in its swaddling-clothes. She was but a little lady, and now, as she lay in the large bed, her face
and form shrunken and drawn with suffering, she looked scarce bigger than
a child. In the brief days of her happiness those who toasted her had
called her Titania for her fairy slightness and delicate beauty, but then
her fair wavy locks had been of a length that touched the ground when her
woman unbound them, and she had had the colour of a wild rose and the
eyes of a tender little fawn. Sir Jeoffry for a month or so had paid
tempestuous court to her, and had so won her heart with his dashing way
of love-making and the daringness of his reputation, that she had thought
herself--being child enough to think so--the luckiest young lady in the
world that his black eye should have fallen upon her with favour. Each
year since, with the bearing of each child, she had lost some of her
beauty. With each one her lovely hair fell out still more, her wild-rose
colour faded, and her shape was spoiled. She grew thin and yellow, only
a scant covering of the fair hair was left her, and her eyes were big and
sunken. Her marriage having displeased her family, and Sir Jeoffry
having a distaste for the ceremonies of visiting and entertainment, save
where his own cronies were concerned, she had no friends, and grew
lonelier and lonelier as the sad years went by. She being so without
hope and her life so dreary, her children were neither strong nor
beautiful, and died quickly, each one bringing her only the anguish of
birth and death. This wintry morning her ninth lay slumbering by her
side; the noise of baying dogs and boisterous men had died away with the
last sound of the horses' hoofs; the little light which came into the
room through the ivied window was a faint yellowish red; she was cold,
because the fire in the chimney was but a scant, failing one; she was
alone--and she knew that the time had come for her death. This she knew
full well. She was alone, because, being so disrespected and deserted by her lord,
and being of a timid and gentle nature, she could not command her
insufficient retinue of servants, and none served her as was their duty. The old woman Sir Jeoffry had dubbed Mother Posset had been her sole
attendant at such times as these for the past five years, because she
would come to her for a less fee than a better woman, and Sir Jeoffry had
sworn he would not pay for wenches being brought into the world. She was
a slovenly, guzzling old crone, who drank caudle from morning till night,
and demanded good living as a support during the performance of her
trying duties; but these last she contrived to make wondrous light,
knowing that there was none to reprove her. "A fine night I have had," she had grumbled when she brought back Sir
Jeoffry's answer to her lady's message. "My old bones are like to break,
and my back will not straighten itself. I will go to the kitchen to get
victuals and somewhat to warm me; your ladyship's own woman shall sit
with you." Her ladyship's "own woman" was also the sole attendant of the two little
girls, Barbara and Anne, whose nursery was in another wing of the house,
and my lady knew full well she would not come if she were told, and that
there would be no message sent to her. She knew, too, that the fire was going out, but, though she shivered
under the bed-clothes, she was too weak to call the woman back when she
saw her depart without putting fresh fuel upon it. So she lay alone, poor lady, and there was no sound about her, and her
thin little mouth began to feebly quiver, and her great eyes, which
stared at the hangings, to fill with slow cold tears, for in sooth they
were not warm, but seemed to chill her poor cheeks as they rolled slowly
down them, leaving a wet streak behind them which she was too far gone in
weakness to attempt to lift her hand to wipe away. "Nine times like this," she panted faintly, "and 'tis for naught but
oaths and hard words that blame me. I was but a child myself and he
loved me. When 'twas 'My Daphne,' and 'My beauteous little Daphne,' he
loved me in his own man's way. But now--" she faintly rolled her head
from side to side. "Women are poor things"--a chill salt tear sliding
past her lips so that she tasted its bitterness--"only to be kissed for
an hour, and then like this--only for this and nothing else. I would
that this one had been dead." Her breath came slower and more pantingly, and her eyes stared more
widely. "I was but a child," she whispered--"a child--as--as this will be--if she
lives fifteen years." Despite her weakness, and it was great and woefully increasing with each
panting breath, she slowly laboured to turn herself towards the pillow on
which her offspring lay, and, this done, she lay staring at the child and
gasping, her thin chest rising and falling convulsively. Ah, how she
panted, and how she stared, the glaze of death stealing slowly over her
wide-opened eyes; and yet, dimming as they were, they saw in the sleeping
infant a strange and troublous thing--though it was but a few hours old
'twas not as red and crumple visaged as new-born infants usually are, its
little head was covered with thick black silk, and its small features
were of singular definiteness. She dragged herself nearer to gaze. "She looks not like the others," she said. "They had no beauty--and are
safe. She--she will be like--Jeoffry--and like _me_." The dying fire fell lower with a shuddering sound. "If she is--beautiful, and has but her father, and no mother!" she
whispered, the words dragged forth slowly, "only evil can come to her. From her first hour--she will know naught else, poor heart, poor heart!" There was a rattling in her throat as she breathed, but in her glazing
eyes a gleam like passion leaped, and gasping, she dragged nearer. "'Tis not fair," she cried. "If I--if I could lay my hand upon thy
mouth--and stop thy breathing--thou poor thing, 'twould be fairer--but--I
have no strength." She gathered all her dying will and brought her hand up to the infant's
mouth. A wild look was on her poor, small face, she panted and fell
forward on its breast, the rattle in her throat growing louder. The
child awakened, opening great black eyes, and with her dying weakness its
new-born life struggled. Her cold hand lay upon its mouth, and her
head upon its body, for she was too far gone to move if she had willed to
do so. But the tiny creature's strength was marvellous. It gasped, it
fought, its little limbs struggled beneath her, it writhed until the cold
hand fell away, and then, its baby mouth set free, it fell a-shrieking. Its cries were not like those of a new-born thing, but fierce and shrill,
and even held the sound of infant passion. 'Twas not a thing to let its
life go easily, 'twas of those born to do battle. Its lusty screaming pierced her ear perhaps--she drew a long, slow
breath, and then another, and another still--the last one trembled and
stopped short, and the last cinder fell dead from the fire. * * * * *

When the nurse came bustling and fretting back, the chamber was cold as
the grave's self--there were only dead embers on the hearth, the new-born
child's cries filled all the desolate air, and my lady was lying stone
dead, her poor head resting on her offspring's feet, the while her open
glazed eyes seemed to stare at it as if in asking Fate some awful
question. CHAPTER II--In which Sir Jeoffry encounters his offspring


In a remote wing of the house, in barren, ill-kept rooms, the poor
infants of the dead lady had struggled through their brief lives, and
given them up, one after the other. Sir Jeoffry had not wished to see
them, nor had he done so, but upon the rarest occasions, and then nearly
always by some untoward accident. The six who had died, even their
mother had scarcely wept for; her weeping had been that they should have
been fated to come into the world, and when they went out of it she knew
she need not mourn their going as untimely. The two who had not
perished, she had regarded sadly day by day, seeing they had no beauty
and that their faces promised none. Naught but great beauty would have
excused their existence in their father's eyes, as beauty might have
helped them to good matches which would have rid him of them. But 'twas
the sad ill fortune of the children Anne and Barbara to have been treated
by Nature in a way but niggardly. They were pale young misses, with
insignificant faces and snub noses, resembling an aunt who died a
spinster, as they themselves seemed most likely to. Sir Jeoffry could
not bear the sight of them, and they fled at the sound of his footsteps,
if it so happened that by chance they heard it, huddling together in
corners, and slinking behind doors or anything big enough to hide them. They had no playthings and no companions and no pleasures but such as the
innocent invention of childhood contrives for itself. After their mother's death a youth desolate and strange indeed lay before
them. A spinster who was a poor relation was the only person of
respectable breeding who ever came near them. To save herself from
genteel starvation, she had offered herself for the place of governess to
them, though she was fitted for the position neither by education nor
character. Mistress Margery Wimpole was a poor, dull creature, having no
wilful harm in her, but endowed with neither dignity nor wit. She lived
in fear of Sir Jeoffry, and in fear of the servants, who knew full well
that she was an humble dependant, and treated her as one. She hid away
with her pupils in the bare school-room in the west wing, and taught
them to spell and write and work samplers. She herself knew no more. The child who had cost her mother her life had no happier prospect than
her sisters. Her father felt her more an intruder than they had been, he
being of the mind that to house and feed and clothe, howsoever poorly,
these three burdens on him was a drain scarcely to be borne. His wife
had been a toast and not a fortune, and his estate not being great, he
possessed no more than his drinking, roystering, and gambling made full
demands upon. The child was baptized Clorinda, and bred, so to speak, from her first
hour, in the garret and the servants' hall. Once only did her father
behold her during her infancy, which event was a mere accident, as he had
expressed no wish to see her, and only came upon her in the nurse's arms
some weeks after her mother's death. 'Twas quite by chance. The woman,
who was young and buxom, had begun an intrigue with a groom, and having a
mind to see him, was crossing the stable-yard, carrying her charge with
her, when Sir Jeoffry came by to visit a horse. The woman came plump upon him, entering a stable as he came out of it;
she gave a frightened start, and almost let the child drop, at which it
set up a strong, shrill cry, and thus Sir Jeoffry saw it, and seeing it,
was thrown at once into a passion which expressed itself after the manner
of all his emotion, and left the nurse quaking with fear. "Thunder and damnation!" he exclaimed, as he strode away after the
encounter; "'tis the ugliest yet. A yellow-faced girl brat, with eyes
like an owl's in an ivy-bush, and with a voice like a very peacocks. Another mawking, plain slut that no man will take off my hands." He did not see her again for six years. But little wit was needed to
learn that 'twas best to keep her out of his sight, as her sisters were
kept, and this was done without difficulty, as he avoided the wing of the
house where the children lived, as if it were stricken with the plague. But the child Clorinda, it seemed, was of lustier stock than her older
sisters, and this those about her soon found out to their grievous
disturbance. When Mother Posset had drawn her from under her dead
mother's body she had not left shrieking for an hour, but had kept up her
fierce cries until the roof rang with them, and the old woman had jogged
her about and beat her back in the hopes of stifling her, until she was
exhausted and dismayed. For the child would not be stilled, and seemed
to have such strength and persistence in her as surely infant never
showed before. "Never saw I such a brat among all I have brought into the world," old
Posset quavered. "She hath the voice of a six-months boy. It cracks my
very ears. Hush thee, then, thou little wild cat." This was but the beginning. From the first she grew apace, and in a few
months was a bouncing infant, with a strong back, and a power to make
herself heard such as had not before appeared in the family. When she
desired a thing, she yelled and roared with such a vigour as left no
peace for any creature about her until she was humoured, and this being
the case, rather than have their conversation and love-making put a stop
to, the servants gave her her way. In this they but followed the example
of their betters, of whom we know that it is not to the most virtuous
they submit or to the most learned, but to those who, being crossed, can
conduct themselves in a manner so disagreeable, shrewish or violent, that
life is a burden until they have their will. This the child Clorinda had
the infant wit to discover early, and having once discovered it, she
never ceased to take advantage of her knowledge. Having found in the
days when her one desire was pap, that she had but to roar lustily enough
to find it beside her in her porringer, she tried the game upon all other
occasions. When she had reached but a twelvemonth, she stood stoutly
upon her little feet, and beat her sisters to gain their playthings, and
her nurse for wanting to change her smock. She was so easily thrown into
furies, and so raged and stamped in her baby way that she was a sight to
behold, and the men-servants found amusement in badgering her. To set
Mistress Clorinda in their midst on a winter's night when they were dull,
and to torment her until her little face grew scarlet with the blood
which flew up into it, and she ran from one to the other beating them and
screaming like a young spitfire, was among them a favourite
entertainment. "Ifackens!" said the butler one night, "but she is as like Sir Jeoffry in
her temper as one pea is like another. Ay, but she grows blood red just
as he does, and curses in her little way as he does in man's words among
his hounds in their kennel." "And she will be of his build, too," said the housekeeper. "What mishap
changed her to a maid instead of a boy, I know not. She would have made
a strapping heir. She has the thigh and shoulders of a handsome
man-child at this hour, and she is not three years old." "Sir Jeoffry missed his mark when he called her an ugly brat," said the
woman who had nursed her. "She will be a handsome woman--though large in
build, it may be. She will be a brown beauty, but she will have a colour
in her cheeks and lips like the red of Christmas holly, and her owl's
eyes are as black as sloes, and have fringes on them like the curtains of
a window. See how her hair grows thick on her little head, and how it
curls in great rings. My lady, her poor mother, was once a beauty, but
she was no such beauty as this one will be, for she has her father's long
limbs and fine shoulders, and the will to make every man look her way." "Yes," said the housekeeper, who was an elderly woman, "there will be
doings--there will be doings when she is a ripe young maid. She will
take her way, and God grant she mayn't be _too_ like her father and
follow his." It was true that she had no resemblance to her plain sisters, and bore no
likeness to them in character. The two elder children, Anne and Barbara,
were too meek-spirited to be troublesome; but during Clorinda's infancy
Mistress Margery Wimpole watched her rapid growth with fear and qualms. She dare not reprove the servants who were ruining her by their
treatment, and whose manners were forming her own. Sir Jeoffry's
servants were no more moral than their master, and being brought up as
she was among them, their young mistress became strangely familiar with
many sights and sounds it is not the fortune of most young misses of
breeding to see and hear. The cooks and kitchen-wenches were flighty
with the grooms and men-servants, and little Mistress Clorinda, having a
passion for horses and dogs, spent many an hour in the stables with the
women who, for reasons of their own, were pleased enough to take her
there as an excuse for seeking amusement for themselves. She played in
the kennels and among the horses' heels, and learned to use oaths as
roundly as any Giles or Tom whose work was to wield the curry comb. It
was indeed a curious thing to hear her red baby mouth pour forth curses
and unseemly words as she would at any one who crossed her. Her temper
and hot-headedness carried all before them, and the grooms and stable-
boys found great sport in the language my young lady used in her innocent
furies. But balk her in a whim, and she would pour forth the eloquence
of a fish-wife or a lady of easy virtue in a pot-house quarrel. There
was no human creature near her who had mind or heart enough to see the
awfulness of her condition, or to strive to teach her to check her
passions; and in the midst of these perilous surroundings the little
virago grew handsomer and of finer carriage every hour, as if on the rank
diet that fed her she throve and flourished. There came a day at last when she had reached six years old, when by a
trick of chance a turn was given to the wheel of her fate. She had not reached three when a groom first set her on a horse's back
and led her about the stable-yard, and she had so delighted in her
exalted position, and had so shouted for pleasure and clutched her
steed's rein and clucked at him, that her audience had looked on with
roars of laughter. From that time she would be put up every day, and as
time went on showed such unchildish courage and spirit that she furnished
to her servant companions a new pastime. Soon she would not be held on,
but riding astride like a boy, would sit up as straight as a man and
swear at her horse, beating him with her heels and little fists if his
pace did not suit her. She knew no fear, and would have used a whip so
readily that the men did not dare to trust her with one, and knew they
must not mount her on a steed too mettlesome. By the time she passed her
sixth birthday she could ride as well as a grown man, and was as familiar
with her father's horses as he himself, though he knew nothing of the
matter, it being always contrived that she should be out of sight when he
visited his hunters. It so chanced that the horse he rode the oftenest was her favourite, and
many were the tempests of rage she fell into when she went to the stable
to play with the animal and did not find him in his stall, because his
master had ordered him out. At such times she would storm at the men in
the stable-yard and call them ill names for their impudence in letting
the beast go, which would cause them great merriment, as she knew nothing
of who the man was who had balked her, since she was, in truth, not so
much as conscious of her father's existence, never having seen or even
heard more of him than his name, which she in no manner connected with
herself. "Could Sir Jeoffry himself but once see and hear her when she storms at
us and him, because he dares to ride his own beast," one of the older men
said once, in the midst of their laughter, "I swear he would burst forth
laughing and be taken with her impudent spirit, her temper is so like his
own. She is his own flesh and blood, and as full of hell-fire as he." Upon this morning which proved eventful to her, she had gone to the
stables, as was her daily custom, and going into the stall where the big
black horse was wont to stand, she found it empty. Her spirit rose hot
within her in the moment. She clenched her fists, and began to stamp and
swear in such a manner as it would be scarce fitting to record. "Where is he now?" she cried. "He is my own horse, and shall not be
ridden. Who is the man who takes him? Who? Who?" "'Tis a fellow who hath no manners," said the man she stormed at,
grinning and thrusting his tongue in his cheek. "He says 'tis his beast,
and not yours, and he will have him when he chooses." "'Tis not his--'tis mine!" shrieked Miss, her little face inflamed with
passion. "I will kill him! 'Tis my horse. He _shall_ be mine!" For a while the men tormented her, to hear her rave and see her passion,
for, in truth, the greater tempest she was in, the better she was worth
beholding, having a colour so rich, and eyes so great and black and
flaming. At such times there was naught of the feminine in her, and
indeed always she looked more like a handsome boy than a girl, her growth
being for her age extraordinary. At length a lad who was a helper said
to mock her--

"The man hath him at the door before the great steps now. I saw him
stand there waiting but a moment ago. The man hath gone in the house." She turned and ran to find him. The front part of the house she barely
knew the outside of, as she was kept safely in the west wing and below
stairs, and when taken out for the air was always led privately by a side
way--never passing through the great hall, where her father might chance
to encounter her. She knew best this side-entrance, and made her way to it, meaning to
search until she found the front. She got into the house, and her spirit
being roused, marched boldly through corridors and into rooms she had
never seen before, and being so mere a child, notwithstanding her strange
wilfulness and daring, the novelty of the things she saw so far
distracted her mind from the cause of her anger that she stopped more
than once to stare up at a portrait on a wall, or to take in her hand
something she was curious concerning. When she at last reached the entrance-hall, coming into it through a door
she pushed open, using all her childish strength, she stood in the midst
of it and gazed about her with a new curiosity and pleasure. It was a
fine place, with antlers, and arms, and foxes' brushes hung upon the
walls, and with carved panels of black oak, and oaken floor and
furnishings. All in it was disorderly and showed rough usage; but once
it had been a notable feature of the house, and well worth better care
than had been bestowed upon it. She discovered on the walls many
trophies that attracted her, but these she could not reach, and could
only gaze and wonder at; but on an old oaken settle she found some things
she could lay hands on, and forthwith seized and sat down upon the floor
to play with them. One of them was a hunting-crop, which she brandished
grandly, until she was more taken with a powder-flask which it so
happened her father, Sir Jeoffry, had lain down but a few minutes before,
in passing through. He was going forth coursing, and had stepped into
the dining-hall to toss off a bumper of brandy. When he had helped himself from the buffet, and came back in haste, the
first thing he clapped eyes on was his offspring pouring forth the powder
from his flask upon the oaken floor. He had never seen her since that
first occasion after the unfortunate incident of her birth, and beholding
a child wasting his good powder at the moment he most wanted it and had
no time to spare, and also not having had it recalled to his mind for
years that he was a parent, except when he found himself forced
reluctantly to pay for some small need, he beheld in the young offender
only some impudent servant's brat, who had strayed into his domain and
applied itself at once to mischief. He sprang upon her, and seizing her by the arm, whirled her to her feet
with no little violence, snatching the powder-flask from her, and dealing
her a sound box on the ear. "Blood and damnation on thee, thou impudent little baggage!" he shouted. "I'll break thy neck for thee, little scurvy beast;" and pulled the bell
as he were like to break the wire. But he had reckoned falsely on what he dealt with. Miss uttered a shriek
of rage which rang through the roof like a clarion. She snatched the
crop from the floor, rushed at him, and fell upon him like a thousand
little devils, beating his big legs with all the strength of her passion,
and pouring forth oaths such as would have done credit to Doll Lightfoot
herself. "Damn _thee_!--damn _thee_!" --she roared and screamed, flogging him. "I'll tear thy eyes out! I'll cut thy liver from thee! Damn thy soul to
hell!" And this choice volley was with such spirit and fury poured forth, that
Sir Jeoffry let his hand drop from the bell, fell into a great burst of
laughter, and stood thus roaring while she beat him and shrieked and
stormed. The servants, hearing the jangled bell, attracted by the tumult, and of a
sudden missing Mistress Clorinda, ran in consternation to the hall, and
there beheld this truly pretty sight--Miss beating her father's legs, and
tearing at him tooth and nail, while he stood shouting with laughter as
if he would split his sides. "Who is the little cockatrice?" he cried, the tears streaming down his
florid cheeks. "Who is the young she-devil? Ods bodikins, who is she?" For a second or so the servants stared at each other aghast, not knowing
what to say, or venturing to utter a word; and then the nurse, who had
come up panting, dared to gasp forth the truth. "'Tis Mistress Clorinda, Sir Jeoffry," she stammered--"my lady's last
infant--the one of whom she died in childbed." His big laugh broke in two, as one might say. He looked down at the
young fury and stared. She was out of breath with beating him, and had
ceased and fallen back apace, and was staring up at him also, breathing
defiance and hatred. Her big black eyes were flames, her head was thrown
up and back, her cheeks were blood scarlet, and her great crop of crow-
black hair stood out about her beauteous, wicked little virago face, as
if it might change into Medusa's snakes. "Damn thee!" she shrieked at him again. "I'll kill thee, devil!" Sir Jeoffry broke into his big laugh afresh. "Clorinda do they call thee, wench?" he said. "Jeoffry thou shouldst
have been but for thy mother's folly. A fiercer little devil for thy
size I never saw--nor a handsomer one." And he seized her from where she stood, and held her at his big arms'
length, gazing at her uncanny beauty with looks that took her in from
head to foot. CHAPTER III--Wherein Sir Jeoffry's boon companions drink a toast


Her beauty of face, her fine body, her strength of limb, and great growth
for her age, would have pleased him if she had possessed no other
attraction, but the daring of her fury and her stable-boy breeding so
amused him and suited his roystering tastes that he took to her as the
finest plaything in the world. He set her on the floor, forgetting his coursing, and would have made
friends with her, but at first she would have none of him, and scowled at
him in spite of all he did. The brandy by this time had mounted to his
head and put him in the mood for frolic, liquor oftenest making him
gamesome. He felt as if he were playing with a young dog or marking the
spirit of a little fighting cock. He ordered the servants back to their
kitchen, who stole away, the women amazed, and the men concealing grins
which burst forth into guffaws of laughter when they came into their hall
below. "'Tis as we said," they chuckled. "He had but to see her beauty and find
her a bigger devil than he, and 'twas done. The mettle of her--damning
and flogging him! Never was there a finer sight! She feared him no more
than if he had been a spaniel--and he roaring and laughing till he was
like to burst." "Dost know who I am?" Sir Jeoffry was asking the child, grinning himself
as he stood before her where she sat on the oaken settle on which he had
lifted her. "No," quoth little Mistress, her black brows drawn down, her handsome
owl's eyes verily seeming to look him through and through in search of
somewhat; for, in sooth, her rage abating before his jovial humour, the
big burly laugher attracted her attention, though she was not disposed to
show him that she leaned towards any favour or yielding. "I am thy Dad," he said. "'Twas thy Dad thou gavest such a trouncing. And thou hast an arm, too. Let's cast an eye on it." He took her wrist and pushed up her sleeve, but she dragged back. "Will not be mauled," she cried. "Get away from me!" He shouted with laughter again. He had seen that the little arm was as
white and hard as marble, and had such muscles as a great boy might have
been a braggart about. "By Gad!" he said, elated. "What a wench of six years old. Wilt have my
crop and trounce thy Dad again!" He picked up the crop from the place where she had thrown it, and
forthwith gave it in her hand. She took it, but was no more in the
humour to beat him, and as she looked still frowning from him to the
whip, the latter brought back to her mind the horse she had set out in
search of. "Where is my horse?" she said, and 'twas in the tone of an imperial
demand. "Where is he?" "Thy horse!" he echoed. "Which is thy horse then?" "Rake is my horse," she answered--"the big black one. The man took him
again;" and she ripped out a few more oaths and unchaste expressions,
threatening what she would do for the man in question; the which
delighted him more than ever. "Rake is my horse," she ended. "None else
shall ride him." "None else?" cried he. "Thou canst not ride him, baggage!" She looked at him with scornful majesty. "Where is he?" she demanded. And the next instant hearing the beast's
restless feet grinding into the gravel outside as he fretted at having
been kept waiting so long, she remembered what the stable-boy had said of
having seen her favourite standing before the door, and struggling and
dropping from the settle, she ran to look out; whereupon having done so,
she shouted in triumph. "He is here!" she said. "I see him;" and went pell-mell down the stone
steps to his side. Sir Jeoffry followed her in haste. 'Twould not have been to his humour
now to have her brains kicked out. "Hey!" he called, as he hurried. "Keep away from his heels, thou little
devil." But she had run to the big beast's head with another shout, and caught
him round his foreleg, laughing, and Rake bent his head down and nosed
her in a fumbling caress, on which, the bridle coming within her reach,
she seized it and held his head that she might pat him, to which
familiarity the beast was plainly well accustomed. "He is my horse," quoth she grandly when her father reached her. "He
will not let Giles play so." Sir Jeoffry gazed and swelled with pleasure in her. "Would have said 'twas a lie if I had not seen it," he said to himself. "'Tis no girl this, I swear. I thought 'twas my horse," he said to her,
"but 'tis plain enough he is thine." "Put me up!" said his new-found offspring. "Hast rid him before?" Sir Jeoffry asked, with some lingering misgiving. "Tell thy Dad if thou hast rid him." She gave him a look askance under her long fringed lids--a surly yet half-
slyly relenting look, because she wanted to get her way of him, and had
the cunning wit and shrewdness of a child witch. "Ay!" quoth she. "Put me up--Dad!" He was not a man of quick mind, his brain having been too many years
bemuddled with drink, but he had a rough instinct which showed him all
the wondrous shrewdness of her casting that last word at him to wheedle
him, even though she looked sullen in the saying it. It made him roar
again for very exultation. "Put me up, Dad!" he cried. "That will I--and see what thou wilt do." He lifted her, she springing as he set his hands beneath her arms, and
flinging her legs over astride across the saddle when she reached it. She
was all fire and excitement, and caught the reins like an old huntsman,
and with such a grasp as was amazing. She sat up with a straight, strong
back, her whole face glowing and sparkling with exultant joy. Rake
seemed to answer to her excited little laugh almost as much as to her
hand. It seemed to wake his spirit and put him in good-humour. He
started off with her down the avenue at a light, spirited trot, while
she, clinging with her little legs and sitting firm and fearless, made
him change into canter and gallop, having actually learned all his paces
like a lesson, and knowing his mouth as did his groom, who was her
familiar and slave. Had she been of the build ordinary with children of
her age, she could not have stayed upon his back; but she sat him like a
child jockey, and Sir Jeoffry, watching and following her, clapped his
hands boisterously and hallooed for joy. "Lord, Lord!" he said. "There's not a man in the shire has such another
little devil--and Rake, 'her horse,'" grinning--"and she to ride him so. I love thee, wench--hang me if I do not!" She made him play with her and with Rake for a good hour, and then took
him back to the stables, and there ordered him about finely among the
dogs and horses, perceiving that somehow this great man she had got hold
of was a creature who was in power and could be made use of. When they returned to the house, he had her to eat her mid-day meal with
him, when she called for ale, and drank it, and did good trencher duty,
making him the while roar with laughter at her impudent child-talk. "Never have I so split my sides since I was twenty," he said. "It makes
me young again to roar so. She shall not leave my sight, since by chance
I have found her. 'Tis too good a joke to lose, when times are dull, as
they get to be as a man's years go on." He sent for her woman and laid strange new commands on her. "Where hath she hitherto been kept?" he asked. "In the west wing, where are the nurseries, and where Mistress Wimpole
abides with Mistress Barbara and Mistress Anne," the woman answered, with
a frightened curtsey. "Henceforth she shall live in this part of the house where I do," he
said. "Make ready the chambers that were my lady's, and prepare to stay
there with her." From that hour the child's fate was sealed. He made himself her
playfellow, and romped with and indulged her until she became fonder of
him than of any groom or stable-boy she had been companions with before. But, indeed, she had never been given to bestowing much affection on
those around her, seeming to feel herself too high a personage to show
softness. The ones she showed most favour to were those who served her
best; and even to them it was always _favour_ she showed, not tenderness. Certain dogs and horses she was fond of, Rake coming nearest to her
heart, and the place her father won in her affections was somewhat like
to Rake's. She made him her servant and tyrannised over him, but at the
same time followed and imitated him as if she had been a young spaniel he
was training. The life the child led, it would have broken a motherly
woman's heart to hear about; but there was no good woman near her, her
mother's relatives, and even Sir Jeoffry's own, having cut themselves off
early from them--Wildairs Hall and its master being no great credit to
those having the misfortune to be connected with them. The neighbouring
gentry had gradually ceased to visit the family some time before her
ladyship's death, and since then the only guests who frequented the place
were a circle of hunting, drinking, and guzzling boon companions of Sir
Jeoffry's own, who joined him in all his carousals and debaucheries. To these he announced his discovery of his daughter with tumultuous
delight. He told them, amid storms of laughter, of his first encounter
with her; of her flogging him with his own crop, and cursing him like a
trooper; of her claiming Rake as her own horse, and swearing at the man
who had dared to take him from the stable to ride; and of her sitting him
like an infant jockey, and seeming, by some strange power, to have
mastered him as no other had been able heretofore to do. Then he had her
brought into the dining-room, where they sat over their bottles drinking
deep, and setting her on the table, he exhibited her to them, boasting of
her beauty, showing them her splendid arm and leg and thigh, measuring
her height, and exciting her to test the strength of the grip of her hand
and the power of her little fist. "Saw you ever a wench like her?" he cried, as they all shouted with
laughter and made jokes not too polite, but such as were of the sole kind
they were given to. "Has any man among you begot a boy as big and
handsome? Hang me! if she would not knock down any lad of ten if she
were in a fury." "We wild dogs are out of favour with the women," cried one of the best
pleased among them, a certain Lord Eldershawe, whose seat was a few miles
from Wildairs Hall--"women like nincompoops and chaplains. Let us take
this one for our toast, and bring her up as girls should be brought up to
be companions for men. I give you, Mistress Clorinda Wildairs--Mistress
Clorinda, the enslaver of six years old--bumpers, lads!--bumpers!" And they set her in the very midst of the big table and drank her health,
standing, bursting into a jovial, ribald song; and the child, excited by
the noise and laughter, actually broke forth and joined them in a high,
strong treble, the song being one she was quite familiar with, having
heard it often enough in the stable to have learned the words pat. * * * * *

Two weeks after his meeting with her, Sir Jeoffry was seized with the
whim to go up to London and set her forth with finery. 'Twas but rarely
he went up to town, having neither money to waste, nor finding great
attraction in the more civilised quarters of the world. He brought her
back such clothes as for richness and odd, unsuitable fashion child never
wore before. There were brocades that stood alone with splendour of
fabric, there was rich lace, fine linen, ribbands, farthingales,
swansdown tippets, and little slippers with high red heels. He had a
wardrobe made for her such as the finest lady of fashion could scarcely
boast, and the tiny creature was decked out in it, and on great occasions
even strung with her dead mother's jewels. Among these strange things, he had the fantastical notion to have made
for her several suits of boy's clothes: pink and blue satin coats, little
white, or amber, or blue satin breeches, ruffles of lace, and waistcoats
embroidered with colours and silver or gold. There was also a small
scarlet-coated hunting costume and all the paraphernalia of the chase. It
was Sir Jeoffry's finest joke to bid her woman dress her as a boy, and
then he would have her brought to the table where he and his fellows were
dining together, and she would toss off her little bumper with the best
of them, and rip out childish oaths, and sing them, to their delight,
songs she had learned from the stable-boys. She cared more for dogs and
horses than for finery, and when she was not in the humour to be made a
puppet of, neither tirewoman nor devil could put her into her brocades;
but she liked the excitement of the dining-room, and, as time went on,
would be dressed in her flowered petticoats in a passion of eagerness to
go and show herself, and coquet in her lace and gewgaws with men old
enough to be her father, and loose enough to find her premature airs and
graces a fine joke indeed. She ruled them all with her temper and her
shrewish will. She would have her way in all things, or there should be
no sport with her, and she would sing no songs for them, but would flout
them bitterly, and sit in a great chair with her black brows drawn down,
and her whole small person breathing rancour and disdain. Sir Jeoffry, who had bullied his wife, had now the pleasurable experience
of being henpecked by his daughter; for so, indeed, he was. Miss ruled
him with a rod of iron, and wielded her weapon with such skill that
before a year had elapsed he obeyed her as the servants below stairs had
done in her infancy. She had no fear of his great oaths, for she
possessed a strangely varied stock of her own upon which she could always
draw, and her voice being more shrill than his, if not of such bigness,
her ear-piercing shrieks and indomitable perseverance always proved too
much for him in the end. It must be admitted likewise that her violence
of temper and power of will were somewhat beyond his own, notwithstanding
her tender years and his reputation. In fact, he found himself obliged
to observe this, and finally made something of a merit and joke of it. "There is no managing of the little shrew," he would say. "Neither man
nor devil can bend or break her. If I smashed every bone in her carcass,
she would die shrieking hell at me and defiance." If one admits the truth, it must be owned that if she had not had
bestowed upon her by nature gifts of beauty and vivacity so
extraordinary, and had been cursed with a thousandth part of the
vixenishness she displayed every day of her life, he would have broken
every bone in her carcass without a scruple or a qualm. But her beauty
seemed but to grow with every hour that passed, and it was by exceeding
good fortune exactly the fashion of beauty which he admired the most. When she attained her tenth year she was as tall as a fine boy of twelve,
and of such a shape and carriage as young Diana herself might have
envied. Her limbs were long, and most divinely moulded, and of a
strength that caused admiration and amazement in all beholders. Her
father taught her to follow him in the hunting-field, and when she
appeared upon her horse, clad in her little breeches and top-boots and
scarlet coat, child though she was, she set the field on fire. She
learned full early how to coquet and roll her fine eyes; but it is also
true that she was not much of a languisher, as all her ogling was of a
destructive or proudly-attacking kind. It was her habit to leave others
to languish, and herself to lead them with disdainful vivacity to doing
so. She was the talk, and, it must be admitted, the scandal, of the
county by the day she was fifteen. The part wherein she lived was a
boisterous hunting shire where there were wide ditches and high hedges to
leap, and rough hills and moors to gallop over, and within the region
neither polite life nor polite education were much thought of; but even
in the worst portions of it there were occasional virtuous matrons who
shook their heads with much gravity and wonder over the beautiful
Mistress Clorinda. CHAPTER IV--Lord Twemlow's chaplain visits his patron's kinsman, and
Mistress Clorinda shines on her birthday night


Uncivilised and almost savage as her girlish life was, and unregulated by
any outward training as was her mind, there were none who came in contact
with her who could be blind to a certain strong, clear wit, and
unconquerableness of purpose, for which she was remarkable. She ever
knew full well what she desired to gain or to avoid, and once having
fixed her mind upon any object, she showed an adroitness and brilliancy
of resource, a control of herself and others, the which there was no
circumventing. She never made a blunder because she could not control
the expression of her emotions; and when she gave way to a passion, 'twas
because she chose to do so, having naught to lose, and in the midst of
all their riotous jesting with her the boon companions of Sir Jeoffry
knew this. "Had she a secret to keep, child though she is," said Eldershawe, "there
is none--man or woman--who could scare or surprise it from her; and 'tis
a strange quality to note so early in a female creature." She spent her days with her father and his dissolute friends, treated
half like a boy, half a fantastical queen, until she was fourteen. She
hunted and coursed, shot birds, leaped hedges and ditches, reigned at the
riotous feastings, and coquetted with these mature, and in some cases
elderly, men, as if she looked forward to doing naught else all her life. But one day, after she had gone out hunting with her father, riding Rake,
who had been given to her, and wearing her scarlet coat, breeches, and
top-boots, one of the few remaining members of her mother's family sent
his chaplain to remonstrate and advise her father to command her to
forbear from appearing in such impudent attire. There was, indeed, a stirring scene when this message was delivered by
its bearer. The chaplain was an awkward, timid creature, who had heard
stories enough of Wildairs Hall and its master to undertake his mission
with a quaking soul. To have refused to obey any behest of his patron
would have cost him his living, and knowing this beyond a doubt, he was
forced to gird up his loins and gather together all the little courage he
could muster to beard the lion in his den. The first thing he beheld on entering the big hall was a beautiful tall
youth wearing his own rich black hair, and dressed in scarlet coat for
hunting. He was playing with a dog, making it leap over his crop, and
both laughing and swearing at its clumsiness. He glanced at the chaplain
with a laughing, brilliant eye, returning the poor man's humble bow with
a slight nod as he plainly hearkened to what he said as he explained his
errand. "I come from my Lord Twemlow, who is your master's kinsman," the chaplain
faltered; "I am bidden to see and speak to him if it be possible, and his
lordship much desires that Sir Jeoffry will allow it to be so. My Lord
Twemlow--"

The beautiful youth left his playing with the dog and came forward with
all the air of the young master of the house. "My Lord Twemlow sends you?" he said. "'Tis long since his lordship
favoured us with messages. Where is Sir Jeoffry, Lovatt?" "In the dining-hall," answered the servant. "He went there but a moment
past, Mistress." The chaplain gave such a start as made him drop his shovel hat. "Mistress!" And this was she--this fine young creature who was tall and
grandly enough built and knit to seem a radiant being even when clad in
masculine attire. He picked up his hat and bowed so low that it almost
swept the floor in his obeisance. He was not used to female beauty which
deigned to cast great smiling eyes upon him, for at my Lord Twemlow's
table he sat so far below the salt that women looked not his way. This beauty looked at him as if she was amused at the thought of
something in her own mind. He wondered tremblingly if she guessed what
he came for and knew how her father would receive it. "Come with me," she said; "I will take you to him. He would not see you
if I did not. He does not love his lordship tenderly enough." She led the way, holding her head jauntily and high, while he cast down
his eyes lest his gaze should be led to wander in a way unseemly in one
of his cloth. Such a foot and such--! He felt it more becoming and
safer to lift his eyes to the ceiling and keep them there, which gave him
somewhat the aspect of one praying. Sir Jeoffry stood at the buffet with a flagon of ale in his hand, taking
his stirrup cup. At the sight of a stranger and one attired in the garb
of a chaplain, he scowled surprisedly. "What's this?" quoth he. "What dost want, Clo? I have no leisure for a
sermon." Mistress Clorinda went to the buffet and filled a tankard for herself and
carried it back to the table, on the edge of which she half sat, with one
leg bent, one foot resting on the floor. "Time thou wilt have to take, Dad," she said, with an arch grin, showing
two rows of gleaming pearls. "This gentleman is my Lord Twemlow's
chaplain, whom he sends to exhort you, requesting you to have the
civility to hear him." "Exhort be damned, and Twemlow be damned too!" cried Sir Jeoffry, who had
a great quarrel with his lordship and hated him bitterly. "What does the
canting fool mean?" "Sir," faltered the poor message-bearer, "his lordship hath--hath been
concerned--having heard--"

The handsome creature balanced against the table took the tankard from
her lips and laughed. "Having heard thy daughter rides to field in breeches, and is an unseemly-
behaving wench," she cried, "his lordship sends his chaplain to deliver a
discourse thereon--not choosing to come himself. Is not that thy errand,
reverend sir?" The chaplain, poor man, turned pale, having caught, as she spoke, a
glimpse of Sir Jeoffry's reddening visage. "Madam," he faltered, bowing--"Madam, I ask pardon of you most humbly! If
it were your pleasure to deign to--to--allow me--"

She set the tankard on the table with a rollicking smack, and thrust her
hands in her breeches-pockets, swaying with laughter; and, indeed, 'twas
ringing music, her rich great laugh, which, when she grew of riper years,
was much lauded and written verses on by her numerous swains. "If 'twere my pleasure to go away and allow you to speak, free from the
awkwardness of a young lady's presence," she said. "But 'tis not, as it
happens, and if I stay here, I shall be a protection." In truth, he required one. Sir Jeoffry broke into a torrent of
blasphemy. He damned both kinsman and chaplain, and raged at the
impudence of both in daring to approach him, swearing to horsewhip my
lord if they ever met, and to have the chaplain kicked out of the house,
and beyond the park gates themselves. But Mistress Clorinda chose to
make it her whim to take it in better humour, and as a joke with a fine
point to it. She laughed at her father's storming, and while the
chaplain quailed before it with pallid countenance and fairly hang-dog
look, she seemed to find it but a cause for outbursts of merriment. "Hold thy tongue a bit, Dad," she cried, when he had reached his loudest,
"and let his reverence tell us what his message is. We have not even
heard it." "Want not to hear it!" shouted Sir Jeoffry. "Dost think I'll stand his
impudence? Not I!" "What was your message?" demanded the young lady of the chaplain. "You
cannot return without delivering it. Tell it to me. _I_ choose it shall
be told." The chaplain clutched and fumbled with his hat, pale, and dropping his
eyes upon the floor, for very fear. "Pluck up thy courage, man," said Clorinda. "I will uphold thee. The
message?" "Your pardon, Madam--'twas this," the chaplain faltered. "My lord
commanded me to warn your honoured father--that if he did not beg you to
leave off wearing--wearing--"

"Breeches," said Mistress Clorinda, slapping her knee. The chaplain blushed with modesty, though he was a man of sallow
countenance. "No gentleman," he went on, going more lamely at each
word--"notwithstanding your great beauty--no gentleman--"

"Would marry me?" the young lady ended for him, with merciful
good-humour. "For if you--if a young lady be permitted to bear herself in such a
manner as will cause her to be held lightly, she can make no match that
will not be a dishonour to her family--and--and--"

"And may do worse!" quoth Mistress Clo, and laughed until the room rang. Sir Jeoffry's rage was such as made him like to burst; but she restrained
him when he would have flung his tankard at the chaplain's head, and amid
his storm of curses bundled the poor man out of the room, picking up his
hat which in his hurry and fright he let fall, and thrusting it into his
hand. "Tell his lordship," she said, laughing still as she spoke the final
words, "that I say he is right--and I will see to it that no disgrace
befalls him." "Forsooth, Dad," she said, returning, "perhaps the old son of
a--"--something unmannerly--"is not so great a fool. As for me, I mean
to make a fine marriage and be a great lady, and I know of none
hereabouts to suit me but the old Earl of Dunstanwolde, and 'tis said he
rates at all but modest women, and, in faith, he might not find breeches
mannerly. I will not hunt in them again." She did not, though once or twice when she was in a wild mood, and her
father entertained at dinner those of his companions whom she was the
most inclined to, she swaggered in among them in her daintiest suits of
male attire, and caused their wine-shot eyes to gloat over her boyish-
maiden charms and jaunty airs and graces. On the night of her fifteenth birthday Sir Jeoffry gave a great dinner to
his boon companions and hers. She had herself commanded that there
should be no ladies at the feast; for she chose to announce that she
should appear at no more such, having the wit to see that she was too
tall a young lady for childish follies, and that she had now arrived at
an age when her market must be made. "I shall have women enough henceforth to be dull with," she said. "Thou
art but a poor match-maker, Dad, or wouldst have thought of it for me. But not once has it come into thy pate that I have no mother to angle in
my cause and teach me how to cast sheep's eyes at bachelors. Long-tailed
petticoats from this time for me, and hoops and patches, and ogling over
fans--until at last, if I play my cards well, some great lord will look
my way and be taken by my shape and my manners." "With thy shape, Clo, God knows every man will," laughed Sir Jeoffry,
"but I fear me not with thy manners. Thou hast the manners of a baggage,
and they are second nature to thee." "They are what I was born with," answered Mistress Clorinda. "They came
from him that begot me, and he has not since improved them. But
now"--making a great sweeping curtsey, her impudent bright beauty almost
dazzling his eyes--"now, after my birth-night, they will be bettered; but
this one night I will have my last fling." When the men trooped into the black oak wainscotted dining-hall on the
eventful night, they found their audacious young hostess awaiting them in
greater and more daring beauty than they had ever before beheld. She
wore knee-breeches of white satin, a pink satin coat embroidered with
silver roses, white silk stockings, and shoes with great buckles of
brilliants, revealing a leg so round and strong and delicately moulded,
and a foot so arched and slender, as surely never before, they swore one
and all, woman had had to display. She met them standing jauntily
astride upon the hearth, her back to the fire, and she greeted each one
as he came with some pretty impudence. Her hair was tied back and
powdered, her black eyes were like lodestars, drawing all men, and her
colour was that of a ripe pomegranate. She had a fine, haughty little
Roman nose, a mouth like a scarlet bow, a wonderful long throat, and
round cleft chin. A dazzling mien indeed she possessed, and ready enough
she was to shine before them. Sir Jeoffry was now elderly, having been a
man of forty when united to his conjugal companion. Most of his friends
were of his own age, so that it had not been with unripe youth Mistress
Clorinda had been in the habit of consorting. But upon this night a
newcomer was among the guests. He was a young relation of one of the
older men, and having come to his kinsman's house upon a visit, and
having proved himself, in spite of his youth, to be a young fellow of
humour, high courage in the hunting-field, and by no means averse either
to entering upon or discussing intrigue and gallant adventure, had made
himself something of a favourite. His youthful beauty for a man almost
equalled that of Mistress Clorinda herself. He had an elegant, fine
shape, of great strength and vigour, his countenance was delicately ruddy
and handsomely featured, his curling fair hair flowed loose upon his
shoulders, and, though masculine in mould, his ankle was as slender and
his buckled shoe as arched as her own. He was, it is true, twenty-four years of age and a man, while she was but
fifteen and a woman, but being so tall and built with such unusual vigour
of symmetry, she was a beauteous match for him, and both being attired in
fashionable masculine habit, these two pretty young fellows standing
smiling saucily at each other were a charming, though singular,
spectacle. This young man was already well known in the modish world of town for his
beauty and adventurous spirit. He was indeed already a beau and
conqueror of female hearts. It was suspected that he cherished a private
ambition to set the modes in beauties and embroidered waistcoats himself
in time, and be as renowned abroad and as much the town talk as certain
other celebrated beaux had been before him. The art of ogling tenderly
and of uttering soft nothings he had learned during his first season in
town, and as he had a great melting blue eye, the figure of an Adonis,
and a white and shapely hand for a ring, he was well equipped for
conquest. He had darted many an inflaming glance at Mistress Clorinda
before the first meats were removed. Even in London he had heard a vague
rumour of this handsome young woman, bred among her father's dogs,
horses, and boon companions, and ripening into a beauty likely to make
town faces pale. He had almost fallen into the spleen on hearing that
she had left her boy's clothes and vowed she would wear them no more, as
above all things he had desired to see how she carried them and what
charms they revealed. On hearing from his host and kinsman that she had
said that on her birth-night she would bid them farewell for ever by
donning them for the last time, he was consumed with eagerness to obtain
an invitation. This his kinsman besought for him, and, behold! the first
glance the beauty shot at him pierced his inflammable bosom like a dart. Never before had it been his fortune to behold female charms so dazzling
and eyes of such lustre and young majesty. The lovely baggage had a
saucy way of standing with her white jewelled hands in her pockets like a
pretty fop, and throwing up her little head like a modish beauty who was
of royal blood; and these two tricks alone, he felt, might have set on
fire the heart of a man years older and colder than himself. If she had been of the order of soft-natured charmers, they would have
fallen into each other's eyes before the wine was changed; but this
Mistress Clorinda was not. She did not fear to meet the full battery of
his enamoured glances, but she did not choose to return them. She played
her part of the pretty young fellow who was a high-spirited beauty, with
more of wit and fire than she had ever played it before. The rollicking
hunting-squires, who had been her play-fellows so long, devoured her with
their delighted glances and roared with laughter at her sallies. Their
jokes and flatteries were not of the most seemly, but she had not been
bred to seemliness and modesty, and was no more ignorant than if she had
been, in sooth, some gay young springald of a lad. To her it was part of
the entertainment that upon this last night they conducted themselves as
beseemed her boyish masquerading. Though country-bred, she had lived
among companions who were men of the world and lived without restraints,
and she had so far learned from them that at fifteen years old she was as
worldly and as familiar with the devices of intrigue as she would be at
forty. So far she had not been pushed to practising them, her singular
life having thrown her among few of her own age, and those had chanced to
be of a sort she disdainfully counted as country bumpkins. But the young gallant introduced to-night into the world she lived in was
no bumpkin, and was a dandy of the town. His name was Sir John Oxon, and
he had just come into his title and a pretty property. His hands were as
white and bejewelled as her own, his habit was of the latest fashionable
cut, and his fair flowing locks scattered a delicate French perfume she
did not even know the name of. But though she observed all these attractions and found them powerful,
young Sir John remarked, with a slight sinking qualm, that her great eye
did not fall before his amorous glances, but met them with high smiling
readiness, and her colour never blanched or heightened a whit for all
their masterly skilfulness. But he had sworn to himself that he would
approach close enough to her to fire off some fine speech before the
night was ended, and he endeavoured to bear himself with at least an
outward air of patience until he beheld his opportunity. When the last dish was removed and bottles and bumpers stood upon the
board, she sprang up on her chair and stood before them all, smiling down
the long table with eyes like flashing jewels. Her hands were thrust in
her pockets--with her pretty young fop's air, and she drew herself to her
full comely height, her beauteous lithe limbs and slender feet set
smartly together. Twenty pairs of masculine eyes were turned upon her
beauty, but none so ardently as the young one's across the table. "Look your last on my fine shape," she proclaimed in her high, rich
voice. "You will see but little of the lower part of it when it is hid
in farthingales and petticoats. Look your last before I go to don my
fine lady's furbelows." And when they filled their glasses and lifted them and shouted admiring
jests to her, she broke into one of her stable-boy songs, and sang it in
the voice of a skylark. No man among them was used to showing her the courtesies of polite
breeding. She had been too long a boy to them for that to have entered
any mind, and when she finished her song, sprang down, and made for the
door, Sir John beheld his long-looked-for chance, and was there before
her to open it with a great bow, made with his hand upon his heart and
his fair locks falling. "You rob us of the rapture of beholding great beauties, Madam," he said
in a low, impassioned voice. "But there should be indeed but _one_ happy
man whose bliss it is to gaze upon such perfections." "I am fifteen years old to-night," she answered; "and as yet I have not
set eyes upon him." "How do you know that, madam?" he said, bowing lower still. She laughed her great rich laugh. "Forsooth, I do not know," she retorted. "He may be here this very night
among this company; and as it might be so, I go to don my modesty." And she bestowed on him a parting shot in the shape of one of her
prettiest young fop waves of the hand, and was gone from him. * * * * *

When the door closed behind her and Sir John Oxon returned to the table,
for a while a sort of dulness fell upon the party. Not being of quick
minds or sentiments, these country roisterers failed to understand the
heavy cloud of spleen and lack of spirit they experienced, and as they
filled their glasses and tossed off one bumper after another to cure it,
they soon began again to laugh and fell into boisterous joking. They talked mostly, indeed, of their young playfellow, of whom they felt,
in some indistinct manner, they were to be bereft; they rallied Sir
Jeoffry, told stories of her childhood and made pictures of her budding
beauties, comparing them with those of young ladies who were celebrated
toasts. "She will sail among them like a royal frigate," said one; "and they will
pale before her lustre as a tallow dip does before an illumination." The clock struck twelve before she returned to them. Just as the last
stroke sounded the door was thrown open, and there she stood, a woman on
each side of her, holding a large silver candelabra bright with wax
tapers high above her, so that she was in a flood of light. She was attired in rich brocade of crimson and silver, and wore a great
hooped petticoat, which showed off her grandeur, her waist of no more
bigness than a man's hands could clasp, set in its midst like the stem of
a flower; her black hair was rolled high and circled with jewels, her
fair long throat blazed with a collar of diamonds, and the majesty of her
eye and lip and brow made up a mien so dazzling that every man sprang to
his feet beholding her. She made a sweeping obeisance and then stood up before them, her head
thrown back and her lips curving in the triumphant mocking smile of a
great beauty looking upon them all as vassals. "Down upon your knees," she cried, "and drink to me kneeling. From this
night all men must bend so--all men on whom I deign to cast my eyes." CHAPTER V--"Not I," said she. "There thou mayst trust me. I would not
be found out." She went no more a-hunting in boy's clothes, but from this time forward
wore brocades and paduasoys, fine lawn and lace. Her tirewoman was kept
so busily engaged upon making rich habits, fragrant waters and essences,
and so running at her bidding to change her gown or dress her head in
some new fashion, that her life was made to her a weighty burden to bear,
and also a painful one. Her place had before been an easy one but for
her mistress's choleric temper, but it was so no more. Never had young
lady been so exacting and so tempestuous when not pleased with the
adorning of her face and shape. In the presence of polite strangers,
whether ladies or gentlemen, Mistress Clorinda in these days chose to
chasten her language and give less rein to her fantastical passions, but
alone in her closet with her woman, if a riband did but not suit her
fancy, or a hoop not please, she did not fear to be as scurrilous as she
chose. In this discreet retirement she rapped out oaths and boxed her
woman's ears with a vigorous hand, tore off her gowns and stamped them
beneath her feet, or flung pots of pomade at the poor woman's head. She
took these freedoms with such a readiness and spirit that she was served
with a despatch and humbleness scarcely to be equalled, and, it is
certain, never excelled. The high courage and undaunted will which had been the engines she had
used to gain her will from her infant years aided her in these days to
carry out what her keen mind and woman's wit had designed, which was to
take the county by storm with her beauty, and reign toast and enslaver
until such time as she won the prize of a husband of rich estates and
notable rank. It was soon bruited abroad, to the amazement of the county, that Mistress
Clorinda Wildairs had changed her strange and unseemly habits of life,
and had become as much a young lady of fashion and breeding as her birth
and charm demanded. This was first made known by her appearing one
Sunday morning at church, accompanied--as though attended with a retinue
of servitors--by Mistress Wimpole and her two sisters, whose plain faces,
awkward shape, and still more awkward attire were such a foil to her
glowing loveliness as set it in high relief. It was seldom that the
coach from Wildairs Hall drew up before the lych-gate, but upon rare
Sunday mornings Mistress Wimpole and her two charges contrived, if Sir
Jeoffry was not in an ill-humour and the coachman was complaisant, to be
driven to service. Usually, however, they trudged afoot, and, if the day
chanced to be sultry, arrived with their snub-nosed faces of a high and
shiny colour, or if the country roads were wet, with their petticoats
bemired. This morning, when the coach drew up, the horses were well groomed, the
coachman smartly dressed, and a footman was in attendance, who sprang to
earth and opened the door with a flourish. The loiterers in the churchyard, and those who were approaching the gate
or passing towards the church porch, stared with eyes wide stretched in
wonder and incredulity. Never had such a thing before been beheld or
heard of as what they now saw in broad daylight. Mistress Clorinda, clad in highest town fashion, in brocades and silver
lace and splendid furbelows, stepped forth from the chariot with the air
of a queen. She had the majestic composure of a young lady who had worn
nothing less modish than such raiment all her life, and who had prayed
decorously beneath her neighbours' eyes since she had left her nurse's
care. Her sisters and their governess looked timorous, and as if they knew not
where to cast their eyes for shamefacedness; but not so Mistress
Clorinda, who moved forward with a stately, swimming gait, her fine head
in the air. As she stepped into the porch a young gentleman drew back
and made a profound obeisance to her. She cast her eyes upon him and
returned it with a grace and condescension which struck the beholders
dumb with admiring awe. To some of the people of a commoner sort he was
a stranger, but all connected with the gentry knew he was Sir John Oxon,
who was staying at Eldershawe Park with his relative, whose estate it
was. How Mistress Clorinda contrived to manage it no one was aware but
herself, but after a few appearances at church she appeared at other
places. She was seen at dinners at fine houses, and began to be seen at
routs and balls. Where she was seen she shone, and with such radiance as
caused matchmaking matrons great dismay, and their daughters woeful
qualms. Once having shone, she could not be extinguished or hidden under
a bushel; for, being of rank and highly connected through mother as well
as father, and playing her cards with great wit and skill, she could not
be thrust aside. At her first hunt ball she set aflame every male breast in the shire,
unmasking such a battery of charms as no man could withstand the fire of. Her dazzling eye, her wondrous shape, the rich music of her laugh, and
the mocking wit of her sharp saucy tongue were weapons to have armed a
dozen women, and she was but one, and in the first rich tempting glow of
blooming youth. She turned more heads and caused more quarrels than she could have
counted had she sat up half the night. She went to her coach with her
father followed by a dozen gallants, each ready to spit the other for a
smile. Her smiles were wondrous, but there seemed always a touch of
mockery or disdain in them which made them more remembered than if they
had been softer. One man there was, who perchance found something in her high glance not
wholly scornful, but he was used to soft treatment from women, and had,
in sooth, expected milder glances than were bestowed upon him. This was
young Sir John Oxon, who had found himself among the fair sex that night
as great a beau as she had been a belle; but two dances he had won from
her, and this was more than any other man could boast, and what other
gallants envied him with darkest hatred. Sir Jeoffry, who had watched her as she queened it amongst rakes and fops
and honest country squires and knights, had marked the vigour with which
they plied her with an emotion which was a new sensation to his drink-
bemuddled brain. So far as it was in his nature to love another than
himself, he had learned to love this young lovely virago of his own flesh
and blood, perchance because she was the only creature who had never
quailed before him, and had always known how to bend him to her will. When the chariot rode away, he looked at her as she sat erect in the
early morning light, as unblenching, bright, and untouched in bloom as if
she had that moment risen from her pillow and washed her face in dew. He
was not so drunk as he had been at midnight, but he was a little maudlin. "By God, thou art handsome, Clo!" he said. "By God, I never saw a finer
woman!" "Nor I," she answered back, "which I thank Heaven for." "Thou pretty, brazen baggage," her father laughed. "Old Dunstanwolde
looked thee well over to-night. He never looked away from the moment he
clapped eyes on thee." "That I knew better than thee, Dad," said the beauty; "and I saw that he
could not have done it if he had tried. If there comes no richer,
younger great gentleman, he shall marry me." "Thou hast a sharp eye and a keen wit," said Sir Jeoffry, looking askance
at her with a new maggot in his brain. "Wouldst never play the fool, I
warrant. They will press thee hard and 'twill be hard to withstand their
love-making, but I shall never have to mount and ride off with pistols in
my holsters to bring back a man and make him marry thee, as Chris Crowell
had to do for his youngest wench. Thou wouldst never play the fool, I
warrant--wouldst thou, Clo?" She tossed her head and laughed like a young scornful devil, showing her
white pearl teeth between her lips' scarlet. "Not I," she said. "There thou mayst trust me. _I_ would not be found
out." She played her part as triumphant beauty so successfully that the
cleverest managing mother in the universe could not have bettered her
position. Gallants brawled for her; honest men fell at her feet;
romantic swains wrote verses to her, praising her eyes, her delicate
bosom, the carnation of her cheek, and the awful majesty of her mien. In
every revel she was queen, in every contest of beauties Venus, in every
spectacle of triumph empress of them all. The Earl of Dunstanwolde, who had the oldest name and the richest estates
in his own county and the six adjoining ones, who, having made a love-
match in his prime, and lost wife and heir but a year after his nuptials,
had been the despair of every maid and mother who knew him, because he
would not be melted to a marriageable mood. After the hunt ball this
mourning nobleman, who was by this time of ripe years, had appeared in
the world again as he had not done for many years. Before many months
had elapsed, it was known that his admiration of the new beauty was
confessed, and it was believed that he but waited further knowledge of
her to advance to the point of laying his title and estates at her feet. But though, two years before, the entire county would have rated low
indeed the wit and foresight of the man who had even hinted the
possibility of such honour and good fortune being in prospect for the
young lady, so great was Mistress Clorinda's brilliant and noble beauty,
and with such majesty she bore herself in these times, that there were
even those who doubted whether she would think my lord a rich enough
prize for her, and if, when he fell upon his knees, she would deign to
become his countess, feeling that she had such splendid wares to dispose
of as might be bartered for a duke, when she went to town and to court. During the length of more than one man's lifetime after, the reign of
Mistress Clorinda Wildairs was a memory recalled over the bottle at the
dining-table among men, some of whom had but heard their fathers vaunt
her beauties. It seemed as if in her person there was not a single flaw,
or indeed a charm, which had not reached the highest point of beauty. For
shape she might have vied with young Diana, mounted side by side with her
upon a pedestal; her raven locks were of a length and luxuriance to
clothe her as a garment, her great eye commanded and flashed as Juno's
might have done in the goddess's divinest moments of lovely pride, and
though it was said none ever saw it languish, each man who adored her was
maddened by the secret belief that Venus' self could not so melt in love
as she if she would stoop to loving--as each one prayed she
might--himself. Her hands and feet, her neck, the slimness of her waist,
her mantling crimson and ivory white, her little ear, her scarlet lip,
the pearls between them and her long white throat, were perfection each
and all, and catalogued with oaths of rapture. "She hath such beauties," one admirer said, "that a man must toast them
all and cannot drink to her as to a single woman. And she hath so many
that to slight none her servant must go from the table reeling." There was but one thing connected with her which was not a weapon to her
hand, and this was, that she was not a fortune. Sir Jeoffry had drunk
and rioted until he had but little left. He had cut his timber and let
his estate go to rack, having, indeed, no money to keep it up. The great
Hall, which had once been a fine old place, was almost a ruin. Its
carved oak and noble rooms and galleries were all of its past splendours
that remained. All had been sold that could be sold, and all the outcome
had been spent. The county, indeed, wondered where Mistress Clorinda's
fine clothes came from, and knew full well why she was not taken to court
to kneel to the Queen. That she was waiting for this to make her match,
the envious were quite sure, and did not hesitate to whisper pretty
loudly. The name of one man of rank and fortune after another was spoken of as
that of a suitor to her hand, but in some way it was discovered that she
refused them all. It was also known that they continued to worship her,
and that at any moment she could call even the best among them back. It
seemed that, while all the men were enamoured of her, there was not one
who could cure himself of his passion, however hopeless it might be. Her wit was as great as her beauty, and she had a spirit before which no
man could stand if she chose to be disdainful. To some she was so, and
had the whim to flout them with great brilliancy. Encounters with her
were always remembered, and if heard by those not concerned, were
considered worthy both of recollection and of being repeated to the
world; she had a tongue so nimble and a wit so full of fire. Young Sir John Oxon's visit to his relative at Eldershawe being at an
end, he returned to town, and remaining there through a few weeks of
fashionable gaiety, won new reputations as a triumpher over the female
heart. He made some renowned conquests and set the mode in some new
essences and sword-knots. But even these triumphs appeared to pall upon
him shortly, since he deserted the town and returned again to the
country, where, on this occasion, he did not stay with his relative, but
with Sir Jeoffry himself, who had taken a boisterous fancy to him. It had been much marked since the altered life of Mistress Clorinda that
she, who had previously defied all rules laid down on behaviour for young
ladies, and had been thought to do so because she knew none of them, now
proved that her wild fashion had been but wilfulness, since it was seen
that she must have observed and marked manners with the best. There
seemed no decorum she did not know how to observe with the most natural
grace. It was, indeed, all grace and majesty, there being no suggestion
of the prude about her, but rather the manner of a young lady having been
born with pride and stateliness, and most carefully bred. This was the
result of her wondrous wit, the highness of her talents, and the strength
of her will, which was of such power that she could carry out without
fail anything she chose to undertake. There are some women who have
beauty, and some who have wit or vigour of understanding, but she
possessed all three, and with them such courage and strength of nerve as
would have well equipped a man. Quick as her wit was and ready as were her brilliant quips and sallies,
there was no levity in her demeanour, and she kept Mistress Margery
Wimpole in discreet attendance upon her, as if she had been the daughter
of a Spanish Hidalgo, never to be approached except in the presence of
her duenna. Poor Mistress Margery, finding her old fears removed, was
overpowered with new ones. She had no lawlessness or hoyden manners to
contend with, but instead a haughtiness so high and demands so great that
her powers could scarcely satisfy the one or her spirit stand up before
the other. "It is as if one were lady-in-waiting to her Majesty's self," she used to
whimper when she was alone and dare do so. "Surely the Queen has not
such a will and such a temper. She will have me toil to look worthy of
her in my habit, and bear myself like a duchess in dignity. Alack! I
have practised my obeisance by the hour to perfect it, so that I may
escape her wrath. And I must know how to look, and when and where to
sit, and with what air of being near at hand, while I must see nothing! And I must drag my failing limbs hither and thither with genteel ease
while I ache from head to foot, being neither young nor strong." The poor lady was so overawed by, and yet so admired, her charge, that it
was piteous to behold. "She is an arrant fool," quoth Mistress Clorinda to her father. "A nice
duenna she would be, forsooth, if she were with a woman who needed
watching. She could be hoodwinked as it pleased me a dozen times a day. It is I who am her guard, not she mine! But a beauty must drag some spy
about with her, it seems, and she I can make to obey me like a spaniel. We can afford no better, and she is well born, and since I bought her the
purple paduasoy and the new lappets she has looked well enough to serve." "Dunstanwolde need not fear for thee now," said Sir Jeoffry. "Thou art a
clever and foreseeing wench, Clo." "Dunstanwolde nor any man!" she answered. "There will be no gossip of
me. It is Anne and Barbara thou must look to, Dad, lest their plain
faces lead them to show soft hearts. My face is my fortune!" When Sir John Oxon paid his visit to Sir Jeoffry the days of Mistress
Margery were filled with carking care. The night before he arrived,
Mistress Clorinda called her to her closet and laid upon her her commands
in her own high way. She was under her woman's hands, and while her
great mantle of black hair fell over the back of her chair and lay on the
floor, her tirewoman passing the brush over it, lock by lock, she was at
her greatest beauty. Either she had been angered or pleased, for her
cheek wore a bloom even deeper and richer than usual, and there was a
spark like a diamond under the fringe of her lashes. At her first timorous glance at her, Mistress Margery thought she must
have been angered, the spark so burned in her eyes, and so evident was
the light but quick heave of her bosom; but the next moment it seemed as
if she must be in a pleasant humour, for a little smile deepened the
dimples in the corner of her bowed, full lips. But quickly she looked up
and resumed her stately air. "This gentleman who comes to visit to-morrow," she said, "Sir John
Oxon--do you know aught of him?" "But little, Madame," Mistress Margery answered with fear and humility. "Then it will be well that you should, since I have commands to lay upon
you concerning him," said the beauty. "You do me honour," said the poor gentlewoman. Mistress Clorinda looked her straight in the face. "He is a gentleman from town, the kinsman of Lord Eldershawe," she said. "He is a handsome man, concerning whom many women have been fools. He
chooses to allow it to be said that he is a conqueror of female hearts
and virtue, even among women of fashion and rank. If this be said in the
town, what may not be said in the country? He shall wear no such graces
here. He chooses to pay his court to me. He is my father's guest and a
man of fashion. Let him make as many fine speeches as he has the will
to. I will listen or not as I choose. I am used to words. But see that
we are not left alone." The tirewoman pricked up her ears. Clorinda saw her in the glass. "Attend to thy business if thou dost not want a box o' the ear," she said
in a tone which made the woman start. "You would not be left alone with the gentleman, Madam?" faltered
Mistress Margery. "If he comes to boast of conquests," said Mistress Clorinda, looking at
her straight again and drawing down her black brows, "I will play as
cleverly as he. He cannot boast greatly of one whom he never makes his
court to but in the presence of a kinswoman of ripe years. Understand
that this is to be your task." "I will remember," Madam, answered Mistress Margery. "I will bear myself
as you command." "That is well," said Mistress Clorinda. "I will keep you no more. You
may go." CHAPTER VI--Relating how Mistress Anne discovered a miniature


The good gentlewoman took her leave gladly. She had spent a life in
timid fears of such things and persons as were not formed by Nature to
excite them, but never had she experienced such humble terrors as those
with which Mistress Clorinda inspired her. Never did she approach her
without inward tremor, and never did she receive permission to depart
from her presence without relief. And yet her beauty and wit and spirit
had no admirer regarding them with more of wondering awe. In the bare west wing of the house, comfortless though the neglect of its
master had made it, there was one corner where she was unafraid. Her
first charges, Mistress Barbara and Mistress Anne, were young ladies of
gentle spirit. Their sister had said of them that their spirit was as
poor as their looks. It could not be said of them by any one that they
had any pretension to beauty, but that which Mistress Clorinda rated at
as poor spirit was the one element of comfort in their poor dependent
kinswoman's life. They gave her no ill words, they indulged in no
fantastical whims and vapours, and they did not even seem to expect other
entertainment than to walk the country roads, to play with their little
lap-dog Cupid, wind silks for their needlework, and please themselves
with their embroidery-frames. To them their sister appeared a goddess whom it would be presumptuous to
approach in any frame of mind quite ordinary. Her beauty must be
heightened by rich adornments, while their plain looks were left without
the poorest aid. It seemed but fitting that what there was to spend must
be spent on her. They showed no signs of resentment, and took with
gratitude such cast-off finery as she deigned at times to bestow upon
them, when it was no longer useful to herself. She was too full of the
occupations of pleasure to have had time to notice them, even if her
nature had inclined her to the observance of family affections. It was
their habit, when they knew of her going out in state, to watch her
incoming and outgoing through a peep-hole in a chamber window. Mistress
Margery told them stories of her admirers and of her triumphs, of the
county gentlemen of fortune who had offered themselves to her, and of the
modes of life in town of the handsome Sir John Oxon, who, without doubt,
was of the circle of her admiring attendants, if he had not fallen
totally her victim, as others had. Of the two young women, it was Mistress Anne who had the more parts, and
the attraction of the mind the least dull. In sooth, Nature had dealt
with both in a niggardly fashion, but Mistress Barbara was the plainer
and the more foolish. Mistress Anne had, perchance, the tenderer
feelings, and was in secret given to a certain sentimentality. She was
thin and stooping, and had but a muddy complexion; her hair was heavy, it
is true, but its thickness and weight seemed naught but an ungrateful
burden; and she had a dull, soft eye. In private she was fond of reading
such romances as she could procure by stealth from the library of books
gathered together in past times by some ancestor Sir Jeoffry regarded as
an idiot. Doubtless she met with strange reading in the volumes she took
to her closet, and her simple virgin mind found cause for the solving of
many problems; but from the pages she contrived to cull stories of lordly
lovers and cruel or kind beauties, whose romances created for her a
strange world of pleasure in the midst of her loneliness. Poor,
neglected young female, with every guileless maiden instinct withered at
birth, she had need of some tender dreams to dwell upon, though Fate
herself seemed to have decreed that they must be no more than visions. It was, in sooth, always the beauteous Clorinda about whose charms she
builded her romances. In her great power she saw that for which knights
fought in tourney and great kings committed royal sins, and to her
splendid beauty she had in secrecy felt that all might be forgiven. She
cherished such fancies of her, that one morning, when she believed her
absent from the house, she stole into the corridor upon which Clorinda's
apartment opened. Her first timid thought had been, that if a chamber
door were opened she might catch a glimpse of some of the splendours her
sister's woman was surely laying out for her wearing at a birth-night
ball, at the house of one of the gentry of the neighbourhood. But it so
happened that she really found the door of entrance open, which, indeed,
she had not more than dared to hope, and finding it so, she stayed her
footsteps to gaze with beating heart within. On the great bed, which was
of carved oak and canopied with tattered tapestry, there lay spread such
splendours as she had never beheld near to before. 'Twas blue and silver
brocade Mistress Clorinda was to shine in to-night; it lay spread forth
in all its dimensions. The beautiful bosom and shoulders were to be
bared to the eyes of scores of adorers, but rich lace was to set their
beauties forth, and strings of pearls. Why Sir Jeoffry had not sold his
lady's jewels before he became enamoured of her six-year-old child it
would be hard to explain. There was a great painted fan with jewels in
the sticks, and on the floor--as if peeping forth from beneath the
bravery of the expanded petticoats--was a pair of blue and silver shoes,
high-heeled and arched and slender. In gazing at them Mistress Anne lost
her breath, thinking that in some fashion they had a regal air of being
made to trample hearts beneath them. To the gentle, hapless virgin, to whom such possessions were as the
wardrobe of a queen, the temptation to behold them near was too great. She could not forbear from passing the threshold, and she did with
heaving breast. She approached the bed and gazed; she dared to touch the
scented gloves that lay by the outspread petticoat of blue and silver;
she even laid a trembling finger upon the pointed bodice, which was so
slender that it seemed small enough for even a child. "Ah me," she sighed gently, "how beautiful she will be! How beautiful! And all of them will fall at her feet, as is not to be wondered at. And
it was always so all her life, even when she was an infant, and all gave
her her will because of her beauty and her power. She hath a great
power. Barbara and I are not so. We are dull and weak, and dare not
speak our minds. It is as if we were creatures of another world; but He
who rules all things has so willed it for us. He has given it to us for
our portion--our portion." Her dull, poor face dropped a little as she spoke the words, and her eyes
fell upon the beauteous tiny shoes, which seemed to trample even when no
foot was within them. She stooped to take one in her hand, but as she
was about to lift it something which seemed to have been dropped upon the
floor, and to have rolled beneath the valance of the bed, touched her
hand. It was a thing to which a riband was attached--an ivory
miniature--and she picked it up wondering. She stood up gazing at it, in
such bewilderment to find her eyes upon it that she scarce knew what she
did. She did not mean to pry; she would not have had the daring so to do
if she had possessed the inclination. But the instant her eyes told her
what they saw, she started and blushed as she had never blushed before in
her tame life. The warm rose mantled her cheeks, and even suffused the
neck her chaste kerchief hid. Her eye kindled with admiration and an
emotion new to her indeed. "How beautiful!" she said. "He is like a young Adonis, and has the
bearing of a royal prince! How can it--by what strange chance hath it
come here?" She had not regarded it more than long enough to have uttered these
words, when a fear came upon her, and she felt that she had fallen into
misfortune. "What must I do with it?" she trembled. "What will she say, whether she
knows of its being within the chamber or not? She will be angry with me
that I have dared to touch it. What shall I do?" She regarded it again with eyes almost suffused. Her blush and the
sensibility of her emotion gave to her plain countenance a new liveliness
of tint and expression. "I will put it back where I found it," she said, "and the one who knows
it will find it later. It cannot be she--it cannot be she! If I laid it
on her table she would rate me bitterly--and she can be bitter when she
will." She bent and placed it within the shadow of the valance again, and as she
felt it touch the hard oak of the polished floor her bosom rose with a
soft sigh. "It is an unseemly thing to do," she said; "'tis as though one were
uncivil; but I dare not--I dare not do otherwise." She would have turned to leave the apartment, being much overcome by the
incident, but just as she would have done so she heard the sound of
horses' feet through the window by which she must pass, and looked out to
see if it was Clorinda who was returning from her ride. Mistress
Clorinda was a matchless horsewoman, and a marvel of loveliness and
spirit she looked when she rode, sitting upon a horse such as no other
woman dared to mount--always an animal of the greatest beauty, but of so
dangerous a spirit that her riding-whip was loaded like a man's. This time it was not she; and when Mistress Anne beheld the young
gentleman who had drawn rein in the court she started backward and put
her hand to her heart, the blood mantling her pale cheek again in a
flood. But having started back, the next instant she started forward to
gaze again, all her timid soul in her eyes. "'Tis he!" she panted; "'tis he himself! He hath come in hope to speak
with my sister, and she is abroad. Poor gentleman, he hath come in such
high spirit, and must ride back heavy of heart. How comely, and how
finely clad he is!" He was, in sooth, with his rich riding-habit, his handsome face, his
plumed hat, and the sun shining on the fair luxuriant locks which fell
beneath it. It was Sir John Oxon, and he was habited as when he rode in
the park in town and the court was there. Not so were attired the
country gentry whom Anne had been wont to see, though many of them were
well mounted, knowing horseflesh and naught else, as they did. She pressed her cheek against the side of the oriel window, over which
the ivy grew thickly. She was so intent that she could not withdraw her
gaze. She watched him as he turned away, having received his dismissal,
and she pressed her face closer that she might follow him as he rode down
the long avenue of oak-trees, his servant riding behind. Thus she bent forward gazing, until he turned and the oaks hid him from
her sight; and even then the spell was not dissolved, and she still
regarded the place where he had passed, until a sound behind her made her
start violently. It was a peal of laughter, high and rich, and when she
so started and turned to see whom it might be, she beheld her sister
Clorinda, who was standing just within the threshold, as if movement had
been arrested by what had met her eye as she came in. Poor Anne put her
hand to her side again. "Oh sister!" she gasped; "oh sister!" but could say no more. She saw that she had thought falsely, and that Clorinda had not been out
at all, for she was in home attire; and even in the midst of her
trepidation there sprang into Anne's mind the awful thought that through
some servant's blunder the comely young visitor had been sent away. For
herself, she expected but to be driven forth with wrathful, disdainful
words for her presumption. For what else could she hope from this
splendid creature, who, while of her own flesh and blood, had never
seemed to regard her as being more than a poor superfluous underling? But
strangely enough, there was no anger in Clorinda's eyes; she but laughed,
as though what she had seen had made her merry. "You here, Anne," she said, "and looking with light-mindedness after
gallant gentlemen! Mistress Margery should see to this and watch more
closely, or we shall have unseemly stories told. _You_, sister, with
your modest face and bashfulness! I had not thought it of you." Suddenly she crossed the room to where her sister stood drooping, and
seized her by the shoulder, so that she could look her well in the face. "What," she said, with a mocking not quite harsh--"What is this? Does a
glance at a fine gallant, even taken from behind an oriel window, make
such change indeed? I never before saw this look, nor this colour,
forsooth; it hath improved thee wondrously, Anne--wondrously." "Sister," faltered Anne, "I so desired to see your birth-night ball-gown,
of which Mistress Margery hath much spoken--I so desired--I thought it
would not matter if, the door being open and it spread forth upon the
bed--I--I stole a look at it. And then I was tempted--and came in." "And then was tempted more," Clorinda laughed, still regarding her
downcast countenance shrewdly, "by a thing far less to be resisted--a
fine gentleman from town, with love-locks falling on his shoulders and
ladies' hearts strung at his saddle-bow by scores. Which found you the
most beautiful?" "Your gown is splendid, sister," said Anne, with modest shyness. "There
will be no beauty who will wear another like it; or should there be one,
she will not carry it as you will." "But the man--the man, Anne," Clorinda laughed again. "What of the man?" Anne plucked up just enough of her poor spirit to raise her eyes to the
brilliant ones that mocked at her. "With such gentlemen, sister," she said, "is it like that _I_ have aught
to do?" Mistress Clorinda dropped her hand and left laughing. "'Tis true," she said, "it is not; but for this one time, Anne, thou
lookest almost a woman." "'Tis not beauty alone that makes womanhood," said Anne, her head on her
breast again. "In some book I have read that--that it is mostly pain. I
am woman enough for that." "You have read--you have read," quoted Clorinda. "You are the bookworm,
I remember, and filch romances and poems from the shelves. And you have
read that it is mostly pain that makes a woman? 'Tis not true. 'Tis a
poor lie. _I_ am a woman and I do not suffer--for I _will_ not, that I
swear! And when I take an oath I keep it, mark you! It is men women
suffer for; that was what your scholar meant--for such fine gentlemen as
the one you have just watched while he rode away. More fools they! No
man shall make _me_ womanly in such a fashion, I promise you! Let _them_
wince and kneel; _I_ will not." "Sister," Anne faltered, "I thought you were not within. The gentleman
who rode away--did the servants know?" "That did they," quoth Clorinda, mocking again. "They knew that I would
not receive him to-day, and so sent him away. He might have known as
much himself, but he is an arrant popinjay, and thinks all women wish to
look at his fine shape, and hear him flatter them when he is in the
mood." "You would not--let him enter?" Clorinda threw her graceful body into a chair with more light laughter. "I would not," she answered. "You cannot understand such ingratitude,
poor Anne; you would have treated him more softly. Sit down and talk to
me, and I will show thee my furbelows myself. All women like to chatter
of their laced bodices and petticoats. _That_ is what makes a woman." Anne was tremulous with relief and pleasure. It was as if a queen had
bid her to be seated. She sat almost with the humble lack of case a
serving-woman might have shown. She had never seen Clorinda wear such an
air before, and never had she dreamed that she would so open herself to
any fellow-creature. She knew but little of what her sister was
capable--of the brilliancy of her charm when she chose to condescend, of
the deigning softness of her manner when she chose to please, of her arch-
pleasantries and cutting wit, and of the strange power she could wield
over any human being, gentle or simple, with whom she came in contact. But if she had not known of these things before, she learned to know them
this morning. For some reason best known to herself, Mistress Clorinda
was in a high good humour. She kept Anne with her for more than an hour,
and was dazzling through every moment of its passing. She showed her the
splendours she was to shine in at the birth-night ball, even bringing
forth her jewels and displaying them. She told her stories of the house
of which the young heir to-day attained his majority, and mocked at the
poor youth because he was ungainly, and at a distance had been her slave
since his nineteenth year. "I have scarce looked at him," she said. "He is a lout, with great eyes
staring, and a red nose. It does not need that one should look at men to
win them. They look at us, and that is enough." To poor Mistress Anne, who had seen no company and listened to no wits,
the entertainment bestowed upon her was as wonderful as a night at the
playhouse would have been. To watch the vivid changing face; to hearken
to jesting stories of men and women who seemed like the heroes and
heroines of her romances; to hear love itself--the love she trembled and
palpitated at the mere thought of--spoken of openly as an experience
which fell to all; to hear it mocked at with dainty or biting quips; to
learn that women of all ages played with, enjoyed, or lost themselves for
it--it was with her as if a nun had been withdrawn from her cloister and
plunged into the vortex of the world. "Sister," she said, looking at the Beauty with humble, adoring eyes, "you
make me feel that my romances are true. You tell such things. It is
like seeing pictures of things to hear you talk. No wonder that all
listen to you, for indeed 'tis wonderful the way you have with words. You
use them so that 'tis as though they had shapes of their own and colours,
and you builded with them. I thank you for being so gracious to me, who
have seen so little, and cannot tell the poor, quiet things I have seen." And being led into the loving boldness by her gratitude, she bent forward
and touched with her lips the fair hand resting on the chair's arm. Mistress Clorinda fixed her fine eyes upon her in a new way. "I' faith, it doth not seem fair, Anne," she said. "I should not like to
change lives with thee. Thou hast eyes like a shot pheasant--soft, and
with the bright hid beneath the dull. Some man might love them, even if
thou art no beauty. Stay," suddenly; "methinks--"

She uprose from her chair and went to the oaken wardrobe, and threw the
door of it open wide while she looked within. "There is a gown and tippet or so here, and a hood and some ribands I
might do without," she said. "My woman shall bear them to your chamber,
and show you how to set them to rights. She is a nimble-fingered
creature, and a gown of mine would give almost stuff enough to make you
two. Then some days, when I am not going abroad and Mistress Margery
frets me too much, I will send for you to sit with me, and you shall
listen to the gossip when a visitor drops in to have a dish of tea." Anne would have kissed her feet then, if she had dared to do so. She
blushed red all over, and adored her with a more worshipping gaze than
before. "I should not have dared to hope so much," she stammered. "I could
not--perhaps it is not fitting--perhaps I could not bear myself as I
should. I would try to show myself a gentlewoman and seemly. I--I _am_
a gentlewoman, though I have learned so little. I could not be aught but
a gentlewoman, could I, sister, being of your own blood and my parents'
child?" half afraid to presume even this much. "No," said Clorinda. "Do not be a fool, Anne, and carry yourself too
humbly before the world. You can be as humble as you like to me." "I shall--I shall be your servant and worship you, sister," cried the
poor soul, and she drew near and kissed again the white hand which had
bestowed with such royal bounty all this joy. It would not have occurred
to her that a cast-off robe and riband were but small largesse. It was not a minute after this grateful caress that Clorinda made a sharp
movement--a movement which was so sharp that it seemed to be one of
dismay. At first, as if involuntarily, she had raised her hand to her
tucker, and after doing so she started--though 'twas but for a second's
space, after which her face was as it had been before. "What is it?" exclaimed Anne. "Have you lost anything?" "No," quoth Mistress Clorinda quite carelessly, as she once more turned
to the contents of the oaken wardrobe; "but I thought I missed a trinket
I was wearing for a wager, and I would not lose it before the bet is
won." "Sister," ventured Anne before she left her and went away to her own dull
world in the west wing, "there is a thing I can do if you will allow me. I can mend your tapestry hangings which have holes in them. I am quick
at my needle, and should love to serve you in such poor ways as I can;
and it is not seemly that they should be so worn. All things about you
should be beautiful and well kept." "Can you make these broken things beautiful?" said Clorinda. "Then
indeed you shall. You may come here to mend them when you will." "They are very fine hangings, though so old and ill cared for," said
Anne, looking up at them; "and I shall be only too happy sitting here
thinking of all you are doing while I am at my work." "Thinking of all I am doing?" laughed Mistress Clorinda. "That would
give you such wondrous things to dream of, Anne, that you would have no
time for your needle, and my hangings would stay as they are." "I can think and darn also," said Mistress Anne, "so I will come." CHAPTER VII--'Twas the face of Sir John Oxon the moon shone upon


From that time henceforward into the young woman's dull life there came a
little change. It did not seem a little change to her, but a great one,
though to others it would have seemed slight indeed. She was an
affectionate, house-wifely creature, who would have made the best of
wives and mothers if it had been so ordained by Fortune, and something of
her natural instincts found outlet in the furtive service she paid her
sister, who became the empress of her soul. She darned and patched the
tattered hangings with a wonderful neatness, and the hours she spent at
work in the chamber were to her almost as sacred as hours spent at
religious duty, or as those nuns and novices give to embroidering altar-
cloths. There was a brightness in the room that seemed in no other in
the house, and the lingering essences in the air of it were as incense to
her. In secrecy she even busied herself with keeping things in better
order than Rebecca, Mistress Clorinda's woman, had ever had time to do
before. She also contrived to get into her own hands some duties that
were Rebecca's own. She could mend lace cleverly and arrange
riband-knots with taste, and even change the fashion of a gown. The hard-
worked tirewoman was but too glad to be relieved, and kept her secret
well, being praised many times for the set or fashion of a thing into
which she had not so much as set a needle. Being a shrewd baggage, she
was wise enough always to relate to Anne the story of her mistress's
pleasure, having the wit to read in her delight that she would be
encouraged to fresh effort. At times it so befell that, when Anne went into the bed-chamber, she
found the beauty there, who, if she chanced to be in the humour, would
detain her in her presence for a space and bewitch her over again. In
sooth, it seemed that she took a pleasure in showing her female adorer
how wondrously full of all fascinations she could be. At such times
Anne's plain face would almost bloom with excitement, and her shot
pheasant's eyes would glow as if beholding a goddess. She neither saw nor heard more of the miniature on the riband. It used
to make her tremble at times to fancy that by some strange chance it
might still be under the bed, and that the handsome face smiled and the
blue eyes gazed in the very apartment where she herself sat and her
sister was robed and disrobed in all her beauty. She used all her modest skill in fitting to her own shape and
refurnishing the cast-off bits of finery bestowed upon her. It was all
set to rights long before Clorinda recalled to mind that she had promised
that Anne should sometime see her chance visitors take their dish of tea
with her. But one day, for some cause, she did remember, and sent for her. Anne ran to her bed-chamber and donned her remodelled gown with shaking
hands. She laughed a little hysterically as she did it, seeing her plain
snub-nosed face in the glass. She tried to dress her head in a fashion
new to her, and knew she did it ill and untidily, but had no time to
change it. If she had had some red she would have put it on, but such
vanities were not in her chamber or Barbara's. So she rubbed her cheeks
hard, and even pinched them, so that in the end they looked as if they
were badly rouged. It seemed to her that her nose grew red too, and
indeed 'twas no wonder, for her hands and feet were like ice. "She must be ashamed of me," the humble creature said to herself. "And
if she is ashamed she will be angered and send me away and be friends no
more." She did not deceive herself, poor thing, and imagine she had the chance
of being regarded with any great lenience if she appeared ill.

"Mistress Clorinda begged that you would come quickly," said Rebecca,
knocking at the door. So she caught her handkerchief, which was scented, as all her garments
were, with dried rose-leaves from the garden, which she had conserved
herself, and went down to the chintz parlour trembling. It was a great room with white panels, and flowered coverings to the
furniture. There were a number of ladies and gentlemen standing talking
and laughing loudly together. The men outnumbered the women, and most of
them stood in a circle about Mistress Clorinda, who sat upright in a
great flowered chair, smiling with her mocking, stately air, as if she
defied them to dare to speak what they felt. Anne came in like a mouse. Nobody saw her. She did not, indeed, know
what to do. She dared not remain standing all alone, so she crept to the
place where her sister's chair was, and stood a little behind its high
back. Her heart beat within her breast till it was like to choke her. They were only country gentlemen who made the circle, but to her they
seemed dashing gallants. That some of them had red noses as well as
cheeks, and that their voices were big and their gallantries boisterous,
was no drawback to their manly charms, she having seen no other finer
gentlemen. They were specimens of the great conquering creature Man,
whom all women must aspire to please if they have the fortunate power;
and each and all of them were plainly trying to please Clorinda, and not
she them. And so Anne gazed at them with admiring awe, waiting until there should
come a pause in which she might presume to call her sister's attention to
her presence; but suddenly, before she had indeed made up her mind how
she might best announce herself, there spoke behind her a voice of
silver. "It is only goddesses," said the voice, "who waft about them as they move
the musk of the rose-gardens of Araby. When you come to reign over us in
town, Madam, there will be no perfume in the mode but that of
rose-leaves, and in all drawing-rooms we shall breathe but their
perfume." And there, at her side, was bowing, in cinnamon and crimson, with
jewelled buttons on his velvet coat, the beautiful being whose fair locks
the sun had shone on the morning she had watched him ride away--the man
whom the imperial beauty had dismissed and called a popinjay. Clorinda looked under her lashes towards him without turning, but in so
doing beheld Anne standing in waiting. "A fine speech lost," she said, "though 'twas well enough for the
country, Sir John. 'Tis thrown away, because 'tis not I who am scented
with rose-leaves, but Anne there, whom you must not ogle. Come hither,
sister, and do not hide as if you were ashamed to be looked at." And she drew her forward, and there Anne stood, and all of them stared at
her poor, plain, blushing face, and the Adonis in cinnamon and crimson
bowed low, as if she had been a duchess, that being his conqueror's way
with gentle or simple, maid, wife, or widow, beauty or homespun
uncomeliness. It was so with him always; he could never resist the chance of luring to
himself a woman's heart, whether he wanted it or not, and he had a charm,
a strange and wonderful one, it could not be denied. Anne palpitated
indeed as she made her curtsey to him, and wondered if Heaven had ever
before made so fine a gentleman and so beautiful a being. She went but seldom to this room again, and when she went she stood
always in the background, far more in fear that some one would address
her than that she should meet with neglect. She was used to neglect, and
to being regarded as a nonentity, and aught else discomfited her. All
her pleasure was to hear what was said, though 'twas not always of the
finest wit--and to watch Clorinda play the queen among her admirers and
her slaves. She would not have dared to speak of Sir John Oxon
frequently--indeed, she let fall his name but rarely; but she learned a
curious wit in contriving to hear all things concerning him. It was her
habit cunningly to lead Mistress Margery to talking about him and
relating long histories of his conquests and his grace. Mistress Wimpole
knew many of them, having, for a staid and prudent matron, a lively
interest in his ways. It seemed, truly--if one must believe her long-
winded stories--that no duchess under seventy had escaped weeping for him
and losing rest, and that ladies of all ranks had committed follies for
his sake. Mistress Anne, having led her to this fruitful subject, would sit and
listen, bending over her embroidery frame with strange emotions, causing
her virgin breast to ache with their swelling. She would lie awake at
night thinking in the dark, with her heart beating. Surely, surely there
was no other man on earth who was so fitted to Clorinda, and to whom it
was so suited that this empress should give her charms. Surely no woman,
however beautiful or proud, could dismiss his suit when he pressed it. And then, poor woman, her imagination strove to paint the splendour of
their mutual love, though of such love she knew so little. But it must,
in sooth, be bliss and rapture; and perchance, was her humble thought,
she might see it from afar, and hear of it. And when they went to court,
and Clorinda had a great mansion in town, and many servants who needed a
housewife's eye upon their doings to restrain them from wastefulness and
riot, might it not chance to be that if she served well now, and had the
courage to plead with her then, she might be permitted to serve her
there, living quite apart in some quiet corner of the house. And then
her wild thoughts would go so far that she would dream--reddening at her
own boldness--of a child who might be born to them, a lordly infant son
and heir, whose eyes might be blue and winning, and his hair in great
fair locks, and whom she might nurse and tend and be a slave to--and
love--and love--and love, and who might end by knowing she was his tender
servant, always to be counted on, and might look at her with that wooing,
laughing glance, and even love her too. The night Clorinda laid her commands upon Mistress Wimpole concerning the
coming of Sir John Oxon, that matron, after receiving them, hurried to
her other charges, flurried and full of talk, and poured forth her wonder
and admiration at length. "She is a wondrous lady!" she said--"she is indeed! It is not alone her
beauty, but her spirit and her wit. Mark you how she sees all things and
lets none pass, and can lay a plan as prudent as any lady old enough to
be twice her mother. She knows all the ways of the world of fashion, and
will guard herself against gossip in such a way that none can gainsay her
high virtue. Her spirit is too great to allow that she may even _seem_
to be as the town ladies. She will not have it! Sir John will not find
his court easy to pay. She will not allow that he shall be able to say
to any one that he has seen her alone a moment. Thus, she says, he
cannot boast. If all ladies were as wise and cunning, there would be no
tales to tell." She talked long and garrulously, and set forth to them
how Mistress Clorinda had looked straight at her with her black eyes,
until she had almost shaken as she sat, because it seemed as though she
dared her to disobey her will; and how she had sat with her hair trailing
upon the floor over the chair's back, and at first it had seemed that she
was flushed with anger, but next as if she had smiled. "Betimes," said Mistress Wimpole, "I am afraid when she smiles, but to-
night some thought had crossed her mind that pleased her. I think it was
that she liked to think that he who has conquered so many ladies will
find that he is to be outwitted and made a mock of. She likes that
others shall be beaten if she thinks them impudent. She liked it as a
child, and would flog the stable-boys with her little whip until they
knelt to beg her pardon for their freedoms." That night Mistress Anne went to her bed-chamber with her head full of
wandering thoughts, and she had not the power to bid them disperse
themselves and leave her--indeed, she scarce wished for it. She was
thinking of Clorinda, and wondering sadly that she was of so high a pride
that she could bear herself as though there were no human weakness in her
breast, not even the womanly weakness of a heart. How could it be
possible that she could treat with disdain this gallant gentleman, if he
loved her, as he surely must? Herself she had been sure that she had
seen an ardent flame in his blue eyes, even that first day when he had
bowed to her with that air of grace as he spoke of the fragrance of the
rose leaves he had thought wafted from her robe. How could a woman whom
he loved resist him? How could she cause him to suffer by forcing him to
stand at arm's length when he sighed to draw near and breathe his passion
at her feet? In the silence of her chamber as she disrobed, she sighed with restless
pain, but did not know that her sighing was for grief that love--of which
there seemed so little in some lives--could be wasted and flung away. She
could not fall into slumber when she lay down upon her pillow, but tossed
from side to side with a burdened heart. "She is so young and beautiful and proud," she thought. "It is because I
am so much older that I can see these things--that I see that this is
surely the one man who should be her husband. There may be many others,
but they are none of them her equals, and she would scorn and hate them
when she was once bound to them for life. This one is as beautiful as
she--and full of grace, and wit, and spirit. She could not look down
upon him, however wrath she was at any time. Ah me! 