



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





THE GREY ROOM

by Eden Phillpotts




CONTENTS


     CHAPTER
         I. THE HOUSE PARTY
        II. AN EXPERIMENT
       III. AT THE ORIEL
        IV. "BY THE HAND OF GOD"
         V.    THE UNSEEN MOVES
        VI. THE ORDER FROM LONDON
       VII. THE FANATIC
      VIII. THE LABORS OF THE FOUR
        IX. THE NIGHT WATCH
         X.    SIGNOR VERGILIO MANNETTI
        XI. PRINCE DJEM
       XII. THE GOLDEN BULL
      XIII. TWO NOTES




CHAPTER I. THE HOUSE PARTY


The piers of the main entrance of Chadlands were of red brick, and upon
each reposed a mighty sphere of grey granite. Behind them stretched away
the park, where forest trees, nearly shorn of their leaves at the
edge of winter, still answered the setting sun with fires of thinning
foliage. They sank away through stretches of brake fern, and already
amid their trunks arose a thin, blue haze--breath of earth made visible
by coming cold. There was frost in the air, and the sickle of a new moon
hung where dusk of evening dimmed the green of the western sky. The guns were returning, and eight men with three women arrived at the
lofty gates. One of the party rode a grey pony, and a woman walked on
each side of him. They chattered together, and the little company of
tweed-clad people passed into Chadlands Park and trudged forward, where
the manor house rose half a mile ahead. Then an old man emerged from a lodge, hidden behind a grove of laurel
and bay within the entrance, and shut the great gates of scroll iron. They were of a flamboyant Italian period, and more arrestive than
distinguished. Panelled upon them, and belonging to a later day than
they, had been imposed two iron coats of arms, with crest above and
motto beneath--the heraldic bearings of the present owner of Chadlands. He set store upon such things, but was not responsible for the work. A
survival himself, and steeped in ancient opinions, his coat, won in a
forgotten age, interested him only less than his Mutiny medal--his sole
personal claim to public honor. He had served in youth as a soldier, but
was still a subaltern when his father died and he came into his kingdom. Now, Sir Walter Lennox, fifth baronet, had grown old, and his invincible
kindness of heart, his archaic principles, his great wealth, and the
limited experiences of reality, for which such wealth was responsible,
left him a popular and respected man. Yet he aroused much exasperation
in local landowners from his generosity and scorn of all economic
principles; and while his tenants held him the very exemplar of a
landlord, and his servants worshipped him for the best possible reasons,
his friends, weary of remonstrance, were forced to forgive his bad
precedents and a mistaken liberality quite beyond the power of the
average unfortunate who lives by his land. But he managed his great
manor in his own lavish way, and marvelled that other men declared
difficulties with problems he so readily solved. That night, after a
little music, the Chadlands' house party drifted to the billiard-room,
and while most of the men, after a heavy day far afield, were content to
lounge by a great open hearth where a wood fire burned, Sir Walter, who
had been on a pony most of the time, declared himself unwearied, and
demanded a game. "No excuses, Henry," he said; and turned to a young man lounging in an
easy-chair outside the fireside circle. The youth started. His eyes had been fixed on a woman sitting beside the
fire, with her hand in a man's. It was such an attitude as sophisticated
lovers would only assume in private but the pair were not sophisticated
and lovers still, though married. They lacked self-consciousness, and
the husband liked to feel his wife's hand in his. After all, a thing
impossible until you are married may be quite seemly afterwards, and
none of their amiable elders regarded their devotion with cynicism. "All right, uncle!" said Henry Lennox. He rose--a big fellow with heavy shoulders, a clean-shaven, youthful
face, and flaxen hair. He had been handsome, save for a nose with a
broken bridge, but his pale brown eyes were fine, and his firm mouth and
chin well modelled. Imagination and reflection marked his countenance. Sir Walter claimed thirty points on his scoring board, and gave a miss
with the spot ball. "I win to-night," he said. He was a small, very upright man, with a face that seemed to belong to
his generation, and an expression seldom to be seen on a man younger
than seventy. Life had not puzzled him; his moderate intellect had taken
it as he found it, and, through the magic glasses of good health, good
temper, and great wealth, judged existence a desirable thing and quite
easy to conduct with credit. "You only want patience and a brain," he
always declared. Sir Walter wore an eyeglass. He was growing bald, but
preserved a pair of grey whiskers still of respectable size. His face,
indeed, belied him, for it was moulded in a stern pattern. One had
guessed him a martinet until his amiable opinions and easy-going
personality were manifested. The old man was not vain; he knew that a
world very different from his own extended round about him. But he was
puzzle-headed, and had never been shaken from his life-long complacency
by circumstances. He had been disappointed in love as a young man, and
only married late in life. He had no son, and was a widower--facts that,
to his mind, quite dwarfed his good fortune in every other respect. He
held the comfortable doctrine that things are always levelled up, and he
honestly believed that he had suffered as much sorrow and disappointment
as any Lennox in the history of the race. His only child and her cousin, Henry Lennox, had been brought up
together and were of an age--both now twenty-six. The lad was his
uncle's heir, and would succeed to Chadlands and the title; and it had
been Sir Walter's hope that he and Mary might marry. Nor had the youth
any objection to such a plan. Indeed, he loved Mary well enough; there
was even thought to be a tacit understanding between them, and they
grew up in a friendship which gradually became ardent on the man's part,
though it never ripened upon hers. But she knew that her father keenly
desired this marriage, and supposed that it would happen some day. They were, however, not betrothed when the war burst upon Europe, and
Henry, then one-and-twenty, went from the Officers' Training Corps to
the Fifth Devons, while his cousin became attached to the Red Cross and
nursed at Plymouth. The accident terminated their shadowy romance and
brought real love into the woman's life, while the man found his
hopes at an end. He was drafted to Mesopotamia, speedily fell sick of
jaundice, was invalided to India, and, on returning to the front, saw
service against the Turks. But chance willed that he won no distinction. He did his duty under dreary circumstances, while to his hatred of war
was added the weight of his loss when he heard that Mary had fallen
in love. He was an ingenuous, kindly youth--a typical Lennox, who had
developed an accomplishment at Harrow and suffered for it by getting
his nose broken when winning the heavy-weight championship of the public
schools in his nineteenth year. In the East he still boxed, and after
his love story was ended, the epidemic of poetry-making took Henry also,
and he wrote a volume of harmless verse, to the undying amazement of his
family. For Mary Lennox the war had brought a sailor husband. Captain Thomas
May, wounded rather severely at Jutland, lost his heart to the plain
but attractive young woman with a fine figure who nursed him back to
strength, and, as he vowed, had saved his life. He was an impulsive man
of thirty, brown-bearded, black-eyed, and hot-tempered. He came from a
little Somerset vicarage and was the only son of a clergyman, the
Rev. Septimus May. Knowing the lady as "Nurse Mary" only, and falling
passionately in love for the first time in his life, he proposed on the
day he was allowed to sit up, and since Mary Lennox shared his emotions,
also for the first time, he was accepted before he even knew her name. It is impossible to describe the force of love's advent for Mary Lennox. She had come to believe herself as vaguely committed to her cousin, and
imagined that her affection for Henry amounted to as much as she was
ever likely to feel for a man. But reality awakened her, and its glory
did not make her selfish, since her nature was not constructed so to
be; it only taught her what love meant, and convinced her that she could
never marry anybody on earth but the stricken sailor. And this she knew
long before he was well enough to give a sign that he even appreciated
her ministry. The very whisper of his voice sent a thrill through her
before he had gained strength to speak aloud. And his deep tones, when
she heard them, were like no voice that had fallen on her ear till then. The first thing that indicated restoring health was his request that his
beard might be trimmed; and he was making love to her three days after
he had been declared out of danger. Then did Mary begin to live, and
looking back, she marvelled how horses and dogs and a fishing-rod had
been her life till now. The revelation bewildered her and she wrote her
emotions in many long pages to her cousin. The causes of such changes
she did not indeed specify, but he read between the lines, and knew it
was a man and not the war that had so altered and deepened her outlook. He had never done it, and he could not be angry with her now, for she
had pretended no ardor of emotion to him. Young though he was, he always
feared that she liked him not after the way of a lover. He had hoped to
open her eyes some day, but it was given to another to do so. He felt no surprise, therefore, when news of her engagement reached him
from herself. He wrote the letter of his life in reply, and was at pains
to laugh at their boy-and-girl attachment, and lessen any regret she
might feel on his account. Her father took it somewhat hardly at first,
for he held that more than sufficient misfortunes, to correct the
balance of prosperity in his favor, had already befallen him. But he was
deeply attached to his daughter, and her magical change under the new
and radiant revelation convinced him that she had now awakened to an
emotional fulness of life which could only be the outward sign of love. That she was in love for the first time also seemed clear; but he would
not give his consent until he had seen her lover and heard all there was
to know about him. That, however, did not alarm Mary, for she believed
that Thomas May must prove a spirit after Sir Walter's heart. And so he
did. The sailor was a gentleman; he had proposed without the faintest
notion to whom he offered his penniless hand, and when he did find out,
was so bewildered that Mary assured her father she thought he would
change his mind. "If I had not threatened him with disgrace and breach of promise, I do
think he would have thrown me over," she said. And now they had been wedded for six months, and Mary sat by the great
log fire with her hand in Tom's. The sailor was on leave, but
expected to return to his ship at Plymouth in a day or two. Then his
father-in-law had promised to visit the great cruiser, for the Navy was
a service of which he knew little. Lennoxes had all been soldiers or
clergymen since a great lawyer founded the race. The game of billiards proceeded, and Henry caught his uncle in the
eighties and ran out with an unfinished fifteen. Then Ernest Travers and
his wife--old and dear friends of Sir Walter--played a hundred up, the
lady receiving half the game. Mr. Travers was a Suffolk man, and had
fagged for Sir Walter at Eton. Their comradeship had lasted a lifetime,
and no year passed without reciprocal visits. Travers also looked at
life with the eyes of a wealthy man. He was sixty-five, pompous, large,
and rubicund--a "backwoodsman" of a pattern obsolescent. His wife, ten
years younger than himself, loved pleasure, but she had done more than
her duty, in her opinion, and borne him two sons and a daughter. They
were colorless, kind-hearted people who lived in a circle of others like
themselves. The war had sobered them, and at an early stage robbed them
of their younger boy. Nelly Travers won her game amid congratulations, and Tom May challenged
another woman, a Diana, who lived for sport and had joined the
house party with her uncle, Mr. Felix Fayre-Michell. But Millicent
Fayre-Michell refused. "I've shot six partridges, a hare, and two pheasants to-day," said the
girl, "and I'm half asleep." Other men were present also of a type not dissimilar. It was a
conventional gathering of rich nobodies, each a big frog in his own
little puddle, none known far beyond it and none with sufficient
intellect or ability to create for himself any position in the world
save that won by the accident of money made by their progenitors. Had it been necessary for any of them to earn his living, only in some
very modest capacity and on a very modest plane might they have done
so. Of the entire company only one--the youngest--could claim even the
celebrity that attached to his little volume of war verses. And now upon the lives of these every-day folk was destined to break an
event unique and extraordinary. Existence, that had meandered without
personal incident save of a description common to them all, was, within
twelve hours, to confront men and women alike with reality. They were
destined to endure at close quarters an occurrence so astounding and
unparalleled that, for once in their lives, they would find themselves
interesting to the wider world beyond their own limited circuit, and,
for their friends and acquaintance, the centre of a nine days' wonder. Most of them, indeed, merely touched the hem of the mystery and were not
involved therein, but even for them a reflected glory shone. They were
at least objects of attraction elsewhere, and for many months furnished
conversation of a more interesting and exciting character than any could
ever claim to have provided before. The attitude to such an event, and the opinions concerning it, of such
people might have been pretty accurately predicted; nor would it be fair
to laugh at their terror and bewilderment, their confusion of tongues
and the fatuous theories they adventured by way of explanation. For
wiser than they--men experienced in the problems of humanity and trained
to solve its enigmas--were presently in no better case. A very trivial and innocent remark was prelude to the disaster; and had
the speaker guessed what his jest must presently mean in terms of human
misery, grief, and horror, it is certain enough that he would not have
spoken. The women were gone to bed and the men sat around the fire smoking and
admiring Sir Walter's ancient blend of whisky. He himself had just flung
away the stump of his cigar and was admonishing his son-in-law. "Church
to-morrow, Tom. None of your larks. When first you came to see me,
remember, you went to church twice on Sunday like a lamb. I'll have no
backsliding." "Mary will see to that, governor." "And you, Henry." Sir Walter, disappointed of his hopes respecting his nephew and
daughter, had none the less treated the young man with tact and
tenderness. He felt for Henry; he was also fond of him and doubted not
that the youth would prove a worthy successor. Thomas May was one with
whom none could quarrel, and he and his wife's old flame were now, after
the acquaintance of a week, on friendly terms. "I shan't fail, uncle." "Will anybody have another whisky?" asked Sir Walter, rising. It was the signal for departure and invariably followed the stroke of
a deep-mouthed, grandfather clock in the hall. When eleven sounded, the
master rose; but to-night he was delayed. Tom May spoke. "Fayre-Michell has never heard the ghost story, governor," he said, "and
Mr. Travers badly wants another drink. If he doesn't have one, he won't
sleep all night. He's done ten men's work to-day." Mr. Fayre-Michell spoke. "I didn't know you had a ghost, Sir Walter. I'm tremendously interested
in psychical research and so on. If it's not bothering you and keeping
you up--." "A ghost at Chadlands, Walter?" asked Ernest Travers. "You never told
me." "Ghosts are all humbug," declared another speaker--a youthful "colonel"
of the war. "I deprecate that attitude, Vane. It may certainly be that our ghost is
a humbug, or, rather, that we have no such thing as a ghost at all. And that is my own impression. But an idle generality is always
futile--indeed, any generality usually is. You have, at least, no right
to say, 'Ghosts are all humbug.' Because you cannot prove they are. The
weight of evidence is very much on the other side." "Sorry," said Colonel Vane, a man without pride. "I didn't know you
believed in 'em, Sir Walter." "Most emphatically I believe in them." "So do I," declared Ernest Travers. "Nay, so does my wife--for the best
possible reason. A friend of hers actually saw one." Mr. Fayre-Michell spoke. "Spiritualism and spirits are two quite different things," he said. "One
may discredit the whole business of spiritualism and yet firmly believe
in spirits." He was a narrow-headed, clean-shaven man with grey hair and moustache. He had a small body on very long legs, and though a veteran now, was
still one of the best game shots in the West of England. Ernest Travers agreed with him. Indeed, they all agreed. Sir Walter
himself summed up. "If you're a Christian, you must believe in the spirits of the dead,"
he declared; "but to go out of your way to summon these spirits, to call
them from the next world back to ours, and to consult people who profess
to be able to do so--extremely doubtful characters, as a rule--that I
think is much to be condemned. I deny that there are any living mediums
of communication between the spirit world and this one, and I should
always judge the man or woman who claimed such power to be a charlatan. But that spirits of the departed have appeared and been recognized by
the living, who shall deny? "My son-in-law has a striking case in his own recent experience. He
actually knows a man who was going to sail on the Lusitania, and his
greatest friend on earth, a soldier who fell on the Maine, appeared to
him and advised him not to do so. Tom's acquaintance could not say that
he heard words uttered, but he certainly recognized his dead friend as
he stood by his bedside, and he received into his mind a clear warning
before the vision disappeared. Is that so, Tom?" "Exactly so, sir. And Jack Thwaites--that was the name of the man in New
York--told four others about it, and three took his tip and didn't sail. The fourth went; but he wasn't drowned. He came out all right." "The departed are certainly proved to appear in their own ghostly
persons--nay, they often have been seen to do so," admitted Travers. "But I will never believe they are at our beck and call, to bang
tambourines or move furniture. We cannot ring up the dead as we ring
up the living on a telephone. The idea is insufferable and indecent. Neither can anybody be used as a mouth-piece in that way, or tell us the
present position or occupation and interests of a dead man--or what he
smokes, or how his liquor tastes. Such ideas degrade our impressions
of life beyond the grave. They are, if I may say so, disgustingly
anthropomorphic. How can we even take it for granted that our spirits
will retain a human form and human attributes after death?" "It would be both weak-minded and irreligious to attempt to get at these
things, no doubt," declared Colonel Vane. "And they make confusion worse confounded by saying that evil spirits
pretend sometimes to hoodwink us by posing as good spirits. Now, that's
going too far," said Henry Lennox. "But your own ghost, Sir Walter?" asked Fayre-Michell. "It is a curious
fact that most really ancient houses have some such addition. Is it
a family spectre? Is it fairly well authenticated? Does it reign in a
particular spot of house or garden? I ask from no idle curiosity. It
is a very interesting subject if approached in a proper spirit, as the
Psychical Research Society, of which I am a member, does approach it." "I am unprepared to admit that we have a ghost at all," repeated Sir
Walter. "Ancient houses, as you say, often get some legend tacked on to
them, and here a garden walk, or there a room, or passage, is associated
with something uncanny and contrary to experience. This is an old Tudor
place, and has been tinkered and altered in successive generations. We have one room at the eastern end of the great corridor which always
suffered from a bad reputation. Nobody has ever seen anything in our
time, and neither my father nor grandfather ever handed down any story
of a personal experience. It is a bedroom, which you shall see, if you
care to do so. One very unfortunate and melancholy thing happened in it. That was some twelve years ago, when Mary was still a child--two years
after my dear wife died." "Tell us nothing that can cause you any pain, Walter," said Ernest
Travers. "It caused me very acute pain at the time. Now it is old history and
mercifully one can look back with nothing but regret. One must, however,
mention an incident in my father's time, though it has nothing to do
with my own painful experience. However, that is part of the story--if
story it can be called. A death occurred in the Grey Room when I was
a child. Owing to the general vague feeling entertained against it,
we never put guests there, and so long ago as my father's day it was
relegated to a store place and lumber-store. But one Christmas, when we
were very full, there came quite unexpectedly on Christmas Eve an aunt
of my father--an extraordinary old character who never did anything that
might be foreseen. She had never come to the family reunion before, yet
appeared on this occasion, and declared that, as this was going to be
her last Christmas on earth, she had felt it right to join the clan--my
father being the head of the family. Her sudden advent strained our
resources, I suppose, but she herself reminded us of the Grey Room, and,
on hearing that it was empty, insisted on occupying it. The place is a
bedroom, and my father, who personally entertained no dislike or dread
of it, raised not the least objection to the strong-minded old lady's
proposal. She retired, and was found dead on Christmas morning. She had
not gone to bed, but was just about to do so, apparently, when she had
fallen down and died. She was eighty-eight, had undergone a lengthy
coach journey from Exeter, and had eaten a remarkably good dinner before
going to bed. Her maid was not suspected, and the doctor held her end
in no way unusual. It was certainly never associated with anything but
natural causes. Indeed, only events of much later date served to remind
me of the matter. Then one remembered the spoiled Christmas festivities
and the callous and selfish anger of myself and various other young
people that our rejoicings should be spoiled and Christmas shorn of all
its usual delights. "But twelve years ago Mary fell ill of pneumonia--dangerously--and a
nurse had to be summoned in haste, since her own faithful attendant,
Jane Bond, who is still with us, could not attend her both day and
night. A telegram to the Nurses' Institute brought Mrs. Gilbert
Forrester--'Nurse Forrester,' as she preferred to be called. She was a
little bit of a thing, but most attractive and capable. She had been a
nurse before she married a young medical man, and upon his unfortunate
death she returned to her profession. She desired her bedroom to be as
near the patient as possible, and objected, when she found it arranged
at the other end of the corridor. 'Why not the next room?' she inquired;
and I had to tell her that the next room suffered from a bad name
and was not used. 'A bad name--is it unwholesome?' she asked; and I
explained that traditions credited it with a sinister influence. 'In
fact,' I said, 'it is supposed to be haunted. Not,' I added, 'that
anything has ever been seen, or heard in my lifetime; but nervous
people do not like that sort of room, and I should never take the
responsibility of putting anybody into it without telling them.' She
laughed. 'I'm not in the least afraid of ghosts, Sir Walter,' she said,
'and that must obviously be my room, if you please. It is necessary I
should be as near my patient as possible, so that I can be called at
once if her own nurse is anxious when I am not on duty.' "Well, we saw, of course, that she was perfectly right. She was a
fearless little woman, and chaffed Masters and the maids while they
lighted a fire and made the room comfortable. As a matter of fact, it
is an exceedingly pleasant room in every respect. Yet I hesitated, and
could not say that I was easy about it. I felt conscious of a discomfort
which even her indifference did not entirely banish. I attributed it to
my acute anxiety over Mary--also to a shadow of--what? It may have
been irritation at Nurse Forrester's unconcealed contempt for my
superstition. The Grey Room is large and commodious with a rather fine
oriel window above our eastern porch. She was delighted, and rated me
very amusingly for my doubts. 'I hope you'll never call such a lovely
room haunted again after I have gone,' said she. "Mary took to her, and really seemed easier after she had been in the
sick-room an hour. She loved young people, and had an art to win them. She was also a most accomplished and quick-witted nurse. There seemed
to be quite a touch of genius about her. Her voice was melodious and her
touch gentle. I could appreciate her skill, for I was never far from
my daughter's side during that anxious day. Mrs. Forrester came at the
critical hours, but declared herself very sanguine from the first. "Night fell; the child was sleeping and Jane Bond arrived to relieve the
other about ten o'clock. Then the lady retired, directed that she should
be called at seven o'clock, or at any moment sooner, if Jane wanted her. I sat with Jane I remember until two, and then turned in myself. Before
I did so, Mary drank some milk and seemed to be holding her strength
well. I was worn out, and despite my anxiety fell into deep sleep, and
did not wake until my man called me half an hour earlier than usual. What he told me brought me quickly to my senses and out of bed. Nurse
Forrester had been called at seven o'clock, but had not responded. Nor
could the maid open the door, for it was locked. A quarter of an hour
later the housekeeper and Jane Bond had loudly summoned her without
receiving any reply. Then they called me. "I could only direct that the door should be forced open as speedily as
possible, and we were engaged in this task when Mannering, my medical
man, who shot with us to-day, arrived to see Mary. I told him what had
happened. He went in to look at my girl, and felt satisfied that she was
holding her own well--indeed, he thought her stronger; and just as
he told me so the door into the Grey Room yielded. Mannering and my
housekeeper, Mrs. Forbes, entered the room, while Masters, Fred Caunter,
my footman, who had broken down the lock, and I remained outside. "The doctor presently called me, and I went in. Nurse Forrester was
apparently lying awake in bed, but she was not awake. She slept the
sleep of death. Her eyes were open, but glazed, and she was already
cold. Mannering declared that she had been dead for a good many hours. Yet, save for a slight but hardly unnatural pallor, not a trace of death
marked the poor little creature. An expression of wonder seemed to sit
on her features, but otherwise she was looking much as I had last seen
her, when she said 'Good-night.' Everything appeared to be orderly in
the room. It was now flooded with the first light of a sunny morning,
for she had drawn her blind up and thrown her window wide open. The poor
lady passed out of life without a sound or signal to indicate trouble,
for in the silence of night Jane Bond must have heard any alarm had she
raised one. To me it seemed impossible to believe that we gazed upon
a corpse. But so it was, though, as a matter of form, the doctor took
certain measures to restore her. But animation was not suspended; it had
passed beyond recall. "There was held a post-mortem examination, and an inquest, of course;
and Mannering, who felt deep professional interest, asked a friend
from Plymouth to conduct the examination. Their report astounded all
concerned and crowned the mystery, for not a trace of any physical
trouble could be discovered to explain Nurse Forrester's death. She was
thin, but organically sound in every particular, nor could the slightest
trace of poison be reported. Life had simply left her without any
physical reason. Search proved that she had brought no drugs or any sort
of physic with her, and no information to cast the least light came from
the institution for which she worked. She was a favorite there, and the
news of her sudden death brought sorrow to her many personal friends. "The physicians felt their failure to find a natural and scientific
cause for her death. Indeed, Dr. Mordred, from Plymouth, an eminent
pathologist, trembled not a little about it, as Mannering afterwards
told me. The finite mind of science hates, apparently, to be faced with
any mystery beyond its power to explain. It regards such an incident
as a challenge to human intellect, and does not remember that we are
encompassed with mystery as with a garment, and that every day and every
night are laden with phenomena for which man cannot account, and never
will. "Nurse Forrester's relations--a sister and an old mother--came to the
funeral. Also her dearest woman friend, another professional nurse,
whose name I do not recollect. She was buried at Chadlands, and her
grave lies near our graves. Mary loves to tend it still, though to her
the dead woman is but a name. Yet to this day she declares that she can
remember Nurse Forrester's voice through her fever--gentle, yet musical
and cheerful. As for me, I never mourned so brief an acquaintance
so heartily. To part with the bright creature, so full of life and
kindliness, and to stand beside her corpse but eight or nine hours
afterwards, was a chastening and sad experience." Sir Walter became pensive, and did not proceed for the space of a
minute. None, however, spoke until he had again done so:

"That is the story of what is called our haunted room, so far as this
generation is concerned. What grounds for its sinister reputation
existed in the far past I know not--only a vague, oral tradition came to
my father from his, and it is certain that neither of them attached any
personal importance to it. But after such a peculiar and unfortunate
tragedy, you will not be surprised that I regarded the chamber as ruled
out from my domiciliary scheme, and denied it to any future guests." "Do you really associate the lady's death with the room, Walter?" asked
Mr. Travers. "Honestly I do not, Ernest. And for this reason: I deny that any
malignant, spiritual personality would ever be permitted by the Creator
to exercise physical powers over the living, or destroy human beings
without reason or justice. The horror of such a possibility to the
normal mind is sufficient argument against it. Causes beyond our
apparent knowledge were responsible for the death of Nurse Forrester;
but who shall presume to say that was really so? Why imagine anything so
irregular? I prefer to think that had the post-mortem been conducted by
somebody else, subtle reasons for her death might have appeared. Science
is fallible, and even specialists make outrageous mistakes." "You believe she died from natural causes beyond the skill of those
particular surgeons to discover?" asked Colonel Vane. "That is my opinion. Needless to say, I should not tell Mannering so. But to what other conclusion can a reasonable man come? I do not, of
course, deny the supernatural, but it is weak-minded to fall back upon
it as the line of least resistance." Then Fayre-Michell repeated his question. He had listened with intense
interest to the story. "Would you deny that ghosts, so to call them, can be associated with one
particular spot, to the discomfort and even loss of reason, or life, of
those that may be in that spot at the psychological moment, Sir Walter?" "Emphatically I would deny it," declared the elder. "However tragic the
circumstances that might have befallen an unfortunate being in life at
any particular place, it is, in my opinion, monstrous to suppose his
disembodied spirit will hereafter be associated with the place. We
must be reasonable, Felix. Shall the God Who gave us reason be Himself
unreasonable?" "And yet there are authentic--However, I admit the weight of your
argument." "At the same time," ventured Mr. Travers, "none can deny that many
strange and terrible things happen, from hidden causes quite beyond
human power to explain." "They do, Ernest; and so I lock up my Grey Room and rule it out of our
scheme of existence. At present it is full of lumber--old furniture and
a pack of rubbishy family portraits that only deserve to be burned, but
will some day be restored, I suppose." "Not on my account, Uncle Walter," said Henry Lennox. "I have no more
respect for them than yourself. They are hopeless as art." "No, no one must restore them. The art is I believe very bad, as you
say, but they were most worthy people, and this is the sole memorial
remaining of them." "Do let us see the room, governor," urged Tom May. "Mary showed it to me
the first time I came here, and I thought it about the jolliest spot in
the house." "So it is, Tom," said Henry. "Mary says it should be called the Rose
Room, not the grey one." "All who care to do so can see it," answered Sir Walter, rising. "We
will look in on our way to bed. Get the key from my key-cabinet in the
study, Henry. It's labelled 'Grey Room.'" CHAPTER II. AN EXPERIMENT


Ernest Travers, Felix Fayre-Michell, Tom May, and Colonel Vane followed
Sir Walter upstairs to a great corridor, which ran the length of the
main front, and upon which opened a dozen bedrooms and dressing-rooms. They proceeded to the eastern extremity. It was lighted throughout, and
now their leader took off an electric bulb from a sconce on the wall
outside the room they had come to visit. "There is none in there," he explained, "though the light was installed
in the Grey Room as elsewhere when I started my own plant twenty years
ago. My father never would have it. He disliked it exceedingly, and
believed it aged the eyes." Henry arrived with the key. The door was unlocked, and the light
established. The party entered a large and lofty chamber with ceiling
of elaborate plaster work and silver-grey walls, the paper on which was
somewhat tarnished. A pattern of dim, pink roses as large as cabbages
ran riot over it. A great oriel window looked east, while a smaller one
opened upon the south. Round the curve of the oriel ran a cushioned seat
eighteen inches above the ground, while on the western side of the room,
set in the internal wall, was a modern fireplace with a white Adams
mantel above it. Some old, carved chairs stood round the walls, and in
one corner, stacked together, lay half a dozen old oil portraits, grimy
and faded. They called for the restorer, but were doubtfully worth his
labors. Two large chests of drawers, with rounded bellies, and a very
beautiful washing-stand also occupied places round the room, and against
the inner wall rose a single, fourposter bed of Spanish chestnut, also
carved. A grey, self-colored carpet covered the floor, and on one of the
chests stood a miniature bronze copy of the Faun of Praxiteles. The apartment was bright and cheerful of aspect. Nothing gloomy or
depressing marked it, nor a suggestion of the sinister. "Could one wish for a more amiable looking room?" asked Fayre-Michell. They gazed round them, and Ernest Travers expressed admiration at the
old furniture. "My dear Walter, why hide these things here?" he asked. "They are
beautiful, and may be valuable, too." "I've been asked the same question before," answered the owner. "And
they are valuable. Lord Bolsover offered me a thousand guineas for
those two chairs; but the things are heirlooms in a sort of way, and
I shouldn't feel justified in parting with them. My grandfather
was furniture mad--spent half his time collecting old stuff on the
Continent. Spain was his happy hunting ground." "It's positively a shame to doom these chairs to a haunted room, uncle,"
declared Henry. But the other shook his head and smothered a yawn. "The house is too full as it is." he said. "Mary wants you to scrap dozens of things," replied his nephew. "Then
there'd be plenty of room." "You'll do what you please when your turn comes, and no doubt cast out
my tusks and antlers and tiger-skins, which I know you don't admire. Wait in patience, Henry. And we will now go to bed," answered the elder. "I am fatigued, and it must be nearly midnight." Then Tom May brought their thoughts back to the reason of the visit. "Look here, governor," he said. "It's a scandal to give a champion room
like this a bad name and shut it up. You've fallen into the habit,
but you know it's all nonsense. Mary loves this room. I'll make you a
sporting offer. Let me sleep in it to-night, and then, when I report
a clean bill to-morrow, you can throw it open again and announce it is
forgiven without a stain on its character. You've just said you don't
believe spooks have the power to hurt anybody. Then let me turn in
here." Sir Walter, however, refused. "No, Tom; most certainly not. It's far too late to go over the ground
again and explain why, but I don't wish it." "A milder-mannered room was never seen," said Ernest Travers. "You must
let me look at it by daylight, and bring Nelly. The ceiling, too, is
evidently very fine--finer even than the one in my room." "The ceilings here were all the work of Italians in Tudor times,"
explained his friend. "They are Elizabethan. The plaster is certainly
wonderful, and my ceilings are considered as good as anything in the
country, I believe." He turned, and the rest followed him. Henry removed the electric bulb, and restored it to its place outside. Then his uncle gave him the key. "Put it back in the cabinet," he said. "I won't go down again." The party broke up, and all save Lennox and the sailor went to their
rooms. The two younger men descended together and, when out of ear-shot
of his uncle, Henry spoke. "Look here, Tom," he said, "you've given me a tip. I'm going to camp out
in the Grey Room to-night. Then, in the morning, I'll tell Uncle Walter
I have done so, and the ghost's number will be up." "Quite all right, old man--only the plan must be modified. I'll
sleep there. I'm death on it, and the brilliant inspiration was mine,
remember." "You can't. He refused to let you." "I didn't hear him." "Oh, yes, you did--everybody did. Besides, this is fairly my task--you
won't deny that. Chadlands will be mine, some day, so it's up to me to
knock this musty yarn on the head once and for all. Could anything be
more absurd than shutting up a fine room like that? I'm really rather
ashamed of Uncle Walter." "Of course it's absurd but, honestly, I'm rather keen about this. I'd
dearly love to add a medieval phantom to my experiences, and only wish I
thought anything would show up. I beg you'll raise no objection. It was
my idea, and I very much wish to make the experiment. Of course, I don't
believe in anything supernatural." They went back to the billiard-room, dismissed Fred Caunter, the
footman, who was waiting to put out the lights, and continued their
discussion. The argument began to grow strenuous, for each proved
determined, and who owned the stronger will seemed a doubtful question. For a time, since no conclusion could satisfy both, they abandoned
the centre of contention and debated, as their elders had done, on
the general question. Henry declared himself not wholly convinced. He
adopted an agnostic attitude, while Tom frankly disbelieved. The one
preserved an open mind, the other scoffed at apparitions in general. "It's humbug to say sailors are superstitious now," he asserted. "They
might have been, but my experience is that they are no more credulous
than other people in these days. Anyway, I'm not. Life is a matter of
chemistry. There's no mumbo jumbo about it, in my opinion. Chemical
analysis has reached down to hormones and enzymes and all manner of
subtle secretions discovered by this generation of inquirers; but
it's all organic. Nobody has ever found anything that isn't. Existence
depends on matter, and when the chemical process breaks down, the
organism perishes and leaves nothing. When a man can't go on breathing,
he's dead, and there's an end of him." But Henry had read modern science also. "What about the vital spark, then? Biologists don't turn down the theory
of vitalism, do they?" "Most of them do, who count, my dear chap. The presence of a vital
spark--a spark that cannot be put out--is merely a theory with nothing
to prove it. When he dies, the animating principle doesn't leave a man,
and go off on its own. It dies too. It was part of the man--as much as
his heart or brain." "That's only an opinion. Nobody can be positive. We don't know anything
about what life really means, and we haven't got the machinery to find
out." "By analogy we can," argued Tom. "Where are you going to draw the line? Life is life, and a sponge is just as much alive as a herring; a nettle
is just as much alive as an oak-tree; and an oak-tree is just as much
alive as you are. What becomes of its vital spark when you eat an
oyster?" "You wouldn't believe in a life after death at all, then?" "It's a pure assumption, Henry. I'd like to believe in it--who wouldn't? Because, if you honestly did, it would transform this life into
something infinitely different from what it is." "It ought to--yet it doesn't seem to." "It ought to, certainly. If you believe this life is only the portal to
another of much greater importance, then--well, there you are. Nothing
matters but trying to make everybody else believe it, too. But as a
matter of fact, the people who do believe it, or think they do, seem
to me just as concentrated on this life and just as much out to get the
very best they can from it, and wring it dry, as I am, who reckon it's
all." "They believe as a matter of course, and don't seem to realize how much
their belief ought to imply," confessed Henry. "Why do they believe? Because most of them haven't really thought about
it more than a turnip thinks. They dwell in a foggy sort of way on the
future life when they go to church on Sundays; then they return home and
forget all about it till next Sunday." Lennox brought him back to the present difference. "Well, seeing you laugh at ghosts, and I remain doubtful, it's only fair
that I sleep in the Grey Room. You must see that. Ghosts hate people
who don't believe in them. They'd cold shoulder you; but in my case they
might feel I was good material, worth convincing. They might show up for
me in a friendly spirit. If they show for you, it will probably be to
bully you." Tom laughed. "That's what I want. I'd like to have it out and talk sense to a spook,
and show him what an ass he's making of himself. The governor was right
about that. When Fayre-Michell asked if he believed in them loafing
about a place where they'd been murdered or otherwise maltreated, he
rejected the idea." "Yet a woman certainly died there, and without a shadow of reason." "She probably died for a very good reason, only we don't happen to know
it." Henry tried a different argument. "You're married, and you matter; I'm not married, and don't matter to
anybody." "Humbug!" "Mary wouldn't like it, anyway; you know that." "True--she'd hate it. But she won't know anything about it till
to-morrow. She always sleeps in her old nursery when she comes here, and
I'm down the corridor at the far end. She'd have a fit if she knew I'd
turned in next door to her and was snoozing in the Grey Room; but she
won't know till I tell her of my rash act to-morrow. Don't think I'm a
fool. Nobody loves life better than I do, and nobody has better reason
to. But I'm positive that this is all rank nonsense, and so are
you really. We know there's nothing in the room with a shadow of
supernatural danger about it. Besides, you wouldn't want to sleep there
so badly if you believed anything wicked was waiting for you. You're
tons cleverer than I am--so you must agree about that." Lennox was bound to confess that he entertained no personal fear. They
still argued, and the clock struck midnight. Then the sailor made a
suggestion. "Since you're so infernally obstinate, I'll do this. We'll toss up, and
the winner can have the fun. That's fair to both." The other agreed; he tossed a coin, and May called "tails," and won. He was jubilant, while Henry showed a measure of annoyance. The other
consoled him. "It's better so, old man. You're highly strung and nervy, and a poet and
all that sort of thing. I'm no better than a prize ox, and don't know
what nerves mean. I can sleep anywhere, anyhow. If you can sleep in a
submarine, you bet you can in a nice, airy Elizabethan room, even if it
is haunted. But it's not; that's the whole point. There's not a haunted
room in the world. Get me your service revolver, like a good chap." Henry was silent, and Tom rose to make ready for his vigil. "I'm dog-tired, anyhow," he said. "Nothing less than Queen Elizabeth
herself will keep me awake, if it does appear." Then the other surprised him. "Don't think I want to go back on it. You've won the right to make the
experiment--if we ignore Uncle Walter. But--well, you'll laugh, yet,
on my honor, Tom, I've got a feeling I'd rather you didn't. It isn't
nerves. I'm not nervy any more than you are. I'm not suggesting that I
go now, of course. But I do ask you to think better of it and chuck the
thing." "Why?" "Well, one can't help one's feelings. I do feel a rum sort of conviction
at the bottom of my mind that it's not good enough. I can't explain;
there are no words for it that I know, but it's growing on me. Intuition, perhaps." "Intuition of what?" "I can't tell you. But I ask you not to go." "You were going if you'd won the toss?" "I know." "Then your growing intuition is only because I won it. Hanged if I don't
think you want to funk me, old man!" "I couldn't do that. But it's different me going and you going. I've got
nothing to live for. Don't think I'm maudlin, or any rot of that sort;
but you know all about the past. I've never mentioned it to you, and,
of course, you haven't to me; and I never should have. But I will now. I loved Mary with all my heart and soul, Tom. She didn't know how much,
and probably I didn't either. But that's done, and no man on earth
rejoices in her great happiness more than I do. And no man on earth is
going to be a better or a truer friend to you and her than, please God,
I shall be. But that being so, can't you see the rest? My life ended in
a way when the dream of my life ended. I attach no importance to living
for itself, and if anything final happened to me it wouldn't leave a
blank anywhere. You're different. In sober honesty you oughtn't to run
into any needless danger--real or imaginary. I'm thinking of Mary only
when I say that--not you." "But I deny the danger." "Yes; only you might listen. So did I, but I deny it no longer. The case
is altered when I tell you in all seriousness--when I take my oath if
you like--that I do believe now there is something in this. I don't
say it's supernatural, and I don't say it isn't; but I do feel deeply
impressed in my mind now, and it's growing stronger every minute,
that there's something here out of the common and really infernally
dangerous." The other looked at him in astonishment. "What bee has got into your bonnet?" "Don't call it that. It's a conviction, Tom. Do be guided by me, old
chap!" The sailor flushed a little, emptied his glass, and rose. "If you really wanted to choke me off, you chose a funny way to do
so. Surely it only needed this to determine anybody. If you, as a sane
person, honestly believe there's a pinch of danger in that blessed
place, then I certainly sleep there to-night, or else wake there." "Let me come, too, then, Tom." "That be damned for a yarn! Ghosts don't show up for two people--haven't
got pluck enough. If I get any sport, I'll be quite straight about it,
and you shall try your luck to-morrow." "I can only make it a favor; and not for your own sake, either." "I know. Mary will be sleeping the sleep of the just in the next room. How little she'll guess! Perhaps, if I see an apparition worthy of the
Golden Age, I'll call her up." "Do oblige me, May." "In anything on earth but this thing. It's really too late now. Don't
you see you've defeated your own object? You mustn't ask me to throw
up the sponge to your sudden intuition of danger sprung on me at the
eleventh hour. I won the toss, and can't take my orders from you, old
chap, can I?" The other, in his turn, grew a little warm. "All right. I've spoken. I think you're rather a fool to be so
obstinate. It isn't as if a nervous old woman was talking to you. But
you'll go your own way. It doesn't matter a button to me, and I only
made it a favor for somebody else's sake." "We'll leave it at that, then. May I trouble you for the key? And your
revolver, too. I haven't got mine here." Henry hesitated. The key was in the pocket of his jacket. "It is a matter of honor, Lennox," said the sailor. The other handed over the key on this speech, and prepared to go. "I'll get the revolver," he said. "Thanks. Look me up in the morning, if you're awake first," added May;
but the other did not answer. He let Tom precede him, and then turned out the lights. Other lights
he also extinguished as they left the hall and ascended the stairs. The younger's pride was struggling for mastery; but he conquered it and
spoke again. "I wish to Heaven you could see it from another point of view than your
own, Tom." "I have no point of view. You're rather exasperating, and don't seem
to understand that, even if I might have changed my mind before, it's
impossible now." "That's really only a foolish sort of pride. If I chose my words
clumsily--"

"You did. The devil and all his angels wouldn't make me climb down now." The younger left him, and returned in a minute or two with the revolver. "Good-night," he said. "Good-night, old boy. Thank you. Loaded?" "In all the chambers. Funny you should want it." "Take it back, then." But Henry did not answer, and they parted. Each sought his own bedroom,
and while Lennox retired at once and might have been expected to pass a
night more mentally peaceful than the other, in reality it was not so. The younger slept ill, while May suffered no emotion but annoyance. He
was contemptuous of Henry. It seemed to him that he had taken a rather
mean and unsporting line, nor did he believe for a moment that he was
honest. Lennox had a modern mind; he had been through the furnace of
war; he had received a first-class education. It seemed impossible to
imagine that he spoke the truth, or that his sudden suspicion of real
perils, beyond human power to combat, could be anything but a spiteful
attempt to put May off, after he himself had lost the toss. Yet that
seemed unlike a gentleman. Then the allusion to Mary perturbed the
sailor. He could not quarrel with the words, but he resented the advice,
seeing what it was based upon. His anger lessened swiftly, however, and before he started his
adventure he had dismissed Henry from his mind. He put on pyjamas and a
dressing-gown, took a candle, a railway-rug, his watch, and the loaded
revolver. Then he walked quietly down the corridor to the Grey Room. On reaching
it his usual good temper returned, and he found himself entirely happy
and contented. He unlocked the forbidden entrance, set his candle by
the bed, and locked the door again from inside. He rolled up his
dressing-gown for a pillow, and placed his watch and revolver and candle
at his hand on a chair. A few broken reflections drifted through his
mind, as he yawned and prepared to sleep. His brain brought up events
of the day--a missed shot, a good shot, lunch under a haystack with Mary
and Fayre-Michell's niece. She was smart and showy and slangy--cheap
every way compared with Mary. What would his wife think if she knew he
was so near? Come to him for certain. He cordially hoped that he might
not be recalled to his ship; but there was a possibility of it. It would
be rather a lark to show the governor over the Indomitable. She was a
"hush-hush" ship--one of the wonders of the Navy still. Funny that the
Italian roof of the Grey Room looked like a dome, though it was really
flat. A cunning trick of perspective. It was a still and silent night, moonless, very dark, and very tranquil. He went to the window to throw it open. Only a solitary being waked long that night at Chadlands, and only
a solitary mind suffered tribulation. But into the small hours Henry
Lennox endured the companionship of disquiet thoughts. He could not
sleep, and his brain, clear enough, retraced no passage from the past
day. Indeed the events of the day had sunk into remote time. He was only
concerned with the present, and he wondered while he worried that he
should be worrying. Yet a proleptic instinct made him look forward. He
had neither lied nor exaggerated to May. From the moment of losing the
toss, he honestly experienced a strong, subjective impression of danger
arising out of the proposed attack on the mysteries of the Grey Room. It was, indeed, that consciousness of greater possibilities in the
adventure than May admitted or imagined which made Lennox so insistent. Looking back, he perceived many things, and chiefly that he had taken a
wrong line, and approached Mary's husband from a fatal angle. Too late
he recognized his error. It was inevitable that a hint of suspected
danger would confirm the sailor in his resolution; and that such a hint
should follow the spin of the coin against Lennox, and be accompanied by
the assurance that, had he won, Henry would have proceeded, despite his
intuitions, to do what he now begged Tom not to do--that was a piece of
clumsy work which he deeply regretted. At the hour when his own physical forces were lowest, his errors of
diplomacy forced themselves upon his mind. He wasted much time, as all
men do upon their beds, in anticipating to-morrow; in considering what
is going to happen, or what is not; in weighing their own future words
and deeds given a variety of contingencies. For reason, which at first
kept him, despite his disquiet, in the region of the rational, grew
weaker with Henry as the night advanced; the shadow of trouble deepened
as his weary wits lost their balance to combat it. The premonition was
as formless and amorphous as a cloud, and, though he could not see any
shape to his fear, or define its limitations, it grew darker ere he
slept. He considered what might happen and, putting aside any lesser
disaster, tried to imagine what the morning would bring if May actually
succumbed. For the moment the size of such an imaginary disaster served curiously
to lessen his uneasiness. Pushed to extremities, the idea became merely
absurd. He won a sort of comfort from such an outrageous proposition,
because it brought him back to the solid ground of reason and the
assurance that some things simply do not happen. From this extravagant
summit of horror, his fears gradually receded. Such a waking nightmare
even quieted his nerves when it was past; for if a possibility presents
a ludicrous side, then its horror must diminish by so much. Moreover,
Henry told himself that if the threat of a disaster so absolute could
really be felt by him, it was his duty to rise at once, intervene, and,
if necessary, summon his uncle and force May to leave the Grey Room
immediately. This idea amused him again and offered another jest. The tragedy really
resolved into jests. He found himself smiling at the picture of May
being treated like a disobedient schoolboy. But if that happened, and
Tom was proclaimed the sinner, what must be Henry's own fate? To win
the reputation of an unsportsmanlike sneak in Mary's opinion as well as
Tom's. He certainly could call upon nobody to help him now. But he
might go and look up May himself. That would be very sharply resented,
however. He travelled round and round in circles, then asked himself
what he would do and say to-morrow if anything happened to Tom--nothing,
of course, fatal, but something perhaps so grave that May himself would
be unable to explain it. In that case Henry could only state facts
exactly as they had occurred. But there would be a deuce of a muddle
if he had to make statements and describe the exact sequence of recent
incidents. Already he forgot the exact sequence. It seemed ages since he
parted from May. He broke off there, rose, drank a glass of water,
and lighted a cigarette. He shook himself into wakefulness, condemned
himself for this debauch of weak-minded thinking, found the time to be
three o'clock, and brushed the whole cobweb tangle from his mind. He
knew that sudden warmth after cold will often induce sleep--a fact
proved by incidents of his campaigns--so he trudged up and down and
opened his window and let the cool breath of the night chill his
forehead and breast for five minutes. This action calmed him, and he headed himself off from returning to the
subject. He felt that mental dread and discomfort were only waiting to
break out again; but he smothered them, returned to bed, and succeeded
in keeping his mind on neutral-tinted matter until he fell asleep. He woke again before he was called, rose and went to his bath. He
took it cold, and it refreshed him and cleared his head, for he had a
headache. Everything was changed, and the phantoms of his imagination
remained only as memories to be laughed at. He no longer felt alarm or
anxiety. He dressed presently, and guessing that Tom, always the first
to rise, might already be out of doors, he strolled on to the terrace
presently to meet him there. Already he speculated whether an apology was due from him to May, or
whether he might himself expect one. It didn't matter. He knew perfectly
well that Tom was all right now, and that was the only thing that
signified. CHAPTER III. AT THE ORIEL


Chadlands sprang into existence when the manor houses of England--save
for the persistence of occasional embattled parapets and other
warlike survivals of unrestful days now past--had obeyed the laws of
architectural evolution, and begun to approach a future of cleanliness
and comfort, rising to luxury hitherto unknown. The development of this
ancient mass was displayed in plan as much as in elevation, and, at its
date, the great mansion had stood for the last word of perfection, when
men thought on large lines and the conditions of labour made possible
achievements now seldom within the power of a private purse. Much had
since been done, but the main architectural features were preserved,
though the interior of the great house was transformed. The manor of Chadlands extended to some fifty thousand acres lying in a
river valley between the heights of Haldon on the east and the frontiers
of Dartmoor westerly. The little township was connected by a branch with
the Great Western Railway, and the station lay five miles from the manor
house. No more perfect parklands, albeit on a modest scale, existed in
South Devon, and the views of the surrounding heights and great vale
opening from the estate caused pleasure alike to those contented with
obvious beauty and the small number of spectators who understood the
significance of what constitutes really distinguished landscape. Eastward, long slopes of herbage and drifts of azaleas--a glorious
harmony of gold, scarlet, and orange in June--sloped upwards to larch
woods; while the gardens of pleasure, watered by a little trout stream,
spread beneath the manor house, and behind it rose hot-houses and the
glass and walled gardens of fruit and vegetables. To the south and west
opened park and vale, where receded forest and fallow lands, until the
grey ramparts of the moor ascending beyond them hemmed in the picture. Sir Walter Lennox had devoted himself to the sporting side of the estate
and had made it famous in this respect. His father, less interested in
shooting and hunting, had devoted time and means to the flower gardens,
and rendered them as rich as was possible in his day; while earlier yet,
Sir Walter's grandfather had been more concerned for the interior, and
had done much to enrich and beautify it. A great terrace stretched between the south front and a balustrade of
granite, that separated it from the gardens spreading at a lower level. Here walked Henry Lennox and sought Tom May. It was now past eight
o'clock on Sunday morning, and he found himself alone. The sun, breaking
through heaviness of morning clouds, had risen clear of Haldon Hills
and cast a radiance, still dimmed by vapour, over the glow of the autumn
trees. Subdued sounds of birds came from the glades below, and far
distant, from the scrub at the edge of the woods, pheasants were
crowing. The morning sparkled, and, in a scene so fair, Henry found his
spirits rise. Already the interview with Mary's husband on the preceding
night seemed remote and unreal. He was, however, conscious that he had
made an ass of himself, but he did not much mind, for it could not be
said that May had shone, either. He called him, and, for reply, an old spaniel emerged from beneath,
climbed a flight of broad steps that ascended to the terrace, and
paddled up to Henry, wagging his tail. He was a very ancient hero, whose
record among the wild duck still remained a worthy memory and won him
honour in his declining days. The age of "Prince" remained doubtful,
but he was decrepit now--gone in the hams and suffering from cataract of
both eyes--a disease to which it is impossible to minister in a dog. But his life was good to him; he still got about, slept in the sun, and
shared the best his master's dish could offer. Sir Walter adored
him, and immediately felt uneasy if the creature did not appear when
summoned. Often, had he been invisible too long, his master would wander
whistling round his haunts. Then he would find him, or be himself found,
and feel easy again. "Prince" went in to the open window of the breakfast-room, while Henry,
moved by a thought, walked round the eastern angle of the house and
looked up at the oriel window of the Grey Room, where it hung aloft
on the side of the wall, like a brilliant bubble, and flashed with the
sunshine that now irradiated the casement. To his surprise he saw the
window was thrown open and that May, still in his pyjamas, knelt on the
cushioned recess within and looked out at the morning. "Good lord, old chap!" he cried, "Needn't ask you if you have slept. It's nearly nine o'clock." But the other made no response whatever. He continued to gaze far away
over Henry's head at the sunrise, while the morning breeze moved his
dark hair. "Tom! Wake up!" shouted Lennox again; but still the other did not move
a muscle. Then Henry noticed that he was unusually pale, and something
about his unwinking eyes also seemed foreign to an intelligent
expression. They were set, and no movement of light played upon them. It
seemed that the watcher was in a trance. Henry felt his heart jump,
and a sensation of alarm sharpened his thought. For him the morning was
suddenly transformed, and fearing an evil thing had indeed befallen the
other, he turned to the terrace and entered the breakfast-room from it. The time was now five minutes to nine, and as unfailing punctuality had
ever been a foible of Sir Walter, his guests usually respected it. Most
of them were already assembled, and Mary May, who was just stepping into
the garden, asked Henry if he had seen her husband. "He's always the first to get up and the last to go to bed," she said. Bidding her good-morning, but not answering her question, the young man
hastened through the room and ascended to the corridor. Beneath, Ernest
Travers, a being of fussy temperament with a heart of gold, spoke
to Colonel Vane. Travers was clad in Sunday black, for he respected
tradition. "Forgive me, won't you, but this is your first visit, and you don't look
much like church." "Must we go to church, too?" asked the colonel blankly. He was still a
year under forty, but had achieved distinction in the war. "There is
no 'must' about it, but Sir Walter would appreciate the effort on your
part. He likes his guests to go. He is one of those men who are a light
to this generation--an ancient light, if you like, but a shining one. He loves sound maxims. You may say he runs his life on sound maxims. He
lives charitably with all men and it puzzles him, as it puzzles me, to
understand the growing doubt, the class prejudice--nay, class hatred
the failure of trust and the increasing tension and uneasiness between
employer and employed. He and I are agreed that the tribulations of
the present time can be traced to two disasters only--the lack of
goodwill--as shown in the proletariat, whose leaders teach them to
respect nobody, and the weakening hold of religion as also revealed in
the proletariat. Now, to combat these things and set a good example is
our duty--nay, our privilege. Don't you think so?" Such a lecture on an empty stomach depressed the colonel. He looked
uneasy and anxious. "I'll come, of course, if he'd like it; but I'm afraid I shared my men's
dread of church parade, though our padre was a merciful being on the
whole and fairly sensible." Overhead, Henry had tried the door of the Grey Room, and found it
locked. As he did so, the gong sounded for breakfast. Masters always
performed upon it. First he woke a preliminary whisper of the great
bronze disc, then deepened the note to a genial and mellow roar, and
finally calmed it down again until it faded gently into silence. He
spoke of the gong as a musical instrument, and declared the art of
sounding it was a gift that few men could acquire. Neither movement nor response rewarded the summons of Lennox, and now in
genuine alarm, he went below again, stopped Fred Caunter, the footman,
and asked him to call out Sir Walter. Fred waited until his master had said a brief grace before meat; then he
stepped to his side and explained, that his nephew desired to see him. "Good patience! What's the matter?" asked the old man as he rose and
joined Henry in the hall. Then his nephew spoke, and indicated his alarm. He stammered a little,
but strove to keep calm and state facts clearly. "It's like this. I'm afraid you'll be rather savage, but I can't talk
now. Tom and I had a yarn when you'd gone to bed, and he was awfully
keen to spend the night in the Grey Room." "I did not wish it." "I know--we were wrong--but we were both death on it, and we tossed up,
and he won." "Where is he?" "Up there now, looking out of the window. I've called him and made a row
at the door, but he doesn't answer. He's locked himself in, apparently." "What have you done, Henry? We must get to him instantly. Tell
Caunter--no, I will. Don't breathe a syllable of this to anybody unless
necessity arises. Don't tell Mary." Sir Walter beckoned the footman, bade him get some tools and ascend
quickly to the Grey Room. He then went up beside his nephew, while Fred,
bristling with excitement, hastened to the toolroom. He was a handy man,
had been at sea during the war, and now returned to his old employment. His slow brain moved backwards, and he remembered that this was a task
he had already performed ten or more years before. Then the ill-omened
chamber had revealed a dead woman. Who was in it now? Caunter guessed
readily enough. Lennox spoke to his uncle as they approached the locked door. "It was only a lark, just to clear the room of its bad character
and have a laugh at your expense this morning. But I'm afraid he's
ill--fainted or something. He turned in about one o'clock. I was rather
bothered, and couldn't explain to myself why, but--"

"Don't chatter!" answered the other. "You have both done a very wrong
thing and should have respected my wishes." At the door he called loudly. "Let us in at once, Tom, please! I am much annoyed! If this is a jest,
it has gone far enough--and too far! I blame you severely!" But none replied. Absolute silence held the Grey Room. Then came the footman with a frail of tools. The task could not be
performed in a moment, and Sir Walter, desirous above all things to
create no uneasiness at the breakfast-table, determined to go down
again. But he was too late, for his daughter had already suspected
something. She was not anxious but puzzled that her husband tarried. She
came up the stairs with a letter. "I'm going to find Tom," she said. "It's not like him to be so lazy. Here's a letter from the ship, and I'm awfully afraid he may have to go
back." "Mary," said her father, "come here a moment." He drew her under a great window which threw light into the corridor. "You must summon your nerve and pluck, my girl! I'm very much afraid
that something has gone amiss with Tom. I know nothing yet, but last
night, it seems, after we had gone to bed, he and Henry determined that
one of them should sleep in the Grey Room." "Father! Was he there, and I so near him--sleeping in the very next
room?" "He was there--and is there. He is not well. Henry saw him looking out
of the window five minutes ago, but he was, I fear, unconscious." "Let me go to him," she said. "I will do so first. It will be wiser. Run down and ask Ernest to join
me. Do not be alarmed; I dare say it is nothing at all." Her habit of obedience prompted her to do as he desired instantly, but
she descended like lightning, called Travers, and returned with him. "I will ask you to come in with me, Ernest," explained Sir Walter. "My
son-in-law slept in the Grey Room last night, and he does not respond to
our calls this morning. The door is locked and we are breaking it open." "But you expressly refused him permission to do so, Walter." "I did--you heard me. Let sleeping dogs lie is a very good motto, but
young men will be young men. I hope, however, nothing serious--"

He stopped, for Caunter had forced the door and burst it inward with
a crash. During the moment's silence that followed they heard the key
spring into the room and strike the wainscot. The place was flooded with
sunshine, and seemed to welcome them with genial light and attractive
art. The furniture revealed its rich grain and beautiful modelling;
the cherubs carved on the great chairs seemed to dance where the light
flashed on their little, rounded limbs. The silvery walls were bright,
and the huge roses that tumbled over them appeared to revive and display
their original color at the touch of the sun. On a chair beside the bed stood an extinguished candle, Tom's watch, and
Henry's revolver. The sailor's dressing-gown was still folded where he
had placed it; his rug was at the foot of the bed. He himself knelt
in the recess at the open window upon the settee that ran beneath. His
position was natural; one arm held the window-ledge and steadied him,
and his back was turned to Sir Walter and Travers, who first entered the
room. Henry held Mary back and implored her to wait a moment, but she shook
off his hand and followed her father. Sir Walter it was who approached Tom and grasped his arm. In so doing he
disturbed the balance of the body, which fell back and was caught by the
two men. Its weight bore Ernest Travers to the ground, but Henry was in
time to save both the quick and the dead. For Tom May had expired many
hours before. His face was of an ivory whiteness, his mouth closed. No
sign of fear, but rather a profound astonishment sat upon his features. His eyes were opened and dim. In them, too, was frozen a sort of
speechless amazement. How long he had been dead they knew not, but none
were in doubt of the fact. His wife, too, perceived it. She went to
where he now lay, put her arms around his neck, and fainted. Others were moving outside, and the murmur of voices reached the Grey
Room. It was one of those tragic situations when everybody desires to be
of service, and when well-meaning and small-minded people are often hurt
unintentionally and never forget it, putting fancied affronts before the
incidents that caused them. The man lay dead and his wife unconscious upon his body. Sir Walter rose to the occasion as best he might, issued orders, and
begged all who heard him to obey without question. He and his friend
Travers lifted Mary and carried her to her room. It was her nursery of
old. Here they put her on her bed, and sent Caunter for Mrs. Travers and
Mary's old servant, Jane Bond. She had recovered consciousness before
the women reached her. Then they returned to the dead, and the master of
Chadlands urged those standing on the stairs and in the corridor to go
back to their breakfast and their duties. "You can do no good," he said. "I will only ask Vane to help us." Fayre-Michell spoke, while the colonel came forward. "Forgive me, Sir Walter, but if it is anything psychical, I ask, as a
member--"

"For Heaven's sake do as I wish," returned the other. "My son-in-law
is dead. What more there is to know, you'll hear later. I want Vane,
because he is a powerful man and can help Henry and my butler. We have
to carry--"

He broke off. "Dead!" gasped the visitor. Then he hastened downstairs. Presently they lifted the sailor among
them, and got him to his own room. They could not dispose him in a
comely position--a fact that specially troubled Sir Walter--and Masters
doubted not that the doctor would be able to do it. Henry Lennox started as swiftly as possible for the house of the
physician, four miles off. He took a small motor-car, did the journey
along empty roads in twelve minutes, and was back again with Dr.
Mannering in less than half an hour. The people, whose visit of pleasure was thus painfully brought to a
close, moved about whispering on the terrace. They had as yet heard no
details, and were considering whether it would be possible to get off at
once, or necessary to wait until the morrow. Their natural desire was to depart, since they could not be of any
service to the stricken household; but no facilities existed on Sunday. They walked about in little groups. One or two, desiring to smoke but
feeling that to do so would appear callous, descended into the seclusion
of the garden. Then Ernest Travers joined them. He was important, but
could only tell them that May had disobeyed his father-in-law, slept in
the Grey Room, and died there. He gave them details and declared that in
his opinion it would be unseemly to attempt to leave until the following
day. "Sir Walter would feel it," he said. "He is bearing up well. He will
lunch with us. My wife tells me that Mary, Mrs. May, is very sadly. That
is natural--an awful blow. I find myself incapable of grasping it. To
think of so much boyish good spirits and such vitality extinguished in
this way." "Can we do anything on earth for them?" asked Millicent Fayre-Michell. "Nothing--nothing. If I may advise, I think we had all better go to
church. By so doing we get out of the way for a time and please dear Sir
Walter. I shall certainly go." They greeted the suggestion--indeed, clutched at it. Their bewildered
minds welcomed action. They were hushed and perturbed. Death, crashing
in upon them thus, left them more than uncomfortable. Some, at the
bottom of their souls, felt almost indignant that an event so horrible
should have disturbed the level tenor of their lives. They shared the
most profound sympathy for the sufferers as well as for themselves. Some discovered that their own physical bodies were upset, too, and felt
surprised at the depth of their emotions. "It isn't as if it were natural," Felix Fayre-Michell persisted. "Don't
imagine that for a moment." "It's too creepy--I can't believe it," declared his niece. She was
incapable of suffering much for anybody, and her excitement had a
flavour not wholly bitter. She saw herself describing these events at
other house parties. It would be unfair to say that she was enjoying
herself; still she knew nobody at Chadlands very well, it was her first
visit, and adventures are, after all, adventures. Her uncle discussed
the psychic significance of the tragedy, and gave instances of similar
events. One or two listened to him for lack of anything better to do. There was a general sensation of blankness. They were all thrown. Life
had let them down. Under the circumstances, to most of them it seemed an
excellent idea to go to church. Vane joined them presently. He was able
to give them many details and excite their interest. They crowded round
him, and he spoke nakedly. Death was nothing to him--he had seen so
much. They heard the motor return with Dr. Mannering. "We're so out of it," said Mr. Miles Handford, a stout man from
Yorkshire--a wealthy landowner and sportsman. He was unaccustomed to be out of anything in his environment, and he
showed actual irritation. "Thank Heaven we are, I should think!" answered another; and the first
speaker frowned at him. Ernest Travers joined them presently. He had put on a black tie and wore
black gloves and a silk hat. "If you accompany me," he said, "I can show you the short way by a
field path. It cuts off half a mile. I have told Sir Walter we all go to
church, and he asked me if we would like the motors; but I felt, the day
being fine, you would agree with me that we might walk. He is terribly
crushed, but taking it like the man he is." Miles Handford and Fayre-Michell followed the church party in the rear,
and relieved their minds by criticizing Mr. Travers. "Officious ass!" said the stout man. "A typical touch that black tie! A
decent-minded person would have felt this appalling tragedy far too much
to think of such a trifle. I hope I shall never see the brute again." "It seems too grotesque marching to church like a lot of children,
because he tells us to do so," murmured Fayre-Michell. "I don't want to go. I only want distraction. In fact, I don't think I
shall go," added Mr. Handford. But a woman urged him to do so. "Sir Walter would like it," she said. "It's all very sad and very exasperating indeed," declared the
Yorkshireman; "and it shows, if that wanted showing, that there's far,
far less consideration among young men for their elders than there used
to be in my young days. If my father-in-law had told me not to do a
thing, the very wish to do it would have disappeared at once." "Sir Walter was as clear as need be," added Felix. "We all heard him. Then the young fool--Heaven forgive him--behind everybody's back goes
and plays with fire in this insane way." "The selfishness! Just look at the inconvenience--the upset--the
suffering to his relations and the worry for all of us. All our plans
must be altered--everything upset, life for the moment turned upside
down--a woman's heart broken very likely--and all for a piece of
disobedient folly. Such things make one out of tune with Providence. They oughtn't to happen. They don't happen in Yorkshire. Devonshire
appears to be a slacker's county. It's the air, I shouldn't wonder." "Education, and law and order, and the discipline inculcated in the Navy
ought to have prevented this," continued Fayre-Michell. "Who ever heard
of a sailor disobeying--except Nelson?" "He's paid, poor fellow," said his niece, who walked beside him. "We have all paid," declared the north countryman. "We have all paid the
price; and the price has been a great deal of suffering and discomfort
and stress of mind that we ought not have been called upon to endure. One resents such things in a stable world." "Well, I'm not going to church, anyway. I must smoke for my nerves. I'm a psychic myself, and I react to a thing of this sort," replied
Fayre-Michell. From a distant stile between two fields Mr. Travers, some hundred yards
ahead, was waving directions and pointing to the left. "Go to Jericho!" snapped Mr. Handford, but not loud enough for Ernest
Travers to hear him. A little ring of bells throbbed thin music. It rose and fell on the
easterly breeze and a squat grey tower, over which floated a white
ensign on a flagstaff, appeared upon a little knoll of trees in the
midst of the village of Chadlands. Presently the bells stopped, and the flag was brought down to half-mast. Mr. Travers had reached the church. "A maddening sort of man," said Miles Handford, who marked these
phenomena. "Be sure Sir Walter never told him to do anything of that
sort. He has taken it upon himself--a theatrical mind. If I were the
vicar--"

Elsewhere Dr. Mannering heard what Henry Lennox could tell him as they
returned to the manor house together. He displayed very deep concern
combined with professional interest. He recalled the story that Sir
Walter had related on the previous night. "Not a shadow of evidence--a perfectly healthy little woman; and it will
be the same here as sure as I'm alive," he said. "To think--we shot side
by side yesterday, and I remarked his fine physique and wonderful high
spirits--a big, tough fellow. How's poor Mary?" "She is pretty bad, but keeping her nerve, as she would be sure to do,"
declared the other. Sir Walter was with his daughter when Mannering arrived. The doctor had
been a crony of the elder for many years. He was about the average of
a country physician--a hard-bitten, practical man who loved his
profession, loved sport, and professed conservative principles. Experience stood in place of high qualifications, but he kept in touch
with medical progress, to the extent of reading about it and availing
himself of improved methods and preparations when opportunity offered. He examined the dead man very carefully, indicated how his posture might
be rendered more normal, and satisfied himself that human power was
incapable of restoring the vanished life. He could discover no visible
indication of violence and no apparent excuse for Tom May's sudden end. He listened with attention to the little that Henry Lennox could tell
him, and then went to see Mary May and her father. The young wife had grown more collected, but she was dazed rather than
reconciled to her fate; her mind had not yet absorbed the full extent of
her sorrow. She talked incessantly and dwelt on trivialities, as people
will under a weight of events too large to measure or discuss. "I am going to write to Tom's father," she said. "This will be an awful
blow to him. 