

E-text prepared by Al Haines



THE ROAD TO MANDALAY

A Tale of Burma

by

B. M. Croker







Cassell and Company, Ltd
London, New York, Toronto & Melbourne
First published October 1917. Reprinted December 1917, March and May 1918
Popular Edition 1919. TO

LT.-COLONEL A. E. CONGDON

LATE ROYAL MUNSTER FUSILIERS

FROM HIS OLD FRIEND

THE AUTHOR




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

   1. BLINDS DOWN
   2. WHAT HANNAH SAID
   3. THE CLOSED HOUSE
   4. KICKS AND HALFPENCE
   5. CLOUDS
   6. AN EMPTY OFFER
   7. "THE MONSTER"
   8. BOUND FOR BURMA
   9. THE "BLANKSHIRE"
  10. THE LAND OF PROMISE
  11. A BURMESE HOSTESS
  12. EAST AND WEST
  13. "KEEP AN EYE UPON HER"
  14. THE MANTLE OF FERNANDA
  15. THE CHUMMERY
  16. MR. AND MRS. ABELSALTER
  17. AT THE PLAY
  18. THE CHINESE SHOP
  19. CHAFF
  20. THE PONGYE
  21. THE COCAINE DEN
  22. THE APPROACHING DREAD
  23. MYSTERY AND SUSPICION
  24. SENTENCE OF DEATH
  25. THE LATE RICHARD ROSCOE
  26. FITZGERALD IMPARTS INFORMATION
  27. A ROPE TRICK
  28. MA CHIT
  29. MUNG BAW
  30. ENLIGHTENMENT
  31. SEEING IS BELIEVING
  32. ON DUTY
  33. SOPHY
  34. ALL IS OVER
  35. MUNG BAW LIES LOW
  36. THE BOMBSHELL
  37. THE TUG OF WAR
  38. SERGEANT-MAJOR RYAN




THE ROAD TO MANDALAY


CHAPTER I

BLINDS DOWN

"What do you think, Mitty? All the blinds are down at 'Littlecote,'"
announced Miss Jane Tebbs, bursting open the drawing-room door and
disturbing her sister in a surreptitious game of patience. In
well-ordered households the mistress is understood to have various
domestic tasks claiming her attention in the morning. Cards should
never appear until after sunset. "Blinds down?" echoed Miss Tebbs, hastily moving a newspaper in the
hope of concealing her ill-doing. "Why are you in such a taking, Jane? I suppose the family are away." "Rubbish!" exclaimed her relative, sinking into a chair and dragging
off her gloves. "Did you ever know them all away together? Of course,
Mrs. Shafto goes gadding, and Douglas is at Sandhurst, but 'he' seldom
stirs. It is my opinion that something has happened. The Shaftos have
lived at 'Littlecote' for ten years, and I have never seen the blinds
down before to-day." "Oh, you are so fussy and ready to imagine things!" grumbled Mitty, who
meanwhile had collected and pocketed the cards with surpassing
dexterity. "I don't forget the time when the curate had a smart lady
in his lodgings, and you nearly went out of your mind: rampaging up and
down the village, and telling everyone that the bishop must be
informed; and after all your outcry she turned out to be the young
man's mother!" "That's true. I confess I was misled; but she made herself up to look
like a girl of twenty. You can't deny that she powdered her nose and
wore white shoes. But this is different. Drawn blinds are a sign of
trouble, and there is trouble at 'Littlecote,' as sure as my name is
Jane." "Then, in that case, why don't you go up to the house and
inquire?" --The query suggested a challenge. "_Mitty_! You know perfectly well that I have never been inside the
door since Mrs. Shafto was so rude to me about the book club, when I
wrote and protested against the 'loose' novels she put upon her list. Why, you saw her letter yourself!" Here a pause ensued, during which Miss Jane blew into every separate
finger of her gloves and folded them up with the neatest exactitude. Presently she murmured with a meditative air:

"I was thinking of asking Eliza to run over." "Oh, you may ask!" rejoined her sister, with a sniff of scorn, "but
Eliza won't stir. There's a beefsteak pudding for dinner. And that
reminds me that this is the egg woman's day, and I must see if she has
called. I shall want three dozen." And without another word the elder Miss Tebbs bustled out of the room
and abandoned her relative to solitude and speculation. Matilda and Jane Tebbs were the elderly orphans of a late vicar, and
still considered the parish and community of Tadpool their special
charge. Miss Jane was organist and Sunday school superintendent; Miss
Tebbs held mothers' meetings and controlled the maternity basket and
funds. Subsequent to their retirement from the vicarage the sisters
had known straitened circumstances; in fact, had experienced the sharp
nip of real poverty; but, no matter how painful their necessities, they
contrived to keep up appearances and never withdrew from society, nor
suffered their little circle to forget that their grandfather had been
an archdeacon. In spite of anxious times and scanty funds, they clung
with loyal tenacity to certain family relics, in the shape of old
silver, china and prints, many of which were highly marketable. In those evil days it was whispered that "the Tebbs had only one best
dress between them"--a certain rich black silk. As Miss Jane was at
least six inches taller than dumpy Miss Mitty, difficulties of length
were cunningly surmounted by an adjustable flounce. Needless to add
that on festive occasions, such as high teas, little dinners, and card
parties, the sisters never appeared together, the one "out of turn"
invariably excusing herself with toothache or a heavy cold. Although
they argued and bickered in private, and had opposing tastes in the
matter of boiling eggs and drawing tea, the Tebbs were a deeply
attached pair and presented an unbroken front to the outer world. After several years of brave struggle, during which the wolf of want
prowled hungrily round Highfield Cottage, a substantial and unexpected
fortune, fell to the Tebbs, restored them to comfortable
independence--and to the notice of such far-sighted parents as happened
to be in quest of useful and benevolent godmothers. The sisters made
but little change in their style of living; they now owned handsome
furs, a separate wardrobe, and not a few rich silks; they still
continued to occupy the cottage, and retained in their service a
certain tyrannical treasure, widely known and feared as "the Tebbs's
Eliza." Although an admirable and trustworthy servant, Eliza ruled the
household, permitted no late hours, no breakfasts in bed, no
unnecessary fires, no unnecessary, guests. Her mistresses were obliged
to do a considerable amount of household work; for instance, they made
their beds and Miss Tebbs dusted the china; she also had the charge of
the linen and store-room; whilst Miss Jane was responsible for the
silver, the lamps, and, on Eliza's day out, "the door." When the door was answered by Eliza in person, her manner was so fierce
and intimidating that nervous callers complained that the Tebbs' maid
looked as if she was ready to fly at, and bite them! Ill-natured
tongues declared that the tyrant was tolerated merely because she was a
channel for the most far-reaching, fresh and sensational gossip. But
let us hope that this was a malignant libel! Highfield Cottage was old, two-storied and solid; elsewhere than
Tadpool it might have ventured to pose as a villa residence, but
Tadpool, a fine, sixteenth century, self-respecting and historical
village, tolerated no villas. If such abodes ventured to arise, they
sprouted timidly in the fields beyond its boundaries. Moreover, the
age and history of Highfield Cottage were too widely known for any
change of name. The cottage was connected with the high road by a prim
little garden and a red-tiled footpath; eight long narrow windows
commanded a satisfactory outlook--including Littlecote Hall--a square
white mansion withdrawn in dignified retirement behind elms and
beeches, in age the contemporary of its humbler _vis-a-vis_. Here resided Edward Shafto, late Fellow of St. John's, Oxford, his wife
Lucilla, and his son Douglas. Ten years previously the family had
descended on Tadpool as from the skies--or as a heavy stone cast into
some quiet mill pond. No one in the neighbourhood could discover
anything about them--although Jane Tebbs's exertions in the matter were
admittedly prodigious and unwearied. The house agent proved
disappointingly vague, and could only inform her that a gentleman who
happened to hear of the place had come down from London, inspected the
house, liked its lofty, spacious rooms with their old mahogany doors
(it recalled his home), was much taken with the gardens--and promptly
signed the lease! Certainly it was an audacious step to invade a
strange neighbourhood without a social sponsor or reference. However,
the community breathed more freely when they beheld the new tenant of
"Littlecote," a middle-aged, distinguished-looking individual; and Miss
Jane discovered, or pretended to discover, that he was one of the
Shaftos of Shafton Court. Mrs. Shafto (who looked surprisingly young to be the mother of a tall
lad of ten) had a pretty figure, quantities of lightish red hair, an
animated manner, and a pair of hard blue eyes. She was fashionably
turned out, and her hat of a remarkable shape was discussed in the
village for weeks. The arrival of furniture vans, horses, carriages and a number of
servants, afforded unqualified interest to the Misses Tebbs; and
moreover advertised the fact that the new-comers were well-to-do; and
after allowing a reasonable time for the strangers to settle down, the
neighbours called. By and by these calls were returned by Mrs. Shafto in a smart victoria
and a still smarter costume; her husband was merely represented by a
neatly printed card, which bore the name of "Mr. Edward Shafto,
Athenaeum Club." Mr. Edward Shafto was rarely to be met beyond his
grounds and garden, unless driving through the village to Bricklands
railway station, en route for London. He did not sit on the Bench, nor
was he a churchwarden, the usual grounds of meeting. When encountered
he was invariably agreeable and had charming easy manners, but not much
to say for himself, and his acquaintance, like the farmers and the
claret, got "no forrarder." Gradually the painful truth was accepted
that Shafto did not care to know people. He never dined out, he did
not shoot or hunt, but it was mysteriously whispered that "he wrote." What, no one precisely knew, but one fact was common property: he was
fond of horticulture and the once famous gardens of "Littlecote" had
been delightfully restored. If Tadpool was held at arm's length by Edward Shafto, the community had
no difficulty in making acquaintance with his consort, a pretty
vivacious lady who accepted all invitations, and herself gave tennis
parties, bridge parties, luncheons and teas. For some time the
neighbourhood was disposed to like her, although perhaps she was not
quite "off the top shelf," a little too demonstrative, loud and
unreserved; then by degrees Mrs. Shafto fell into disfavour; quiet folk
were afraid of her, she enjoyed repeating ill-natured remarks, was
capricious in her likes and dislikes, made a good deal of mischief, and
separated chief friends. The lady was not disposed to be reticent respecting her family affairs;
there was something satisfactory in this! People learned that her
husband was really a Shafto of Shafton, and also that his elder
brother, who actually reigned in the family place, was "a brute." She
volubly explained that they had deserted the Border and moved south,
partly because "the pater" wished to be within easy reach of London,
his Club and musty old libraries, and also because it was more
convenient for Douglas, who was at Winchester. Then gradually it came to pass that the village bored the new-comer;
bored her to death. She became restless and quarrelsome, had a
coolness with the vicarage regarding a pew, with Mrs. Tremenheere at
the Park about a housemaid, and actually cut Mrs. General Finch "dead"
in the village post office, owing to a mislaid visiting-card. At the
end of three years Lucilla Shafto had embroiled herself with almost
everyone in her immediate vicinity, and found her true level and most
congenial companions in the busy bustling town of Bricklands, a rapidly
growing and prosperous mushroom place, situated thirty miles south of
London, and within two miles of our ancient and respectable hamlet. Here she belonged to several clubs, bridge, tennis and croquet; enjoyed
being a Triton among minnows; entertained a third-rate set at
"Littlecote," and joined gay little theatre parties to London to "do a
play," and return home by the last train. Housekeeping sat but lightly on Mrs. Shafto's graceful shoulders, for
the Shaftos also possessed a family treasure named Hannah, an elderly
woman, who had been in service with "the family" and now managed the
house, and looked after the comforts and buttons of her master and his
boy. Mr. and Mrs. Shafto went their separate ways, and were rarely to be
seen in one another's company. The lady assured her friends that her
husband's health was indifferent, and that he did not care for society;
for her part she liked amusement, excitement, life; whilst he preferred
to read, write, overlook his garden, and occasionally run up to London. She did not trouble herself much about her son--a handsome active boy,
resembling his father in looks. Between these there undoubtedly
existed a deep affection. During the holidays they were frequently to
be met walking or riding together, and Shafto _pere_ would so far
emerge from his retirement as to be a proud spectator at cricket
matches in Tremenheere Park and elsewhere. Douglas and two of the
Tremenheere boys were schoolmates, and he was in continual request at
their home. Unfortunately these visits were displeasing to Mrs.
Shafto, as was also his intimacy with the young people at the vicarage;
and poor Douglas had an awkward part to play. He could not avoid or
drop his friends; yet, on the other hand, there were painful
difficulties with his mother, who declared that he was a mean fellow to
run after people who had _insulted_ her, and one day, when in a
towering passion, she had been overheard to scream "that he was a thorn
in her side, and a true Shafto!" But all this time Miss Jane Tebbs remains stationed at the drawing-room
window, watching the road with unwinking vigilance. For a long while
she beheld no object of special interest, but at last, after seeing the
grocer's cart, a travelling tinker, two cows and a boy go by, her
patience was handsomely rewarded. To her delight, she descried Mrs. Billing, the doctor's wife, emerge from "Littlecote" and, hammering on
the window to attract notice, she flew down to open the hall door. Mrs. Billing, a stout, middle-aged lady, looked unusually hot and
flustered as she waddled through the little green gate and entered the
cottage. "Why, my dear, you seem quite upset!" cried Jane, as she welcomed the
visitor, "come into the dining-room, and have a glass of milk." But Mrs. Billing dismissing the proffered refreshment with a dramatic
wave of her hand, subsided upon the only chair in the narrow hall and
gasped out:

"I have just come from 'Littlecote.' Mr. Shafto is gone--he died last
night!" CHAPTER II

WHAT HANNAH SAID

On hearing this announcement, Jane Tebbs gave a little lurch and leant
against the wall in speechless horror; and yet in her heart she had
been more than half expecting--we will not say hoping for--some
tragedy. Then she made a rush to the store-room, where Miss Mitty,
invested in a large blue apron, was methodically marking eggs. "Sister, sister, come out!" she cried. "Mrs. Billing is here; she says
Mr. Shafto is dead; I told you that something had happened!" "Dead!" repeated Mitty, staring blankly at her relative. Then she cast
aside her apron and hurried into the hall. "Let us all go into the
dining-room," she continued, leading the way. "What a shocking thing,
Mrs. Billing!" --turning to her visitor. "Do tell us the particulars. I can hardly believe it! Why, I saw Mr. Shafto in Bricklands on
Tuesday, and he looked as well as he ever did in his life." "That was the day he heard the news," announced Mrs. Billing, selecting
an arm-chair and casting off her feather boa. "Bad news?" suggested Miss Jane. "Very bad indeed--could not be worse. He heard he'd lost every penny
he possessed in the wide world." "Great patience!" ejaculated Miss Tebbs; "you don't say so; but how?" "Well, you know he was always comfortably off; indeed, one might say
rich." "That's true! They keep five maids indoors, and a charwoman three
times a week, two men and a boy in the garden, and two men in the
stables," glibly enumerated Miss Jane. "All that is not done on small
means, and I happen to know that Mr. Shafto himself paid everything
monthly--which is more than we can say for his wife; even her bridge
losses"; here she halted on the brink of scandal. After hesitating for a second, Mrs. Billing continued:

"Well, it appears, from what my husband can gather, that Mr. Shafto
trusted all his money and investments to a man who had managed his
affairs for years, and in whom he had the most absolute confidence; he
just drew his income regularly, lived his quiet life, and never
troubled his head about business. It seems that for a considerable
time this agent had been speculating with his clients' capital, and
paying them the interest to the day. He staved off the reckoning by
every possible device, and when he could no longer hide his wickedness,
when liabilities poured in, and proceedings were instituted, he shot
himself! Not much comfort in that for the families he has beggared. I
believe he had a splendid establishment at Hampstead; greenhouses,
pictures, motor-cars, and entertained like a prince. He squandered the
handsome fortune that was left to Mr. Shafto, and all that Mr. Shafto
could be sure of, about a hundred and fifty pounds a year, belongs to
Douglas." "Oh, my dear, never mind the money, but do tell us about poor Mr.
Shafto," urged Jane. "What was the cause of his death? Suicide? This
morning I thought I heard a shot!" "No, no, no--heart failure," hastily interposed Mrs. Billing. "He was
always troubled with a rickety heart, and on several occasions my
husband attended him for rather dangerous fainting attacks; no doubt
that was partly the reason why he lived so quietly, just taken up with
his books, his garden, and, when he was at home, his boy. It appears
that when Mr. Shafto heard of the smash, he went straight up to London,
interviewed a lawyer, and learnt the worst. He returned in the
afternoon, very tired and excited, broke the news to his wife, and had
a serious fainting attack. My husband was sent for, but he found Mr.
Shafto sinking. He died at midnight. He himself had wired for
Douglas, who arrived just in time for the end. Poor boy! He feels it
terribly." "Yes," assented Miss Mitty, "Douglas and his father were such friends. The loss of money will make a sad difference to him. There will be no
going into the Army now, no more hunting and cricket; he will have to
take a clerkship. Did you see him?" "Yes. He and my Freddy are great pals, so I know him pretty well. I
declare he gave me a shock, he looked utterly heart-broken; and he
said: 'It is so sudden, so frightfully sudden--about the pater; the
money may come back somehow or other, but he is gone for ever; I'll
never see him again. If he had only known me--or spoken to me!' And
then he just laid his head upon his arms and sobbed like a girl." "And Mrs. Shafto, how does _she_ bear this double loss?" inquired Miss
Jane magisterially. "She had one fit of screaming hysterics after another. If you ask
_me_, I believe it's the money that touches her most keenly; my husband
begged me to go up this morning, and see if I could do anything. She
has no intimate friends here, and I have sent to Mrs. Boomer and Mrs.
Jake; they will be over from Bricklands immediately. The doctor has
given a certificate, and has undertaken to see about the funeral, and
sent the notice to the _Times_ and _Morning Post_. From what old
Hannah told me, it seems that Mr. Shafto and his family were not on
terms; I believe the quarrel had something to do"--she paused and
glanced from one to the other of her eager listeners--"with Mrs.
Shafto, and I am not surprised. They did not approve of the
marriage--it was a mistake." "I'm afraid it was," agreed Miss Mitty briskly; "they never appeared a
well-matched couple; he, so reserved and aristocratic, and she such a
gabbling, fluffy, restless creature--crazy about bridge and dress. I
wonder who she was?" "I can tell you that!" was Mrs. Billing's unexpected reply. "Mr.
Shafto was a Fellow of his College at Oxford, wealthy and
distinguished--he had taken no end of honours. He was hooked--there is
no other word for it--by the niece of a local book-seller! He was an
important customer, and the girl always contrived to be there, when he
came in and out, and was so sympathetic, and bright and lively, as well
as being uncommonly pretty, that the poor man lost his head and, with
very little pressure from the uncle, married her. It was all scrambled
up in a hurry, before his friends could turn round, or interfere. Of
course he had to resign his fellowship and his beautiful rooms
overlooking the garden, and he took his bride abroad. His relations
dropped him and he dropped his Oxford friends; then he went and settled
in the north. He must have lived there for years; his next move was
here." "And have you always known this?" demanded Miss Mitty, her countenance
expressing injury and jealousy. Fancy Mrs. Billing knowing this story
all that time and keeping it to herself; how sly! "Oh, only lately," replied the visitor in an apologetic key; "an old
aunt of mine lives in Oxford, and I met her in town last Easter. Somehow the name of Shafto cropped up, and I heard the whole tale. I
told my husband and he said I'd better hold my tongue, and so I have,
until now, when it's of no consequence who knows--as of course
'Littlecote' must be given up, and the Shaftos will go away." "Well, we have often wondered who she was? and how Shafto--who looked
like a duke--came to marry her," said Miss Tebbs; "such an odd,
flighty, uncertain sort of creature, always for strangers, instead of
her home. That poor boy never saw much of his mother; I believe he was
hustled off to a preparatory school when he was about seven, and when
he happened to be here for his holidays it was his father who took him
about. I am very sorry for Douglas, a handsome, cheery, nice fellow,"
she continued, "always with a pleasant word, even for an old woman like
me. The rectory lads and the Tremenheeres just love him!" "Luckily there are no girls at the rectory," remarked Miss Mitty. "Douglas is but nineteen, and really only a boy," protested Mrs. Billing. "Well, this affair will make a man of him, or I'm greatly mistaken." "More likely it will make him a slave," argued Jane; "he is bound to
support his mother, and a hundred and fifty pounds a year won't go far
with her! And now I dare say she will have her wish and be able to
live in London. I suppose there will be an auction at 'Littlecote'?" "Yes, of course," assented Mrs. Billing, "and that is sure to bring in
a handsome sum--unless there are liabilities and debts. I've always
admired that Crown Derby tea service--dark blue and gold." "I know," rejoined Miss Tebbs, "a beautiful long set, and there's a
nice little old Sheffield tea urn that we could do with! I expect the
kitchen things will go pretty cheap; we want a new preserving pan." "Talking of the kitchen, reminds me of food," remarked the visitor
rising. "My husband will be back clamouring for his lunch and I must
run," and in spite of her size, Mrs. Billing was out of the house in
less than no time, pursued by a volley of questions to the very gate. *      *      *      *      *      *

During that afternoon there was an unusual amount of visiting and
talking; the recent event had stirred the village to its depths, but
beyond the facts disclosed by Mrs. Billing everything was surmise and
regret; the personality of the late Edward Shafto, though slightly
known, was much respected. "He was a gentleman"--the statement implied
a left-handed compliment to his wife--"and his purse was ever open to
the poor; it was said that he was a secret benefactor to various aged
people, and to the local charities." As the Misses Tebbs sat at supper the following night--a frugal meal of
cocoa and bread and butter--Eliza tramped in, still wearing her hat; it
had been her afternoon out. She seemed to be a little breathless, and
was undoubtedly charged with some weighty intelligence. "Well, Eliza, what is it?" eagerly inquired Miss Tebbs. "I just thought I'd step over to 'Littlecote' this evening, and see
Hannah." Oh, priceless handmaiden! "Yes--and what did she tell you?" Eliza placed her hands on her hips--invariable preliminary to an
important announcement. "She took me to see the corpse; he looked
beautiful, just like a marble statue; and there in front of the dead,
what do you think Hannah told me? That Mrs. Shafto had _killed_ him!" She paused to contemplate the effect of this statement. "Yes, his
heart was always weak, he couldn't stand no shocks, and when he come
back wore out from London, and told her as how he was ruined, the
screams of that woman was enough to bring the house down! Hannah ran
in and there was he, lying back in a chair, and she standing over him
with a face all worked up, and her hands clenched, shouting at him that
it was all through his lunacy and laziness they were beggared--and she
wished he was _dead_. I couldn't tell you all the awful things she
said, but he fainted right away and never come to again. Now, what do
you say to that?" and she surveyed her audience judicially. The sisters remained dumb; for once, speech had failed them. "As for caring," continued Eliza, "Mrs. Shafto doesn't feel no more
than this table," rapping it with her bony knuckles; "all she minds is
about _the money_--and already they say she has been routing among his
papers, searching for his bank book. Oh! she is an awful woman, her
heart is just a stone. As for poor Master Douglas, now there's real
grief! He hasn't tasted a bite or sup, and he looks crushed. Everyone
in the place will be sorry for him and for his father; but as far as
Mrs. Shafto is concerned, when she's paid off the money she owes--the
sooner the place can get shut of her the better!" CHAPTER III

THE CLOSED HOUSE

The break-up of the home at Littlecote Hall was a speedy and complete
affair; Miss Jane Tebbs, being practically on the spot, volunteered
invaluable assistance. Always energetic and anxious to be "up and
doing," and with a sadly restricted field for her activities, here was
a grand opportunity absolutely within her reach. The second Miss Tebbs
had an immense acquaintance and correspondence, a fairly, good business
head and, to her late enemy Mrs. Shafto, she ultimately proved a
veritable tower of strength. The recent sad catastrophe had melted
Jane's heart, and she promptly appeared in "Littlecote" drawing-room,
waving a large olive branch--which her former adversary most thankfully
accepted. In such a crisis as the present there was no more helpless,
hopeless creature than Lucilla Shafto--a woman who was always ready to
transfer her burdens to others. Strange to say, she somewhat
distrusted her intimates in Bricklands; it seemed to her that their
questions and sympathy were chiefly founded on vulgar curiosity and
greedy self-interest. "How was she left? What had become of all the
money? What was the boy going to do? Where would she settle? Would
she not be glad to get rid of some of her smart summer clothes, now
that she would be in weeds for at least two years? _What_ about her
sables?" Jane Tebbs was totally different; an honest and single-hearted woman,
she wrote business letters, interviewed the local agent, arranged for
the auction and,--O wonderful and miraculous achievement!--was even
instrumental in getting rid of the lease. It was not surprising in all these circumstances that Mrs. Shafto
should cling as a limpet to Jane Tebbs, whom she had so often
apostrophised as a "meddling, mischievous, malignant old cat," but
Lucilla Shafto was suffering from a violent mental shock. The sudden
descent, as it were in one day, from comfortable affluence to a very
narrow income, had temporarily stunned her, and she had a secret
conviction that if she were to leave her affairs in the capable hands
of her nearest neighbour, all would be well. She therefore remained
secluded in her own spacious bedroom, whilst busy Jane undertook her
affairs; helped with the auction list, interviewed the tradespeople,
and, accompanied by the boy, went up to London to confer with Mr.
Shafto's lawyers. Douglas was subdued; he seemed a different creature, so silent and
pale, but keenly anxious to put his shoulder to the wheel. He had
withdrawn from Sandhurst and, in conversations with the Tremenheeres,
informed them that his idea of going into the Army was knocked on the
head, and that he now intended to look out for some job in the City. It must not be supposed that Jane Tebbs, the indefatigable, was the
only neighbour who had come forward with offers of assistance to the
widow; the Tremenheeres, the vicarage, and many other acquaintances had
been sincere in their sympathy and goodwill, but somehow or other Mrs.
Shafto would have none of them! She refused to see the vicar or his
wife, and lay in bed most of the day bewailing her fate, scribbling
answers to letters of condolence, and occasionally dipping into a
novel. "Read she must," she declared, "as it diverted her mind from
the too dreadful present. A good novel was the best of anodynes." The auction at "Littlecote" proved an important local event, and threw
the annual Church bazaar woefully into the shade. It lasted three
summer days and enabled a substantial sum to be placed to the credit of
Edward Shafto's widow. Unfortunately Edward Shafto's widow had
considerable private debts and, when these were settled, five hundred
pounds was all that remained for investment. As is proverbial with respect to auctions, good and even valuable lots
went in some cases for the traditional old song; it is on record that
Mrs. Shafto's smart victoria was sold to a jobmaster for six pounds,
Mrs. Billing secured a wonderful bargain in the Crown Derby tea
service, and the Sheffield tea urn fell to Miss Tebbs for ten shillings
and sixpence! On the other hand, rubbish was at a premium. The
kitchen utensils were dispersed at an alarmingly high figure, and a
Turkey carpet, aged twenty years, fetched more than its original cost. The sale was over. Needless to say, it had afforded enormous interest
to the inmates of Highfield Cottage. Miss Jane could almost tell the
price and history of each individual lot. In a short time the great placards of advertisement were torn off the
gate piers at "Littlecote," the house was closed, and once more the
blinds were down. CHAPTER IV

KICKS AND HALFPENCE

More than four years had elapsed since Mrs. Shafto and her son had
driven away from "Littlecote" behind a pair of smart bay steppers. (The widow was determined to keep up what she was pleased to call "her
position" to the last.) Immediately succeeding this dignified exit
came a woeful change in their circumstances. Mrs. Shafto was obliged
to make the best of boarding-house and 'bus, and Douglas, thanks to the
exertions of his friends the Tremenheeres, found a situation in a
mercantile house in the City. There was no time for him to pick and
choose. It was imperative that he should begin to earn without delay,
and not, as his parent frankly remarked, "look to a poor widow for
support." This condition of abject poverty was, she declared,
"entirely due to his father's criminal carelessness respecting his
affairs. She had what would barely keep her alive"--170 pounds per
annum--"and that was all." As for Douglas, he must work. Although they were not congenial companions Douglas faithfully
accompanied his mother in her varied wanderings, supported her in
action with enraged landladies, helped her out of a libel case, covered
her reverses and retreats, and lived by command under the same roof. For the last eighteen months the pair had been established at a
well-managed private hotel in Lincoln Square, Bayswater, W.  "Malahide"
was a flourishing concern; two substantial houses had been thrown into
one; the rooms were spacious, clean, and adequately furnished; the food
was plain but abundant. The double drawing-room contained a fine
piano, one or two sofas, and card tables; also a sufficiency of sound
and reliable chairs; but not an ornament, save two clocks--not one
paper fan, nor bunch of coloured grasses, nor a single antimacassar,
not even a shell! Such amazing restraint gave the apartments an empty
but dignified appearance. Among its various advantages, "Malahide" was within a few minutes' walk
of "the Grove," and "Underground," a situation which appealed to men in
business and to women whose chief occupation was shopping. Mrs. Shafto appreciated her present quarters for several excellent
reasons. Here she had no giggling young rivals and was, even at
forty-five, the best-looking and best-dressed of all the lady boarders. Moreover, she had found a friend and admirer in her neighbour at
meals--a certain Mr. Manasseh Levison, a widower, with a stout figure,
a somewhat fleshy nose, and a pair of fine piercing black eyes. He was
the proprietor of a fashionable and flourishing antiquities and
furniture business in a well-known thoroughfare, and was considered one
of the best judges of old silver and china in the trade. It exasperated Shafto to listen to his mother's "table talk," and he
made a point of sitting as far as possible from her vicinity. She
liked to impress Levison and other with highly-coloured reminiscences
of her grand acquaintances; even the Tremenheeres--with whom she had
quarrelled so bitterly--were dragged in and shown off as intimates. More than once Shafto had felt his face burn, as exaggerations and
glorifications were unfolded in his parent's far-carrying and assertive
treble. Besides Mr. Manasseh Levison, were the two Misses
Smith--twins--genteel, middle-aged spinsters, who, until the arrival of
the sprightly and attractive widow, had alternately cherished high
hopes of the wealthy Jew. Their chief energies were devoted to the
task of blowing one another's trumpets, thereby drawing attention to
particular virtues and modestly hidden accomplishments. For example,
the elder would say:

"Darling Ella is so clever at cooking, as good as any French chef, her
sauces and savouries are too wonderful." They were! And Ella, in repayment, assured her listeners that Jessie had a perfect
genius for gardening and housekeeping; and yet it was whispered that
this effusively fond couple, when alone, quarrelled and wrangled as
cruelly as the notorious Kilkenny cats. Among other patrons at "Malahide" were two quiet, polite little
Japanese gentlemen, Mr. Den and Mr. Yabe; Madame Galli, a shrivelled
old woman in a cheap wig, with sharp rat's eyes that nothing escaped,
the soul of good nature, rich, miserly and incredibly mischievous. There were several boarders who were in business in the City, and Mr.
Hutton, a careworn man of fifty, who spent his days working in the
British Museum. Next to him at table sat Douglas Shafto, now a well
set-up, self-possessed young fellow, who still retained something of
the cheery voice and manner of the Public School boy. Thanks to his
steadiness and fair knowledge of French and German, he was drawing a
salary of a hundred and fifty per annum. His neighbour on the left happened to be his own cousin, Sandy Larcher,
older by three years, and in the same office, but receiving a lower
"screw," Sandy was of the "knut" tribe, a confident authority on dress,
noisy, slangy, and familiar; much given to cigarettes and music-halls,
a slacker at work, but remarkably active at play and, on the whole,
rather a good sort. Sandy's mother, Mrs. Larcher, the widow of a cab proprietor, was Mrs.
Shafto's only sister, and in the days of that sister's glory had never
obtruded herself; but now that poor Lucilla had come down in the world,
she had advanced with open arms, and at "Monte Carlo," the abode of the
Larcher family, Mrs. Shafto occasionally spent a week end. The
"go-as-you-please" atmosphere, late hours, breakfast in bed, and casual
meals, recalled old, and not unhappy times. Mrs. Larcher, who had
never been a beauty, was now a fat woman past fifty, lazy,
good-natured, and absolutely governed by her children. Besides Sandy,
the dandy, she had two daughters, Delia and Cossie. Delia was on the stage (musical comedy), petite, piquant, and very
lively; a true grasshopper, living only for the summer; a loud,
reckless but respectable young woman, who, having but thirty shillings
a week salary and to find her own "tights," was ever ready to accept
motor drives, dinners, or a smart hat, or frock, from any of her
"boys." Cossie, the stay-at-home, was round-faced and plump; a
tireless talker and tennis player. She managed the house, held the
slender purse, accepted her sister's cast-offs, and always had a "case"
on with somebody. Cossie was exceedingly anxious (being the eldest of
the family) to secure a home of her own, and made this alarmingly
obvious. To "Monte Carlo" Douglas, the highly presentable cousin, was frequently
commanded by both mother and aunt. At first he had hated this duty,
but nevertheless went, in order to please and silence his parent, whose
hand plied the goad and who otherwise "nagged" at him in public and in
private. In private she pointed out that the Larcher family were his
own blood relations, "so different from his father's side of the house,
which, since his death, had ignored both her and him, and never even
sent a wreath to the funeral!" By slow and painful degrees Douglas
became accustomed to "Monte Carlo"; at first the manners and customs of
his cousins had a rasping effect, and it was more than a year before he
really fell into line, and visited his kindred without pressure. The
girls were not bad-looking--in a flamboyant style--and effusively
good-natured; they took his chaff and criticism without offence, and
accepted with giggles his hints with respect to manners and appearance. When Douglas happened to be expected, they did not stroll about
slip-shod in dressing-gowns, with their hair hanging loose, or bombard
one another with corks and crusts. For his part, he brought them books and chocolates, watered the garden,
mowed the tennis ground, mended the bells, and made himself generally
useful. At first this flashy, muddling, free-and-easy household had
disgusted him; and his cool assured manner and critical air irritated
his relatives; whilst his attitude of superior comment had proved a
vexatious restraint. But week by week Douglas came to see that it was
to this particular class he now belonged. These were his nearest
relatives, and he told himself that he must endeavour to accommodate
himself to circumstances--and them; otherwise he was a snob, a beastly
snob! His first Christmas holidays had been spent at "Tremenheere," where he
had received a heart-warming welcome. Other school friends had also
claimed him, but his time was now mortgaged to the office, and by
degrees correspondence and intimacy languished--or, rather, changed. His contemporaries had gone forth into the wide world; the Army, the
Diplomatic Service, and India, had summoned them, their paths in life
lay far apart from that of a mere correspondence clerk, and only the
old birds remained in the nests. Those who were in England wrote and
made arrangements for meetings in town, but Shafto found ready and real
excuses and generally withdrew from his former circle. He liked his
friends--nothing could offer him so much pleasure as their company--but
he realised that in time they would arrive at the parting of the ways,
and it was for him to make the first step in that direction; in such
homes as "Monte Carlo" he must in future find society and entertainment. *      *      *      *      *      *

"Monte Carlo" (sixpence return, third class, from town, and eight
minutes' walk from the station) was a grotesque, little red-faced
abode, situated among a tangle of villas and roads. It stood detached
in a garden, with--O! theme of pride--a full-sized tennis court. There
were also several flower beds, and six unhappy gooseberry bushes, but
_the_ feature was the lawn; here also were seats and a small striped
awning. The grounds of "Monte Carlo" were only divided from its
immediate neighbours by a thin wooden partition--there was no such
thing as privacy or seclusion. Conversation was audible, and the
boisterous jokes of "Chatsworth" and "Travancore" were thoroughly
enjoyed at "Monte Carlo." In the same way "Monte Carlo" overheard
various interesting items of news, some sharp quarrels and, once or
twice, unpleasant personal truths! On the last occasion, the remark
was so unfriendly (it dealt with Cossie's methods) that when
"Chatsworth," ignorant of offence, sent the same evening an emissary to
borrow three pints of stout, the reply was a harsh refusal! Within doors space was naturally more contracted, but the click of the
opposite gate, the sound of the next door dinner-bell and gramophone
remained, as it were, common property! The tiny hall was choked with
umbrellas, wraps, tennis shoes, and tattered sixpenny books; the
drawing-room, with its pink casement curtains, gaudy cretonne covers,
huge signed photographs, jars of dusty artificial bowers, packs of
dingy cards, and scraps of millinery, looked "lived in"--but tawdry and
untidy. The big Chesterfield sofa--a wonderful bargain--had broken
springs (perhaps it was not such a wonderful bargain?) and many hills
and hollows. In the roomiest of these last the mistress of the house
was more or less a fixture, and the whole apartment, like a _passee_
beauty, was to be seen at its best by candle-light. The dining-room was chiefly notable for the heavy atmosphere of
tobacco, and multitudes of empty black bottles under the sideboard. The kitchen, both in sound and smell, absolutely refused to be ignored. Such was "Monte Carlo!" The inmates of "Malahide" have received honourable mention, but nothing
has been said of Mrs. Malone, the proprietress, who kept the
establishment running, as it were, on well-oiled wheels. Joyce Malone
was an Irishwoman who had met with cruel reverses. Well born, well
educated, and an almost penniless widow, she thankfully accepted the
post of housekeeper in a nobleman's family, and there remained until
her savings, and a timely legacy, enabled her to set up for herself. From the first she had met with success. Her terms were moderate;
butter, eggs and poultry came from her native land; there was no
skimping of coals, or hot water; and clients--who became
permanent--flocked to "Malahide." In appearance Mrs. Malone was a tall
old woman, with a stoop, who shuffled a little as she walked, and
always wore a black gown, a gold Indian chain, and a white lace cap
with ribbon bows. She kept severely aloof from her guests and had her
own little lair on the second landing. It was, she said, "her business
to see to domestic matters, and not to gossip or play bridge." Nevertheless, she had her favourites: Mr. Hutton and young Shafto. (Envy and malice declared that Mrs. Malone had _no_ favourites among
her own sex.) She was drawn to the boy by his air of good breeding and
admirable manners; also she noticed with secret indignation how
shamefully his mother neglected and snubbed him. She took far more
notice of Jimmy Black, or Sandy Larcher, than of her own son. No doubt
she disliked to be so unmistakably dated by his tall, well-grown youth,
and her hostess mentally agreed with a gossip who declared that "Mrs.
Shafto didn't care a pin for her boy--rather the other way, and if she
had kept her figure, she could never keep her word, or a secret--and
was a hard, selfish, grasping woman." Although Shafto and his mother lived under the same roof, she,
figuratively, sat with folded hands as far as he was concerned; it was
kindly Mrs. Malone who looked after his little comforts, saw that his
socks were mended, and made him a hot drink when he had a heavy cold. Also, as a special honour, she invited him to her "den," gave him a cup
of coffee, or a glass of port, and talked to him of her Irish home and
her young days. Once upon a time she had been a capital horsewoman,
and it was strange to hear this old lady and the bright-eyed  youth
comparing notable runs. One day in the Strand at luncheon hour, Shafto came face to face with
his old friend Geoffrey Tremenheere, looking bronzed, splendidly fit,
and independent as a prince. "Hallo, Douglas!" he exclaimed. "Well, if this isn't a piece of luck! How are you, old man?" "AH right--and you?" "I arrived from India yesterday and go up to Scotland to-night--the
family are all on the moors. I've just been looking for a pair of
guns. Come and give your opinion, and then we will lunch. I'm
stopping at the Grand." "I'd like to awfully, I need not tell you, Geoff, but I've got to be
back at 1.15 sharp--it's mail day." "Oh, hang mail day! Come along and lunch--and let us have a good old
_bukh_!" "I don't know what that means--but I'll be glad of lunch, and more glad
of a bit of a jaw!" "Now, tell me all about yourself, Douglas," said his schoolfellow, as
they sat _vis-a-vis_ in the marble hall. "You don't look particularly
chirpy. Still in the office?" "Yes--I expect to live and die there." "Poor old boy--and doing work you hate!" "Oh, I'm getting used to it now. I shall manage to hang on." "And Mrs. Shafto--how is she?" "As usual--going strong. We live in the same boarding-house." "'Umph! Well, let me tell you this--you are in the black books at
home. I hear you refuse all invitations and make monstrous excuses." "You know I'd love to go down to 'Tremenheere,' but how can I? My time
is not my own, and I only got a week's holiday in August and three days
at Christmas. There's nothing to tell about my career--let's hear
yours?" Thus invited, Geoffrey, a gay young officer in a crack regiment, broke
into short and vivid descriptions of Indian quarters, polo matches, and
capital black-buck shooting in the Central Provinces, and gave a full
and detailed history of his one tiger. Shafto,  an eager and enthusiastic listener, exclaimed:

"I say, how splendid! Do you know, Geoff, I'd give ten years of this
life to have a good chance of seeing the world--especially the East?" "Who knows--you might yet!" "Pigs might fly! Still I must not grumble. I'm delighted you have had
such a glorious time; when one's friends are enjoying themselves, it's
next best to doing the same oneself. What leave have you got?" "Only three months and every hour is priceless. This time to-morrow I
shall be blazing away at a grouse drive." From grouse they fell to talking of shooting, of old scenes, of
rabbiting and ferreting, of cricket matches, schoolfellows and scrapes. Suddenly Douglas sprang to his feet and pointed to the clock. "Half-past one, I must run! Good-bye and good luck, old boy," wringing
his friend's hand, "I shan't forget this lunch in a hurry," and he was
gone. This little break and talk of old times and warm friends gave
Shafto something pleasant to think of for many days; it was like a
gleam of sunshine in his grey and joyless life. Richard Hutton, hack writer and "ghost," sat next to him at table twice
a day, and proved a sympathetic neighbour. Hutton was a clever,
cultured, and--when he pleased--a wholly delightful companion. Occasionally on Sundays the pair made little excursions together,
visited the City churches and quaint bits of Old London, or ventured a
dash into the country, or up the river. "You say Friday is a holiday in your office, Shafto," he remarked one
evening; "how would you like to come for a prowl, and see what we can
find in the Caledonian Market? It's an out-of-the-way place, where
once a week all manner of rubbish is shot, and now and then you pick up
a really staggering bargain." "What's that?" inquired Shafto. "Well, I'm told that lately a woman bought a rusty steel fender for two
shillings and, when she went to clean it, it turned out to be solid
silver--a bit of loot from some old French chateau. I must confess
that I've never found any spoil, but I only root among the books. Once, I thought I'd got hold of a Coverdale Bible, but it proved to be
a fake." "All right," agreed Shafto, "I'd like to try my luck; I'll go with you
and look for a set of gold fire-irons. I've nothing special on--only
tennis in the afternoon." "And the market is at its best in the morning--we'll start at ten." Friday morning found the couple roaming aimlessly round that great bare
enclosure at the end of the Camden Road, known as the Caledonian
Market. It was just eleven by the clock tower, and wares were still
pouring in; arriving in all manner of shabby carts and vans--mostly
drawn by aged and decrepit horses. Every variety of goods had its own
particular pitch. In one quarter were piles of books, brown, musty
volumes of all shapes and sizes, also tattered magazines, and of
theological works a great host. Farther on the explorers came to a
vast collection of old iron. It was as if numbers of travelling
tinkers had here discharged their stock; fenders, gasoliers,
stair-rods, tin-cans, officers' swords--yes, at least a dozen--frying
pans and saucepans. Old clothes were needless to say, a prominent
feature. Here you might suit yourself with a bald-looking sealskin, a
red flannel petticoat, a soiled evening gown on graceful lines, or a
widow's bonnet. Here also were black costumes (dripping beads), broken
feathers, and hopeless hats. Old furniture had several stands and was
an important department. Grandfather clocks, sideboards, chairs
(Chippendale or otherwise), chairs in horsehair or upholstered in
wool-work, and framed family portraits solicited notice. Should anyone
marvel as to what becomes of the rubbish and relics belonging to houses
whose contents have been scattered, after several generations--trifles
that survived wrecked fortunes, odds and ends which, for sacred
reasons, people had clung to till the last, let them repair to the
"Market"--the relics are there, lying on unresponsive cobble stones, a
pitiful spectacle, handled, despised, and cast aside--the precious
hoarded treasures of a bygone age. Delicately worked samplers, faded water-colours, portraits, old seals,
snuff-boxes, and lockets, attract the curio-hunter. Here is a Prayer
Book with massive silver clasps, inscribed, "Dearest Mary, on our
wedding day, June 4th, 1847, from Gilbert." There, in a red morocco
case, is a miniature of a handsome naval officer. At the back, under
glass, are two locks of hair, joined by a true lover's knot in seed
pearls. Some ruthless hand will pick out those pearls and throw the
hair away. For a considerable time Shafto strolled about with his hands in his
pockets, so far seeing nothing to tempt him. Meanwhile his companion
eagerly examined books and bargained over a tattered old volume. Shafto noted with surprise the number of well-dressed visitors poking
among the stalls, in search of treasure trove. There were a parson
with a greedy-looking leather bag, an officer in uniform, and various
smart ladies, hunting in couples. Among a quantity of jugs and basins,
soup tureens and coarse crockery, Shafto's idle glance fell upon a
frightful Chinese figure, the squat presentation of a man, about eight
inches in height. "I say, did you ever see such a horror?" he asked, pointing it out to
his companion; "a curio for ugliness, and just the sort of monster Mrs.
Malone would love. I'll try if I can get hold of it. What's the price
of the China demon?" he inquired of a wizened old woman, who wore a
bashed black bonnet and a pair of blue sand shoes. "Five shillin'," she replied promptly. "Five shillings!" he exclaimed. "You're joking." "No time for jokes here," she retorted, "it's a good piece" (picking up
the figure), "and come out of a grand house. If it were in Bond
Street, they'd ask you five pounds. I showed it to a man, who said it
was good, although there was no mark, and it might be worth a lot; but
I've no time to be raking up things--my trade is a quick sale--and
cash." "I'll give you half a crown," said the customer. "Two half-crowns, and it's yours, and a bargain; you won't know the old
fellow when he's had a wash!" "What do you say, Hutton?" inquired Douglas, turning to his friend. "Well, I think you might risk five shillings; you don't see such
ugliness every day, and I should not wonder if it was a good piece. I've never come across one like it." "All right then, I'll take the horror." And in another moment the bargain was effected. Douglas tendered two
half-crowns, which the old woman carefully examined and pocketed, then
she wrapped up the figure in a piece of crumpled newspaper, and
presently he and his friend departed, each bearing his booty. "There is little to find now," said Hutton, as they passed through the
gates; "the Market has become one of the weekly fashionable gatherings
of the town, and is dredged by dealers from all over England, who look
on it as a sort of lucky-bag--but the bag is nearly empty." Mrs. Malone was enchanted with the monster--she had a secret weakness
for cheap little gifts--that is to say, from her own particular
friends. More than once Douglas had brought her some trifling tribute,
but his mother had felt deeply affronted by such uncalled for
generosity to a stranger; and when he ventured to exhibit the Chinese
atrocity, she exclaimed with great bitterness:

"Oh, for Mrs. Malone, Of course! It's rather strange that you never
think of bringing me a present." "But, mother, you wouldn't care for this sort of thing," he protested,
"and it was awfully cheap." "Cheap and nasty!" she retorted. "If you had offered me such hideous
rubbish, I'd have sent it straight to the dustbin!" CHAPTER V

CLOUDS

It was an abnormally hot summer; all London lay at the mercy of a
fierce and fiery sun; grass in the parks was brown, plants drooped in
window boxes, and there was not even a little breeze to stir the soft
dust under foot, nor one hopeful cloud in the blue vault overhead. But
in the sky of Douglas Shafto's existence dark and threatening clouds
were gathering; the largest of these was a haunting fear that his
mother intended to marry her admirer, Manasseh Levison--the prosperous
dealer in furniture and antiquities, a wealthy man, who owned, besides
his business, a fine mansion at Tooting; this he had closed after the
death of Mrs. Levison, when he had repaired to "Malahide" for society
and distraction--bidden there by his lively old friend, Mrs. Moses
Galli. The shrivelled little miserly widow was his confidante, and,
for the illumination of Mrs. Shafto, she had drawn glowing pictures of
Khartoum House, and outlined an imposing sketch of the luxuries
awaiting its future mistress. It was noticed as a significant fact
that when Mrs. Shafto and Madame Galli went to Eastbourne for a week
(at Mrs. Shafto's expense), they had been joined at the Grand Hotel by
Manasseh Levison, who treated them to a special banquet, enlivened by
the finest brands of champagne--and had subsequently motored them back
to town. The idea that Levison should usurp his father's place overwhelmed
Douglas with horror and shame; the prospect was intolerable; so were
other matters; for instance, his monotonous office life, the want of
variety and fresh air. For exercise, he belonged to a neighbouring
gymnasium, but this was not sufficient for a country-bred, energetic
young man, in his twenty-fourth year. As for the variety of amusements
that satisfied and delighted his brother clerks, they left him cold. He was sensible of a tormenting thirst for a far-away different
life--and its chances, sick of this existence, of continually going
round and round, like a squirrel in a cage. A change of surroundings
and scene, or a spice of adventure, was what he longed for--as eagerly
and as hopelessly as some fallen wayfarer in a desert land. His
mother's flinty attitude and hostile nagging had frozen a naturally
affectionate disposition, and Shafto passed several years of his youth
without one single ray of woman's love, until generous Mrs. Malone had
come forward and installed him in her heart. His usual routine was
breakfast at eight, office at nine, lunch twelve-thirty, freedom at
six, dinner at seven-thirty. On Saturday afternoons he was expected at
"Monte Carlo"--to join the family at tennis and high tea--and here,
over the little red villa, brooded yet another cloud! Cossie, the
gushing and good-natured, had been given what her brother brutally
termed "the chuck" by her young man; he had taken on another girl, and
his repentance and return were hopeless. Shafto listened to Cossie's hysterical lamentations and outpourings
with what patience he could assume; until by degrees the dreadful truth
began to dawn on him, that _he_ was selected to replace the faithless
Lothario! Of late Cossie's manner had become jealously possessive, She
seemed to hold him by a nipping tenacious clutch, and pattered out to
meet him at the gate, sat next to him at table, and was invariably his
partner at tennis. Once, arriving unseen, he had overheard her
declaiming to another girl:

"No, no, no, I won't have it; Douglas is my boy--and my joy! Douglas
belongs to _me_!" "There will be two opinions about that," he muttered to himself, as he
flung down his hat and entered the tawdry little drawing-room; but, in
spite of his stern resolutions, he found himself borne along by a
strong and irresistible current of family goodwill. Sandy gave him
cigars, Delia declared over and over again that he was a "darling," his
aunt became extra-motherly, and Cossie endowed him with button-holes,
pairs of ill-knit shapeless socks, and sent him many notes. She seemed
to appropriate him as a matter of course, and once when they parted at
the gate, had held up her face to be kissed--but this undesired favour
he affected not to see. He noted, too, that when Cossie accompanied
him to the same little gate, Delia and Sandy lingered behind with
alarming significance. He began to hate Cossie and to revolt against
the slap-dash untidy _menage_, Delia and her train of rowdy boys, the
shouting, the practical jokes, and the slang. Then suddenly the
Levison cloud burst! One night, when he was flying upstairs to his sky
parlour, his mother waylaid him on the landing and, with an imperative
gesture, beckoned him into her room. "Shut the door, Douglas!" she commanded in her usual frigid manner, "I
have something to tell you. Come over here and sit down." "Yes, mother, all right," but nevertheless he remained standing; "what
is it?" She cleared her throat and replied in her sharp metallic voice, "Mr.
Levison and I have at last made up our minds to be married; you see, we
have no one to consider but ourselves." This announcement was followed
by a blank and paralysed silence. "He is absolutely devoted to me," resumed Mrs. Shafto, "and is a
wealthy man and, as you know, _I_ was never accustomed to poverty. The
wedding will take place in six weeks. Well, why do you stand glowering
there?" she demanded impatiently. "What have you got to say?" "I have got to say," replied Douglas, then his voice broke a little,
"that I don't see how you can do it, or put that fat Jew tradesman into
my father's place!" "Your father!" she screamed passionately, and a scar on her chin showed
white against a suffused complexion; "don't talk to me of your father. Before we were married, he often came to my uncle's shop, and talked to
me about books--I got up Haydn's Dictionary of Dates, bits of Browning,
and Lamb's Essays, and Omar Khayyam. I had to study them in my own
room at night, so as to make him think I was well educated and shared
his tastes; but I did not; no," she cried, with a stamp of her foot, "I
_hated_ his tastes! Aristotle and Plato, yes, and Shakespeare--dull to
the last degree, but I liked him: he was so handsome, so thoughtful,
such a gentleman. And I believed that as he was madly in love I could
easily twist him round to my way of thinking--but I was mistaken!" She
paused, momentarily out of breath, then resumed: "He soon found me out
and was sick of me in three weeks. He disliked dances, theatres, and
smart society, and buried me alive in the country. We had nothing in
common; he was just a bookworm, with a sarcastic tongue, who left me a
beggar! Now I am free, I am going to be a rich woman, marry a man who
understands me--and lead a new life." "I see you are easily satisfied," remarked her son. "I am; and although Mr. Levison is a Jew tradesman, as you have
remarked in your nasty sneering way, he has been generous enough to
offer you an opening as his assistant. He will take you into the shop
and pay you two hundred a year." "No, thank you," replied Douglas stiffly; "I know nothing about old
furniture." "Only old family, I suppose! Well, you might do worse; and when you
marry Cossie, as is probable, I will make you a small allowance." (Shafto had relinquished his income of a hundred and fifty a year, and
made it over to his mother legally, immediately he had come of age.) "I haven't the smallest idea of marrying Cossie, or anyone else," he
answered, with white-faced decision. "Well, she, and indeed they _all_, expect it." "I've never given them any reason to do so." "Yes, you have," she contradicted sharply; "you go there, sit by her,
and take her into the garden." "There is nothing in that," he rejoined, too chivalrous to add that it
was his cousin who sat by, escorted him, and clung to him like the
traditional limpet. "She is five years older than you, I know, but very sweet-tempered, and
not a bad manager--she runs 'Monte Carlo'!" "Cossie is absolutely nothing to me beyond a cousin; nor have I ever
given her reason to think otherwise--or ever shall." "Oh, you are wonderfully bold and courageous here with _me_; I should
like to hear you telling them this at 'Monte Carlo'! I know my sister
has set her heart on the match; she has been talking to me about the
trousseau, and intends to give you table linen, and a silver
tea-pot--she has two." "Even the silver tea-pot would not bribe me!" declared Douglas with an
angry laugh. "Well, I can assure you that it's an understood thing," persisted his
parent, with spiteful emphasis. "How can it be understood, when I have never asked the girl to marry me
and never shall? Cossie is straight enough and can tell you that
herself." "Oh, she has told me lots of things!" said her aunt mysteriously. "Well, to turn to another subject, am I to inform Mr. Levison that you
refuse his offer of two hundred a year? You may come to us for
week-ends if you like; he is doing up the house at Tooting and giving
me a fine car." "No, thank you, I prefer to remain where I am; and now if you've told
me everything you wished to say, I think I'll go to bed," and with a
brief "Good night" he departed. But he did not go to bed when he found himself in his bare fourth-floor
room, but sat on the side of his lumpy mattress, and smoked cigarettes
for a couple of hours. He must squash this Cossie question at all
costs; even if it led to a disagreeable interview with his relations
and made a complete breach between them. In one sense this breach
would mean freedom and relief, and yet he was rather fond of his dowdy
old Aunt Emma, and he also liked that slangy slacker Sandy; he could
not bear to give anyone pain, or to appear shabby or ungrateful. Of
course he ought to have taken a firm stand weeks ago, and repelled
advances that had stolen upon him so insidiously. He saw this now; yet
how can you refuse to accept a flower from a girl, or be such a brute
as to leave her notes and telephones unanswered, or rise and desert her
when she nestles down beside you on the sofa? He felt as if he was on
the edge of a precipice; and must make a desperate, a life or death
struggle; be firm and show no weakness. To be weak would establish him
with a wife, house-linen, and the tea-pot, in some dingy little flat
near his office, where, plodding monotonous round like a horse in a
mill, he would probably end his days. Always too anxious to please and
to be liked, he had enjoyed lounging about at "Monte Carlo" and
chaffing his cousin, but the price now demanded was exorbitant. He
recalled Cossie, stout and smiling, with rather pretty eyes and a
ceaseless flow of chatter. She had ugly hands and thick red lips, her
hair was coarse, but abundant, and she frequently borrowed her sister's
rouge. Cossie was immensely good-natured and affectionate, and he
would be sorry to hurt her feelings, poor little thing. Then as to his mother and her marriage to Levison, he hated to think of
it. He could not endure his future stepfather; between them there
existed a bottomless chasm of dislike and distrust. Levison considered
Shafto a conceited young cub, "but a clever cub"; and Shafto looked on
Levison as a purse-proud tradesman, ever bragging of his "finds," his
sales, and his titled customers. Douglas had never felt so abjectly miserable since the time of his
father's death; his depression was such that he wished he was dead too;
but fate was in a kindly mood and, although he was unconscious of the
fact, the clouds were lifting. CHAPTER  VI

AN EMPTY OFFER

The night that Shafto subsequently spent was wakeful and seemed
endless; he tossed about on his hard bed and thumped the irresponsive
pillow, paced his room from end to end, drank all the water in the
carafe--and even encroached on the ewer; he felt as if his vitality had
been sapped, that he had no energy with which to face his new position,
nothing to which he could look forward, no gleam of hope and, as it
turned out, no appetite for breakfast. Seated at table, he proved
infectiously depressing and gloomily silent. On the way to the
Underground, Sandy Larcher, who happened to be in exuberant spirits,
noticed his cousin's grave face and chaffed him about Cossie. (Sandy,
a coarse-grained creature, knew no reserves, did not profess to be a
gentleman, and had never heard of the word "tact.") "And so you couldn't sleep for thinking of her, eh? Ate no breakfast,
only a bit of toast, and half a kipper; quite in a bad way, poor old
chap." "Come now, Sandy, none of that!" angrily protested the victim. "You
are a sensible fellow, though you do play the ass; and must know as
well as I do myself that you are talking through your hat. I swear on
my word of honour, I have never made love to Cossie, I'd as soon think
of making love to the parrot next door, and I have not the remotest
idea of marrying her. Imagine marrying on a hundred and fifty pounds a
year!" "Oh well, I couldn't face it myself, old man," generously conceded his
companion, "but the mater and the girls are dead nuts on the idea; they
are awfully fond of you, and say you are so mortal clever, so well-bred
and such top-hole style, that you are bound to rise in the world; and
Cossie is getting rather long in the tooth. Of course, I know as well
as if you told me, how she rushes a chap, and writes silly notes,
manicures his nails, and gives him flowers and cigarettes. She overdid
it with Freddy Soames and got the knock; and now he is formally
engaged, I expect she is mad keen to show that two can play at that
game!" "I'm not for it, and that's certain," declared the other, with an
emphasis that was almost violent. "I like Cossie right enough as a
cousin, but I'm not a scrap in love. Why, we've not one single taste
in common--bar tennis and walnut pickles! I hate saying all this to
you, old man--it seems monstrously caddish, and really----"

"Oh, don't apologise," interrupted Sandy; "I know Cossie and her little
ways--you are not the first by a long way that she's tried it on with." "Couldn't you drop her some sort of gentle hint? Do, like a good chap
and say a word to my aunt? I'd stay away from 'Monte Carlo,' only that
I'm drawn to play in this confounded tournament." "No good! They wouldn't listen to _me_; you must do the business
yourself, Douglas, old man. Come on, hurry up, or we'll miss our
train!" and Sandy began to run. Shafto had not long been perched on his office stool and invested in
his office coat and paper cuffs, when he received a message that Mr.
Martin--the head of the firm--wished to see him in his private room. "This is the limit!" he said to himself, as he followed the messenger
into a cool, luxurious apartment. "Now I'm going to get a
slating--over that French correspondence--and it was Fraser's job. Well, if that's the case, I'll enlist; I'm sick of this life!" He found Mr. Martin temporarily idle, seated in front of his large
writing-table, scanning the _Financial News_. He raised his eyes as
Douglas entered, and said:

"Hullo, that you, Shafto? I have something to say to you. How would
you like a little promotion?" "Very much indeed, sir," he replied after a moment's hesitation due to
amazement. "You've been over four years with us as correspondence clerk?" "Yes, sir." "I believe you know Mr. Tremenheere?" "Yes." "So do I. He has called here to see me about you. What would you
think of going abroad for a change--say, to Burma?" "Burma--yes, sir, all right," assented Shafto, with a glowing face. Something within him had always craved for the East. "It's like this," continued the other, leaning back and placing his
fingers together, tent fashion. "Our house in Rangoon wants a smart,
healthy, young fellow, quick at figures, and able to manage bills of
lading. You would soon pick up that; it will be chiefly an out-of-door
job on the wharves." "I'd like that." "The pay offered is four hundred rupees a month, and house rent; not
much, I admit, considering the fall of the rupee and Rangoon prices;
but we have been compelled to modify expenses, our profits are run so
fine, thanks to an active German mercantile element. Well, what do you
think, Shafto?" Shafto thought Mr. Martin a species of genie, who was offering him a
magic carpet that would transport him into the great, hurrying, active
world; into the land of sunshine he had longed to see; he would have
jumped at the proposal if the salary had been half, and he replied:

"I shall be glad to accept." "Then that's all right! I was afraid you might have some ties in this
country. Of course, in time you are bound to get a rise, and I believe
there are boarding-houses in Rangoon where they make you fairly
comfortable." "When do you wish me to start?" "As soon as you can get under way," was the unexpected reply. "One of
the Bibby Line sails on Saturday week, and that brings me to another
matter. You have to pay for your own passage and outfit. The passage
money is six hundred rupees; the outfit, good English boots, cool
clothes, a solar topee, and a revolver--and a medicine-chest might come
in handy. No doubt some of your relations will help, or give you a
loan. You see, you are getting a big rise and a capital opening in a
new line." "That is true, sir," replied Douglas, whose face had considerably
lengthened, "but I'm afraid I cannot manage the ready money--near a
hundred pounds. Is my salary paid in advance?" "No, that is out of the question in a province where cholera carries a
man off in a couple of hours. I am sorry about the passage; at one
time we did pay, but now we have to pinch and consider our expenses. No doubt you would like to talk over the matter with your people?" "Well, yes, I should, thank you," he answered, staring fixedly at the
floor. "Then let me have your decision before mail day. I may tell you,
Shafto, that, irrespective of Mr. Tremenheere's interest, you have
given us entire satisfaction, and for this chance, and it _is_ a
chance, you have only yourself to thank. You can take a couple of
days' leave and let me hear from you definitely on Friday morning." It was only eleven o'clock, an oppressively warm July day, and Douglas
walked up to Lincoln's Inn Fields, took a seat in the cool shade of the
finest trees in the largest square in London, and there endeavoured to
think out some plan. "I say, what a chance!" he muttered to himself. "What a stroke of
luck! A new start in life, offering change and freedom." Yet he must
lose it--and all for a paltry hundred pounds. Paltry--no; to him it
represented a huge and unattainable fortune; there wasn't a soul from
whom he could borrow; not from the Tebbs, nor the Tremenheeres, and his
associates at "Malahide" were, with one detestable exception, as poor
as himself. After long meditation, entirely barren of inspiration, he
went down to the Strand and lunched at Slater's, and then took the Tube
to Bayswater Public Library, where he got hold of some books on
Burma--Burma, the land of the Pagoda and Golden Umbrella. Somehow the
very name fired his imagination and thrilled his blood. After sitting in the library, greedily devouring information, he
strolled back to Lincoln Square, in time for dinner, and all that
evening he kept his great news to himself. It would have seemed
natural for an only son to carry such important tidings to his mother;
but Mrs. Shafto was the last woman to welcome his confidences. She was
entirely without the maternal instinct and, armed with a certain fierce
reserve, held her son inflexibly at arm's length. A stranger would
scarcely have discovered the relationship--unless they happened to note
that the pair walked to church together on Sunday, and that she pecked
his cheek of a night before retiring. As a matter of course, she made
use of Douglas and, insisting on maternal claims, thrust on him
disagreeable interviews, sent him messages, borrowed his money--when
short of change--and allowed him to pay her taxis. Honestly, she did
not care for the boy. He was too detached and self-contained; he had
such odd ideas and resembled his father in many respects--especially in
appearance--though Douglas's expression was keener and more animated,
he had the same well-cut features, fine head, and expressive dark grey
eyes. Yes, he recalled too forcibly a dead man whom she had neglected,
detested and deceived. And as for Douglas, for years he had been
sensible of the smart of a baffled instinct, a hunger for a mother's
love and affection, which had never been his--and never would be his. In the drawing-room, after dinner, the boarders were amusing themselves
as usual and making a good deal of noise, yet somehow the circle
presented an air of rather spurious gaiety. Mrs. Shafto, in a smart
black-and-gold evening frock, was smoking a cigarette and playing
auction-bridge with Mr. Levison and the two Japanese; the Misses Smith
and various casual boarders were engrossed at coon-can. Another group
was assembled about the piano. Douglas Shafto sat aloof in the window
seat absorbed in the book on Burma and acquiring information; for even
if he were never to see the country, it was as well to learn something
about it. Rangoon, the capital (that fact he already knew), once a
mere collection of monasteries around the Great Pagoda, was now assumed
to be the Liverpool of the East, the resting-place of Buddha's relics,
and an important industrial centre. As his reading was disturbed by
the boisterous chorus at the piano, and the shrieks of laughter from
the coon-can set, he tucked the volume under his arm and slipped out of
the room as noiselessly as possible. He could rest at peace up in his
"cock loft" and endeavour to puzzle out some means of reaching the land
of the Golden Umbrella--even if he worked his passage as a cabin
steward. In passing the door of Mrs. Malone's den, some strange,
unaccountable impulse constrained him to knock. Yes; he suddenly made
up his mind that he would confide in _her_--and why not? She was
always so understanding, sympathetic and wise. In reply to a shrill "Come in," he entered and found the old lady
sitting by the open window with a black cat on her lap. The room was
small and homelike; there were some shabby rugs, a few fine prints, a
case of miniatures, and, in a cabinet, a variety of odd "bits" which
Mrs. Malone had picked up from time to time. "So it's you, Douglas," she exclaimed; "come over and sit down. I'm
always glad to see you; you know you have the private entree!" and she
laughed. "What have you been doing with yourself to-day?" As he muttered something indefinite, she added, "What's your book?" holding out her hand. "Burma, I declare! One does not hear much of
that part of the world; it's always connected in my mind with rice and
rain. Douglas," suddenly raising her eyes, "I believe you have
something on your mind. What is it? Come now--speak out--is it a love
affair, or money? You know I'm _safe_." Thus invited, in a few halting sentences, he told her of his friend's
good offices, the offer, his supreme delight--and subsequent despair. "A hundred pounds--yes, well, it's a tidy sum," she admitted, "and you
will want all that. I think Gregory and Co. might pay your passage, as
the salary is not large." "No," agreed Shafto, "but I'll be only too glad to earn it. It's this
blessed ready money that stumps me." He began to pace about the room with his hands in his pockets, then
suddenly broke out:

"Mrs. Malone, I'd give one of my eyes to go; to be up and doing, and
get out into the world--especially to the East. Isn't it hard
lines--one moment to be offered a splendid chance, and the next to have
it snatched away." "I suppose you couldn't borrow?" she suggested, looking at him over her
spectacles. "No, who would lend _me_ money? I have no security and no wealthy
friends." "Well, I am not a wealthy friend, Douglas, but I will lend you a
hundred pounds--I've saved a good bit--and I can." "No, no, Mrs. Malone," he interrupted. "I couldn't accept it. I know
how hardly your money has been earned; I know all your hateful worries;
your bothers with servants and coal; your trampings into 'the Grove,'
and up and down these confounded stairs." "But, Douglas, you can pay me back by degrees." "No; you'd run a poor chance of seeing your hundred pounds again. Mr.
Martin informed me the firm never paid in advance, as cholera carried
off people in a few hours--cheerful, wasn't it? And if I were carried
off, where would _you_ be?" "Here, my boy, and in the deepest grief." "Well, thanking you all the same, I will not touch a penny of your
money; but I know you are long-headed and may think of some scheme for
me. I've got nothing to sell of any value; I parted with my father's
watch--and it's still at the pawnbroker's; worse luck!" (His
pitilessly selfish mother had borrowed ten pounds and forgotten the
debt, and he had been compelled to apply to his "Uncle.") Shafto found
his salary a very tight fight; eleven pounds a month seemed to melt
away in board, clothes, washing and those innumerable little expenses
that crop up in London. "Anyhow, you have till Friday, you proud, obstinate boy, and before
that, I may be able to thrash out something. I have noticed that you
don't look yourself the last few weeks, not my dear lively Douglas,
tearing up and down stairs, whistling like a blackbird. Tell me the
reason," and she laid a well-shaped wrinkled hand upon his arm. Then, walking up and down the room, he frankly unfolded his
troubles--the approaching marriage of his mother (this was no news),
and, in an agitated and incoherent manner, his desperate predicament
with regard to Cossie Larcher. "The poor boy," said his listener to herself. "That man-hunting,
determined little cat has got her claws into him. I have seen the
vulgar, made-up minx, without education, fortune, or modesty, trying to
carry off her gentleman cousin! But she shan't have him. No! by hook
or by crook, he must be got out of the country, as sure as my name is
Joyce Malone!" CHAPTER VII

"THE MONSTER"

For a considerable time Mrs. Malone sat, stroking her long nose with
her long forefinger and thinking profoundly; there fell, in
consequence, an unusual silence. At last this was broken by the old
lady, who exclaimed with an air of triumph:

"Douglas, my boy, I do believe I have got hold of a bright idea!" "That's nothing new," he rejoined with a smile. "Come now, none of your blarney! You know the queer little monster you
brought me some time ago. You see him there grinning at us out of the
cabinet? Well, a friend of mine noticed him yesterday--she is a bit of
a connoisseur, and she said that, if genuine, that diabolical object
had considerable value! To-morrow, I will take it round to a shop in
'the Grove,' and get an opinion; let us hear what the expert says, and
if the object is good and marketable, I'll sell him--and you shall have
the money. Now," raising a hand authoritatively, "I warn you not to
say 'No' to me again, for if you do, I'll just take the poker and smash
the deformity into a thousand atoms!" "Oh, well, I suppose that puts the lid on," said Douglas, "but I ask
you, if anything in the whole world can be meaner than to give a
present and to take it back? However, I'll consent to commit that
outrage to save the monster. I don't believe he is worth a sovereign!" "Stop! I hear them moving in the drawing-room, so, my dear boy, fly up
to your roost at once. You know how it vexes your mother to see you
spending your time with me. Good night, my dear child," and rising,
she laid her hands on his shoulders and kissed him on the cheek. The very next evening, shortly before dinner, Mrs. Malone sent for her
favourite boarder. "I've grand news for you!" she announced. "I've had the ugly figure
valued and a man has offered me a hundred and ten pounds." "A hundred and ten pounds!" repeated Shafto. "Come, this is one of
your good old Irish jokes!" Alas! it must be here recorded that warm-hearted Mrs. Malone was not
joking--but lying. She had never been to any expert. The hundred and
ten pounds were to come out of her own lean pocket; this had been her
"bright idea," when she contemplated the monster in the cabinet. She
was sincerely fond of Shafto; during the time he had been under her
roof she had never known him to do a mean or ungentlemanly action; he
was considerate, unselfish, and generous--poor as he was; also he
opened doors, handed chairs, treated age with deference, and in short
conducted himself like the people among whom she had lived most of her
life. Richard Hutton was of the same type, so were the two Japanese; but
Levison, her most valuable guest, Larcher, and other young boarders
had, in her opinion, no manners at all. They smoked where and how they
pleased (barring the drawing-room), left cigarette stumps all over the
house, kicked off their boots in the hall, were late for meals, loud in
talk, arguments and complaints, and supremely indifferent to the
comfort of their companions. *      *      *      *      *      *

In some extraordinary and inexplicable manner the story of the monster
had leaked out--at any rate, it was in the air. Perhaps the monster
himself had blazoned forth the fact of his own value, or Michael, the
handy man, had caught a whisper from Maggie (Mrs. Malone's right hand)? However it was, Mrs. Malone was not a little startled when Mr. Levison,
in his loud resonant voice, shouted at her down the dinner table:

"So I hear you've come in for a wonderful find, ma'am--a Chinese figure
valued at a handsome sum! Do you know I'm something of a judge of such
stuff--old porcelain is rather in my line--and I'd like to have a look
at the prize after dinner, if you don't object, and if the bargain is
not clinched perhaps I might go one better." Mrs. Malone coloured like a young girl--or was it the blush of guilt? Would her sin find her out? No; no matter what the dealer said, she
determined to stick to her story; she would not allow him to see the
figure. She knew Manasseh Levison to be a persistent, over-bearing
sort of man; nevertheless, she was resolved to defeat him. If the
worst came to the worst, she would go to bed, and either take the
figure with her, or hide it up the chimney. But alas for her plans! Manasseh, scenting a good thing, immediately after his cigar was
finished, boldly followed the old lady into forbidden ground--her
sitting-room--and did not even knock, but just turned the handle of the
door and walked in. He discovered his hostess and young Shafto,
evidently holding a weighty conference--with the figure on the table
between them. "Mr. Levison," she exclaimed, "are you aware that this is my private
apartment, and that such an intrusion is unwelcome?" Levison, not the least abashed, had snatched up the figure and
critically examined it, glass in eye. For an appreciable time he stood
silent and transfixed, obviously gloating over the article in his
grasp--yes, gloating, with the absorbed expression of a devotee! At
last he spoke, raising his voice almost to a shout:

"And are _you_ aware, madam; that this--this piece in my hand, is a
most glorious specimen of old 'Kang He'? An altar vessel, too; a most
perfect, complete, and unique specimen of Chinese enamelled porcelain,
dating from the Kang dynasty? By George!" handling it and turning it
about with tender loving care, "what an astonishing find! I've never
come across such a piece, and I've seen a good few in my time. How did
you get hold of it?" "Mr. Shafto gave it to me," replied Mrs. Malone, in her stiffest manner. "And I picked it off a stall in the Caledonian Market," supplemented
Shafto. "What luck; what incredible luck!" exclaimed the dealer, nodding his
big head; "well, Mrs. Malone, will you please inform your other
customer that I will pay you three hundred pounds down for this
piece--that rather snuffs him out, eh? I'll give you a cheque in the
morning," and carrying the monster as reverently as if it were some
holy relic, Manasseh Levison, expert and connoisseur, marched out of
the room in triumph. CHAPTER VIII

BOUND FOR BURMA

It was some minutes before Mrs. Malone recovered her breath and
composure, the invasion and purchase had been so startlingly abrupt. At last she found her tongue and her wits, and after a lengthy and
animated discussion, it was ultimately decided that she and Douglas
would each take a hundred pounds (privately she determined to invest
her share for his benefit) and hand the remaining hundred to the old
woman in the black bonnet at her stand in the Caledonian Market. The journey to Rangoon was now likely to be accomplished, thanks to the
Chinese Monster. When Douglas picked it off the cobble stones, from
among coarse common crockery, how little he dreamed what a factor this
figure would prove in his future--it had been the means of shaping his
destiny! On Friday morning he sent in a formal acceptance of Mr. Martin's offer
and, having obtained leave, hurried away to the Caledonian Market, in
search of the old rag and bottle female. It was half-past twelve
o'clock when he arrived, he was late, and her pitch was empty. Had she
departed already? On inquiry he was informed that old Mother Doake had
departed for good--was, in fact, dead! "Yes, she were run over by a motor-trolley ten days ago," announced the
woman in the next stall; "she was terribly old and blind and a real
wicked miser. There was no one belonging to her. Her clothes were
just lined with bank-notes, and there was a whole lot of papers and
bonds in her mattress, and a lovely silver tea-set up the chimney. She
grudged herself a penn-'orth o' milk, or a drop o' brandy, and she
worth thousands o' pounds! Being no heirs, the Crown takes the lot! Thank you, sir," accepting a tip, "I suppose I could not tempt you with
a splendid fur-lined overcoat? Cost a hundred--but you can have it for
six. It belonged to a lord--I got it off his man. Well, maybe it's a
bit warmish, but it's dirt cheap and would come in next winter." Since Mother Doake was now defunct, her share divided gave Douglas
another fifty pounds, and he felt quite a wealthy man. The first use
he made of the monster's money was to take his father's watch and chain
out of pawn; the next, to secure his passage in the Bibby Line to
Rangoon. Then he spent a long morning at the Stores and bought a new
outfit, saddle and bridle, steamer trunks, and a steamer chair. The purchase of the "Kang He" piece and its price were naturally not
withheld from Mrs. Shafto. She pounced upon Douglas in the hall and
drove him before her into the empty dining-room. "Well, I've heard all about your wonderful luck!" she began excitedly,
"and how Mr. Levison has actually paid you three hundred pounds for
that frightful figure." "Yes, so he did; it's a true bill." "And now, my dear boy; you will be able to help me with my trousseau,"
said this daughter of a horse-leech, "I must really get good frocks. Mr. L. is so sharp, and notices everything, and can tell the price of a
gown to a sixpence; he has wonderful taste, and is very particular. You must let me have fifty or sixty to begin with--it's not much out of
three hundred pounds. What a windfall!" "Oh, but I have already divided it with Mrs. Malone," replied Douglas;
"she insisted upon my taking half--you see, the figure was hers." "Divided it with Mrs. Malone!" screamed his mother. "What a mean,
grasping, greedy old hag! I shall speak to her about it and make her
disgorge. She has no right to your money; whilst I am your mother!" "I do beg you won't interfere. Mrs. Malone is the most generous woman
I know." "Generous!" echoed Mrs. Shafto. "The greatest old skinflint in
London--she charges me sixpence a day for having my breakfast in bed,
and----"

"Well, you will soon be out of it," interrupted her son impetuously,
"and so shall I! And I am glad to have an opportunity now of telling
you that I have got promotion in the office and am going to Burma." "Oh! are you? Burma--Burma! Why, that's abroad--some place near
India--or is it the West Indies?" "You are thinking of Bermuda. Burma is east of India. I have to pay
for my passage and outfit, and this unexpected windfall is a wonderful
bit of luck. If I hadn't got it, I never could have accepted the post,
or made a new start." "And when do you leave?"' "In a week." "So soon," she exclaimed cheerfully; "I wonder what Cossie will say?" "It is not of the slightest consequence what Cossie says; she has
nothing to do with my plans." "Cossie won't think so, and when she hears you have been promoted and
are off to Burma, she will stick to you like a burr." "But, my dear mother, what is the use of her sticking to me?" protested
Douglas. "I haven't the faintest intention of being engaged to Cossie. If she imagines that I am in love with her, she is making the greatest
mistake in her life." "Cossie is a foolish girl," admitted her aunt, "and has made heaps of
mistakes; but if she sees her way to bettering herself, she can be as
determined as anyone. Of course you will have to run down and say
'good-bye.'" "Yes, I shall go to-morrow." "I must say I don't envy you the visit!" declared his mother with a
malicious smile. "No, I daresay it will be disagreeable--but Aunt Emma will see me
through. In Cossie's case it is not a matter of deep attachment; she
only wants to play me off against that fellow Soames. Ah, here is
Michael jingling his tray outside; he wants to lay the cloth and we had
better clear." In some respects the dreaded farewell at "Monte Carlo" was even more
trying than Douglas had anticipated. His relatives had learned and
digested his news; to them, it seemed an uplifting of the entire
connection. After pushing congratulations and some high-flown talk
respecting the delights of his future career and "position," the girls,
as if by mutual agreement, rose and left him alone with their mother. Thus abandoned to a _tete-a-tete_, after a lengthy silence, Mrs.
Larcher, sitting among the collapsible spring's, began to speak in a
shaky voice. "Ahem! We have _all_ seen, Douglas, how devotedly attached you are to
Cossie, and the marked attentions you have paid her. Of course, on
such a small salary you were too honourable to say anything definite. Ahem! But now that you are in a better position, with splendid
prospects, I have no objection to an engagement, and as soon as you are
comfortably settled in Rangoon, Cossie will join you." Douglas instantly lifted himself out of his chair and confronted the
unfortunate catspaw; standing erect before her, he said:

"My dear Aunt Emma, kindly understand once for all that I am not in
love with Cossie. I have never made love to her, or ever shall. I
like her as a cousin--but no more. Even if I were madly in love, I
could not marry; my screw will barely keep myself." "Oh, but you'll get on!" interposed his aunt eagerly. "They all do out
there, and you who are so well educated and gentlemanly will soon be
drawing high pay, and keeping dozens of black servants, and a
motor--and you know poor Cossie is _so_ fond of you." "I am truly sorry to hear you say so; I cannot imagine _why_ she should
be fond of me; or why, quite lately, she has got this preposterous idea
into her head. Naturally it is a delicate subject to discuss with you,
Aunt Emma; but I declare on my honour that I have never thought of
Cossie but just as a jolly sort of girl and a cousin." "But you have given her presents, my darling boy; yes, and written to
her," urged the poor lady, clinging to the last straw. "I have given her chocolates, and a couple of pairs of gloves, and
answered her notes; and if Cossie imagines that every man who gives her
chocolates, and answers notes about tea and tennis, is seriously in
love with her, she must be incredibly foolish. Cossie knows in her
heart that I have never cast her a thought, except as a relation; and,
as a matter of fact, of the two girls I like Delia the best! I don't
want to say unpleasant things when I'm on the point of going
away--probably for years. I hoped to have spent a jolly long day among
you, but from what you have just told me I really could not face it,
and I must ask you to say good-bye to my cousins for me. I will write
to you, Aunt Emma, as soon as I get out to Rangoon. You have always
been very kind, and made me feel at home here; you may be sure I won't
forget it." And he stooped down suddenly and gave her a hearty kiss. Then before the poor stout lady could struggle out of the cavity which
her weight had made in the Chesterfield Douglas had departed. She
heard the close of the hall door, immediately followed by the click of
the garden gate. Yes, he was _gone_! And Cossie, who all the time had
been listening on the top of the stairs, instantly descended like a
wolf on the fold. She would have run out bareheaded after Douglas, but
that her more prudent sister actually restrained her by violent
physical force; and then, what a scene she made! Oh, what
recriminations and angry speeches and reproaches she showered upon her
unhappy parent! "You told me to sound him about an engagement, and I did. Oh, but it
was a hateful job, and here's my thanks!" whimpered Mrs. Larcher. "He
looked awfully white and stern, and said he only likes you as a cousin,
and that he had no intention of anything--and I believe him. It was
only in the last two months, since Freddy Soames broke it off, that
you've gone out of your way to hang on to Douglas. I'm sure I wish
there had been something in it--he's a dear good boy, and I could love
him like a son," and the poor lady sobbed aloud. "You bungled the whole thing, of course!" cried her ungrateful
offspring, "I might have known you would put your foot in it; you've
let him slip through your fingers and just ruined my last chance. Oh,
if I'd only talked to him myself, I'd have been on my way to Burma in
six months!" Then Cossie broke down, buried her head in a musty cushion, and wept
sore. However, after a little time, the broken-hearted damsel recovered; her
feelings were elastic, and she allowed herself to be revived with a
stiff whisky and soda and a De Reske cigarette. On the following day
she had so far recovered as to be able to make a careful toilet and
walk out, to call upon her two most intimate pals, in order to inform
them--in the very strictest confidence--that she was engaged to her
cousin, Douglas Shafto, who had just got a splendid appointment in
Burma and would come home in two years! Then she added impressively,
"I don't want this given out--mother would be _furious_; but the first
time you come across him I don't mind if you whisper the news to Freddy
Soames." Cossie sent her cousin a heart-broken letter of farewell, full of
underlined words and vague expressions of despair--a portion of which
she had copied from a dramatic love scene in a novel. She implored him
to write to her, and remained "his devoted till death, Cossie." Shafto thrust his devoted-till-death Cossie's letter into the
waste-paper basket, with a gesture of excommunication, and barred the
doors of his memory upon her round fat face. Preparations for departure proceeded satisfactorily. He received a
number of good wishes and not a few gifts. The Tremenheeres sent him
an express rifle, the Tebbs a dispatch box, Mrs. Malone gave him a
silver cigarette case and a warm rug, Mrs. Galli gave him her blessing,
and his mother gave him advice. On the appointed day a band of friends travelled down to Tilbury to
take leave of Douglas Shafto. These included Mrs. Malone, Mr. Hutton,
the two Japanese gentlemen, and several of his fellow clerks.--Mrs. Shafto had excused herself, declaring that "her feelings would not
endure the strain of a public leave-taking." --Shortly before the
_Blankshire_ (Bibby Line) sailed, Sandy--alas! accompanied by
Cossie--hurried down the gangway (for Cossie was allied to the stamp of
the British soldier, who never knows when he is beaten and entirely
refuses to accept defeat!). She wore her best hat--a conspicuous
affair with enormous green wings--a somewhat murky white fur, and
carried a presentation bunch of wilted flowers. The new arrival,
chattering like a magpie, took immediate possession of her cousin,
snatched her away from poor Mrs. Malone, who was looking very old and
sad, and insisted on inspecting his cabin and as much as was possible
of the ship. When the bell rang and the moment of parting arrived, she
burst into wild unrestrained sobs, and clung, in the best melodramatic
style, to her unresisting kinsman, who was compelled to accept her
kisses and tears. In fact, as her brother rudely stated, "she made a
shameless show of herself, slobbering over Douglas before all the
passengers, and he was sorry for the poor chap, who was covered with
blushes; and not for her at all--as anyone could see with half an eye!" However, Cossie returned home by the Underground, fortified with the
conviction that the party who had witnessed her farewell were bound to
realise that Douglas Shafto was her affianced lover. The last signal Shafto received, ere the group of friends had dissolved
into a blur, was a frantic waving of Cossie's damp handkerchief, and he
turned his face towards the bows of the _Blankshire_, now heading down
the river, with the happy exaltation of freedom and a grateful sense of
escape. CHAPTER IX

THE "BLANKSHIRE"

The _Blankshire_ was a full and well-known ship. Not a few of the
passengers had made several trips in her and some, as they met in saloon
and corridors, exchanged loud hearty greetings and hailed one another as
old friends. These were chiefly planters and officials from Ceylon,
Southern India and Burma, who herded in parties both at meals and on deck. It was not to be expected that Shafto would see one familiar face, and he
felt completely "out of it," as he took a scat at a draughty table
between two elderly people, whose interest was entirely concentrated upon
their meals and the weather. The second day proved rough and wet and the smoking-room was crowded. Here Shafto made an acquaintance with a well-set-up, weather-beaten young
man, his neighbour. Finding they had similar tastes with regard to
cigars and boots, they proceeded to cement an acquaintance. Hoskins was
the name of Shafto's companion, and after half an hour's lively talk, he
exclaimed:

"I say, look here, we must dig you out of 'the Potter's Field,' and bring
you to our table." "What do you mean by 'the Potter's Field'?" "Why, to bury strangers in! We bury dull folk and such-like in the table
near the door; but I'll speak to the head steward and get you moved." And before the next meal Shafto's transition was an accomplished fact,
and he found himself one of a merry and congenial circle. In his novel
and detached position he realised a sense of independence; he was
breathing a new existence, an exhilarating atmosphere, and enjoying every
hour of the day. At table and in the smoke-room he picked up a certain amount of useful
information respecting Burma, listened to many a "Don't" with polite
attention, and was offered the address of a fairly good chummery in
Rangoon. As he could play bridge without letting down his partners, was
active at deck sports, and invariably cheery and obliging, he soon gained
that effervescent prize, "board-ship popularity." Here was a different fellow from Douglas Shafto of "Malahide." He seemed
to have cast off a load of care; the cramped, monotonous life, his
mother's hard indifference, the octopus-like Cossie, all had slipped from
his shoulders and were figuratively buried in the heaving, dark blue sea. What delicious hours of tranquil ease were enjoyed in a steamer chair;
hours when he looked on the past five years as a distant and fading dream! As he paced the deck with a companion he learnt many strange things. Odd
bits of half-told stories, confidences respecting some girl, or some
ambition--and now and then a warning. "You are so new and green to the East," said Hoskins, his first friend, a
police officer returning from short leave. "You had better keep your
eyes skinned! Rangoon is not like India, but a roaring busy seaport,
where every soul is on the make. You will find various elements there,
besides British and Burmese. Tribes from Upper Burma, Tibetans, Hindoos,
Malays, Chinese and, above all, Germans. They do an enormous trade, and
have many substantial firms and houses, and put through as much business
as, or more than, we do ourselves. No job is too small, no order too
insignificant for their prompt attention. They have agents all over the
country, who pull strings in wolfram and the ruby mines, and have a
finger in every mortal thing. I'll say this for them, they're most
awfully keen and industrious, and stick at nothing to earn the nimble
rupee, underselling when they can, and grabbing contracts and trade
secrets. Some of these days they will mine us out of Burma!" "So I see they needn't go to you for a character," remarked Shafto. "Oh, they are not all tarred with the same brush! I have some good pals
in the German Club--fellows that are as straight as a die. Is this your
first journey out of England?" "Yes, bar winter sports in Switzerland, when I was a kid." "Well, you will see a small bit of the world this trip; as soon as we
collect the passengers at Marseilles, and once the awnings and the moon
are up, things will begin to hum!" "How do you mean hum?" "We shall have sports, dances, concerts--this has always been a gay ship,
and the purser is a rare hustler. We are due at Marseilles to-morrow
morning, and we take in a cargo of the lazy luxurious folk who abhor 'the
Bay,' and have travelled overland. I'd have done the same, only I'm
frightfully hard up; three months at home, having a 'good time,' comes
pretty expensive!" "I hope you will be a fixture in Rangoon?" "I'm afraid not; I'm going straight up to Mandalay, but I shall be down
later, and meanwhile I'll do my best to settle you in that chummery. I'll send a line to FitzGerald of my service; he lives there; a rattling
Irishman, with lots of brains in his handsome head, and a good sort;
there's also Roscoe, a clever oddity, and MacNab of the Irrawaddy
Flotilla--a wonderful golfer. Most of the fellows in business in Rangoon
are Scotch. Murray was in the same chummery; there were four chums till
May." "And Number Four has gone home?" "He has--to his long home, worse luck; he broke his neck fooling over a
log jump." On this fresh October morning the _Blankshire_ lay moored at her usual
berth in Marseilles harbour, and the overland passengers were streaming
aboard in great numbers. Hoskins and Shafto, leaning over the bulwarks, watched the long
procession of travellers, followed by porters, bearing their light
baggage. "There are a good few, you see," remarked Hoskins; "this is a popular
ship and date. We won't have an empty berth--anyway as far as the Canal. Most of this crowd," waving a hand, "these with maids and valets, are
bound for Egypt; there will be a big contingent for Colombo and Southern
India. I'm a bit curious to see our own little lot.--Ah! here comes one
of them!" He indicated a stout imposing person, who was majestically ascending the
gangway. "That's Lady Puffle, the consort of one of our big wigs; very official
and dignified, keeps old Fluffy in grand order. The next, the tall
handsome woman, is Mrs. Pomeroy, wife of the Judicial Commissioner, a
real lady, and--hullo! she has brought out a daughter! Not, as far as I
can see, up to her mother's sample; too much nose and too much bone. And
next, we have Mrs. Flint, of Flint and Co., a big house. She gives the
best dinners in Rangoon. The little fair lady with the small dog is Mrs.
Maitland, wife of the General Commanding in Burma, and the one with her
must be her sister, or sister-in-law. Here comes the great Otto
Bernhard, junior partner in the house of Bernhard Brothers; as you see, a
fine, handsome man, with the most All Highest moustache; and also owns a
heavenly tenor voice--but I would not trust him farther than I could
throw him!" "And that would not be far," said Shafto; "he weighs every ounce of
fourteen stone." "Yes, a big man in every way, trades on his voice and his good looks, as
well as in teak and paddy--an unscrupulous devil where women are
concerned; the lady he is escorting is Mrs. Lacy; you would not think to
look at her, so slim, gracious and smiling, that she is a noted
man-eater." "What do you mean?" "Well, perhaps the expression is a bit too strong. She has a subtle way
of attracting mankind. It amuses her and, in the long run, does no harm. Wait till you see how they will collect about her on board--like flies
round a pot of honey." "Shall you be one of the flies?" "Possibly. I enjoy being fascinated and I like honey! She is very
amusing and dances like a moonbeam. Those are two coffee planters,
wonderful pals and bridge players, and here comes a strange lady,
probably a tourist--rich too." Shafto looked and saw a handsome grey-haired woman, with a round smiling
face, wearing a long sable coat and an air of complacent prosperity. "Why, for a wonder I know her!" he declared. "It's Mrs. Milward. Her
sister was our neighbour at home; I've met her often." "Who is she?" "A widow--very rich, I believe. I think her daughter is married to a man
in India--or Burma." 