



Produced by Al Haines





32 CALIBER


by

Donald McGibeny



_Frontispiece by_

HUGH MACKEY

[Transcriber's note: frontispiece missing from book]




INDIANAPOLIS

THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY

PUBLISHERS




COPYRIGHT 1920

THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I  BRING JIM HERE
    II  TWO MEN AND A WOMAN
   III  I COULD KILL HIM
    IV  THE WORST HAPPENS
     V  ACCIDENT OR MURDER
    VI  A CLUE AND A VERDICT
   VII  I TURN DETECTIVE
  VIII  IT LOOKS BAD FOR HELEN
    IX  LOOK OUT, JIM
     X  I ACCUSE ZALNITCH
    XI  A DOUBLE INDICTMENT
   XII  WHO AM I
  XIII  WE PLAN THE DEFENSE
   XIV  BULLET PROOF
    XV  THE ANSWER
   XVI  THE MECHANICIAN
  XVII  RED CAPITULATES
 XVIII  I LISTEN TO MY FOREBEARS




32 CALIBER


CHAPTER ONE

BRING JIM HERE

I was in the locker-room of the country-club, getting dressed after the
best afternoon of golf I had ever had. I had just beaten Paisley
"one-up" in eighteen holes of the hardest kind of sledding. If you knew Paisley you'd understand just why I was so glad to beat
him. He is a most insufferably conceited ass about his golf, for a man
who plays as badly as he does; in addition to which he usually beats
me. It's not that Paisley plays a better game, but he has a way of
making me pull my drive or over-approach just by his confounded manner
of looking at me when I am getting ready to play. We usually trot along about even until we come to the seventh hole--in
fact, I'm usually ahead at the seventh--and then conversation does me
in. You see, the seventh hole can be played two ways. There's a small
clay bank that abuts the green and you can either play around or over
it to the hole, which lies directly behind. The real golfers play over
with a good mashie shot that lands them dead on the green, but dubs,
like Paisley, play around with two easy mid-iron shots. When we get to
the place where the choice must be made, Paisley suggests that I go
around, which makes me grip my mashie firmly, recall all the things I
have read in the little book about how to play a mashie shot, and let
drive with all my force, which usually lands me somewhere near the top
of the clay bank, where it would take a mountain goat to play the next
shot. After that, Paisley and I exchange a few hectic observations and
my temperature and score mount to the highest known altitude. Of course, every now and then, I forget my stance and Paisley long
enough to send the ball in a beautiful parabola right on to the green,
and when I do--oh, brother!--the things I say to Paisley put him in
such a frame of mind that I could play the rest of the course with a
paddle and a basket-ball and still beat him. This particular afternoon
he had tried to play the seventh hole as it should be played, and
though we had both foozled, I had won the hole and romped triumphantly
home with the side of pig. I was gaily humming to myself as I put on my clothes when James
Felderson came in. His face was drawn and his mouth was set in a way
that was utterly foreign to Jim, whose smile has done more to keep
peace in committee meetings and to placate irate members than all other
harmonizing agencies in the club put together. There was something
unnatural, too, about his eyes, as though he had been drinking. "Have you seen Helen?" he demanded in a thick voice. "No. Not to-day," I answered. "What's the matter, Jim? Anything
wrong?" Felderson has been my law partner ever since he married my sister
Helen. I had left him at the office just before lunch and he had
seemed then as cheerful and unperturbed as usual. "Helen has gone with Frank Woods!" he burst out, his voice breaking as
he spoke. It took a second for me to grasp the meaning of what he said, then I
grabbed him by the shoulder. "Jim, Jim, what are you saying?" My sister--left her husband--run off with another man! I had read of
such things in stories, but never had I believed that real people, in
real life and of real social position, ever so disgraced themselves. Every one knew that Frank Woods had been seeing a lot of Helen, and
several close friends had asked me if Jim knew the man's reputation. I
had even spoken to Helen, only to be laughed at, and assured that it
was the idle gossip of scandal-mongers. That she should have left Jim,
darling old Jim, for Frank Woods, or any other man, was unthinkable. Jim sank on a bench and turned a face to me that had grown utterly
haggard. "It's true, Bupps! I found this on the table when I went home to
lunch." He held out a crumpled note written in Helen's rather mannish back-hand. "Jim,

"It is now ten-thirty. Frank is coming for me at eleven. He has made
me realize that, loving him the way I do, I would be doing you a
horrible injustice to keep up the wretched pretense of being your wife. "Had you left any other way open, I would have taken it, but you
refused a divorce. I hate to hurt you the way I must, but try to
understand and forgive me. "Helen." I turned toward Jim. His chin was sunk in his hands. Two men came in
from the tennis-courts and nodded as they went by. "What have you done?" I asked. He raised his head, and on his face was written incalculable misery. "Nothing!" he answered, dropping his hands hopelessly. "What can I do,
except let them go and get a divorce as soon as possible? It's my
fault. After we--quarreled the other night, she asked me to divorce
her, and I refused. God, Bupps! If you only knew how much I love her
and how hard I've tried to make her love me. And she did love me till
Woods came along." I hurried up my dressing, turning over in my mind the details of Jim's
married life. In the light of the latest developments, I realized the
painful fact that I was partly to blame myself. Helen hadn't really
loved Jim when she married him. Oh, she'd loved him in the same way
she'd loved a lot of other men whom she'd been more or less engaged to
at one time or another. She had married Jim, because it had been the
thing to do that year, to get married; and she realized that Jim loved
her more and could give her more than any of the others. Where I came
in was that I had urged her to marry Jim because he was the best man in
the world and because I wanted him for my brother-in-law. I remembered now how cold Helen had been, even during their engagement,
trumping up almost any excuse to keep from spending an evening alone
with the man who was to be her husband. It had made me so hot that I
had reproached her even in Jim's presence. My words didn't seem to
affect Helen any, but they did affect Jim a lot. He had taken me for a
long ride in his car and filled me full of moonshine about how he was
unworthy of her and how he would win her love after they were married. I was in such sympathy with him that I tried to believe it true,
although I knew Helen as only a younger brother can know a sister. I
knew that she had been pampered and petted ever since she was a child;
that she had never shown much affection for father and mother, who were
her slaves, while toward me, who had insulted and made fun of her, she
was almost effusive. With this in mind, I had urged Jim to neglect
her, to "treat her rough," but when a man is head-over-heels in love
with a girl, what's the good of advice? To tell him to mistreat her
was like telling a Mohammedan to spit in the face of the prophet. They had been married a little over a year when Frank Woods came to
Eastbrook on war business for the French Government. He had been in
Papa Joffre's Army during part of the melee, wore the _Croix de Guerre_
with several palms, and could hold a company of people enthralled with
stories of his experiences. Whether he had a right to the decorations,
or even the uniform, no one was quite sure, but it set off every good
point of his massive, well-built frame. He would stand in front of the
fire and tell of air-scraps in such a way that, while he never
mentioned the hero by name, it was easy to guess that "hero" and Frank
Woods were synonymous. He could dance, ride, play any game and shoot
better than the best of us, and when he sat at the piano and sang,
every man looked at his wife or his fiancee and wondered where the
lightning was going to strike. For although he was a very proper young
bachelor for months, showing no unseemly interest in women, we all of
us, I think, secretly felt that he was setting the stage for a "grand
coup." If he had singled out Helen from the first, he couldn't have played his
game better, for his seeming indifference to her loveliness piqued her
almost to madness. During the early months of our entrance in the war
he was called back to France, and every man in Eastbrook breathed a
sigh of relief. There wasn't one of us who could say why we thought
him a cad, but just the same, I doubt if there was a father in
Eastbrook who would willingly have given his daughter to him. He was
too much of the ideal lover to make a good husband. There was
something about him, too, that made no man want to claim him as a
particular friend, but perhaps it was because we were all jealous. While most of the younger men of the town were in France, or, like Jim
and myself, in a training-camp, Frank Woods came back, and this time
there was no mistaking whom he had picked out for his attentions. Until the war was over and Jim home, it was not noticeable, for he was
most meticulous in his behavior, but with Jim busy trying to straighten
out our tangled practise, Woods lost no time in taking advantage of his
opportunities. And there had been opportunities enough, heaven knows,
with Jim surrounded by clients, yet trying in his clumsy, lovable way
to remonstrate with Helen for seeing so much of Woods. My interference
had only increased his opportunities, for the evening I told her what
people were saying, she quarreled with Jim, and as a result he threw
himself into his work with an energy in which enthusiasm had no part. All the time these thoughts were running through my head--and they ran
much faster than I can set them down--I had been throwing my clothes
on, knowing something had to be done, yet what that something was I
couldn't for the life of me figure out. "Come on, Jim!" I said, grabbing him by the arm and pulling him from
his dejected position. "Where to?" he responded wearily. "First of all, we're going to shut this thing up. _The Sun_ would like
nothing better than to spread it thick all over the front page of their
filthy sheet." "You're right, old boy! I'd forgotten about the newspapers. It would
be horrible for Helen to have her name dragged through the mud." "I wasn't thinking of Helen," I responded testily, "but a lot of cheap
notoriety won't help our law practise any." All the spirit seemed to have seeped out of his system, so I pushed him
into my car, preferring to take the wheel rather than have him drive. I can always think better when I have a steering wheel in my hands, and
knowing with what speed Jim drove ordinarily, I didn't care to trust my
precious body to him in his overwrought condition. We were just backing into the drive when one of the servants came
running from the club. "Oh, Mr. Thompson!" he called. I stopped the car and waited for him to come up. "What is it?" "You're wanted on the telephone." I jumped from the car and started for the club. There were the usual
groups of tea-drinkers and bridge-players scattered about on the broad
veranda, and it seemed to me, as I ran up the steps, that they all
stopped talking and looked at me, I thought, with curiosity, if not
with pity. There would be no use shutting up the newspapers if that
bunch of gossips were in possession of the scandal. I hurried to the telephone and slammed the door to the booth, expecting
to hear the voice of some reporter demand if there was any truth to the
rumor that Mrs. James Felderson had run off with Frank Woods. To my
buzzing brain it seemed that the whole world must have heard the news. "Hello," I called. "Is that you, Warren?" It was Helen's voice. "Helen!" I yelled. "For God's sake, where are you?" "I am at the house. Listen, Warren! Have you seen Jim?" Her voice sounded faint and strangely uncontrolled. "Yes--yes," I shouted. "He's here with me now." "Then bring him here quickly, Warren! Please hurry." "But, Helen----"

"Don't ask me any questions, please." There was a catch in the voice
on the other end of the wire. "I c-can't answer any questions now, but
bring Jim, and hurry!" The receiver clicked and I dashed out of the booth, a thousand
questions pounding in my brain. Why was Helen at the house? Had Frank
Woods failed to keep his appointment, thinking better of eloping with
another man's wife; or, had Helen come to her senses, seen through the
thin veneer that covered the cad and the libertine in Frank Woods and
returned to her husband for good? Over and above these questions and
conjectures and hopes, there was thanksgiving in my heart that the
irremediable step had not been taken; that something had intervened to
keep scandal and disgrace away from Jim. There must have been something in my face that told Jim I had been
talking to Helen, for he moved into the driver's seat and greeted me
with the single question: "Where is she?" "Home!" I panted, "and drive like the devil!" I might have saved myself the trouble of the last, for even before I
got into the car there was a roar of exhaust and the crunch of grinding
gears and we were off down the smooth drive with a speed that quickly
brought tears to my eyes and put the fear of God in my heart. How we ever escaped a smash-up after we got into the city I can't tell
to this day, for Jim never once slackened speed. He sat there with
jaws set, pumping gas and still more gas into the little car. Thrice I
saw death loom up ahead of us, as vehicles approached from
side-streets, but with a swerve and a sickening skid, we missed them
somehow. Once a street-car and a wagon seemed completely to block the
road ahead, but Jim steered for the slender opening and when I opened
my eyes we had skinned through, leaving a corpulent and cursing driver
far behind. After that I forgot my wretched fear and the blood surged
through my veins at the delicious feel of the air as it whipped my
cheeks. We turned at last into the long approach to Jim's house and it
was then that my heart sank. Frank Woods' car was standing before the door. CHAPTER TWO

TWO MEN AND A WOMAN

Had Helen been alone, I would have dropped Jim and gone on, knowing
that what they had to say to each other was not for outside ears, but
when I saw Frank Woods' car there, I felt that a cool head might be
needed. There was an ominous set to Jim's shoulders as he walked
toward the steps, a sort of drawing in of the head, as though all the
muscles in his big frame were tensed. He hesitated a fraction of a
second at the door, either to let me catch up with him or because of
distaste for the prospective meeting, and we entered the cool dark hall
together. Helen was standing at the entrance to the big living-room, her tall
figure erect, her head proudly poised, one graceful arm upraised, with
the hand buried in the velvet hangings. She had on a gray
traveling-suit, the coat of which lay tossed over the back of a near-by
chair. A large patent-leather traveling-case lay beside it. I had
expected, from the urgency of the message and the sound of her voice
over the telephone, to find Helen agitated, but, except for slight
traces of recent tears and a high color, she looked as cool and
collected as though she had invited us to tea. Jim, on the other hand,
was trembling, his face a pasty white, with great beads of perspiration
standing on his forehead. She motioned us to enter, and I led the way, gripping Jim's hand in
passing. Woods was standing by the window, his back to us, and his
whole pose so artificial, so expressive of disdain, that I felt the
short hair rising along the back of my neck in antagonism. When he
heard us, Woods turned with contemptuous deliberation, but when he
caught sight of the dumb misery on Jim's face, his own turned a dull
crimson. Helen crossed the room and seated herself on the divan, back
of which Woods was standing. The whole performance--the place she
chose near him, the look she flashed at him as she sat down, showed so
completely which of the men she loved, that my heart sank and I lost
hope of ever bringing her back to Jim. It was Helen who first spoke. "You received the note I left this morning?" Jim moistened his lips once and said, "Yes." The word was barely
audible. "Then there is no need to tell you I have made up my mind to go with
Frank." Her tone was coldly final. Woods had turned and was again gazing out
of the window. Jim looked at Helen with the eyes of a hound-dog. My
heart ached for him, but there was nothing I could do. "Why did you come back?" Jim almost whispered, keeping his eyes
directly on her face. "Because I didn't want a scandal." She glanced down at her lap where
she was opening and closing a beaded vanity bag. Evidently she was
finding the interview harder than she had expected. "I felt--I hoped that if I could show you definitely and finally that I
don't love you, that I am devoted to Frank, your pride, if nothing
else, would induce you to give me the divorce for which I asked. That
is the reason we decided to come back--so you might make it possible
for us to marry without a scandal." The gross selfishness of the woman--I could hardly think of her as my
sister--her cold cruelty, yes, even her damnable beauty, seemed to go
to my head and something snapped inside. I couldn't bear the sight of
Jim standing there helpless, while these two turned the knife. "That was very considerate of you," I sneered. "You keep out of this, Warren!" "I'm damned if I do," I retorted. "I at least have a brother's right
to tell you that a man who will sneak into another's home to make love
to his wife, behind his back, and then----"

Woods turned quickly. "That's a lie, and you know it." Jim put his hand on my shoulder. He knew I was ready to fight. "Don't, Bupps!" Suddenly he seemed to straighten into life. From the way he set his
jaw, I knew that the old courage, which had won so many cases in the
court-room, was back on the job. "You were quite right, Helen. While I imagine your reason for not
wanting a scandal was largely selfish, yet I think that consideration
for my position was partly responsible for your return, and for that I
thank you. When you asked for a divorce the other night, I didn't
realize that your love for me was so entirely dead, or that you had
fallen so completely under this man's influence. Under the
circumstances, I shall give you a divorce, if only to keep you from
taking matters into your own hands. But I shall not do it until I have
satisfied myself that your new love is real, that the man is worthy of
it. If there is anything in Woods' life that does not bear looking
into, I'll find it out; if he has done anything in the past that is
likely to hurt you in the future, I shall know it, and you shall know
it, too, before you take this irrevocable step." Woods flushed for a moment when Jim spoke of digging into his past, but
he laughed easily and said:

"You're getting a bit melodramatic, aren't you?" "Better melodrama than tragedy," Jim responded bitterly. "Helen has told you she doesn't love you, and that she does love me. This morning she was ready to face the scandal of leaving her husband;
to go to live with me, to live openly with me, unmarried, until you
could get a divorce. That rather answers your first point, doesn't it?" "It makes me think no better of you, that you should have agreed to
such a sacrifice." "I never expected to win the husband's love at the same time I won his
wife's," Woods responded evenly. Never have I seen murder shine out of a man's eyes as it did out of
Jim's at that moment. Each man measured the other across the narrow
space, and I longed that the laws of civilization might be swept aside
so that the two might tear at each other's throats, for the woman they
loved. Both men were powerful, and neither feared the other. "As to looking up my past," Woods continued, "one might think you were
the father of the lady and I a youthful suitor. While I recognize no
right of yours to meddle in my affairs, the fact that I was sent to
America as the duly accredited agent of the French Government should
have some weight. They are not accustomed over there to hiring thugs
and cutthroats to carry on their business." "This is all beside the point," Helen broke in. "May I ask, Jim, where
I am going to stay and what I am going to do while you are
investigating Frank's past?" "You are going to stay here." "Here? But where will you stay?" "I am going to stay here with you." Woods came around the divan. "Look here, Felderson! Can't you see
Helen doesn't love you, that you've lost--?" "Keep back!" warned Jim huskily. "She can't stay here with you. She's no more your wife than if she had
never married you. Do you think I'll allow her to stay in this house,
forced to endure your attentions--?" "Who are you to say what you will or won't allow?" Jim roared, his eyes
blazing. "You came into my house as my guest and stole my most
precious possession. Get out before I kill you!" Woods' face was white. For one minute I felt sure the two men would
settle matters then and there. Suddenly he turned and said: "Come,
Helen!" "She stays here!" Jim cried. Helen had arisen from the divan when the two men came together. Now
she stepped forward. "I'm going with Frank. We came back here more for your sake than our
own. We tried to give you a chance to do the decent thing, but I might
have known you wouldn't. With all your protestations of love for me,
when I ask you to do the one thing that would show that love, the one
thing that would make me happy, you not only refuse, but you insult the
man who means everything in the world to me. If I had ever loved you
in my life, what you have just said would have made me hate you. As I
never loved you, I despise and loathe you now." She started to pass him, but he grabbed her by the shoulders. His face
was white and drawn and his eyes were the eyes of a madman. He lifted
her up bodily and almost threw her on the divan, crying, "By God! You
stay here!" Jim turned just as Woods rushed and with a mighty swing to the side of
the head, sent him crashing into the corner. Dazed as he was, he half
struggled to his feet, and when I saw him reach beneath his coat, I
sprang on him and wrenched the revolver from his hand. Disheveled and half-stupefied, he rose and glared at us like an angry
bull. Slowly he straightened his tie and brushed back his hair. He
glanced over at Helen, who was sobbing on the sofa. "Two of you--eh? A frame-up." All the hatred in the world gleamed in
his eyes, as he looked at Jim. "If you don't let Helen come to me,
Felderson, I'll kill you; so help me God, I'll kill you!" Then he
picked up his coat and hat and walked out of the room. Jim went slowly to the door and into the hall. He looked tired and
old. I heard the outer door slam behind Frank Woods and a motor start. Then I went out to Jim. CHAPTER THREE

I COULD KILL HIM

I was on my way back to Jim's after having gone home to change my
clothes. Jim had asked me to stay with him that evening and, to tell
the truth, I was glad to do it, partly because of the threat Woods had
made and partly because of the way Helen looked at Jim when she passed
us in the hall on the way to her bedroom. Being a lawyer, I have
naturally made a pretty close study of character, and if I ever saw
vindictiveness on the face of any human, it was on Helen's at that
moment. I said nothing about the affair to mother while I was home, for she has
been very frail ever since my father's death and I thought there was no
use in needlessly upsetting her. There would be plenty of time to
discuss the matter after Helen left Jim. Again and again I recalled the struggle of the afternoon and again and
again, Helen's face, distorted with anger, reappeared. Finally I
decided to drive the car over to Mary Pendleton's and ask her to come
spend the night with Helen. In her overwrought, hysterical condition,
Helen was capable of doing almost anything. Mary has been like a second sister to me. She really cares nothing for
me, except in a sisterly way, but we have been together, so much so and
so long that Eastbrook gossips have given up speculating whether we are
engaged. I'd marry her in a minute, or even less, if she would have
me, but Mary insists on treating me like a kid; calls my crude attempts
at love-making "silly tosh and flub-dub," which makes the going rather
difficult. She was bridesmaid to Helen and is the one person, besides
myself, who can influence her in the least, so I felt that her presence
would add ballast to our wildly tossing domestic craft. Needless to
say, my own lack of self-control during the afternoon had been as
unexpected as it was disappointing, but when it comes to anything that
concerns Jim, I'm not responsible. I rang the bell and Mary, herself, came to the door, looking radiant as
usual. "Hello, Buppkins!" She greeted me with that detestable nick-name she
has used since I wore rompers. "Aren't you trying for a record or
something? This is twice you've called on me this month." "Mary, I'm in trouble." "Is the poor 'ittle boy in trouble and come to Auntie Mary to tell her
all about it?" she sing-songed, making a little moue, as though she was
talking to her pet cat. "Cut it, Mary!" I said. "I'm really in trouble." "What is it, Bupps?" "Helen ran off with Frank Woods to-day." "Heavens, Bupps!" --she was serious enough now.--"Where did they go?" "They went, but they came back. Helen's home with Jim. They tried to
force him to give Helen a divorce. There was an awful fight and Woods
swore that he would kill Jim unless he let Helen go. But put on your
hat and coat and get your things. Helen needs you with her. I'll tell
you the rest on the way over." "I'll be with you in a second," she called, running up-stairs. When Mary was snuggled down beside me in the car--and she does snuggle
the best of any girl I ever knew--I told her everything, not forgetting
the part where I wrenched the gun away from Woods. "Goodness, Bupps! I bet you were scared," she commented, her eyes
twinkling. "Frankly, I didn't know what I was doing, or I would never have had the
nerve," I laughed. "But, lord! I feel sorry for Jim." Mary's face clouded over. "So do I, Bupps, but any one could have seen it coming. Jim was too
good to her. As much as I like Helen, I will say that the only kind of
husband she deserves is a brute who would beat her. That's the only
kind she can love. I was with her the night before her wedding, and
she confessed then that if Jim were only cruel or indifferent to her,
just once, she thought she could love him to death. The only reason
Helen cares for you and me, was because we never paid any particular
attention to her when she acted up and pouted. That is why she is mad
about Frank Woods. When he came to Eastbrook, he treated her as though
she didn't exist." "And if Jim were cruel to her now, do you think she would go back to
him?" I asked. Mary shook her head. "No, it's different now. If Jim were cruel to
her, she would probably hate him all the more for it." "Proving the incomprehensibility of woman," I jeered. "Proving the flumdability of flapdoodle," Mary responded. "If you men
only put one little thought into giving a woman what she wants, instead
of giving her what you think she ought to want; if you kept as
up-to-date in your love-making as you do in your law practise, women
wouldn't be the incomprehensible riddle you always make them out to be." "Well, why don't you tell us what you want?" I asked. "Silly! That would spoil it all, don't you see? Besides we aren't
sure just what we want ourselves." My spirits, which had risen considerably during our conversation,
dropped with a slump when Jim's big house loomed up ahead. Already,
something of the unhappiness within seemed to have added a more somber
touch to the outside. Have you noticed how you can tell from the face
of a house what kind of life the inhabitants lead? Happiness or
misery, health or sickness, riches or poverty all show as though the
walls were saturated from the admixture of life within. I sent Mary up-stairs to see Helen, while I went into the drawing-room
in search of Jim, but there was no one there except Wicks, the butler,
who was lighting a fire, for, though it was only the last of September,
the nights were chilly. I snatched up the evening paper to see if by
any chance a hint of the scandal had crept into print. I felt sure
that, as matters stood, they would not dare to put in anything
definite, but _The Sun_ has a nasty way of writing all around a
scandal, so that, while the persons involved are readily recognized,
they are quite helpless as far as redress is concerned. I noticed that Wicks had taken an infernally long time to start the
fire. Although it was burning merrily, he still puttered about,
brushing up the chips and rearranging the blower and tongs. When Wicks
hangs about he usually has a question on his mind that he wants
answered, and he takes that means of letting you know it. I decided
not to notice him but to force him to come out in the open and ask, for
once, a straightforward question. From the fire, he moved to the table
and straightened the magazines and books, glancing now and then in my
direction, trying to catch my eye, but I buried myself more deeply than
ever in the paper. When he finally stepped back of my chair, human
nature could stand his puttering no longer, so I laid down _The Sun_,
and turned to him. "Well, Wicks, what do you want?" I snapped. Wicks looked at me with the expression of a small boy caught
sticky-handed in the jam-closet. "Nothing, sir!--that is--er--nothing." He turned and started from the
room. "Come here, Wicks!" I called. "I know when you hang around a room
unnecessarily, as you have been doing for the last ten minutes, that
you have something on your mind. Now, out with it." "I was merely going to arsk, sir, hif I 'ad better begin lookin' arfter
another place, sir?" That was an extraordinary question. Wicks had been with the Feldersons
ever since they were married. "What put that idea into your head, Wicks?" He was far more confused than I had ever seen him. "Meanin' no disrespect, sir, and I don't mean to be hinquisitive about
what doesn't concern me, but I couldn't 'elp 'earin' a bit of what took
place this arfternoon, sir." Good lord! I'd forgotten there might have been other witnesses to the
scene of the afternoon besides myself. "Do the other servants know about this, Wicks?" "Hi think they do, sir, seein' as 'ow Mrs. Felderson 'as been actin'
and talkin' so queer." "What do you mean?" I demanded. Wicks struggled for composure. The subject was evidently most
distasteful to his conservative and conventional British nature. "Hit was Annie, Mrs. Felderson's maid, sir, that hupset the servants. W'en she came down from hup-stairs, she said as 'ow Mrs. Felderson was
a ragin' and a rampagin' around 'er room, sayin' that if Mr. Felderson
didn't give 'er a divorce, she would do violence to 'im, sir." "Did Annie hear her say that?" I questioned. "She says so, sir." The whole thing was so monstrous that I gasped. For this awful
dime-novel muck to be tumbled into the middle of my family was too
sickening. My sister, running away from her husband with another man
and now threatening, in the hearing of the servants, to kill him,
unless he gave her a divorce, disgusted me with its cheap vulgarity. I
hid, as best I could, the tempest that was brewing inside me. "Wicks, Mrs. Felderson is not well. Tell the servants that she is
greatly depressed over an accident that happened to a friend. At the
present time, she is so upset over that, she really doesn't know what
she is saying. Quiet them in some way, Wicks! And tell Annie to stay
with Mrs. Felderson!" "Very good, sir." He started to leave. "And, Wicks--"

"Yes, sir." "There is no need of your looking for another place." "Yes, sir. Thank you, sir!" Wicks departed and I was left to my gloomy thoughts. Helen must be
brought to her senses. Mary and I must work, either to bring her back
to Jim, or, if that prove hopeless, to see that the divorce was hurried
as much as possible. The very thought of having Mary along with me,
with her inexhaustible fund of God-given humor and common sense, gave
me a vast amount of comfort and confidence. At this point, Jim came in. He had had a bath and a shave and had put
on a dinner-coat, looking a lot more fit to grapple with his troubles
than he had the last time I had seen him. Only in his eyes did he show
the shock he'd received that day. "Communing with yourself in the dark, Bupps?" --his voice was natural
and easy. "Yes," I sighed, "I've been trying to see a way out of this mess." Jim lit a cigarette and threw himself into a chair. For a few moments
he puffed in silence, taking deep inhalations and blowing the smoke
against the lighted tip, so that it showed all the rugged, strength of
his superb head. "What would you say, Bupps, if I told you everything would come out all
right?" "And Helen stay with you?" I asked incredulously. "And Helen stay with me," he repeated calmly. "Of her own free will?" "Of her own free will," he answered. "I should say that the events of the day had addled your brain and that
you are a damned inconsiderate brother-in-law to try to make a fool of
me." "I mean it, Bupps," he said quietly. "What do you mean?" I demanded. "That everything will come out all right," he smiled. "But how, man?" His complacency almost drove me wild. "Bupps, have you noticed how much money Woods has been spending around
here--his extravagant way of living? Where do you think that money
comes from?" "His contracts with the French Government," I replied. "But I happen to know he didn't land those contracts. That's the
reason he beat it so suddenly when we got into the war." He tossed his
cigarette into the fire. "His salary from the French, then. They must have paid him some kind
of salary." "Have you never heard what ridiculously small salaries the French
Government pays its officers?" It was true that Woods could never have lived as he did on ten times
the salary of a French captain. "His own private fortune then," I suggested. "Ah! There's the point! If he has a private fortune, then my whole
case falls to pieces. That's what I've got to find out. Woods has
been playing for a big stake, and I think he has been playing with
other people's money. Did you notice how he flushed this afternoon
when I suggested looking into his private affairs? It was the veriest
accident--I was stalling for time--but when I saw him color up I knew
I'd touched a sore spot. No, Bupps, I don't think Woods has a private
fortune." "But even if you show him up as worthless, will Helen come back to you,
Jim?" The color came to his face and he laughed with a queer twist to his
mouth. "Am I as horrible as all that, Bupps?" His words brought a lump to my throat. I went over to him and almost
hugged him. "Jim, you're such a peach--dammit all--"

I heard a light step behind me. "Oh, Bupps!" laughed Mary, "if you'd only make love to me in that
ardent fashion, I'd drag you to the altar by your few remaining hairs." I stood up, blushing in spite of myself. She can always make me feel
that whatever I am doing is either stupid or foolish. "Dinner is served, and I'm starving. Come on, people!" she announced,
leading the way to the dining-room. "Where's Helen?" I asked. "She's not coming down. She has a slight headache," Mary answered,
giving me a warning look. "I am delegated to be lady of the manor this
evening." She looked so adorable as she curtsied to us that I felt an
almost uncontrollable impulse to grab her in my arms and smother her
with kisses, but remembering what she had done to me once when I
yielded to impulse, I refrained. When we sat down to the table, Helen's empty place threatened to cast a
gloom over the party, so Mary told Wicks to remove it. "It's too much like Banquo's ghost," she whispered, laughing merrily at
Jim. "Speaking of ghosts," said Jim turning to me, "I hear the labor people
are asking the governor to pardon Zalnitch." "A lot of good it will do them," I responded. "If ever a man deserved
hanging, he does." "I know, but labor is awfully strong now, and with the unsettled social
conditions in the state, a bigger man than Governor Fallon might find
it expedient to let Zalnitch off." "Who is Zalnitch? Don't think I've met the gentleman," Mary said. "He's the Russian who was supposed to be the ring-leader of the gang
that blew up the Yellow Funnel steamship piers in 1915," I explained. "Do you mean to say he hasn't been hanged yet?" "Yes!" Jim answered. "And what's more, I'm afraid he's going to be
pardoned." "Not really, Jim?" I queried. "Yes! I'm almost sure of it. Fallon is a machine man before
everything else, although he was elected on a pro-American ticket. They are threatening to do all kinds of things to him, just as they
threatened me, unless Zalnitch goes free, and I think Fallon is afraid
of them, not physically perhaps, but politically. He wants reelection." Jim had helped the prosecuting attorney convict Zalnitch; in fact it
was Jim's work more than anything else that had sent the Russian to
prison. At the time, Jim had received a lot of threatening letters,
just as every other American who denounced the Germans before we
entered the war had received them. Nothing had come of it, of course,
and after we went in, the whole matter dropped from public attention. Zalnitch had been sent to prison, but his friends had worked constantly
for commutation of his sentence. With labor's new power, due to the
fear of Bolshevism, they were again bringing influence to bear on the
governor. Wicks had removed the soup plates and was bringing in the roast, when
Annie appeared. The girl was both frightened and angry. "Mr. Felderson?" Jim looked up. "What is it, Annie?" "Will you come up-stairs, please, sir?" Mary pushed back her chair, "I'll go, Jim." "It's Mr. Felderson that's wanted," Annie said with just a touch of
asperity. "Yes, you two better stay here and amuse each other," said Jim. "Bupps, you carve!" "If Bupps carves, I'm _sure_ to be amused," laughed Mary. Jim left, and I went around to his place. If there is one thing I do
more badly than another, it is carving. At home it's done in the
kitchen, but Jim takes great pride in the neatness and celerity with
which he separates the component parts of a fowl and so insists on
having the undissected whole brought to the table. "What is it to-night?" Mary asked as I eyed my task with disfavor. "Roast duck." I tried to speak casually. "Wait, Bupps, while Wicks lays the oilcloth and I get an umbrella." "Smarty!" I responded, grabbing my tools firmly, "you wait and see! I
watched Jim the last time he carved one of these and I know just how
it's done." I speared for the duck's back, but the fork skidded down the slippery
side of the bird and spattered a drop of gravy in front of me. "I'm waiting and seeing," Mary chided. "Well, you wanted some gravy, didn't you?" "Yes, but on my plate, please." This time I placed the tines of the fork carefully on the exact middle
of the duck's breast and gently pushed, giving some aid and comfort
with my knife. The little beast eased over on the platter an inch or
two. "The thing's still alive," I exclaimed, getting mad. "If you'll let me have full control, I'll carve it for you," Mary spoke
up. "Come on, then," I responded, gladly relinquishing my place. With a
deftness and ease that could only be explained by the fact that the
duck was ready and willing to be carved, she removed the legs and then
demolished the bird altogether. There was the sound of voices raised in altercation up-stairs, the
slamming of a door and the patter of feet rapidly descending the steps. The next moment Helen burst into the room. She was fully dressed for
going out and was pinning on her hat with spiteful little jabs. "Will you take me home, Warren?" Mary left me and went over to her. "What has happened, Helen?" "Oh, I can't stay here another minute. It is bad enough to have to
stay in the same house with a man you loathe, but when a husband bribes
his wife's servants to spy on her and watch over her as though she were
a dangerous lunatic--"

Her eyes were blazing. Mary put her arm around her and tried to quiet
her. "Helen, dear, you don't know how ridiculous that is. No one is spying
on you." Helen tore herself away. "That's right, stand up for him! You're all against me, I know. The
only reason Warren brought you here, was to try to talk me into staying
with him. Well, I won't, you understand? I won't! I hate him! I
could kill him! If you won't take me home, Warren, I'll go alone." She was almost hysterical. "Have you thought what this would do to mother?" I asked. "She doesn't
know you've quarreled with Jim. If she found out you were
contemplating a divorce, it would kill her. You know how weak she is." I heard Jim's heavy tread coming downstairs. "Can I stay with you, Mary?" Big tears stood in Helen's eyes and she
seemed on the verge of a complete breakdown. "Of course, Honey-bunch!" Mary responded, kissing her and leading her
into the drawing-room. "Just go in there and lie down while I get my
things." As Helen walked from the room, Jim came in. Mary turned toward us,
looked us over for the briefest moment and whispered, "You men are
brutes!" As she ran up-stairs, Jim gazed after her. That same gray
look had come back into his face. "I guess we are," he said, shaking his head, "but I don't know how or
why." I patted him on the shoulder and went for my coat. Whether he realized
it or not, I knew Helen would never come back to him. I went out to the car and turned on the lights. A white moon was
sailing through a sky cluttered with puffy clouds, its soft radiance
bathing the house and grounds in mellow loveliness. It all seemed so
remote from the sordid quarrel inside that its beauty was enhanced by
the contrast. Here was a night when the whole world should be in love. Nature herself conspired to that end. And yet, there were thousands of
men and women who were so forgetful of everything except their own
petty differences that they turned their backs to the beauty around
them, in order to try to hurt each other. As Helen and Mary came out of the door, I climbed into the car and said
to myself, "Damn men, damn women, damn everything!" CHAPTER FOUR

THE WORST HAPPENS

I was late getting down to the office the next morning, for I had gone
back to Jim's and talked till all hours. It seemed that my
instructions to Wicks, to tell Annie to stay with Helen, had been taken
quite literally by that estimable pair, for when Helen had told the
girl to leave she had refused, saying that Mr. Felderson had ordered
her to stay. That was what had precipitated the quarrel. Even when I left Jim, to go to bed, I had heard him walking back and
forth in his room, and once during the night, I heard him shut his
door. Thinking perhaps he might want me with him, I went to his door
and knocked. Jim was untying his shoes and explained that, unable to
sleep, he had gone out for a walk. The clock on the mantel-piece
showed half past four. In spite of the fact he had practically no sleep the night before, he
was down at his usual hour, nine o'clock, and when I went into his
office to see him, there was no sign of fatigue on his face. "Any news?" I inquired. "This may interest you," and he tossed over the morning paper folded to
an article on the first page. ZALNITCH FREED

  GOVERNOR FALLON PARDONS MAN
  IMPLICATED IN YELLOW PIER
  EXPLOSION

  Prisoner Upon Release Makes Terrific
  Indictment Against Those Responsible for
  His Imprisonment


I glanced hurriedly down the long article. One paragraph in particular
caught my eye. It was part of a quotation from Zalnitch's "speech" to
the reporters. "Those who were responsible for my imprisonment may well regret the
fact that justice has at last been given me. I shall not rest until I
lay before the working classes the extent to which the processes of law
can be distorted in this state, and rouse them to overthrow and drive
out those who have the power of depriving them of their rights and
their liberty. I shall not rest until I see a full meed of punishment
brought to those who have punished me and hundreds like me. Their
money and their high position will not help them to escape a just
retribution." "It looks as though our friend was going to have a very restless time,"
I commented, after reading the passage aloud to Jim. "'Vengeance is mine,' saith Zalnitch." Jim's eyes twinkled. "You're not afraid of him, are you, Jim?" I asked. "No more now than ever, Bupps." His face suddenly clouded over. "Wouldn't it clear the air, though, if
they did carry out their funny little threats and put me out of the
way? When I think of some of the things Helen has said to me during
the last month, I almost wish they would." "That sounds weak and silly," I scoffed; "not a bit like you, Jim. Cheer up! Give Helen a divorce and let her go! She's not worth all
this heartache." Jim sat for a moment thinking. "You don't know what this has done to
me, Bupps. It's not as though divorcing Helen would straighten the
whole matter out. Ever since I've known Helen I've--idolized
her--foolishly, perhaps. She has been the one big thing worth working
for; the thing I've built my whole life around. I've got to fight for
her, Bupps. I can't let her smash my ideals all to pieces. I've got
to make her live up to what I've always believed her to be." The tone of the man, the dead seriousness of his words, made me want to
disown Helen and then kill Woods. I left the room with my eyes a bit
misty and did my best, in the case I was working on, to forget. For two days I was kept so busy I hardly saw Jim except when I had to
go into his office for papers, or to consult an authority. I was
trying to win a case against the L. L. & G. railroad, and though I knew
my client could never pay me a decent fee, even if I should win, I was
pitted against some of the best lawyers in the state, and was anxious
for the prestige that a verdict in my favor would give me. The case
was going my way, or seemed to be, but the opposition was fighting
harder every day, so that I had time for little else than food, sleep
and work. Frank Woods had apparently left town, either on business or
to give Helen a clear field to influence Jim. Helen was still at
Mary's, and her presence on a visit there was so natural that it hid
her separation from Jim better than if she had gone home to mother. I was just leaving for court one morning when Jim called me into his
office. There was a gleam of triumph in his eyes and his whole
attitude was one of cheerful excitement. "Have you a minute, Bupps?" "Only a minute, Jim. This is the day of days for me." There were several letters and telegrams lying on the table. Jim
pointed exultantly to them and cried: "I've got him, Bupps! There is
enough evidence there to send Woods up for twenty years. I wouldn't
have used such underhand methods against any one else, against anything
but a snake, but I had to win, I had to win!" I rushed to the table and rapidly scanned one of the telegrams. "You've started at the wrong end, but it doesn't matter. Frank Woods
has used the money entrusted him by the French Government to gamble
with. He counted on the contracts with the International Biplane
people to bring him clean and leave him a comfortable fortune besides. The end of the war and the wholesale cancellation of government
contracts killed that. To cover his deficits, he borrowed from the
Capitol Loan and Trust, and they are hunting for their money now." "How did you find all this out, Jim?" I demanded breathlessly. "From friends, good friends, Bupps. Men who knew that if I asked for
this unusual information, I had need of it and that I wouldn't abuse
their confidence." "And now that you've got it, what are you going to do with it?" "I have sent messages to Woods, to his apartment, to the club and to
the International plant, saying that I want to see him. I know he is
working like the devil to get the contracts to furnish the government
with mail planes for next year. If he gets that contract, he may
possibly pull through, for the bank would probably extend his credit,
but if knowledge of his illegal use of the money entrusted to him by
the French Government ever gets out, he knows it's the stripes without
the stars for him." "Be careful when you meet him, Jim," I warned. "He'll go to the limit,
you know, to save himself." "He's all front, Bupps; just like Zalnitch. I'll give him three days
to straighten out his affairs and get away. If he hasn't left by then,
I'll put all the evidence I have into the hands of the Capitol Loan and
Trust." "Are you going to tell Helen about this?" I asked. Jim pondered a moment. "I haven't decided that yet. If I was sure
Woods would go away without any trouble, I think I'd leave her in
ignorance; but he might use her to save himself." "How do you mean?" "I'm not so blind I can't see that Helen's infatuated with the man. If
he is blackguard enough to ask her again to go with him, I think she
would go, and that would pretty effectively tie my hands." "You mean that for Helen's sake you wouldn't prosecute Woods?" I
demanded. "That's stupid sentimentality." "It's for Helen's sake that I'm doing _all_ this," Jim insisted. "Don't think for a moment I would stop the prosecution just because she
was with him. The reason my hands would be tied is because Helen's
money would pay his obligations." "Helen's money?" I laughed. "Helen hasn't as much as I have." Jim flushed. "Helen is quite a wealthy woman, Bupps. When I went into
the army I wanted to leave Helen perfectly easy in a financial way
while I was gone, so I transferred all my railroad stock to her, so
that she might draw the interest. I haven't asked her for it since I
came home, because, in the light of our recent differences, I was
afraid she might think I didn't trust her." "And do you suppose Woods knows that?" "Of course he knows it!" Jim burst out. "She must have told him. Why
do you suppose he played around so long before deciding to make love to
Helen? Oh, it's all so simple and clear to me now that I wonder at my
stupidity." I glanced at my watch. "Good lord, Jim! You've almost made me lose my case. I have only
three minutes to get to the court-house. Hold up the climax until I
get back, if you can." I jumped for the elevator and rushed to my appointment, getting there
just in time. The news of the morning had so raised my spirits that I
was filled with an immense enthusiasm. Everything went my way. My
summing up was a masterpiece of logic, if I do say so myself, and my
client received a substantial judgment. There is no moment sweeter in a young lawyer's life than when another
lawyer, of big reputation, congratulates him on his conduct of a case. My cup was filled to overflowing, and I must confess I had little
thought for Jim's affairs when I lunched that day with Stevenson and
McGuire, councils for the L. L. & G.  The prognostications that they
made for my future were so exaggerated that a bigger man than I might
well have been excused for increased head and chest measurements. At half past two I went back to the office to announce the good news to
Jim. I had made up my mind before luncheon to spend the afternoon on
the links in honor of my victory, but the clouds, which had been heavy
during the morning, by two o'clock opened up a steady drizzle. Jim was
at his desk when I came in bringing the glad tidings. He got up and
gripped my hand. "Good boy, Bupps! I knew you'd do it. Thank the Lord your affairs are
going well anyway." "Has something happened since I've been out?" I asked. "Yes. The First National telephoned about eleven o'clock saying that
Helen wanted to borrow quite a large sum of money on her railroad stock
and asking if I knew about it. They thought the money was probably for
me and they wanted to ask if I'd be willing to wait a few days." "How much was it?" "Fifty thousand dollars." "Is the stock worth that much, Jim?" "Yes," said Jim seriously, "the stock is worth twice that. That's why
I have to go slow. She could sell that stock for fifty thousand at any
broker's in five minutes." I whistled. "Gee! Fifty thousand. Woods must have asked her for it
because he knew you were after him." "It's open warfare now. I told the bank I knew what the money was for
and that it would cause no inconvenience to me to have them hold up the
loan for a few days. In fact I asked Sherwood, the cashier, to wait
until he saw me before making the loan." Just then the telephone rang. Jim answered it. "Hello--Yes--Woods?--Where are you now?" He listened a moment. "I
understand--Eight-thirty promptly?--I'll be there--Yes, I
understand--I'll be there." He hung up the receiver and looked at me with twinkling eyes. "The shoe is beginning to pinch, Bupps. That was Woods. He asks me to
meet him alone this evening at the country-club, at eight-thirty
promptly. Says he wants to see me urgently on business that concerns
us both." "Did he ask you to come alone?" "Yes. He distinctly said that I was to come alone and be prompt." "Jim," I argued, "you can't go out there alone to meet that man. It's
too infernally dangerous." "There's no danger, Bupps; but I'm not going alone. Helen is going
with me." He opened the bottom drawer of his desk and pulled out a leather
portfolio, into which he put all the letters and telegrams that were
scattered about his desk. "I'm going to prove to Helen, in his presence, what kind of man he is;
that he loves her only for the money I gave her, and to save his yellow
hide. I'm going to tear out of her heart all the affection she ever
had for him. I think, after that, she will not only come back to me,
but she will love me all the more for having known Frank Woods. No
matter how badly a leg or an arm may be shattered, a quick, clean
operation may cause the parts to grow together again, stronger than
they were before. I think I win, Bupps." "Still, I believe you ought to carry a gun, in case he gets nasty." "I will, if you like," he responded; "but I won't use it, no matter
what happens." I left the office, vaguely disquieted with the thought of Jim going out
to the club to face a man as dangerous and desperate as Frank Woods. When a fellow of his standing sees the penitentiary looming up in his
foreground he's capable of anything. Helen, herself, in the crazed
condition I had seen her the other night, was an added element of
danger. I didn't like the looks of the situation any way I turned. I climbed into my car and drove slowly through the wet slippery
streets. The windshield was so covered with rain-drops that I lowered
it to see the better, and the autumn rain, beating into my face, soon
swept away my gloomy forebodings. After all, no man was going to stick
his neck into the hangman's noose, no matter how eager he was for
revenge. This was the twentieth century, in which no man could
deliberately flout the law. Frank Woods would never have invited Jim
to a "rendezvous" so public as the country-club, if he planned
mischief. When he found out how much Jim knew, realizing the game was
up, he would leave town quietly. Helen certainly would shake Woods
when she learned of his dishonesty and trickery. Surely, no woman with
Helen's pride could learn how she had been duped without hating the man
who duped her. I stopped at the University Union and found the card room well filled
with bridge players. The rainy afternoon had driven the golfers to
cards, and as one of the men, Terry O'Connel, was on the point of
leaving, I took his place. I played till seven and then started home
to dinner. The rain had stopped and a fresh chilly wind was rippling
the pools in the streets and rapidly drying the sidewalks. The
prospect of a cold blustery evening made me look forward with pleasure
to the warm comfort of my study, and a good book. I had just finished a solitary dinner--mother being confined to her
room--and had settled down in dressing gown and slippers before my
cheerful fire, when the telephone rang. I put down my book and tried
to think of some excuse for staying home, in case it was my
bridge-playing friends of the afternoon wanting me to come back to the
club. A strange voice called from the other end of the wire. "Mr. Thompson?" "Yes." "There has been an accident to your brother-in-law's car." "What?--Where?--Who is this talking?" I shouted breathlessly. "This is Captain Wadsworth of the North District Police Station
speaking. Your brother-in-law had a very bad accident with his car at
the second bridge on the Blandesville Road. Both Mr. and Mrs.
Felderson were pretty badly injured." "Where are they now?" I gasped, fear clutching at my throat. "They have been taken to St. Mary's Hospital." I slammed down the receiver and tore into my clothes. I ran out to the
car and drove through the dark wet streets regardless of speed laws. From out the gray gloom, the heavy bulk and lighted windows of St.
Mary's loomed just ahead. I ran up the steps and went at once to the
office. Three nurses were standing there talking. "Can you tell me where they have taken Mr. and Mrs. Felderson?" "Were they the people in the automobile accident?" I nodded my head. One of the nurses led me to a large room on the second floor. As we
neared the door a young interne, so the nurse told me, came out. He
was thoughtfully polishing his glasses. "I am Warren Thompson, Mr. Felderson's brother-in-law," I explained. "Can you tell me how badly Mr. and Mrs. Felderson were hurt?" He put his glasses back on his nose and looked at me sympathetically. "Mr. Felderson is dead, and Mrs. Felderson is dying," he said. CHAPTER FIVE

ACCIDENT OR MURDER

Have you ever had the whole world stop for you? Well, that's what
happened when that young interne told me that Jim was dead. I must
have been half mad for a few moments, at least they said I acted that
way. Sometimes, tragic news deadens the senses, like the brief numbness that
follows the sudden cutting off of a limb, the pain not manifesting
itself until some time afterward. But with me, the fact of Jim's death
clawed and tore at the very foundation of my brain. It stamped itself
into my sensibilities with such crushing force that I writhed under the
burden of its bitter actuality. I felt as though I, myself, had died
and my spirit, snatched from the brilliant, airy sunlight of life, had
been plunged into the hammering emptiness of hell. "Jim is dead--big,
happy, kind-hearted Jim is dead" ached through my brain. They gave me something to drink--ammonia, I think--and my whirling head
began to clear. "Can I see Mrs. Felderson?" I asked the interne. It was he who had
given me the ammonia. "I'm afraid not," he replied. "She is being prepared for the operating
table." "There is a chance, then, of her being saved?" I clutched at his arm. He slowly shook his head. "One chance in a thousand only, I'm afraid. There was severe concussion of the brain and a slight displacement of
one of the cranial vertebra. Luckily, Doctor Forbes is here, and if
any one can save her, he can." He got up from his seat beside me. "Now, Mr. Thompson, I advise you to go home and get a good night's
rest. You can do nothing here, and the next few days are bound to be a
great strain." "You will telephone me at once the result of the operation?" I asked
quickly. "I wouldn't count too much on the operation," he said kindly, "but I
will let you know." He turned and walked back toward Helen's room. Just then the door was
opened and there appeared a sort of elongated baby-cab, without a top. On this wheeling table was a still white bundle, from which a stifled
moan escaped now and then. Shaken with terror and nausea, I ran for
the stairs and did not stop until I got into my car and was racing away. As I drove, my brain cleared and I remembered that there were others to
whom the tragedy was almost as vital as to myself and who ought to be
informed. I stopped at a corner drug store and called up Mary. Mother
should not be told until a physician could assure me she was strong
enough to stand the shock. Mary was wonderfully sympathetic and tender, not voluble the way some
women would have been. She asked me if I had been to the scene of the
accident, and when I told her I was just going, she asked me if I
wanted her with me. As it was after ten o'clock and the rain had begun
again, I told her "No," and added that I'd come to see her in the
morning. When I left the telephone-booth the drug clerk stared at me
inquisitively. "You look all fagged out," he said frankly. "I'm not feeling very well," I replied, struggling into my rain-coat. "Better let me give you somethin' to fix you up," he suggested. I
acquiesced, and he went to the shelf and shook some white powder into a
glass. Then he put some water with it and it phizzed merrily. I drank
it at a gulp and, climbing into the car, started for the second bridge
on the Blandesville Road. The drink braced me up and as I drove I began to recall the events of
the last few days, and for the first time to wonder if they had any
connection with the tragedy. Captain Wadsworth had told me it was an
accident. Could Frank Woods have been in any way responsible? No,
certainly not, for Helen had been in the car, and he surely would never
have done anything to put her life in jeopardy. _But Woods didn't know
that she was there_. He had told Jim to come out alone; had insisted
on it, in fact. It was _Jim's_ idea to bring Helen with him. My heart was doing a hundred revolutions to the minute. Now that I had
hit on this idea, every fiber of my being cried out that Frank Woods
was in some way responsible. I tried to urge my car to more speed. The wreck would surely tell me something. I determined to hunt every
inch of ground around the place for a clue. Woods would have to prove
to me that he had nothing to do with the accident before I'd believe
him innocent. I drove up the long hill overlooking the little bridge that had
suddenly assumed such a tragic significance in my life. It lies at the
bottom of the hill, about half-way between the city and the
country-club and on the loneliest stretch of the entire road. There
are no houses about; the city not having grown that far out and the
soil being entirely unsuitable for farming. In fact, there are only
one or two large trees near by, to break the desolate expanse, the
vegetation consisting mostly of thorny bushes springing from the rocky
soil. There have been several accidents at the bridge, for its
narrowness is deceiving and it is impossible for two autos to pass. Motorists, going to the club, usually let their cars out on the long
hill and if another car, coming around the bend from the opposite
direction, reaches the bridge at the same time, only skilful driving
and good brakes can avoid a smash-up. The matter has been brought to
the attention of the authorities several times, but nothing has ever
been done, either to widen the bridge or to warn automobilists of the
danger. As I reached the top of the hill, I saw that two automobiles had
stopped at the bottom, and, noticing that their lights blinked as
people passed back and forth in front of them, I was convinced that a
small crowd had gathered, probably out of curiosity. I slowed up as I
neared the spot and came to a stop at the side of the road. A
motorcycle cop walked up to my car. "Inspector Robinson, sir?" "No," I answered, "I am Warren Thompson, brother-in-law of Mr.
Felderson, who had the accident. How did it happen, do you know,
Sergeant?" "It was the fault of the bridge again, sir. I've told the chief that
something ought to be done. This is the third accident in six months. We've been trying to find the other car." "What other car?" I asked. "The car that made Mr. Felderson take the ditch," he explained. "He
must have been driving fast--he usually did; many's the time I've had
to warn him--and must have seen that the other car would meet him at
the bridge. He stopped too quick, skidded off the road and turned over
into the creek." I shuddered as I pictured the scene. One of the automobiles turned
around and the lights picked out the upturned wheels of Jim's car. It
looked like some monster whose back had been broken. It was a large
Peckwith-Pierce touring car, and the force of the crash had twisted and
smashed the huge chassis. Several men were gathered around the car,
examining it with the aid of a barn-lantern. "Where were the bodies found?" I asked, my voice trembling. "Mrs. Felderson was over there on the bank. She was thrown out likely
when the car left the road. Mr. Felderson's body was under the
machine." While the thought of the heavy weight crushing the life out of Jim
sickened me, I thanked God that death must have been instantaneous. "Do you know who found them, Sergeant?" He pointed to a man standing by the wreck. "That man over there. He
found them and took them to the hospital after sending one of his
friends to notify the police." The man evidently heard our voices, and came over to us. "Is this the inspector?" he asked. "No," I replied, "I am Mr. Felderson's brother-in-law." "Oh, I'm sorry!" he said quickly. "May I express my deep, deep
sympathy?" "Thank you. Will you tell me how you discovered the accident?" "I had been out to Blandesville on business and was returning with a
party of friends. As we neared the bridge, one of them caught sight of
the upturned automobile in the creek, and we stopped. We found Mrs.
Felderson first, being attracted by her moans. We went at once to the
car, and as there were four of us, we were able to lift the automobile
sufficiently to get Mr. Felderson from under it. We knew that the
woman was still living, but none of us was doctor enough to tell
whether Mr. Felderson was alive or not. We carried them quickly to our
car and hurried to St. Mary's, dropping one of my friends at the North
District Station to inform the police what had occurred. Afterward we
drove back here, thinking we might be wanted in case there was an
investigation." "Did you see the lights of any car ahead of you, as you came along the
road?" I asked. "Did any car pass you, going in the same direction?" "A car turned in ahead of us from the Millerstown Road about ten
minutes before." "Do you think that might have been the car that was partly responsible
for this accident?" I queried. "Of course, no one could be sure in a situation of that kind, but I
wouldn't doubt it at all. It left us behind as if we were tied." Another car had driven up while we were talking and our policeman had
gone over to it at once. He came back now, accompanied by a short
heavy-set man in plain clothes. "I am Inspector Robinson, detailed to examine into this affair. Were
you the man who discovered the accident?" he asked, addressing my
companion. "Yes, Inspector; Pickering is my name. I'm with the Benefit Insurance
Company." He told the circumstances of the discovery to the plain-clothes man,
who, all the time Pickering was talking, bustled up and down and around
the car. Finally he made Pickering show him just where the bodies lay. "Distressing, distressing," the inspector chirped, "dreadful accident,
dreadful indeed, but quite to be expected with fast driving. If they
will risk their lives----"

"Inspector," I broke in, "I am the brother-in-law of the man who drove
that car. While he was a fast driver, he was not a careless one. I've
never known him to have an accident before." The little man irritated
me. "That's the way it always happens," he came back at me; "they take
risks a dozen times and get away with them, and then--Blooey!!" "But aren't you going to find the other car?" I demanded. "What other car?" he snapped. "The one that must have been coming from the opposite direction; that
caused this accident." "Do you know there was any such car?" he bristled. "There must have been," I answered. "No accident has ever happened
here except under such circumstances. Besides, Mr. Pickering saw a car
turn into this road ahead of him not ten minutes before the accident." Robinson looked from me to Pickering as though we were both conspiring
to defeat justice. "Did you see such a car?" he barked at Pickering. "A car turned out of the Millerstown Road and went toward the city
about ten minutes before we discovered the bodies," Pickering replied
evenly. "Why didn't you say so?" the detective asked sharply. "What kind of a
car was it?" "A black limousine with wire wheels. I couldn't see the number." Robinson's humor seemed to have come back. "Now we're getting on," he said, rubbing his hands. "That's better. That's much better. If you gentlemen had just told me that in the
first place we'd have saved all this time." He turned to the motorcycle policeman. "Feeney, go over to Millerstown
and inquire if a black limousine with wire wheels stopped there
to-night between eight and nine o'clock." A figure, unnoticed in the darkness, approached. It proved to be a
lanky farmer, who spoke with a decided drawl. "I reckon I kin help ye thar. They was a big limozine tourin' car with
wire wheels went through Millerstown 'bout ha'f past eight, quat' t'
nine. I know, 'cause it durn near run me down." "Do you live in Millerstown?" the inspector questioned. "Yep! Come over t' see the accident." "Did that auto stop in Millerstown?" The farmer chuckled and expectorated. "It didn't even hesitate." "Can you tell us anything else about it?" I spoke up. The inspector glared at me. "I'll conduct this investigation,
Mr.--err----"

The farmer scratched his head. "Waal, nothin' much. It went too
blamed fast fer me to git mor'n a right good look, but I did gee that
it was full o' men an' the tail-light was bu'sted an' they wa'n't no
license on it." "You're sure of that?" the inspector asked. "Yep!" he said, "I'm sure, 'cause I was goin' to report 'em." Again the inspector turned to Feeney, who had been listening intently. "Feeney, go in and tell the chief to issue instructions to all the
force to keep an eye out for a black limousine with wire wheels, a
broken tail-light and no license tag! My friend," he said, turning to
the farmer, "I thank you for your information. By to-morrow night
we'll have that car and the parties concerned. By gad! They had their
nerve, running away after the accident. The damned rascals--killing
people and then running away. I'll grill their toes for them." The malice of the little detective, his readiness to jump from one
conclusion to another, reminded me for all the world of some
disagreeable, little, barking dog that chases every passing vehicle. I bade him good night, shook hands with Pickering and was on my way
back to my car, when another automobile drove up. Three men jumped
out, and as they passed in front of the lamps, I recognized Lawrence
Brown and Fred Paisley, from the club; the third man was Frank Woods. As I caught sight of his well-set-up figure, all the hatred I had for
him seemed to rise in my throat and choke me. Try as I would I
couldn't separate him from the tragedy. When the farmer said the black
limousine was full of men, I realized that Frank Woods couldn't have
been one of them, and yet, so great was my distrust of the man, that I
felt like accusing him on the spot. Larry Brown caught sight of me and wrung my hand. "Dammit, old man, I
can't fell you how sorry I am." Paisley patted me on the back. "If
there is anything we can do, Thompson----"

I shook my head and tears came to my eyes. They made me realize
poignantly how much I had lost. Woods didn't join us. He knew if he
tried to sympathize with me, after the affair the other day, that I
would throttle him for his hypocrisy. "Was Jim killed outright?" Brown asked. "Yes! And there's one chance in a thousand for Helen." Both men started. "Was Mrs. Felderson there? They telephoned us at
the club that Jim had been killed, but we didn't know she was with him." They glanced at each other and then at Woods, who was standing by the
side of the overturned car. "You'd better tell him, Larry," Paisley muttered. "Doesn't he know?" I asked. "Of course not," replied Brown. "He was out there at the club with us. I'm afraid it will hit him awfully hard." He stepped over to Woods and, taking him by the arm, they disappeared
into the darkness. We heard a choking cry, and the next moment Woods
came running toward us. His face was distorted with horror and his
eyes were almost starting from his head. "Thompson, for God's sake, tell me he lies! Tell me he lies!" he
shrieked. "Helen wasn't in that car?" The old suspicions came tumbling back an hundredfold and I turned cold
all over. "It is true," I said, "Mrs. Felderson is in the hospital at the point
of death." With a stifled groan, Woods sank to the ground and buried his face in
his shaking hands. CHAPTER SIX

A CLUE AND A VERDICT

I drove home with my thoughts in a tumult. The look on Woods' face and
the vehemence of his words made me sure he was in some way responsible
for Jim's death. I walked the floor for hours trying to build up my
case against him. He had sworn to kill Jim, unless he let Helen go,
and he must have known that afternoon that not only was Jim going to
keep Helen from him, but that he had the proof with which to ruin him
forever. He had planned to have it out with Jim at the country-club,
knowing it would be a cold damp night and that few people would be out
there. He had emphatically stated that Jim should come alone and
should be there promptly at half-past eight. All those facts pointed
to the man's guilt and I felt sure that in some way I should be able to
unearth the proof. I knew I ought to sleep, but sleep was the last thing I could do. Twice I called up the hospital to inquire after Helen, but they could
tell me nothing. Had the operation been successful? Yes, she had come
through it. Would she get well? Ah, that they could not say. They
would let me know if there was any change. I sent a telegram to Jim's
uncle in the West, the only relative Jim ever corresponded with, and
told him to notify any others to whom the news would be of vital
interest. Toward five o'clock, when dawn was just graying the windows, I threw
myself on my bed. I suddenly realized I was extremely tired, yet my
brain was buzzing like a dynamo. Pictures and scenes from the last few
days flashed through my mind: the vindictive look in Helen's eyes after
the fight with Woods; that table being wheeled out of Helen's room at
the hospital, with the moaning white bundle on it; the upturned car
pricked out of the darkness by the automobile lamps, and finally, Frank
Woods' face when he heard that Helen had been in the car. With the
realization that I ought to get up and close the window, where the
morning breeze was idly flapping the curtain, I fell asleep. I awoke with a start, to find the room flooded with golden sunlight. A
glance at the clock on the mantel-shelf showed that it was after nine. My body was cramped and stiff and I felt stale and musty from having
slept in my clothes. It was only after a cold shower and a complete
change that I felt refreshed enough to pick up the threads where I had
dropped them the night before. Again, like the sudden aching of a tooth, came the heart-breaking
realization that Jim was dead. 