

Transcribed from the 1903 Longmans, Green And Co. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org

                        _MORE NEW ARABIAN NIGHTS_





                              THE DYNAMITER


                                    BY

                          ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
                                   AND
                       FANNY VAN DE GRIFT STEVENSON

                      [Picture: The Silver Library]

                             _NEW IMPRESSION_

                                * * * * *

                         LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
                        39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
                           NEW YORK AND BOMBAY

                                   1903

                          _All rights reserved_

                                * * * * *

                           _BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTE_

    _First Edition_, _April 1885_; _Reprinted May 1885_, _July 1885_. _Silver Library Edition_, _January 1895_; _Reprinted March 1897_, _July
                          1899_, _August 1903_. TO
MESSRS. COLE AND COX,
POLICE OFFICERS


_Gentlemen,--In the volume now in your hands_, _the authors have touched
upon that ugly devil of crime_, _with which it is your glory to have
contended_. _It were a waste of ink to do so in a serious spirit_. _Let
us dedicate our horror to acts of a more mingled strain_, _where crime
preserves some features of nobility_, _and where reason and humanity can
still relish the temptation_. _Horror_, _in this case_, _is due to Mr.
Parnell_: _he sits before posterity silent_, _Mr. Forster's appeal
echoing down the ages_. _Horror is due to ourselves_, _in that we have
so long coquetted with political crime_; _not seriously weighing_, _not
acutely following it from cause to consequence_; _but with a generous_,
_unfounded heat of sentiment_, _like the schoolboy with the penny tale_,
_applauding what was specious_. _When it touched ourselves_ (_truly in a
vile shape_), _we proved false to the imaginations_; _discovered_, _in a
clap_, _that crime was no less cruel and no less ugly under sounding
names_; _and recoiled from our false deities_. _But seriousness comes most in place when we are to speak of our
defenders_. _Whoever be in the right in this great and confused war of
politics_; _whatever elements of greed_, _whatever traits of the bully_,
_dishonour both parties in this inhuman contest_;--_your side_, _your
part_, _is at least pure of doubt_. _Yours is the side of the child_,
_of the breeding woman_, _of individual pity and public trust_. _If our
society were the mere kingdom of the devil_ (_as indeed it wears some of
his colours_) _it yet embraces many precious elements and many innocent
persons whom it is a glory to defend_. _Courage and devotion_, _so
common in the ranks of the police_, _so little recognised_, _so meagrely
rewarded_, _have at length found their commemoration in an historical
act_. _History_, _which will represent Mr. Parnell sitting silent under
the appeal of Mr. Forster_, _and Gordon setting forth upon his tragic
enterprise_, _will not forget Mr. Cole carrying the dynamite in his
defenceless hands_, _nor Mr. Cox coming coolly to his aid_. _ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON_

                                            _FANNY VAN DE GRIFT STEVENSON_




CONTENTS
_THE DYNAMITER_

                                               PAGE
PROLOGUE OF THE CIGAR DIVAN                       1
CHALLONER'S ADVENTURE:
   THE SQUIRE OF DAMES                           13
   STORY OF THE DESTROYING ANGEL                 27
THE SQUIRE OF DAMES (_continued_)                76
SUMMERSET'S ADVENTURE:
   THE SUPERFLUOUS MANSION                      100
   NARRATIVE OF THE SPIRITED OLD LADY           108
THE SUPERFLUOUS MANSION (_continued_)           145
   ZERO'S TALE OF THE EXPLOSIVE BOMB            195
DESBOROUGH'S ADVENTURE:
   THE BROWN BOX                                209
   STORY OF THE FAIR CUBAN                      219
THE BROWN BOX (_continued_)                     269
THE SUPERFLUOUS MANSION (_continued_)           286
EPILOGUE OF THE CIGAR DIVAN                     299

A NOTE FOR THE READER


It is within the bounds of possibility that you may take up this volume,
and yet be unacquainted with its predecessor: the first series of NEW
ARABIAN NIGHTS. The loss is yours--and mine; or to be more exact, my
publishers'. But if you are thus unlucky, the least I can do is to pass
you a hint. When you shall find a reference in the following pages to
one Theophilus Godall of the Bohemian Cigar Divan in Rupert Street, Soho,
you must be prepared to recognise, under his features, no less a person
than Prince Florizel of Bohemia, formerly one of the magnates of Europe,
now dethroned, exiled, impoverished, and embarked in the tobacco trade. R. L. S.




_PROLOGUE OF THE CIGAR DIVAN_


In the city of encounters, the Bagdad of the West, and, to be more
precise, on the broad northern pavement of Leicester Square, two young
men of five- or six-and-twenty met after years of separation. The first,
who was of a very smooth address and clothed in the best fashion,
hesitated to recognise the pinched and shabby air of his companion. 'What!' he cried, 'Paul Somerset!' 'I am indeed Paul Somerset,' returned the other, 'or what remains of him
after a well-deserved experience of poverty and law. But in you,
Challoner, I can perceive no change; and time may be said, without
hyperbole, to write no wrinkle on your azure brow.' 'All,' replied Challoner, 'is not gold that glitters. But we are here in
an ill posture for confidences, and interrupt the movement of these
ladies. Let us, if you please, find a more private corner.' 'If you will allow me to guide you,' replied Somerset, 'I will offer you
the best cigar in London.' And taking the arm of his companion, he led him in silence and at a brisk
pace to the door of a quiet establishment in Rupert Street, Soho. The
entrance was adorned with one of those gigantic Highlanders of wood which
have almost risen to the standing of antiquities; and across the
window-glass, which sheltered the usual display of pipes, tobacco, and
cigars, there ran the gilded legend: 'Bohemian Cigar Divan, by T. Godall.' The interior of the shop was small, but commodious and ornate;
the salesman grave, smiling, and urbane; and the two young men, each
puffing a select regalia, had soon taken their places on a sofa of
mouse-coloured plush and proceeded to exchange their stories. 'I am now,' said Somerset, 'a barrister; but Providence and the attorneys
have hitherto denied me the opportunity to shine. A select society at
the Cheshire Cheese engaged my evenings; my afternoons, as Mr. Godall
could testify, have been generally passed in this divan; and my mornings,
I have taken the precaution to abbreviate by not rising before twelve. At this rate, my little patrimony was very rapidly, and I am proud to
remember, most agreeably expended. Since then a gentleman, who has
really nothing else to recommend him beyond the fact of being my maternal
uncle, deals me the small sum of ten shillings a week; and if you behold
me once more revisiting the glimpses of the street lamps in my favourite
quarter, you will readily divine that I have come into a fortune.' 'I should not have supposed so,' replied Challoner. 'But doubtless I met
you on the way to your tailors.' 'It is a visit that I purpose to delay,' returned Somerset, with a smile. 'My fortune has definite limits. It consists, or rather this morning it
consisted, of one hundred pounds.' 'That is certainly odd,' said Challoner; 'yes, certainly the coincidence
is strange. I am myself reduced to the same margin.' 'You!' cried Somerset. 'And yet Solomon in all his glory--'

'Such is the fact. I am, dear boy, on my last legs,' said Challoner. 'Besides the clothes in which you see me, I have scarcely a decent
trouser in my wardrobe; and if I knew how, I would this instant set about
some sort of work or commerce. With a hundred pounds for capital, a man
should push his way.' 'It may be,' returned Somerset; 'but what to do with mine is more than I
can fancy. Mr. Godall,' he added, addressing the salesman, 'you are a
man who knows the world: what can a young fellow of reasonable education
do with a hundred pounds?' 'It depends,' replied the salesman, withdrawing his cheroot. 'The power
of money is an article of faith in which I profess myself a sceptic. A
hundred pounds will with difficulty support you for a year; with somewhat
more difficulty you may spend it in a night; and without any difficulty
at all you may lose it in five minutes on the Stock Exchange. If you are
of that stamp of man that rises, a penny would be as useful; if you
belong to those that fall, a penny would be no more useless. When I was
myself thrown unexpectedly upon the world, it was my fortune to possess
an art: I knew a good cigar. Do you know nothing, Mr. Somerset?' 'Not even law,' was the reply. 'The answer is worthy of a sage,' returned Mr. Godall. 'And you, sir,'
he continued, turning to Challoner, 'as the friend of Mr. Somerset, may I
be allowed to address you the same question?' 'Well,' replied Challoner, 'I play a fair hand at whist.' 'How many persons are there in London,' returned the salesman, 'who have
two-and-thirty teeth? Believe me, young gentleman, there are more still
who play a fair hand at whist. Whist, sir, is wide as the world; 'tis an
accomplishment like breathing. I once knew a youth who announced that he
was studying to be Chancellor of England; the design was certainly
ambitious; but I find it less excessive than that of the man who aspires
to make a livelihood by whist.' 'Dear me,' said Challoner, 'I am afraid I shall have to fall to be a
working man.' 'Fall to be a working man?' echoed Mr. Godall. 'Suppose a rural dean to
be unfrocked, does he fall to be a major? suppose a captain were
cashiered, would he fall to be a puisne judge? The ignorance of your
middle class surprises me. Outside itself, it thinks the world to lie
quite ignorant and equal, sunk in a common degradation; but to the eye of
the observer, all ranks are seen to stand in ordered hierarchies, and
each adorned with its particular aptitudes and knowledge. By the defects
of your education you are more disqualified to be a working man than to
be the ruler of an empire. The gulf, sir, is below; and the true learned
arts--those which alone are safe from the competition of insurgent
laymen--are those which give his title to the artisan.' 'This is a very pompous fellow,' said Challoner, in the ear of his
companion. 'He is immense,' said Somerset. Just then the door of the divan was opened, and a third young fellow made
his appearance, and rather bashfully requested some tobacco. He was
younger than the others; and, in a somewhat meaningless and altogether
English way, he was a handsome lad. When he had been served, and had
lighted his pipe and taken his place upon the sofa, he recalled himself
to Challoner by the name of Desborough. 'Desborough, to be sure,' cried Challoner. 'Well, Desborough, and what
do you do?' 'The fact is,' said Desborough, 'that I am doing nothing.' 'A private fortune possibly?' inquired the other. 'Well, no,' replied Desborough, rather sulkily. 'The fact is that I am
waiting for something to turn up.' 'All in the same boat!' cried Somerset. 'And have you, too, one hundred
pounds?' 'Worse luck,' said Mr. Desborough. 'This is a very pathetic sight, Mr. Godall,' said Somerset: 'Three
futiles.' 'A character of this crowded age,' returned the salesman. 'Sir,' said Somerset, 'I deny that the age is crowded; I will admit one
fact, and one fact only: that I am futile, that he is futile, and that we
are all three as futile as the devil. What am I? I have smattered law,
smattered letters, smattered geography, smattered mathematics; I have
even a working knowledge of judicial astrology; and here I stand, all
London roaring by at the street's end, as impotent as any baby. I have a
prodigious contempt for my maternal uncle; but without him, it is idle to
deny it, I should simply resolve into my elements like an unstable
mixture. I begin to perceive that it is necessary to know some one thing
to the bottom--were it only literature. And yet, sir, the man of the
world is a great feature of this age; he is possessed of an extraordinary
mass and variety of knowledge; he is everywhere at home; he has seen life
in all its phases; and it is impossible but that this great habit of
existence should bear fruit. I count myself a man of the world,
accomplished, _cap-a-pie_. So do you, Challoner. And you, Mr. Desborough?' 'Oh yes,' returned the young man. 'Well then, Mr. Godall, here we stand, three men of the world, without a
trade to cover us, but planted at the strategic centre of the universe
(for so you will allow me to call Rupert Street), in the midst of the
chief mass of people, and within ear-shot of the most continuous chink of
money on the surface of the globe. Sir, as civilised men, what do we do? I will show you. You take in a paper?' 'I take,' said Mr. Godall solemnly, 'the best paper in the world, the
_Standard_.' 'Good,' resumed Somerset. 'I now hold it in my hand, the voice of the
world, a telephone repeating all men's wants. I open it, and where my
eye first falls--well, no, not Morrison's Pills--but here, sure enough,
and but a little above, I find the joint that I was seeking; here is the
weak spot in the armour of society. Here is a want, a plaint, an offer
of substantial gratitude: "_Two hundred Pounds Reward_.--The above reward
will be paid to any person giving information as to the identity and
whereabouts of a man observed yesterday in the neighbourhood of the Green
Park. He was over six feet in height, with shoulders disproportionately
broad, close shaved, with black moustaches, and wearing a sealskin
great-coat." There, gentlemen, our fortune, if not made, is founded.' 'Do you then propose, dear boy, that we should turn detectives?' inquired
Challoner. 'Do I propose it? No, sir,' cried Somerset. 'It is reason, destiny, the
plain face of the world, that commands and imposes it. Here all our
merits tell; our manners, habit of the world, powers of conversation,
vast stores of unconnected knowledge, all that we are and have builds up
the character of the complete detective. It is, in short, the only
profession for a gentleman.' 'The proposition is perhaps excessive,' replied Challoner; 'for hitherto
I own I have regarded it as of all dirty, sneaking, and ungentlemanly
trades, the least and lowest.' 'To defend society?' asked Somerset; 'to stake one's life for others? to
deracinate occult and powerful evil? I appeal to Mr. Godall. He, at
least, as a philosophic looker-on at life, will spit upon such philistine
opinions. He knows that the policeman, as he is called upon continually
to face greater odds, and that both worse equipped and for a better
cause, is in form and essence a more noble hero than the soldier. Do
you, by any chance, deceive yourself into supposing that a general would
either ask or expect, from the best army ever marshalled, and on the most
momentous battle-field, the conduct of a common constable at Peckham
Rye?' {9}

'I did not understand we were to join the force,' said Challoner. 'Nor shall we. These are the hands; but here--here, sir, is the head,'
cried Somerset. 'Enough; it is decreed. We shall hunt down this
miscreant in the sealskin coat.' 'Suppose that we agreed,' retorted Challoner, 'you have no plan, no
knowledge; you know not where to seek for a beginning.' 'Challoner!' cried Somerset, 'is it possible that you hold the doctrine
of Free Will? And are you devoid of any tincture of philosophy, that you
should harp on such exploded fallacies? Chance, the blind Madonna of the
Pagan, rules this terrestrial bustle; and in Chance I place my sole
reliance. Chance has brought us three together; when we next separate
and go forth our several ways, Chance will continually drag before our
careless eyes a thousand eloquent clues, not to this mystery only, but to
the countless mysteries by which we live surrounded. Then comes the part
of the man of the world, of the detective born and bred. This clue,
which the whole town beholds without comprehension, swift as a cat, he
leaps upon it, makes it his, follows it with craft and passion, and from
one trifling circumstance divines a world.' 'Just so,' said Challoner; 'and I am delighted that you should recognise
these virtues in yourself. But in the meanwhile, dear boy, I own myself
incapable of joining. I was neither born nor bred as a detective, but as
a placable and very thirsty gentleman; and, for my part, I begin to weary
for a drink. As for clues and adventures, the only adventure that is
ever likely to occur to me will be an adventure with a bailiff.' 'Now there is the fallacy,' cried Somerset. 'There I catch the secret of
your futility in life. The world teems and bubbles with adventure; it
besieges you along the street: hands waving out of windows, swindlers
coming up and swearing they knew you when you were abroad, affable and
doubtful people of all sorts and conditions begging and truckling for
your notice. But not you: you turn away, you walk your seedy mill round,
you must go the dullest way. Now here, I beg of you, the next adventure
that offers itself, embrace it in with both your arms; whatever it looks,
grimy or romantic, grasp it. I will do the like; the devil is in it, but
at least we shall have fun; and each in turn we shall narrate the story
of our fortunes to my philosophic friend of the divan, the great Godall,
now hearing me with inward joy. Come, is it a bargain? Will you,
indeed, both promise to welcome every chance that offers, to plunge
boldly into every opening, and, keeping the eye wary and the head
composed, to study and piece together all that happens? Come, promise:
let me open to you the doors of the great profession of intrigue.' 'It is not much in my way,' said Challoner, 'but, since you make a point
of it, amen.' 'I don't mind promising,' said Desborough, 'but nothing will happen to
me.' 'O faithless ones!' cried Somerset. 'But at least I have your promises;
and Godall, I perceive, is transported with delight.' 'I promise myself at least much pleasure from your various narratives,'
said the salesman, with the customary calm polish of his manner. 'And now, gentlemen,' concluded Somerset, 'let us separate. I hasten to
put myself in fortune's way. Hark how, in this quiet corner, London
roars like the noise of battle; four million destinies are here
concentred; and in the strong panoply of one hundred pounds, payable to
the bearer, I am about to plunge into that web.' CHALLONER'S ADVENTURE


_THE SQUIRE OF DAMES_


Mr. Edward Challoner had set up lodgings in the suburb of Putney, where
he enjoyed a parlour and bedroom and the sincere esteem of the people of
the house. To this remote home he found himself, at a very early hour in
the morning of the next day, condemned to set forth on foot. He was a
young man of a portly habit; no lover of the exercises of the body;
bland, sedentary, patient of delay, a prop of omnibuses. In happier days
he would have chartered a cab; but these luxuries were now denied him;
and with what courage he could muster he addressed himself to walk. It was then the height of the season and the summer; the weather was
serene and cloudless; and as he paced under the blinded houses and along
the vacant streets, the chill of the dawn had fled, and some of the
warmth and all the brightness of the July day already shone upon the
city. He walked at first in a profound abstraction, bitterly reviewing
and repenting his performances at whist; but as he advanced into the
labyrinth of the south-west, his ear was gradually mastered by the
silence. Street after street looked down upon his solitary figure, house
after house echoed upon his passage with a ghostly jar, shop after shop
displayed its shuttered front and its commercial legend; and meanwhile he
steered his course, under day's effulgent dome and through this
encampment of diurnal sleepers, lonely as a ship. 'Here,' he reflected, 'if I were like my scatter-brained companion, here
were indeed the scene where I might look for an adventure. Here, in
broad day, the streets are secret as in the blackest night of January,
and in the midst of some four million sleepers, solitary as the woods of
Yucatan. If I but raise my voice I could summon up the number of an
army, and yet the grave is not more silent than this city of sleep.' He was still following these quaint and serious musings when he came into
a street of more mingled ingredients than was common in the quarter. Here, on the one hand, framed in walls and the green tops of trees, were
several of those discreet, _bijou_ residences on which propriety is apt
to look askance. Here, too, were many of the brick-fronted barracks of
the poor; a plaster cow, perhaps, serving as ensign to a dairy, or a
ticket announcing the business of the mangler. Before one such house,
that stood a little separate among walled gardens, a cat was playing with
a straw, and Challoner paused a moment, looking on this sleek and
solitary creature, who seemed an emblem of the neighbouring peace. With
the cessation of the sound of his own steps the silence fell dead; the
house stood smokeless: the blinds down, the whole machinery of life
arrested; and it seemed to Challoner that he should hear the breathing of
the sleepers. As he so stood, he was startled by a dull and jarring detonation from
within. This was followed by a monstrous hissing and simmering as from a
kettle of the bigness of St. Paul's; and at the same time from every
chink of door and window spirted an ill-smelling vapour. The cat
disappeared with a cry. Within the lodging-house feet pounded on the
stairs; the door flew back, emitting clouds of smoke; and two men and an
elegantly dressed young lady tumbled forth into the street and fled
without a word. The hissing had already ceased, the smoke was melting in
the air, the whole event had come and gone as in a dream, and still
Challoner was rooted to the spot. At last his reason and his fear awoke
together, and with the most unwonted energy he fell to running. Little by little this first dash relaxed, and presently he had resumed
his sober gait and begun to piece together, out of the confused report of
his senses, some theory of the occurrence. But the occasion of the
sounds and stench that had so suddenly assailed him, and the strange
conjunction of fugitives whom he had seen to issue from the house, were
mysteries beyond his plummet. With an obscure awe he considered them in
his mind, continuing, meanwhile, to thread the web of streets, and once
more alone in morning sunshine. In his first retreat he had entirely wandered; and now, steering vaguely
west, it was his luck to light upon an unpretending street, which
presently widened so as to admit a strip of gardens in the midst. Here
was quite a stir of birds; even at that hour, the shadow of the leaves
was grateful; instead of the burnt atmosphere of cities, there was
something brisk and rural in the air; and Challoner paced forward, his
eyes upon the pavement and his mind running upon distant scenes, till he
was recalled, upon a sudden, by a wall that blocked his further progress. This street, whose name I have forgotten, is no thoroughfare. He was not the first who had wandered there that morning; for as he
raised his eyes with an agreeable deliberation, they alighted on the
figure of a girl, in whom he was struck to recognise the third of the
incongruous fugitives. She had run there, seemingly, blindfold; the wall
had checked her career: and being entirely wearied, she had sunk upon the
ground beside the garden railings, soiling her dress among the summer
dust. Each saw the other in the same instant of time; and she, with one
wild look, sprang to her feet and began to hurry from the scene. Challoner was doubly startled to meet once more the heroine of his
adventure, and to observe the fear with which she shunned him. Pity and
alarm, in nearly equal forces, contested the possession of his mind; and
yet, in spite of both, he saw himself condemned to follow in the lady's
wake. He did so gingerly, as fearing to increase her terrors; but, tread
as lightly as he might, his footfalls eloquently echoed in the empty
street. Their sound appeared to strike in her some strong emotion; for
scarce had he begun to follow ere she paused. A second time she
addressed herself to flight; and a second time she paused. Then she
turned about, and with doubtful steps and the most attractive appearance
of timidity, drew near to the young man. He on his side continued to
advance with similar signals of distress and bashfulness. At length,
when they were but some steps apart, he saw her eyes brim over, and she
reached out both her hands in eloquent appeal. 'Are you an English gentleman?' she cried. The unhappy Challoner regarded her with consternation. He was the spirit
of fine courtesy, and would have blushed to fail in his devoirs to any
lady; but, in the other scale, he was a man averse from amorous
adventures. He looked east and west; but the houses that looked down
upon this interview remained inexorably shut; and he saw himself, though
in the full glare of the day's eye, cut off from any human intervention. His looks returned at last upon the suppliant. He remarked with
irritation that she was charming both in face and figure, elegantly
dressed and gloved; a lady undeniable; the picture of distress and
innocence; weeping and lost in the city of diurnal sleep. 'Madam,' he said, 'I protest you have no cause to fear intrusion; and if
I have appeared to follow you, the fault is in this street, which has
deceived us both.' An unmistakable relief appeared upon the lady's face. 'I might have guessed it!' she exclaimed. 'Thank you a thousand times! But at this hour, in this appalling silence, and among all these staring
windows, I am lost in terrors--oh, lost in them!' she cried, her face
blanching at the words. 'I beg you to lend me your arm,' she added with
the loveliest, suppliant inflection. 'I dare not go alone; my nerve is
gone--I had a shock, oh, what a shock! I beg of you to be my escort.' 'My dear madam,' responded Challoner heavily, 'my arm is at your
service.' 'She took it and clung to it for a moment, struggling with her sobs; and
the next, with feverish hurry, began to lead him in the direction of the
city. One thing was plain, among so much that was obscure: it was plain
her fears were genuine. Still, as she went, she spied around as if for
dangers; and now she would shiver like a person in a chill, and now
clutch his arm in hers. To Challoner her terror was at once repugnant
and infectious; it gained and mastered, while it still offended him; and
he wailed in spirit and longed for release. 'Madam,' he said at last, 'I am, of course, charmed to be of use to any
lady; but I confess I was bound in a direction opposite to that you
follow, and a word of explanation--'

'Hush!' she sobbed, 'not here--not here!' The blood of Challoner ran cold. He might have thought the lady mad; but
his memory was charged with more perilous stuff; and in view of the
detonation, the smoke and the flight of the ill-assorted trio, his mind
was lost among mysteries. So they continued to thread the maze of
streets in silence, with the speed of a guilty flight, and both thrilling
with incommunicable terrors. In time, however, and above all by their
quick pace of walking, the pair began to rise to firmer spirits; the lady
ceased to peer about the corners; and Challoner, emboldened by the
resonant tread and distant figure of a constable, returned to the charge
with more of spirit and directness. 'I thought,' said he, in the tone of conversation, 'that I had
indistinctly perceived you leaving a villa in the company of two
gentlemen.' 'Oh!' she said, 'you need not fear to wound me by the truth. You saw me
flee from a common lodging-house, and my companions were not gentlemen. In such a case, the best of compliments is to be frank.' 'I thought,' resumed Challoner, encouraged as much as he was surprised by
the spirit of her reply, 'to have perceived, besides, a certain odour. A
noise, too--I do not know to what I should compare it--'

'Silence!' she cried. 'You do not know the danger you invoke. Wait,
only wait; and as soon as we have left those streets, and got beyond the
reach of listeners, all shall be explained. Meanwhile, avoid the topic. What a sight is this sleeping city!' she exclaimed; and then, with a most
thrilling voice, '"Dear God," she quoted, "the very houses seem asleep,
and all that mighty heart is lying still."' 'I perceive, madam,' said he, 'you are a reader.' 'I am more than that,' she answered, with a sigh. 'I am a girl condemned
to thoughts beyond her age; and so untoward is my fate, that this walk
upon the arm of a stranger is like an interlude of peace.' They had come by this time to the neighbourhood of the Victoria Station
and here, at a street corner, the young lady paused, withdrew her arm
from Challoner's, and looked up and down as though in pain or indecision. Then, with a lovely change of countenance, and laying her gloved hand
upon his arm--

'What you already think of me,' she said, 'I tremble to conceive; yet I
must here condemn myself still further. Here I must leave you, and here
I beseech you to wait for my return. Do not attempt to follow me or spy
upon my actions. Suspend yet awhile your judgment of a girl as innocent
as your own sister; and do not, above all, desert me. Stranger as you
are, I have none else to look to. You see me in sorrow and great fear;
you are a gentleman, courteous and kind: and when I beg for a few
minutes' patience, I make sure beforehand you will not deny me.' Challoner grudgingly promised; and the young lady, with a grateful
eye-shot, vanished round the corner. But the force of her appeal had
been a little blunted; for the young man was not only destitute of
sisters, but of any female relative nearer than a great-aunt in Wales. Now he was alone, besides, the spell that he had hitherto obeyed began to
weaken; he considered his behaviour with a sneer; and plucking up the
spirit of revolt, he started in pursuit. The reader, if he has ever
plied the fascinating trade of the noctambulist, will not be unaware
that, in the neighbourhood of the great railway centres, certain early
taverns inaugurate the business of the day. It was into one of these
that Challoner, coming round the corner of the block, beheld his charming
companion disappear. To say he was surprised were inexact, for he had
long since left that sentiment behind him. Acute disgust and
disappointment seized upon his soul; and with silent oaths, he damned
this commonplace enchantress. She had scarce been gone a second, ere the
swing-doors reopened, and she appeared again in company with a young man
of mean and slouching attire. For some five or six exchanges they
conversed together with an animated air; then the fellow shouldered again
into the tap; and the young lady, with something swifter than a walk,
retraced her steps towards Challoner. He saw her coming, a miracle of
grace; her ankle, as she hurried, flashing from her dress; her movements
eloquent of speed and youth; and though he still entertained some
thoughts of flight, they grew miserably fainter as the distance lessened. Against mere beauty he was proof: it was her unmistakable gentility that
now robbed him of the courage of his cowardice. With a proved
adventuress he had acted strictly on his right; with one who, in spite of
all, he could not quite deny to be a lady, he found himself disarmed. At
the very corner from whence he had spied upon her interview, she came
upon him, still transfixed, and--'Ah!' she cried, with a bright flush of
colour. 'Ah! Ungenerous!' The sharpness of the attack somewhat restored the Squire of Dames to the
possession of himself. 'Madam,' he returned, with a fair show of stoutness, 'I do not think that
hitherto you can complain of any lack of generosity; I have suffered
myself to be led over a considerable portion of the metropolis; and if I
now request you to discharge me of my office of protector, you have
friends at hand who will be glad of the succession.' She stood a moment dumb. 'It is well,' she said. 'Go! go, and may God help me! You have seen
me--me, an innocent girl! fleeing from a dire catastrophe and haunted by
sinister men; and neither pity, curiosity, nor honour move you to await
my explanation or to help in my distress. Go!' she repeated. 'I am lost
indeed.' And with a passionate gesture she turned and fled along the
street. Challoner observed her retreat and disappear, an almost intolerable sense
of guilt contending with the profound sense that he was being gulled. She was no sooner gone than the first of these feelings took the upper
hand; he felt, if he had done her less than justice, that his conduct was
a perfect model of the ungracious; the cultured tone of her voice, her
choice of language, and the elegant decorum of her movements, cried out
aloud against a harsh construction; and between penitence and curiosity
he began slowly to follow in her wake. At the corner he had her once
more full in view. Her speed was failing like a stricken bird's. Even
as he looked, she threw her arm out gropingly, and fell and leaned
against the wall. At the spectacle, Challoner's fortitude gave way. In
a few strides he overtook her and, for the first time removing his hat,
assured her in the most moving terms of his entire respect and firm
desire to help her. He spoke at first unheeded; but gradually it
appeared that she began to comprehend his words; she moved a little, and
drew herself upright; and finally, as with a sudden movement of
forgiveness, turned on the young man a countenance in which reproach and
gratitude were mingled. 'Ah, madam,' he cried, 'use me as you will!' And once more, but now with a great air of deference, he offered her the
conduct of his arm. She took it with a sigh that struck him to the
heart; and they began once more to trace the deserted streets. But now
her steps, as though exhausted by emotion, began to linger on the way;
she leaned the more heavily upon his arm; and he, like the parent bird,
stooped fondly above his drooping convoy. Her physical distress was not
accompanied by any failing of her spirits; and hearing her strike so soon
into a playful and charming vein of talk, Challoner could not
sufficiently admire the elasticity of his companion's nature. 'Let me
forget,' she had said, 'for one half hour, let me forget;' and sure
enough, with the very word, her sorrows appeared to be forgotten. Before
every house she paused, invented a name for the proprietor, and sketched
his character: here lived the old general whom she was to marry on the
fifth of the next month, there was the mansion of the rich widow who had
set her heart on Challoner; and though she still hung wearily on the
young man's arm, her laughter sounded low and pleasant in his ears. 'Ah,' she sighed, by way of commentary, 'in such a life as mine I must
seize tight hold of any happiness that I can find.' When they arrived, in this leisurely manner, at the head of Grosvenor
Place, the gates of the park were opening and the bedraggled company of
night-walkers were being at last admitted into that paradise of lawns. Challoner and his companion followed the movement, and walked for awhile
in silence in that tatterdemalion crowd; but as one after another, weary
with the night's patrolling of the city pavement, sank upon the benches
or wandered into separate paths, the vast extent of the park had soon
utterly swallowed up the last of these intruders; and the pair proceeded
on their way alone in the grateful quiet of the morning. Presently they came in sight of a bench, standing very open on a mound of
turf. The young lady looked about her with relief. 'Here,' she said, 'here at last we are secure from listeners. Here,
then, you shall learn and judge my history. I could not bear that we
should part, and that you should still suppose your kindness squandered
upon one who was unworthy.' Thereupon she sat down upon the bench, and motioning Challoner to take a
place immediately beside her, began in the following words, and with the
greatest appearance of enjoyment, to narrate the story of her life. _STORY OF THE DESTROYING ANGEL_


My father was a native of England, son of a cadet of a great, ancient,
but untitled family; and by some event, fault or misfortune, he was
driven to flee from the land of his birth and to lay aside the name of
his ancestors. He sought the States; and instead of lingering in
effeminate cities, pushed at once into the far West with an exploring
party of frontiersmen. He was no ordinary traveller; for he was not only
brave and impetuous by character, but learned in many sciences, and above
all in botany, which he particularly loved. Thus it fell that, before
many months, Fremont himself, the nominal leader of the troop, courted
and bowed to his opinion. They had pushed, as I have said, into the still unknown regions of the
West. For some time they followed the track of Mormon caravans, guiding
themselves in that vast and melancholy desert by the skeletons of men and
animals. Then they inclined their route a little to the north, and,
losing even these dire memorials, came into a country of forbidding
stillness. I have often heard my father dwell upon the features of that ride: rock,
cliff, and barren moor alternated; the streams were very far between; and
neither beast nor bird disturbed the solitude. On the fortieth day they
had already run so short of food that it was judged advisable to call a
halt and scatter upon all sides to hunt. A great fire was built, that
its smoke might serve to rally them; and each man of the party mounted
and struck off at a venture into the surrounding desert. My father rode for many hours with a steep range of cliffs upon the one
hand, very black and horrible; and upon the other an unwatered vale
dotted with boulders like the site of some subverted city. At length he
found the slot of a great animal, and from the claw-marks and the hair
among the brush, judged that he was on the track of a cinnamon bear of
most unusual size. He quickened the pace of his steed, and still
following the quarry, came at last to the division of two watersheds. On
the far side the country was exceeding intricate and difficult, heaped
with boulders, and dotted here and there with a few pines, which seemed
to indicate the neighbourhood of water. Here, then, he picketed his
horse, and relying on his trusty rifle, advanced alone into that
wilderness. Presently, in the great silence that reigned, he was aware of the sound
of running water to his right; and leaning in that direction, was
rewarded by a scene of natural wonder and human pathos strangely
intermixed. The stream ran at the bottom of a narrow and winding
passage, whose wall-like sides of rock were sometimes for miles together
unscalable by man. The water, when the stream was swelled with rains,
must have filled it from side to side; the sun's rays only plumbed it in
the hour of noon; the wind, in that narrow and damp funnel, blew
tempestuously. And yet, in the bottom of this den, immediately below my
father's eyes as he leaned over the margin of the cliff, a party of some
half a hundred men, women, and children lay scattered uneasily among the
rocks. They lay some upon their backs, some prone, and not one stirring;
their upturned faces seemed all of an extraordinary paleness and
emaciation; and from time to time, above the washing of the stream, a
faint sound of moaning mounted to my father's ears. While he thus looked, an old man got staggering to his feet, unwound his
blanket, and laid it, with great gentleness, on a young girl who sat hard
by propped against a rock. The girl did not seem to be conscious of the
act; and the old man, after having looked upon her with the most engaging
pity, returned to his former bed and lay down again uncovered on the
turf. But the scene had not passed without observation even in that
starving camp. From the very outskirts of the party, a man with a white
beard and seemingly of venerable years, rose upon his knees, and came
crawling stealthily among the sleepers towards the girl; and judge of my
father's indignation, when he beheld this cowardly miscreant strip from
her both the coverings and return with them to his original position. Here he lay down for a while below his spoils, and, as my father
imagined, feigned to be asleep; but presently he had raised himself again
upon one elbow, looked with sharp scrutiny at his companions, and then
swiftly carried his hand into his bosom and thence to his mouth. By the
movement of his jaws he must be eating; in that camp of famine he had
reserved a store of nourishment; and while his companions lay in the
stupor of approaching death, secretly restored his powers. My father was so incensed at what he saw that he raised his rifle; and
but for an accident, he has often declared, he would have shot the fellow
dead upon the spot. How different would then have been my history! But
it was not to be: even as he raised the barrel, his eye lighted on the
bear, as it crawled along a ledge some way below him; and ceding to the
hunters instinct, it was at the brute, not at the man, that he discharged
his piece. The bear leaped and fell into a pool of the river; the canyon
re-echoed the report; and in a moment the camp was afoot. With cries
that were scarce human, stumbling, falling and throwing each other down,
these starving people rushed upon the quarry; and before my father,
climbing down by the ledge, had time to reach the level of the stream,
many were already satisfying their hunger on the raw flesh, and a fire
was being built by the more dainty. His arrival was for some time unremarked. He stood in the midst of these
tottering and clay-faced marionettes; he was surrounded by their cries;
but their whole soul was fixed on the dead carcass; even those who were
too weak to move, lay, half-turned over, with their eyes riveted upon the
bear; and my father, seeing himself stand as though invisible in the
thick of this dreary hubbub, was seized with a desire to weep. A touch
upon the arm restrained him. Turning about, he found himself face to
face with the old man he had so nearly killed; and yet, at the second
glance, recognised him for no old man at all, but one in the full
strength of his years, and of a strong, speaking, and intellectual
countenance stigmatised by weariness and famine. He beckoned my father
near the cliff, and there, in the most private whisper, begged for
brandy. My father looked at him with scorn: 'You remind me,' he said,
'of a neglected duty. Here is my flask; it contains enough, I trust, to
revive the women of your party; and I will begin with her whom I saw you
robbing of her blankets.' And with that, not heeding his appeals, my
father turned his back upon the egoist. The girl still lay reclined against the rock; she lay too far sunk in the
first stage of death to have observed the bustle round her couch; but
when my father had raised her head, put the flask to her lips, and forced
or aided her to swallow some drops of the restorative, she opened her
languid eyes and smiled upon him faintly. Never was there a smile of a
more touching sweetness; never were eyes more deeply violet, more
honestly eloquent of the soul! I speak with knowledge, for these were
the same eyes that smiled upon me in the cradle. From her who was to be
his wife, my father, still jealously watched and followed by the man with
the grey beard, carried his attentions to all the women of the party, and
gave the last drainings of his flask to those among the men who seemed in
the most need. 'Is there none left? not a drop for me?' said the man with the beard. 'Not one drop,' replied my father; 'and if you find yourself in want, let
me counsel you to put your hand into the pocket of your coat.' 'Ah!' cried the other, 'you misjudge me. You think me one who clings to
life for selfish and commonplace considerations. But let me tell you,
that were all this caravan to perish, the world would but be lightened of
a weight. These are but human insects, pullulating, thick as May-flies,
in the slums of European cities, whom I myself have plucked from
degradation and misery, from the dung-heap and gin-palace door. And you
compare their lives with mine!' 'You are then a Mormon missionary?' asked my father. 'Oh!' cried the man, with a strange smile, 'a Mormon missionary if you
will! I value not the title. Were I no more than that, I could have
died without a murmur. But with my life as a physician is bound up the
knowledge of great secrets and the future of man. This it was, when we
missed the caravan, tried for a short cut and wandered to this desolate
ravine, that ate into my soul, and, in five days, has changed my beard
from ebony to silver.' 'And you are a physician,' mused my father, looking on his face, 'bound
by oath to succour man in his distresses.' 'Sir,' returned the Mormon, 'my name is Grierson: you will hear that name
again; and you will then understand that my duty was not to this caravan
of paupers, but to mankind at large.' My father turned to the remainder of the party, who were now sufficiently
revived to hear; told them that he would set off at once to bring help
from his own party; 'and,' he added, 'if you be again reduced to such
extremities, look round you, and you will see the earth strewn with
assistance. Here, for instance, growing on the under side of fissures in
this cliff, you will perceive a yellow moss. Trust me, it is both edible
and excellent.' 'Ha!' said Doctor Grierson, 'you know botany!' 'Not I alone,' returned my father, lowering his voice; 'for see where
these have been scraped away. Am I right? Was that your secret store?' My father's comrades, he found, when he returned to the signal-fire, had
made a good day's hunting. They were thus the more easily persuaded to
extend assistance to the Mormon caravan; and the next day beheld both
parties on the march for the frontiers of Utah. The distance to be
traversed was not great; but the nature of the country, and the
difficulty of procuring food, extended the time to nearly three weeks;
and my father had thus ample leisure to know and appreciate the girl whom
he had succoured. I will call my mother Lucy. Her family name I am not
at liberty to mention; it is one you would know well. By what series of
undeserved calamities this innocent flower of maidenhood, lovely, refined
by education, ennobled by the finest taste, was thus cast among the
horrors of a Mormon caravan, I must not stay to tell you. Let it
suffice, that even in these untoward circumstances, she found a heart
worthy of her own. The ardour of attachment which united my father and
mother was perhaps partly due to the strange manner of their meeting; it
knew, at least, no bounds either divine or human; my father, for her
sake, determined to renounce his ambitions and abjure his faith; and a
week had not yet passed upon the march before he had resigned from his
party, accepted the Mormon doctrine, and received the promise of my
mother's hand on the arrival of the party at Salt Lake. The marriage took place, and I was its only offspring. My father
prospered exceedingly in his affairs, remained faithful to my mother; and
though you may wonder to hear it, I believe there were few happier homes
in any country than that in which I saw the light and grew to girlhood. We were, indeed, and in spite of all our wealth, avoided as heretics and
half-believers by the more precise and pious of the faithful: Young
himself, that formidable tyrant, was known to look askance upon my
father's riches; but of this I had no guess. I dwelt, indeed, under the
Mormon system, with perfect innocence and faith. Some of our friends had
many wives; but such was the custom; and why should it surprise me more
than marriage itself? From time to time one of our rich acquaintances
would disappear, his family be broken up, his wives and houses shared
among the elders of the Church, and his memory only recalled with bated
breath and dreadful headshakings. When I had been very still, and my
presence perhaps was forgotten, some such topic would arise among my
elders by the evening fire; I would see them draw the closer together and
look behind them with scared eyes; and I might gather from their
whisperings how some one, rich, honoured, healthy, and in the prime of
his days, some one, perhaps, who had taken me on his knees a week before,
had in one hour been spirited from home and family, and vanished like an
image from a mirror, leaving not a print behind. It was terrible,
indeed; but so was death, the universal law. And even if the talk should
wax still bolder, full of ominous silences and nods, and I should hear
named in a whisper the Destroying Angels, how was a child to understand
these mysteries? I heard of a Destroying Angel as some more happy child
might hear in England of a bishop or a rural dean, with vague respect and
without the wish for further information. Life anywhere, in society as
in nature, rests upon dread foundations; I beheld safe roads, a garden
blooming in the desert, pious people crowding to worship; I was aware of
my parents' tenderness and all the harmless luxuries of my existence; and
why should I pry beneath this honest seeming surface for the mysteries on
which it stood? We dwelt originally in the city; but at an early date we moved to a
beautiful house in a green dingle, musical with splashing water, and
surrounded on almost every side by twenty miles of poisonous and rocky
desert. The city was thirty miles away; there was but one road, which
went no further than my father's door; the rest were bridle-tracks
impassable in winter; and we thus dwelt in a solitude inconceivable to
the European. Our only neighbour was Dr. Grierson. To my young eyes,
after the hair-oiled, chin-bearded elders of the city, and the
ill-favoured and mentally stunted women of their harems, there was
something agreeable in the correct manner, the fine bearing, the thin
white hair and beard, and the piercing looks of the old doctor. Yet,
though he was almost our only visitor, I never wholly overcame a sense of
fear in his presence; and this disquietude was rather fed by the awful
solitude in which he lived and the obscurity that hung about his
occupations. His house was but a mile or two from ours, but very
differently placed. It stood overlooking the road on the summit of a
steep slope, and planted close against a range of overhanging bluffs. Nature, you would say, had here desired to imitate the works of man; for
the slope was even, like the glacis of a fort, and the cliffs of a
constant height, like the ramparts of a city. Not even spring could
change one feature of that desolate scene; and the windows looked down
across a plain, snowy with alkali, to ranges of cold stone sierras on the
north. Twice or thrice I remember passing within view of this forbidding
residence; and seeing it always shuttered, smokeless, and deserted, I
remarked to my parents that some day it would certainly be robbed. 'Ah, no,' said my father, 'never robbed;' and I observed a strange
conviction in his tone. At last, and not long before the blow fell on my unhappy family, I
chanced to see the doctor's house in a new light. My father was ill; my
mother confined to his bedside; and I was suffered to go, under the
charge of our driver, to the lonely house some twenty miles away, where
our packages were left for us. The horse cast a shoe; night overtook us
halfway home; and it was well on for three in the morning when the driver
and I, alone in a light waggon, came to that part of the road which ran
below the doctor's house. The moon swam clear; the cliffs and mountains
in this strong light lay utterly deserted; but the house, from its
station on the top of the long slope and close under the bluff, not only
shone abroad from every window like a place of festival, but from the
great chimney at the west end poured forth a coil of smoke so thick and
so voluminous, that it hung for miles along the windless night air, and
its shadow lay far abroad in the moonlight upon the glittering alkali. As we continued to draw near, besides, a regular and panting throb began
to divide the silence. First it seemed to me like the beating of a
heart; and next it put into my mind the thought of some giant, smothered
under mountains and still, with incalculable effort, fetching breath. I
had heard of the railway, though I had not seen it, and I turned to ask
the driver if this resembled it. But some look in his eye, some pallor,
whether of fear or moonlight on his face, caused the words to die upon my
lips. We continued, therefore, to advance in silence, till we were close
below the lighted house; when suddenly, without one premonitory rustle,
there burst forth a report of such a bigness that it shook the earth and
set the echoes of the mountains thundering from cliff to cliff. A pillar
of amber flame leaped from the chimney-top and fell in multitudes of
sparks; and at the same time the lights in the windows turned for one
instant ruby red and then expired. The driver had checked his horse
instinctively, and the echoes were still rumbling farther off among the
mountains, when there broke from the now darkened interior a series of
yells--whether of man or woman it was impossible to guess--the door flew
open, and there ran forth into the moonlight, at the top of the long
slope, a figure clad in white, which began to dance and leap and throw
itself down, and roll as if in agony, before the house. I could no more
restrain my cries; the driver laid his lash about the horse's flank, and
we fled up the rough track at the peril of our lives; and did not draw
rein till, turning the corner of the mountain, we beheld my father's
ranch and deep, green groves and gardens, sleeping in the tranquil light. This was the one adventure of my life, until my father had climbed to the
very topmost point of material prosperity, and I myself had reached the
age of seventeen. I was still innocent and merry like a child; tended my
garden or ran upon the hills in glad simplicity; gave not a thought to
coquetry or to material cares; and if my eye rested on my own image in a
mirror or some sylvan spring, it was to seek and recognise the features
of my parents. But the fears which had long pressed on others were now
to be laid on my youth. I had thrown myself, one sultry, cloudy
afternoon, on a divan; the windows stood open on the verandah, where my
mother sat with her embroidery; and when my father joined her from the
garden, their conversation, clearly audible to me, was of so startling a
nature that it held me enthralled where I lay. 'The blow has come,' my father said, after a long pause. I could hear my mother start and turn, but in words she made no reply. 'Yes,' continued my father, 'I have received to-day a list of all that I
possess; of all, I say; of what I have lent privately to men whose lips
are sealed with terror; of what I have buried with my own hand on the
bare mountain, when there was not a bird in heaven. Does the air, then,
carry secrets? Are the hills of glass? Do the stones we tread upon
preserve the footprint to betray us? Oh, Lucy, Lucy, that we should have
come to such a country!' 'But this,' returned my mother, 'is no very new or very threatening
event. You are accused of some concealment. You will pay more taxes in
the future, and be mulcted in a fine. It is disquieting, indeed, to find
our acts so spied upon, and the most private known. But is this new? Have we not long feared and suspected every blade of grass?' 'Ay, and our shadows!' cried my father. 'But all this is nothing. Here
is the letter that accompanied the list.' I heard my mother turn the pages, and she was some time silent. 'I see,' she said at last; and then, with the tone of one reading: '"From
a believer so largely blessed by Providence with this world's goods,"'
she continued, '"the Church awaits in confidence some signal mark of
piety." There lies the sting. Am I not right? These are the words you
fear?' 'These are the words,' replied my father. 'Lucy, you remember Priestley? Two days before he disappeared, he carried me to the summit of an
isolated butte; we could see around us for ten miles; sure, if in any
quarter of this land a man were safe from spies, it were in such a
station; but it was in the very ague-fit of terror that he told me, and
that I heard, his story. He had received a letter such as this; and he
submitted to my approval an answer, in which he offered to resign a third
of his possessions. I conjured him, as he valued life, to raise his
offering; and, before we parted, he had doubled the amount. Well, two
days later he was gone--gone from the chief street of the city in the
hour of noon--and gone for ever. O God!' cried my father, 'by what art
do they thus spirit out of life the solid body? What death do they
command that leaves no traces? that this material structure, these strong
arms, this skeleton that can resist the grave for centuries, should be
thus reft in a moment from the world of sense? A horror dwells in that
thought more awful than mere death.' 'Is there no hope in Grierson?' asked my mother. 'Dismiss the thought,' replied my father. 'He now knows all that I can
teach, and will do naught to save me. His power, besides, is small, his
own danger not improbably more imminent than mine; for he, too, lives
apart; he leaves his wives neglected and unwatched; he is openly cited
for an unbeliever; and unless he buys security at a more awful price--but
no; I will not believe it: I have no love for him, but I will not believe
it.' 'Believe what?' asked my mother; and then, with a change of note, 'But
oh, what matters it?' she cried. 'Abimelech, there is but one way open:
we must fly!' 'It is in vain,' returned my father. 'I should but involve you in my
fate. To leave this land is hopeless: we are closed in it as men are
closed in life; and there is no issue but the grave.' 'We can but die then,' replied my mother. 'Let us at least die together. Let not Asenath {43} and myself survive you. Think to what a fate we
should be doomed!' My father was unable to resist her tender violence; and though I could
see he nourished not one spark of hope, he consented to desert his whole
estate, beyond some hundreds of dollars that he had by him at the moment,
and to flee that night, which promised to be dark and cloudy. As soon as
the servants were asleep, he was to load two mules with provisions; two
others were to carry my mother and myself; and, striking through the
mountains by an unfrequented trail, we were to make a fair stroke for
liberty and life. As soon as they had thus decided, I showed myself at
the window, and, owning that I had heard all, assured them that they
could rely on my prudence and devotion. I had no fear, indeed, but to
show myself unworthy of my birth; I held my life in my hand without
alarm; and when my father, weeping upon my neck, had blessed Heaven for
the courage of his child, it was with a sentiment of pride and some of
the joy that warriors take in war, that I began to look forward to the
perils of our flight. Before midnight, under an obscure and starless heaven, we had left far
behind us the plantations of the valley, and were mounting a certain
canyon in the hills, narrow, encumbered with great rocks, and echoing
with the roar of a tumultuous torrent. Cascade after cascade thundered
and hung up its flag of whiteness in the night, or fanned our faces with
the wet wind of its descent. The trail was breakneck, and led to
famine-guarded deserts; it had been long since deserted for more
practicable routes; and it was now a part of the world untrod from year
to year by human footing. Judge of our dismay, when turning suddenly an
angle of the cliffs, we found a bright bonfire blazing by itself under an
impending rock; and on the face of the rock, drawn very rudely with
charred wood, the great Open Eye which is the emblem of the Mormon faith. We looked upon each other in the firelight; my mother broke into a
passion of tears; but not a word was said. The mules were turned about;
and leaving that great eye to guard the lonely canyon, we retraced our
steps in silence. Day had not yet broken ere we were once more at home,
condemned beyond reprieve. What answer my father sent I was not told; but two days later, a little
before sundown, I saw a plain, honest-looking man ride slowly up the road
in a great pother of dust. He was clad in homespun, with a broad straw
hat; wore a patriarchal beard; and had an air of a simple rustic farmer,
that was, in my eyes, very reassuring. He was, indeed, a very honest man
and pious Mormon; with no liking for his errand, though neither he nor
any one in Utah dared to disobey; and it was with every mark of
diffidence that he had had himself announced as Mr. Aspinwall, and
entered the room where our unhappy family was gathered. My mother and
me, he awkwardly enough dismissed; and as soon as he was alone with my
father laid before him a blank signature of President Young's, and
offered him a choice of services: either to set out as a missionary to
the tribes about the White Sea, or to join the next day, with a party of
Destroying Angels, in the massacre of sixty German immigrants. The last,
of course, my father could not entertain, and the first he regarded as a
pretext: even if he could consent to leave his wife defenceless, and to
collect fresh victims for the tyranny under which he was himself
oppressed, he felt sure he would never be suffered to return. He refused
both; and Aspinwall, he said, betrayed sincere emotion, part religious,
at the spectacle of such disobedience, but part human, in pity for my
father and his family. He besought him to reconsider his decision; and
at length, finding he could not prevail, gave him till the moon rose to
settle his affairs, and say farewell to wife and daughter. 'For,' said
he, 'then, at the latest, you must ride with me.' I dare not dwell upon the hours that followed: they fled all too fast;
and presently the moon out-topped the eastern range, and my father and
Mr. Aspinwall set forth, side by side, on their nocturnal journey. My
mother, though still bearing an heroic countenance, had hastened to shut
herself in her apartment, thenceforward solitary; and I, alone in the
dark house, and consumed by grief and apprehension, made haste to saddle
my Indian pony, to ride up to the corner of the mountain, and to enjoy
one farewell sight of my departing father. The two men had set forth at
a deliberate pace; nor was I long behind them, when I reached the point
of view. I was the more amazed to see no moving creature in the
landscape. The moon, as the saying is, shone bright as day; and nowhere,
under the whole arch of night, was there a growing tree, a bush, a farm,
a patch of tillage, or any evidence of man, but one. From the corner
where I stood, a rugged bastion of the line of bluffs concealed the
doctor's house; and across the top of that projection the soft night wind
carried and unwound about the hills a coil of sable smoke. What fuel
could produce a vapour so sluggish to dissipate in that dry air, or what
furnace pour it forth so copiously, I was unable to conceive; but I knew
well enough that it came from the doctor's chimney; I saw well enough
that my father had already disappeared; and in despite of reason, I
connected in my mind the loss of that dear protector with the ribbon of
foul smoke that trailed along the mountains. Days passed, and still my mother and I waited in vain for news; a week
went by, a second followed, but we heard no word of the father and
husband. As smoke dissipates, as the image glides from the mirror, so in
the ten or twenty minutes that I had spent in getting my horse and
following upon his trail, had that strong and brave man vanished out of
life. Hope, if any hope we had, fled with every hour; the worst was now
certain for my father, the worst was to be dreaded for his defenceless
family. Without weakness, with a desperate calm at which I marvel when I
look back upon it, the widow and the orphan awaited the event. On the
last day of the third week we rose in the morning to find ourselves alone
in the house, alone, so far as we searched, on the estate; all our
attendants, with one accord, had fled: and as we knew them to be
gratefully devoted, we drew the darkest intimations from their flight. The day passed, indeed, without event; but in the fall of the evening we
were called at last into the verandah by the approaching clink of horse's
hoofs. The doctor, mounted on an Indian pony, rode into the garden, dismounted,
and saluted us. He seemed much more bent, and his hair more silvery than
ever; but his demeanour was composed, serious, and not unkind. 'Madam,' said he, 'I am come upon a weighty errand; and I would have you
recognise it as an effect of kindness in the President, that he should
send as his ambassador your only neighbour and your husband's oldest
friend in Utah.' 'Sir,' said my mother, 'I have but one concern, one thought. You know
well what it is. Speak: my husband?' 'Madam,' returned the doctor, taking a chair on the verandah, 'if you
were a silly child, my position would now be painfully embarrassing. You
are, on the other hand, a woman of great intelligence and fortitude: you
have, by my forethought, been allowed three weeks to draw your own
conclusions and to accept the inevitable. Farther words from me are, I
conceive, superfluous.' My mother was as pale as death, and trembled like a reed; I gave her my
hand, and she kept it in the folds of her dress and wrung it till I could
have cried aloud. 'Then, sir,' said she at last, 'you speak to deaf
ears. If this be indeed so, what have I to do with errands? What do I
ask of Heaven but to die?' 'Come,' said the doctor, 'command yourself. I bid you dismiss all
thoughts of your late husband, and bring a clear mind to bear upon your
own future and the fate of that young girl.' 'You bid me dismiss--' began my mother. 'Then you know!' she cried. 'I know,' replied the doctor. 'You know?' broke out the poor woman. 'Then it was you who did the deed! I tear off the mask, and with dread and loathing see you as you are--you,
whom the poor fugitive beholds in nightmares, and awakes raving--you, the
Destroying Angel!' 'Well, madam, and what then?' returned the doctor. 'Have not my fate and
yours been similar? Are we not both immured in this strong prison of
Utah? Have you not tried to flee, and did not the Open Eye confront you
in the canyon? Who can escape the watch of that unsleeping eye of Utah? Not I, at least. Horrible tasks have, indeed, been laid upon me; and the
most ungrateful was the last; but had I refused my offices, would that
have spared your husband? You know well it would not. I, too, had
perished along with him; nor would I have been able to alleviate his last
moments, nor could I to-day have stood between his family and the hand of
Brigham Young.' 'Ah!' cried I, 'and could you purchase life by such concessions?' 'Young lady,' answered the doctor, 'I both could and did; and you will
live to thank me for that baseness. You have a spirit, Asenath, that it
pleases me to recognise. But we waste time. Mr. Fonblanque's estate
reverts, as you doubtless imagine, to the Church; but some part of it has
been reserved for him who is to marry the family; and that person, I
should perhaps tell you without more delay, is no other than myself.' At this odious proposal my mother and I cried out aloud, and clung
together like lost souls. 'It is as I supposed,' resumed the doctor, with the same measured
utterance. 'You recoil from this arrangement. Do you expect me to
convince you? You know very well that I have never held the Mormon view
of women. Absorbed in the most arduous studies, I have left the
slatterns whom they call my wives to scratch and quarrel among
themselves; of me, they have had nothing but my purse; such was not the
union I desired, even if I had the leisure to pursue it. No: you need
not, madam, and my old friend'--and here the doctor rose and bowed with
something of gallantry--'you need not apprehend my importunities. On the
contrary, I am rejoiced to read in you a Roman spirit; and if I am
obliged to bid you follow me at once, and that in the name, not of my
wish, but of my orders, I hope it will be found that we are of a common
mind.' So, bidding us dress for the road, he took a lamp (for the night had now
fallen) and set off to the stable to prepare our horses. 'What does it mean?--what will become of us?' I cried. 'Not that, at least,' replied my mother, shuddering. 'So far we can
trust him. I seem to read among his words a certain tragic promise. Asenath, if I leave you, if I die, you will not forget your miserable
parents?' Thereupon we fell to cross-purposes: I beseeching her to explain her
words; she putting me by, and continuing to recommend the doctor for a
friend. 'The doctor!' I cried at last; 'the man who killed my father?' 'Nay,' said she, 'let us be just. I do believe before, Heaven, he played
the friendliest part. And he alone, Asenath, can protect you in this
land of death.' At this the doctor returned, leading our two horses; and when we were all
in the saddle, he bade me ride on before, as he had matter to discuss
with Mrs. Fonblanque. They came at a foot's pace, eagerly conversing in
a whisper; and presently after the moon rose and showed them looking
eagerly in each other's faces as they went, my mother laying her hand
upon the doctor's arm, and the doctor himself, against his usual custom,
making vigorous gestures of protest or asseveration. At the foot of the track which ascended the talus of the mountain to his
door, the doctor overtook me at a trot. 'Here,' he said, 'we shall dismount; and as your mother prefers to be
alone, you and I shall walk together to my house.' 'Shall I see her again?' I asked. 'I give you my word,' he said, and helped me to alight. 'We leave the
horses here,' he added. 'There are no thieves in this stone wilderness.' The track mounted gradually, keeping the house in view. The windows were
once more bright; the chimney once more vomited smoke; but the most
absolute silence reigned, and, but for the figure of my mother very
slowly following in our wake, I felt convinced there was no human soul
within a range of miles. At the thought, I looked upon the doctor,
gravely walking by my side, with his bowed shoulders and white hair, and
then once more at his house, lit up and pouring smoke like some
industrious factory. And then my curiosity broke forth. 'In Heaven's
name,' I cried, 'what do you make in this inhuman desert?' He looked at me with a peculiar smile, and answered with an evasion--

'This is not the first time,' said he, 'that you have seen my furnaces
alight. One morning, in the small hours, I saw you driving past; a
delicate experiment miscarried; and I cannot acquit myself of having
startled either your driver or the horse that drew you.' 'What!' cried I, beholding again in fancy the antics of the figure,
'could that be you?' 'It was I,' he replied; 'but do not fancy that I was mad. I was in
agony. I had been scalded cruelly.' We were now near the house, which, unlike the ordinary houses of the
country, was built of hewn stone and very solid. Stone, too, was its
foundation, stone its background. Not a blade of grass sprouted among
the broken mineral about the walls, not a flower adorned the windows. Over the door, by way of sole adornment, the Mormon Eye was rudely
sculptured; I had been brought up to view that emblem from my childhood;
but since the night of our escape, it had acquired a new significance,
and set me shrinking. The smoke rolled voluminously from the chimney
top, its edges ruddy with the fire; and from the far corner of the
building, near the ground, angry puffs of steam shone snow-white in the
moon and vanished. The doctor opened the door and paused upon the threshold. 'You ask me
what I make here,' he observed. 'Two things: Life and Death.' And he
motioned me to enter. 'I shall await my mother,' said I. 'Child,' he replied, 'look at me: am I not old and broken? Of us two,
which is the stronger, the young maiden or the withered man?' I bowed, and passing by him, entered a vestibule or kitchen, lit by a
good fire and a shaded reading-lamp. It was furnished only with a
dresser, a rude table, and some wooden benches; and on one of these the
doctor motioned me to take a seat; and passing by another door into the
interior of the house, he left me to myself. Presently I heard the jar
of iron from the far end of the building; and this was followed by the
same throbbing noise that had startled me in the valley, but now so near
at hand as to be menacing by loudness, and even to shake the house with
every recurrence of the stroke. I had scarce time to master my alarm
when the doctor returned, and almost in the same moment my mother
appeared upon the threshold. But how am I to describe to you the peace
and ravishment of that face? Years seemed to have passed over her head
during that brief ride, and left her younger and fairer; her eyes shone,
her smile went to my heart; she seemed no more a woman but the angel of
ecstatic tenderness. I ran to her in a kind of terror; but she shrank a
little back and laid her finger on her lips, with something arch and yet
unearthly. To the doctor, on the contrary, she reached out her hand as
to a friend and helper; and so strange was the scene that I forgot to be
offended. 'Lucy,' said the doctor, 'all is prepared. Will you go alone, or shall
your daughter follow us?' 'Let Asenath come,' she answered, 'dear Asenath! At this hour, when I am
purified of fear and sorrow, and already survive myself and my
affections, it is for your sake, and not for mine, that I desire her
presence. Were she shut out, dear friend, it is to be feared she might
misjudge your kindness.' 'Mother,' I cried wildly, 'mother, what is this?' But my mother, with her radiant smile, said only 'Hush!' as though I were
a child again, and tossing in some fever-fit; and the doctor bade me be
silent and trouble her no more. 'You have made a choice,' he continued,
addressing my mother, 'that has often strangely tempted me. The two
extremes: all, or else nothing; never, or this very hour upon the
clock--these have been my incongruous desires. But to accept the middle
term, to be content with a half-gift, to flicker awhile and to burn
out--never for an hour, never since I was born, has satisfied the
appetite of my ambition.' He looked upon my mother fixedly, much of
admiration and some touch of envy in his eyes; then, with a profound
sigh, he led the way into the inner room. It was very long. From end to end it was lit up by many lamps, which by
the changeful colour of their light, and by the incessant snapping sounds
with which they burned, I have since divined to be electric. At the
extreme end an open door gave us a glimpse into what must have been a
lean-to shed beside the chimney; and this, in strong contrast to the
room, was painted with a red reverberation as from furnace-doors. The
walls were lined with books and glazed cases, the tables crowded with the
implements of chemical research; great glass accumulators glittered in
the light; and through a hole in the gable near the shed door, a heavy
driving-belt entered the apartment and ran overhead upon steel pulleys,
with clumsy activity and many ghostly and fluttering sounds. In one
corner I perceived a chair resting upon crystal feet, and curiously
wreathed with wire. To this my mother advanced with a decisive
swiftness. 'Is this it?' she asked. The doctor bowed in silence. 'Asenath,' said my mother, 'in this sad end of my life I have found one
helper. Look upon him: it is Doctor Grierson. Be not, oh my daughter,
be not ungrateful to that friend!' She sate upon the chair, and took in her hands the globes that terminated
the arms. 'Am I right?' she asked, and looked upon the doctor with such a radiancy
of face that I trembled for her reason. Once more the doctor bowed, but
this time leaning hard against the wall. He must have touched a spring. The least shock agitated my mother where she sat; the least passing jar
appeared to cross her features; and she sank back in the chair like one
resigned to weariness. I was at her knees that moment; but her hands
fell loosely in my grasp; her face, still beatified with the same
touching smile, sank forward on her bosom: her spirit had for ever fled. I do not know how long may have elapsed before, raising for a moment my
tearful face, I met the doctor's eyes. They rested upon mine with such a
depth of scrutiny, pity, and interest, that even from the freshness of my
sorrow, I was startled into attention. 'Enough,' he said, 'to lamentation. Your mother went to death as to a
bridal, dying where her husband died. It is time, Asenath, to think of
the survivors. Follow me to the next room.' I followed him, like a person in a dream; he made me sit by the fire, he
gave me wine to drink; and then, pacing the stone floor, he thus began to
address me--

'You are now, my child, alone in the world, and under the immediate watch
of Brigham Young. It would be your lot, in ordinary circumstances, to
become the fiftieth bride of some ignoble elder, or by particular
fortune, as fortune is counted in this land, to find favour in the eyes
of the President himself. Such a fate for a girl like you were worse
than death; better to die as your mother died than to sink daily deeper
in the mire of this pit of woman's degradation. But is escape
conceivable? Your father tried; and you beheld yourself with what
security his jailers acted, and how a dumb drawing on a rock was counted
a sufficient sentry over the avenues of freedom. Where your father
failed, will you be wiser or more fortunate? or are you, too, helpless in
the toils?' I had followed his words with changing emotion, but now I believed I
understood. 'I see,' I cried; 'you judge me rightly. I must follow where my parents
led; and oh! I am not only willing, I am eager!' 'No,' replied the doctor, 'not death for you. The flawed vessel we may
break, but not the perfect. No, your mother cherished a different hope,
and so do I.  I see,' he cried, 'the girl develop to the completed woman,
the plan reach fulfilment, the promise--ay, outdone! I could not bear to
arrest so lively, so comely a process. It was your mother's thought,' he
added, with a change of tone, 'that I should marry you myself.' I fear I
must have shown a perfect horror of aversion from this fate, for he made
haste to quiet me. 'Reassure yourself, Asenath,' he resumed. 'Old as I
am, I have not forgotten the tumultuous fancies of youth. I have passed
my days, indeed, in laboratories; but in all my vigils I have not
forgotten the tune of a young pulse. Age asks with timidity to be spared
intolerable pain; youth, taking fortune by the beard, demands joy like a
right. These things I have not forgotten; none, rather, has more keenly
felt, none more jealously considered them; I have but postponed them to
their day. See, then: you stand without support; the only friend left to
you, this old investigator, old in cunning, young in sympathy. Answer me
but one question: Are you free from the entanglement of what the world
calls love? Do you still command your heart and purposes? or are you
fallen in some bond-slavery of the eye and ear?' I answered him in broken words; my heart, I think I must have told him,
lay with my dead parents. 'It is enough,' he said. 'It has been my fate to be called on often, too
often, for those services of which we spoke to-night; none in Utah could
carry them so well to a conclusion; hence there has fallen into my hands
a certain share of influence which I now lay at your service, partly for
the sake of my dead friends, your parents; partly for the interest I bear
you in your own right. I shall send you to England, to the great city of
London, there to await the bridegroom I have selected. He shall be a son
of mine, a young man suitable in age and not grossly deficient in that
quality of beauty that your years demand. Since your heart is free, you
may well pledge me the sole promise that I ask in return for much expense
and still more danger: to await the arrival of that bridegroom with the
delicacy of a wife.' I sat awhile stunned. The doctor's marriages, I remembered to have
heard, had been unfruitful; and this added perplexity to my distress. But I was alone, as he had said, alone in that dark land; the thought of
escape, of any equal marriage, was already enough to revive in me some
dawn of hope; and in what words I know not, I accepted the proposal. He seemed more moved by my consent than I could reasonably have looked
for. 'You shall see,' he cried; 'you shall judge for yourself.' And
hurrying to the next room he returned with a small portrait somewhat
coarsely done in oils. It showed a man in the dress of nearly forty
years before, young indeed, but still recognisable to be the doctor. 'Do
you like it?' he asked. 'That is myself when I was young. My--my boy
will be like that, like but nobler; with such health as angels might
condescend to envy; and a man of mind, Asenath, of commanding mind. That
should be a man, I think; that should be one among ten thousand. A man
like that--one to combine the passions of youth with the restraint, the
force, the dignity of age--one to fill all the parts and faculties, one
to be man's epitome--say, will that not satisfy the needs of an ambitious
girl? Say, is not that enough?' And as he held the picture close before
my eyes, his hands shook. I told him briefly I would ask no better, for I was transpierced with
this display of fatherly emotion; but even as I said the words, the most
insolent revolt surged through my arteries. I held him in horror, him,
his portrait, and his son; and had there been any choice but death or a
Mormon marriage, I declare before Heaven I had embraced it. 'It is well,' he replied, 'and I had rightly counted on your spirit. Eat, then, for you have far to go.' So saying, he set meat before me;
and while I was endeavouring to obey, he left the room and returned with
an armful of coarse raiment. 'There,' said he, 'is your disguise. I
leave you to your toilet.' The clothes had probably belonged to a somewhat lubberly boy of fifteen;
and they hung about me like a sack, and cruelly hampered my movements. But what filled me with uncontrollable shudderings, was the problem of
their origin and the fate of the lad to whom they had belonged. I had
scarcely effected the exchange when the doctor returned, opened a back
window, helped me out into the narrow space between the house and the
overhanging bluffs, and showed me a ladder of iron footholds mortised in
the rock. 'Mount,' he said, 'swiftly. When you are at the summit, walk,
so far as you are able, in the shadow of the smoke. The smoke will bring
you, sooner or later, to a canyon; follow that down, and you will find a
man with two horses. Him you will implicitly obey. And remember,
silence! That machinery, which I now put in motion for your service, may
by one word be turned against you. Go; Heaven prosper you!' The ascent was easy. Arrived at the top of the cliff, I saw before me on
the other side a vast and gradual declivity of stone, lying bare to the
moon and the surrounding mountains. Nowhere was any vantage or
concealment; and knowing how these deserts were beset with spies, I made
haste to veil my movements under the blowing trail of smoke. Sometimes
it swam high, rising on the night wind, and I had no more substantial
curtain than its moon-thrown shadow; sometimes again it crawled upon the
earth, and I would walk in it, no higher than to my shoulders, like some
mountain fog. But, one way or another, the smoke of that ill-omened
furnace protected the first steps of my escape, and led me unobserved to
the canyon. There, sure enough, I found a taciturn and sombre man beside a pair of
saddle-horses; and thenceforward, all night long, we wandered in silence
by the most occult and dangerous paths among the mountains. A little
before the dayspring we took refuge in a wet and gusty cavern at the
bottom of a gorge; lay there all day concealed; and the next night,
before the glow had faded out of the west, resumed our wanderings. About
noon we stopped again, in a lawn upon a little river, where was a screen
of bushes; and here my guide, handing me a bundle from his pack, bade me
change my dress once more. The bundle contained clothing of my own,
taken from our house, with such necessaries as a comb and soap. I made
my toilet by the mirror of a quiet pool; and as I was so doing, and
smiling with some complacency to see myself restored to my own image, the
mountains rang with a scream of far more than human piercingness; and
while I still stood astonished, there sprang up and swiftly increased a
storm of the most awful and earth-rending sounds. Shall I own to you,
that I fell upon my face and shrieked? And yet this was but the overland
train winding among the near mountains: the very means of my salvation:
the strong wings that were to carry me from Utah! When I was dressed, the guide gave me a bag, which contained, he said,
both money and papers; and telling me that I was already over the borders
in the territory of Wyoming, bade me follow the stream until I reached
the railway station, half a mile below. 'Here,' he added, 'is your
ticket as far as Council Bluffs. The East express will pass in a few
hours.' With that, he took both horses, and, without further words or
any salutation, rode off by the way that we had come. Three hours afterwards, I was seated on the end platform of the train as
it swept eastward through the gorges and thundered in tunnels of the
mountain. The change of scene, the sense of escape, the still throbbing
terror of pursuit--above all, the astounding magic of my new conveyance,
kept me from any logical or melancholy thought. I had gone to the
doctor's house two nights before prepared to die, prepared for worse than
death; what had passed, terrible although it was, looked almost bright
compared to my anticipations; and it was not till I had slept a full
night in the flying palace car, that I awoke to the sense of my
irreparable loss and to some reasonable alarm about the future. In this
mood, I examined the contents of the bag. It was well supplied with
gold; it contained tickets and complete directions for my journey as far
as Liverpool, and a long letter from the doctor, supplying me with a
fictitious name and story, recommending the most guarded silence, and
bidding me to await faithfully the coming of his son. All then had been
arranged beforehand: he had counted upon my consent, and what was tenfold
worse, upon my mother's voluntary death. My horror of my only friend, my
aversion for this son who was to marry me, my revolt against the whole
current and conditions of my life, were now complete. I was sitting
stupefied by my distress and helplessness, when, to my joy, a very
pleasant lady offered me her conversation. I clutched at the relief; and
I was soon glibly telling her the story in the doctor's letter: how I was
a Miss Gould, of Nevada City, going to England to an uncle, what money I
had, what family, my age, and so forth, until I had exhausted my
instructions, and, as the lady still continued to ply me with questions,
began to embroider on my own account. This soon carried one of my
inexperience beyond her depth; and I had already remarked a shadow on the
lady's face, when a gentleman drew near and very civilly addressed me. 'Miss Gould, I believe?' said he; and then, excusing himself to the lady
by the authority of my guardian, drew me to the fore platform of the
Pullman car. 'Miss Gould,' he said in my ear, 'is it possible that you
suppose yourself in safety? Let me completely undeceive you. One more
such indiscretion and you return to Utah. And, in the meanwhile, if this
woman should again address you, you are to reply with these words:
"Madam, I do not like you, and I will be obliged if you will suffer me to
choose my own associates."' Alas, I had to do as I was bid; this lady, to whom I already felt myself
drawn with the strongest cords of sympathy, I dismissed with insult; and
thenceforward, through all that day, I sat in silence, gazing on the bare
plains and swallowing my tears. Let that suffice: it was the pattern of
my journey. Whether on the train, at the hotels, or on board the ocean
steamer, I never exchanged a friendly word with any fellow-traveller but
I was certain to be interrupted. In every place, on every side, the most
unlikely persons, man or woman, rich or poor, became protectors to
forward me upon my journey, or spies to observe and regulate my conduct. Thus I crossed the States, thus passed the ocean, the Mormon Eye still
following my movements; and when at length a cab had set me down before
that London lodging-house from which you saw me flee this morning, I had
already ceased to struggle and ceased to hope. The landlady, like every one else through all that journey, was expecting
my arrival. A fire was lighted in my room, which looked upon the garden;
there were books on the table, clothes in the drawers; and there (I had
almost said with contentment, and certainly with resignation) I saw month
follow month over my head. At times my landlady took me for a walk or an
excursion, but she would never suffer me to leave the house alone; and I,
seeing that she also lived under the shadow of that widespread Mormon
terror, felt too much pity to resist. To the child born on Mormon soil,
as to the man who accepts the engagements of a secret order, no escape is
possible; so I had clearly read, and I was thankful even for this
respite. Meanwhile, I tried honestly to prepare my mind for my
approaching nuptials. The day drew near when my bridegroom was to visit
me, and gratitude and fear alike obliged me to consent. A son of Doctor
Grierson's, be he what he pleased, must still be young, and it was even
probable he should be handsome; on more than that, I felt I dared not
reckon; and in moulding my mind towards consent I dwelt the more
carefully on these physical attractions which I felt I might expect, and
averted my eyes from moral or intellectual considerations. We have a
great power upon our spirits; and as time passed I worked myself into a
frame of acquiescence, nay, and I began to grow impatient for the hour. At night sleep forsook me; I sat all day by the fire, absorbed in dreams,
conjuring up the features of my husband, and anticipating in fancy the
touch of his hand and the sound of his voice. In the dead level and
solitude of my existence, this was the one eastern window and the one
door of hope. At last, I had so cultivated and prepared my will, that I
began to be besieged with fears upon the other side. How if it was I
that did not please? How if this unseen lover should turn from me with
disaffection? And now I spent hours before the glass, studying and
judging my attractions, and was never weary of changing my dress or
ordering my hair. When the day came I was long about my toilet; but at last, with a sort of
hopeful desperation, I had to own that I could do no more, and must now
stand or fall by nature. My occupation ended, I fell a prey to the most
sickening impatience, mingled with alarms; giving ear to the swelling
rumour of the streets, and at each change of sound or silence, starting,
shrinking, and colouring to the brow. Love is not to be prepared, I
know, without some knowledge of the object; and yet, when the cab at last
rattled to the door and I heard my visitor mount the stairs, such was the
tumult of hopes in my poor bosom that love itself might have been proud
to own their parentage. The door opened, and it was Doctor Grierson that
appeared. I believe I must have screamed aloud, and I know, at least,
that I fell fainting to the floor. When I came to myself he was standing over me, counting my pulse. 'I
have startled you,' he said. 'A difficulty unforeseen--the impossibility
of obtaining a certain drug in its full purity--has forced me to resort
to London unprepared. I regret that I should have shown myself once more
without those poor attractions which are much, perhaps, to you, but to me
are no more considerable than rain that falls into the sea. Youth is but
a state, as passing as that syncope from which you are but just awakened,
and, if there be truth in science, as easy to recall; for I find,
Asenath, that I must now take you for my confidant. Since my first
years, I have devoted every hour and act of life to one ambitious task;
and the time of my success is at hand. In these new countries, where I
was so long content to stay, I collected indispensable ingredients; I
have fortified myself on every side from the possibility of error; what
was a dream now takes the substance of reality; and when I offered you a
son of mine I did so in a figure. That son--that husband, Asenath, is
myself--not as you now behold me, but restored to the first energy of
youth. You think me mad? It is the customary attitude of ignorance. I
will not argue; I will leave facts to speak. When you behold me
purified, invigorated, renewed, restamped in the original image--when you
recognise in me (what I shall be) the first perfect expression of the
powers of mankind--I shall be able to laugh with a better grace at your
passing and natural incredulity. To what can you aspire--fame, riches,
power, the charm of youth, the dear-bought wisdom of age--that I shall
not be able to afford you in perfection? Do not deceive yourself. I
already excel you in every human gift but one: when that gift also has
been restored to me you will recognise your master.' Hereupon, consulting his watch, he told me he must now leave me to
myself; and bidding me consult reason, and not girlish fancies, he
withdrew. I had not the courage to move; the night fell and found me
still where he had laid me during my faint, my face buried in my hands,
my soul drowned in the darkest apprehensions. Late in the evening he
returned, carrying a candle, and, with a certain irritable tremor, bade
me rise and sup. 'Is it possible,' he added, 'that I have been deceived
in your courage? A cowardly girl is no fit mate for me.' I flung myself before him on my knees, and with floods of tears besought
him to release me from this engagement, assuring him that my cowardice
was abject, and that in every point of intellect and character I was his
hopeless and derisible inferior. 'Why, certainly,' he replied. 'I know you better than yourself; and I am
well enough acquainted with human nature to understand this scene. It is
addressed to me,' he added with a smile, 'in my character of the still
untransformed. But do not alarm yourself about the future. Let me but
attain my end, and not you only, Asenath, but every woman on the face of
the earth becomes my willing slave.' Thereupon he obliged me to rise and eat; sat down with me to table;
helped and entertained me with the attentions of a fashionable host; and
it was not till a late hour, that, bidding me courteously good-night, he
once more left me alone to my misery. In all this talk of an elixir and the restoration of his youth, I scarce
knew from which hypothesis I should the more eagerly recoil. If his
hopes reposed on any base of fact, if indeed, by some abhorrent miracle,
he should discard his age, death were my only refuge from that most
unnatural, that most ungodly union. If, on the other hand, these dreams
were merely lunatic, the madness of a life waxed suddenly acute, my pity
would become a load almost as heavy to bear as my revolt against the
marriage. So passed the night, in alternations of rebellion and despair,
of hate and pity; and with the next morning I was only to comprehend more
fully my enslaved position. For though he appeared with a very tranquil
countenance, he had no sooner observed the marks of grief upon my brow
than an answering darkness gathered on his own. 'Asenath.' he said, 'you
owe me much already; with one finger I still hold you suspended over
death; my life is full of labour and anxiety; and I choose,' said he,
with a remarkable accent of command, 'that you shall greet me with a
pleasant face.' He never needed to repeat the recommendation; from that
day forward I was always ready to receive him with apparent cheerfulness;
and he rewarded me with a good deal of his company, and almost more than
I could bear of his confidence. He had set up a laboratory in the back
part of the house, where he toiled day and night at his elixir, and he
would come thence to visit me in my parlour: now with passing humours of
discouragement; now, and far more often, radiant with hope. It was
impossible to see so much of him, and not to recognise that the sands of
his life were running low; and yet all the time he would be laying out
vast fields of future, and planning, with all the confidence of youth,
the most unbounded schemes of pleasure and ambition. How I replied I
know not; but I found a voice and words to answer, even while I wept and
raged to hear him. A week ago the doctor entered my room with the marks of great
exhilaration contending with pitiful bodily weakness. 'Asenath,' said
he, 'I have now obtained the last ingredient. In one week from now the
perilous moment of the last projection will draw nigh. You have once
before assisted, although unconsciously, at the failure of a similar
experiment. It was the elixir which so terribly exploded one night when
you were passing my house; and it is idle to deny that the conduct of so
delicate a process, among the million jars and trepidations of so great a
city, presents a certain element of danger. From this point of view, I
cannot but regret the perfect stillness of my house among the deserts;
but, on the other hand, I have succeeded in proving that the singularly
unstable equilibrium of the elixir, at the moment of projection, is due
rather to the impurity than to the nature of the ingredients; and as all
are now of an equal and exquisite nicety, I have little fear for the
result. In a week then from to-day, my dear Asenath, this period of
trial will be ended.' And he smiled upon me in a manner unusually
paternal. I smiled back with my lips, but at my heart there raged the blackest and
most unbridled terror. What if he failed? And oh, tenfold worse! what
if he succeeded? What detested and unnatural changeling would appear
before me to claim my hand? And could there, I asked myself with a
dreadful sinking, be any truth in his boasts of an assured victory over
my reluctance? I knew him, indeed, to be masterful, to lead my life at a
sign. Suppose, then, this experiment to succeed; suppose him to return
to me, hideously restored, like a vampire in a legend; and suppose that,
by some devilish fascination . . . My head turned; all former fears
deserted me: and I felt I could embrace the worst in preference to this. My mind was instantly made up. The doctor's presence in London was
justified by the affairs of the Mormon polity. Often, in our
conversation, he would gloat over the details of that great organisation,
which he feared even while yet he wielded it; and would remind me, that
even in the humming labyrinth of London, we were still visible to that
unsleeping eye in Utah. His visitors, indeed, who were of every sort,
from the missionary to the destroying angel, and seemed to belong to
every rank of life, had, up to that moment, filled me with unmixed
repulsion and alarm. I knew that if my secret were to reach the ear of
any leader my fate were sealed beyond redemption; and yet in my present
pass of horror and despair, it was to these very men that I turned for
help. I waylaid upon the stair one of the Mormon missionaries, a man of
a low class, but not inaccessible to pity; told him I scarce remember
what elaborate fable to explain my application; and by his intermediacy
entered into correspondence with my father's family. They recognised my
claim for help, and on this very day I was to begin my escape. Last night I sat up fully dressed, awaiting the result of the doctor's
labours, and prepared against the worst. The nights at this season and
in this northern latitude are short; and I had soon the company of the
returning daylight. The silence in and around the house was only broken
by the movements of the doctor in the laboratory; to these I listened,
watch in hand, awaiting the hour of my escape, and yet consumed by
anxiety about the strange experiment that was going forward overhead. Indeed, now that I was conscious of some protection for myself, my
sympathies had turned more directly to the doctor's side; I caught myself
even praying for his success; and when some hours ago a low, peculiar cry
reached my ears from the laboratory, I could no longer control my
impatience, but mounted the stairs and opened the door. The doctor was standing in the middle of the room; in his hand a large,
round-bellied, crystal flask, some three parts full of a bright
amber-coloured liquid; on his face a rapture of gratitude and joy
unspeakable. As he saw me he raised the flask at arm's length. 'Victory!' he cried. 'Victory, Asenath!' And then--whether the flask
escaped his trembling fingers, or whether the explosion were spontaneous,
I cannot tell--enough that we were thrown, I against the door-post, the
doctor into the corner of the room; enough that we were shaken to the
soul by the same explosion that must have startled you upon the street;
and that, in the brief space of an indistinguishable instant, there
remained nothing of the labours of the doctor's lifetime but a few shards
of broken crystal and those voluminous and ill-smelling vapours that
pursued me in my flight. _THE SQUIRE OF DAMES_
(_Concluded_)


What with the lady's animated manner and dramatic conduct of her voice,
Challoner had thrilled to every incident with genuine emotion. His
fancy, which was not perhaps of a very lively character, applauded both
the matter and the style; but the more judicial functions of his mind
refused assent. It was an excellent story; and it might be true, but he
believed it was not. Miss Fonblanque was a lady, and it was doubtless
possible for a lady to wander from the truth; but how was a gentleman to
tell her so? His spirits for some time had been sinking, but they now
fell to zero; and long after her voice had died away he still sat with a
troubled and averted countenance, and could find no form of words to
thank her for her narrative. His mind, indeed, was empty of everything
beyond a dull longing for escape. From this pause, which grew the more
embarrassing with every second, he was roused by the sudden laughter of
the lady. His vanity was alarmed; he turned and faced her; their eyes
met; and he caught from hers a spark of such frank merriment as put him
instantly at ease. 'You certainly,' he said, 'appear to bear your calamities with excellent
spirit.' 'Do I not?' she cried, and fell once more into delicious laughter. But
from this access she more speedily recovered. 'This is all very well,'
said she, nodding at him gravely, 'but I am still in a most distressing
situation, from which, if you deny me your help, I shall find it
difficult indeed to free myself.' At this mention of help Challoner fell back to his original gloom. 'My sympathies are much engaged with you,' he said, 'and I should be
delighted, I am sure. But our position is most unusual; and
circumstances over which I have, I can assure you, no control, deprive me
of the power--the pleasure--Unless, indeed,' he added, somewhat
brightening at the thought, 'I were to recommend you to the care of the
police?' She laid her hand upon his arm and looked hard into his eyes; and he saw
with wonder that, for the first time since the moment of their meeting,
every trace of colour had faded from her cheek. 'Do so,' she said, 'and--weigh my words well--you kill me as certainly as
with a knife.' 'God bless me!' exclaimed Challoner. 'Oh,' she cried, 'I can see you disbelieve my story and make light of the
perils that surround me; but who are you to judge? My family share my
apprehensions; they help me in secret; and you saw yourself by what an
emissary, and in what a place, they have chosen to supply me with the
funds for my escape. I admit that you are brave and clever and have
impressed me most favourably; but how are you to prefer your opinion
before that of my uncle, an ex-minister of state, a man with the ear of
the Queen, and of a long political experience? If I am mad, is he? And
you must allow me, besides, a special claim upon your help. Strange as
you may think my story, you know that much of it is true; and if you who
heard the explosion and saw the Mormon at Victoria, refuse to credit and
assist me, to whom am I to turn?' 'He gave you money then?' asked Challoner, who had been dwelling singly
on that fact. 'I begin to interest you,' she cried. 'But, frankly, you are condemned
to help me. If the service I had to ask of you were serious, were
suspicious, were even unusual, I should say no more. But what is it? To
take a pleasure trip (for which, if you will suffer me, I propose to pay)
and to carry from one lady to another a sum of money! What can be more
simple?' 'Is the sum,' asked Challoner, 'considerable?' She produced a packet from her bosom; and observing that she had not yet
found time to make the count, tore open the cover and spread upon her
knees a considerable number of Bank of England notes. It took some time
to make the reckoning, for the notes were of every degree of value; but
at last, and counting a few loose sovereigns, she made out the sum to be
a little under 710 pounds sterling. The sight of so much money worked an
immediate revolution in the mind of Challoner. 'And you propose, madam,' he cried, 'to intrust that money to a perfect
stranger?' 'Ah!' said she, with a charming smile, 'but I no longer regard you as a
stranger.' 'Madam,' said Challoner, 'I perceive I must make you a confession. Although of a very good family--through my mother, indeed, a lineal
descendant of the patriot Bruce--I dare not conceal from you that my
affairs are deeply, very deeply involved. I am in debt; my pockets are
practically empty; and, in short, I am fallen to that state when a
considerable sum of money would prove to many men an irresistible
temptation.' 'Do you not see,' returned the young lady, 'that by these words you have
removed my last hesitation? Take them.' And she thrust the notes into
the young man's hand. He sat so long, holding them, like a baby at the font, that Miss
Fonblanque once more bubbled into laughter. 'Pray,' she said, 'hesitate no further; put them in your pocket; and to
relieve our position of any shadow of embarrassment, tell me by what name
I am to address my knight-errant, for I find myself reduced to the
awkwardness of the pronoun.' Had borrowing been in question, the wisdom of our ancestors had come
lightly to the young man's aid; but upon what pretext could he refuse so
generous a trust? Upon none he saw, that was not unpardonably wounding;
and the bright eyes and the high spirits of his companion had already
made a breach in the rampart of Challoner's caution. The whole thing, he
reasoned, might be a mere mystification, which it were the height of
solemn folly to resent. On the other hand, the explosion, the interview
at the public-house, and the very money in his hands, seemed to prove
beyond denial the existence of some serious danger; and if that were so,
could he desert her? There was a choice of risks: the risk of behaving
with extraordinary incivility and unhandsomeness to a lady, and the risk
of going on a fool's errand. The story seemed false; but then the money
was undeniable. The whole circumstances were questionable and obscure;
but the lady was charming, and had the speech and manners of society. While he still hung in the wind, a recollection returned upon his mind
with some of the dignity of prophecy. Had he not promised Somerset to
break with the traditions of the commonplace, and to accept the first
adventure offered? Well, here was the adventure. He thrust the money into his pocket. 'My name is Challoner,' said he. 'Mr. Challoner,' she replied, 'you have come very generously to my aid
when all was against me. Though I am myself a very humble person, my
family commands great interest; and I do not think you will repent this
handsome action.' Challoner flushed with pleasure. 'I imagine that, perhaps, a consulship,' she added, her eyes dwelling on
him with a judicial admiration, 'a consulship in some great town or
capital--or else--But we waste time; let us set about the work of my
delivery.' She took his arm with a frank confidence that went to his heart; and once
more laying by all serious thoughts, she entertained him, as they crossed
the park, with her agreeable gaiety of mind. Near the Marble Arch they
found a hansom, which rapidly conveyed them to the terminus at Euston
Square; and here, in the hotel, they sat down to an excellent breakfast. The young lady's first step was to call for writing materials and write,
upon one corner of the table, a hasty note; still, as she did so,
glancing with smiles at her companion. 'Here,' said she, 'here is the
letter which will introduce you to my cousin.' She began to fold the
paper. 'My cousin, although I have never seen her, has the character of
a very charming woman and a recognised beauty; of that I know nothing,
but at least she has been very kind to me; so has my lord her father; so
have you--kinder than all--kinder than I can bear to think of.' She said
this with unusual emotion; and, at the same time, sealed the envelope. 'Ah!' she cried, 'I have shut my letter! It is not quite courteous; and
yet, as between friends, it is perhaps better so. I introduce you, after
all, into a family secret; and though you and I are already old comrades,
you are still unknown to my uncle. You go then to this address, Richard
Street, Glasgow; go, please, as soon as you arrive; and give this letter
with your own hands into those of Miss Fonblanque, for that is the name
by which she is to pass. When we next meet, you will tell me what you
think of her,' she added, with a touch of the provocative. 'Ah,' said Challoner, almost tenderly, 'she can be nothing to me.' 'You do not know,' replied the young lady, with a sigh. 'By-the-bye, I
had forgotten--it is very childish, and I am almost ashamed to mention
it--but when you see Miss Fonblanque, you will have to make yourself a
little ridiculous; and I am sure the part in no way suits you. We had
agreed upon a watchword. You will have to address an earl's daughter in
these words: "_Nigger_, _nigger_, _never die_;" but reassure yourself,'
she added, laughing, 'for the fair patrician will at once finish the
quotation. Come now, say your lesson.' '"Nigger, nigger, never die,"' repeated Challoner, with undisguised
reluctance. Miss Fonblanque went into fits of laughter. 'Excellent,' said she, 'it
will be the most humorous scene.' And she laughed again. 'And what will be the counterword?' asked Challoner stiffly. 'I will not tell you till the last moment,' said she; 'for I perceive you
are growing too imperious.' Breakfast over, she accompanied the young man to the platform, bought him
the _Graphic_, the _Athenaeum_, and a paper-cutter, and stood on the step
conversing till the whistle sounded. Then she put her head into the
carriage. '_Black face and shining eye_!' she whispered, and instantly
leaped down upon the platform, with a thrill of gay and musical laughter. As the train steamed out of the great arch of glass, the sound of that
laughter still rang in the young man's ears. Challoner's position was too unusual to be long welcome to his mind. He
found himself projected the whole length of England, on a mission beset
with obscure and ridiculous circumstances, and yet, by the trust he had
accepted, irrevocably bound to persevere. How easy it appeared, in the
retrospect, to have refused the whole proposal, returned the money, and
gone forth again upon his own affairs, a free and happy man! And it was
now impossible: the enchantress who had held him with her eye had now
disappeared, taking his honour in pledge; and as she had failed to leave
him an address, he was denied even the inglorious safety of retreat. To
use the paper-knife, or even to read the periodicals with which she had
presented him, was to renew the bitterness of his remorse; and as he was
alone in the compartment, he passed the day staring at the landscape in
impotent repentance, and long before he was landed on the platform of St.
Enoch's, had fallen to the lowest and coldest zones of self-contempt. As he was hungry, and elegant in his habits, he would have preferred to
dine and to remove the stains of travel; but the words of the young lady,
and his own impatient eagerness, would suffer no delay. In the late,
luminous, and lamp-starred dusk of the summer evening, he accordingly set
forward with brisk steps. The street to which he was directed had first seen the day in the
character of a row of small suburban villas on a hillside; but the
extension of the city had long since, and on every hand, surrounded it
with miles of streets. From the top of the hill a range of very tall
buildings, densely inhabited by the poorest classes of the population and
variegated by drying-poles from every second window, overplumbed the
villas and their little gardens like a sea-board cliff. But still, under
the grime of years of city smoke, these antiquated cottages, with their
venetian blinds and rural porticoes, retained a somewhat melancholy
savour of the past. The street when Challoner entered it was perfectly deserted. From hard
by, indeed, the sound of a thousand footfalls filled the ear; but in
Richard Street itself there was neither light nor sound of human
habitation. The appearance of the neighbourhood weighed heavily on the
mind of the young man; once more, as in the streets of London, he was
impressed with the sense of city deserts; and as he approached the number
indicated, and somewhat falteringly rang the bell, his heart sank within
him. The bell was ancient, like the house; it had a thin and garrulous note;
and it was some time before it ceased to sound from the rear quarters of
the building. Following upon this an inner door was stealthily opened,
and careful and catlike steps drew near along the hall. Challoner,
supposing he was to be instantly admitted, produced his letter, and, as
well as he was able, prepared a smiling face. To his indescribable
surprise, however, the footsteps ceased, and then, after a pause and with
the like stealthiness, withdrew once more, and died away in the interior
of the house. A second time the young man rang violently at the bell; a
second time, to his keen hearkening, a certain bustle of discreet footing
moved upon the hollow boards of the old villa; and again the fainthearted
garrison only drew near to retreat. The cup of the visitor's endurance
was now full to overflowing; and, committing the whole family of
Fonblanque to every mood and shade of condemnation, he turned upon his
heel and redescended the steps. Perhaps the mover in the house was
watching from a window, and plucked up courage at the sight of this
desistance; or perhaps, where he lurked trembling in the back parts of
the villa, reason in its own right had conquered his alarms. Challoner,
at least, had scarce set foot upon the pavement when he was arrested by
the sound of the withdrawal of an inner bolt; one followed another,
rattling in their sockets; the key turned harshly in the lock; the door
opened; and there appeared upon the threshold a man of a very stalwart
figure in his shirt sleeves. He was a person neither of great manly
beauty nor of a refined exterior; he was not the man, in ordinary moods,
to attract the eyes of the observer; but as he now stood in the doorway,
he was marked so legibly with the extreme passion of terror that
Challoner stood wonder-struck. For a fraction of a minute they gazed
upon each other in silence; and then the man of the house, with ashen
lips and gasping voice, inquired the business of his visitor. Challoner
replied, in tones from which he strove to banish his surprise, that he
was the bearer of a letter to a certain Miss Fonblanque. At this name,
as at a talisman, the man fell back and impatiently invited him to enter;
and no sooner had the adventurer crossed the threshold, than the door was
closed behind him and his retreat cut off. It was already long past eight at night; and though the late twilight of
the north still lingered in the streets, in the passage it was already
groping dark. The man led Challoner directly to a parlour looking on the
garden to the back. Here he had apparently been supping; for by the
light of a tallow dip the table was seen to be covered with a napkin, and
set out with a quart of bottled ale and the heel of a Gouda cheese. The
room, on the other hand, was furnished with faded solidity, and the walls
were lined with scholarly and costly volumes in glazed cases. The house
must have been taken furnished; for it had no congruity with this man of
the shirt sleeves and the mean supper. As for the earl's daughter, the
earl and the visionary consulships in foreign cities, they had long ago
begun to fade in Challoner's imagination. Like Doctor Grierson and the
Mormon angels, they were plainly woven of the stuff of dreams. Not an
illusion remained to the knight-errant; not a hope was left him, but to
be speedily relieved from this disreputable business. The man had continued to regard his visitor with undisguised anxiety, and
began once more to press him for his errand. 'I am here,' said Challoner, 'simply to do a service between two ladies;
and I must ask you, without further delay, to summon Miss Fonblanque,
into whose hands alone I am authorised to deliver the letter that I
bear.' A growing wonder began to mingle on the man's face with the lines of
solicitude. 'I am Miss Fonblanque,' he said; and then, perceiving the
effect of this communication, 'Good God!' he cried, 'what are you staring
at? I tell you, I am Miss Fonblanque.' Seeing the speaker wore a chin-beard of considerable length, and the
remainder of his face was blue with shaving, Challoner could only suppose
himself the subject of a jest. He was no longer under the spell of the
young lady's presence; and with men, and above all with his inferiors, he
was capable of some display of spirit. 'Sir,' said he, pretty roundly, 'I have put myself to great inconvenience
for persons of whom I know too little, and I begin to be weary of the
business. Either you shall immediately summon Miss Fonblanque, or I
leave this house and put myself under the direction of the police.' 'This is horrible!' exclaimed the man. 'I declare before Heaven I am the
person meant, but how shall I convince you? It must have been Clara, I
perceive, that sent you on this errand--a madwoman, who jests with the
most deadly interests; and here we are incapable, perhaps, of an
agreement, and Heaven knows what may depend on our delay!' He spoke with a really startling earnestness; and at the same time there
flashed upon the mind of Challoner the ridiculous jingle which was to
serve as password. 'This may, perhaps, assist you,' he said, and then,
with some embarrassment, '"Nigger, nigger, never die."' A light of relief broke upon the troubled countenance of the man with the
chin-beard. '"Black face and shining eye"--give me the letter,' he
panted, in one gasp. 'Well,' said Challoner, though still with some reluctance, 'I suppose I
must regard you as the proper recipient; and though I may justly complain
of the spirit in which I have been treated, I am only too glad to be done
with all responsibility. Here it is,' and he produced the envelope. The man leaped upon it like a beast, and with hands that trembled in a
manner painful to behold, tore it open and unfolded the letter. As he
read, terror seemed to mount upon him to the pitch of nightmare. He
struck one hand upon his brow, while with the other, as if unconsciously,
he crumpled the paper to a ball. 'My gracious powers!' he cried; and
then, dashing to the window, which stood open on the garden, he clapped
forth his head and shoulders, and whistled long and shrill. Challoner
fell back into a corner, and resolutely grasping his staff, prepared for
the most desperate events; but the thoughts of the man with the
chin-beard were far removed from violence. Turning again into the room,
and once more beholding his visitor, whom he appeared to have forgotten,
he fairly danced with trepidation. 'Impossible!' he cried. 'Oh, quite
impossible! O Lord, I have lost my head.' And then, once more striking
his hand upon his brow, 'The money!' he exclaimed. 