

E-text prepared by Janet Kegg and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team



THE RED REDMAYNES

by

EDEN PHILLPOTTS

New York
The MacMillan Company
1922







       BY EDEN PHILLPOTTS

       EUDOCIA
       EVANDER
       PLAIN SONG
       GREEN ALLEYS
       ORPHAN DINAH
       MISER'S MONEY
       THE GREY ROOM
       CHILDREN OF MEN
       A SHADOW PASSES
       STORM IN A TEACUP
       PAN AND THE TWINS
       THE BANKS OF COLNE
       CHRONICLES OF SAINT TID
       THE HUMAN BOY AND THE WAR




CONTENTS

CHAPTER
      I. THE RUMOUR
     II. THE PROBLEM STATED
    III. THE MYSTERY
     IV. A CLUE
      V. ROBERT REDMAYNE IS SEEN
     VI. ROBERT REDMAYNE IS HEARD
    VII. THE COMPACT
   VIII. DEATH IN THE CAVE
     IX. A PIECE OF WEDDING CAKE
      X. ON GRIANTE
     XI. MR. PETER GANNS
    XII. PETER TAKES THE HELM
   XIII. THE SUDDEN RETURN TO ENGLAND
    XIV. REVOLVER AND PICKAXE
     XV. A GHOST
    XVI. THE LAST OF THE REDMAYNES
   XVII. THE METHODS OF PETER GANNS
  XVIII. CONFESSION
    XIX. A LEGACY FOR PETER GANNS





CHAPTER I

THE RUMOUR


Every man has a right to be conceited until he is famous--so it is
said; and perhaps unconsciously, Mark Brendon shared that opinion. His self-esteem was not, however, conspicuous, although he held that
only a second-rate man is diffident. At thirty-five years of age he
already stood high in the criminal investigation department of the
police. He was indeed about to receive an inspectorship, well earned
by those qualities of imagination and intuition which, added to the
necessary endowment of courage, resource, and industry, had created
his present solid success. A substantial record already stood behind him, and during the war
certain international achievements were added to his credit. He felt
complete assurance that in ten years he would retire from government
employ and open that private and personal practice which it was his
ambition to establish. And now Mark was taking holiday on Dartmoor, devoting himself to
his hobby of trout fishing and accepting the opportunity to survey
his own life from a bird's-eye point of view, measure his
achievement, and consider impartially his future, not only as a
detective but as a man. Mark had reached a turning point, or rather a point from which new
interests and new personal plans were likely to present themselves
upon the theatre of a life hitherto devoted to one drama alone. Until now he had existed for his work only. Since the war he had
been again occupied with routine labour on cases of darkness, doubt,
and crime, once more living only that he might resolve these
mysteries, with no personal interest at all outside his grim
occupation. He had been a machine as innocent of any inner life, any
spiritual ambition or selfish aim, as a pair of handcuffs. This assiduity and single-hearted devotion had brought their
temporal reward. He was now at last in position to enlarge his
outlook, consider higher aspects of life, and determine to be a man
as well as a machine. He found himself with five thousand pounds saved as a result of some
special grants during the war and a large honorarium from the French
Government. He was also in possession of a handsome salary and the
prospect of promotion, when a senior man retired at no distant date. Too intelligent to find all that life had to offer in his work
alone, he now began to think of culture, of human pleasures, and
those added interests and responsibilities that a wife and family
would offer. He knew very few women--none who awakened any emotion of affection. Indeed at five-and-twenty he had told himself that marriage must be
ruled out of his calculations, since his business made life
precarious and was also of a nature to be unduly complicated if a
woman shared it with him. Love, he had reasoned, might lessen his
powers of concentration, blunt his extraordinary special faculties,
perhaps even introduce an element of calculation and actual
cowardice before great alternatives, and so shadow his powers and
modify his future success. But now, ten years later, he thought
otherwise, found himself willing to receive impressions, ready even
to woo and wed if the right girl should present herself. He dreamed
of some well-educated woman who would lighten his own ignorance of
many branches of knowledge. A man in this receptive mood is not asked as a rule to wait long for
the needful response; but Brendon was old-fashioned and the women
born of the war attracted him not at all. He recognized their fine
qualities and often their distinction of mind; yet his ideal struck
backward to another and earlier type--the type of his own mother
who, as a widow, had kept house for him until her death. She was his
feminine ideal--restful, sympathetic, trustworthy--one who always
made his interests hers, one who concentrated upon his life rather
than her own and found in his progress and triumphs the salt of her
own existence. Mark wanted, in truth, somebody who would be content to merge
herself in him and seek neither to impress her own personality upon
his, nor develop an independent environment. He had wit to know a
mother's standpoint must be vastly different from that of any wife,
no matter how perfect her devotion; he had experience enough of
married men to doubt whether the woman he sought was to be found in
a post-war world; yet he preserved and permitted himself a hope that
the old-fashioned women still existed, and he began to consider
where he might find such a helpmate. He was somewhat overweary after a strenuous year; but to Dartmoor
he always came for health and rest when opportunity offered, and
now he had returned for the third time to the Duchy Hotel at
Princetown--there to renew old friendships and amuse himself on the
surrounding trout streams through the long days of June and July. Brendon enjoyed the interest he awakened among other fishermen and,
though he always went upon his expeditions alone, usually joined the
throng in the smoking-room after dinner. Being a good talker he
never failed of an audience there. But better still he liked an hour
sometimes with the prison warders. For the convict prison that
dominated that grey smudge in the heart of the moors known as
Princetown held many interesting and famous criminals, more than one
of whom had been "put through" by him, and had to thank Brendon's
personal industry and daring for penal servitude. Upon the prison
staff were not a few men of intelligence and wide experience who
could tell the detective much germane to his work. The psychology of
crime never paled in its intense attraction for Brendon and many a
strange incident, or obscure convict speech, related without comment
to him by those who had witnessed, or heard them, was capable of
explanation in the visitor's mind. He had found an unknown spot where some good trout dwelt and on an
evening in mid-June he set forth to tempt them. He had discovered
certain deep pools in a disused quarry fed by a streamlet, that
harboured a fish or two heavier than most of those surrendered daily
by the Dart and Meavy, the Blackabrook and the Walkham. Foggintor Quarry, wherein lay these preserves, might be approached
in two ways. Originally broken into the granite bosom of the moor
for stone to build the bygone war prison of Princetown, a road still
extended to the deserted spot and joined the main throughfare half a
mile distant. A house or two--dwellings used by old-time
quarrymen--stood upon this grass-grown track; but the huge pit was
long ago deserted. Nature had made it beautiful, although the
wonderful place was seldom appreciated now and only wild creatures
dwelt therein. Brendon, however, came hither by a direct path over the moors. Leaving Princetown railway station upon his left hand he set his
face west where the waste heaved out before him dark against a blaze
of light from the sky. The sun was setting and a great glory of
gold, fretted with lilac and crimson, burned over the distant
earth, while here and there the light caught crystals of quartz in
the granite boulders and flashed up from the evening sobriety of the
heath. Against the western flame appeared a figure carrying a basket. Mark
Brendon, with thoughts on the evening rise of the trout, lifted his
face at a light footfall. Whereupon there passed by him the fairest
woman he had ever known, and such sudden beauty startled the man and
sent his own thoughts flying. It was as though from the desolate
waste there had sprung a magical and exotic flower; or that the
sunset lights, now deepening on fern and stone, had burned together
and became incarnate in this lovely girl. She was slim and not very
tall. She wore no hat and the auburn of her hair, piled high above
her forehead, tangled the warm sunset beams and burned like a halo
round her head. The colour was glorious, that rare but perfect
reflection of the richest hues that autumn brings to the beech and
the bracken. And she had blue eyes--blue as the gentian. Their size
impressed Brendon. He had only known one woman with really large eyes, and she was a
criminal. But this stranger's bright orbs seemed almost to dwarf her
face. Her mouth was not small, but the lips were full and delicately
turned. She walked quickly with a good stride and her slight,
silvery skirts and rosy, silken jumper showed her figure clearly
enough--her round hips and firm, girlish bosom. She swung along--a
flash of joy on little twinkling feet that seemed hardly to touch
the ground. Her eyes met his for a moment with a frank, trustful expression,
then she had passed. Waiting half a minute, Brendon turned to look
again. He heard her singing with all the light-heartedness of youth
and he caught a few notes as clear and cheerful as a grey bird's. Then, still walking quickly, she dwindled into one bright spot upon
the moor, dipped into an undulation, and was gone--a creature of the
heath and wild lands whom it seemed impossible to imagine pent
within any dwelling. The vision made Mark pensive, as sudden beauty will, and he wondered
about the girl. He guessed her to be a visitor--one of a party,
perhaps, possibly here for the day alone. He went no farther than to
guess that she must certainly be betrothed. Such an exquisite
creature seemed little likely to have escaped love. Indeed love and
a spirit of happiness were reflected from her eyes and in her song. He speculated on her age and guessed she must be eighteen. He then,
by some twist of thought, considered his personal appearance. We are
all prone to put the best face possible upon such a matter, but
Brendon lived too much with hard facts to hoodwink himself on that
or any other subject. He was a well-modelled man of great physical
strength, and still agile and lithe for his age; but his hair was an
ugly straw colour and his clean-shorn, pale face lacked any sort of
distinction save an indication of moral purpose, character, and
pugnacity. It was a face well suited to his own requirements, for he
could disguise it easily; but it was not a face calculated to charm
or challenge any woman--a fact he knew well enough. Tramping forward now, the detective came to a great crater that
gaped on the hillside and stood above the dead quarry workings of
Foggintor. Underneath him opened a cavity with sides two hundred
feet high. Its peaks and precipices fell, here by rough, giant
steps, here stark and sheer over broad faces of granite, where only
weeds and saplings of mountain ash and thorn could find a foothold. The bottom was one vast litter of stone and fern, where foxgloves
nodded above the masses of debris and wild things made their homes. Water fell over many a granite shelf and in the desolation lay great
and small pools. Brendon began to descend, where a sheep track wound into the pit. A
Dartmoor pony and her foal galloped away through an entrance
westerly. At one point a wide moraine spread fanwise from above into
the cup, and here upon this slope of disintegrated granite more
water dripped and tinkled from overhanging ledges of stone. Rills
ran in every direction and, from the spot now reached by the
sportsman, the deserted quarry presented a bewildering confusion of
huge boulders, deep pits, and mighty cliff faces heaving up to
scarps and counter-scarps. Brendon had found the guardian spirit of
the place on a former visit and now he lifted his voice and cried
out. "Here I am!" he said. "Here I am!" cleanly answered Echo hid in the granite. "Mark Brendon!" "Mark Brendon!" "Welcome!" "Welcome!" Every syllable echoed back crisp and clear, just tinged with that
something not human that gave fascination to the reverberated words. A great purple stain seemed to fill the crater and night's wine rose
up within it, while still along the eastern crest of the pit there
ran red sunset light to lip the cup with gold. Mark, picking his way
through the huddled confusion, proceeded to the extreme breadth of
the quarry, fifty yards northerly, and stood above two wide, still
pools in the midst. They covered the lowest depth of the old
workings, shelved to a rough beach on one side and, upon the other,
ran thirty feet deep, where the granite sprang sheer in a precipice
from the face of the little lake. Here crystal-clear water sank into
a dim, blue darkness. The whole surface of the pools was, however,
within reach of any fly fisherman who had a rod of necessary
stiffness and the skill to throw a long line. Trout moved and here
and there circles of light widened out on the water and rippled to
the cliff beyond. Then came a heavier rise and from beneath a great
rock, that heaved up from the midst of the smaller pool, a good fish
took a little white moth which had fluttered within reach. Mark set about his sport, yet felt that a sort of unfamiliar
division had come into his mind and, while he brought two tiny-eyed
flies from a box and fastened them to the hairlike leader he always
used, there persisted the thought of the auburn girl--her eyes blue
as April--her voice so bird-like and untouched with human
emotion--her swift, delicate tread. He began to fish as the light thickened; but he only cast once or
twice and then decided to wait half an hour. He grounded his rod and
brought a brier pipe and a pouch of tobacco from his pocket. The
things of day were turning to slumber; but still there persisted a
clinking sound, uttered monotonously from time to time, which the
sportsman supposed to be a bird. It came from behind the great
acclivities that ran opposite his place by the pools. Brendon
suddenly perceived that it was no natural noise but arose from some
human activity. It was, in fact, the musical note of a mason's
trowel, and when presently it ceased, he was annoyed to hear heavy
footsteps in the quarry--a labourer he guessed. No labourer appeared, however. A big, broad man approached him, clad
in a Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers and a red waistcoat with
gaudy brass buttons. He had entered at the lower mouth of the
quarries and was proceeding to the northern exit, whence the little
streamlet that fed the pools came through a narrow pass. The stranger stopped as he saw Brendon, straddled his great legs,
took a cigar from his mouth and spoke. "Ah! You've found 'em, then?" "Found what?" asked the detective. "Found these trout. I come here for a swim sometimes. I've wondered
why I never saw a rod in this hole. There are a dozen half pounders
there and possibly some bigger ones." It was Mark's instinctive way to study all fellow creatures with
whom he came in contact. He had an iron memory for faces. He looked
up now and observed the rather remarkable features of the man before
him. His scrutiny was swift and sure; yet had he guessed the
tremendous significance of his glance, or with proleptic vision seen
what this being was to mean during the years of his immediate
future, it is certain that he would have intensified his inspection
and extended the brief limits of their interview. He saw a pair of broad shoulders and a thick neck over which hung a
square, hard jaw and a determined chin. Then came a big mouth and
the largest pair of mustaches Brendon remembered to have observed on
any countenance. They were almost grotesque; but the stranger was
evidently proud of them, for he twirled them from time to time and
brought the points up to his ears. They were of a foxy red, and
beneath them flashed large, white teeth when the big man talked in
rather grating tones. He suggested one on very good terms with
himself--a being of passionate temperament and material mind. His
eyes were grey, small, set rather wide apart, with a heavy nose
between. His hair was a fiery red, cut close, and of a hue yet more
violent than his mustaches. Even the fading light could not kill his
rufous face. The big man appeared friendly, though Brendon heartily wished him
away. "Sea fishing's my sport," he said. "Conger and cod, pollack and
mackerel--half a boat load--that's sport. That means tight lines and
a thirst afterward." "I expect it does." "But this bally place seems to bewitch people," continued the big
man. "What is it about Dartmoor? Only a desert of hills and stones
and two-penny half-penny streams a child can walk across; and
yet--why you'll hear folk blether about it as though heaven would
only be a bad substitute." The other laughed. "There is a magic here. It gets into your blood." "So it does. Even a God-forgotten hole like Princetown with nothing
to see but the poor devils of convicts. A man I know is building
himself a bungalow out here. He and his wife will be just as happy
as a pair of wood pigeons--at least they think so." "I heard a trowel clinking." "Yes, I lend a hand sometimes when the workmen are gone. But think
of it--to turn your back on civilization and make yourself a home in
a desert!" "Might do worse--if you've got no ambitions." "Yes--ambition is not their strong point. They think love's
enough--poor souls. Why don't you fish?" "Waiting for it to get a bit darker." "Well, so long. Take care you don't catch anything that'll pull you
in." Laughing at his joke and making another echo ring sharply over the
still face of the water, the red man strode off through the gap
fifty yards distant. Then in the stillness Mark heard the purr of a
machine. He had evidently departed upon a motor bicycle to the main
road half a mile distant. When he was gone Brendon rose and strolled down to the other
entrance of the quarry that he might see the bungalow of which the
stranger had spoken. Leaving the great pit he turned right-handed
and there, in a little hollow facing southwest, he found the
building. It was as yet far from complete. The granite walls now
stood six feet high and they were of remarkable thickness. The plan
indicated a dwelling of six rooms and Brendon perceived that the
house would have no second story. An acre round about had been
walled, but as yet the boundaries were incomplete. Magnificent views
swept to the west and south. Brendon's rare sight could still
distinguish Saltash Bridge spanning the waters above Plymouth, where
Cornwall heaved up against the dying afterglow of the west. It was a
wonderful place in which to dwell, and the detective speculated as
to the sort of people who would be likely to lift their home in this
silent wilderness. He guessed that they must have wearied of cities, or of their fellow
creatures. Perhaps they were disappointed and disillusioned with
life and so desired to turn their backs upon its gregarious
features, evade its problems, as far as possible, escape its shame
and follies, and live here amid these stern realities which promised
nothing, yet were full of riches for a certain order of mankind. He
judged that the couple, who designed to dwell beside the silent
hollow of Foggintor, must have outlived much and reached an attitude
of mind that desired no greater boon than solitude in the lap of
nature. Such people could only be middle-aged, he told himself. Yet
he remembered the big man had said that the pair felt "love was
enough." That meant romance still active and alive, whatever their
ages might be. The day grew very dim and the fret of light and shadow died off the
earth, leaving all vague and vast and featureless. Brendon returned
to his sport and found a small "coachman" fly sufficiently
destructive. The two pools yielded a dozen trout, of which he kept
six and returned the rest to the water. His best three fish all
weighed half a pound. Resolved to pay the pools another visit, Mark made an end of his
sport and chose to return by road rather than venture the walk over
the rough moor in darkness. He left the quarry at the gap, passed
the half dozen cottages that stood a hundred yards beyond it, and
so, presently, regained the main road between Princetown and
Tavistock. Tramping back under the stars, his thoughts drifted to
the auburn girl of the moor. He was seeking to recollect how she had
been dressed. He remembered everything about her with extraordinary
vividness, from the crown of her glowing hair to her twinkling feet,
in brown shoes with steel or silver buckles; but he could not
instantly see her garments. Then they came back to him--the
rose-coloured jumper and the short, silvery skirts. Twice afterward, during the evening hour, Brendon again tramped to
Foggintor, but he was not rewarded by any glimpse of the girl; but
as the picture of her dimmed a little, there happened a strange and
apparently terrible thing, and in common with everybody else his
thoughts were distracted. To the detective's hearty annoyance and
much against his will, there confronted him a professional problem. Though the sudden whisper of murder that winged with amazing speed
through that little, uplifted church-town was no affair of his,
there fell out an incident which quickly promised to draw him into
it and end his holiday before the time. Four evenings after his first fishing expedition to the quarries, he
devoted a morning to the lower waters of the Meavy River; at the end
of that day, not far short of midnight, when glasses were empty and
pipes knocked out, half a dozen men, just about to retire, heard a
sudden and evil report. Will Blake, "Boots" at the Duchy Hotel, was waiting to extinguish
the lights, and seeing Brendon he said:

"There's something in your line happened, master, by the look of it. A pretty bobbery to-morrow." "A convict escaped, Will?" asked the detective, yawning and longing
for bed. "That's about the only fun you get up here, isn't it?" "Convict escaped? No--a man done in seemingly. Mr. Pendean's
uncle-in-law have slaughtered Mr. Pendean by the looks of it." "What did he want to do that for?" asked Brendon without emotion. "That's for clever men like you to find out," answered Will. "And who is Mr. Pendean?" "The gentleman what's building the bungalow down to Foggintor." Mark started. The big red man flashed to his mind complete in every
physical feature. He described him and Will Blake replied:

"That's the chap that's done it. That's the gentleman's
uncle-in-law!" Brendon went to bed and slept no worse for the tragedy. Nor, when
morning came and every maid and man desired to tell him all they
knew, did he show the least interest. When Milly knocked with his
hot water and drew up his blind, she judged that nobody could
appreciate the event better than a famous detective. "Oh, sir--such a fearful thing--" she began. But he cut her short. "Now, Milly, don't talk shop. I haven't come to Dartmoor to catch
murderers, but to catch trout. What's the weather like?" "'Tis foggy and soft; and Mr. Pendean--poor dear soul--"

"Go away, Milly. I don't want to hear anything about Mr. Pendean." "That big red devil of a man--

"Nor anything about the big red devil, either. If it's soft, I
shall try the leat this morning." Milly stared at him with much disappointment. "God's goodness!" she said. "You can go off fishing--a professed
murder catcher like you--and a man killed under your nose you may
say!" "It isn't my job. Now, clear out. I want to get up." "Well, I never!" murmured Milly and departed in great astonishment. But Brendon was not to enjoy the freedom that he desired in this
matter. He ordered sandwiches, intending to beat a hasty retreat and
get beyond reach; then at half past nine, he emerged into a dull and
lowering morn. Fine mist was in the air and a heavy fog hid the
hills. There seemed every probability of a wet day and from a
fisherman's point of view the conditions promised sport. He was just
slipping on a raincoat and about to leave the hotel when Will Blake
appeared and handed him a letter. He glanced at it, half inclined to
stick the missive in the hall letter rack and leave perusal until
his return, but the handwriting was a woman's and did not lack for
distinction and character. He felt curious and, not associating the
incident with the rumoured crime, set down his rod and creel, opened
the note, and read what was written:

                                  "3 Station Cottages, Princetown. "DEAR SIR: The police have told me that you are in Princetown,
     and it seems as though Providence had sent you. I fear that I
     have no right to seek your services directly, but if you can
     answer the prayer of a heartbroken woman and give her the
     benefit of your genius in this dark moment, she would be
     unspeakably thankful. "Faithfully yours,
                                 JENNY PENDEAN." Mark Brendon murmured "damn" gently under his breath. Then he turned
to Will. "Where is Mrs. Pendean's house?" he asked. "In Station Cottages, just before you come to the prison woods,
sir." "Run over, then, and say I'll call in half an hour." "There!" Will grinned. "I told 'em you'd never keep out of it!" He was gone and Brendon read the letter again, studied its neat
caligraphy, and observed that a tear had blotted the middle of the
sheet. Once more he said "damn" to himself, dropped his fishing
basket and rod, turned up the collar of his mackintosh, and walked
to the police station, where he heard a little of the matter in hand
from a constable and then asked for permission to use the telephone. In five minutes he was speaking to his own chief at Scotland Yard,
and the familiar cockney voice of Inspector Harrison came over the
two hundred odd miles that separated the metropolis of convicts from
the metropolis of the world. "Man apparently murdered here, inspector. Chap who is thought to
have done it disappeared. Widow wants me to take up case. I'm
unwilling to do so; but it looks like duty." So spoke Brendon. "Right. If it looks like duty, do it. Let me hear again to-night. Halfyard, chief at Princetown, is an old friend of mine. Very good
man. Good-bye." Mark then learned that Inspector Halfyard was already at Foggintor. "I'm on this," said Mark to the constable. "I'll come in again. Tell
the inspector to expect me at noon for all details. I'm going to see
Mrs. Pendean now." The policeman saluted. He knew Brendon very well by sight. "I hope it won't knock a hole in your holiday, sir. But I reckon it
won't. It's all pretty plain sailing by the look of it." "Where's the body?" "That's what we don't know yet, Mr. Brendon; and that's what only
Robert Redmayne can tell us by the look of it." The detective nodded. Then he sought No. 3, Station Cottages. The little row of attached houses ran off at right angles to the
high street of Princetown. They faced northwest, and immediately in
front of them rose the great, tree-clad shoulder of North Hessory
Tor. The woods ascended steeply and a stone wall ran between them
and the dwellings beneath. Brendon knocked at No. 3 and was admitted by a thin, grey-haired
woman who had evidently been shedding tears. He found himself in a
little hall decorated with many trophies of fox hunting. There were
masks and brushes and several specimens of large Dartmoor foxes, who
had run their last and now stood stuffed in cases hung upon the
walls. "Do I speak to Mrs. Pendean?" asked Brendon; but the old woman shook
her head. "No, sir. I'm Mrs. Edward Gerry, widow of the famous Ned Gerry, for
twenty years Huntsman of the Dartmoor Foxhounds. Mr. and Mrs.
Pendean were--are--I mean she is my lodger." "Is she ready to see me?" "She's cruel hard hit, poor lady. What name, sir?" "Mr. Mark Brendon." "She hoped you'd come. But go gentle with her. 'Tis a fearful ordeal
for any innocent person to have to talk to you, sir." Mrs. Gerry opened a door upon the right hand of the entrance. "The great Mr. Brendon be here, Mrs. Pendean," she said; then
Brendon walked in and the widow shut the door behind him. Jenny Pendean rose from her chair by the table where she was writing
letters and Brendon saw the auburn girl of the sunset. CHAPTER II

THE PROBLEM STATED


The girl had evidently dressed that morning without thought or
care--perhaps unconsciously. Her wonderful hair was lifted and wound
carelessly upon her head; her beauty had been dimmed by tears. She
was, however, quite controlled and showed little emotion at their
meeting; but she looked very weary and every inflection of her
pleasant, clear voice revealed it. She spoke as one who had suffered
much and laboured under great loss of vitality. He found this to be
indeed the case, for it seemed that she had lost half herself. As he entered she rose and saw in his face an astonishment which
seemed not much to surprise her, for she was used to admiration and
knew that her beauty startled men. Brendon, though he felt his heart beat quicklier at his discovery,
soon had himself in hand. He spoke with tact and sympathy, feeling
himself already committed to serve her with all his wits and
strength. Only a fleeting regret shot through his mind that the case
in all probability would not prove such as to reveal his own strange
powers. He combined the regulation methods of criminal research with
the more modern deductive system, and his success, as he always
pointed out, was reached by the double method. Already he longed to
distinguish himself before this woman. "Mrs. Pendean," he said, "I am very glad that you learned I was in
Princetown and it will be a privilege to serve you if I can. The
worst may not have happened, though from what I have heard, there is
every reason to fear it; but, believe me, I will do my best on your
account. I have communicated with headquarters and, being free at
this moment, can devote myself wholly to the problem." "Perhaps it was selfish to ask you in your holidays," she said. "But, somehow, I felt--"

"Think nothing whatever of that. I hope that what lies before us may
not take very long. And now I will listen to you. There is no need
to tell me anything about what has happened at Foggintor. I shall
hear all about that later in the day. You will do well now to let me
know everything bearing upon it that went before this sad affair;
and if you can throw the least light of a nature to guide me and
help my inquiry, so much the better." "I can throw no light at all," she said. "It has come like a
thunderbolt and I still find my mind refusing to accept the story
that they have brought to me. I cannot think about it--I cannot bear
to think about it; and if I believed it, I should go mad. My husband
is my life." "Sit down and give me some account of yourself and Mr. Pendean. You
cannot have been married very long." "Four years." He showed astonishment. "I am twenty-five," she explained, "though I'm told I do not look so
much as that." "Indeed not; I should have guessed eighteen. Collect your thoughts
now and just give me what of your history and your husband's you
think most likely to be of use." She did not speak for a moment and Brendon, taking a chair, drew it
up and sat with his arms upon the back of it facing her in a casual
and easy position. He wanted her to feel quite unconstrained. "Just chat, as though you were talking of the past to a friend," he
said. "Indeed you must believe that you are talking to a friend, who
has no desire but to serve you." "I'll begin at the beginning," she answered. "My own history is
brief enough and has surely little bearing on this dreadful thing;
but my relations may be more interesting to you than I am. The
family is now a very small one and seems likely to remain so, for of
my three uncles all are bachelors. I have no other blood relations
in Europe and know nothing of some distant cousins who live in
Australia. "The story of my family is this: John Redmayne lived his life on the
Murray River in Victoria, South Australia, and there he made a
considerable fortune out of sheep. He married and had a large
family. Out of seven sons and five daughters born to them during a
period of twenty years, Jenny and John Redmayne only saw five of
their children grow into adult health and strength. Four boys lived,
the rest died young; though two were drowned in a boating accident
and my Aunt Mary, their eldest daughter, lived a year after her
marriage. "There remained four sons: Henry, the eldest, Albert, Bendigo, and
Robert, the youngest of the family, now a man of thirty-five. It is
he you are seeking in this awful thing that is thought to have
happened. "Henry Redmayne was his father's representative in England and a
wool broker on his own account. He married and had one daughter:
myself. I remember my parents very well, for I was fifteen and at
school when they died. They were on their way to Australia, so that
my father might see his father and mother again after the lapse of
many years. But their ship, _The Wattle Blossom_, was lost with all
hands and I became an orphan. "John Redmayne, my grandfather, though a rich man was a great
believer in work, and all his sons had to find occupation and
justify their lives in his eyes. Uncle Albert, who was only a year
younger than my father, cared for studious subjects and literature. He was apprenticed in youth to a bookseller at Sydney and after a
time came to England, joined a large and important firm of
booksellers, and became an expert. They took him into partnership
and he travelled for them and spent some years in New York. But his
special subject was Italian Renaissance literature and his joy was
Italy, where he now lives. He found himself in a position to retire
about ten years ago, being a bachelor with modest requirements. He
knew, moreover, that his father must soon pass away and, as his
mother was already dead, he stood in a position to count upon a
share of the large fortune to be divided presently between himself
and his two remaining brothers. "Of these my Uncle Bendigo Redmayne was a sailor in the merchant
marine. After reaching the position of a captain in the Royal Mail
Steamship Company he retired on my grandfather's death, four years
ago. He is a bluff, gruff old salt without any charm, and he never
reached promotion into the passenger service, but remained in
command of cargo boats--a circumstance he regarded as a great
grievance. But the sea is his devotion, and when he was able to do
so, he built himself a little house on the Devon cliffs, where now
he resides within sound of the waves. "My third uncle, Robert Redmayne, is at this moment apparently
suspected of having killed my husband; but the more I think of such
a hideous situation, the less possible does it appear. For not the
wildest nightmare dream would seem more mad and motiveless than such
a horror as this. "Robert Redmayne in youth was his father's favourite and if he
spoiled any of his sons he spoiled the youngest. Uncle Robert came
to England, and being fond of cattle breeding and agriculture,
joined a farmer, the brother of an Australian friend of John
Redmayne's. He was supposed to be getting on well, but he came and
went, for my grandfather did not like a year to pass without a
sight of him. "Uncle Bob was a pleasure-loving man especially fond of horse racing
and sea fishing. On the strength of his prospects he borrowed money
and got into debt. After the death of my own father I saw a little
of Uncle Robert from time to time, for he was kind to me and liked
me to be with him in my holidays. He did very little work. Most of
his time he was at the races, or down in Cornwall at Penzance, where
he was supposed to be courting a young woman--a hotel keeper's
daughter. I had just left school and was about to leave England and
go to live with my grandfather in Australia, when events happened
swiftly, one on top of the other, and life was changed for all us
Redmaynes." "Rest a little if you are tired," said Mark. He saw by her
occasional breaks and the sighs that lifted her bosom, how great an
effort Mrs. Pendean was making to tell her story well. "I will go straight on," she answered. "It was summertime and I was
stopping with my Uncle Robert at Penzance when two great
things--indeed three great things--happened. The war broke out, my
grandfather died in Australia and, lastly, I became engaged to
Michael Pendean. "I had loved Michael devotedly for a year before he asked me to
marry him. But when I told my Uncle Robert what had happened he
chose to disapprove and considered that I had made a serious
mistake. My future husband's parents were dead. His father had been
the head of a firm called Pendean and Trecarrow, whose business was
the importation of pilchards to Italy. But Michael, though he had
now succeeded his father in the business, took no interest in it. It
gave him an income, but his own interests were in a mechanical
direction. And, incidentally, he was always a good deal of a dreamer
and liked better to plan than to carry out. "We loved one another passionately and I have very little doubt that
my uncles would have raised no objection to our marrying in the long
run, had not unfortunate events happened to set them against our
betrothal. "On the death of my grandfather it was found that he had written a
peculiar will; and we also learned that his fortune would prove
considerably smaller than his sons expected. However, he left rather
more than one hundred and fifty thousand. It appeared that during
the last ten years of his life, he had lost his judgment and made a
number of hopeless investments. "The terms of the will put all his fortune into the power of my
Uncle Albert, my grandfather's eldest living son. He told Uncle
Albert to divide the total proceeds of the estate between himself
and his two brothers as his judgment should dictate, for he knew
that Albert was a man of scrupulous honour and would do justly by
all. With regard to me, he directed my uncle to set aside twenty
thousand pounds, to be given me on my marriage, or failing that, on
my twenty-fifth birthday. In the meantime I was to be taken care of
by my uncles; and he added that my future husband, if he appeared,
must be approved of by Uncle Albert. "Though jarred to find he would receive far less than he had hoped,
Uncle Robert was soon in a good temper, for their elder brother
informed Uncle Bob and Uncle Bendigo that he should divide the
fortune into three equal parts. Thus it came about that each
received about forty thousand pounds, while my inheritance was set
aside. All would have been well, no doubt, and I was coaxing my
uncle round, for Michael Pendean knew nothing about our affairs and
remained wholly ignorant that I should ever be worth a penny. It was
a marriage of purest love and he had four hundred a year of his own
from the business of the pilchard fishery, which we both deemed
ample for our needs. "Then broke the war, on those awful days in August, and the face of
the world changed--I suppose forever." She stopped again, rose, went to the sideboard, and poured herself
out a little water. Mark jumped up and took the glass jug from her
hand. "Rest now," he begged, but she sipped the water and shook her head. "I will rest when you have gone," she answered; "but please come
back again presently if you can give me a gleam of hope." "Be very sure of that, Mrs. Pendean." She went back to her seat while he also sat down again. Then she
resumed. "The war altered everything and created a painful breach between my
future husband and my Uncle Robert. The latter instantly
volunteered and rejoiced in the opportunity to seek adventure. He
joined a cavalry regiment and invited Michael to do the same; but my
husband, though no more patriotic man lives--I must speak still as
though he lives, Mr. Brendon--"

"Of course you must, Mrs. Pendean--we must all think of him as
living until the contrary is proved." "Thank you for saying that! My husband had no mind for active
warfare. He was delicately built and of a gentle temperament. The
thought of engaging in hand-to-hand conflict was more than he could
endure, and there were, of course, a thousand other ways open to him
in which he could serve his country--a man so skilful as he." "Of course there were." "Uncle Robert, however, made a personal thing of it. Volunteers for
active service were urgently demanded and he declared that in the
ranks was the only place for any man of fighting age, who desired
longer to call himself a man. He represented the situation to his
brothers, and Uncle Bendigo--who had just retired, but who,
belonging to the Naval Reserve, now joined up and soon took charge
of some mine sweepers--wrote very strongly as to what he thought was
Michael's duty. From Italy Uncle Albert also declared his mind to
the same purpose, and though I resented their attitude, the
decision, of course, rested with Michael, not with me. He was only
five-and-twenty then and he had no desire but to do his duty. There
was nobody to advise him and, perceiving the danger of opposing my
uncles' wishes, he yielded and volunteered. "But he was refused. A doctor declared that a heart murmur made the
necessary training quite impossible and I thanked God when I heard
it. The tribulations began then and Uncle Bob saw red about it,
accusing Michael of evading his duty and of having bribed the doctor
to get him off. We had some very distressing scenes and I was
thankful when my uncle went to France. "At my own wish Michael married me and I informed my uncles that he
had done so. Relations were strained all round after that; but I did
not care; and my husband only lived to please me. Then, halfway
through the war, came the universal call for workers; and seeing
that men above combatant age, or incapacitated from fighting, were
wanted up here at Princetown, Michael offered himself and we arrived
together. "The Prince of Wales had been instrumental in starting a big moss
depot for the preparation of surgical dressings; and both my husband
and I joined this station, where the sphagnum moss was collected
from the bogs of Dartmoor, dried, cleaned, treated chemically, and
dispatched to all the war hospitals of the kingdom. A busy little
company carried on this good work and, while I joined the women who
picked and cleaned the moss, my husband, though not strong enough to
tramp the moors and do the heavy work of collecting it and bringing
it up to Princetown, was instrumental in drying it and spreading it
on the asphalt lawn-tennis courts of the prison warders' cricket
ground, where this preliminary process was carried out. Michael also
kept records and accounts and indeed organized the whole depot to
perfection. "For nearly two years we stuck to this task, lodging here with Mrs.
Gerry. During that time I fell in love with Dartmoor and begged my
husband to build me a bungalow up here when the war was ended, if he
could afford to do so. His pilchard trade with Italy practically
came to an end after the summer of 1914. But the company of Pendean
and Trecarrow owned some good little steamers and these were soon
very valuable. So Michael, who had got to care for Dartmoor as much
as I did, presently took steps and succeeded in obtaining a long
lease of a beautiful and sheltered spot near Foggintor quarries, a
few miles from here. "Meanwhile I had heard nothing from my uncles, though I had seen
Uncle Robert's name in the paper among those who had won the D.S.O. Michael advised me to leave the question of my money until after the
war, and so I did. We began our bungalow last year and came back to
live with Mrs. Gerry until it should be completed. "Six months ago I wrote to Uncle Albert in Italy and he told me that
he should deliberate the proposition; but he still much resented my
marriage. I wrote to Uncle Bendigo at Dartmouth also, who was now in
his new home; but while not particularly angry with me, his reply
spoke slightingly of my dear husband. "These facts bring me to the situation that suddenly developed a
week ago, Mr. Brendon." She stopped and sighed again. "I much fear that I am tiring you out," he said. "Would you like to
leave the rest?" "No. For the sake of clearness it is better you hear everything now. A week ago I was walking out of the post-office, when who should
suddenly stop in front of me on a motor bicycle but Uncle Robert? I
waited only to see him dismount and set his machine on a rest before
the post-office. Then I approached him. My arms were round his neck
and I was kissing him before he had time to know what had happened,
for I need not tell you that I had long since forgiven him. He
frowned at first but at last relented. He was lodging at Paignton,
down on Torbay, for the summer months, and he hinted that he was
engaged to be married. I behaved as nicely as I knew how, and when
he told me that he was going on to Plymouth for a few days before
returning to his present quarters, I implored him to let the past go
and be friends and come and talk to my husband. "He had been to see an old war comrade at Two Bridges, two miles
from here, and meant to lunch at the Duchy Hotel and then proceed to
Plymouth; but I prevailed upon him at last to come and share our
midday meal, and I was able to tell him things about Michael which
promised to change his unfriendly attitude. To my delight he at
last consented to stop for a few hours, and I arranged the most
attractive little dinner that I could. When my husband returned from
the bungalow I brought them together again. Michael was on his
defence instantly; but he never harboured a grievance very long and
when he saw that Uncle Bob was not unfriendly and very interested to
hear he had won the O.B.E. for his valuable services at the depot,
Michael showed a ready inclination to forget and forgive the past. "I think that was almost the happiest day of my life and, with my
anxiety much modified, I was able to study Uncle Robert a little. He
seemed unchanged, save that he talked louder and was more excitable
than ever. The war had given him wide, new interests; he was a
captain and intended, if he could, to stop in the army. He had
escaped marvellously on many fields and seen much service. During
the last few weeks before the armistice, he succumbed to gassing and
was invalided; though, before that, he had also been out of action
from shell shock for two months. He made light of this; but I felt
there was really something different about him and suspected that
the shell shock accounted for the change. He was always excitable
and in extremes--now up in the clouds and now down in the
depths--but his terrible experiences had accentuated this
peculiarity and, despite his amiable manners and apparent good
spirits, both Michael and I felt that his nerves were highly strung
and that his judgment could hardly be relied upon. Indeed his
judgment was never a strong point. "But he proved very jolly, though very egotistical. He talked for
hours about the war and what he had done to win his honours; and we
noticed particularly a feature of his conversation. His memory
failed him sometimes. By which I do not mean that he told us
anything contrary to fact; but he often repeated himself, and having
mentioned some adventure, would, after the lapse of an hour or less,
tell us the same story over again as something new. "Michael explained to me afterwards that this defect was a serious
thing and probably indicated some brain trouble which might get
worse. I was too happy at our reconciliation, however, to feel any
concern for the moment and presently, after tea, I begged Uncle
Robert to stop with us for a few days instead of going to Plymouth. We walked out over the moor in the evening to see the bungalow and
my uncle was very interested. Finally he decided that he would
remain for the night, at any rate, and we made him put up with us
and occupy Mrs. Gerry's spare bedroom, instead of going to the Duchy
Hotel as he intended. "He stopped on and liked to lend a hand with the building sometimes
after the builders had gone. He and Michael often spent hours of
these long evenings there together; and I would take out tea to
them. "Uncle Robert had told us about his engagement to a young woman, the
sister of a comrade in the war. She was stopping at Paignton with
her parents and he was now going to return to her. He made us
promise to come to Paignton next August for the Torbay Regatta; and
in secret I begged him to write to both, my other uncles and
explain that he was now satisfied Michael had done his bit in the
war. He consented to do so and thus it looked as though our
anxieties would soon be at an end. "Last night Uncle Robert and Michael went, after an early tea, to
the bungalow, but I did not accompany them on this occasion. They
ran round by road on Uncle Robert's motor bicycle, my husband
sitting behind him, as he always did. "Supper time came and neither of them appeared. I am speaking of
last night now. I did not bother till midnight, but then I grew
frightened. I went to the police station, saw Inspector Halfyard,
and told him that my husband and uncle had not come back from
Foggintor and that I was anxious about them. He knew them both by
sight and my husband personally, for he had been of great use to
Michael when the moss depot was at work. That is all I can tell
you." Mrs. Pendean stopped and Brendon rose. "What remains to be told I will get from Inspector Halfyard
himself," he said. "And you must let me congratulate you on your
statement. It would have been impossible to put the past situation
more clearly before me. The great point you made is that your
husband and Captain Redmayne were entirely reconciled and left you
in complete friendship when you last saw them. You can assure me of
that?" "Most emphatically." "Have you looked into your uncle's room since he disappeared?" "No, it has not been touched." "Again thank you, Mrs. Pendean. I shall see you some time to-day." "Can you give me any sort of hope?" "As yet I know nothing of the actual event, and must not therefore
offer you hope, or tell you not to hope." She shook his hand and a fleeting ghost of a smile, infinitely
pathetic but unconscious, touched her face. Even in grief the beauty
of the woman was remarkable; and to Brendon, whose private emotions
already struck into the present demands upon his intellect, she
appeared exquisite. As he left her he hoped that a great problem lay
before him. He desired to impress her--he looked forward with a
passing exaltation quite foreign from his usual staid and cautious
habit of mind; he even repeated to himself a pregnant saying that he
had come across in a book of quotations, though he knew not the
author of it. "There is an hour in which a man may be happy all his
      life, can he but find it." Then he grew ashamed of himself and felt something like a blush
suffuse his plain features. At the police station a car was waiting for him and in twenty
minutes he had reached Foggintor. Picking his way past the fishing
pools and regarding the frowning cliffs and wide spaces of the
quarry under a mournful mist, Mark proceeded to the aperture at the
farther end. Then he left the rill which ran out from this exit and
soon stood by the bungalow. It was now the dinner hour. Half a
dozen masons and carpenters were eating their meal in a wooden shed
near the building and with them sat two constables and their
superior officer. Inspector Halfyard rose as Brendon appeared, came forward, and shook
hands. "Lucky you was on the spot, my dear," he said in his homely Devon
way. "Not that it begins to look as if there was anything here deep
enough to ask for your cleverness." Inspector Halfyard stood six feet high and had curiously broad,
square shoulders; but his imposing torso was ill supported. His legs
were very thin and long, and they turned out a trifle. With his
prominent nose, small head, and bright little slate-grey eyes, he
looked rather like a stork. He was rheumatic, too, and walked
stiffly. "This here hole is no place for my legs," he confessed. "But from
the facts, so far as we've got 'em, Foggintor quarry don't come into
the story, though it looks as if it ought to. But the murder was
done here--inside this bungalow--and the chap that's done it hadn't
any use for such a likely sort of hiding-place." "Have you searched the quarries'?" "Not yet. 'Tis no good turning fifty men into this jakes of a hole
till we know whether it will be needful; but all points to somewhere
else. A terrible strange job--so strange, in fact, that we shall
probably find a criminal lunatic at the bottom of it. Everything
looks pretty clear, but it don't look sane." "You haven't found the body?" "No; but you can often prove murder mighty well without it--as now. Come out to the bungalow and I'll tell you what there is to tell. There's been a murder all right, but we're more likely to find the
murderer than his victim." They went out together and soon stood in the building. "Now let's have the story from where you come in," said Brendon, and
Inspector Halfyard told his tale. "Somewhere about a quarter after midnight I was knocked up. Down I
came and Constable Ford, on duty at the time, told me that Mrs.
Pendean was wishful to see me. I knew her and her husband very well,
for they'd been the life and soul of the Moss Supply Depot, run at
Princetown during the war. "Her husband and her uncle, Captain Redmayne, had gone to the
bungalow, as they often did after working hours, to carry on a bit;
but at midnight they hadn't come home, and she was put about for
'em. Hearing of the motor bike, I thought there might have been a
breakdown, if not an accident, so I told Ford to knock up another
chap and go down along the road. Which they did do--and Ford came
back at half after three with ugly news that they'd seen nobody, but
they'd found a great pool of blood inside the bungalow--as if
somebody had been sticking a pig there. 'Twas daylight by then and I
motored out instanter. The mess is in the room that will be the
kitchen, and there's blood on the lintel of the back door which
opens into the kitchen. "I looked round very carefully for anything in the nature of a clue,
but I couldn't see so much as a button. What makes any work here
wasted, so far as I can see, is the evidence of the people at the
cottages in the by-road to Foggintor, where we came in. A few
quarrymenn and their families live there, and also Tom Ringrose, the
water bailiff down on Walkham River. The quarrymen don't work here
because this place hasn't been open for more than a hundred years;
but they go to Duke's quarry down at Merivale, and most of 'em have
push bikes to take 'em to and from their job. "At these cottages, on my way back to breakfast, I got some
information of a very definite kind. Two men told the same tale and
they hadn't met before they told it. One was Jim Bassett, under
foreman at Duke's quarry, and one was Ringrose, the water bailiff
who lives in the end cottage. Bassett has been at the bungalow once
or twice, as granite for it comes from the quarry at Merivale. He
knew Mr. Pendean and Captain Redmayne by sight and, last night,
somewhere about ten o'clock by summer time, while it was still
light, he saw the captain leave and pass the cottages. Bassett was
smoking at his door at the time and Robert Redmayne came alone,
pushing his motor bicycle till he reached the road. And behind the
saddle he had a big sack fastened to the machine. "Bassett wished him 'good night' and he returned the compliment;
and half a mile down the by-road, Ringrose also passed him. He was
now on his machine and riding slowly till he reached the main road. He reached it and then Ringrose heard him open out and get up speed. He proceeded up the hill and the water bailiff supposed that he was
going back to Princetown." Inspector Halfyard stopped. "And that is all you know?" asked Brendon. "As to Captain Redmayne's movements--yes," answered the elder. "There will probably be information awaiting us when we return to
Princetown, as inquiries are afoot along both roads--to Moreton and
Exeter on the one side and by Dartmeet to Ashburton and the coast
towns on the other. He must have gone off to the moor by one of
those ways, I judge; and if he didn't, then he turned in his tracks
and got either to Plymouth, or away to the north. We can't fail to
pick up his line pretty quickly. He's a noticeable man." "Did Ringrose also report the sack behind the motor bicycle?" "He did." "Before you mentioned it?" "Yes, he volunteered that item, just as Bassett had done." "Let me see what's to be seen here, then," said Brendon, and they
entered the kitchen of the bungalow together. CHAPTER III

THE MYSTERY


Brendon followed Halfyard into the apartment destined to be the
kitchen of Michael Pendean's bungalow, and the inspector lifted some
tarpaulins that had been thrown upon a corner of the room. In the
midst stood a carpenter's bench, and the floor, the boards of which
had already been laid, was littered with shavings and tools. Under
the tarpaulin a great red stain soaked to the walls, where much
blood had flowed. It was still wet in places and upon it lay
shavings partially ensanguined. At the edge of the central stain
were smears and, among them, half the impress of a big, nail-studded
boot. "Have the workmen been in here this morning?" asked Brendon, and
Inspector Halfyard answered that they had not. "Two constables were here last night after one o'clock--the men I
sent from Princetown when Mrs. Pendean gave the alarm," he said. "They looked round with an electric torch and found the blood. One
came back; the other stopped on the spot all night. I was out here
myself before the masons and carpenters came to work, and I forbade
them to touch anything till we'd made our examination. Mr. Pendean
was in the habit of doing a bit himself after hours." "Can the men say if anything was done last night--in the way of
work on the bungalow?" "No doubt they'd know." Brendon sent for a mason and a carpenter; and while the latter
alleged that nothing had been added to the last work of himself and
his mate, the mason, pointing to a wall which was destined to
inclose the garden, declared that some heavy stones had been lifted
and mortared into place since he left on the previous evening at
five o 'clock. "Pull down all the new work," directed Brendon. Then he turned to examine the kitchen more closely. A very careful
survey produced no results and he could find nothing that the
carpenters were not able to account for. There was no evidence of
any struggle. A sheep might as easily have been killed in the
chamber as a man; but he judged the blood to be human and Halfyard
had made one discovery of possible importance. The timbers of the
kitchen door were already set up and they had received a preliminary
coat of white paint. This was smeared at the height of a man's
shoulder with blood. Brandon then examined the ground immediately outside the kitchen
door. It was rough and trampled with many feet of the workmen but
gave no special imprints or other indications of the least value. For twenty yards he scrutinized every inch of the ground and
presently found indications of a motor bicycle. It had stood
here--ten yards from the bungalow--and the marks of the wheels and
the rest lowered to support it were clear enough in the peat. He
traced the impressions as the machine was wheeled away and observed
that at one soft place they had pressed very deeply into the earth. The pattern of the tire was familiar to him, a Dunlop. Half an hour
later one of the constables approached, saluted Mark, and made a
statement. "They've pulled down the wall, sir, and found nothing there; but
Fulford, the mason, says that a sack is missing. It was a big sack,
in the corner of the shed out there, and the cement that it
contained is all poured out; but the sack has gone." The detective visited the spot and turned over the pile of cement,
which revealed nothing. Then, having himself searched the workmen's
shed without discovering any clue, he strolled in the immediate
neighbourhood of the bungalow and examined the adjacent entrance to
the quarries. Not the least spark of light rewarded the search. He
came back presently out of the rain which had now begun to fall
steadily--but not before he had strolled as far as the fishing pools
and seen clear marks of naked, adult feet on the sandy brink. Inspector Halfyard, who had remained in the bungalow, joined him
while he examined the other five chambers with close attention. In
the apartment destined for a sitting-room, which faced out upon the
great view to the southwest, Brendon found a cigar half smoked. It
had evidently been flung down alight and had smouldered for some
time, scorching the wooden floor before it went out. He found also
the end of a broken, brown boot lace with a brass tag. The lace had
evidently frayed away and probably had broken when being tied. But
he attached not the least importance to either fragment. Nothing
that he regarded as of value resulted from inspection of the
remaining rooms and Brendon presently decided that he would return
to Princetown. He showed Halfyard the footprints by the water and
had them protected with a tarpaulin. "Something tells me that this is a pretty simple business all the
same," he said. "We need waste no more time here, inspector--at any
rate until we have got back to the telephone and heard the latest." "What's your idea?" "I should say we have to do with an unfortunate man who's gone mad,"
replied the detective; "and a madman doesn't take long to find as a
rule. I think it's murder right enough and I believe we shall find
that this soldier, who's had shell shock, turned on Pendean and cut
his throat, then, fondly hoping to hide the crime, got away with the
body. Why I judge him to be mad is because Mrs. Pendean, who has
told me the full story of the past, was able to assure me that the
men had become exceedingly friendly, and that certain differences,
which existed between them at the outbreak of the war, were entirely
composed. And even granting that they quarrelled again, the quarrel
must have suddenly sprung up. That seems improbable and one can't
easily imagine a sudden row so tremendous that it ends in murder. "Redmayne was a big, powerful man and he may have struck without
intention to kill; but this mess means more than a blow with a fist. I think that he was a homicidal maniac and probably plotted the job
beforehand with a madman's limited cunning; and if that is so,
there's pretty sure to be news waiting for us at Princetown. Before
dark we ought to know where are both the dead and the living man. These footprints mean a bather, or perhaps two. We'll study them
later and drag the pond, if necessary." The correctness of Brendon's deduction was made manifest within an
hour, and the operations of Robert Redmayne defined up to a point. A
man was waiting at the police station--George French, ostler at Two
Bridges Hotel, on West Dart. "I knew Captain Redmayne," he said, "because he'd been down once or
twice of late to tea at Two Bridges. Last night, at half after ten,
I was crossing the road from the garage and suddenly, without
warning, a motor bike came over the bridge. I heard the rush of it
and only got out of the way by a yard. There was no light showing
but the man went through the beam thrown from the open door of the
hotel and I saw it was the captain by his great mustache and his red
waistcoat. "He didn't see me, because it was taking him all his time to look
after himself, and he'd just let her go, to rush the stiff hill that
rises out of Two Bridges. He was gone like a puff of smoke and must
have been running terrible fast--fifty mile an hour I dare say. We
heard as there was trouble at Princetown and master sent me up over
to report what I'd seen." "Which way did he go after he had passed, Mr. French?" asked
Brendon, who knew the Dartmoor country well. "The road forks above
Two Bridges. Did he take the right hand for Dartmeet, or the left
for Post Bridge and Moreton?" But George could not say. "'Twas like a thunder planet flashing by," he told Mark, "and I
don't know from Adam which way he went after he'd got up on top." "Was anybody with him?" "No, sir. I'd have seen that much; but he carried a big sack behind
the saddle--that I can swear to." There had been several telephone calls for Inspector Halfyard during
his absence; and now three separate statements from different
districts awaited him. These were already written out by a
constable, and he took them one by one, read them, and handed them
to Brendon. The first came from the post office at Post Bridge, and
the post-mistress reported that a man, one Samuel White, had seen a
motor bicycle run at great speed without lights up the steep hill
northward of that village on the previous night. He gave the time as
between half past ten and eleven o'clock. "We should have heard of him from Moreton next," said Halfyard;
"but, no. He must have branched under Hameldown and gone south, for
the next news is from Ashburton." The second message told how a garage keeper was knocked up at
Ashburton, just after midnight, in order that petrol might be
obtained for a motor bicycle. The description of the purchaser
corresponded to Redmayne and the message added that the bicycle had
a large sack tied behind it. The rider was in no hurry; he smoked a
cigarette, swore because he could not get a drink, lighted his
lamps, and then proceeded by the Totnes road which wound through the
valley of the Dart southward. The third communication came from the police station at Brixham and
was somewhat lengthy. It ran thus:

     "At ten minutes after two o'clock last night P.C. Widgery, on
     night duty at Brixham, saw a man on a motor bicycle with a
     large parcel behind him run through the town square. He
     proceeded down the main street and was gone for the best part
     of an hour; but, before three o'clock, Widgery saw him return
     without his parcel. He went fast up the hill out of Brixham,
     the way he came. Inquiries to-day show that he passed the
     Brixham coast-guard station about a quarter after two o'clock,
     and he must have lifted his machine over the barrier at the end
     of the coast-guard road, because he was seen by a boy, from
     Berry Head lighthouse, pushing it up the steep path that runs
     to the downs. The boy was going for a doctor, because his
     father, one of the lighthouse watchers, had been taken ill. The
     boy says the motor bicyclist was a big man and he was blowing,
     because the machine was heavy and the road just there very
     steep and rough. He saw no more of him on returning from the
     doctor. We are searching the Head and cliffs round about." Inspector Halfyard waited until Brendon had read the messages and
put them down. "About as easy as shelling peas--eh?" he asked. "I expected an arrest," answered the detective. "It can't be long
delayed." As though to confirm him the telephone bell rang and Halfyard rose
and entered the box to receive the latest information. "Paignton speaking," said the message. "We have just called at
address of Captain Redmayne--No. 7 Marine Terrace. He was expected
last night--had wired yesterday to say he'd be home. They left
supper for him, as usual when he is expected, and went to bed. Didn't hear him return, but found on going down house next morning
that he had come--supper eaten, motor bike in tool house in back
yard, where he keeps it. They called him at ten o'clock--no answer. They went in his room. Not there and bed not slept in and his
clothes not changed. He's not been seen since." "Hold on. Mark Brendon's here and has the case. He'll speak." Inspector Halfyard reported the statement and Brendon picked up the
mouthpiece. "Detective Brendon speaking. Who is it?" "Inspector Reece, Paignton." "Let me hear at five o'clock if arrest has been made. Failing arrest
I will motor down to you after that hour." "Very good, sir. I expect to hear he's taken any minute." "Nothing from Berry Head?" "We've got a lot of men there and all round under the cliffs, but
nothing yet." "All right, inspector. I'll come down if I don't hear to the
contrary by five." He hung up the receiver. "All over bar shouting, I reckon," said Halfyard. "It looks like it. He's mad, poor devil." "It's the dead man I'm sorry for." Brendon considered, having first looked at his watch. Personal
thoughts would thrust themselves upon him, though he felt both
surprise and shame that they could do so. Certain realities were
clear enough to his mind, however future details might develop. And
the overmastering fact was that Jenny Pendean had lost her husband. If she were, indeed, a widow--

He shook his head impatiently and turned to Halfyard. "Should Robert Redmayne not be taken to-day, one or two things must
be done," he said. "You'd better have some of that blood collected
and the fact proved that it is human. And keep the cigar and boot
lace here for the minute, though I attach no importance to either. Now I'll go and get some food and see Mrs. Pendean. Then I'll come
back. I'll take the police car for Paignton at half past five if we
hear nothing to alter my plans." "You will. This isn't going to spoil your holiday, after all." "What is it going to do, I wonder?" thought Brendon. But he said no
more and prepared to go on his way. It was now three o'clock. Suddenly he turned and asked Halfyard a question. "What do you think of Mrs. Pendean, inspector?" "I think two things about her," answered the elder. "I think she's
such a lovely piece that it's hard to believe she's just flesh and
blood, like other women; and I think I never saw such worship for a
man as she had for her husband. This will knock her right bang out." These opinions made the detective melancholy; but he had not yet
begun to reflect on how the passing of a dearly loved husband would
change the life of Mrs. Pendean. He suddenly felt himself thrust out
of the situation forever, yet resented his own conviction as
irrational. "What sort of a man was he?" "A friendly fashion of chap--Cornish--a pacifist at heart I reckon;
but we never talked war politics." "What was his age?" "Couldn't tell you--doubtful--might have been anything between
twenty-five and thirty-five. A man with weak eyes and a brown beard. He wore double eye-glasses for close work, but his long sight he
said was good." After a meal Brendon went again to Mrs. Pendean; but many rumours
had reached her through the morning and she already knew most of
what he had to tell. A change had come over her; she was very silent
and very pale. Mark knew that she had grasped the truth and knew
that her husband must probably be dead. She was, however, anxious to learn if Brendon could explain what
had happened. "Have you ever met with any such thing before?" she asked. "No case is quite like another. They all have their differences. I
think that Captain Redmayne, who has suffered from shell shock, must
have been overtaken by loss of reason. Shell shock often produces
dementia of varying degrees--some lasting, some fleeting. I'm afraid
your uncle went out of his mind and, in a moment of madness, may
have done a dreadful thing. Then he set out, while he was still
insane, to cover up his action. So far as we can judge, he took away
his victim and meant apparently to throw him into the sea. I feel
only too sure that your husband has lost his life, Mrs. Pendean. You
must be prepared to accept that unspeakable misfortune." "It is hard to accept," she answered, "because they were good
friends again." "Something of which you do not know may have cropped up between them
to upset Redmayne. When he comes to his senses, he will probably
think the whole thing an evil dream. Have you a portrait of your
husband?" She left the room and returned in a few moments with a photograph. It presented a man of meditative countenance, wide forehead, and
steadfast eyes. He wore a beard, mustache and whiskers, and his hair
was rather long. "Is that like him?" "Yes; but it does not show his expression. It is not quite
natural--he was more animated than that." "How old was he?" "Not thirty, Mr. Brendon, but he looked considerably older." Brendon studied the photograph. "You can take it with you if you wish to do so. I have another
copy," said Mrs. Pendean. "I shall remember very accurately," answered Brendon. "I am
tolerably certain that poor Mr. Pendean's body was thrown into the
sea and may already be recovered. That appears to have been Captain
Redmayne's purpose. Can you tell me anything about the lady to whom
your uncle is engaged?" "I can give you her name and address. But I have never seen her." "Had your husband seen her?" "Not to my knowledge. Indeed I can say certainly that he never had. She is a Miss Flora Reed and she is stopping with her mother and
father at the Singer Hotel, Paignton. Her brother, my uncle's friend
in France, is also there I believe." "Thank you very much. If I hear nothing further, I go to Paignton
this evening." "Why?" "To pursue my inquiry and see all those who know your uncle. It has
puzzled me a little that he has not already been found, because a
man suffering from such an upset of mind could make no successful
attempt to evade a professional search for long. Nor, so far as we
know, has he apparently attempted to escape. After going to Berry
Head early this morning, he returned to his lodgings, ate a meal,
left his motor bicycle, and then went out again--still in his tweed
suit with the red waistcoat." "You'll see Flora Reed?" "If necessary; but I shall not go if Robert Redmayne has been
found." "You think it is all very simple and straight-forward, then?" "So it appears. The best that one can hope is that the unfortunate
man may come back to his senses and give a clear account of
everything. And may I ask what you design to do and if it is in my
power to serve you personally in any way?" Jenny Pendean showed surprise at this question. She lifted her face
to Brendon's and a slight warmth touched its pallor. "That is kind of you," she said. "I will not forget. But when we
know more, I shall probably leave here. If my husband has indeed
lost his life, the bungalow will not be finished by me. I shall go,
of course." "May I hope that you have friends who are coming forward?" She shook her head. "As a matter of fact I am much alone in the world. My husband was
everything--everything. And I was everything to him also. You know
my story--I told you all there was to tell this morning. There
remain to me only my father's two brothers--Uncle Bendigo in
England, and Uncle Albert in Italy. I wrote them both to-day." Mark rose. "You shall hear from me to-morrow," he said, "and if I do not go to
Paignton, I will see you again to-night." "Thank you--you are very kind." "Let me ask you to consider yourself and your own health under this
great strain. People can endure anything, but often they find
afterwards that they have put too heavy a call on nature, when it
comes to pay the bill. Would you care to see a medical man?" "No, Mr. Brendon--that is not necessary. If my husband should be--as
we think, then my own life has no further interest for me. I may end
it." "For God's sake don't allow yourself to speak in that way," said
Brendon. "Look forward. If we can no longer be happy in the world,
that is not to deny us the power and privilege of being useful in
it. Think what your husband would have wished you to do and how he
would have expected you to face any great tragedy, or grief." "You are a good man," said Mrs. Pendean quietly. "I appreciate what
you have said. You will see me again." She took his hand and pressed it. Then he left her, bewildered by
the subtle atmosphere that seemed to surround her. He did not fear
her threat. There was a vitality and self-command about Mrs. Pendean
that seemed to shut out any likelihood of self-destruction. She was
young and time could be trusted to do its inevitable work. But he
perceived the quality of her love for the man who was too certainly
destroyed. She might face life, proceed with her own existence, and
bring happiness into other lives; but it did not follow that she
would ever forget her husband or consent to wed another. He returned to the police station and was astonished to find that
Robert Redmayne continued at large. No news concerning him had been
reported; but there came a minor item of information from the
searchers at Berry Head. The cement sack had been found in the mouth
of a rabbit hole to the west of the Head above a precipice. The sack
was bloodstained and contained some small tufts of hair and the dust
of cement. An hour later Mark Brendon had packed a bag and started in a police
motor car for Paignton; but there was no more to be learned when he
arrived. Inspector Reece shared Brendon's surprise that Redmayne had
not been arrested. He explained that fishermen and coast guards were
dragging the sea, as far as it was possible to do so, beneath the
cliff on which the sack had been found; but the tide ran strongly
here and local men suspected the current might well have carried a
body out to sea. They judged that the corpse would be found floating
within a mile or two of the Head in a week's time, if no means had
been taken to anchor it at the bottom. Brendon called at Robert Redmayne's lodgings after he had eaten some
supper at the Singer Hotel. There he had taken a room, that he
might see and hear something of the vanished man's future wife and
her family. At No. 7 Marine Terrace the landlady, a Mrs. Medway,
could say little. Captain Redmayne was a genial, kind-hearted, but
hot-headed gentleman, she told Mark. He was irregular in his hours
and they never expected him until they saw him. He often thus
returned from excursions after the household was gone to bed. She
did not know at what hour he had come back on the previous night, or
at what hour he had gone out again; but he had not changed his
clothes or apparently taken anything away with him. Brendon examined the motor bicycle with meticulous care. There was a
rest behind the saddle made of light iron bars, and here he detected
stains of blood. A fragment of tough string tied to the rest was
also stained. It had been cut--no doubt when Redmayne cast his
burden loose on reaching the cliffs. Nothing offered any difficulty
in the chain of circumstantial evidence, nor did another morning
furnish further problems save the supreme and sustained mystery of
Robert Redmayne's continued disappearance. Brendon visited Berry Head before breakfast on the following day and
examined the cliff. It fell in broad scales of limestone, whereon
grew thistles and the white rock-rose, sea pinks and furze. Rabbits
dwelt here and the bloodstained sack had been discovered by a dog. It was thrust into a hole, but the terrier had easily reached it and
dragged it into light. Immediately beneath the spot, the cliffs fell starkly into the
sea--a drop of three hundred feet. Beneath was deep water and only
an occasional cleft or cranny broke the face of the shining
precipice, where green things made shift to live and the gulls built
their rough nests with scurvy grass. No sign marked the cliff edge,
but beneath, on the green sea, were boats from which fishermen still
dredged for the dead. This work, long continued, had yielded no
results whatever. Later in the day Brendon returned to his hotel and introduced
himself to Miss Reed and her family to find that her brother, Robert
Redmayne's friend, had returned to London. She and her parents were
sitting together in the lounge when he joined them. All three
appeared to be much shocked and painfully mystified. None could
throw any light. Mr. and Mrs. Reed were quiet, elderly people who
kept a draper shop in London; their daughter revealed more
character. She was a head taller than her father and cast in a
generous mould. She exhibited a good deal of manner and less actual
sorrow than might have been expected; but Brendon discovered that
she had only known Robert Redmayne for half a year and their actual
engagement was not of much more than a month's duration. Miss Reed
was dark, animated, and commonplace of mind. Her ambition had been
to go upon the stage and she had acted on tour in the country; but
she declared that theatrical life wearied her and she had promised
her future husband to abandon the art. "Did you ever hear Captain Redmayne speak of his niece and her
husband?" Brendon inquired, and Flora Reed answered:

"He did; and he always said that Michael Pendean was a 'shirker' and
a coward. He also assured me that he had done with his niece and
should never forgive her for marrying her husband. But that was
before Bob went to Princetown, six days ago. From there he wrote
quite a different story. He had met them by chance and he found that
Mr. Pendean had not shirked but done good work in the war and got
the O.B.E. After that discovery, Bob changed and he was certainly on
the best of terms with the Pendeans before this awful thing
happened. He had already made them promise to come here for the
regattas." "You have neither seen nor heard of the captain since?" "Indeed, no. My last letter, which you can see, came three days ago. In it he merely said he would be back yesterday and meet me to bathe
as usual. I went to bathe and looked out for him, but of course he
didn't come." "Tell me a little about him, Miss Reed," said Mark. "It is good of
you to give me this interview, for we are up against a curious
problem and the situation, as it appears at present, may be illusive
and quite unlike the real facts. Captain Redmayne, I hear, had
suffered from shell shock and a breath of poison gas also. Did you
ever notice any signs that these troubles had left any mark upon
him?" "Yes," she answered. "We all did. My mother was the first to point
out that Bob often repeated himself. He was a man of great good
temper, but the war had made him rough and cynical in some respects. He was impatient, yet, after he quarrelled or had a difference with
anybody, he would be quickly sorry; and he was never ashamed to
apologize." "Did he quarrel often?" "He was very opinionated and, of course, he had seen a good deal of
actual war. It had made him a little callous and he would sometimes
say things that shocked civilians. Then they would protest and make
him angry." "You cared much for him? Forgive the question." "I admired him and I had a good influence over him. There were fine
things in him--great bravery and honesty. Yes, I loved him and was
proud of him. I think he would have become calmer and less excitable
and impatient in time. Doctors had told him that he would outgrow
all effects of his shock." "Was he a man you can conceive of as capable of striking or killing
a fellow creature?" The lady hesitated. "I only want to help him," she answered. "Therefore I say that,
given sufficient provocation, I can imagine Bob's temper flaring
out, and I can see that it would have been possible to him, in a
moment of passion, to strike down a man. He had seen much death and
was himself absolutely indifferent to danger. Yes, I can imagine him
doing an enemy, or fancied enemy, a hurt; but what I cannot imagine
him doing is what he is supposed to have done afterwards--evade the
consequence of a mistaken act." "And yet we have the strongest testimony that he has tried to
conceal a murder--whether committed by himself, or somebody else, we
cannot yet say." "I only hope and pray, for all our sakes, that you will find him,"
she replied, "but if, indeed, he has been betrayed into such an
awful crime, I do not think you will find him." "Why not, Miss Reed? But I think I know. What is in your mind has
already passed through my own. The thought of suicide." She nodded and put her handkerchief to her eyes. "Yes; if poor Bob lost himself and then found himself and discovered
that he had killed an innocent man in a moment of passion, he would,
if I know him, do one of two things--either give himself up
instantly and explain all that had happened, or else destroy himself
as quickly as he could." "Motive is not always adequate," Brendon told them. "A swift,
passing storm of temper has often destroyed a life with no more evil
intent than a flash of lightning. In this case, only such a storm
seems to be the explanation. But how a man of the Pendean type could
have provoked such a storm I have yet to learn. So far the testimony
of Mrs. Pendean and the assurances of Inspector Halfyard at
Princetown indicate an amiable and quiet person, slow to anger. Inspector Halfyard knew him quite well at the Moss Depot, where he
worked through two years of the war. He was apparently not a man to
have infuriated Captain Redmayne or anybody else." Mark then related his own brief personal experience of Redmayne on
the occasion of their meeting by the quarry pools. For some reason
this personal anecdote touched Flora Reed and the detective observed
that she was genuinely moved by it. Indeed she began to weep and presently rose and left them. Her
parents were able to speak more freely upon her departure. Mr. Reed indeed, from being somewhat silent and indifferent, grew
voluble. "I think it right to tell you," he said, "that my wife and I never
cared much for this engagement. Redmayne meant well and had a good
heart I believe. He was free-handed and exceedingly enamoured of
Flora. He made violent love from the first and his affection was
returned. But I never could see him a steady, married man. He was a
rover and the war had made him--not exactly inhuman, but apparently
unconscious of his own obligations to society and his own duty, as a
reasonable being, to help build up the broken organization of social
life. He only lived for pleasure and sport or spending money; and
though I do not suggest he would have been a bad husband, I did not
see the makings of a stable home in his ideas of the future. He had
inherited some forty thousand pounds, but he was very ignorant of
the value of money and he showed no particular good sense on the
subject of his coming responsibilities." Mark Brendon thanked them for their information and repeated his
growing conviction that the subject of their speech had probably
committed suicide. "Every hour which fails to account for him increases my fear," he
said. "Indeed it may be a good thing to happen; for the alternative
can at best be Broadmoor; and it is a hateful thought that a man who
has fought for his country, and fought well, should end his days in
a criminal lunatic asylum." For two days the detective remained at Paignton and devoted all his
energy, invention, and experience to the task of discovering the
vanished men. But, neither alive nor dead, did either appear, and
not a particle of information came from Princetown or elsewhere. Portraits of Robert Redmayne were printed and soon hung on the
notice board of every police station in the west and south; but one
or two mistaken arrests alone resulted from this publicity. A tramp
with a big red mustache was detained in North Devon and a recruit
arrested at Devonport. This man resembled the photograph and had
joined a line regiment twenty-four hours after the disappearance of
Redmayne. Both, however, could give a full account of themselves. Then Brendon prepared to return to Princetown. He wrote his
intention to Mrs. Pendean and informed her that he would visit
Station Cottages on the following evening. It happened, however,
that his letter crossed another and his plans were altered, for
Jenny Pendean had already left Princetown and joined Mr. Bendigo
Redmayne at his house, "Crow's Nest," beyond Dartmouth. She wrote:

     "My uncle has begged me to come and I was thankful to do so. I
     have to tell you that Uncle Bendigo received a letter yesterday
     from his brother, Robert. I begged him to let me send it to you
     instantly, but he declines. Uncle Bendigo is on Captain
     Redmayne's side I can see. He would not, I am sure, do anything
     to interfere with the law, but he is convinced that we do not
     know all there is to be told about this terrible thing. The
     motor boat from 'Crow's Nest' will be at Kingswear Ferry to
     meet the train reaching there at two o'clock to-morrow and I
     hope you may still be at Paignton and able to come here for a
     few hours." She added a word of thanks to him and a regret that his holiday was
being spoiled by her tragedy. Whereupon the man's thoughts turned to her entirely and he forgot
for a while the significance of her letter. He had expected to see
her that night at Princetown. Instead he would find her far nearer,
in the house on the cliffs beyond Dartmouth. He telegraphed presently that he would meet the launch. Then he had
leisure to be annoyed that the letter from Robert Redmayne was thus
delayed. He speculated on Bendigo Redmayne. "A brother is a brother," he thought, "and no doubt this old
sailor's home would offer a very efficient hiding-place for any
vanished man." CHAPTER IV

A CLUE


A motor boat lay off Kingswear Ferry when Mark Brendon arrived. The
famous harbour was new to him and though his mind found itself
sufficiently occupied, he still had perception disengaged and could
admire the graceful river, the hills towering above the estuary, and
the ancient town lying within their infolding and tree-clad slopes. Dominating all stood the Royal Naval College, its great masses of
white and red masonry breaking the blue sky. A perfect little craft awaited him. She was painted white and
furnished with teak. Her brasses and machinery glittered; the
engines and steering wheel were set forward, while aft of the cabins
and saloon an awning was rigged over the stern. The solitary sailor
who controlled the launch was in the act of furling this protection
against the sun as Mark descended to the water; and while the man
did so, Brendon's eyes brightened, for a passenger already occupied
the boat: a woman sat there and he saw Jenny Pendean. She wore black and he found, as he leaped aboard and greeted her,
that her mourning attire was an echo to her heart. That had happened
which convinced the young wife that all hope must be abandoned; she
knew that she was a widow, for the letter in her uncle's possession
told her so. She greeted the detective kindly and was glad that he
had responded to her invitation, but Mark soon found that her
attitude of mind had changed. She now exhibited an extreme
listlessness and profound melancholy. He told her that a letter from
himself had gone to her at Princetown and he asked her for
information respecting the communication received from Captain
Redmayne; but she was not responsive. "My uncle will tell you what there is to tell," she said. "It
appears that your original suspicion has proved correct. My husband
has lost his precious life at the hands of a madman." "Yet it seems incredible, Mrs. Pendean, that such an afflicted
creature, if alive, should still be evading the general search. Can
you tell me from where this letter came? We ought to have heard of
it instantly." "So I told my Uncle Bendigo." "Is he sure that it really does come from his brother?" "Yes; there is no doubt about that. The letter was posted in
Plymouth. But please do not ask me about it, Mr. Brendon. I do not
want to think of it." "I hope you are keeping well; and I know you are being brave." "I am alive," she said, "but my life has none the less ended." "You must not think or feel so. Let me say a thing that comforted
me in the mouth of another when I lost my mother. It was an old
clergyman who said it. 'Think what the dead would wish and try to
please them.' It doesn't sound much; but if you consider, it is
helpful." The boat was speedy and she soon slipped out between the historic
castles that stood on either bank of the entrance to the harbour. Mrs. Pendean spoke. "All this loveliness and peace seem to make my heart more sore. 