



Produced by Bill Tozier, Barbara Tozier, and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. THE STOWMARKET MYSTERY

Or A Legacy of Hate


By LOUIS TRACY


AUTHOR OF

"Wings of the Morning,"
"The Final War,"
"An American Emperor,"
"Disappearance of Lady Delia," etc., etc. 1904




CONTENTS

         I. "THE STOWMARKET MYSTERY"
        II. DAVID HUME'S STORY
       III. THE DREAM
        IV. THROUGH THE LIBRARY WINDOW
         V. FROM BEHIND THE HEDGE
        VI. AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE
       VII. HUSBAND AND WIFE
      VIII. REVELATIONS
        IX. THE KO-KATANA
         X. THE BLACK MUSEUM
        XI. MR. "OKASAKI"
       XII. WHAT THE STATIONMASTER SAW
      XIII. TWO WOMEN
       XIV. MARGARET SPEAKS OUT
        XV. AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR
       XVI. THE COUSINS
      XVII. "CHERCHEZ LA FEMME"
     XVIII. FURTHER COMPLICATIONS
       XIX. THE THIRD MAN APPEARS
        XX. THE TRAIL
       XXI. CONCERNING CHICKENS, AND MOTIVES
      XXII. THE SECOND ATTACK
     XXIII. MARGARET'S SECRET
      XXIV. THE MEETING
       XXV. WHERE DID MARGARET GO? XXVI. MR. OOMA
     XXVII. HOLDEN'S STORY
    XXVIII. MR. AND MRS. JIRO
      XXIX. MARGARET'S SECRET
       XXX. HUSBAND AND WIFE
      XXXI. TO BEECHCROFT
     XXXII. THE FIGHT
    XXXIII. THE LAST NOTE IN BRETT'S DIARY




A LEGACY OF HATE




CHAPTER I

"THE STOWMARKET MYSTERY"


"Mr. David Hume." Reginald Brett, barrister-detective, twisted round in his easy-chair to
permit the light to fall clearly on the card handed to him by his
man-servant. "What does Mr. David Hume look like, Smith?" he asked. "A gentleman, sir." Well-trained servants never make a mistake when they give such a
description of a visitor. Brett was satisfied. "Produce him." Then he examined the card. "It is odd," he thought. "Mr. David Hume gives no address, and writes his
own cards. I like his signature, too. Now, I wonder--"

The door was thrown open. A tall, well-proportioned young man entered. He
was soberly attired in blue serge. His face and hands bore the impress of
travel and exposure. His expression was pleasing and attractive. In repose
his features were regular, and marked with lines of thought. A short,
well-trimmed beard, of the type affected by some naval men, gave him a
somewhat unusual appearance. Otherwise he carried himself like a British
cavalry officer in mufti. He advanced into the room and bowed easily. Brett, who had risen,
instantly felt that his visitor was one of those people who erect
invisible barriers between themselves and strangers. "My errand will occupy some time, perhaps half an hour, to permit of full
explanation," said Mr. Hume. "May I ask--"

"I am completely at your service. Take that chair. You will find it
comfortable. Do you smoke? Yes. Well, try those cigarettes. They are
better than they look." Mr. Hume seemed to be gratified by this cordial reception. He seated
himself as requested, in the best light obtainable in a north-side
Victoria Street flat, and picked up the box of cigarettes. "Turkish," he announced. "Yes." "Grown on a slope near Salonica." "Indeed? You interest me." "Oh, I know them well. I was there two months ago. I suppose you got these
as a present from Yildiz Kiosk?" "Mr. Hume, you asked for half an hour, Make it an hour. You have touched
upon a subject dear to my heart." "They are the best cigarettes in the world. No one can buy them. They are
made for the exclusive use of the Sultan's household. To attempt to export
them means the bastinado and banishment, at the least. I do not credit you
with employing agents on such terms, so I assume an Imperial gift." The barrister had been looking intently at the other man during this short
colloquy. Suddenly his eyes sparkled. He struck a match and held it to his
visitor, with the words:

"You are quite right, Mr. David Hume-Frazer." The person thus addressed neither started, nor sprang to his feet, nor
gasped in amazement He took the match, lit a cigarette, and said:

"So you know me?" "Yes." "It is strange. I have never previously met you to my knowledge. Am I
still a celebrity?" "To me--yes." "A sort of distinguished criminal, eh?" "No man could be such a judge of tobacco and remain commonplace." "'Pon my honour, Mr. Brett, I think you deserve your reputation. For the
first time during eighteen months I feel hopeful. Do you know, I passed
dozens of acquaintances in the streets yesterday and none of them knew me. Yet you pick me out at the first glance, so to speak." "They might do the same if you spoke to them, Mr.--"

"Hume, if you please." "Certainly. Why have you dropped part of your surname?" "It is a long story. My lawyers, Flint & Sharp, of Gray's Inn, heard of
your achievements in the cases of Lady Lyle and the Imperial Diamonds. They persuaded me to come to you." "Though, personally, you have little faith in me?" "Heaven knows, Mr. Brett, I have had good cause to lose faith. My case
defies analysis. It savours of the supernatural." The barrister shoved his chair sideways until he was able to reach a
bookcase, from which he took a bulky interleaved volume. "Supernatural," he repeated. "That is new to me. As I remember the affair,
it was highly sensational, perplexing--a blend of romance and Japanese
knives--but I do not remember any abnormal element save one, utter absence
of motive." "Do you mean to say that you possess a record of the facts?" inquired
Hume, exhibiting some tokens of excitement in face and voice as he watched
Brett turning over the leaves of the scrap-book, in which newspaper
cuttings were neatly pasted, some being freely annotated. "Yes. The daily press supplies my demands in the way of fiction--a word,
by the way, often misapplied. Where do you find stranger tales than in the
records of every-day life? Ah, here we are!" He searched through a large number of printed extracts. There were
comments, long reports, and not a few notes, all under the heading: "The
Stowmarket Mystery." Hume was now deeply agitated; he evidently restrained his feelings by
sheer force of will. "Mr. Brett," he said, and his voice trembled a little, "surely you could
not have expected my presence here this morning?" "I no more expected you than the man in the moon," was the reply; "but I
recognised you at once. I watched your face for many hours whilst you
stood in the dock. Professional business took me to the Assizes during
your second trial. At one time I thought of offering my services." "To me?" "No, not to you." "To whom, then?" "To the police. Winter, the Scotland Yard man who had charge of the
business, is an old friend of mine." "What restrained you?" "Pity, and perhaps doubt. I could see no reason why you should kill your
cousin." "But you believed me guilty?" The barrister looked his questioner straight in the eyes. He saw there the
glistening terror of a tortured soul. Somehow he expected to find a
different expression. He was puzzled. "Why have you come here, Mr. Hume?" he abruptly demanded. "To implore your assistance. They tell me you are the one man in the world
able to clear my name from the stain of crime. Will you do it?" Again their eyes met. Hume was fighting now, fighting for all that a man
holds dear. He did not plead. He only demanded his rights. Born a few
centuries earlier, he would have enforced them with cold steel. "Come, Mr. Brett," he almost shouted. "If you are as good a judge of men
as you say I am of tobacco, you will not think that the cowardly murderer
who struck down my cousin would come to you, of all others, and reopen the
story of a crime closed unwillingly by the law." Brett could, on occasion, exhibit an obstinate determination not to be
drawn into expressing an opinion. His visitor's masterful manner annoyed
him. Hume, metaphorically speaking, took him by the throat and compelled
his services. He rebelled against this species of compulsion, but mere
politeness required some display of courteous tolerance. "It seems to me," he said, "that we are beginning at the end. I may not be
able to help you. What are the facts?" The stranger was so agitated that he could not reply. Self-restrained men
are not ready with language. Their thoughts may be fiery as bottled
vitriol, but they keep the cork in. The barrister allowed for this
drawback. His sympathies were aroused, and they overcame his slight
resentment. "Try another cigarette," he said, "I have here a summary of the evidence. I will read it to you. Do not interrupt. Follow the details closely, and
correct anything that is wrong when I have ended." Hume was still volcanic, but he took the proffered box. "Ah," cried Brett, "though you are angry, your judgment is sound. Now
listen!" Then he read the following statement, prepared by himself in an idle
moment:--

"The Stowmarket Mystery is a strange mixture of the real and the unreal. Sir Alan Hume-Frazer, fourth baronet, met his death on the hunting-field. His horse blundered at a brook and the rider was impaled on a hidden
stake, placed in the stream by his own orders to prevent poachers from
netting trout. His wife, nee Somers, a Bristol family, had pre-deceased
him. "There were two children, a daughter, Margaret, aged twenty-five, and a
son, Alan, aged twenty-three. By his will, Sir Alan left all his real and
personal estate to his son, with a life charge of L1,000 per annum for the
daughter. As he was a very wealthy man, almost a millionaire, the
provision for his daughter was niggardly, which might be accounted for by
the fact that the girl, several years before her father's death,
quarrelled with him and left home, residing in London and in Florence. Both children, by the way, were born in Italy, where Sir Alan met and
married Miss Somers. "The old gentleman, it appeared, allowed Miss Hume-Frazer L5,000 per annum
during his life. His son voluntarily continued this allowance, but the
brother and sister continued to live apart, he devoted to travel and
sport, she to music and art, with a leaning towards the occult--a woman
divorced from conventionality and filled with a hatred of restraint. "Beechcroft, the family residence, is situated four miles from Stowmarket,
close to the small village of Sleagill. After his father's death, the
young Sir Alan went for a protracted tour round the world. Meanwhile his
first cousin, Mr. David Hume-Frazer, lived at Beechcroft during the
shooting season, and incidentally fell in love with Miss Helen Layton,
daughter of the rector of Sleagill, the Rev. Wilberforce Layton." Hume stirred uneasily in his chair, and the barrister paused, expecting
him to say something. But the other only gasped brokenly: "Go on; go on!" "Love lasts longer than death or crime," mused Brett. He continued:

"In eighteen months Sir Alan the fifth--all heirs had same name--returned
to Beechcroft, about Christmas. His cousin had been called away on family
business, but returned for a New Year's Eve ball, given by Mrs. Eastham, a
lady of some local importance. Sir Alan and Helen Layton had followed the
hounds together three times during Christmas week. They were, of course,
old friends. "David sent from Scotland--his father's estate was situated close to
Inverness--some presents to his future wife, his cousin, and others. The
gift to Sir Alan was noteworthy and fatalistic--a handsomely inlaid
Japanese sword, with a small dagger inserted in a sheath near the top of
the scabbard. David reached Beechcroft on the day of the ball. Relations
between the cousins seemed to the servants to be cool, though the coolness
lay rather with the baronet, and David, a year older, it may be here
stated, was evidently taken by surprise by Sir Alan's attitude. "The three young people went to the ball, and shortly after midnight there
was something in the nature of a scene. Sir Alan had been dancing with
Miss Layton. They were in the conservatory when the young lady burst into
tears, hurried to find David, and asked him to take her at once to her
carriage. Mrs. Eastham was acting as chaperon to the girl, and some heated
words passed between her and the two young men. "Evidence showed that Sir Alan had bitterly upbraided Miss Layton on
account of her engagement, and hinted that David had taken an unfair
advantage of his (Alan's) absence to win her affections. This was
absolutely untrue. It was denied by the two most concerned, and by Mrs.
Eastham, who, as a privileged friend, knew all the facts. The young men
were in a state of white heat, but David sensibly withdrew, and walked to
the Hall. "Mrs. Eastham's house was close to the lodge gates, and from the lodge a
straight yew-shaded drive led to the library windows, the main entrance
being at the side of the house. "In the library a footman, on duty in the room, maintained a good fire,
and the French windows were left unfastened, as the young gentlemen would
probably enter the house that way. David did, in fact, do so. The footman
quitted the room, and a few minutes later the butler appeared. He was an
old favourite of David's. He asked if he should send some whisky and soda. "The young man agreed, adding:

"'Sir Alan and I have commenced the year badly, Ferguson. We quarrelled
over a silly mistake. I have made up my mind not to sleep on it, so I will
await his arrival. Let me know if he comes in the other way.' "The butler hoped that the matter was not a serious one. "'Under other circumstances it might be,' was the answer, 'but as things
are, it is simply a wretched mistake, which a little reasonable discussion
will put right.' "The footman brought the whisky and soda. "Twenty minutes later he re-entered the room to attend to the fire. Mr.
David Hume-Frazer was curled up in an arm-chair asleep, or rather dozing,
for he stirred a little when the man put some coal in the grate. This was
at 1 a.m. exactly. "At 1.10 a.m. the butler thought he heard his master's voice coming from
the front of the house, and angrily protesting something. Unfortunately he
could not catch a single word. He imagined that the 'quarrel' spoken of by
David had been renewed. "He waited two minutes, not more, but hearing no further sounds, he walked
round to the library windows, thinking that perhaps he would see Sir Alan
in the room. "To his dismay he found his young master stretched on the turf at the side
of the drive, thirty feet from the house. He rushed into the library,
where David was still asleep and moving uneasily--muttering, the man
thought:

"'Come quickly, sir,' he cried, 'I fear something has happened to Sir
Alan. He is lying on the ground outside the house, and I cannot arouse
him.' "Then David Hume-Frazer sprang to his feet and shouted:

"'My God! It was not a dream. He is murdered!' "Unquestionably--"

But the barrister's cold-blooded synopsis of a thrilling crime proved to
be too much for his hearer's nerves. Hume stood up. The man was a born
fighter. He could take, his punishment, but only on his feet. Again he cried in anguish:

"No! It was no dream, but a foul murder. And they blame me!" CHAPTER II

DAVID HUME'S STORY


Brett closed the book with a snap. "What good purpose can it serve at this time to reopen the miserable
story?" he asked. Curiously enough, Hume paid no heed to the question. His lips quivered,
his nostrils twitched, and his eyes shot strange gleams. He caught the
back of his chair with both hands in a grasp that tried to squeeze the
tough oak. "What else have you written there?" he said, and Brett could not help but
admire his forced composure. "Nothing of any material importance. You were arrested, after an interval
of some days, as the result of a coroner's warrant. You explained that you
had a vivid dream, in which you saw your cousin stabbed by a stranger whom
you did not know, whose face even you never saw. Sir Alan was undoubtedly
murdered. The dagger-like attachment to your Japanese sword had been
driven into his breast up to the hilt, actually splitting his heart. To
deliver such a blow, with such a weapon, required uncommon strength and
skill. I think I describe it here as 'un-English.'" Brett referred to his scrap-book. In spite of himself, he felt all his old
interest reawakening in this remarkable crime. "Yes?" queried Hume. The barrister, his lips pursed up and critical, surveyed his concluding
notes. "You were tried at the ensuing Assizes, and the jury disagreed. Your
second trial resulted in an acquittal, though the public attitude towards
you was dubious. The judge, in summing up, said that the evidence against
you 'might be deemed insufficient.' In these words he conveyed the popular
opinion. I see I have noted here that Miss Margaret Hume-Frazer was at a
Covent Garden Fancy Dress Ball on the night of the murder. But the tragic
deaths of her father and brother had a marked influence on the young lady. She, of course, succeeded to the estates, and decided at once to live at
Beechcroft. Does she still live there?" "Yes. I am told she is distinguished for her charity and good works. She
is married." "Ah! To whom?" "To an Italian, named Giovanni Capella." "His stage name?" "No; he is really an Italian." Brett's pleasantry was successful in its object. David Hume regained his
equanimity and sat down again. After a pause he went on:

"May I ask, Mr. Brett, before I tell you my part of the story, if you
formed any theories as to the occurrence at the time?" The barrister consulted his memoranda. Something that met his eyes caused
him to smile. "I see," he said, "that Mr. Winter, of Scotland Yard, was convinced of
your guilt. That is greatly in your favour." "Why?" Hume disdained the police, but Brett's remark evoked curiosity. "Because Mr. Winter is a most excellent officer, whose intellect is
shackled by handcuffs. 'De l'audace!' says the Frenchman, as a specific
for human conduct. 'Lock 'em up,' says Mr. Winter, when he is inquiring
into a crime. Of course, he is right nine times out of ten; but if, in the
tenth case, intellect conflicts with handcuffs, the handcuffs win, being
stronger in his instance." Hume was in no mood to appreciate the humours of Scotland Yard, so the
other continued:

"The most telling point against you was the fact that not only the butler,
footman, and two housemaids, but you yourself, at the coroner's inquest,
swore that the small Japanese knife was in its sheath during the
afternoon; indeed, the footman said it was there, to the best of his
belief, at midnight. Then, again, a small drawer in Sir Alan's
writing-table had been wrenched open whilst you were alone in the room. On
this point the footman was positive. Near the drawer rested the sword from
which its viperish companion had been abstracted. Had not the butler found
Sir Alan's body, still palpitating, and testified beyond any manner of
doubt that you were apparently sleeping in the library, you would have
been hanged, Mr. Hume." "Probably." "The air of probability attending your execution would have been most
convincing." "Is my case, then, so desperate?" "You cannot be tried again, you know." "I do not mean that. I want to establish my innocence; to compel society
to reinstate me as a man profoundly wronged; above all, to marry the woman
I love." Brett amused himself by rapidly projecting several rings of smoke through
a large one. "So you really are innocent?" he said, after a pause. David Hume rose from his chair, and reached for his hat, gloves, and
stick. "You have crushed my remaining hope of emancipation," he exclaimed
bitterly. "You have the repute of being able to pluck the heart out of a
mystery, Mr. Brett, so when you assume that I am guilty--"

"I have assumed nothing of the kind. You seem to possess the faculty of
self-control. Kindly exercise it, and answer my questions, Did you kill
your cousin?" "No." "Who did kill him?" "I do not know." "Do you suspect anybody ?" "Not in the remotest degree." "Did he kill himself?" "That theory was discussed privately, but not brought forward at the
trial. Three doctors said it was not worthy of a moment's consideration." "Well, you need not shout your replies, and I would prefer to see you
comfortably seated, unless, of course, you feel more at ease near the
door." A trifle shamefacedly, Hume returned to his former position near the
fireplace--that shrine to which all the household gods do reverence, even
in the height of summer. It is impossible to conceive the occupants of a
room deliberately grouping themselves without reference to the grate. Brett placed the open scrap-book on his knees, and ran an index finger
along underlined passages in the manner of counsel consulting a brief. "Why did you give your cousin this sword?" "Because he told me he was making a collection of Japanese arms, and I
remarked that my grandfather on my mother's side, Admiral Cunningham, had
brought this weapon, with others, from the Far East. It lay for fifty
years in our gun-room at Glen Tochan." "So you met Sir Alan soon after his return home?" "Yes, in London, the day he arrived. Came to town on purpose, in fact. Afterwards I travelled North, and he went to Beechcroft." "How long afterwards? Be particular as to dates." "It is quite a simple matter, owing to the season. Alan reached Charing
Cross from Brindisi on December 20. We remained together--that is, lived
at the same hotel, paid calls in company, visited the same restaurants,
went to the same theatres--until the night of the 23rd, when we parted. It
is a tradition of my family that the members of it should spend Christmas
together." "A somewhat unusual tradition in Scotland, is it not?" "Yes, but it was my mother's wish, so my father and I keep the custom up." "Your father is still living?" "Yes, thank goodness!" "He is now the sixth baronet?" "He is not. Neither he nor I will assume the title while the succession
bears the taint of crime." "Did you quarrel with your cousin in London?" "Not by word or thought. He seemed to be surprised when I told him of my
engagement to Helen, but he warmly congratulated me. One afternoon he was
a trifle short-tempered, but not with me." "Tell me about this." "His sister is, or was then, a rather rapid young lady. She discovered
that certain money-lenders would honour her drafts on her brother, and she
had been going the pace somewhat heavily. Alan went to see her, told her
to stop this practice, and sent formal notice to the same effect through
his solicitors to the bill discounters. It annoyed him, not on account of
the money, but that his sister should act in such a way,"

"Ah, this is important! It was not mentioned at the trial." "Why should it be?" "Who can say? I wish to goodness I had helped your butler to raise Sir
Alan's lifeless body. But about this family dispute. Was there a
scene--tears, recriminations?" "Not a bit. You don't know Rita. We used to call her Rita because, as
boys, we teased her by saying her name was Margharita, and not Margaret"

"Why?" "She has such a foreign manner and style." "How did she acquire them?" "She was a big girl, six years old, and tall for her age, when her parents
settled down in England. She first spoke Italian, and picked up Italian
ways from her nurse, an old party who was devotedly attached to her. Even
Alan was a good Italian linguist, and given to foreign manners when a
little chap. But Harrow soon knocked them out of him. Rita retained them." "I see. A curious household. I should have expected this young lady to
upbraid her brother after the style of the prima donna in grand opera." "No. He told me she laughed at him, and invited him to witness the trying
on of a fancy dress costume, the 'Queen of Night,' which she wore at a
_bal masque_ the night he was murdered." "When did she get married?" "Last January, at Naples, very suddenly, and without the knowledge of any
of her relatives." "She had been living at Beechcroft nearly a year, then?" "Yes, she went South in the winter. The reason she gave was that the Hall
would be depressing on the anniversary of her brother's death. She had
become most popular in the district. Helen is very fond of her, and was
quite shocked to hear of her marriage. The local people do not like Signor
Capella." "Why?" "It is difficult to give a reason. Miss Layton does not indulge in
details, but that is the impression I gather from her letters." Hume paused, and Brett shot a quick glance at him. "Finish what you were going to say," he said. "Only this--Helen and I have mutually released each other from our
engagement, and in the same breath have refused to be released. That is,
if you understand--"

The barrister nodded. "The result is that we are both thoroughly miserable. Our respective
fathers do not like the idea of our marriage under the circumstances. We
are simply drifting in the feeble hope that some day a kindly Providence
will dissipate the cloud that hangs over me. Ah, Mr. Brett, I am a rich
man. Command the limits of my fortune, but clear me. Prove to Helen that
her faith in my innocence is justified." "For goodness' sake light another cigarette," snapped the barrister. "You
have interfered with my line of thought. It is all wriggly." Quite a minute elapsed before he began again. "What caused the trouble at Mrs. Eastham's ball?" "I think I can explain that. It seems that Alan's father told him to get
married--"

"Told him!" "Well, left instructions." "How?" "I do not know. I only gathered as much from my cousin's remarks. Well, it
was not until his final home-coming that he realised what a beautiful
woman the jolly little girl he knew as a boy had developed into. She was
just the kind of wife he wanted, and I fancy he imagined I had stolen a
march on him. But he was a thoroughly straightforward, manly fellow, and
something very much out of the common must have upset him before he vented
his anger on me and Helen." "Have you any notion--"

"Not the least. Pardon me. I suppose you were going to ask if I guessed
the cause?" "Yes." "It is quite unfathomable. We parted the best of friends in London,
although he knew all about the engagement. We met again at 6 p.m. on New
Year's Eve, and he was very short with me. I can only vaguely assume that
some feeling of resentment had meanwhile been working up in him, and it
found expression during his chat with Helen in the conservatory." "Did you use threats to him during the subsequent wrangle?" "Threats! Good gracious, no. I was angry with him for spoiling Miss
Layton's enjoyment. I called him an ass, and said that he had better have
remained away another year than come back and make mischief. That is all. Mrs. Eastham was far more outspoken." "Indeed. What did she say?" "She hinted that his temper was a reminiscence of his Southern birth,
always a sore point with him, and contrasted me with him, to his
disadvantage. All very unfair, of course, but, you see, she was the
hostess, and Alan had upset her party very much." "So you walked home, and resolved to hold out the olive branch?" "Most decidedly. I was older, perhaps a trifle more sedate. I knew that
Helen loved me. There were no difficulties in the way of our marriage,
which was arranged for the following spring. Indeed, my second trial took
place on the very date we had selected. It was my duty to use poor Alan
gently. Even his foolish and unreasonable jealousy was a compliment." Brett threw the scrap-book on to the table. He clasped his hands in front
of his knees, tucking his heels on the edge of his chair. "Mr. Hume," he said slowly, gazing fixedly at the other, "I believe you. You did not kill your cousin." CHAPTER III

THE DREAM


"Thank you," was the quiet answer. "You hinted at some supernatural influence in relation to this crime. What
did you mean?" "Ah, that is the unpublished part of the affair. We are a Scots family, as
our name implies. The first Sir Alan Frazer became a baronet owing to his
services to King George during the '45 Rebellion. There was some trouble
about a sequestered estate--now our place in Scotland--which belonged to
his wife's brother, a Hume and a rebel. Anyhow, in 1763, he fought a duel
with Hume's son, his own nephew by marriage, and was killed." "Really," broke in Brett, "this ancient history--"

"Is quite to the point. Sir Alan the first fought and died in front of the
library at Beechcroft." The barrister commenced to study the moulding in the centre of the
ceiling. "He was succeeded by his grandson, a little lad of eight. In 1807, after a
heavy drinking bout, the second Sir Alan Hume-Frazer cut his throat, and
chose the scene of his ancestor's duel for the operation." "A remarkable coincidence!" "In 1842, during a bread riot, the third baronet was stabbed with a
pitchfork whilst facing a mob in the same place. Then a long interval
occurred. Again a small child became the heir. Three years ago the fourth
baronet expired whilst the library windows were being opened to admit the
litter on which he was carried from the hunting-field. The fate of the
fifth you know." Brett's chair emitted a series of squeaks as he urged it closer to the
wall. At the proper distance he stretched out his leg and pressed an
electric bell with his toe. "Decanters and syphons, Smith," he cried, when the door opened. "Which do you take, whisky or brandy, Mr. Hume?" he inquired. "Whisky. But I assure you I am quite serious. These things--"

"Serious! If my name were Hume-Frazer, nothing less than a runaway
steam-engine would take me to Beechcroft. I have never previously heard
such a marvellous recital." "We are a stiff-necked race. My uncle and cousin knew how strangely Fate
had pursued every heir to the title, yet each hoped that in his person the
tragic sequence would be broken. Oddly enough, my father holds that the
family curse, or whatever it is, has now exhausted itself." "What grounds has he for the belief?" "None, save a Highlander's readiness to accept signs and portents. Look at
this seal." He unfastened from his waistcoat his watch and chain, with a small bunch
of pendants attached, and handed them to Brett. The latter examined the
seal with deep interest. It was cut into a bloodstone, and showed a stag's
head, surmounted by five pointed rays, like a crown of daggers. "I cannot decipher the motto," he said; "what is it?" "Fortis et audax." "Hum! 'Strong and bold.' A stiff-necked legend, too." He reached to his bookcase for Burke's "General Armoury." After a brief
search, he asked:

"Do you know anything about heraldry?" "Nothing whatever." "Then listen to this. The crest of your, house is: 'A stag's head, erased
argent, charged with a star of five rays gules.' It is peculiar." "Yes, so my father says; but why does it appeal to you in that way?" "Because 'erased' means, in this instance, a stag's head torn forcibly
from the body, the severed part being jagged like the teeth of a saw. And
'gules' means 'red.' Now, such heraldic rays are usually azure or blue." "By Jove, you have hit upon the old man's idea. He contends that those
five blood-coloured points signify the founder of the baronetcy and his
four lineal descendants. Moreover, the race is now extinct in the direct
succession. The title goes to a collateral branch." Brett stroked his chin thoughtfully. "It is certainly very strange," he murmured, "that the dry-as-dust
knowledge of some member of the College of Heralds should evolve these
armorial bearings with their weird significance. Does this account for
your allusion to the supernatural?" "Partly. Do not forget my dream." "Tell it to me." "During the trials, my counsel, a very able man, by the way--you know him,
of course, Mr. Dobbie, K.C.--only referred to the fact that I dreamed my
cousin was in some mortal danger, and that my exclamation 'He is
murdered!' was really a startled comment on my part induced by the
butler's words. That is not correct. I never told Mr. Dobbie the details
of my dream, or vision." "Oh, didn't you? Men have been hanged before to-day because they thought
they could construct a better line of defence than their counsel." "I had nothing to defend. I was innocent. Moreover, I knew I should not be
convicted." The barrister well remembered the view of the case taken by the Bar mess. Even the redoubtable Dobbie was afraid of the jury. His face must have
conveyed dubiety with respect to Hume's last remark, for the other
continued eagerly:

"It is quite true. Wait until I have concluded. After the footman brought
the whisky and soda to the library that night I took a small quantity, and
pulled an easy-chair in front of the fire. I was tired, having travelled
all the preceding night and part of the day. Hence the warmth and comfort
soon sent me to sleep. I have a hazy recollection of the man coming in to
put some coal on the fire. In a sub-conscious fashion I knew that it was
not my cousin, but a servant. I settled down a trifle more comfortably,
and everything became a blank. Then I thought I awoke. I looked out
through the windows, and, to my astonishment, it was broad daylight. The
trees, too, were covered with leaves, the sun was shining, and there was
every evidence of a fine day in early summer. In some indefinite way I
realised that the library was no longer the room which I knew. The
furniture and carpets were different. The books were old-fashioned. A very
handsome spinning-wheel stood near the open window. There was no litter of
newspapers or magazines. "Before I could begin to piece together these curious discrepancies in the
normal condition of things, I saw two men riding up the avenue, where the
yew trees, by the way, were loftier and finer in every way than those
really existing. The horsemen were dressed in such strange fashion that,
unfortunately, I paid little heed to their faces. They wore frilled
waistcoats, redingotes with huge lapels and turned-back cuffs,
three-cornered hats, and gigantic boots. They dismounted when close to the
house. One man held both horses; the other advanced. I was just going to
look him straight in the face when another figure appeared, coming from
that side of the hall where the entrance is situated. This was a gentleman
in very elegant garments, hatless, with powdered queue, pink satin coat
embroidered with lace, pink satin small-clothes, white silk stockings, and
low shoes. As he walked, a smart cane swung from his left wrist by a silk
tassel, and he took a pinch of snuff from an ivory box. "The two men met and seemed to have a heated argument, bitter and
passionate on one side, studiously scornful on the other. This was all in
dumb show. Not a word did I hear. My amazed wits were fully taken up with
noting their clothes, their postures, the trappings of the horses, the
eighteenth century aspect of the library. Strange, is it not, I did not
look at their faces?" Hume paused to gulp down the contents of his tumbler. Brett said not a
word, but sat intent, absorbed, wondering, with eyes fixed on the speaker. "All at once the dispute became vehement. The more stylishly attired man
disappeared, but returned instantly with a drawn sword in his hand. The
stranger, as we may call him, whipped out a claymore, and the two fought
fiercely. By Jove, it was no stage combat or French duel. They went for
each other as if they meant it. There was no stopping to take breath, nor
drawing apart after a foiled attack. Each man tried to kill the other as
speedily as possible. Three times they circled round in furious
sword-play. Then the stranger got his point home. The other, in mortal
agony, dropped his weapon, and tried with both hands to tear his
adversary's blade from his breast. He failed, and staggered back, the
victor still shoving the claymore through his opponent's body. Then, and
not until then, I saw the face of the man who was wounded, probably
killed. It was my cousin, Alan Hume-Fraser." David Hume stopped again. His bronzed face was pale now. With his left
hand he swept huge drops of perspiration from his brow. But his class
demands coolness in the most desperate moments. He actually struck a match
and relighted his cigarette. "I suppose you occasionally have a nightmare after an indigestible supper,
Mr. Brett," he went on, "and have experienced a peculiar sensation of dumb
palsy in the presence of some unknown but terrifying danger? Well, such
was my exact state at that moment. Alan fell, apparently lifeless. The
stranger kissed his blood-stained sword, which required a strong tug
before he could disengage it, rattled it back into the scabbard, rejoined
his companion, and the two rode off, without once looking back. I can see
them now, square-shouldered, with hair tied in a knot beneath their quaint
hats, their hips absurdly swollen by the huge pockets of their coats,
their boots hanging over their knees. They wore big brass spurs with
tremendous rowels, and the cantles of their saddles were high and
brass-bound. "Alan lay motionless. I could neither speak nor move. Whether I was
sitting or standing I cannot tell you, nor do I know how I was supposed to
be attired, A darkness came over my eyes. Then a voice--Helen's
voice--whispered to me, 'Fear not, dearest; the wrong is avenged.' I
awoke, to find the trembling butler shouting in my ear that his master was
lying dead outside the house. Now, Mr. Brett, I ask you, would you have
submitted that fairy tale to a jury? I was quite assured of a verdict in
my favour, though the first disagreement almost shook my faith in Helen's
promise, but I did not want to end my days in a criminal lunatic asylum." He did not appear to expect an answer. He was quite calm again, and even
his eyes had lost their intensity. The mere telling of his uncanny
experience had a soothing effect. He nonchalantly readjusted his watch and
chain, and noted the time. "I have gone far beyond my stipulated half hour," he said, forcing a
deprecatory smile. "Yes; far beyond, indeed. You carried me back to 1763, but Heaven alone
knows when you will end." "Will you take up my case?" "Can you doubt it? Do you think I would throw aside the most remarkable
criminal puzzle I have ever tackled?" "Mr. Brett, I cannot find words to thank you. If you succeed--and you
inspire me with confidence--Helen and I will strive to merit your lifelong
friendship." "Miss Layton knows the whole of your story, of course?" "Yes; she and my father only. I must inform you that I had never heard the
full reason of the duel between the first Sir Alan and his nephew. But my
father knew it fairly well, and the details fitted in exactly with my
vision. I can hardly call it a dream." "What was the nephew's name?" "David Hume!" Brett jumped up, and paced about the room. "These coincidences defy analysis," he exclaimed. "Your Christian name is
David. Your surname joins both families. Why, the thing is a romance of
the wildest sort." "Unhappily, it has a tragic side for me." "Yes; the story cannot end here. You and your _fiancee_ have suffered. Miss Layton must be a very estimable young lady--one worth winning. She
will be a true and loyal wife." "Do you think you will be able to solve the riddle? Someone murdered my
cousin." "That is our only solid fact at present. The family tradition is passing
strange, but it will not serve in a court of law. I may fail, for the
first time, but I will try hard. When can you accompany me to Stowmarket?" The question disconcerted his eager auditor. The young man's countenance
clouded. "Is it necessary that I should go there?" he asked. "Certainly. You must throw aside all delicacy of feeling, sacrifice even
your own sentiments. That is the one locality where you don't wish to be
seen, of course?" "It is indeed." "I cannot help that. I must have the assistance of your local and family
knowledge to decide the knotty points sure to arise when I begin the
inquiry. Can you start this afternoon?" "Yes." "Very well. Come and lunch with me at my club. Then we will separate, to
meet again at Liverpool Street. Smith! Pack my traps for a week." Brett was in the hall now, but he suddenly stopped his companion. "By the way, Hume, you may like to wire to Miss Layton. My man will send
the telegram for you." David Hume's barrier of proud reserve vanished from that instant. The
kindly familiarity of the barrister's words to one who, during many weary
days, suspected all men of loathing him as a murderer at large, was
directed by infinite tact. Hume held out his hand, "You _are_ a good chap," he said. CHAPTER IV

THROUGH THE LIBRARY WINDOW


Hume did not send a telegram to the Sleagill Rectory. He explained that,
owing to the attitude adopted by the Rev. Wilberforce Layton, Helen
avoided friction with her father by receiving his (Hume's) letters under
cover to Mrs. Eastham. The younger man was quick to note that Brett did not like this
arrangement. He smilingly protested that there was no deception in the
matter. "Helen would never consent to anything that savoured of subterfuge," he
explained. "Her father knows well that she hears from me constantly. He is
a studious, reserved old gentleman. He was very much shocked by the
tragedy, and his daughter's innocent association with it. He told me quite
plainly that, under the circumstances, I ought to consider the engagement
at an end. Possibly I resented an imputation not intended by him. I made
some unfair retort about his hyper-sensitiveness, and promptly sent Helen
a formal release. She tore it up, and at the same time accepted it so far
as I was concerned. We met at Mrs. Eastham's house--that good lady has
remained my firm friend throughout--and I don't mind telling you, Brett,
that I broke down utterly. Well, we began by sending messages to each
other through Mrs. Eastham. Then I forwarded to Helen, in the same way, a
copy of a rough diary of my travels. She wrote to me direct; I replied. The position now is that she will not marry me without her father's
consent, and she will marry no one else. He is aware of our
correspondence. She always tells him of my movements. The poor old rector
is worried to know how to act for the best. His daughter's happiness is at
stake, and so my unhappy affairs have drifted aimlessly for more than a
year." "The drifting must cease," said Brett decisively. "Beechcroft Hall will
probably provide scope for activity." They reached Stowmarket by a late train. Next morning they drove to
Sleagill--a pretty village, with a Norman church tower standing squarely
in the midst of lofty trees, and white-washed cottages and red-tiled
villa-residences nestling in gardens. "A bower of orchards and green lanes," murmured the barrister as their
dog-cart sped rapidly over the smooth highway. Hume was driving. He pointed out the rectory. His eyes were eagerly
searching the lawn and the well-trimmed garden, but he was denied a sight
of his divinity. The few people they encountered gazed at them curiously. Hume was seemingly unrecognised. "Here is Mrs. Eastham's house," he said, checking the horse's pace as they
approached a roomy, comfortable-looking mansion, occupying an angle where
the village street sharply bifurcated. "And there is Beechcroft!" The lodge faced the road along which they were advancing. Beyond the gates
the yew-lined drive, with its selvages of deep green turf, led straight to
the Elizabethan house a quarter of a mile distant. The ground in the rear
rose gently through a mile or more of the home park. Immediately behind the Hall was a dense plantation of spruce and larch. The man who planned the estate evidently possessed both taste and spirit. It presented a beautiful and pleasing picture. A sense of homeliness was
given by a number of Alderney cattle and young hunters grazing in the park
on both sides of the avenue. Beechcroft had a reputation in metropolitan
sale-rings. Its two-year-olds were always in demand. "We will leave the conveyance here," announced Brett "I prefer to walk to
the house." The hotel groom went to the horse's head. He did not hear the barrister's
question:

"I suppose both you and your cousin quitted Mrs. Eastham's house by that
side-door and entered the park through the wicket?" "Yes," assented Hume, "though I fail to see why you should hit upon the
side-door rather than the main entrance." "Because the ball-room is built out at the back. It was originally a
granary. The conservatory opens into the garden on the other side. As
there was a large number of guests, Mrs. Eastham required all her front
rooms for supper and extra servants, so she asked people to halt their
carriages at the side-door. I would not be surprised if the gentlemen's
cloak-room was provided by the saddle-room there, whilst the yard was
carpeted and covered with an awning." Brett rattled on in this way, heedless of his companion's blank amazement,
perhaps secretly enjoying it. Hume was so taken aback that he stood poised on the step of the vehicle
and forgot to slip the reins into the catch on the splashboard. "I told you none of these things," he cried. "Of course not. They are obvious. But tell this good lady that we are
going to the Hall." Both the main gate and wicket were fastened, and the lodge-keeper's wife
was gazing at them through the bars. "Hello, Mrs. Crowe, don't you know me?" cried Hume. "My gracious, It's Mr. David!" gasped the woman. "Why are the gates locked?" "Mrs. Capella is not receiving visitors, sir." "Is she ill?" "No, sir. Indisposed, I think Mr. Capella said." "Well, she will receive me, at any rate." "No doubt, sir, it will be all right." She hesitatingly unbarred the wicket, and the two men entered. They walked
slowly up the drive. Hume was restless. Twice he looked behind him. He stopped. "It was here," he said, "that the two men dismounted." Then a few yards farther on:

"Alan came round from the door there, and they fought here. Alan forced
the stranger on to the turf. When he was stabbed he fell here." He pointed to a spot where the road commenced to turn to the left to clear
the house. Brett watched him narrowly. The young man was describing his
dream, not the actual murder. The vision was far more real to him. "It was just such a day as this," he continued. "It might have been almost
this hour. The library windows--"

He ceased and looked fixedly towards the house. Brett, too, gazed in
silence. They saw a small, pale-faced, exceedingly handsome Italian--a
young man, with coal-black eyes and a mass of shining black hair--scowling
at them from within the library. A black velvet coat and a brilliant tie were the only bizarre features of
his costume. They served sufficiently to enhance his foreign appearance. Such a man would be correctly placed in the marble frame of a Neapolitan
villa; here he was unusual, _outre_, "un-English," as Brett put it. But he was evidently master. He flung open the window, and said, with some
degree of hauteur:

"Whom do you wish to see? Can I be of any assistance?" His accent was strongly marked, but his words were well chosen and civil
enough, had his tone accorded with their sense. As it was, he might be
deemed rude. Brett advanced. "Are you Signor Capella?" he inquired. "Mr. Capella. Yes." "Then you can, indeed, be of much assistance. This gentleman is Mrs.
Capella's cousin, Mr. David Hume-Frazer." "Corpo di Baccho!" The Italian was completely taken by surprise. His eyebrows suddenly stood
out in a ridge. His sallow skin could not become more pallid; to show
emotion he flushed a swarthy red. Beyond the involuntary exclamation in
his own language, he could not find words. "Yes," explained the smiling Brett, "he is a near relative of yours by
marriage. We were told by the lodge-keeper that Mrs. Capella was
indisposed, but under the circumstances we felt assured that she would
receive her cousin--unless, that is, she is seriously ill."

"It is an unexpected pleasure, this visit." Capella replied to the barrister, but looked at Hume. He had an unpleasant
habit of parting his lips closely to his teeth, like the silent snarl of a
dog. "Undoubtedly. We both apologise for not having prepared you." Brett's smooth, even voice seemed to exasperate the other, who continued
to block the library window in uncompromising manner. "And you, sir. May I ask who you are?" "My name is Brett, Reginald Brett, a friend of Mr. Hume's--who, I may
mention, does not use his full surname at present." The Italian was compelled to turn his glittering eyes upon the man who
addressed him so glibly. "I am sorry," he said slowly, "but Mrs. Capella is too unwell to meet
either of you to-day." "Ah! We share your regrets. Nevertheless, as a preliminary to our purpose,
you will serve our needs equally well. May we not come in?" Capella was faced with difficult alternatives. He must either be
discourteous to two gentlemanly strangers, one of them his wife's
relative, or admit them with some show of politeness. An Italian may be
rude, he can never be _gauche_. Having decided, Capella ushered them into
the library with quick transition to dignified ease. He asked if he might ring for any refreshments. Hume, who glared at his
host with uncompromising hostility, and had not taken any part in the
conversation, shook his head. Brett surprised both, for different reasons, by readily falling in with
Capella's suggestion. "A whisky and soda would be most grateful," he said. The Italian moved towards the bell. "Permit me!" cried Brett. He rose in awkward haste, and upset his chair with a loud crash on the
parquet floor. "How stupid of me!" he exclaimed, whilst Hume wondered what had happened
to flurry the barrister, and Capella smothered a curse. A distant bell jangled. By tacit consent, there was no further talk until
a servant appeared. The man was a stranger to Hume. Oddly enough, Brett took but a very small allowance of the spirit. In
reality, he hated alcohol in any form during the earlier hours. He was
wont to declare that it not only disturbed his digestion but destroyed his
taste for tobacco. Hume did not yet know what a concession to exciting
circumstances his new-found friend had made the previous day in ordering
spirits before luncheon. When the servant vanished, Capella settled himself in his chair with the
air of a man awaiting explanations. Yet he was restless and disturbed. He
was afraid of these two. Why? Brett determined to try the effect of
generalities. "You probably guess the object of our visit?" he began. "I? No. How should I guess?" "As the husband of a lady so closely connected with Mr. Hume--"

But the Italian seemed to be firmly resolved to end the suspense. "Caramba!" he broke in. "What is it?" "It is this. Mr. Hume has asked me to help him in the investigation of
certain--"

The library door swung open, and a lady entered. She was tall, graceful,
distinguished-looking. Her cousinship to Hume was unmistakable. In both
there was the air of aristocratic birth. Their eyes, the contour of their
faces, were alike. But the fresh Anglo-Saxon complexion of the man was
replaced in the woman by a peach-like skin, whilst her hair and eyebrows
were darker. She was strikingly beautiful. A plain black dress set off a figure that
would have caused a sculptor to dream of chiselled marble. "A passionate, voluptuous woman," thought Brett. "A woman easily swayed,
but never to be compelled, the ready-made heroine of a tragedy." Her first expression was one of polite inquiry, but her glance fell upon
Hume. Her face, prone to betray each fleeting emotion, exhibited surprise,
almost consternation. "You, Davie!" she gasped. Hume went to meet her. "Yes, Rita," he said. "I hope you are glad to see me." Mrs. Capella was profoundly agitated, but she held out her hand and
summoned the quick smile of an actress. "Of course I am," she cried. "I did not know you were in England. Why did
you not let me know, and why are you here?" "I only returned home three days ago. My journey to Beechcroft was a hasty
resolve. This is my friend, Mr. Reginald Brett. He was just about to
explain to Mr. Capella the object of our visit when you came in." Neither husband nor wife looked at the other. Mrs. Capella was flustered,
indulging in desperate surmises, but she laughed readily enough. "I heard a noise in this room, and then the bell rang. I thought something
had happened. You know--I mean, I thought there was no one here." "I fear that I am the culprit, Mrs. Capella. Your husband was good enough
to invite us to enter by the window, and I promptly disturbed the
household." Brett's pleasant tones came as a relief. Capella glared at him now with
undisguised hostility, for the barrister's adroit ruse had outwitted him
by bringing the lady from the drawing-room, which gave on to the garden
and lawn at the back of the house. "Please do not take the blame of my intrusion, Mr. Brett," said Margaret,
with forced composure. "You will stay for luncheon, will you not? And you,
Davie? Are you at Mrs. Eastham's?" Her concluding question was eager, almost wistful. Her cousin answered it
first. "No," he said. "We have driven over from Stowmarket." "And, unfortunately," put in the barrister, "we are pledged to visit Mrs.
Eastham within an hour." The announcement seemed to please Mrs. Capella, for some reason at present
hidden from Brett. Hume, of course, was mystified by the course taken by
his friend, but held his peace. Capella brusquely interfered:

"Perhaps, Rita, these gentlemen would now like to make the explanation
which you prevented." He moved towards the door. So that his wife could rest under no doubt as
to his wishes, he held it open for her. "No, no!" exclaimed Brett. "This matter concerns Mrs. Capella personally. You probably forget that we asked to be allowed to see her in the first
instance, but you told us that she was too unwell to receive us." For an instant Margaret gazed at the Italian with imperious scorn. Then
she deliberately turned her back on him, and seated herself close to her
cousin. Capella closed the door and walked to the library window. Hume openly showed his pained astonishment at this little scene. Brett
treated the incident as a domestic commonplace. "The fact is," he explained, "that your cousin, Mrs. Capella, has sought
my assistance in order to clear his name of the odium attached to it by
the manner of Sir Alan Hume-Frazer's death. At my request he brought me
here. In this house, in this very room, such an inquiry should have its
origin, wherever it may lead ultimately." The lady's cheeks became ashen. Her large eyes dilated. "Is not that terrible business ended yet?" she cried. "I little dreamed
that such could be the object of your visit, Davie. What has happened--"

The Italian swung round viciously. "If you come here as a detective, Mr. Brett," he snapped, "I refer you to
the police. Mr. Hume-Frazer is known to them." CHAPTER V

FROM BEHIND THE HEDGE


The man's swarthy rage added force to the taunt. David Hume leaped up, but
Brett anticipated him, gripping his arm firmly, and without ostentation. Margaret, too, had risen. She appeared to be battling with some powerful
emotion, choking back a fierce impulse. For an instant the situation was
electrical. Then the woman's clear tones rang through the room. "I am mistress here," she cried, "Giovanni, remain silent or leave us. How
dare you, of all men, speak thus to my cousin?" Certainly the effect of the barrister's straightforward statement was
unlooked-for. But Brett felt that a family quarrel would not further his
object at that moment. It was necessary to stop the imminent outburst, for
David Hume and Giovanni Capella were silently challenging each other to
mortal combat. What a place of ill-omen to the descendants of the Georgian
baronet was this sun-lit library with its spacious French windows! "Of course," said the barrister, speaking as quietly as if he were
discussing the weather, "such a topic is an unpleasant one. It is,
however, unavoidable. My young friend here is determined, at all costs, to
discover the secret of Sir Alan's murder. It is imperative that he should
do so. The happiness of his whole life depends upon his success. Until
that mystery is solved he cannot marry the woman he loves." "Do you mean Helen Layton?" Margaret's syllables might have been so many
mortal daggers. "Yes." "Is David still in love with her?" "Yes." "And she with him?" David Hume broke in:

"Yes, Rita. She has been faithful to the end." A very forcible Italian oath came from Capella as he passed through the
window and strode rapidly out of sight, passing to the left of the house,
where one of the lines of yew trees ended in a group of conservatories. Margaret was now deadly white. She pressed her hand to her bosom. "Forgive me," she sobbed. "I do not feel well. You will both be always
welcome here. Let no one interfere with you. But I must leave you. This
afternoon--"

She staggered to the door. Her cousin caught her. "Thank you, Davie," she whispered. "Leave me now. I will be all right
soon. My heart troubles me. No. Do not ring. Let us keep our miseries from
the servants." She passed out, leaving Hume and the barrister uncertain how best to act
The situation had developed with a vengeance. Brett was more bewildered
than ever before in his life. "That scoundrel killed Alan, and now he wants to kill his own wife!" growled Hume, when they were alone. Brett looked through him rather than at him. He was thinking intently. For
a long time--minutes it seemed to his fuming companion--he remained
motionless, with glazed, immovable eyes. Then he awoke to action. "Quick!" he cried. "Tell me if this room has changed much since you were
last here. Is the furniture the same? Is that the writing-table? What
chair did you sit in? Where was it placed? Quick, man! You have wasted
eighteen months. Give me no opinions, but facts." Thus admonished, scared somewhat by the barrister's volcanic energy, Hume
obeyed him. "There is no material change in the room," he said. "The secretaire is the
same. You see, here is the drawer which was broken open. It bears the
marks of the implement used to force the lock. I think I sat in this
chair, or one like it. It was placed here. My face was turned towards the
fire, yet in my dream I was looking through the centre window. The
Japanese sword rested here. I showed you where Alan's body was found." The young man darted about the room to illustrate each sentence. Brett
followed his words and actions without comment. He grabbed his hat and
stick. "We will return later in the day," he said. "Let us go at once and call on
Mrs. Eastham." "Mrs. Eastham! Why?" "Because I want to see Miss Helen Layton. The old lady can send for her." Hume needed no urging. He could not walk fast enough. They had gone a
hundred yards from the house when Brett suddenly stopped and checked his
companion. Behind the yew trees on the left, and rendered invisible by a stout hedge,
a man was running--running at top speed, with the labouring breath of one
unaccustomed to the exercise. The barrister sprang over the strip of turf,
passed among the trees, and plunged into the hedge regardless of thorns. He came back instantly. "There is a footpath across the park, leading towards the lodge gates. Where does it come out?" he asked, speaking rapidly in a low tone. "It enters, the road near the avenue, close to the gates. It leads from a
farmhouse." "A lady is walking through the park towards the lodge. Capella is running
to intercept her. Come! We may hear something." Brett set off at a rapid pace along the turf. Hume followed, and soon they
were near the lodge. Mrs. Crowe saw them, and came out. "Stop her!" gasped Brett. Hume signalled the woman not to open the gate. She watched them with
open-mouthed curiosity. The barrister slowed down and quietly made his way
to the leafy angle where the avenue hedge joined that which shut off the
park from the road. He held up a warning hand. Hume stepped warily behind him, and both men
looked through a portion of the hedge where briars were supplanted by
hazel bushes. Capella was standing panting near a stile. A girl, dressed in muslin, and
wearing a large straw hat, was approaching. "Great Heavens! It is Helen!" exclaimed Hume. Brett grasped his shoulder. "Restrain yourself," he whispered earnestly. "Luckily, Capella has not
heard you. I regret the necessity which makes us eavesdroppers, but it is
a fortunate accident, all the same. Not a word! Remember what is at
stake." They could not see the Italian's face. His back was heaving from the
violence of his exertion. Miss Layton was walking rapidly towards the
stile. Obviously she had perceived the waiting man, and she was not
pleased. Her pretty face, flushed and sunburnt, wore the strained aspect of a woman
annoyed, but trying to be civil. It was she who took the initiative. "Good day, Mr. Capella," she said pleasantly. "Why on earth did you run so
fast?" "Because I wished to be here before you, Miss Layton," replied the man,
his voice tremulous with excitement. "Then I wish I had known, because I could have beaten you easily if you
meant to race me." "That was not my object." "Well, now you have attained it, whatever it may have been, please allow
me to get over the stile. I will be late for luncheon. My father wished me
to ascertain how Farmer Burton is progressing after his spill. He was
thrown from his dog-cart whilst coming from the Bury St. Edmund's fair." It was easy for the listeners behind the hedge to gather that the girl's
affable manner was affected. She was really somewhat alarmed. Her eyes
wandered to the high road to see if anyone was approaching, and she kept
at some distance from the Italian. "Do not play with me, Nellie," said Capella, in agonised accents. "I am
consumed with love of you. Can you not, at least, give me your pity?" "Mr. Capella," she cried, and none but one blind to all save his own
passionate desires could fail to note her lofty disdain, "how can you be
so base as to use such language to me?" "Base! To love you!" 