

E-text prepared by Janet Kegg and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations. See 15893-h.htm or 15893-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/8/9/15893/15893-h/15893-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/8/9/15893/15893-h.zip)





THE LIGHTED WAY

by

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

Author of _Havoc_, _Peter Ruff and the Double-Four_,
_The Master Mummer_, etc. With Illustrations by A. B. Wenzell

Boston
Little, Brown, and Company

1912







   [Illustration: Her head sank upon his shoulder, her hands
   clasped his. FRONTISPIECE. _See page 354_.] CONTENTS


     I AN INVITATION TO DINNER
    II RUTH
   III ARNOLD SCENTS MYSTERY
    IV THE FACE AT THE WINDOW
     V AN UNUSUAL ERRAND
    VI THE GLEAM OF STEEL
   VII "ROSARIO IS DEAD!" VIII THE DUTIES OF A SECRETARY
    IX A STRAINED CONVERSATION
     X AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR
    XI AN INTERRUPTED LUNCHEON
   XII JARVIS IS JUSTLY DISTURBED
  XIII CASTLES IN SPAIN
   XIV SABATINI'S DOCTRINES
    XV THE RED SIGNET RING
   XVI AN ADVENTURE
  XVII THE END OF AN EVENING
 XVIII DISCUSSING THE MYSTERY
   XIX IN THE COUNTRY
    XX WOMAN'S WILES
   XXI ARNOLD SPEAKS OUT
  XXII THE REFUGEE'S RETURN
 XXIII TROUBLE BREWING
  XXIV ISAAC AT BAY
   XXV MR. WEATHERLEY'S DISAPPEARANCE
  XXVI ARNOLD BECOMES INQUISITIVE
 XXVII THE LETTERS IN THE SAFE
XXVIII TALK OF TREASURE SHIPS
  XXIX COUNT SABATINI VISITS
   XXX SOME QUESTIONS ANSWERED
  XXXI A LUNCHEON-PARTY
 XXXII ISAAC IN HIDING
XXXIII SABATINI'S DAUGHTER
 XXXIV CLOSE TO TRAGEDY
  XXXV MR. WEATHERLEY RETURNS
 XXXVI COUNTERCLAIMS
XXXVII THE SHIP COMES IN




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Her head sank upon his shoulder, her hands clasped his (Frontispiece)
"I was waiting here for you," he explained
The eyes of every one were turned toward the wall
"For myself," he declared, "I remain"
"Where is this man?" he demanded
Mrs. Weatherley and the cashier looked over his shoulder




CHAPTER I

AN INVITATION TO DINNER


Mr. Samuel Weatherley, sole proprietor of the firm of Samuel
Weatherley & Co., wholesale provision merchants, of Tooley Street,
London, paused suddenly on his way from his private office to the
street. There was something which until that second had entirely
slipped his memory. It was not his umbrella, for that, neatly tucked
up, was already under his arm. Nor was it the _Times_, for that,
together with the supplement, was sticking out of his overcoat
pocket, the shape of which it completely ruined. As a matter of
fact, it was more important than either of these--it was a
commission from his wife. Very slowly he retraced his steps until he stood outside the
glass-enclosed cage where twelve of the hardest-worked clerks in
London bent over their ledgers and invoicing. With his forefinger--a
fat, pudgy forefinger--he tapped upon a pane of glass, and an
anxious errand boy bolted through the doorway. "Tell Mr. Jarvis to step this way," his employer ordered. Mr. Jarvis heard the message and came hurrying out. He was an
undersized man, with somewhat prominent eyes concealed by
gold-rimmed spectacles. He was possessed of extraordinary talents
with regard to the details of the business, and was withal an expert
and careful financier. Hence his hold upon the confidence of his
employer. The latter addressed him with a curious and altogether unusual
hesitation in his manner. "Mr. Jarvis," he began, "there is a matter--a little matter--upon
which I--er--wish to consult you." "Those American invoices--"

"Nothing to do with business at all," Mr. Weatherley interrupted,
ruthlessly. "A little private matter." "Indeed, sir?" Mr. Jarvis interjected. "The fact is," Mr. Weatherley blundered on, with considerable
awkwardness, for he hated the whole affair, "my wife--Mrs.
Weatherley, you know--is giving a party this evening--having some
friends to dinner first, and then some other people coming to
bridge. We are a man short for dinner. Mrs. Weatherley told me to
get some one at the club--telephoned down here just an hour ago." Mr. Weatherley paused. Mr. Jarvis did his best to grasp the
situation, but failed. All that he could do was to maintain his
attitude of intelligent interest. "I don't know any one at the club," continued his employer,
irritably. "I feel like a fish out of water there, and that's the
truth, Mr. Jarvis. It's a good club. I got elected there--well,
never mind how--but it's one thing to be a member of a club, and
quite another to get to know the men there. You understand that, Mr. Jarvis." Mr. Jarvis, however, did not understand it. He could conceive of no
spot in the city of London, or its immediate neighborhood, where Mr.
Samuel Weatherley, head of the firm of Messrs. Weatherley & Co.,
could find himself among his social superiors. He knew the capital
of the firm, and its status. He was ignorant of the other things
which counted--as ignorant as his master had been until he had paid
a business visit a few years ago, in search of certain edibles, to
an island in the Mediterranean Sea. He was to have returned in
triumph to Tooley Street and launched upon the provision-buying
world a new cheese of astounding quality and infinitesimal
price--instead of which he brought home a wife. "Anything I can do, sir," began Mr. Jarvis, a little vaguely,--

"My idea was," Mr. Weatherley proceeded, "that one of my own young
men--there are twelve of them in there, aren't there?" he added,
jerking his head in the direction of the office--"might do. What do
you think?" Mr. Jarvis nodded thoughtfully. "It would be a great honor, sir," he declared, "a very great honor
indeed." Mr. Weatherley did not contradict him. As a matter of fact, he was
of the same opinion. "The question is which," he continued. Mr. Jarvis began to understand why he had been consulted. His
fingers involuntarily straightened his tie. "If I could be of any use personally, sir,--"

His employer shook his head. "My wife would expect me to bring a single man, Jarvis," he said,
"and besides, I don't suppose you play bridge." "Cards are not much in my line," Mr. Jarvis admitted, "not having,
as a rule, the time to spare, but I can take a hand at loo, if
desired." "My wife's friends all play bridge," Mr. Weatherley declared, a
little brusquely. "There's only one young man in the office, Jarvis,
who, from his appearance, struck me as being likely." "Mr. Stephen Tidey, of course, sir," the confidential clerk agreed. "Most suitable thing, sir, and I'm sure his father would accept it
as a high compliment. Mr. Stephen Tidey Senior, sir, as you may be
aware, is next on the list for the shrievalty. Shall I call him out,
sir?" Mr. Weatherley looked through the glass and met the glance,
instantly lowered, of the young man in question. Mr. Stephen Tidey
Junior was short and stout, reflecting in his physique his
aldermanic father. His complexion was poor, however, his neck thick,
and he wore a necktie of red silk drawn through a diamond ring. There was nothing in his appearance which grated particularly upon
Mr. Weatherley's sense of seemliness. Nevertheless, he shook his
head. He was beginning to recognize his wife's point of view, even
though it still seemed strange to him. "I wasn't thinking of young Tidey at all," he declared, bluntly. "I
was thinking of that young fellow at the end of the desk there--chap
with a queer name--Chetwode, I think you call him." Mr. Jarvis, human automaton though he was, permitted himself an
exclamation of surprise. "Young Chetwode! Surely you're not in earnest, sir!" "Why not?" Mr. Weatherley demanded. "There's nothing against him,
is there?" "Nothing against him, precisely," Mr. Jarvis confessed, "but he's at
the lowest desk in the office, bar Smithers. His salary is only
twenty-eight shillings a week, and we know nothing whatever about
him except that his references were satisfactory. It isn't to be
supposed that he would feel at home in your house, sir. Now, with
Mr. Tidey, sir, it's quite different. They live in a very beautiful
house at Sydenham now--quite a small palace, in its way, I've been
told." Mr. Weatherley was getting a little impatient. "Send Chetwode out for a moment, anyway," he directed. "I'll speak
to him here." Mr. Jarvis obeyed in silence. He entered the office and touched the
young man in question upon the shoulder. "Mr. Weatherley wishes to speak to you outside, Chetwode," he
announced. "Make haste, please." Arnold Chetwode put down his pen and rose to his feet. There was
nothing flurried about his manner, nothing whatever to indicate on
his part any knowledge of the fact that this was the voice of Fate
beating upon his ear. He did not even show the ordinary interest of
a youthful employee summoned for the first time to an audience with
his chief. Standing for a moment by the side of the senior clerk in
the middle of the office, tall and straight, with deep brown hair,
excellent features, and the remnants of a healthy tan still visible
on his forehead and neck, he looked curiously out of place in this
unwholesome, gaslit building with its atmosphere of cheese and
bacon. He would have been noticeably good-looking upon the cricket
field or in any gathering of people belonging to the other side of
life. Here he seemed almost a curiously incongruous figure. He
passed through the glass-paned door and stood respectfully before
his employer. Mr. Weatherley--it was absurd, but he scarcely knew
how to make his suggestion--fidgetted for a moment and coughed. The
young man, who, among many other quite unusual qualities, was
possessed of a considerable amount of tact, looked down upon his
employer with a little well-assumed anxiety. As a matter of fact, he
really was exceedingly anxious not to lose his place. "I understood from Mr. Jarvis that you wished to speak to me, sir,"
he remarked. "I hope that my work has given satisfaction? I know
that I am quite inexperienced but I don't think that I have made any
mistakes." Mr. Weatherley was, to tell the truth, thankful for the opening. "I have had no complaints, Chetwode," he admitted, struggling for
that note of condescension which he felt to be in order. "No
complaints at all. I was wondering if you--you happened to play
bridge?" Once more this extraordinary young man showed himself to be
possessed of gifts quite unusual at his age. Not by the flicker of
an eyelid did he show the least surprise or amusement. "Bridge, sir," he repeated. "Yes, I have played at--I have played
occasionally." "My wife is giving a small dinner-party this evening," Mr.
Weatherley continued, moving his umbrella from one hand to the other
and speaking very rapidly, "bridge afterwards. We happen to be a man
short. I was to have called at the club to try and pick up some
one--find I sha'n't have time--meeting at the Cannon Street Hotel to
attend. Would you--er--fill the vacant place? Save me the trouble of
looking about." It was out at last and Mr. Weatherley felt unaccountably relieved. He felt at the same time a certain measure of annoyance with his
junior clerk for his unaltered composure. "I shall be very much pleased, sir," he answered, without
hesitation. "About eight, I suppose?" Again Mr. Weatherley's relief was tempered with a certain amount of
annoyance. This young man's _savoir faire_ was out of place. He
should have imagined a sort of high-tea supper at seven o'clock, and
been gently corrected by his courteous employer. As it was, Mr.
Weatherley felt dimly confident that this junior clerk of his was
more accustomed to eight o'clock dinners than he was himself. "A quarter to, to-night," he replied. "People coming for bridge
afterwards, you see. I live up Hampstead way--Pelham Lodge--quite
close to the tube station." Mr. Weatherley omitted the directions he had been about to give
respecting toilet, and turned away. His youthful employee's manners,
to the last, were all that could be desired. "I am much obliged to you, sir," he said. "I will take care to be
punctual." Mr. Weatherley grunted and walked out into the street. Here his
behavior was a little singular. He walked up toward London Bridge,
exchanging greetings with a good many acquaintances on the way. Opposite the London & Westminster Bank he paused for a moment and
looked searchingly around. Satisfied that he was unobserved, he
stepped quickly into a very handsome motor car which was drawn up
close to the curb, and with a sigh of relief sat as far back among
the cushions as possible and held the tube to his mouth. "Get along home," he ordered, tersely. *       *       *       *       *

Arnold Chetwode, after his interview with his employer, returned
unruffled to his place. Mr. Jarvis bustled in after him. He was
annoyed, but he wished to conceal the fact. Besides, he still had an
arrow in his quiver. He came and stood over his subordinate. "Congratulate you, I'm sure, Chetwode," he said smoothly. "First
time any one except myself has been to the house since Mr.
Weatherley's marriage." Mr. Jarvis had taken the letters there one morning when his employer
had been unwell, and had waited in the hall. He did not, however,
mention that fact. "Indeed?" Chetwode murmured, with his eye upon his work. "You understand, of course," Mr. Jarvis continued, "that it will be
an evening-dress affair. Mrs. Weatherley has the name of being very
particular." He glanced covertly at the young man, who was already immersed in
his work. "Evening dress," Chetwode remarked, with a becoming show of
interest. "Well, I dare say I can manage something. If I wear a
black coat and a white silk bow, and stick a red handkerchief in
underneath my waistcoat, I dare say I shall be all right. Mr.
Weatherley can't expect much from me in that way, can he?" The senior clerk was secretly delighted. It was not for him to
acquaint this young countryman with the necessities of London life. He turned away and took up a bundle of letters. "Can't say, I'm sure, what the governor expects," he replied,
falsely. "You'll have to do the best you can, I suppose. Better get
on with those invoices now." Once more the office resounded to the hum of its varied labors. Mr.
Jarvis, dictating letters to a typist, smiled occasionally as he
pictured the arrival of this over-favored young man in the
drawing-room of Mrs. Weatherley, attired in the nondescript fashion
which his words had suggested. One or two of the clerks ventured
upon a chaffing remark. To all appearance, the person most absorbed
in his work was the young man who had been singled out for such
especial favor. CHAPTER II

RUTH


In the topmost chamber of the last of a row of somber gray stone
houses in Adam Street a girl with a thin but beautiful face and
large, expectant eyes sat close to the bare, uncurtained window,
from which it was possible to command a view of the street below. A
book which she had apparently been reading had fallen neglected onto
the floor. Steadfastly she watched the passers-by. Her delicate,
expressive features were more than once illuminated with joy, only
to be clouded, a moment later, with disappointment. The color came
and went in her cheeks, as though, indeed, she were more sensitive
than her years. Occasionally she glanced around at the clock. Time
dragged so slowly in that great bare room with its obvious touch of
poverty! At last a tall figure came striding along the pavement below. This
time no mistake was possible. There was a fluttering handkerchief
from above, an answering wave of the hand. The girl drew a sigh of
inexpressible content, moved away from the window and faced the
door, with lifted head waiting for the sound of footsteps upon the
stairs. They arrived at last. The door was thrown open. Arnold
Chetwode came hastily across the room and gripped the two hands
which were held out to him. Then he bent down and kissed her
forehead. "Dear little Ruth!" he exclaimed. "I hope you were careful crossing
the landing?" The girl leaned back in her chair. Her eyes were fixed anxiously
upon his face. She completely ignored his question. "The news at once!" she insisted. "Tell me, Arnold!" He was a little taken aback. "How did you know that I had any?" She smiled delightfully. "Know, indeed! I knew it directly I saw you, I knew it every time
your foot touched the stairs. What is it, Arnold? The cheeses didn't
smell so bad to-day? Or you've had a rise? Quick! I must hear all
about it." "You shall," Arnold replied. "It is a wonderful story. Listen. Have
you ever heard the fable of Dick Whittington?" "Married his employer's daughter, of course. What's she like,
Arnold? Have you seen her? Did you save her life? When are you going
to see her again?" Chetwode was already on his knees, dragging out an old trunk from
underneath the faded cupboard. Suddenly he paused with a gesture of
despair. "Alas!" he exclaimed. "My dream fades away. Old Weatherley was
married only last year. Consequently, his daughter--"

"He can't have one," she interrupted, ruthlessly. "Tell me the news
at once?" "I am going to dine with old Weatherley," he announced. The girl smiled, a little wistfully. "How funny! But you will get a good dinner, won't you, Arnold? Eat
ever so much, dear. Yesterday I fancied that you were getting thin. I do wish I could see what you have in the middle of the day." "Little mother!" he laughed. "To-day I gorged myself on poached
eggs. What did Isaac give you?" "Mutton stew and heaps of it," the girl replied, quickly. "To-night
I shall have a bowl of milk as soon as you are gone. Have you
everything you ought to have to wear, Arnold?" "Everything," he declared, rising to his feet with a sigh of relief. "It's so long since I looked at my clothes that to tell you the
truth I was a little bit anxious. They may be old-fashioned, but
they came from a good man to start with." "What made Mr. Weatherley ask you?" she demanded. "Wanted one of his clerks to fill up and found that I played
bridge," Arnold answered. "It's rather a bore, isn't it? But, after
all, he is my employer." "Of course you must go and behave your very nicest. Tell me, when
have you to start?" "I ought to be changing in a quarter of an hour. What shall we do
till then?" "Whatever you like," she murmured. "I am coming to sit at the window with you," he said. "We'll look
down at the river and you shall tell me stories about the ships." She laughed and took his hand as he dragged a chair over to her
side. He put his arm around her and her head fell naturally back
upon his shoulder. Her eyes sought his. He was leaning forward,
gazing down between the curving line of lamp-posts, across the belt
of black river with its flecks of yellow light. But Ruth watched him
only. "Arnie," she whispered in his ear, "there are no fairy ships upon
the river to-night." He smiled. "Why not, little one? You have only to close your eyes." Slowly she shook her head. "Don't think that I am foolish, dear," she begged. "To-night I
cannot look upon the river at all. I feel that there is something
new here--here in this room. The great things are here, Arnold. I
can feel life hammering and throbbing in the air. We aren't in a
garret any longer, dear. It's a fairy palace. Listen. Can't you hear
the people shout, and the music, and the fountains playing? Can't
you see the dusky walls fall back, the marble pillars, the lights in
the ceiling?" He turned his head. He found himself, indeed, listening, found
himself almost disappointed to hear nothing but the far-off, eternal
roar of the city, and the melancholy grinding of a hurdy-gurdy
below. Always she carried him away by her intense earnestness, the
bewitching softness of her voice, even when it was galleons full of
treasure that she saw, with blood-red sails, coming up the river,
full of treasure for them. To-night her voice had more than its
share of inspiration, her fancies clung to her feverishly. "Be careful, Arnold," she murmured. "To-night means a change. There
is something new coming. I can feel it coming in my heart." Her face was drawn and pale. He laughed down into her eyes. "Little lady," he reminded her, mockingly, "I am going to dine with
my cheesemonger employer." She shook her head dreamily. She refused to be dragged down. "There's something beating in the air," she continued. "It came into
the room with you. Don't you feel it? Can't you feel that you are
going to a tragedy? Life is going to be different, Arnold, to be
different always." He drew himself up. A flicker of passion flamed in his own deep gray
eyes. "Different, child? Of course it's going to be different. If there
weren't something else in front, do you think one could live? Do you
think one could be content to struggle through this miserable
quagmire if one didn't believe that there was something else on the
other side of the hill?" She sighed, and her fingers touched his. "I forgot," she said simply. "You see, there was a time when I
hadn't you. You lifted me out of my quagmire." "Not high enough, dear," he answered, caressingly. "Some day I'll
take you over to Berlin or Vienna, or one of those wonderful places. We'll leave Isaac to grub along and sow red fire in Hyde Park. We'll
find the doctors. We shall teach you to walk again without that
stick. No more gloominess, please." She pressed his hand tightly. "Dear Arnold!" she whispered softly. "Turn around and watch the river with me, little one," he begged. "See the lights on the barges, how slowly they move. What is there
behind that one, I wonder?" Her eyes followed his finger without enthusiasm. "I can't look out of the room to-night, Arnold," she said. "The
fancies won't come. Promise me one thing." "I promise," he agreed. "Tell me everything--don't keep anything back." "On my honor," he declared, smiling. "I will bring the menu of the
dinner, if there is one, and a photograph of Mrs. Cheesemonger if I
can steal it. Now I am going to help you back into your room." "Don't bother," she begged. "Open the door and I can get there quite
easily." He set the door open and, crossing the bare stone landing, opened
the door of another room, similar to his. They were somber
apartments at the top of the deserted house, which had once been a
nobleman's residence. The doors were still heavy, though blistered
with time and lack of varnish. There were the remains of paneling
upon the wall and frescoes upon the ceiling. "Come and see me before you go," she pleaded. "I am all alone. Isaac
has gone to a meeting somewhere." He promised and returned to his own apartment. With the help of a
candle which he stuck upon the mantelpiece, and a cracked mirror, he
first of all shaved, then disappeared for a few minutes behind a
piece of faded curtain and washed vigorously. Afterwards he changed
his clothes, putting on a dress suit produced from the trunk. When
he had finished, he stepped back and laughed softly to himself. His
clothes were well cut. His studs, which had very many times been on
the point of visiting the pawnbroker's, were correct and good. He
was indeed an incongruous figure as he stood there and, with a
candle carefully held away from him in his hand, looked at his own
reflection. For some reason or other, he was feeling elated. Ruth's
words had lingered in his brain. One could never tell which way
fortune might come! He found her waiting in the darkness. Her long arms were wound for a
moment around his neck, a sudden passion shook her. "Arnold--dear Arnold," she sobbed, "you are going into the
storm--and I want to go! I want to go, too! My hands are cold, and
my heart. Take me with you, dear!" He was a little startled. It was not often that she was hysterical. He looked down into her convulsed face. She choked for a moment, and
then, although it was not altogether a successful effort, she
laughed. "Don't mind me," she begged. "I am a little mad to-night. I think
that the twilight here has got upon my nerves. Light the lamp,
please. Light the lamp and leave me alone for a moment while you do
it." He obeyed, fetching some matches from his own room and setting the
lamp, when it was lit, on the table by her side. There were no tears
left in her eyes now. Her lips were tremulous, but an unusual spot
of color was burning in her cheeks. While he had been dressing, he
saw that she had tied a piece of deep blue ribbon, the color he
liked best, around her hair. "See, I am myself now. Good night and good luck to you, Arnold! Eat
a good dinner, mind, and remember your promise." "There is nothing more that I can do for you?" he asked. "Nothing," she replied. "Besides, I can hear Uncle Isaac coming." The door was suddenly opened. A thin, undersized man in worn black
clothes, and with a somber hat of soft black felt still upon his
head, came into the room. His dark hair was tinged with gray, he
walked with a pronounced stoop. In his shabby clothes, fitting
loosely upon his diminutive body, he should have been an
insignificant figure, but somehow or other he was nothing of the
sort. His thin lips curved into a discontented droop. His cheeks
were hollow and his eyes shone with the brightness of the fanatic. Arnold greeted him familiarly. "Hullo, Isaac!" he exclaimed. "You are just in time to save Ruth
from being left all alone." The newcomer came to a standstill. He looked the speaker over from
head to foot with an expression of growing disgust, and he spat upon
the floor. "What livery's that?" he demanded. Arnold laughed good-naturedly. "Come, Isaac," he protested, "I don't often inflict it upon you, do
I? It's something that belongs to the world on the other side, you
know. We all of us have to look over the fence now and then. I have
to cross the borderland to-night for an hour or so." Isaac threw open the door by which he had entered. "Get out of here," he ordered. "If you were one of us, I'd call you
a traitor for wearing the rags. As it is, I say that no one is
welcomed under my roof who looks as you look now. Why, d--n it, I
believe you're a gentleman!" Arnold laughed softly. "My dear Isaac," he retorted, "I am as I was born and made. You
can't blame me for that, can you? Besides,--"

He broke off suddenly. A little murmur from the girl behind
reminded him of her presence. He passed on to the door. "Good night, Isaac," he said. "Look after Ruth. She's lonely
to-night." "I'll look after her," was the grim reply. "As for you, get you
gone. There was one of your sort came to the meeting of Jameson's
moulders this afternoon. He had a question to ask and I answered
him. He wanted to know wherein wealth was a sin, and I told him." Arnold Chetwode was young and his sense of humor triumphant. He
turned on the threshold and looked into the shadowy room, dimly lit
with its cheap lamp. He kissed his hands to Ruth. "My dear Isaac," he declared, lightly, "you are talking like an ass. I have two shillings and a penny ha'penny in my pocket, which has to
last me till Saturday, and I earn my twenty-eight shillings a week
in old Weatherley's counting-house as honestly as you earn your wage
by thundering from Labor platforms and articles in the _Clarion_. My
clothes are part of the livery of civilization. The journalist who
reports a Lord Mayor's dinner has to wear them. Some day, when
you've got your seat in Parliament, you'll wear them yourself. Good
night!" He paused before closing the door. Ruth's kiss came wafted to him
from the shadows where her great eyes were burning like stars. Her
uncle had turned his back upon him. The word he muttered sounded
like a malediction, but Arnold Chetwode went down the stone steps
blithely. It was an untrodden land, this, into which he was to pass. CHAPTER III

ARNOLD SCENTS MYSTERY


From the first, nothing about that evening was as Arnold had
expected. He took the tube to Hampstead station, and, the night
being dry, he walked to Pelham Lodge without detriment to his
carefully polished patent shoes. The neighborhood was entirely
strange to him and he was surprised to find that the house which was
pointed out to him by a policeman was situated in grounds of not
inconsiderable extent, and approached by a short drive. Directly he
rang the bell he was admitted not by a flamboyant parlormaid but by
a quiet, sad-faced butler in plain, dark livery, who might have been
major-domo to a duke. The house was even larger than he had
expected, and was handsomely furnished in an extremely subdued
style. It was dimly, almost insufficiently lit, and there was a
faint but not unpleasant odor in the drawing-room which reminded him
of incense. The room itself almost took his breath away. It was
entirely French. The hangings, carpet and upholstery were all of a
subdued rose color and white. Arnold, who was, for a young man,
exceedingly susceptible to impressions, looked around him with an
air almost of wonder. It was fortunate, perhaps, that the room was
empty. "Mr. and Mrs. Weatherley will be downstairs in one moment, sir,"
the man announced. "Mr. Weatherley was a little late home from the
city." Arnold nodded and stood upon the hearthrug, looking around him. He
was quite content to spend a few moments alone, to admire the
drooping clusters of roses, the elegance with which every article of
furniture and appointment of the room seemed to fit into its place. Somehow or other, too, nothing appeared new. Everything seemed
subdued by time into its proper tone. He began to wonder what sort
of woman the presiding genius over such perfection could be. Then,
with a quaint transition of thought, he remembered the little
counting-house in Tooley Street, the smell of cheeses, and Mr.
Weatherley's half-nervous invitation. His lips twitched and he began
to smile. These things seemed to belong to a world so far away. Presently he heard footsteps outside and voices. The door was opened
but the person outside did not immediately enter. Apparently she had
turned round to listen to the man who was still some distance
behind. Arnold recognized his employer's voice. "I am sorry that you are displeased, my dear Fenella, but I assure
you that I did the best I could. It is true that the young man is in
my office, but I am convinced that you will find him presentable." A peal of the softest and most musical laughter that Arnold had
ever heard in his life effectually stopped Mr. Weatherley's
protestations. Yet, for all its softness and for all its music,
there was a different note underneath, something a little bitter,
unutterably scornful. "My dear Samuel, it is true, without doubt, that you did your best. I do not blame you at all. It was I who was foolish to leave such a
matter in your hands. It was not likely that among your
acquaintances there was one whom I would have cared to welcome to my
house. But that you should have gone to your employees--that,
indeed, is funny! You do amuse me very much. Come." The door was pushed fully open now and a woman entered, at the sight
of whom Arnold forgot all his feelings of mingled annoyance and
amusement. She was of little over the medium height, exceedingly
slim--a slimness which was accentuated by the fashion of the gown
she wore. Her face was absolutely devoid of color, but her features
were almost cameo-like in their sensitive perfection. Her eyes were
large and soft and brown, her hair a Titian red, worn low and
without ornament. Her dress was of pale blue satin, which somehow
had the effect of being made in a single piece, without seam or
joining. Her neck and throat, exquisitely white, were bare except
for a single necklace of pearls which reached almost to her knees. The look in Arnold's face, as she came slowly into the room, was one
of frank and boyish admiration. The woman came towards him with a
soft smile about her lips, but she was evidently puzzled. It was Mr.
Weatherley who spoke. There was something almost triumphant in his
manner. "This is Mr. Chetwode, dear, of whom I was speaking to you," he
said. "Glad to see you, Chetwode," he added, with ponderous
condescension. The woman laughed softly as she held out her hand. "Are you going to pretend that you were deaf, to forgive me and be
friends, Mr. Chetwode?" she asked, looking up at him. "One foggy
day my husband took me to Tooley Street, and I did not believe that
anything good could come out of the yellow fog and the mud and the
smells. It was my ignorance. You heard, but you do not mind? I am
sure that you do not mind?" "Not a bit in the world," Arnold answered, still holding the hand
which she seemed to have forgotten to draw away, and smiling down
into her upturned face. "I was awfully sorry to overhear but you see
I couldn't very well help it, could I?" "Of course you could not help it," she replied. "I am so glad that
you came and I hope that we can make it pleasant for you. I will try
and send you in to dinner with some one very charming." She laughed at him understandingly as his lips parted and closed
again without speech. Then she turned away to welcome some other
guests, who were at that moment announced. Arnold stood in the
background for a few minutes. Presently she came back to him. "Do you know any one here?" she asked. "No one," he answered. She dropped her voice almost to a whisper. Arnold bent his head and
listened with a curious pleasure to her little stream of words. "It is a strange mixture of people whom you see here," she said, "a
mixture, perhaps, of the most prosaic and the most romantic. The
Count Sabatini, whom you see talking to my husband, is my brother. He is a person who lives in the flood of adventures. He has taken
part in five wars, he has been tried more than once for political
offenses. He has been banished from what is really our native
country, Portugal, with a price set upon his head. He has an estate
upon which nothing grows, and a castle with holes in the roof in
which no one could dwell. Yet he lives--oh, yes, he lives!" Arnold looked across at the man of whom she was speaking--gaunt and
olive-skinned, with deep-set eyes and worn face. He had still some
share of his sister's good looks and he held himself as a man of his
race should. "I think I should like your brother," Arnold declared. "Will he talk
about his campaigns?" "Perhaps," she murmured, "although there is one about which you
would not care to hear. He fought with the Boers, but we will not
speak of that. Mr. and Mrs. Horsman there I shall say nothing about. Imagine for yourself where they belong." "They are your husband's friends," he decided, unhesitatingly. "You are a young man of great perceptions," she replied. "I am going
to like you, I am sure. Come, there is Mr. Starling standing by the
door. What do you think of him?" Arnold glanced across the room. Mr. Starling was apparently a
middle-aged man--clean-shaven, with pale cheeks and somewhat narrow
eyes. "An American, without a doubt," Arnold remarked. "Quite right. Now the lady in the gray satin with the wonderful
coiffure--she has looked at you already more than once. Her name is
Lady Blennington, and she is always trying to discover new young
men." Arnold glanced at her deliberately and back again at his hostess. "There is nothing for me to say about her," he declared. "You are wonderful," she murmured. "That is so exactly what one
feels about Lady Blennington. Then there is Lady Templeton--that
fluffy little thing behind my husband. She looks rather as though
she had come out of a toy shop, does she not?" "She looks nice," Arnold admitted. "I knew--"

She glanced up at him and waited. Arnold, however, had stopped
short. "You have not yet told me," he said, "the name of the man who stands
alone near the door--the one with the little piece of red ribbon in
his coat?" It seemed to him that, for some reason, the presence of that
particular person affected her. He was a plump little man, sleek and
well-dressed, with black hair, very large pearl studs, black
moustache and imperial. Mrs. Weatherley stood quite still for a
moment. Perhaps, he thought, she was listening to the conversation
around them. "The man's name is Rosario," she replied. "He is a financier and a
man of fashion. Another time you must tell me what you think of him,
but I warn you that it will not be so easy as with those others, for
he is also a man of schemes. I am sorry, but I must send you in now
with Mrs. Horsman, who is much too amiable to be anything else but
dull. You shall come with me and I will introduce you." Dinner was announced almost at that moment. Arnold, keen to enjoy,
with all the love of new places and the enthusiasm of youth in his
veins, found every moment of the meal delightful. They took their
places at a round table with shaded lights artistically arranged, so
that they seemed to be seated before a little oasis of flowers and
perfumes in the midst of a land of shadows. He found his companion
pleasant and sympathetic. She had a son about his age who was going
soon into the city and about whom she talked incessantly. On his
left, Lady Blennington made frank attempts to engage him in
conversation whenever an opportunity arose. Arnold felt his spirits
rise with every moment. He laughed and talked the whole of the time,
devoting himself with very little intermission to one or the other
of his two neighbors. Mr. Weatherley, who was exceedingly
uncomfortable and found it difficult even to remember his few staple
openings, looked across the table more than once in absolute wonder
that this young man who, earning a wage of twenty-eight shillings a
week, and occupying almost the bottom stool in his office, could yet
be entirely and completely at his ease in this exalted company. More
than once Arnold caught his hostess's eye, and each time he felt,
for some unknown reason, a little thrill of pleasure at the faint
relaxing of her lips, the glance of sympathy which shone across the
roses. Life was a good place, he thought to himself, for these few
hours, at any rate. And then, as he leaned back in his place for a
moment, Ruth's words seemed suddenly traced with a finger of fire
upon the dim wall. To-night was to be a night of mysteries. To-night
the great adventure was to be born. He glanced around the table. There was, indeed, an air of mystery about some of these guests,
something curiously aloof, something which it was impossible to put
into words. The man Starling, for instance, seemed queerly placed
here. Count Sabatini was another of the guests who seemed somehow to
be outside the little circle. For minutes together he sat sometimes
in grim silence. About him, too, there was always a curious air of
detachment. Rosario was making the small conversation with his
neighbor which the occasion seemed to demand, but he, too, appeared
to talk as one who had more weighty matters troubling his brain. It
was a fancy of Arnold's, perhaps, but it was a fancy of which he
could not rid himself. He glanced towards his employer and a curious
feeling of sympathy stirred him. The man was unhappy and ill at
ease. He had lost his air of slight pomposity, the air with which he
entered his offices in the morning, strutted about the warehouse,
went out to lunch with a customer, and which he somehow seemed to
lose as the time came for returning to his home. Once or twice he
glanced towards his wife, half nervously, half admiringly. Once she
nodded back to him, but it was the nod of one who gathers up her
skirts as she throws alms to a beggar. Then Arnold realized that his
little fit of thoughtfulness had made a material difference to the
hum of conversation. He remembered his duty and leaned over toward
Lady Blennington. "You promised to tell me more about some of these people," he
reminded her. "I am driven to make guesses all the time. Why does
Mr. Starling look so much like an unwilling and impatient guest? And
where is the castle of the Count Sabatini which has no roof?" Lady Blennington sighed. "This table is much too small for us to indulge in scandal," she
replied. "It really is such a pity. One so seldom meets any one
worth talking to who doesn't know everything there is that shouldn't
be known about everybody. About Count Sabatini, for instance, I
could tell you some most amusing things." "His castle, perhaps, is in the air?" Arnold inquired. "By no means," Lady Blennington assured him. "On the contrary, it is very much upon the rocks. Some little island
near Minorca, I believe. They say that Mr. Weatherley was wrecked
there and Sabatini locked him up in a dungeon and refused to let him
go until he promised to marry his sister." "There are a good many men in the world, I should think," Arnold
murmured, "who would like to be locked up on similar conditions." She looked at him with a queer little smile. "I suppose it is inevitable," she declared. "You will have to go
through it, too. She certainly is one of the loveliest women I ever
saw. I suppose you are already convinced that she is entirely
adorable?" "She has been very kind to me," Arnold replied. "She would be," Lady Blennington remarked, dryly. "Look at her
husband. The poor man ought to have known better than to have
married her, of course, but do you think that he looks even
reasonably happy?" Arnold was beginning to feel rather uncomfortable. He was conscious
of a strong desire not to discuss his hostess. Yet his curiosity was
immense. He asked one question. "Tell me," he said, "if she came from this little island in the
Mediterranean, why does she speak English so perfectly?" "She was educated in England," Lady Blennington told him. "Afterwards, her brother took her to South America. She had some
small fortune, I believe, but when she came back they were
penniless. They were really living as small market gardeners when
Mr. Weatherley found them." "You don't like her," he remarked. "I wonder why?" Lady Blennington shook her head. "One never knows," she replied. "I admire her, if that is anything." "But you do not like her," he persisted. She shrugged her shoulders slightly. "I am afraid it is true," she agreed. "You admit that and yet you are willing to be her guest?" She smiled at him approvingly. "If there is one masculine quality which I do appreciate," she said,
"it is directness. I come because I love bridge and because I love
my fellow-creatures and because my own friends are none too
numerous. With the exception of those worthy friends of our host and
his wife who are seated upon your right--Mr. and Mrs. Horsman, I
believe they are called--we are all of the same ilk. Mr. Starling no
one knows anything about; Count Sabatini's record is something
awful." "But there is Rosario," Arnold protested. "Rosario goes into all the odd corners of the world," she replied. "Sometimes the corners are respectable and sometimes they are not. It really doesn't matter so far as he is concerned. Supposing, in
return for all this information, you tell me something about
yourself?" "There isn't anything to tell," Arnold assured her. "I was asked
here to fill up. I am an employee of Mr. Weatherley's." She turned in her chair to look at him. Her surprise was obvious. "Do you mean that you are his secretary, or something of that
sort?" she demanded. "I am a clerk in his office," Arnold told her. She was evidently puzzled, but she asked him no more questions. At
that moment Mrs. Weatherley rose from her place. As she passed
Arnold she paused for a moment. "You are all coming in five minutes," she said. "Before we play
bridge, come straight to me. I have something to say to you." He bowed and resumed his seat, from which he had risen quickly at
her coming. Mr. Weatherley motioned to him to move up to his side. His face now was a little flushed, but his nervousness had not
disappeared. He was certainly not the same man whom one met at
Tooley Street. "Glad to see you've made friends with the wife, Chetwode," he said. "She seems to have taken quite a fancy to you." "Mrs. Weatherley has been very kind," Arnold answered. "Enjoying yourself, I hope?" Mr. Weatherley asked. "Very much indeed," Arnold declared. "It has been quite a treat for
me." Sabatini and Starling were talking earnestly together at the other
side of the table. Rosario, bringing his wine down, came and sat at
his host's other side. "Beautiful vintage, this, Mr. Weatherley," he said. "Excellent
condition, too." Mr. Weatherley, obviously pleased, pursued the subject. In a way, it
was almost pathetic to see his pleasure in being addressed by one of
his own guests. Arnold drew a little away and looked across the
banks of roses. There was something fascinating to him in the
unheard conversation of Sabatini and Starling, on the opposite side
of the table. Everything they said was in an undertone and the
inexpressive faces of the two men gave no indication as to the
nature of their conversation. Yet the sense of something mysterious
in this house and among these guests was growing all the time with
Arnold. CHAPTER IV

THE FACE AT THE WINDOW


Mr. Weatherley laid his hand upon his young companion's arm as they
crossed the hall on their way from the dining-room. "We are going to play bridge in the music-room," he announced. "Things are different, nowadays, than when I was a boy. The men and
the women, too, have to smoke cigarettes all the time while they
play cards. A bad habit, Chetwode! A very bad habit indeed! I've
nothing to say against a good Havana cigar in the dining-room or the
smoking-room, but this constant cigarette smoking sickens me. I
can't bear the smell of the things. Here we are. I don't know what
table my wife has put you at, I'm sure. She arranges all these
things herself." Several guests who had arrived during the last few minutes were
already playing at various tables. Mrs. Weatherley was moving about,
directing the proceedings. She came across to them as soon as they
entered, and, laying her hand upon Arnold's arm, drew him on one
side. There was a smile still upon her lips but trouble in her eyes. She looked over her shoulder a little nervously and Arnold half
unconsciously followed the direction of her gaze. Rosario was
standing apart from the others, talking earnestly with Starling. "I want you to stay with me, if you please," she said. "I am not
sure where you will play, but there is no hurry. I myself shall not
sit down at present. There are others to arrive." Her brother, who had been talking languidly to Lady Blennington,
came slowly up to them. "You, Andrea, will wait for the baccarat, of course?" she said. "I
know that this sort of bridge does not amuse you." He answered her with a little shrug of the shoulders and, leaning
towards her, spoke a few words in some tongue which Arnold did not
at once recognize. She looked again over her shoulder at Rosario and
her face clouded. She replied in the same tongue. Arnold would have
moved away, but she detained him. "You must not mind," she said softly, "that my brother and I talk
sometimes in our native language. You do not, by chance, know
Portuguese, Mr. Chetwode?" "Not a word," he replied. "I am going to leave all these people to amuse themselves," she
continued, dropping her voice slightly. "I want you to come with me
for a moment, Mr. Chetwode. You must take care that you do not slip. These wooden floors are almost dangerous. I did give a dance here
once," she continued, as they made their way across the room,
talking a little vaguely and with an obvious effort. "I did not
enjoy it at all. To me the style of dancing in this country seems
ungraceful. Look behind, Mr. Chetwode. Tell me, is Mr. Rosario
following us?" Arnold glanced over his shoulder. Rosario was still standing in the
same place, but he was watching them intently. "He is looking after us, but he has not moved," Arnold announced. "It is better for him that he stays there," Mrs. Weatherley said
softly. "Please come." At the further end of the apartment there was a bend to the left. Mrs. Weatherley led the way around the corner into a small recess,
out of sight of the remainder of the people. Here she paused and,
holding up her finger, looked around. Her head was thrown back, the
trouble still gleamed in her eyes. She listened intently to the hum
of voices, as though trying to distinguish those she knew. Satisfied, apparently, that their disappearance had not occasioned
any comment, she moved forward again, motioned Arnold to open a
door, and led him down a long passage to the front of the house. Here she opened the door of an apartment on the left-hand side of
the hall, and almost pushed him in. She closed the door quickly
behind them. Then she held up her finger. "Listen!" she said. They could hear nothing save the distant murmur of voices in the
music-room. The room which they had entered was in complete
darkness, through which the ivory pallor of her arms and face, and
the soft fire of her eyes, seemed to be the only things visible. She
was standing quite close to him. He could hear her breathing, he
could almost fancy that he heard her heart beat. A strand of hair
even touched his cheek as she moved. "I do not wish to turn the light up for a moment," she whispered. "You do not mind?" "I mind nothing," Arnold answered, bewildered. "Are you afraid of
anything? Is there anything I can do?" A sense of excitement was stirring him. "Just do as I ask, that is all," she murmured. "I want to look
outside a moment. Just do as I ask and keep quiet." She stole from him to the window and, moving the curtain a few
inches, knelt down, peering out. She remained there motionless for a
full minute. Then she rose to her feet and came back. His eyes were
becoming more accustomed to the gloom now and he could see the
outline of her figure as she moved towards him. "Take my place there," she whispered. "Look down the drive. Tell me
whether you can see any one watching the house?" He went down on his knees at the place she indicated and peered
through the parted curtain. For a few seconds he could see nothing;
then, as his eyes grew accustomed to the gloom, he discerned two
motionless figures standing on the left-hand side of the drive,
partly concealed by a tall laurel bush. "I believe," he declared hoarsely, "that there are two men standing
there." "Tell me, are they moving?" she demanded. "They seem to be simply watching the house," he replied. She was silent. He could hear her breath come and go. "They still do not move?" she asked, after a few seconds. He shook his head, and she turned away, listening to some footsteps
in the hall. "Remember," she whispered, "I am standing where I can turn on the
light in a moment. If any one comes, you are here to see my South
American curios. This is my own sitting-room. You understand?" "I understand," he assented. "Whatever you tell me to say, I will
say." She seemed to be gathering courage. She laughed very softly, as
though amused at his earnestness. There was little enough of mirth
in her laughter, yet somehow it gave him heart. "What do these men want?" he asked. "Would you like me to go out and
send them away?" "No," she replied. "I do not wish you to leave me." "But they are terrifying you," he protested. "What right have they
in your garden? They are here, perhaps, as thieves." "Hush!" She sprang away from him. The room was suddenly flooded with light. She was leaning with her arm upon the mantelpiece, a statuette of
black ivory in her hand. "If you are really fond of this sort of thing," she began, "you
should come with me to the South Kensington Museum one day--Who is
that?" The door had opened. It was Mr. Weatherley who appeared. Mr.
Weatherley was distinctly fussy and there was some return of his
pompous manner. "My dear Fenella!" he exclaimed. "What on earth are you doing in
here, with half your bridge tables as yet unarranged? Your guests
are wondering what has become of you." "Has any one fresh turned up?" she asked, setting down the
statuette. "A Lady Raynham has just arrived," Mr. Weatherley replied, "and is
making herself very disagreeable because there is no one to tell her
at which table she is to play. I heard a young man who came with
her, too, asking Parkins what time supper was. I do not wish to
criticize the manners of your guests, but really, my dear Fenella,
some of them do seem to have strange ideas." "Lady Raynham," she remarked, coldly, "is a person who should be
glad to find herself under any respectable roof without making
complaints. Mr. Chetwode," she continued, turning to him, "it is my
wish to finish showing you my treasures. Therefore, will you wait
here, please, for a short time, while I go and start another bridge
table? I shall return quite soon. Come, Samuel." Mr. Weatherley coughed. He seemed unwilling to leave Arnold behind. "I dare say young Chetwode would like a hand at bridge himself, my
dear," he protested. "Mr. Chetwode shall have one later on," she promised. "I think that
very likely he will play at my table. Come." They left the room together. She looked back for a moment before,
they disappeared and Arnold felt his heart give a little jump. She
was certainly the most beautiful creature he had ever seen, and
there was something in her treatment of him, the subtle flattery of
her half appealing confidence, which went to his head like wine. The
door closed and he was left alone. He listened to their departing
footsteps. Then he looked around him, for the first time forming
some idea of his surroundings. He was in a very charming,
comfortable-looking apartment, with deep easy-chairs, a divan
covered with luxurious cushions, numbers of little tables covered
with photographs and flowers, a great bowl of hot-house roses, and
an oak cabinet with an oak background in the further corner of the
room, which was packed with curios. After his first brief
inspection, however, he felt scarcely any curiosity as to the
contents of the room. It was the window which drew him always
towards It. Once more he peered through the chink of the curtains. He had not cared to turn out the lights, however, and for several
moments everything was indistinguishable. Then he saw that the two
figures still remained in very nearly the same position, except that
they had drawn, if anything, a little closer to the house. A tiny clock upon the mantelpiece was ticking away the seconds. Arnold had no idea how long he remained there watching. Suddenly,
however, he received a shock. For some time he had fancied that one
of the two figures had disappeared altogether, and now, outside on
the window-sill, scarcely a couple of feet from the glass through
which he was looking, a man's hand appeared and gripped the
window-sill. He stared at it, fascinated. It was so close to him
that he could see the thin, yellow fingers, on one of which was a
signet ring with a blood-red stone; the misshapen knuckles, the
broken nails. He was on the point of throwing up the window when a
man's face shot up from underneath and peered into the room. There
was only the thickness of the glass between them, and the light from
the gas lamp which stood at the corner of the drive fell full upon
the white, strained features and the glittering black eyes which
stared into the room. The chink of the curtain through which Arnold
was gazing was barely an inch wide; but it was sufficient. For a
moment he stared at the man. Then he threw the curtains open and
stooped to unfasten the window. It was the affair of a few seconds
only to throw it up. To his surprise, the man did not move. Their
faces almost touched. "What the devil do you want?" Arnold exclaimed, gripping him by the
arm. The man did not flinch. He inclined his head towards the interior of
the room. "Rosario, the Jew," he answered thickly. "He is in the house there. Will you take him a message?" "Ring at the door and bring it yourself," Arnold retorted. The man laughed contemptuously. He stared at Arnold for a moment and
seemed to realize for the first time that he was a stranger. "You are a fool to meddle in things you know nothing of!" he
muttered. "I know you've no right where you are," said Arnold, "and I shall
keep you until some one comes." The intruder made a sudden dive, freeing himself with an
extraordinary turn of the wrist. Arnold caught a glimpse of his face
as he slunk away. While he hesitated whether to follow him, he heard
the door open and the soft rustle of a woman's skirts. "What are you doing out there, Mr. Chetwode?" He turned around. Mrs. Weatherley was standing just behind him,
leaning also out of the window, with a little halo of light about
her head. For a moment he was powerless to answer. Her head was
thrown back, her lips parted. She seemed to be listening as well as
watching. There was fear in her eyes as she looked at him, yet she
made the most beautiful picture he had ever seen. He pulled himself
together. "Well?" she asked, breathlessly. "I was waiting here for you," he explained. "I looked through the
curtains. Then I saw a man's hand upon the sill." [Illustration: "I was waiting here for you," he explained. _Page 39_.] Her hand shot to her side. "Go on," she whispered. "I saw his face," Arnold continued. "It was pressed close to the
window. It was as though he meant to enter. I threw the curtains
back, opened the window, and gripped him by the arm. I asked him
what he wanted." She sat down in a chair and began to tremble. "He said he wanted Rosario, the Jew," Arnold went on. "Then, when he
found that I was a stranger, he got away. I don't know how he
managed it, for my fingers are strong enough, but he wrenched
himself free somehow." "Look out once more," she implored. "See if he is anywhere around. I
will speak to him." He stood at the window and looked in every direction. "There is no one in sight," he declared. "I will go to the corner of
the street, if you like." She shook her head. "Close the window and bolt it, please," she begged. "Draw the
curtains tight. Now come and sit down here for a moment." He did as he was bidden with some reluctance. "The man was a villainous-looking creature," he persisted. "I don't
think that he was up to any good. Look! There's a policeman almost
opposite. Shall I go and tell him?" She put out her hand and clasped his, drawing him down to her side. Then she looked steadfastly into his face. "Mr. Chetwode," she said slowly, "women have many disadvantages in
life, but they have had one gift bestowed upon them in which they
trust always. It is the gift of instinct. You are very young, and I
know very little about you, but I know that you are to be trusted." "If I could serve you," he murmured,--

"You can," she interrupted. Then for a time she was silent. Some new emotion seemed to move her. Her face was softer than he had ever seen it, her beautiful eyes
dimmer. His mind was filled with new thoughts of her. "Mrs. Weatherley," he pleaded, "please do believe in me, do trust
me. I mean absolutely what I say when I tell you there is nothing in
the world I would not do to save you from trouble or alarm." Her moment of weakness was over. She flashed one wonderful smile at
him and rose to her feet. "It is agreed," she declared. "When I need help--and it may be at
any moment--I shall call upon you." "I shall be honored," he assured her, gravely. "In the meantime,
please tell me--are we to speak of this to Rosario?" "Leave it to me," she begged. "I cannot explain to you what all this
means, but I think that Mr. Rosario can take care of himself. We
must go back now to the bridge-room. My husband is annoyed with me
for coming away again." Mr. Weatherley met them in the passage. He was distinctly irritable. "My dear Fenella!" he exclaimed. "Your guests do not understand
your absence. Mr. Rosario is most annoyed and I cannot imagine what
is the matter with Starling. I am afraid that he and Rosario have
had words." She turned her head as she passed, and smiled very slightly. "I have no concern," she said, "in the quarrel between Mr. Starling
and Mr. Rosario. As for the others--Mr. Chetwode and I are quite
ready for bridge now. We are going in to do our duty." CHAPTER V

AN UNUSUAL ERRAND


Arnold arrived at the office the next morning punctually at five
minutes to nine, and was already at work when Mr. Jarvis appeared
ten minutes later. "Gayety's not upset you, then, eh?" the latter remarked, divesting
himself of his hat and overcoat. "Not at all, thanks," Arnold answered. "Nice house, the governor's, isn't it?" "Very nice indeed." "Good dinners he gives, too," continued Mr. Jarvis. "Slap-up wines,
and the right sort of company. Must have been an eye-opener for
you." Arnold nodded. He was not in the least anxious to discuss the events
of the previous evening with Mr. Jarvis. The latter, however, came a
little nearer to him. He took off his gold-rimmed spectacles and
wiped them carefully. "Now I should like to know," he said, "exactly how Mrs. Weatherley
struck you?" "She appeared to me to be a singularly charming and very beautiful
lady," Arnold replied, writing quickly. Mr. Jarvis was disappointed. "She's good-looking enough," he admitted. "I can't say that I've
seen much of her, mind you, but she gave me the impression of a
woman who wasn't above using the powder-puff. She drove down here
with the governor one day, and to look at her you'd have thought she
was a princess come among the slums." "She was born abroad," Arnold remarked. "I dare say this atmosphere
would seem a little strange to her." "Sort of half a foreigner, I've understood," Mr. Jarvis continued. "Speaks English all right, though. I can't help thinking," he went
on, "that the governor would have done better to have married into
one of our old city families. Nothing like them, you know, Chetwode. Some fine women, too. There's Godson, the former Lord Mayor. He had
four daughters, and the governor might have had his pick." "Here he comes," Arnold remarked, quietly. Mr. Jarvis took the hint and went off to his work. A moment or two
later, Mr. Weatherley arrived. He passed through the office and
bestowed upon every one his customary salutation. At Arnold's desk
he paused for a moment. "Feeling all right this morning, young man?" he inquired, striving
after a note of patronage which somehow or other eluded him. "Quite well, thank you, sir." "You found the evening pleasant, I hope? Didn't lose any money at
bridge, eh?" "Mrs. Weatherley was good enough to take on the stakes, sir," Arnold
replied. "As a matter of fact, I believe that we won. I enjoyed the
evening very much, thank you." Mr. Weatherley passed on to his office. Jarvis waited until his
door was closed. "So you played bridge with Mrs. Weatherley, eh?" he remarked. "I did," Arnold admitted. "Have you noticed the shrinkage of weight
in these last invoices?" Mr. Jarvis accepted the papers which his junior passed him, and
departed into the warehouse. Arnold was left untroubled with any
more questions. At half-past twelve, however, he was sent for into
Mr. Weatherley's private office. Mr. Weatherley was leaning back in
his chair and he had the air of a man who has come to a resolution. "Shut the door, Chetwode," he ordered. Arnold did as he was bidden. "Come up to the desk here," he was further instructed. "Now, listen
to me," Mr. Weatherley continued, after a moment's pause. "You are a
young man of discretion, I am sure. My wife, I may say, Chetwode,
thought quite highly of you last night." Arnold looked his employer in the face and felt a sudden pang of
sympathy. Mr. Weatherley was certainly not looking as hale and
prosperous as a few months ago. His cheeks were flabby, and there
was a worried look about him which the head of the firm of
Weatherley & Co. should certainly not have worn. "Mrs. Weatherley is very kind, sir," he remarked. "As to my
discretion, I may say that I believe I am to be trusted. I should
try, of course, to justify any confidence you might place in me." "I believe so, too, Chetwode," Mr. Weatherley declared. "I am going
to trust you now with a somewhat peculiar commission. You may have
noticed that I have been asked to speak privately upon the
telephone several times this morning." "Certainly, sir," Arnold replied. "It was I who put you through." "I am not even sure," Mr. Weatherley continued, "who it was
speaking, but I received some communications which I think I ought
to take notice of. I want you accordingly to go to a certain
restaurant in the west-end, the name and address of which I will
give you, order your lunch there--you can have whatever you
like--and wait until you see Mr. Rosario. I dare say you remember
meeting Mr. Rosario last night, eh?" "Certainly, sir. I remember him quite well." "He will not be expecting you, so you will have to sit near the door
and watch for him. Directly you see him, you must go to him and say
that this message is from a friend. Tell him that whatever
engagement he may have formed for luncheon, he is to go at once to
the Prince's Grill Room and remain there until two o'clock. He is
not to lunch at the Milan--that is the name of the place where you
will be. Do you understand?" "I understand perfectly," Arnold assented. "But supposing he only
laughs at me?" "You will have done your duty," Mr. Weatherley said. "There need be
no mystery about the affair. You can say at once that you are there
as the result of certain telephone messages addressed to me this
morning, and that I should have come myself if it had been possible. If he chooses to disregard them, it is his affair entirely--not
mine. At the same time, I think that he will go." "It seems an odd sort of a thing to tell a perfect stranger, sir,"
Arnold remarked. Mr. Weatherley produced a five-pound note. "You can't go into those sort of places without money in your
pocket," he continued. "You can account to me for the change later,
but don't spare yourself. Have as good a lunch as you can eat. The
restaurant is the Milan Grill Room on the Strand--the cafe, mind,
not the main restaurant. You know where it is?" "Quite well, sir, thank you." Mr. Weatherley looked at his employee curiously. "Have you ever been there, then?" he inquired. "Once or twice, sir," Arnold admitted. "Not on the twenty-eight shillings a week you get from me!" "Quite true, sir," Arnold assented. "My circumstances were slightly
different at the time." Mr. Weatherley hesitated. This young man's manner did not invite
confidences. On the other hand, he was genuinely curious about him. "What made you come into the city, Chetwode?" he inquired. 