

E-text prepared by MRK



THE SURVIVOR

by

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM







CONTENTS

           I. THE SERMON THAT WAS NEVER PREACHED
          II. A STRANGE BETROTHAL
         III. THE MAN WHO WAS IN A HURRY
          IV. EXIT MR. DOUGLAS GUEST
           V. HOW THE ADDRESS WAS LOST
          VI. THE YOUNG MAN FROM THE COUNTRY HEARS SOME
         VII. A NIGHT IN HELL--AND NEXT DAY
        VIII. THE AUTHOR OF "NO MAN'S LAND"
          IX. THE EDITOR OF THE "IBEX" RECEIVES A STRANGE LETTER
           X. A WOMAN OF WHIMS
          XI. DOUGLAS GUEST GETS HIS "CHANCE"
         XII. THE MAN WHO NEARLY WENT UNDER
        XIII. THE FIRST TASTE OF FAME
         XIV. A VISITOR FROM SCOTLAND YARD
          XV. EMILY DE REUSS TELLS A LIE
         XVI. JOAN STRONG, AVENGER
        XVII. A PLAIN QUESTION AND A WARNING
       XVIII. THE TASTE OF THE LOTUS
         XIX. A MAN WITHOUT A PAST
          XX. CICELY ASKS A QUESTION
         XXI. THE REBELLION OF DREXLEY
        XXII. DREXLEY SPEAKS OUT
       XXIII. CICELY S SECRET
        XXIV. THE COUNTESS, THE COUSIN, AND THE CRITIC
         XXV. A TRAGIC INTERRUPTION
        XXVI. A VISITOR FOR DOUGLAS JESSON
       XXVII. FELLOW-CRIMINALS
      XXVIII. THE LITTLE FIGURE IN BLACK
        XXIX. JOAN STRONG FINDS HER BROTHER
         XXX. DAVID AND JOAN
        XXXI. DREXLEY FORESEES DANGER
       XXXII. A SUPPER AT THE "MILAN," AND A MEETING
      XXXIII. A MISUNDERSTANDING
       XXXIV. THE WOOING OF CICELY
        XXXV. THE NET OF JOAN'S VENGEANCE
       XXXVI. A SCENE AT THE CLUB
      XXXVII. CICELY MAKES HER CHOICE
     XXXVIII. "SHE WAS A WOMAN: I WAS A COWARD"
       XXXIX. A JOURNEY AND A WEDDING
          XL. A CALL BEFORE THE CURTAIN





THE SURVIVOR



CHAPTER I

THE SERMON THAT WAS NEVER PREACHED

A little party of men and women on bicycles were pushing their machines
up the steep ascent which formed the one street of Feldwick village. It
was a Sunday morning, and the place was curiously empty. Their little
scraps of gay conversation and laughter--they were men and women of the
smart world--seemed to strike almost a pagan note in a deep Sabbatical
stillness. They passed the wide open doors of a red brick chapel, and
several of the worshippers within turned their heads. As the last two
of the party went by, the wheezings of a harmonium ceased, and a man's
voice came travelling out to them. The lady rested her hand upon her
host's arm. "Listen," she whispered. Her host, Lord of the Manor, Lord Lieutenant of the County, and tenth
Earl of Cumberland, paused readily enough and leaned his machine against
a kerbstone. Bicycling was by no means a favourite pursuit of his, and
the morning for the time of year was warm. "Dear lady," he murmured, "shall we go a little nearer and listen to the
words of grace? Anything for a short rest." She leaned her own bicycle against the wall. From where she was she
could catch a sideway glimpse of a tall, slight figure standing up
before the handful of people. "I should like to go inside," she said, indifferently. "Would they
think it an intrusion?" "Certainly not," he answered, with visions of a chair before him. "As a
matter of fact, I have a special invitation to become a member of that
flock--temporarily, at any rate." "What do you mean?" she asked. "The land here" he answered, "is not entailed, and they are very anxious
to buy this little bit and own their chapel. I had a letter from a
worthy farmer and elder, Gideon Strong, on the matter yesterday. He
wound up by expressing a wish that I might join them in their service
one morning. This is their service, and here we are. Come!" They crossed the street, and, to the obvious amazement of the little
congregation, stood in the doorway. A gaunt shepherd, with
weather-marked face and knotted fingers, handed them clumsily a couple
of chairs. Some of the small farmers rose and made a clumsy obeisance
to their temporal lord. Gideon Strong, six feet four, with great unbent
shoulders, and face as hard and rugged as iron, frowned them down, and
showed no signs of noticing his presence. Elsewhere he would have been
one of the first, proud man though he was, to stand bareheaded before
the owner of his farm and half a county, but in the house of God, humble
little building though it was, he reckoned all men equal. Praying silently before them, on the eve of his first sermon, a young
man was kneeling. He had seen nothing of these newcomers, but of a
sudden as he knelt there, his thoughts and sensations in strange
confusion, himself half in revolt against what lay before him, there
floated up the little aisle an exquisite perfume of crushed violets, and
he heard the soft rustling of a gown which was surely worn by none of
those who were gathered together to listen to him. He opened his eyes
involuntarily, and met the steady gaze of the lady whose whim it had
been to enter the place. He had never seen her before, nor any one like her. Yet he felt that,
in her presence, the task which lay before him had become immeasurably
more difficult. She was a type to him of all those things, the memory
of which he had been strenuously trying to put away from him, the
beautiful, the worldly, the joyous. As he rose slowly to his feet, he
looked half despairingly around. It was a stern religion which they
loved, this handful of weatherbeaten farmers and their underlings. Their womenkind were made as unlovely as possible, with flat hair,
sombre and ill-made clothes. Their surroundings were whitewashed and
text-hung walls, and in their hearts was the love for narrow ways. He
gave out his text slowly and with heavy heart. Then he paused, and,
glancing once more round the little building, met again the soft,
languid fire of those full dark eyes. This time he did not look away. He saw a faint interest, a slight pity, a background of nonchalance. His cheeks flushed, and the fire of revolt leaped through his veins. He
shut up the Bible and abandoned his carefully prepared discourse, in
which was a mention of hellfire and many gloomy warnings, which would
have brought joy to the heart of Gideon Strong, and to each of which he
would slowly and approvingly have nodded his head. He delivered
instead, with many pauses, but in picturesque and even vivid language, a
long and close account of the miracle with which his text was concerned. In the midst of it there came from outside the tinkling of many bicycle
bells--the rest of the party had returned in search of their host and
his companion. The Earl looked up with alacrity. He was nicely rested
now, and wanted a cigarette. "Shall we go?" he whispered. She nodded and rose. At the door she turned for a moment and looked
backwards. The preacher was in the midst of an elaborate and
painstaking sifting of evidence as to the season of the year during
which this particular miracle might be supposed to have taken place. Again their eyes met for a moment, and she went out into the sunlight
with a faint smile upon her lips, for she was a woman who loved to feel
herself an influence, and she was swift to understand. To her it was an
episode of the morning's ride, almost forgotten at dinner-time. To him
it marked the boundary line between the old things and the new. CHAPTER II

A STRANGE BETROTHAL

The room had all the chilly discomfort of the farmhouse parlour, unused,
save on state occasions--a funereal gloom which no sunlight could
pierce, a mustiness which savoured almost of the grave. One by one they
obeyed the stern forefinger of Gideon Strong, and took their seats on
comfortless chairs and the horse-hair sofa. First came John Magee,
factor and agent to the Earl of Cumberland, a great man in the district,
deacon of the chapel, slow and ponderous in his movements. A man of few
words but much piety. After him, with some hesitation as became his
lowlier station, came William Bull, six days in the week his master's
shepherd and faithful servant, but on the seventh an elder of the
chapel, a person of consequence and dignity. Then followed Joan and
Cicely Strong together, sisters in the flesh, but as far apart in kin
and the spirit as the poles of humanity themselves. And lastly, Douglas
Guest. At the head of his shining mahogany table, with a huge Bible
before him on which rested the knuckle of one clenched hand, stood
Gideon Strong, the master of Feldwick Hall Farm. It was at his bidding
that these people had come together; they waited now for him to speak. His was no common personality. Neat in his dress, precise though local,
with a curious mixture of dialects in his speech, he was feared by every
man in Feldwick, whether he stood over them labouring or prayed amongst
them in the little chapel, where every Sunday he took the principal
place. He was well set-up for all his unusual height and seventy years,
with a face as hard as the ancient rocks which jutted from the
Cumberland hillside, eyes as keen and grey and merciless as though every
scrap of humanity which might ever have lain behind them had long since
died out. Just he reckoned himself and just he may have been, but
neither man nor woman nor child had ever heard a kindly word fall from
his lips. Children ran indoors as he passed, women ceased their
gossiping, men slunk away from a friendly talk as though ashamed. If
ever at harvest or Christmas time the spirit of good fellowship warmed
the hearts of these country folk and loosened their tongues the grim
presence of Gideon Strong was sufficient to check their merriment and
send them silently apart. He had been known to pray that sinners might
meet with the punishment they deserved, both in this world and
hereafter. Such was Gideon Strong. He cleared his throat and spoke, addressing the young man who sat on the
corner of the horse-hair sofa, where the shadows of the room were
darkest. "Nephew Douglas," he said, "to-day you ha' come to man's estate, and I
ha' summoned those here who will have to do wi' your future to hear
these few words. The charge of you left on my shoulders by your
shiftless parents has been a heavy one, but to-day I am quit of it. The
deacons of Feldwick chapel have agreed to appoint you their pastor,
provided only that they be satisfied wi' your discourse on the coming
Sabbath. See to it, lad, that 'ee preach the word as these good men and
mysen have ever heard it. Let there be no new-fangled ideas in thy
teachings, and be not vain of thy learning, for therein is vanity and
trouble. Dost understand?" "I understand," the young man answered
slowly, and without enthusiasm. "Learning and godliness are little akin," said John Magee, in his thin
treble. "See to it, lad, that thou choosest the one which is of most
account." "Ay, ay," echoed the shepherd thickly. "Ay, ay!" Douglas Guest answered
nothing. A sudden light had flashed in his dark eyes, and his lips had
parted. But almost at the same moment Gideon Strong stretched out his
hand. "Nephew Douglas," he said. "I am becoming an old man, and to-day I will
release myself from the burden of your affairs once and for all. This
is the woman, my daughter Joan, whom I have chosen to wife for thee. Take her hand and let thy word be pledged to her." If silence still reigned in that gloomy apartment, it was because there
were those present whom surprise had deprived of speech. The very image
of her father, Joan looked steadily into her cousin's face without
tremor or nervousness. Her features were shapely enough, but too large
and severe for a woman, her wealth of black hair was brushed fiat back
from her forehead in uncompromising ugliness. Her figure was as
straight as a dart, but without lines or curves, her gown, of homely
stuff and ill-made, completed her unattractiveness. There was neither
blush nor tremor, nor any sign of softening in her cold eyes. Then
Douglas, in whom were already sown the seeds of a passionate discontent
with the narrowing lines of his unlovely life, who on the hillside and
in the sweet night solitudes had taken Shelley to his heart, had lived
with Keats and had felt his pulses beat thickly to the passionate love
music of Tennyson, stood silent and unresponsive. Child of charity he
might be, but the burden of his servitude was fast growing too heavy for
him. So he stood there whilst the old man's eyes flashed like steel,
and Joan's face, in her silent anger, seemed to grow into the likeness
of her father's. "Dost hear, nephew Douglas? Take her hands in thine and thank thy God
who has sent thee, a pauper and a youth of ill-parentage, a daughter of
mine for wife." Then the young man found words, though they sounded to him and to the
others faint and unimpressive. "Uncle," he said, "there has been no word of this nor any thought of it
between Joan and myself. I am not old enough to marry nor have I the
inclination." Terrible was the look flashed down upon him from those relentless
eyes-fierce, too, the words of his reply, measured and slow although
they were. "There is no need for words between thee and Joan. Choose between my
bidding and the outside o' my doors this night and for ever." Even then he might have won his freedom like a man. But the old dread
was too deeply engrafted. The chains of servitude which he and the
whole neighbourhood wore were too heavy to be thrown lightly aside. So
he held out his hand, and Joan's fingers, passive and cold, lay for a
moment in his. The old man watched without any outward sign of
satisfaction. "Thou ha' chosen well, nephew Douglas," he said, with marvellous but
quite unconscious irony. "I reckon, too, that we ha' chosen well to
elect you our pastor. Thou wilt have two pounds a week and Bailiff
Morrison's cottage. Neighbour Magee, there is a sup o' ale and some tea
in the kitchen." John Magee and William Bull betrayed the first signs of real interest
they had exhibited in the proceedings. One by one they all filed out of
the room save Douglas Guest and Joan. Cicely had flitted away with the
first. They two were alone. He wondered, with a grim sense of the
humour of the thing, whether she was expecting any love-making to follow
upon so strange an engagement. He looked curiously at her. There was
no change in her face nor any sign of softening. "I hope you will believe, Joan," he said, taking up a book and looking
for his place, "that I knew nothing of this, and that I am not in any
way responsible for it." Her face seemed to darken as she rose and moved towards the door. "I am sure of that," she said, stiffly. "I do not blame you." *     *     *     *     *

Up into the purer, finer air of the hills-up with a lightening heart,
though still carrying a bitter burden of despondency. Night rested upon
the hilltops and brooded in the valleys. Below, the shadowy landscape
lay like blurred patchwork-still he climbed upwards till Feldwick lay
silent and sleeping at his feet and a flavour of the sea mingled with
the night wind which cooled his cheeks. Then Douglas Guest threw
himself breathless amongst the bracken and gazed with eager eyes
downwards. "If she should not come," he murmured. "I must speak to some one or I
shall go mad." Deeper fell the darkness, until the shape of the houses below was lost,
and only the lights were visible. Such a tiny little circle they
seemed. He watched them with swelling heart. Was this to be the end of
his dreams, then? Bailiff Morrison's cottage, two pounds a week, and
Joan for his wife? He, who had dreamed of fame, of travel in distant
countries, of passing some day into the elect of those who had written
their names large in the book of life. His heart swelled in passionate
revolt. Even though he might be a pauper, though he owed his learning
and the very clothes in which he stood to Gideon Strong, had any man the
right to demand so huge a sacrifice? He had spoken his mind and his
wishes only to be crushed with cold contempt. To-day his answer had
been given. What was it that Gideon Strong had said? "I have fed you
and clothed you and taught you; I have kept you from beggary and made
you what you are. Now, as my right, I claim your future. Thus and thus
shall it be. I have spoken." He walked restlessly to and fro upon the windy hilltop. A sense of
freedom possessed him always upon these heights. The shackles of Gideon
Strong fell away. Food and clothing and education, these were great
things to owe, but life was surely a greater, and life he owed to no man
living--only to God. Was it a thing which he dared misuse?--fritter
helplessly away in this time-forgotten corner of the earth? Life surely
was a precious loan to be held in trust, to be made as full and deep and
fruitful a thing as a man's energy and talent could make it. To Gideon
Strong he owed much, but it was a debt which surely could be paid in
other ways than this. He stopped short. A light footstep close at hand startled, then
thrilled him. It was Cicely--hatless, breathless with the climb, and
very fair to see in the faint half-lights. For Cicely, though she was
Gideon Strong's daughter, was not of Feldwick or Feldwick ways, nor were
her gowns simple, though they were fashioned by a village dressmaker. She had lived all her life with distant relatives near London. Douglas
had never seen her till two months ago, and her coming had been a
curious break in the life at the farm. He moved quickly to meet her. For a moment their hands met. Then she
drew away. "How good of you, Cicely," he cried. "I felt that I must talk to some
one or go mad." She stood for a moment recovering her breath--her bosom rising and
falling quickly under her dark gown, a pink flush in her cheeks. Her
hair, fair and inclined to curliness, had escaped bounds a little, and
she brushed it impatiently back. "I must only stay for a moment, Douglas," she said, gravely. "Let us go
down the hill by the Beacon. We shall be on the way home." They walked side by side in silence. Neither of them were wholly at
their ease. A new element had entered into their intercourse. The
wonderfully free spirit of comradeship which had sprung up between them
since her coming, and which had been so sweet a thing to him, was for
the moment, at least, interrupted. "I want you to tell me, Douglas," she said at last, "exactly how much of
a surprise to-day has been to you." "It is easily done," he answered. "Last night I went to your father. I
tried to thank him as well as I was able for all that he has done for
me. I then told him that with every respect for his wishes I did not
feel myself prepared at present to enter the ministry. I showed him my
diplomas and told him of my degrees. I told him what I wished--to
become a schoolmaster, for a year or two, at any rate. Well, he
listened to me in fixed silence. When I had finished he asked, 'Is that
all?' I said, 'Yes,' and he turned his back upon me. 'Your future is
already provided for, Douglas,' he said. 'I will speak to you of it
to-morrow.' Then he walked away. That is all the warning I had." "And what about Joan?" His face flushed hotly. "No word from him, nor any hint of such a thing has ever made me think
of Joan in such a connection. I should have been less surprised if the
ceiling had fallen in upon us." She looked at him and nodded gravely. "Well," she said, "our oracle has spoken. What are you going to do?" "I am going to ask for your advice first," he said. "Then you must tell me just how you feel," she said. He drew a long breath. "There are so many things," he said, speaking softly and half to
himself. "Last week, Cicely, I took a compass and a stick and I walked
across the hills to Rydal Mount, where Wordsworth lived. When I came
back I think that I was quite content to spend all my days here. It is
such a beautiful world. Some day when you have lived here longer, you
will know what I mean--the bondage will fall upon you, too. The
mountains with their tops hidden in soft blue mist, the winds blowing
across the waste places, the wild flowers springing up in unexpected
corners, the little streams tearing down the hillside to flow smoothly
like a belt of beautiful ribbon through the pasture land below. The
love which comes for these things, Cicely, is a strange, haunting thing. You cannot escape from it. It is a sort of bondage. The winds seem to
tune themselves to your thoughts, the sunlight laughs away your
depression. Listen! Do you hear the sheep-bells from behind the hill
there? Isn't that music? Then the twilight and the darkness! If you
are on the hilltop they seem to steal down like a world of soothing
shadows. Everything that is dreary and sad seems to die away;
everywhere is a beautiful effortless peace. Cicely, I came back from
that tramp and I felt content with my lot, content to live amongst these
country folk, speak to them simply once a week of the God of mysteries,
and spend my days wandering about this little corner of the world
beautiful." "Men have lived such lives," she said quietly, "and found happiness." "Ay, but there is the other side," he continued, quickly. "Sometimes it
seems as though the love for these things is a beautiful delusion, a
maddening, unreal thing. Then I know that my God is not their God, that
my thoughts would be heresy to them. I feel that I want to cast off the
strange passionate love for the place which holds me here, to go out
into the world and hold my place amongst my fellows. Cicely, surely
where men do great works, where men live and die, that is the proper
place for man? I have no right to fritter away a life in the sensuous
delight of moving amongst beautiful places. I want to come into touch
with my kind, to feel the pulse of humanity, to drink the whole cup of
life with its joys and sorrows. Contemplation should be the end of
life--its evening, not its morning." "Douglas," she cried, "you are right. You know that you have power. Out into the world and use it! Oh, if I were you, if I were a man, I
would not hesitate for a moment." His hand fell upon her shoulder. He pointed downwards. "How far am I bound," he asked hoarsely, "to do your father's bidding?" The glow passed from her cheeks. She moved imperceptibly away from him. "Douglas," she said, "it is of that I came to speak to you to-night. You know that I have a brother who is eternally banished from home,
whose life I honestly believe my father's severity has ruined. I saw
him in London not long ago, and he sent a message to you. It is very
painful for me to even think of it, Douglas, for I always believed my
father to be a just man. He has let you believe that you were a pauper. My brother told me that it was not true--that there was plenty of money
for your education, and that there should be some to come to you. There, I have told you! You must go to my father and ask him for the
truth!" He was silent for a moment. It was a strange thing to hear. "If this is true," he said, "it is freedom." "Freedom," she repeated, and glided away from him whilst he stood there
dreaming. CHAPTER III

THE MAN WHO WAS IN A HURRY

He lay back in a corner seat of the carriage, panting, white-faced,
exhausted. His clumsy boots, studded with nails, were wet, and his
frayed black trousers were splashed with mud. In his eyes was the light
of vivid fear, his delicate mouth was twitching still with excitement. In his ears there rang yet the angry cry of the guard, the shouting of
porters, the excitement of that leap through the hastily-opened carriage
door tingled yet in his veins. Before his eyes there was a mist. He
was conscious indeed that the carriage which he had marked out as being
empty was tenanted by a single person, but he had not even glanced
across towards the occupied seat. What mattered it so long as they were
off? Already the fields seemed flying past the window, and the
telegraph posts had commenced their frantic race. Ten, twenty, forty
miles an hour at least-off on that wonderful run, the pride of the
directors and the despair of rival companies. Nothing could stop them
now. All slower traffic stood aside to let them pass, the express with
her two great engines vomiting fire and smoke, crawling across the map,
flying across bridges and through tunnels from the heart of the country
to the great city. Gradually, and with the exhilaration of their ever
increasing speed, the courage of the man revived, and the blood flowed
once more warmly through his veins. He lifted his head and looked
around him. Shock the first came when he realised that he was in a first-class
carriage; shock the second, when he saw that his solitary companion
was a lady. He took in the details of her appearance and
surroundings--wonderful enough to him who had been brought up in a
cottage, and to whom the ways and resources of luxury were all unknown. Every seat save the one which he occupied was covered with her
belongings. On one was a half-opened dressing-case filled with
gold-topped bottles and emitting a faint, delicate perfume. On another
was a pile of books and magazines, opposite to him a sable-lined coat,
by his side a luncheon basket and long hunting flask. Then his eyes
were caught by an oblong strip of paper pasted across the carriage
window--he read it backwards--"Engaged." What an intrusion! He looked
towards the woman with stammering words of apology upon his lips--but
the words died away. He was tongue-tied. He had met the languid gaze of her dark, full eyes, a little
supercilious, a little amused, faintly curious, and his own fell at once
before their calm insolence. She was handsomely dressed. The delicate,
white hand which held her novel was ablaze with many and wonderful
rings. She was evidently tall, without doubt stately. Her black hair,
parted in the middle, drooped a little to the side by her ears, her
complexion, delightfully clear, was of a curious ivory pallor
unassociated with ill-health. She regarded him through a pair of
ivory-handled lorgnettes, which she carelessly closed as he looked
towards her. "Will you tell me," she asked quietly, "why you have entered my carriage
which is engaged--and in such an extraordinary manner?" He drew a little breath. He had never heard a voice like it
before--soft, musical, and with the slightest suggestion of a foreign
accent. Then he remembered that she was waiting for an answer. He
began his apology. "I am sorry--indeed I am very sorry. I had no time to look inside, and
I thought it was an empty carriage--a third-class one, too. It was very
stupid." "You appeared to be" she remarked, "in a hurry." The faint note of humour in her tone passed undetected by him. "I wanted to get away," he said. "I had walked fourteen miles, and
there was no other train. I am very sorry to intrude upon you. The
train was moving when I reached the platform, and I jumped." She shrugged her shoulders slightly and raised her book once more. But
from over its top she found herself watching very soon this strange
travelling companion of hers. The trousers above his clumsy boots were
frayed and muddy, his black clothes were shiny and antiquated in
cut--these, and his oddly-arranged white tie, somehow suggested the
cleric. But when she reached his face her eyes lingered there. It
puzzled and in a sense attracted her. His features were cleanly cut and
prominent, his complexion was naturally pale, but wind and sun had
combined to stain his cheeks with a slight healthy tan. His eyes were
deep-set, keen and bright, the eyes of a visionary perhaps, but afire
now with the instant excitement of living. A strange face for a man of
his apparently humble origin. Whence had he come, and where was he
going? The vision of his face as he had leaped into the carriage
floated again before her eyes. Surely behind him were evil things,
before him--what? She took up her novel again, but laid it down almost
immediately. "You are going" she asked, "to London?" "To London," he repeated dreamily. "Yes." "But your luggage--was that left behind?" He smiled. "I have no luggage," he said. "You are going up for the day only?" she
hazarded. He shook his head. There was a note of triumph almost in his tone. "I am going for good," he said. "If wishes count for anything I shall
never set foot within this county again." There was a story, she felt sure, connected with this strange
fellow-passenger of hers. She watched him thoughtfully. A human
document such as this was worth many novels. It was not the first time
that he had excited her interest. "London" she said, "is a wonderful place for young men." He turned a rapt face towards her. The fire seemed leaping out of his
eyes. "Others have found it so," he said. "I go to prove their words." "You are a stranger there, then?" "I have never been further south than this in my life," he replied. "I
know only the London of De Quincey and Lamb-London with the halo of
romance around it." She sighed gently. "You will find it all so different," she said. "You will be bitterly
disappointed." He set his lips firmly together. "I have no fear," he said. "I shall find it possible to live there, at
any rate. If I stayed where I was, I must have gone mad." "You are going to friends?" she asked. He laughed softly. "I have not a friend in the world," he said. "In London I do not know a
soul. What matter? There is life to be lived there, prizes to be won. There is room for every one." She half closed her eyes, watching him keenly all the time with an
interest which was certainly not diminished. "London is a wonderful city," she said, "but she is not always kind to
the stranger. You have spoken of De Quincey who wove fairy fancies
about her, and Lamb, who was an affectionate stay-at-home, a born
dweller in cities. They were dreamers both, these men. What about
Chatterton?" "An unhappy exception," he said. "If only he had lived a few months
longer his sorrows would have been over." "To-day," she said, "there are many Chattertons who must die before the
world will listen to them. Are you going to take your place amongst
them?" He smiled confidently. "Not I," he answered. "I shall work with my hands if men will have none
of my brains. Indeed," he continued, turning towards her with a swift,
transfiguring smile, "I am not a village prodigy going to London with a
pocketful of manuscripts. Don't think that of me. I am going to London
because I have been stifled and choked--I want room to breathe, to see
men and women who live. Oh, you don't know the sort of place I have
come from--the brain poison of it, the hideous sameness and narrowness
of it all." "Tell me a little," she said, "and why at last you made up your mind to
leave. It is not so long, you know, since I saw you in somewhat
different guise." A quick shiver seemed to pass through him; underneath his tanned skin he
was paler, and the blood in his veins was cold. His eyes, fixed upon
the flying landscape, were set in a fixed, unseeing stare--surely the
fields were peopled with evil memories, and faces in the trees were
mocking him. So he remained for several moments as though in the grip
of a nightmare, and the lady watched him. There was a little tragedy,
then, behind. "There was a man once," he said, "who drew a line through his life, and
said to himself that everything behind it concerned some other
person--not him. So with me. Such memories as I have, I shall
strangle. To-day I commence a new life." She sighed. "One's past" she said, "is not always so easily to be disposed of. There are ghosts which will haunt us, and sometimes the ghosts are
living figures." "Let them come to me," he murmured, "and my fingers shall be upon their
throats. I want no such legacies." She shook her head slowly. "Ghosts" she said, with a faint smile, "are sometimes very difficult
people to deal with." CHAPTER IV

EXIT MR. DOUGLAS GUEST

Through the heart of England the express tore on--through town and
country, underneath the earth and across high bridges. All the while
the man and the woman talked. To him she was a revelation. Every
moment of his life had been spent in a humdrum seclusion--every moment
of hers seemed to have been lived out to its limit in those worlds of
which he had barely even dreamed. She was older than he had thought
her--thirty, perhaps, or thirty-one--and her speech and gestures every
now and then had a foreign flavour. She talked to him of countries
which he had scarcely dared hope to visit, and of men and women whose
names were as household words. She spoke of them with an ease and
familiarity which betokened close acquaintance--talking to him with a
mixture of kindness and reserve as if he were some strange creature who
had had the good fortune to interest her for the moment, but from whom
at any time she might draw aloof. Every word she spoke he hung upon. He had come out into the world to seek for adventures--not, indeed, in
the spirit of the modern Don Quixote, tingling only for new sensations
to stimulate; but with the more robust and breezy spirit of his
ancestors, seeking for a fuller life and a healthy excitement, even at
the cost of hard blows and many privations. Surely this was an
auspicious start--an adventure this indeed! During a momentary silence
she looked across at him with genuine curiosity, her eyes half closed,
her brows knitted. What enthusiasm! She was not a vain woman, and she
knew that her personality had little, if anything, to do with the flush
upon his cheeks and the bright light in his eyes. She herself, a much
travelled, a learned, a brilliant, even a famous woman, had become only
lately conscious of a certain jaded weariness in her outlook upon life. Even the best had begun to pall, the sameness of it had commenced its
fatal work. More than once lately a touch of that heart languor, which
is the fruit of surfeit, had startled her by its numbing and depressing
effect. Here at last was a new type--a man with clean pages before
him--young, emotional, without a doubt intellectual. But for his awful
clothes he was well enough to look upon, he had no affectations, his
instincts were apparently correct. His manners were hoydenish, but
there was nothing of the clown about him. She asked him a direct
question concerning himself. "Tell me," she said, "what you really are. A worker, a student--or have
you a trade?" He flushed up to his brows. "I was brought up" he said, in a low tone, "for the ministry. It was no
choice of mine. I had an uncle and guardian who ruled our household as
he ruled everybody and everything with which he came in contact." She was puzzled. To her the word sounded political. "The ministry?" "Yes. You remember when you first saw me? It was my first appearance. I was to have been chosen pastor of that church." "Oh!" She looked at him now with something like amazement. This, then,
accounted for the sombreness of his clothes and his little strip of
white tie. She had only the vaguest ideas as to the conduct of those
various sects to be met with in English villages, but she had certainly
believed that the post of preacher was filled indifferently by any
member of the congregation, and she had looked upon his presence in the
pulpit on that last Sunday as an accident. To associate him with such
an occupation permanently seemed to her little short of the ridiculous. She laughed softly, showing, for the first time, her brilliantly white
teeth, and his cheeks were stained with scarlet. "I do not know why you laugh," he said, with a note of fierceness in his
tone. "It is the part of my life which is behind me. I was brought up
to it, and traditions are hard to break away from. I have been obliged
to live in a little village, to constrain my life between the narrowest
limits, to watch ignorance, and suffer prejudices as deeply rooted as
the hills. But all the same, it is nothing to laugh at. The thing
itself is great and good enough--it is the people who are so hopeless. No, there is nothing to laugh at," he cried, with a sudden little burst
of excitement, "but may God help the children whose eyes He has opened
and who yet have to pass their lives on the smallest treadmill of the
world." "You" she whispered, "have escaped." "I have escaped," he murmured, with a sudden pallor, "but not
scatheless." There was a silence between them then. She recognised that she had made
a mistake in questioning him about a past which he had already declared
hateful. The terror of an hour or more ago was in his face again. He
was back amongst the shadows whence she had beckoned him. She yawned
and took up her book. They stopped at a great station, but the man was in a brown study and
scarcely moved his head. An angry guard came hurrying up to the window,
but a few words from the lady and a stealthily opened purse worked
wonders. They were left undisturbed, and the train glided off. She
laid down her book and spoke again. "Do you mind passing me my luncheon basket?" she said, "and opening that
flask of wine? Are you not hungry, too?" He shook his head, but when he came to think of it he knew that he was
ravenous. She passed him sandwiches as a matter of course--such
sandwiches as he had never eaten before--and wine which was strange to
him and which ran through his veins like warm magic. Once more the load
of evil memories seemed to pass away from him. He was not so much at
ease eating and drinking with her, but she easily acquired her former
hold upon him. She herself, whose appetite was assumed, watched him,
and wondered more and more. Suddenly there came an interruption. The shrill whistling of the
engine, the shutting off of steam, the violent application of the brake. The train came to a standstill. The man put down the window and looked
out. "What is it?" she asked, with admirable nonchalance, making no effort to
leave her seat. "I think that there has been an accident to some one," he said. "I will
go and see." She nodded. "Come back and tell me," she said. "Myself I shall not look. I am not
fond of horrors." She took up her book, and he jumped down upon the line and made his way
to where a little group of men were standing in a circle. Some one
turned away with white face as he approached and stopped him. "Don't look!--for God's sake, don't look!" he said. "It's too awful. It isn't fit. Fetch a tarpaulin, some one." "Was he run over?" some one asked. "Threw himself from that carriage,"
the guard answered, moving his head towards a third-class compartment,
of which the door stood open. "He was dragged half a mile, and--there
isn't much left of him, poor devil," he added, with a little break in
his speech. "Does any one know who he was?" the young man asked. "No one--nor where he got in." "No luggage?" "None." The young man set his teeth and moved towards the carriage. His hand
stole for a moment to his pocket, then he seemed to pick something up
from the dusty floor. "Here's a card," he said to the guard, "on the seat where he was." The man took it and spelt the name out. "Mr. Douglas Guest," he said. "Well, we shall know who he was, at any
rate. It's lucky you found it, sir. Now we'll get on, if you please." A tarpaulin-covered burden was carefully deposited in an empty carriage,
and the little troop of people melted away. She looked up from her book
as he entered. "Well?" "It was an accident, or a suicide," he said, gravely. "A man threw
himself from an empty carriage in front and was run over. It was a
horrible affair." "Do they know who he was?" she asked. "There was a card found near him," he answered. "Mr. Douglas Guest. That was his name." Was it his fancy, or did she look at him for a moment more intently
during the momentary silence which followed his speech? It must have
been his fancy. Yet her next words puzzled him. "You have not told me yet" she said, "your own name. I should like to
know it." He hesitated for a moment. His own name. A name to be kept--to live
and die under--the hall mark of his new identity. How poor his
imagination was. Never an inspiration, and she was watching him. There
was so much in a name, and he must find one swiftly, for Mr. Douglas
Guest was dead. "My name is Jesson," he said--"Douglas Jesson." CHAPTER V

HOW THE ADDRESS WAS LOST

And now the end of that journey, never altogether forgotten by either of
them, was close at hand. Tunnels became more frequent, the green fields
gave way to an interminable waste of houses, the gloom of the autumn
afternoon was deepened. The speed of the train decreased, the heart of
Douglas Jesson beat fast with anticipation. For now indeed he was near
the end of his journey, the beginning of his new life. What matter that
the outlook from where he sat was dreary enough. Beyond, there was a
glow in the sky; beyond was an undiscovered world. He was young, and he
came fresh to the fight. The woman who watched him wondered. "Will you tell me," she said, "now that you are in London, what will you
do? You have money perhaps, or will you work?" "Money," he laughed, gaily at first, but with a chill shiver immediately
afterwards. Yes, he had money. For the moment he had forgotten it. "I have a small sum," he said, "just sufficient to last me until I begin
to earn some." "And you will earn money--how?" "With my pen, I hope," he answered simply. "I have sent several stories
to the _Ibex_. One they accepted, but it has not appeared yet." "To make money by writing in London is very difficult they say," she
remarked. "Everything in life is difficult," he answered confidently. "I am
prepared for disappointment at first. In the end I have no fears." She handed him a card from her dressing-case. "Will you come and see me?" she asked. "Thank you," he answered hesitatingly. "I will come when I have made a
start." "I know a great many people who are literary, including the editor of
the _Ibex_," she said. "I think if you came that I could help you." He shook his head. "The narrow way for me," he answered smiling. "I am very anxious for
success, but I want to win it myself." Her face was clouded. "You are a foolish boy," she said. "Believe me that I am offering you
the surest path to success. London is full of young men with talent,
and most days they go hungry." He stood up, and, though she was annoyed, the fire in his eyes was good
to look upon. "I must take my place with them," he said. "Whatever my destiny may be
I shall find it." The final tunnel, and they were gliding into the station alongside the
platform. A tall footman threw open the door of the carriage, and a
lady's maid, with a jewel case in her hand, stared at him with
undisguised curiosity. The lady bade him goodbye kindly, yet with a
note of final dismissal in her tone. He had occupied her time for an
hour or two, and saved her from absolute boredom. The matter was ended
there. Nevertheless, from a quiet corner of the station he watched her
stand listlessly on the platform while her things were being
collected--a tall, distinguished looking figure, and very noticeable
amongst the motley crowd who were streaming from the train. Once he
fancied that her eyes strayed along the way by which he had left. A
moment later she was accosted by a man who had just driven into the
station. She seemed to greet him without enthusiasm. He, on the other
hand, was obviously welcoming her warmly. He too was tall, carefully
dressed and well groomed, middle aged, a type, he supposed, of the men
of her world. There was a few minutes' conversation, then they moved
across the platform to the carriage, which was drawn up waiting. He
handed her in, lingering hat in hand for a moment as though hoping for
an invitation to follow her, which, however, did not come. The carriage
drove off, passing the spot where Douglas had lingered, and it seemed to
him that her eyes, gazing languidly out of the window, met his, and that
she started forward in her seat as though to call to him. But the
carriage received no summons to stop. It rolled out of the station and
turned westwards. Douglas turned and followed it on foot. *     *     *     *     *

He walked at first very much like a man in a dream, quite heedless as to
direction, even without any fixed purpose before him. Here he was,
arrived after all at the first stage in his new life. He was a free
man, a living unit in this streaming horde of humanity. Of his old
life, the most pleasant memory which survived was the loneliness of the
hills and moorland high above his village home. Here he had spent whole
nights with nothing but the wind and the stars and the distant sheep
bells to keep him company. Here he had woven many dreams of this future
which lay now actually within his grasp. He had stolen up the mountain
path whilst the little village lay sleeping, and watched the shadows
pass across the hills, and the darkness steal softly down upon the
landscape stretched out like patchwork below. Then with the night and
the absence of all human sounds had come that sweet and mystical sense
of loneliness which had so often brought him peace at a time when the
smallness of the day's events and the tyranny of his home life had
filled him with bitterness. It was here that courage had come to him to
plan out his emancipation, here that he had fed his brain with sweet but
forbidden fruits. Something of that delicious loneliness was upon him
now. He was a wanderer in a new world. What matter though the streets
were squalid, and the men and women against whom he brushed were, for
the most part, poorly dressed and ill looking? He was free. Even his
identity was gone. Douglas Guest was dead, and with his past Douglas
Jesson had nothing to do. He wandered on, asking no questions, perfectly content. The great city
expanded before him. Streets became wider, carriages were more
frequent, the faces of the people grew more cheerful. He laughed softly
to himself from sheer lightness of heart. From down a side street he
came into the Strand, and here, for the first time, he noticed that he
himself was attracting some attention. Then he remembered his clothes,
shabby enough, but semi-clerical, and he walked boldly into a large
ready-made clothing establishment, where everything was marked in plain
figures, and where layfigures of gentlemen with waxy faces, attired in
the height of fashion, were gazing blandly out into the world from
behind a huge plate-glass window. He bought a plain blue serge suit,
and begged leave to change in the "trying-on" room. Half an hour later
he walked out again, with his own clothes done up in a bundle, feeling
that his emancipation was now complete. The lights of Waterloo Bridge attracted him, and he turned down before
them. From one of the parapets he had his first view of the Thames. He
leaned over, gazing with fascinated eyes at the ships below, dimly seen
now through the gathering darkness, at the black waters in which flashed
the reflection of the long row of lamps. The hugeness of the hotels on
the Embankment, all afire with brilliant illuminations, almost took away
his breath. Whilst he lingered there Big Ben boomed out the hour of
six, and he realised with beating heart that those must be the Houses of
Parliament across on the other side. A cold breeze came up and blew in
his face, but he scarcely heeded it. It was the mother river which
flowed beneath him--the greatest of the world's cities into which he had
come, a wanderer, yet at heart one of her sons. Now at last he was in
touch with his kind. Oh, what a welcome present--how gladly he realised
that henceforth he must date his life from that day. He lifted his
parcel cautiously to the ledge and waited for a moment. There was no
one looking. Now was his time. He let it go, and heard the muffled
splash as it fell upon the water. Not until it had slipped from his
fingers and gone beyond recovery did he realise that the card which she
had given him was carefully tucked away in the breast pocket of the
coat. He knew neither her name nor where to look for her. CHAPTER VI

THE YOUNG MAN FROM THE COUNTRY HEARS SOME NEWS

"I say, mister." Douglas started round, cramped with his long lingering against the stone
wall. A girl was standing by his side. There were roses in her hat and
a suspicion of powder upon her cheeks. "Were you speaking to me?" he asked hesitatingly. She laughed shortly. "No one else within earshot that I know of," she answered. "I saw you
throw that parcel over." "I was just wishing," he remarked, "that I could get it back." "Well, you are a mug to chuck it over and then want it back. I guess
it's lost now, anyway, unless the river police find it--and that ain't
likely, is it?" "I should think not," he answered gravely. "Good evening." He would
have moved away, but she stopped him. "Come, that's not good enough,"
she said, in a harder tone. "You ain't going to bluff me. What was in
that parcel, eh?" He looked at her in surprise. "I don't quite see how it concerns you, anyway," he said, "but I don't
know that I mind telling you that it contained a suit of clothes." "Your own?" "Yes." "What have you been up to?" "I am afraid I don't understand you," he said. "Oh, rot! People don't sneak their clothes over into the river for
nothing. What are you going to stand me not to tell that bobby, eh?" "I really don't care whether you do or not," he answered. "I had a
reason for wanting to get rid of my clothes, but I am afraid you
wouldn't understand it." "Well, we'll try the bobby, then," she said. "There's a horrible murder
this morning on the placards. How do I know that you're not the chap? It looks suspicious when you come out in a new suit of clothes and throw
the old ones into the river. Anyway, the bobby would want to ask you a
few questions about it." "Well, you can try him, then," Douglas answered. "I'll wait here while
you fetch him." The girl laughed--it was not a pleasant sound. "Where'd you be by the time I'd brought him, I'd like to know?" she
remarked. "Never mind. I see you ain't likely to part with a lot. Stand us a drink, and I won't tell a soul." "I would rather not, thanks," Douglas said. "I'll give you the money
for one." She looked at him angrily. "Too much of a toff, eh? No, you can keep your money. You'll come
along and have one with me, or I'll tell the bobby." Douglas hesitated. He thought for a moment of De Quincey's Ann
wandering out of the mists to cross the bridge with weary footsteps, and
turned towards the girl with a courtesy which was almost tenderness. "I will come with you if you like," he said, "only--"

The girl laughed hardly. "All right. We'll go to the 'Cross.' The port wine's A1 there. You a
Londoner?" she added, as they turned towards the Strand. He shook his head. "I have never been in London before to-day," he answered. "More fool you to come, then," she said, shortly. "You don't look like
a Cockney. I guess you're a gentleman, aren't you--run away from home
or something?" "I have come to live in London," he said, evasively. "I have always
wanted to." She shook her head. "You'd better have stopped away. You are young, and you look good. You'll be neither long. Ugh! Here we are." He stepped aside and let her pass in first through the swing doors. She
led the way into what was called a private bar. They sat in cushioned
chairs, and Douglas gave his order mechanically. A few feet away, with
only a slim partition between them, was the general room full of men. The tinkle of glasses and hum of conversation grew louder and louder. It was a cold evening and a busy time. Douglas sipped his wine in
silence. The girl opposite was humming a tune and beating time with her
foot. She was watching him covertly but not unkindly. "He'll be caught right enough. They even know 'is name. Serve 'im
right, too, for it was an 'orrible murder . . . Douglas Guest." Douglas started suddenly in his chair, a cry upon his lips, his eyes
almost starting from his head. The girl's gloved hand was pressed
against his mouth and the cry was stifled. Afterwards he remembered all
his life the smell of patchouli or some cheap scent which assailed him
at her near presence. "Hush!" she whispered. "Don't be a silly fool." He sat back in his chair, pale to the lips, trembling in every limb. The mirrors, the rows of glasses, the cushioned seats seemed flying
round, there was a buzzing in his ears. Again she rose and poured wine
down his throat. "Sit still," she said, hoarsely. "You'll be all right in a moment." The whole story, in disconnected patches, came floating in to them. He
heard it, gripping all the while the sides of his chair, struggling with
a deadly faintness. She too listened, watching him carefully all the
time lest he should call out. In their corner they were scarcely to be
seen even from the bar, and she had moved her seat a little so as to
wholly shield him. It sounded bad enough. An old man over sixty, a
farmer living in a northern village, had been found in his bedroom dead. By his side was a rifled cash box. There had been the best part of a
hundred pounds there, all of which was gone. There were no signs of any
one having broken in, but a young man named Douglas Guest, an inmate of
the house and a distant relative, was missing. The thing was clear
enough. Another voice chimed in--its owner possessed a later edition. Only that
night there had been a violent quarrel between the dead man and this
Douglas Guest concerning money. Guest had been seen to enter the London
train secretly at the nearest large station. His arrest was only a
matter of a few hours. The police knew exactly where to put their hands
upon him. A description followed. The girl and her companion exchanged
stealthy glances. The buzz of voices continued. Covering Douglas all she could, the girl
called for more wine. The barmaid, seeing his pale face, nodded across
towards him. "Your friend don't look well," she said. "Had too much yesterday," the girl answered, promptly. "He was fairly
on 'the do,' and he ain't strong. He'll be all right when he gets a
drop of this inside him." The barmaid nodded and turned away. The girl made him drink and then
roused him. "Can you walk?" she said shortly. "We're best away from here." He nodded. "Yes." She rose and paid for the last drinks. He followed her out on to the
pavement and stood there, dazed, almost helpless. She looked at him
critically. "Come, pull yourself together," she said. "You've had a bit of a knock,
I guess, but you don't want to advertise yourself here. Now listen. You'd best get some quiet lodging and lie low for a bit. I don't know
anything and I don't want to know anything, but it's pretty clear you're
keeping out of the way. I'm not going to take you down my way. For one
thing, you ain't exactly that sort, I should say, and for another, the
coppers are on to us like hot bricks when any one's wanted. Do you know
London at all?" "I was never here before this evening," he answered, in a low tone. She looked at him critically. "You're a bit of a green 'un," she said, bluntly. "You don't need to go
giving yourself away like that, you know. Come along. I'm going to
take you out to a quiet part that'll do for you as well as anywhere." He walked by her side passively. Once he stopped and bought an evening
paper, and under the next gas lamp he read a certain paragraph through
carefully. She waited for him without remark. He folded the paper up
after a minute or two and rejoined her. Side by side they threaded
their way along Pall Mall, across the Park and southwards. A walk
which, an hour or two ago, would have filled him with wonder and
delight, he undertook now with purely mechanical movements and unseeing
eyes. When they reached Chelsea she paused. "Look here," she said, "are you feeling all right now?" He nodded. "I am quite myself again," he said, steadily. "I am much obliged to you
for looking after me. You are very kind." He drew some gold pieces hesitatingly from his pocket. She motioned him
to replace them. "I don't want any money, thanks," she said. "Now listen. That street
there is all lodging-houses. Go and get a room and lie quiet for a bit. They're used to odd folk down here, and you look like a painter or a
writer. Say you're an actor out of a job, or anything that comes
handy." "Thank you," he said. "I understand." She turned away. "Good night, then." "Good night." He heard something that sounded like a sob, and the quick rustling of
skirts. He turned round. She was by the corner--out of sight already. At the bottom of the street was the glitter of a gas lamp reflected from
the walk. He walked down and found himself on Chelsea Embankment. He
made his way to the wall with the gold which she had refused still in
his hand, and without hesitation threw the coins far out into the river. Then he looked around. There was not a soul in sight. He drew a
handful of money from his pocket and flung it away--a little shower of
gold flashing brightly in the gaslight for a moment. He went through
his pockets carefully and found an odd half sovereign and some silver. Away they went. Then he moved back to a seat and closed his eyes. CHAPTER VII

A NIGHT IN HELL--AND NEXT DAY

There are few men, Douglas had once read, who have not spent one night
of their lives in hell. When morning came he knew that he at least was
amongst the majority. Sleep had never once touched his eyelids--his
most blessed respite had been a few moments of deadly stupor, when the
red fires had ceased to play before his eyes, and the old man's upturned
face had faded away into the chill mists. Yet when at last he rose he
asked himself, with a sudden passionate eagerness, whether after all it
might not have been a terrible dream. He gazed around eagerly looking
for a latticed window with dimity curtains, a blue papered wall hung
with texts, and a low beamed ceiling. Alas! Before him was a
white-shrouded river, around him a wilderness of houses, and a long row
of faintly-burning lights stretched from where he sat all along the
curving embankment. He was wearing unfamiliar clothes, and a doubled-up
newspaper was in his pockets. It was all true then, the flight across
the moor, the strange ride to town, the wild exhilaration of spirits,
and the dull, crushing blow. The girl with the roses--ah, she had been
with him--had brought him here. He remembered the look in her eyes when
she had refused his money. At least he had ridded himself of that. He
tried to stretch himself. He was stiff and sore all over. His head was
throbbing like a steam engine, and he sank back upon the seat in the
throes of a cold, ghastly sickness. He remembered then that he had not
touched food for hours. He remembered too that he had not a penny in
the world. For an hour or more he lay there partially unconscious. Physically he
was almost unable to move--his brain, however, was gradually clearing. After all, perhaps the boldest course was the safest. He would go and
say, "Here am I, Douglas Guest--what do you want with me? It is true
that I took money from the old man, but it was my own. As to his death,
what do I know of that? Who heard me threaten him? Who saw me strike
him? There is no one." He staggered up to his feet. The morning had come now, and people had
begun to stir. A few market waggons went rumbling by. There were
milk-carts in the streets, and sleepy-looking servants in print dresses
were showing their heads above the area steps. Douglas moved on with
unsteady footsteps. He passed a policeman who looked at him curiously,
and of whom he felt more than half inclined to ask the way to the
nearest police-station, then walked up into the square, where before him
hung a red lamp from a tall, red brick house with barred windows. He
peered in at the window. A fat sergeant was sitting at the table
yawning, the walls were hung with police bills, the room itself was the
quintessence of discomfort. The place repelled him strongly. He did
not like the look of the sergeant nor his possible quarters. After all,
why need he hurry? The day was young, and it was very unlikely that he
would be recognised. He strolled away with his hands in his pockets,
lighter-hearted with every step which took him away from those barred
windows. Across the square, a fat little man was making strenuous efforts to
remove the shutter from in front of his shop. He looked round as
Douglas appeared, wiping the perspiration from his forehead, and
regarded him doubtfully. "Will yer lend us a hand, guvnor?" he inquired. Douglas was willing enough, and between them the job was soon finished. The little man, who was a confectioner, explained that he had an
assistant who came from a distance, and whose laziness was most
phenomenal. After this morning, however, his services would be
dispensed with. For once he had gone a little too far. Eight o'clock
and no sign of him. It was monstrous! The little man produced a few
coppers and glanced towards Douglas with some hesitation. Douglas laughed softly. "I don't want any money, thanks," he said, "but if I could beg a piece
of bread or cake, I'm really hungry." The little man nodded and hastened into the shop. Douglas followed him. "If you'd care for a cup of milk," he remarked, taking a tin from the
door handle, "we can manage it. No tea yet, I'm afraid." "I should enjoy the milk very much if you can spare it." He made a curious meal. A little hysterical, but stronger at every
mouthful. The little man watched him covertly. "Like a wash?" he inquired. "Rather," Douglas answered. After all, it was a good start for the day. He walked out of the shop a quarter of an hour later a new man, spruce
and clean, smoking a cigarette, and with the terrors of the night far
behind him. The cold water had been like a sweet, keen tonic to him. The cobwebs had gone from his brain. Memory had returned. What a fool
he had been. There was no such person as Douglas Guest. Douglas Guest
was dead. What need for him to fear? The greatest desire he had now was for a morning newspaper, but though
he tried every pocket several times over he was absolutely penniless. Then he thought of the Free Libraries--a sudden and delightful
inspiration. A policeman directed him. He entered a handsome building,
and being early had his choice of the great dailies, neatly cut and
arranged upon rollers for him. One by one he read them through with
feverish interest, and when he set them down he laughed softly to
himself. There was not one of them which did not chronicle the death of
Douglas Guest on the Midland Express, and refer to him as the person
wanted for the Feldwick murder. So he was safe, after all. The press
had made it clearer than ever. Douglas Guest was dead. Henceforth he
need have no fear. He moved to the tables where the reviews and magazines were, and spent a
pleasant hour or two amongst them. He planned out a new story, saw his
way to a satirical article upon a popular novel, thought of an epigram,
and walked out into the street a few minutes before one with something
of the old exhilaration of spirits dancing through his veins. His
condition of absolute poverty had not yet lost the flavour of novelty. He even laughed as he realised that again he was hungry and must rely
upon chance for a meal. This time there was no fat confectioner to play
the good Samaritan. But by chance he passed a pawnbroker's shop, and
with a little cry of triumph he dragged a fat, yellow-faced silver watch
from his pocket and stepped blithely inside. He found it valued at much
less than he had expected, but he attempted no bargaining. He walked
out again into the street, a man of means. There were silver coins in
his pocket--enough to last him for a couple of days at least. It was
unexpected fortune. He bought some tobacco and cigarette papers and rolled himself a
cigarette. Then he stepped out in the direction of the Strand, where he
imagined the restaurants mostly lay. He passed St. James's Palace, up
St. James's Street and into Piccadilly. For a while he forgot his
hunger. There was so much that was marvellous, so much to admire. Burlington House was pointed out by a friendly policeman; he passed into
the courtyard where the pigeons were feeding, and looked around him with
admiration which was tempered almost with awe. On his way out he again
addressed the policeman. "I want to have some lunch somewhere," he said. "I can only spend about
two shillings, and I want the best I can get for the money. I wonder
whether you could direct me." The policeman smiled. "There's only one place for you, sir," he said, "and it's lucky as I can
direct you there. You go to Spargetti's in Old Compton Street, off Soho
Square. I've heard that there's no West-End place to touch it--and they
do you the whole lot for two bob, including a quarter flask of wine. I've a brother-in-law as keeps the books there, and I have it from him,
sir, that there ain't such value for money in the whole country. And
there's this about it, sir," he added confidentially, "you can eat
what's set before you. It ain't like some of these nasty, low, foreign
eating-'ouses where you daren't touch rabbit, and the soup don't seem
canny. There's plenty like that, but not Spargetti's. You're all right
there, sir." Douglas went off, fortified with many directions, and laughing heartily. He found Spargetti's, and seated himself at a tiny table in a long low
room, blue already with cigarette smoke. They brought him such a
luncheon as he had never eaten before. Grated macaroni in his soup,
watercress and oil with his chicken, a curious salad and a wonderful
cheese. Around him was the constant hum of gay conversation. Every one
save himself seemed to have friends here, and many of them. It was
indeed a very ordinary place, a cosmopolitan eating-house, good of its
sort, and with an excellent connection of lighthearted but impecunious
foreigners, who made up with the lightness of their spirits for the
emptiness of their purses. To Douglas, whose whole upbringing and
subsequent life had been amongst the dreariest of surroundings, there
was something about it all peculiarly fascinating. The air of pleasant
abandonment, the subtle aroma of gaiety allied with irresponsibility,
the strange food and wine, well cooked and stimulating, delighted him. His sole desire now was for a companion. If only those men--artists, he
was sure they were--would draw him into their conversation. He had
plenty to say. He was ready to be as merry as any of them. A faint
sense of loneliness depressed him for a moment as he looked from one to
another of the long tables. All his life he had been as one removed
from his fellows. He was weary of it. Surely it must be nearly at an
end now. Some of the children of the great mother city would hold out
their hands to him. It was not alms he needed. It was a friend. "Good morning." Douglas looked up quickly. A newcomer had taken the vacant place at his
table. CHAPTER VIII

THE AUTHOR OF "NO MAN'S LAND"

Douglas returned his greeting cordially. His _vis-a-vis_ drew the menu
towards him and studied it with interest. Setting it down he screwed a
single eyeglass into his eye and beamed over at Douglas. "Is the daily grind O. K.?" he inquired suavely. Douglas was disconcerted at being unable to answer a question so
pleasantly asked. "I--beg your pardon," he said, doubtfully. "I'm afraid I don't quite
understand." The newcomer waved his hand to some acquaintances and smiled cheerfully. "I see you're a stranger here," he remarked. "There's a _table-d'hote_
luncheon for the modest sum of eighteenpence, which is the cheapest way
to feed, if it's decent. Sometimes it is, sometimes it isn't. I
thought perhaps you might have sampled it." "I believe I have," Douglas answered. "I told the waiter to bring me
the ordinary lunch, and I thought it was very good indeed." "Then I will risk it. Henri. Come here, you scamp." He gave a few orders to the waiter, who treated him with much respect. Then he turned again to Douglas. "You have nearly finished," he said. "Please don't hurry. I hate to
eat alone. It is a whim of mine. If I eat alone I read, and if I read
I get dyspepsia. Try the oat biscuits and the Camembert." Douglas did as the newcomer had suggested. "I am in no hurry," he said. "I have nothing to do, nor anywhere to
go." "Lucky man!" "You speak as though that were unusual," Douglas laughed, "but I was
just thinking that every one here seems to be in the same state. Some
one once told me that London was a city of sadness. Who could watch the
people here and say so?" The newcomer screwed in his eyeglass and looked deliberately round the
room. "Well," he said, "this is a resort of the poor, and the poor are seldom
sad. It is the unfortunate West-Enders who carry the burdens of wealth
and the obligation of position, who have earned for us the reproach of
dulness. Here we are on the threshold of Bohemia. Long life and health
to it." He drank a glass of Chianti with the air of a connoisseur tasting some
rare vintage. Douglas laughed softly. "If the people here are poor," he said, "what about me? I pawned my
watch because I had had nothing to eat since yesterday." His new friend sighed and stuck his fork into an olive. "What affluence," he sighed, meditatively. "I have not possessed a
watch for a year, and I've only ninepence in my pocket. They give me
tick here. Foolish Spargetti. Long may their confidence last!" A companion in impecuniosity. Douglas looked at his neat clothes and
the flower in his buttonhole, and wondered. "But you have the means of making money if you care to." "Have I?" The eyeglass was carefully removed, the small wizened face
assumed a lugubrious aspect. "My friend," he said, "in a measure it is
true--but such a small measure. 