



Produced by Michael Kolodny





THE DOUBLE LIFE

OF

MR. ALFRED BURTON


BY

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM


CONTENTS

CHAPTER
     I. THE FRUIT OF THE TREE
    II. A TRANSFORMATION
   III. MR. ALFRED BURTON'S FAMILY
    IV. A SHOCK TO MR. WADDINGTON
     V. BURTON'S NEW LIFE
    VI. A MEETING WITH ELLEN
   VII. LIE TRUTHFUL AUCTIONEER
  VIII. HESITATION
    IX. THE LAND OF ENCHANTMENT
     X. NO RECONCILIATION
    XI. THE GATE INTO PARADISE
   XII. A BOLT FROM THE BLUE
  XIII. PROOF POSITIVE
   XIV. THE LEGEND OF THE PERFECT FOOD
    XV. THE PROFESSOR INSISTS
   XVI. ENTER MR. BOMFORD! XVII. BURTON DECLINES
 XVIII. THE END OP A DREAM
   XIX. A BAD HALF-HOUR
    XX. ANOTHER COMPLICATION
   XXI. AN AMAZING TRANSFORMATION
  XXII. DOUBTS
 XXIII. CONDEMNED! XXIV. MENATOGEN, THE MIND FOOD
   XXV. DISCONTENT
  XXVI. THE END OF A WONDERFUL WORLD
 XXVII. MR. WADDINGTON ALSO
XXVIII. THE REAL ALFRED BURTON
  XXIX. RICHES AND REPENTANCE
   XXX. A MAN'S SOUL



THE DOUBLE LIFE

OF

MR. ALFRED BURTON

CHAPTER I

THE FRUIT OF THE TREE

Mr. Alfred Burton, although he was blissfully and completely ignorant
of the fact, stood at the door of Fate. He was a little out of breath
and his silk hat was reclining at the back of his head. In his mouth
was a large cigar which he felt certain was going to disagree with him,
but he smoked it because it had been presented to him a few minutes ago
by the client upon whom he was in attendance. He had rather deep-set
blue eyes, which might have been attractive but for a certain keenness
in their outlook, which was in a sense indicative of the methods and
character of the young man himself; a pale, characterless face, a
straggling, sandy moustache, and an earnest, not to say convincing,
manner. He was dressed in such garments as the head-clerk of Messrs.
Waddington & Forbes, third-rate auctioneers and house agents, might have
been expected to select. He dangled a bunch of keys in his hand. "If this house don't suit you, sir," he declared, confidently, "why,
there isn't one in the whole west-end that will. That's my opinion,
anyway. There's nothing in our books to compare with it for value and
accommodation. We nearly let it last week to Lord Leconside, but Her
Ladyship--she came round with me herself--decided that it was just a
trifle too large. As a matter of fact, sir," this energetic young man
went on, confidentially, "the governor insisted upon a deposit and it
didn't seem to be exactly convenient. It isn't always these people with
titles who've got the money. That we find out in our business, sir, as
quickly as anybody. As for the steam heating you were talking about,
Mr. Lynn, why, that's all very well for New York," he continued,
persuasively, "but over here the climate doesn't call for it--you can
take it from me that it doesn't, indeed, Mr. Lynn. I have the letting
in my hands of as many houses as most people, and you can take it from
me, sir, as the direct result of my experience, that over here they
won't have it--won't have it at any price, sir. Most unhealthy we find
it, and always produces a rare crop of colds and coughs unknown to those
that are used to an honest coal fire. It's all a matter of climate,
sir, after all, isn't it?" The young man paused to take breath. His client, who had been listening
attentively in gloomy but not unappreciative silence, removed his cigar
from his mouth. He was a middle-aged American with a wife and daughters
on their way over from New York, and his business was to take a house
before they arrived. It wasn't a job he liked, but he was making the
best of it. This young man appealed to his sense of business. "Say," he remarked, approvingly, "you've learned how to talk in your
trade!" Stimulated by this encouragement, Alfred Burton clapped on his hat a
little more securely, took a long breath, and went at it again. "Why, I'm giving myself a rest this morning, sir!" he declared. "I
haven't troubled to tell you more than the bare facts. This house
doesn't need any talking about--doesn't need a word said about it. Her
Ladyship's last words to us were--Lady Idlemay, you know, the owner of
the house--'Mr. Waddington and Mr. Burton,' she said--she was speaking
to us both, for the governor always introduces me to clients as being
the one who does most of the letting,--'Mr. Waddington and Mr.
Burton,' she said, 'if a tenant comes along whom you think I'd like to
have living in my rooms and using my furniture, breathing my air, so to
speak, why, go ahead and let the house, rents being shockingly low just
now, with agricultural depression and what not, but sooner than not let
it to gentlepeople, I'll do without the money,' Her Ladyship declared. Now you're just the sort of tenant she'd like to have here. I'm quite
sure of that, Mr. Lynn. I should take a pleasure in bringing you two
together." Mr. Lynn grunted. He was perfectly well aware that the house would
seem more desirable to his wife and daughters from the very fact that it
belonged to a "Lady" anybody. He was perfectly well aware, also, that
his companion had suspected this. The consideration of these facts left
him, however, unaffected. He was disposed, if anything, to admire the
cleverness of the young man who had realized an outside asset. "Well, I've seen pretty well all over it," he remarked. "I'll go back
to the office with you, anyhow, and have a word with Mr. Waddington. By the way, what's that room behind you?" The young man glanced carelessly around at the door of the room of Fate
and down at the bunch of keys which he held in his hand. He even
chuckled as he replied. "I was going to mention the matter of that room, sir," he replied,
"because, if perfectly agreeable to the tenant, Her Ladyship would like
to keep it locked up." "Locked up?" Mr. Lynn repeated. "And why?" "Regular queer story, sir," the young man declared, confidentially. "The late Earl was a great traveller in the East, as you may have heard,
and he was always poking about in some ruined city or other in the
desert, and picking up things and making discoveries. Well, last time
he came home from abroad, he brought with him an old Egyptian or
Arab,--I don't know which he was, but he was brown,--settled him down in
this room--in his own house, mind--and wouldn't have him disturbed or
interfered with, not at any price. Well, the old chap worked here night
and day at some sort of writing, and then, naturally enough, what with
not having the sort of grub he liked, and never going outside the doors,
he croaked." "He what?" Mr. Lynn interposed. "He died," the young man explained. "It was just about the time that
the Earl was ill himself. His Lordship gave orders that the body was to
be buried and the room locked up, in case the old chap's heirs should
come along. Seems he'd brought a few odd things of his own
over--nothing whatever of any value. Anyway, those were Lord Idlemay's
wishes, and the room has been locked up ever since." Mr. Lynn was interested. "No objection to our just looking inside, I suppose?" "None whatever," the young man declared, promptly. "I was going to have
a peep myself. Here goes!" He fitted the key in the lock and pushed the door open. Mr. Lynn took
one step forward and drew back hurriedly. "Thanks!" he said. "That'll do! I've seen all I want--and smelt!" Mr. Alfred Burton, fortunately or unfortunately, was possessed of less
sensitive nasal organs and an indomitable curiosity. The room was dark
and stuffy, and a wave of pungent odor swept out upon them with the
opening of the door. Nevertheless, he did not immediately close it. "One moment!" he muttered, peering inside. "I'll just look around and
see that everything is in order." He crossed the threshold and passed into the room. It was certainly a
curious apartment. The walls were hung not with paper at all, but with
rugs of some Oriental material which had the effect of still further
increasing the gloom. There were neither chairs nor tables--no
furniture at all, in fact, of any account but in the furthest corner was
a great pile of cushions, and on the floor by the side a plain strip of
sandalwood, covered with a purple cloth, on which were several
square-shaped sheets of paper, a brass inkstand, and a bundle of quill
pens. On the extreme corner of this strip of wood, which seemed to have
been used as a writing desk by some one reclining upon the cushions, was
the strangest article of all. Alfred Burton stared at it with wide-open
eyes. It was a tiny plant growing out of a small-sized flower-pot, with
real green leaves and a cluster of queer little brown fruit hanging down
from among them. "Jiminy!" the clerk exclaimed. "I say, Mr. Lynn, sir!" But Mr. Lynn had gone off to pace the dining-room once more. Burton
moved slowly forward and stooped down over the cushions. He took up the
sheets of paper which lay upon the slab of sandalwood. They were
covered with wholly indecipherable characters save for the last page
only, and there, even as he stood with it in his fingers, he saw,
underneath the concluding paragraph of those unintelligible
hieroglyphics, a few words of faintly traced English, laboriously
printed, probably a translation. He struck a match and read them slowly
out to himself:


"It is finished. The nineteenth generation has triumphed. He who shall
eat of the brown fruit of this tree shall see the things of Life and
Death as they are. He who shall eat--" The translation concluded
abruptly. Mr. Alfred Burton removed his silk hat and reflectively
scratched his head. "Queer sort of joker he must have been," he remarked to himself. "I
wonder what he was getting at?" His eyes fell upon the little tree. He felt the earth in the pot it was
quite dry. Yet the tree itself was fresh and green. "Here goes for a brown bean," he continued, and plucked one. Even then, while he held it in his fingers, he hesitated. "Don't suppose it will do me any harm," he muttered, doubtfully. There was naturally no reply. Mr. Alfred Burton laughed uneasily to
himself. The shadows of the room and its curious perfume were a trifle
disconcerting. "Risk it, anyway," he concluded. "Here goes!" He raised the little
brown fruit--which did indeed somewhat resemble a bean--to his mouth and
swallowed it. He found it quite tasteless, but the deed was no sooner
done than he was startled by a curious buzzing in his ears and a
momentary but peculiar lapse of memory. He sat and looked around him
like a man who has been asleep and suddenly awakened in unfamiliar
surroundings. Then the sound of his client's voice suddenly recalled
him to himself. He started up and peered through the gloom. "Who's there?" he asked, sharply. "Say, young man, I am waiting for you when you're quite ready," Mr.
Lynn remarked from the threshold. "Queer sort of atmosphere in there,
isn't it?" Mr. Alfred Burton came slowly out and locked the door of the room. Even then he was dimly conscious that something had happened to him. He
hated the musty odor of the place, the dusty, unswept hall, and the
general air of desertion. He wanted to get out into the street and he
hurried his client toward the front door. As soon as he had locked up,
he breathed a little sigh of relief. "What a delicious soft wind!" he exclaimed, removing his unsightly hat. "Really, I think that when we get a sunny day like this, April is almost
our most beautiful month." Mr. Lynn stared at his companion, who was now slowly descending the
steps. "Say, about this house," he began, "I guess I'd better take it. It may
not be exactly what I want but it seems to me to be about as near as
anything I am likely to find. We'll go round to the office right away
and fix things up." Mr. Alfred Burton shook his head doubtfully. "I don't think I would take it, if I were you, Mr. Lynn," he said. Mr. Lynn stopped short upon the pavement and looked at his companion in
amazement. The latter had the air of one very little interested in the
subject of conversation. He was watching approvingly a barrowful of
lilac and other spring flowers being wheeled along by a flower-seller in
the middle of the road. "What an exquisite perfume!" the young man murmured, enthusiastically. "Doesn't it remind you, Mr. Lynn, of a beautiful garden somewhere right
away in the country--one of those old-fashioned gardens, you know, with
narrow paths where you have to push your way through the flowers, and
where there are always great beds of pink and white stocks near the box
edges? And do you notice--an accident, of course--but what a delicate
blend of color the lilac and those yellow jonquils make!" "I can't smell anything," the American declared, a little impatiently,
"and I don't know as I want to just now. I am here to talk business, if
you don't mind." "In one moment," Burton replied. "Excuse me for one moment, if you
please." He hastened across the street and returned a moment or two later with a
bunch of violets in his hand. Mr. Lynn watched him, partly in
amazement, partly in disapproval. There seemed to be very little left
of the smart, businesslike young man whose methods, only a short time
ago, had commanded his unwilling admiration. Mr. Alfred Burton's
expression had undergone a complete change. His eyes had lost their
calculating twinkle, his mouth had softened. A pleasant but somewhat
abstracted smile had taken the place of his forced amiability. "You will forgive me, won't you?" he said, as he regained the pavement. "I really haven't smelt violets before this year. Spring comes upon us
Londoners so suddenly." "About that house, now," the American insisted, a little sharply. "Certainly," Burton replied, removing his eyes unwillingly from the
passing barrow. "I really don't think you had better take it, Mr.
Lynn. You see, it is not generally known, but there is no doubt that
Lord Idlemay had typhoid fever there." "Typhoid!" Mr. Lynn exclaimed, incredulously. His companion nodded. "Two of the servants were down with it as well," he continued. "We
implored Lady Idlemay, when she offered us the letting of the house, to
have the drains put in thorough order, but when we got the estimate out
for her she absolutely declined. To tell you the truth, the best agents
had all refused, under the circumstances, to have the house upon their
books at all. That is why we got the letting of it." Mr. Lynn removed the cigar from his mouth for a moment. There was a
slight frown Upon his forehead. He was puzzled. "Say, you're not getting at me for any reason, are you?" he demanded. "My dear sir!" Burton protested, eagerly. "I am simply doing my duty
and telling you the truth. The house is not in a fit state to be let to
any one--certainly not to a man with a family. If you will permit me to
say so, you are not going the right way to secure a suitable house. You
simply walked into our office because you saw the sign up, and listened
to anything the governor had to say. We haven't any west-end houses at
all upon our books. It isn't our business, unfortunately. Miller &
Sons, or Roscoe's, are the best people. No one would even come to see
you at Idlemay House, much less stay with you--the place has such a bad
reputation." "Then will you be good enough to just explain to me why you were
cracking it up like blazes only a few minutes ago?" Mr. Lynn demanded,
indignantly. "I nearly took the darned place!" Mr. Burton shook his head penitently. "I am afraid that I cannot explain, sir," he confessed. "To tell you
the truth, I do not understand in the least how I could have brought
myself to be so untruthful. I am only thankful that no harm has been
done." They had reached the corner of the street in which the offices of
Messrs. Waddington & Forbes were situated. Mr. Lynn came to a full
stop. "I can't see but what we might just as well part here, young man," he
declared. "There's no use in my coming to your office, after what
you've told me." "Not the slightest," Mr. Burton admitted frankly, "in fact you are
better away. Mr. Waddington would certainly try to persuade you to
take the house. If you'll accept my advice, sir, you will go to Miller
& Sons in St. James's Place. They have all the best houses on their
books and they are almost certain to find something to suit you." Mr. Lynn gazed once more at his companion curiously. "Say, I'm not quite sure that I can size you up, even now," he said. "At first I thought that you were a rare little hustler, right on the
job. I was set against that house and yet you almost persuaded me into
taking it. What's come over you, anyway?" Mr. Burton shook his head dubiously. "I am afraid that it is no use asking me," he replied, "for I really
don't quite know myself." Mr. Lynn still lingered. The longer he looked at his companion, the
more he appreciated the subtle change of demeanor and language which had
certainly transformed Mr. Alfred Burton. "It was after you came out of that little room," he continued,
meditatively, "where that Oriental fellow had been shut up. The more I
think of it, the odder it seems. You were as perky as mustard when you
went in and you've been sort of dazed ever Since you came out." Mr. Burton lifted his hat. "Good day, sir!" he said. "I trust that you will find a residence to
suit you." Mr. Lynn strolled off with a puzzled frown upon his forehead, and
Alfred Burton, with a slight gesture of aversion, pushed open the
swinging doors which led into the offices of Messrs. Waddington &
Forbes. CHAPTER II

A TRANSFORMATION

Burton stood for a moment upon the threshold of the office, looking
around him. A new and peculiar distaste for these familiar surroundings
seemed suddenly to have sprung into life. For the first time he
realized the intense ugliness of this scene of his daily labors. The
long desk, ink-splashed and decrepit, was covered with untidy piles of
papers, some of them thick with dust; the walls were hung with
seedy-looking files and an array of tattered bills; there were cobwebs
in every corner, gaps in the linoleum floor-covering. In front of the
office-boy--a youth about fourteen years of age, who represented the
remaining clerical staff of the establishment--were pinned up several
illustrations cut out from _Comic Cuts_, the _Police News_, and various
other publications of a similar order. As Burton looked around him, his
distaste grew. It seemed impossible that he had ever existed for an
hour amid such an environment. The prospect of the future was suddenly
hugely distasteful. Very slowly he changed his coat and climbed on to his worn horsehair
stool, without exchanging his usual facetious badinage with the
remaining member of the staff. The office-boy, who had thought of
something good to say, rather resented his silence. It forced him into
taking the initiative, a position which placed him from the first at a
disadvantage. "Any luck with the Yank, Mr. Burton?" he inquired, with anxious
civility. Burton shook his head. "None at all," he confessed. "He wouldn't have anything to do with the
house." "Has any one been letting on to him about it, do you think?" "I don't think so," Burton replied. "I don't think any one else has
mentioned it to him at all. He seems to be a complete stranger here." "Couldn't have been quite at your best, could you, Mr. Burton, sir? Not your usual bright and eloquent self, eh?" The boy grinned and then ducked, expecting a missile. None came,
however. Alfred Burton was in a very puzzled state of mind, and he
neither showed nor indeed felt any resentment. He turned and faced his
subordinate. "I really don't know, Clarkson," he admitted. "I am sure that I was
quite polite, and I showed him everything he wished to see; but, of
course, I had to tell him the truth about the place." "The what?" young Clarkson inquired, in a mystified tone. "The truth," Burton repeated. "Wot yer mean?" "About the typhoid and that," Burton explained, mildly. The office-boy pondered for a moment. Then he slowly opened a ledger,
drew a day-book towards him, and continued his work. He was being
jollied, of course, but the thing was too subtle for him at present. He
decided to wait for the next move. Burton continued to regard his
subordinate, however, and by degrees an expression of pained disapproval
crept into his face. "Clarkson," he said, "if you will forgive my mentioning a purely
personal matter, why do you wear such uncomfortable collars and such an
exceedingly unbecoming tie?" The office-boy swung round upon his stool. His mouth was wide open like
a rabbit's. He fingered the offending articles. "What's the matter with them?" he demanded, getting his question out
with a single breath. "Your collars are much too high," Burton pointed out. "One can see how
they cut into your neck. Then why wear a tie of that particular shade
of vivid purple when your clothes themselves, with that blue and yellow
stripe, are somewhat noticeable? There is a lack of symphony about the
arrangement, an entire absence of taste, which is apt to depress one. The whole effect which you produce upon one's vision is abominable. You
won't think my mentioning this a liberty, I hope?" "What about your own red tie and dirty collar?" young Clarkson asked,
indignantly. "What price your eight and sixpenny trousers, eh, with the
blue stripe and the grease stains? What about the sham diamond stud in
your dickey, and your three inches of pinned on cuff? Fancy your
appearance, perhaps! Why, I wouldn't walk the streets in such a
rig-out!" Burton listened to his junior's attack unresentingly but with increasing
bewilderment. Then he slipped from his seat and walked hurriedly across
to the looking-glass, which he took down from its nail. He gazed at
himself long and steadily and from every possible angle. It is probable
that for the first time in his life he saw himself then as he really
was. He was plain, of insignificant appearance, he was ill and
tastelessly dressed. He stood there before the sixpenny-ha'penny mirror
and drank the cup of humiliation. "Calling my tie, indeed!" the office-boy muttered, his smouldering
resentment bringing him back to the attack. "Present from my best girl,
that was, and she knows what's what. Young lady with a place in a
west-end milliner's shop, too. If that doesn't mean good taste, I
should like to know what does. Look at your socks, too, all coming down
over the tops of your boots! Nasty dirty pink and green stripes! There's another thing about my collar, too," he continued, speaking with
renewed earnestness as he appreciated his senior's stupefaction. "It
was clean yesterday, and that's more than yours was--or the day before!" Burton shivered as he finally turned away from that looking-glass. The
expression upon his face was indescribable. "I am sorry I spoke, Clarkson," he apologized humbly. "It certainly
seemed to have slipped my memory that I myself--I can't think how I
managed to make such hideous, unforgivable mistakes." "While we are upon the subject," his subordinate continued, ruthlessly,
"why don't you give your fingernails a scrub sometimes, eh? You might
give your coat a brush, too, now and then, while you are about it. All
covered with scurf and dust about the shoulders! I'm all for
cleanliness, I am." Burton made no reply. He was down and his junior kicked him. "I'd like to see the color of your shirt if you took those paper cuffs
off!" the latter exclaimed. "Why don't you chuck that rotten dickey
away? Cave!" The door leading into the private office was brusquely opened. Mr.
Waddington, the only existing member of the firm, entered---a large,
untidy-looking man, also dressed in most uncomely fashion, and wearing
an ill-brushed silk hat on the back of his head. He turned at once to
his righthand man. "Well, did you land him?" he demanded, with some eagerness. Burton shook his head regretfully. "It was quite impossible to interest him in the house at all, sir," he
declared. "He seemed inclined to take it at first, but directly he
understood the situation he would have nothing more to do with it." Mr. Waddington's face fell. He was disappointed. He was also puzzled. "Understood the situation," he repeated. "What the dickens do you mean,
Burton? What situation?" "I mean about the typhoid, sir, and Lady Idlemay's refusal to have the
drains put in order." Mr. Waddington's expression for a few moments was an interesting and
instructive study. His jaw had fallen, but he was still too bewildered
to realize the situation properly. "But who told him?" he gasped. "I did," Burton replied gently. "I could not possibly let him remain in
ignorance of the facts." "You couldn't--what?" "I could not let him the house without explaining all the circumstances,
sir," Burton declared, watching his senior anxiously. "I am sure you
would not have wished me to do anything of the sort, would you?" What Mr. Waddington said was unimportant. There was very little that
he forgot and he was an auctioneer with a low-class clientele and a fine
flow of language. When he had finished, the office-boy was dumb with
admiration. Burton was looking a little pained and he had the shocked
expression of a musician who has been listening to a series of discords. Otherwise he was unmoved. "Your duty was to let that house," Mr. Waddington wound up, striking
the palm of one hand with the fist of the other. "What do I give you
forty-four shillings a week for, I should like to know? To go and blab
trade secrets to every customer that comes along? If you couldn't get
him to sign the lease, you ought to have worked a deposit, at any rate. He'd have had to forfeit that, even if he'd found out afterwards." "I am sorry," Burton said, speaking in a much lower tone than was usual
with him, but with a curious amount of confidence. "It would have been
a moral falsehood if I had attempted anything of the sort. I could not
possibly offer the house to Mr. Lynn or anybody else, without
disclosing its drawbacks." The auctioneer's face had become redder. His eyes seemed on the point
of coming out of his head. He became almost incoherent. "God bless my soul!" he spluttered. "Have you gone mad, Burton? What's
come to you since the morning? Have you changed into a blithering fool,
or what?" "I think not, sir," Burton replied, gravely. "I don't--exactly remember
for the moment," he went on with a slight frown. "My head seems a
little confused, but I cannot believe that it has been our custom to
conduct our business in the fashion you are suggesting." Mr. Waddington walked round the office, holding his head between his
hands. "I don't suppose either of us has been drinking at this hour in the
morning," he muttered, when he came to a standstill once more. "Look
here, Burton, I don't want to do anything rash. Go home--never mind the
time--go home this minute before I break out again. Come to-morrow
morning, as usual. We'll talk it out then. God bless my soul!" he
added, as Burton picked up his hat with a little sigh of relief and
turned toward the door. "Either I'm drunk or the fellow's got religion
or something! I never heard such infernal rubbish in my life!" "Made a nasty remark about my tie just now, sir," Clarkson said, with
dignity, as his senior disappeared. "Quite uncalled for. I don't fancy
he can be well." "Ever known him like it before?" Mr. Waddington inquired. "Never, sir. I thought he seemed chippier than ever this morning when
he went out. His last words were that he'd bet me a packet of Woodbines
that he landed the old fool." "He's gone dotty!" the auctioneer decided, as he turned back towards his
sanctum. "He's either gone dotty or he's been drinking. The last chap
in the world I should have thought it of!" The mental attitude of Alfred Burton, as he emerged into the street, was
in some respects curious. He was not in the least sorry for what had
happened. On the contrary, he found himself wishing that the day's
respite had not been granted to him, and that his departure from the
place of his employment was final. He was very much in the position of
a man who has been transferred without warning or notice from the
streets of London to the streets of Pekin. Every object which he saw he
looked upon with different eyes. Every face which he passed produced a
different impression upon him. He looked about him with all the avidity
of one suddenly conscious of a great store of unused impressions. It
was like a second birth. He neither understood the situation nor
attempted to analyze it. He was simply conscious of a most delightful
and inexplicable light-heartedness, and of a host of sensations which
seemed to produce at every moment some new pleasure. His first and most
pressing anxiety was a singular one. He loathed himself from head to
foot. He shuddered as he passed the shop-windows for fear he should see
his own reflection. He made his way unfalteringly to an outfitter's
shop, and from there, with a bundle under his arm, to the baths. It was
a very different Alfred Burton indeed who, an hour or two later, issued
forth into the streets. Gone was the Cockney young man with the sandy
moustache, the cheap silk hat worn at various angles to give himself a
rakish air, the flashy clothes, cheap and pretentious, the assured, not
to say bumptious air so sedulously copied from the deportment of his
employer. Enter a new and completely transformed Alfred Burton, an
inoffensive-looking young man in a neat gray suit, a lilac-colored tie
of delicate shade, a flannel shirt with no pretence at cuffs, but with a
spotless turned down collar, a soft Homburg hat, a clean-shaven lip. With a new sense of self-respect and an immense feeling of relief,
Burton, after a few moments' hesitation, directed his footsteps towards
the National Gallery. He had once been there years ago on a wet Bank
Holiday, and some faint instinct of memory which somehow or other had
survived the burden of his sordid days suddenly reasserted itself. He
climbed the steps and passed through the portals with the beating heart
of the explorer who climbs his last hill. It was his entrance, this,
into the new world whose call was tearing at his heartstrings. He
bought no catalogue, he asked no questions. From room to room he passed
with untiring footsteps. His whole being was filled with the
immeasurable relief, the almost passionate joy, of one who for the first
time is able to gratify a new and marvelous appetite. With his eyes,
his soul, all these late-born, strange, appreciative powers, he
ministered to an appetite which seemed unquenchable. It was dusk when
he came out, his cheeks burning, his eyes bright. He carried a new
music, a whole world of new joys with him, but his most vital sensation
was one of glowing and passionate sympathy. They were splendid, these
heroes who had seen the truth and had struggled to give life to it with
pencil or brush or chisel, that others, too, might see and understand. If only one could do one's little share! He walked slowly along, absorbed in his thoughts, unconscious even of
the direction in which his footsteps were taking him. When at last he
paused, he was outside a theatre. The name of Ibsen occupied a
prominent place upon the boards. From somewhere among the hidden cells
of his memory came a glimmering recollection--a word or two read at
random, an impression, only half understood, yet the germ of which had
survived. Ibsen! A prophet of truth, surely! He looked eagerly down
the placard for the announcements and the prices of admission. And then
a sudden cold douche of memory descended upon his new enthusiasms. There was Ellen! CHAPTER III

MR. ALFRED BURTON'S FAMILY

There certainly was Ellen! Like a man on his way to prison, Alfred
Burton took his place in a third-class carriage in his customary train
to Garden Green. Ned Miles, who travelled in the oil trade, came up and
smote him upon the shoulder. "Say, cocky, what have you been doing to yourself?" he demanded in
amazement. "Have you robbed a bank and going about in disguise, eh? Why, the missis won't know you!" Burton shrank a little back in his place. His eyes seemed filled with
some nameless distaste as he returned the other's gaze. "I have taken a dislike to my former style of dress," he replied simply,
"also to my moustache." "Taken a dislike--Lord love a duck!" his quondam friend exclaimed. "Strike me blind if I should have known you! Taken a dislike to
the--here, Alf, is this a game?" "Not at all," Burton answered quietly. "It is the truth. It is one of
those matters, I suppose," he continued, "which principally concern
oneself." "No need to get jumpy about it," Mr. Miles remarked, still a little
dazed. "Come in and have some farthing nap with the boys. They won't
recognize you in that get-up. We'll have a lark with them." Burton shook his head. Again he was unable to keep the distaste from
his eyes or tone. "Not to-night, thank you." The train was just moving, so Miles was obliged to hurry off, but at
Garden Green, Burton was compelled to run the gauntlet of their cheers
and mockery as he passed down the platform. Good sports and excellent
fellows he had thought them yesterday. To-day he had no words for them. He simply knew that they grated upon every nerve in his body and that he
loathed them. For the first time he began to be frightened. What was
this thing that had happened to him? How was it possible for him to
continue his daily life? As soon as he was out of the station, his troubles began again. A veil
seemed to have been torn from before his eyes. Just as in London every
face into which he had looked, every building which he had passed, had
seemed to him unfamiliar, appealing to an altered system of impressions,
so here, during that brief walk, a new disgust was born in him. The
showy-looking main street with its gingerbread buildings, all new and
glittering with paint, appalled him. The larger villas--self-conscious
types all reeking with plaster and false decorations--set him shivering. He turned into his own street and his heart sank. Something had indeed
touched his eyes and he saw new and terrible things. The row of houses
looked as though they had come out of a child's playbox. They were all
untrue, shoddy, uninviting. The waste space on the other side of the
unmade street, a repository for all the rubbish of the neighborhood,
brought a groan to his lips. He stopped before the gate of his own
little dwelling. There were yellow curtains in the window, tied back
with red velvet. Even with the latch of the gate in his hand, he
hesitated. A child in a spotted velveteen suit and a soiled lace
collar, who had been playing in the street, greeted him with an amazed
shout and then ran on ahead. "Mummy, come and look at Daddy!" the boy shrieked. "He's cut off all
the hair from his lip and he's got such funny clothes on! Do come and
look at his hat!" The child was puny, unprepossessing, and dirty. Worse tragedy than
this, Burton knew it. The woman who presently appeared to gaze at him
with open-mouthed wonder, was pretentiously and untidily dressed, with
some measure of good looks woefully obscured by a hard and unsympathetic
expression. Burton knew these things also. It flashed into his mind as
he stood there that her first attraction to him had been because she
resembled his ill-conceived idea of an actress. As a matter of fact,
she resembled much more closely her cousin, who was a barmaid. Burton
looked into the tragedy of his life and shivered. "What in the name of wonder's the meaning of this, Alfred?" his better
half demanded. "What are you standing there for, looking all struck of
a heap?" He made no reply. Speech, for the moment, was absolutely impossible. She stood and stared at him, her arms akimbo, disapproval written in her
face. Her hair was exceedingly untidy and there was a smut upon her
cheek. A soiled lace collar, fastened with an imitation diamond brooch,
had burst asunder. "What's come to your moustache?" she demanded. "And why are you dressed
like--like a house-painter on a Sunday?" Burton found his first gleam of consolation. A newly-discovered sense
of humor soothed him inexplicably. "Sorry you don't like my clothes," he replied. "You'll get used to
them." "Get used to them!" his better half repeated, almost hysterically. "Do
you mean to say you are going about like that?" "Something like it," Burton admitted. "No silk hat, no tail coat?" Burton shook his head gently. "I trust," he said, "that I have finished, for the present, at any rate,
with those most unsightly garments." "Come inside," Ellen ordered briskly. They passed into the little sitting-room. Burton glanced around him
with a half-frightened sense of apprehension. His memory, at any rate,
had not played him false. Everything was as bad--even worse than he had
imagined. The suite of furniture which was the joy of his wife's heart
had been, it is true, exceedingly cheap, but the stamped magenta velvet
was as crude in its coloring as his own discarded tie. He looked at the
fringed cloth upon the table, the framed oleographs upon the wall, and
he was absolutely compelled to close his eyes. There was not a single
thing anywhere which was not discordant. Mrs. Burton had not yet finished with the subject of clothes. The
distaste upon her face had rather increased. She looked her husband up
and down and her eyes grew bright with anger. "Well, I did think," she declared, vigorously, "that I was marrying a
man who looked like a gentleman, at least! Do you mean to say, Alfred,
that you mean to go into the city like that?" "Certainly," Burton replied. "And Ellen!" "Well?" "Since we are upon the subject of dress, may I have a few words? You
have given expression to your dislikes quite freely. You will not mind
if I do the same?" "Well, what have you got to say?" she demanded, belligerently. "I don't like your bun," Burton said firmly. "Don't like my what?" his wife shrieked, her hands flying to the back of
her head. "I don't like your bun--false hair, or whatever you call it," Burton
repeated. "I don't like that brooch with the false diamonds, and if you
can't afford a clean white blouse, I'd wear a colored one." Mrs. Burton's mouth was open but for the moment she failed to express
herself adequately. Her husband continued. "Your skirt is fashionable, I suppose, because it is very short and very
tight, but it makes you walk like a duck, and it leaves unconcealed so
much of your stockings that I think at least you should be sure that
they are free from holes." "You called my skirt smart only yesterday," Ellen gasped, "and I wasn't
going out of doors in these stockings." "It is just as bad to wear them indoors or outdoors, whether any one
sees them or whether any one does not," Burton insisted. "Your own
sense of self-respect should tell you that. Did you happen, by the bye,
to glance at the boy's collar when you put it on?" "What, little Alf now?" his mother faltered. "You're getting on to him
now, are you?" "I certainly should wish," Burton protested mildly, "that he was more
suitably dressed. A plain sailor-suit, or a tweed knickerbocker suit
with a flannel collar, would be better than those velveteen things with
that lace abomination. And why is he tugging at your skirt so?" "He is ready to start," Ellen replied sharply. "Haven't forgotten
you're taking us to the band, have you?" "I had forgotten it," Burton admitted, "but I am quite willing to go." Ellen turned towards the stairs. "Down in five minutes," she announced. "I hope you've finished all that
rubbishing talk. There's some tea in the tea-pot on the hob, if you
want any. Don't upset things." Burton drifted mechanically into the kitchen, noting its disorder with a
new disapproval. He sat on the edge of the table for a few moments,
gazing helplessly about him. Presently Ellen descended the stairs and
called to him. He took up his hat and followed his wife and the boy out
of the house. The latter eyed him wonderingly. "Look at pa's hat!" he shouted. "Oh, my!" Ellen stopped short upon her way to the gate. "Alfred," she exclaimed, "you don't mean to say you're coming out with
us like that--coming to the band, too, where we shall meet everyone?" "Certainly, my dear," Burton replied, placing the object of their
remarks fearlessly upon his head. "You may not be quite used to it yet,
but I can assure you that it is far more becoming and suitable than a
cheap silk hat, especially for an occasion like the present." Ellen opened her mouth and closed it again--it was perhaps wise! "Come on," she said abruptly. "Alfred wants to hear the soldier music
and we are late already. Take your father's hand." They started upon their pilgrimage. Burton, at any rate, spent a
miserable two hours. He hated the stiff, brand-new public garden in
which they walked, with its stunted trees, its burnt grass, its
artificial and weary flower-beds. He hated the people who stood about
as they did, listening to the band,--the giggling girls, the callow,
cigarette-smoking youths, the dressed up, unnatural replicas of his own
wife and himself, with whom he was occasionally forced to hold futile
conversation. He hated the sly punch in the ribs from one of his
quondam companions, the artful murmur about getting the missis to look
another way and the hurried visit to a neighboring public-house, the
affected anger and consequent jokes which followed upon their return. As they walked homeward, the cold ugliness of it all seemed almost to
paralyze his newly awakened senses. It was their social evening of the
week, looked forward to always by his wife, spoken of cheerfully by him
even last night, an evening when he might have had to bring home friends
to supper, to share a tin of sardines, a fragment of mutton, Dutch
cheese, and beer which he himself would have had to fetch from the
nearest public-house. He wiped his forehead and found that it was wet. Then Ellen broke the silence. "What I should like to know, Alfred, is--what's come to you?" she
commenced indignantly. "Not a word have you spoken all the evening--you
that there's no holding generally with your chaff and jokes. What Mr.
and Mrs. Johnson must have thought of you, I can't imagine, standing
there like a stick when they stopped to be civil for a few minutes, and
behaving as though you never even heard their asking us to go in and
have a bite of supper. What have we done, eh, little Alf and me? You
look at us as though we had turned into ogres. Out with it, my man. What's wrong?" "I am not--"

Burton stopped short. The lie of ill-health stuck in his throat. He
thirsted to tell the truth, but a new and gentle kindliness kept him
speechless. Ellen was beginning to get a little frightened. "What is it that's come to you, Alfred?" she again demanded. "Have you
lost your tongue or your wits or what?" "I do not know," he answered truthfully enough. His manner was so
entirely non-provocative that her resentment for a moment dropped. "What's changed you since yesterday?" she persisted. "What is it that
you don't like about us, anyway? What do you want us to do?" Burton sighed. He would have given a great deal to have been able to
prevaricate, but he could not. It was the truth alone which he could
speak. "I should like you," he said, "to take down your hair and throw away all
that is not real, to wash it until it is its natural color, to brush it
hard, and then do it up quite simply, without a net or anything. Then I
should like you to wash your face thoroughly in plain soap and water and
never again touch a powder-puff or that nasty red stuff you have on your
lips. I should like you to throw away those fancy blouses with the
imitation lace, which are ugly to start with, and which you can't afford
to have washed often enough, and I should like you to buy some plain
linen shirts and collars, a black tie, and a blue serge skirt made so
that you could walk in it naturally." Ellen did not at that moment need any rouge, nor any artificial means of
lending brightness to her eyes. What she really seemed to need was
something to keep her still. "Anything else?" she demanded, unsteadily. "Some thicker stockings, or, if not thicker, stockings without that
open-work stuff about them," Burton continued earnestly, warming now to
his task. "You see, the open-work places have all spread into little
holes, and one can't help noticing it, especially as your shoes are such
a bright yellow. That stuff that looks like lace at the bottom of your
petticoat has got all draggled. I should cut it off and throw it
away. Then I'd empty all that scent down the drain, and wear any sort
of gloves except those kid ones you have had cleaned so often." "And my hat?" she asked with trembling lips. "What about my hat? Don't
leave that out." "Burn it," he replied eagerly, "feathers and all. They've been dyed,
haven't they? more than once, and I think their present color is their
worst. It must be very uncomfortable to wear, too, with all those pins
sticking out of it. Colored glass they are made of, aren't they? They
are not pretty, you know. I'll buy you a hat, if you like, a plain felt
or straw, with just a few flowers. You'll look as nice again." "Finished?" He looked at her apprehensively. "There are one or two things about the house--" he commenced. Ellen began to talk--simply because she was unable to keep silent any
longer. The longer she talked, the more eloquent she became. When she
had finished, Burton had disappeared. She followed him to the door, and
again to the gate. Her voice was still ringing in his ears as he turned
the corner of the street. CHAPTER IV

A SHOCK TO MR. WADDINGTON

Punctually at nine o'clock on the following morning, Alfred Burton,
after a night spent in a very unsatisfactory lodging-house, hung up his
gray Homburg on the peg consecrated to the support of his discarded silk
hat, and prepared to plunge into his work. The office-boy, who had been
stricken dumb at his senior's appearance, recovered himself at last
sufficiently for speech. "My eye!" he exclaimed. "Whose clothes have you been stealing? What
have you been up to, eh? Committing a burglary or a murder?" Burton shook his head. "Nothing of the sort," he replied pleasantly. "The fact is I came to
the conclusion that my late style of dress, as you yourself somewhat
eloquently pointed out yesterday, was unbecoming." The boy seemed a little dazed. "You look half way between a toff and an artist!" he declared. "What's
it all about, anyway? Have you gone crazy?" "I don't think so," Burton replied. "I rather think I have come to my
senses. Have you got those last furniture accounts?" "No use starting on that job," Clarkson informed him, genially. "The
guvnor wants you down at the salesrooms, you've got to clerk for him." Burton looked very blank indeed. A flood of unpleasant recollections
assailed him. He had lied a good deal in the letting of houses, but he
had lied more still in the auction room. And to-day's sale! He knew
all about it! He knew a great deal more than under the circumstances it
was wise for him to know! "I quite forgot," he said slowly, "that there was a sale to-day. I
don't suppose Mr. Waddington would let you take my place, Clarkson?" "Not on your life!" the boy replied. "I've got to stay here and boss
the show. You'd better hurry along, too. It's Thursday morning and you
know the people come in early. Lord, what a guy you look!" Very slowly and very reluctantly Burton made his way through the gloomy
warehouse and into the salesrooms, which were approached from the street
by a separate entrance. He knew exactly what was before him and he
realized that it must be the end. Mr. Waddington, who had not yet
mounted the rostrum, saw him come in, stared at him for several moments
in his gray clothes and Homburg hat, and turned away to spit upon the
floor. A woman with a catalogue in her hand--evidently an intending
purchaser--gripped Burton by the arm. "I say, mister, you're the auctioneer's clerk, aren't you?" "I am," he admitted. "About that h'oil painting, now--the one of Gladstone. My old man's
fair dotty on Gladstone and it's his birthday to-morrow. If it's all
right, I thought I might make him a present. It says in the catalogue
'Artist unknown.' I suppose, as it's a real oil painting, it's worth a
bit, isn't it?" "It is not an oil painting at all," Burton said quietly. "Wot yer mean?" the woman demanded. "Here you are--lot number
17--'Interesting oil painting of the Right Honorable W. E. Gladstone,
artist unknown.'" Burton thrust the catalogue away from him with a sigh. "I am afraid," he admitted, "that the description can scarcely be said
to be entirely accurate. As a matter of fact, it is a colored
lithograph, very cleverly done but quite valueless. I dare say you
would find that there are thousands of them exactly like it." The woman stared at him suspiciously. "Why, your guvnor's just told me that the reserve upon it's two
guineas!" she exclaimed. "Mr. Waddington must have made a mistake," Burton replied, with a
sinking heart. "Look here," the woman insisted, "what is it worth, anyway?" "A few pence for the frame," Burton answered, hurrying off. The woman drew her shawl about her shoulders, threw her catalogue upon
the floor and made her way towards the door. "Not going to stay here to be swindled!" she declared loudly, looking
around her. "Colored lithograph, indeed, and put down in the catalogue
as an interesting oil painting! They must think us folks don't know
nothing. Cheating's the word, I say--cheating!" The woman's eye met the eye of Mr. Waddington as she stood for a moment
in the doorway before taking her departure. She raised her fist and
shook it. "Bah!" she exclaimed. "Ought to be ashamed of yourself! You and your
h'oil paintings!" Mr. Waddington was too far off to hear her words but the character of
her farewell was unmistakable! He glanced suspiciously towards his
chief clerk. Burton, however, had at that moment been button-holed by a
fidgety old gentleman who desired to ask him a few questions. "I am a little puzzled, sir," the old gentleman said, confidentially,
"about the absolute authenticity of this chippendale suite--lot number
101 in the catalogue. This sale is--er--um--advertised as being--" the
old gentleman turned over the pages of the catalogue quickly--"a sale of
the effects of the late Doctor Transome. That's so, eh?" "I believe the announcement is to that effect," Burton confessed,
hesitatingly. "Quite so," the little old gentleman continued. "Now I knew Dr.
Transome intimately, and he was, without the slightest doubt, a rare
judge of old furniture. I wouldn't mind following him anywhere, or
accepting his judgment about anything. He was very set upon not having
anything in his house that was not genuine. Now under any other
circumstances, mind you, I should have had my doubts about that suite,
but if you can assure me that it came from Dr. Transome's house, why,
there's no more to be said about it. I'm a bidder." Burton shook his head gravely. "I am sorry," he declared, "but the frontispiece of the catalogue is
certainly a little misleading. To tell you the truth, sir, there are
very few articles here from Dr. Transome's house at all. The bulk of
his effects were distributed among relatives. What we have here is a
portion of the kitchen and servant's bedroom furniture." "Then where on earth did all this dining-room and library furniture come
from?" the old gentleman demanded. Burton looked around him and back again at his questioner. There was no
evading the matter, however. "The great majority of it," Burton admitted, "has been sent in to us for
sale from dealers and manufacturers." The little old gentleman was annoyed. Instead of being grateful, as he
ought to have been, he visited his annoyance upon Burton, which was
unreasonable. "Deliberate swindling, sir--that's what I call it," he proclaimed,
rolling up the catalogue and striking the palm of his hand with it. "All the way from Camberwell I've come, entirely on the strength of what
turns out to be a misrepresentation. There's the bus fare there and
back--six-pence, mind you--and a wasted morning. Who's going to
recompense me, I should like to know? I'm not made of sixpences." Burton's hand slipped into his pocket. The little old gentleman
sniffed. "You needn't insult me, young fellow," he declared. "I've a friend or
two here and I'll set about letting them know the truth." He was as good as his word. The woman who had departed had also found
her sympathizers. Mr. Waddington watched the departure of a little
stream of people with a puzzled frown. "What's the matter with them all?" he muttered. "Come here, Burton." Burton, who had been standing a little in the background, endeavoring to
escape further observation until the commencement of the sale, obeyed
his master's summons promptly. "Can't reckon things up at all," Mr. Waddington confided. "Why aren't
you round and amongst 'em, Burton, eh? You're generally such a good 'un
at rubbing it into them. Why, the only two people I've seen you talk to
this morning have left the place! What's wrong with you, man?" "I only wish I knew," Burton replied, fervently. Mr. Waddingon scratched his chin. "What's the meaning of those clothes, eh?" he demanded. "You've lost
your appearance, Burton--that's what you've done. Not even a silk hat
on a sale day!" "I'm sorry," Burton answered. "To tell you the truth, I had forgotten
that it was a sale day." Mr. Waddington looked curiously at his assistant, and the longer he
looked, the more convinced he became that Burton was not himself. "Well," he said, "I suppose you can't always be gassing if you're not
feeling on the spot. Let's start the sale before any more people leave. Come on." Mr. Waddington led the way to the rostrum. Burton, with a sinking
heart, and a premonition of evil, took the place by his side. The first
few lots were put up and sold without event, but trouble came with lot
number 13. "Lot number 13--a magnificent oak bedroom--" the auctioneer began. "Eh? What? What is it, Burton?" "Stained deal," Burton interrupted, in a pained but audible whisper. "Stained deal bedroom suite, sir--not oak." Mr. Waddington seemed about to choke. He ignored the interruption,
however, and went on with his description of the lot. "A magnificent oak bedroom suite, complete and as good as new, been in
use for three weeks only. The deceased gentleman whose effects we are
disposing of, and who is known to have been a famous collector of
valuable furniture, told me himself that he found it at a farmhouse in
Northumberland. Look at it, ladies and gentlemen. Look at it. It'll
bear inspection. Shall we say forty-five guineas for a start?" Mr. Waddington paused expectantly. Burton leaned over from his place. "The suite is of stained deal," he said distinctly. "It has been very
cleverly treated by a new process to make it resemble old oak, but if
you examine it closely you will see that what I say is correct. I
regret that there has been an unfortunate error in the description." For a moment there was a tumult of voices and some laughter. Mr.
Waddington was red in the face. The veins about his temples were
swollen and the hammer in his hand showed a desire to descend on his
clerk's head. A small dealer had pulled out one of the drawers and was
examining it closely. "Stained deal it is, Mr. Auctioneer," he announced, standing up. "Call
a spade a spade and have done with it!" There was a little mingled laughter and cheers. Mr. Waddington
swallowed his anger and went on with the sale. "Call it what you like," he declared, indulgently. "Our clients send us
in these things with their own description and we haven't time to verify
them all--not likely. One bedroom suite, then--there you are. Now
then, Burton, you blithering idiot," he muttered savagely under his
breath, "if you can't hold your tongue I'll kick you out of your seat
Thirty pounds shall we say?" he continued, leaning forward persuasively. "Twenty pounds, then? The price makes no difference to me, only do
let's get on." The suite in question was knocked down at eight pounds ten. The sale
proceeded, but bidders were few. A spirit of distrust seemed to be in
the air. Most of the lots were knocked down to dummy bidders, which
meant that they were returned to the manufacturers on the following day. The frown on Mr. Waddington's face deepened. "See what you've done, you silly jackass!" he whispered to his
assistant, during a momentary pause in the proceedings. "There's
another little knot of people left. Here's old Sherwell coming in, half
drunk. Now hold your tongue if you can. I'll have him for the
dining-room suite, sure. If you interfere this time, I'll break your
head. . . . We come now, ladies and gentlemen, to the most important
lot of the day. Mr. Sherwell, sir, I am glad to see you. You're just
in time. There's a dining-room suite coming on, the only one I have to
offer, and such a suite as is very seldom on the market. One table, two
sideboards, and twelve chairs. Now, Mr. Sherwell, sir, look at the
table for yourself. You're a judge and I am willing to take your word. Did you ever see a finer, a more magnificent piece of mahogany? There
is no deception about it. Feel it, look at it, test it in any way you
like. I tell you, ladies and gentlemen, this is a lot I have examined
myself, and if I could afford it I'd have bought it privately. I made a
bid but the executors wouldn't listen to me. Now then, ladies and
gentlemen, make me an offer for the suite." "Fine bit o' wood," the half-intoxicated furniture dealer pronounced,
leaning up against the table and examining it with clumsy gravity. "A
genuine bit o' stuff." "You're right, Mr. Sherwell," the auctioneer agreed, impressively. "It
is a unique piece of wood, sir--a unique piece of wood, ladies and
gentlemen. Now how much shall we say for the suite? Lot number
85--twelve chairs, the table you are leaning up against, two sideboards,
and butler's tray. Shall we say ninety guineas, Mr. Sherwell? Will
you start the bidding in a reasonable manner and make it a hundred?" "Fifty!" Mr. Sherwell declared, striking the table with his fist. "I
say fifty!" Mr. Waddington for a moment looked pained. He laid down the hammer and
glanced around through the audience, as though appealing for their
sympathy. Then he shrugged his shoulders. Finally, he took up his
hammer again and sighed. "Very well, then," he consented, in a resigned tone, "we'll start it at
fifty, then. I don't know what's the matter with every one to-day, but
I'm giving you a turn, Mr. Sherwell, and I shall knock it down quick. Fifty guineas is bid for lot number 85. Going at fifty guineas!" Burton rose once more to his feet. "Does Mr. Sherwell understand," he asked, "that the remainder of the
suite is different entirely from the table?" Mr. Sherwell stared at the speaker, shifted his feet a little
unsteadily and gripped the table. "Certainly I don't," he replied,--"don't understand anything of the sort! Where is the rest of the suite, young man?" "Just behind you, sir," Burton pointed out, "up against the wall." Mr. Sherwell turned and looked at a miserable collection of gimcrack
articles piled up against the wall behind him. Then he consulted the
catalogue. "One mahogany dining-table, two sideboards, one butler's tray, twelve
chairs. These the chairs?" he asked, lifting one up. "Those are the chairs, sir," Burton admitted. Mr. Sherwell, with a
gesture of contempt, replaced upon the floor the one which he had
detached from its fellows. He leaned unsteadily across the table. "A dirty trick, Mr. Auctioneer," he declared. "Shan't come here any
more! Shan't buy anything! Ought to be ashamed of yourself. Yah!" Mr. Sherwell, feeling his way carefully out, made an impressive if not
very dignified exit. Mr. Waddington gripped his clerk by the arm. "Burton," he hissed under his breath, "get out of this before I throw
you down! Never let me see your idiot face again! If you're at the
office when I come back, I'll kill you! I'll clerk myself. Be off with
you!" Burton rose quietly and departed. As he left the room, he heard Mr.
Waddington volubly explaining that no deception was intended and that
the catalogue spoke for itself. Then he passed out into the street and
drew a little breath of relief. The shackles had fallen away. He was a
free man. Messrs. Waddington & Forbes had finished with him. CHAPTER V

BURTON'S NEW LIFE

Burton spent the rest of the day in most delightful fashion. He took
the Tube to South Kensington Museum, where he devoted himself for
several hours to the ecstatic appreciation of a small section of its
treasures. He lunched off some fruit and tea and bread and butter out
in the gardens, wandering about afterwards among the flower-beds and
paying especial and delighted attention to the lilac trees beyond the
Memorial. Towards evening he grew depressed. The memory of Ellen, of
little Alfred, and his gingerbread villa, became almost like a nightmare
to him. And then the light came! His great resolution was formed. With beating heart he turned to a stationer's shop, bought a sheet of
paper and an envelope, borrowed a pen and wrote:

My DEAR ELLEN,


I am not coming home for a short time. As you remarked, there is
something the matter with me. I don't know what it is. Perhaps in a
few days I shall find out. I shall send your money as usual on
Saturday, and hope that you and the boy will continue well. From your husband,

ALFRED BURTON. Burton sighed a long sigh of intense relief as he folded up and
addressed this epistle. Then he bought four stamps and sent it home. He was a free man. He had three pounds fifteen in his pocket, a trifle
of money in the savings-bank, no situation, and a wife and son to
support. The position was serious enough, yet never for a moment could
he regard it without a new elasticity of spirit and a certain reckless
optimism, the source of which he did not in the least understand. He
was to learn before long, however, that moods and their resulting effect
upon the spirit were part of the penalty which he must pay for the
greater variety of his new life. He took a tiny bedroom somewhere Westminster way--a room in a large,
solemn-looking house, decayed and shabby, but still showing traces of
its former splendor. That night he saw an Ibsen play from the front row
of a deserted gallery, and afterwards, in melancholy mood, he walked
homeward along the Embankment by the moonlight. For the first time in
life he had come face to face with a condition of which he had had no
previous experience--the condition of intellectual pessimism. He was
depressed because in this new and more spontaneous world, so full of
undreamed-of beauties, so exquisitely stimulating to his new powers of
appreciation, he had found something which he did not understand. Truth
for the first time had seemed unpleasant, not only in its effects but in
itself. The problem was beyond him. Nevertheless, he pulled his bed up
to the window, from which he could catch a glimpse of the varied lights
of the city, and fell asleep. In the morning he decided to seek for a situation. A very reasonable
instinct led him to avoid all such houses as Messrs. Waddington &
Forbes. He made his way instead to the offices of a firm who were quite
at the top of their profession. A junior partner accorded him a
moment's interview. He was civil but to the point. "There is no opening whatever in this firm," he declared, "for any one
who has been in the employment of Messrs. Waddington & Forbes. Good
morning!" On the doorstep, Burton ran into the arms of Mr. Lynn, who recognized
him at once. "Say, young man," he exclaimed, holding out his hand, "I am much obliged
for that recommendation of yours to these people! I have taken a house
in Connaught Place--a real nice house it is, too. Come and see
us--number 17. The wife and daughters land to-morrow." "Thank you very much," Burton answered. "I am glad you are fixed up
comfortably." Mr. Lynn laid his hand upon the young man's shoulder. He looked at him
curiously. He was an observant person and much interested in his
fellow-creatures. "Kind of change in you, isn't there?" he asked, in a puzzled manner. "I
scarcely recognized you at first." Burton made no reply. The conventional falsehood which rose to his
lips, died away before it was uttered. "Look here," Mr. Lynn continued, "you take a word of advice from me. You chuck those people, Waddington & Forbes. They're wrong 'uns--won't
do you a bit of good. Get another job. So long, and don't forget to
look us up." Mr. Lynn passed on his way into the office. He ran into the junior
partner, who greeted him warmly. "Say, do you know that young man who's just gone out?" the former
inquired. The junior partner shook his head. "Never seen him before," he replied. "He came here looking for a job." "Is that so?" Mr. Lynn asked with interest. "Well, I hope you gave it
to him?" Young Mr. Miller shook his head. "He came from the wrong school for us," he declared. "Regular thieves,
the people he was with. By the bye, didn't they nearly let you that
death-trap of old Lady Idlemay's?" "Yes, and he happens to be just the young man," Mr. Lynn asserted,
removing the cigar from his mouth, "who prevented my taking it, or at
any rate having to part with a handsome deposit. I was sent down there
with him and at first he cracked it up like a real hustler. He got me
so fixed that I had practically made up my mind and was ready to sign
any reasonable agreement. Then he suddenly seemed to turn round. He
looked me straight in the face and told me about the typhoid and all of
it, explained that it wasn't the business of the firm to let houses
likely to interest me, and wound up by giving me your name and address
and recommending me to come to you." "You surprise me very much indeed," Mr. Miller admitted. "Under the
circumstances, it is scarcely to be wondered at that he is out of
employment. Old Waddington wouldn't have much use for a man like that." "I shouldn't be surprised," Mr. Lynn remarked thoughtfully, "if it was
through my affair that he got the sack. Couldn't you do something for
him, Mr. Miller--to oblige me, eh?" "If he calls again," Mr. Miller promised, "I will do my best." But Burton did not call again. He made various efforts to obtain a
situation in other directions, without the slightest result. Then he
gave it up. He became a wanderer about London, one of her children who
watched her with thoughtful eyes at all times and hours of the day and
night. He saw the pink dawn glimmer through the trees in St. James's
Park. He saw the bridges empty, the smoke-stained buildings deserted by
their inhabitants, with St. Paul's in the background like a sentinel
watching over the sleeping world. He heard the crash and roar of life
die away and he watched like an anxious prophet while the city slept. He looked upon the stereotyped horrors of the Embankment, vitalized and
actual to him now in the light of his new understanding. He wandered
with the first gleam of light among the flower-beds of the Park,
sniffing with joy at the late hyacinths, revelling in the cool, sweet
softness of the unpolluted air. Then he listened to the awakening, to
the birth of the day. He heard it from the bridges, from London Bridge
and Westminster Bridge, over which thundered the great vans fresh from
the country, on their way to Covent Garden. He stood in front of the
Mansion House and watched the thin, black stream of the earliest corners
grow into a surging, black-coated torrent. There were things which made
him sorry and there were things which made him glad. On the whole,
however, his isolated contemplation of what for so long he had taken as
a matter of course depressed him. Life was unutterably and intensely
selfish. Every little unit in that seething mass was so entirely, so
strangely self-centered. None of them had any real love or friendliness
for the millions who toiled around them, no one seemed to have time to
take his eyes from his own work and his own interests. Burton became
more and more depressed as the days passed. Then he closed his eyes and
tried an antidote. He abandoned this study of his fellow-creatures and
plunged once more into the museums, sated himself with the eternal
beauties, and came out to resume his place amid the tumultuous throng
with rested nerves and a beatific smile upon his lips. It mattered so
little, his welfare of to-day or to-morrow--whether he went hungry or
satisfied to bed! The other things were in his heart. He saw the
truth. One day he met his late employer. Mr. Waddington was not, in his way,
an ill-natured man, and he stopped short upon the pavement. Burton's
new suit was not wearing well. It showed signs of exposure to the
weather. The young man himself was thin and pale. It was not for Mr.
Waddington to appreciate the soft brilliance of his eyes, the altered
curves of his lips. From his intensely practical point of view, his
late employee was certainly in low water. "Hullo, Burton!" he exclaimed, coming to a standstill and taking the
pipe from his mouth. "How do you do, sir?" Burton replied, civilly. Getting on all right, eh? 