

E-text prepared by MRK



NOBODY'S MAN

by

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

1921







NOBODY'S MAN

CHAPTER I

Andrew Tallente stepped out of the quaint little train on to the
flower-bedecked platform of this Devonshire hamlet amongst the hills, to
receive a surprise so immeasurable that for a moment he could do nothing
but gaze silently at the tall, ungainly figure whose unpleasant smile
betrayed the fact that this meeting was not altogether accidental so far
as he was concerned. "Miller!" he exclaimed, a little aimlessly. "Why not?" was the almost challenging reply. "You are not the only
great statesman who needs to step off the treadmill now and then." There was a certain quiet contempt in Tallente's uplifted eyebrows. The
contrast between the two men, momentarily isolated on the little
platform, was striking and extreme. Tallente had the bearing, the voice
and the manner which were his by heritage, education and natural
culture. Miller, who was the son of a postman in a small Scotch town,
an exhibitioner so far as regards his education, and a mimic where
social gifts were concerned, had all the aggressive bumptiousness of the
successful man who has wit enough to perceive his shortcomings. In his
ill-chosen tourist clothes, untidy collar and badly arranged tie, he
presented a contrast to his companion of which he seemed, in a way,
bitterly conscious. "You are staying near here?" Tallente enquired civilly. "Over near Lynton. Dartrey has a cottage there. I came down
yesterday." "Surely you were in Hellesfield the day before yesterday?" Miller smiled ill-naturedly. "I was," he admitted, "and I flatter myself that I was able to make the
speech which settled your chances in that direction." Tallente permitted a slight note of scorn to creep into his tone. "It was not your eloquence," he said, "or your arguments, which brought
failure upon me. It was partly your lies and partly your tactics." An unwholesome flush rose in the other's face. "Lies?" he repeated, a little truculently. Tallente looked him up and down. The station master was approaching
now, the whistle had blown, their conversation was at an end. "I said lies," Tallente observed, "most advisedly." The train was
already on the move, and the departing passenger was compelled to step
hurriedly into a carriage. Tallente, waited upon by the obsequious
station master, strolled across the line to where his car was waiting. It was not until his arrival there that he realised that Miller had
offered him no explanation as to his presence on the platform of this
tiny wayside station. "Did you notice the person with whom I was talking?" he asked the
station master. "A tall, thin gentleman in knickerbockers? Yes, sir," the man replied. "Part of your description is correct," Tallente remarked drily. "Do you
know what he was doing here?" "Been down to your house, I believe, sir. He arrived by the early train
this morning and asked the way to the Manor." "To my house?" Tallente repeated incredulously. "It was the Manor he asked for, sir," the station master assured his
questioner. "Begging your pardon, sir, is it true that he was Miller,
the Socialist M.P.?" "True enough," was the brief reply. "What of it?" The man coughed as he deposited the dispatch box which he had been
carrying on the seat of the waiting car. "They think a lot of him down in these parts, sir," he observed, a
little apologetically. Tallente made no answer to the station master's last speech and merely
waved his hand a little mechanically as the car drove off. His mind was
already busy with the problem suggested by Miller's appearance in these
parts. For the first few minutes of his drive he was back again in the
turmoil which he had left. Then with a little shrug of the shoulders he
abandoned this new enigma. Its solution must be close at hand. Arrived at the edge of the dusty, white strip of road along which he had
travelled over the moors from the station, Tallente leaned forward and
watched the unfolding panorama below with a little start of surprise. He had passed through acres of yellowing gorse, of purple heather and
mossy turf, fragrant with the aromatic perfume of sun-baked herbiage. In the distance, the moorland reared itself into strange promontories,
out-flung to the sea. On his right, a little farm, with its cluster of
out-buildings, nestled in the bosom of the hills. On either side, the
fields still stretched upward like patchwork to a clear sky, but below,
down into the hollow, blotting out all that might lie beneath, was a
curious sea of rolling white mist, soft and fleecy yet impenetrable. Tallente, who had seen very little of this newly chosen country home of
his, had the feeling, as the car crept slowly downward, of one about to
plunge into a new life, to penetrate into an unknown world. A man of
extraordinarily sensitive perceptions, leading him often outside the
political world in which he fought the battle of life, he was conscious
of a curious and grim premonition as the car, crawling down the
precipitous hillside, approached and was enveloped in the grey shroud. The world which a few moments before had seemed so wonderful, the
sunlight, the distant view of the sea, the perfumes of flowers and
shrubs, had all gone. The car was crawling along a rough and stony
road, between hedges dripping with moisture and trees dimly seen like
spectres. At last, about three-quarters of the way down to the sea,
after an abrupt turn, they entered a winding avenue and emerged on to a
terrace. The chauffeur, who had felt the strain of the drive, ran a
little past the front door and pulled up in front of an uncurtained
window. Tallente glanced in, dazzled a little at first by the
unexpected lamplight. Then he understood the premonition which had sat
shivering in his heart during the long descent. The mist, which had hung like a spectral curtain over the little demesne
of Martinhoe Manor, had almost entirely disappeared when, at a few
minutes before eight, with all traces of his long journey obliterated,
Andrew Tallente stepped out on to the stone-flagged terrace and looked
out across the little bay below. The top of the red sandstone cliff
opposite was still wreathed with mists, but the sunlight lay upon the
tennis lawn, the flower gardens below, and the rocks almost covered by
the full, swelling tide. Tall, and looking slimmer than ever in his
plain dinner garb, there were some indications of an hour of strange and
unexpected suffering in the tired face of the man who gazed out in
somewhat dazed fashion at the little panorama which he had been looking
forward so eagerly to seeing again. Throughout the long journey down
from town, he had felt an unusual and almost boyish enthusiasm for his
coming holiday. He had thought of his tennis racquet and fishing rods,
wondered about his golf clubs and his guns. Even the unexpected
encounter with Miller had done little more than leave an unpleasant
taste in his mouth. And then, on his way down from "up over," as the
natives called that little strip of moorland overhead, he had vanished
into the mist and had come out into another world. "Andrew! So you are out here? Why did you not come to my room? Surely
your train was very punctual?" Tallente remained for a moment tense and motionless. Then he turned
around. The woman who stood upon the threshold of the house, framed
with a little cascade of drooping roses, sought for his eyes almost
hungrily. He realised how she must be feeling. A dormant vein of
cynicism parted his lips as he held her fingers for a moment. His tone
and his manner were quite natural. "We were, I believe, unusually punctual," he admitted. "What an
extraordinary mist! Up over there was no sign of it at all." She shivered. Her eyes were still watching his face, seeking for an
answer to her unasked question. Blue eyes they were, which had been
beautiful in their day, a little hard and anxious now. She wore a white
dress, simple with the simplicity of supreme and expensive art. A rope
of pearls was her only ornament. Her hair was somewhat elaborately
coiffured, there was a touch of rouge upon her cheeks, and the
unscreened evening sunlight was scarcely kind to her rather wan features
and carefully arranged complexion. She still had her claims to beauty,
however. Tallente admitted that to himself as he stood there appraising
her, with a strange and almost impersonal regard,--his wife of thirteen
years. She was beautiful, notwithstanding the strained look of anxiety
which at that moment disfigured her face, the lurking fear which made
her voice sound artificial, the nervousness which every moment made
fresh demands upon her self-restraint. "It came up from the sea," she said. "One moment Tony and I were
sitting out under the trees to keep away from the sun, and the next we
were driven shivering indoors; It was just like running into a fog bank
in the middle of the Atlantic on a hot summer's day." "I found the difference in temperature amazing," he observed. "I, too,
dropped from the sunshine into a strange chill." She tried to get rid of the subject. "So you lost your seat," she said. "I am very sorry. Tell me how it
happened?" He shrugged his shoulders. "The Democratic Party made up their mind, for some reason or other, that
I shouldn't sit. The Labour Party generally were not thinking of
running a candidate. I was to have been returned unopposed, in
acknowledgment of my work on the Nationalisation Bill. The Democrats,
however, ratted. They put up a man at the last moment, and--well, you
know the result--I lost." "I don't understand English politics," she confessed, "but I thought you
were almost a Labour man yourself." "I am practically," he replied. "I don't know, even now, what made them
oppose me." "What about the future?" "My plans are not wholly made." For the first time, an old and passionate ambition prevailed against the
thrall of the moment. "One of the papers this morning," she said eagerly, "suggested that you
might be offered a peerage." "I saw it," he acknowledged. "It was in the Sun. I was once
unfortunate enough to be on the committee of a club which blackballed
the editor." Her mouth hardened a little. "But you haven't forgotten your promise?" "'Bargain' shall we call it?" he replied. "No, I have not forgotten." "Tony says you could have a peerage whenever you liked." "Then I suppose it must be so. Just at present I am not prepared to
write 'finis' to my political career." The butler announced dinner. Tallente offered his arm and they passed
through the homely little hall into the dining room beyond. Stella came
to a sudden standstill as they crossed the threshold. "Why is the table laid for two only?" she demanded. "Mr. Palliser is
here." "I was obliged to send Tony away--on important business," Tallente
intervened. "He left about an hour ago." Once more the terror was upon her. The fingers which gripped her napkin
trembled. Her eyes, filled with fierce enquiry, were fixed upon her
husband's as he took his place in leisurely fashion and glanced at the
menu. "Obliged to send Tony away?" she repeated. "I don't understand. He
told me that he had several days' work here with you." "Something intervened," he murmured. "Why didn't you wire?" she faltered, almost under her breath. "He
couldn't have had any time to get ready." Andrew Tallente looked at his wife across the bowl of floating flowers. "Ah!" he exclaimed. "I didn't think of that. But in any case I did not
make up my mind until I arrived that it was necessary for him to go." There was silence for a time, an unsatisfactory and in some respects an
unnatural silence. Tallente trifled with his _hors d'oeuvres_ and was
inquisitive about the sauce with which his fish was flavoured. Stella
sent away her plate untouched, but drank two glasses of champagne. The
light came back to her eyes, she found courage again. After all, she
was independent of this man, independent even of his name. She looked
across the table at him appraisingly. He was still sufficiently
good-looking, lithe of frame and muscular, with features well-cut
although a little irregular in outline. Time, however, and anxious work
were beginning to leave their marks. His hair was grey at the sides,
there were deep lines in his face, he seemed to her fancy to have
shrunken a little during the last few years. He had still the languid,
high-bred voice which she had always admired so munch, the same coolness
of manner and quiet dignity. He was a personable man, but after all he
was a failure. His career, so far as she could judge it, was at an end. She was a fool to imagine, even for a moment, that her whole future lay
in his keeping. "Have you any plans?" she asked him presently. "Another constituency?" He smiled a little wearily. For once he spoke quite naturally. "The only plan I have formulated at present is to rest for a time," he
admitted. She drank another glass of champagne and felt almost confident. She
told him the small events of the sparsely populated neighbourhood, spoke
of the lack of water in the trout stream, the improvement in the golf
links, the pheasants which a near-by landowner was turning down. They
were comparative newcomers and had seen as yet little of their
neighbours. "I was told," she concluded, "that the great lady of the neighbourhood
was to have called upon me this afternoon. I waited in but she didn't
come." "And who is that?" he enquired. "Lady Jane Partington of Woolhanger--a daughter of the Duke of
Barminster. Woolhanger was left to her by an old aunt, and they say
that she never leaves the place." "An elderly lady?" he asked, merely with an intent of prolonging a
harmless subject of conversation. "On the contrary, quite young," his wife replied. "She seems to be a
sort of bachelor-spinster, who lives out in that lonely place without a
chaperon and rules the neighborhood. You ought to make friends with
her, Andrew. They say that she is half a Socialist.--By the by, how
long are we going to stay down here?" "We will discuss that presently," he answered. The service of dinner came to its appointed end. Tallente drank one
glass of port alone. Then he rose, left the room by the French windows,
passed along the terrace and looked in at the drawing-room, where Stella
was lingering over her coffee. "Will you walk with me as far as the lookout?" he invited. "Your maid
can bring you a cloak if you are likely to be cold." She responded a little ungraciously, but appeared a few minutes later, a
filmy shawl of lace covering her bare shoulders. She walked by his side
to the end of the terrace, along the curving walk through the
plantation, and by the sea wall to the flagged space where some seats
and a table had been fixed. Four hundred feet below, the sea was
beating against jagged rocks. The moon was late and it was almost dark. She leaned over and he stood by her side. "Stella," he said, "you asked me at dinner when we were leaving here. You are leaving to-morrow morning by the twelve-thirty train." "What do you mean?" she demanded, with a sudden sinking of the heart. "Please do not ask," he replied. "You know and I know. It is not my
wish to make public the story of our--disagreement." She was silent for several moments, looking over into the black gulf
below, watching the swirl of the sea, listening to its dull booming
against the distant rocks, the shriek of the backward-dragged pebbles. An owl flew out from some secret place in the cliffs and wheeled across
the bay. She drew her shawl around her with a little shiver. "So this is the end," she answered. "No doubt, in my way," he reflected, "I have been as great a
disappointment to you as you to me. You brought me your great wealth,
believing that I could use it towards securing just what you desired in
the way of social position. Perhaps that might have come but for the
war. Now I have become rather a failure." "There was no necessity for you ever to have gone soldiering," she
reminded him a little hardly. "As you say," he acquiesced. "Still, I went and I do not regret it. I
might even remind you that I met with some success." "Pooh!" she scoffed. "What is the use of a few military distinctions? What are an M.C. and a D.S.O. and a few French and Belgian orders going
to do for me? You know I want other things. They told me when I
married you," she went on, warming with her own sense of injury, "that
you were certain to be Prime Minister. They told me that the Coalition
Party couldn't do without you, that you were the only effective link
between them and Labour. You had only to play your cards properly and
you could have pushed out Horlock whenever you liked. And now see what
a mess you have made of things! You have built up Horlock's party for
him, he offers you an insignificant post in the Cabinet, and you can't
even win your seat in Parliament." "Your epitome of my later political career has its weak points, but I
dare say, from your point of view, you have every reason for complaint,"
he observed. "Since I have failed to procure for you the position you
desire, our parting will have a perfectly natural appearance. Your
fortune is unimpaired--you cannot say that I have been extravagant--and
I assure you that I shall not regret my return to poverty." "But you won't be able to live," she said bluntly. "You haven't any
income at all." "Believe me," he answered quietly, "you exaggerate my poverty. In any
case, it is not your concern." "You wouldn't--"

She paused. She was a woman of not very keen perceptions, but she
realised that if she were to proceed with the offer which was half
framed in her mind, the man by her side, with his, to her outlook,
distorted sense of honour, would become her enemy. She shrugged her
shoulders, and turning towards him, held out her hand. "It is the end, then," she said. "Well, Andrew, I did my best according
to my lights, and I failed. Will you shake hands?" He shook his head. "I cannot, Stella. Let us agree to part here. We know all there is to
be known of one another, and we shall be able to say good-by without
regret." She drifted slowly away from him. He watched her figure pass in and out
among the trees. She was unashamed, perhaps relieved,--probably, he
reflected, as he watched her enter the house, already making her plans
for a more successful future. He turned away and looked downwards. The
darkness seemed, if possible, to have become a little more intense, the
moaning of the sea more insistent. Little showers of white spray
enlaced the sombre rocks. The owl came back from his mysterious
journey, hovered for a moment over the cliff and entered his secret
home. Behind him, the lights in the house went out, one by one. Suddenly he felt a grip upon his shoulder, a hot breath upon his cheek. It was Stella, returned dishevelled, her lace scarf streaming behind,
her eyes lit with horror. "Andrew!" she cried. "It came over me--just
as I entered the house! What have you done with Anthony?" CHAPTER II

Tallente's first impressions of Jane Partington were that an exceedingly
attractive but somewhat imperious young woman had surprised him in a
most undignified position. She had come cantering down the drive on a
horse which, by comparison with the Exmoor ponies which every one rode
in those parts, had seemed gigantic, and, finding a difficulty in making
her presence known, had motioned to him with her whip. He climbed down
from the steps where he had been busy fastening up some roses, removed a
nail from his mouth and came towards her. "How is it that I can make no one hear?" she asked. "Do you know if
Mrs. Tallente is at home?" Tallente was in no hurry to reply. He was busy taking in a variety of
pleasant impressions. Notwithstanding the severely cut riding habit and
the hard little hat, he decided that he had never looked into a more
attractively feminine face. For some occult reason, unconnected, he was
sure, with the use of any skin food or face cream, this young woman who
had the reputation of living out of doors, winter and summer, had a
complexion which, notwithstanding its faint shade of tan, would have
passed muster for delicacy and clearness in any Mayfair drawing-room. Her eyes were soft and brown, her hair a darker shade of the same
colour. Her mouth, for all its firmness, was soft and pleasantly
curved. Her tone, though a trifle imperative, was kindly, gracious and
full of musical quality. Her figure was moderately slim, but
indistinguishable at that moment under her long coat. She possessed a
curious air of physical well-being, the well-being of a woman who has
found and is enjoying what she seeks in life. "Won't you tell me why I can make no one hear?" she repeated, still
good-naturedly but frowning slightly at his silence. "Mrs. Tallente is in London," he announced. "She has taken most of the
establishment with her." The visitor fumbled in her side pocket and produced a diminutive ivory
case. She withdrew a card and handed it to Tallente, with a glance at
his gloved hands. "Will you give this to the butler?" she begged. "Tell him to tell his
mistress that I was sorry not to find her at home." "The butler," Tallente explained, "has gone for the milk. He shall have
the card immediately on his return." She looked at him for a moment and then smiled. "Do forgive me," she said. "I believe you are Mr. Tallente?" He drew off his gloves and shook hands. "How did you guess that?" he asked. "From the illustrated papers, of course," she answered. "I have come to
the conclusion that you must be a very vain man, I have seen so many
pictures of you lately." "A matter of snapshots," he replied, "for which, as a rule, the victim
is not responsible. You should abjure such a journalistic vice as
picture papers." "Why?" she laughed. "They lead to such pleasant surprises. I had been
led to believe, for instance, by studying the Daily Mirror, that you
were quite an elderly person with a squint." "I am becoming self-conscious," he confessed. "Won't you come in? There is a boy somewhere about the premises who can look after your
horse, and I shall be able to give you some tea as soon as Robert gets
back with the milk." He cooeed to the boy, who came up from one of the lower shelves of
garden, and she followed him into the hall. He looked around him for a
moment in some perplexity. "I wonder whether you would mind coming into my study?" he suggested. "I am here quite alone for the present, and it is the only room I use." She followed him down a long passage into a small apartment at the
extreme end of the house. "You are like me," she said. "I keep most of my rooms shut up and live
in my den. A lonely person needs so much atmosphere." "Rather a pigsty, isn't it?" he remarked, sweeping a heap of books from
a chair. "I am without a secretary just now--in fact," he went on, with
a little burst of confidence engendered by her friendly attitude, "we
are in a mess altogether." She laughed softly, leaning back amongst the cushions of the chair and
looking around the room, her kindly eyes filled with interest. "It is a most characteristic mess," she declared. "I am sure an
interviewer would give anything for this glimpse into your tastes and
habits. Golf clubs, all cleaned up and ready for action; trout rod,
newly-waxed at the joints--you must try my stream, there is no water in
yours; tennis racquets in a very excellent press--I wonder whether
you're too good for a single with me some day? Typewriter--rather
dusty. I don't believe that you can use it." "I can't," he admitted. "I have been writing my letters by hand for the
last two days." She sighed. "Men are helpless creatures! Fancy a great politician unable to write
his own letters! What has become of your secretary?" Tallente threw some books to the floor and seated himself in the vacant
easy-chair. "I shall begin to think," he said, a little querulously, "that you don't
read the newspapers. My secretary, according to that portion of the
Press which guarantees to provide full value for the smallest copper
coin, has 'disappeared'." "Really?" she exclaimed. "He or she?" "He--the Honourable Anthony Palliser by name, son of Stobart Palliser,
who was at Eton with me." She nodded. "I expect I know his mother. What exactly do you mean by
'disappeared'?" Tallente was looking out of the window. A slight hardness had crept
into his tone and manner. He had the air of one reciting a story. "The young man and I differed last Tuesday night," he said. "In the
language of the novelists, he walked out into the night and disappeared. Only an hour before dinner, too. Nothing has been heard of him since." "What a fatuous thing to do!" she remarked. "Shall you have to get
another secretary?" "Presently," he assented. "Just for the moment I am rather enjoying
doing nothing." She leaned back amongst the cushions of her chair and looked across at
him with interest, an interest which presently drifted into sympathy. Even the lightness of his tone could not mask the inwritten weariness of
the man, the tired droop of the mouth, and the lacklustre eyes. "Do you know," she said, "I have never been more intrigued than when I
heard you were really coming down here. Last summer I was in
Scotland--in fact I have been away every time the Manor has been open. I am so anxious to know whether you like this part of the world." "I like it so much," he replied, "that I feel like settling here for the
rest of my life." She shook her head. "You will never be able to do that," she said, "at least not for many
years. The country will need so much of your time. But it is
delightful to think that you may come here for your holidays." "If you read the newspapers," he remarked, a little grimly, "you might
not be so sure that the country is clamouring for my services." She waved away his speech with a little gesture of contempt. "Rubbish! Your defeat at Hellesfield was a matter of political jobbery. Any one could see through that. Horlock ought never to have sent you
there. He ought to have found you a perfectly safe seat, and of course
he will have to do it." He shook his head. "I am not so sure. Horlock resents my defeat almost as though it were a
personal matter. Besides, it is an age of young men, Lady Jane." "Young men!" she scoffed. "But you are young." "Am I?" he answered, a little sadly. "I am not feeling it just now. Besides, there is something wrong about my enthusiasms. They are
becoming altogether too pastoral. I am rather thinking of taking up the
cultivation of roses and of making a terraced garden down to the sea. Do you know anything about gardening, Lady Jane?" "Of course I do," she answered, a little impatiently. "A very excellent
hobby it is for women and dreamers and elderly men. There is plenty of
time for you to take up such a pursuit when you have finished your
work." "Fifteen thousand intelligent voters have just done their best to tell
me that it is already finished," he sighed. She made a little grimace. "Am I going to be disappointed in you, I wonder?" she asked. "I don't
think so. You surely wouldn't let a little affair like one election
drive you out of public life? It was so obvious that you were made the
victim for Horlock's growing unpopularity in the country. Haven't you
realised that yourself--or perhaps you don't care to talk about these
things to an ignoramus such as I am?" "Please don't believe that," he begged hastily. "I think yours is
really the common-sense view of the matter. Only," he went on, "I have
always represented, amongst the coalitionists, the moderate Socialist,
the views of those men who recognise the power and force of the coming
democracy, and desire to have legislation attuned to it. Yet it was the
Democratic vote which upset me at Hellesfield." "That was entirely a matter of faction," she persisted. "That horrible
person Miller was sent down there, for some reason or other, to make
trouble. I believe if the election had been delayed another week, and
you had been able to make two more speeches like you did at the Corn
Exchange, you would have got in." He looked at her in some surprise. "That is exactly what I thought myself," he agreed. "How on earth do
you come to know all these things?" "I take an interest in your career," she said, smiling at him, "and I
hate to see you so dejected without cause." He felt a little thrill at her words. A queer new sense of
companionship stirred in his pulses. The bitterness of his suppressed
disappointment was suddenly soothed. There was something of the
excitement of the discoverer, too, in these new sensations. It seemed
to him that he was finding something which had been choked out of his
life and which was yet a real and natural part of it. "You will make an awful nuisance of me if you don't mind," he warned
her. "If you encourage me like this, you will develop the most juvenile
of all failings--you will make me want to talk about myself. I am
beginning to feel terribly egotistical already." She leaned a little towards him. Her mouth was soft with sweet and
feminine tenderness, her eyes warm with kindness. "That is just what I hoped I might succeed in doing," she declared. "I
have been interested in your career ever since I had the faintest idea
of what politics meant. You could not give me a greater happiness than
to talk to me--about yourself." CHAPTER III

Very soon tea was brought in. The homely service of the meal, and
Robert's plain clothes, seemed to demand some sort of explanation. It
was she who provided the opening. "Will your wife be long away?" she enquired. Tallente looked at his guest thoughtfully. She was pouring out tea from
an ordinary brown earthenware pot with an air of complete absorption in
her task. The friendliness of her seemed somehow to warm the atmosphere
of the room, even as her sympathy had stolen into the frozen places of
his life. For the moment he ignored her question. His eyes appraised
her critically, reminiscently. There was something vaguely familiar in
the frank sweetness of her tone and manner. "I am going to make the most idiotically commonplace remark," he said. "I cannot believe that this is the first time we have met." "It isn't," she replied, helping herself to strawberry

"Are you in earnest?" he asked, puzzled. "Do you mean that I have spoken to you?" "Absolutely!" "Not only that but you have made me a present." He searched the recesses of his memory in vain. She smiled at his
perplexity and began to count on her fingers. "Let me see," she said, "exactly fourteen years ago you arrived in Paris
from London on a confidential mission to a certain person." "To Lord Peters!" he exclaimed. She nodded. "You had half an hour to spare after you had finished your business, and
you begged to see the young people. Maggie Peters was always a friend
of yours. You came into the morning-room and I was there." "You?" "Yes! I was at school in Paris, and I was spending my half-holiday with
Maggie." "The little brown girl!" he murmured. "I never heard your name, and
when I sent the chocolates I had to send them to 'the young lady in
brown.' Of course I remember! But your hair was down your back, you had
freckles, and you were as silent as a mouse." "You see how much better my memory is than yours," she laughed. "I am not so sure," he objected. "You took me for the gardener just
now." "Not when you came down the steps," she protested, "and besides, it is
your own fault for wearing such atrociously old clothes." "They shall be given away to-morrow," he promised. "I should think so," she replied. "And you might part with the battered
straw hat you were wearing, at the same time." "It shall be done," he promised meekly. She became reminiscent. "We were all so interested in you in those days. Lord Peters told us,
after you were gone, that some day you would be Prime Minister." "I am afraid," he sighed, "that I have disappointed most of my friends." "You have disappointed no one," she assured him firmly. "You will
disappoint no one. You are the one person in politics who has kept a
steadfast course, and if you have lost ground a little in the country,
and slipped out of people's political appreciation during the last
decade, don't we all know why? Every one of your friends--and your
wife, of course," she put in hastily, "must be proud that you have lost
ground. There isn't another man in the country who gave up a great
political career to learn his drill in a cadet corps, who actually
served in the trenches through the most terrible battles of the war, and
came out of it a Brigadier-General with all your distinctions." He felt his heart suddenly swell. No one had ever spoken to him like
this. The newspapers had been complimentary for a day and had accepted
the verdict of circumstances the next. His wife had simply been the
reflex of other people's opinion and the trend of events. "You make me feel," he told her earnestly, "almost for the first time,
that after all it was worth while." The slight unsteadiness of his tone at first surprised, then brought her
almost to the point of confusion. Their eyes met--a startled glance on
her part, merely to assure herself that he was in earnest--and
afterwards there was a moment's embarrassment. She accepted a cigarette
and went back to her easy-chair. "You did not answer the question I asked you a few minutes ago," she
reminded him. "When is your wife returning?" The shadow was back on his face. "Lady Jane," he said, "if it were not that we are old friends, dating
from that box of chocolates, remember, I might have felt that I must
make you some sort of a formal reply. But as it is, I shall tell you
the truth. My wife is not coming hack." "Not at all?" she exclaimed. "To me, never," he answered. "We have separated." "I am so very sorry," she said, after a moment's startled silence. "I
am afraid that I asked a tactless question, but how could I know?" "There was nothing tactless about it," he assured her. "It makes it
much easier for me to tell you. I married my wife thirteen years ago
because I believed that her wealth would help me in my career. She
married me because she was an American with ambitions, anxious to find a
definite place in English society. She has been disappointed in me. Other circumstances have now presented themselves. I have discovered
that my wife's affections are bestowed elsewhere. To be perfectly
honest, the discovery was a relief to me." "So that is why you are living down here like this?" she murmured. "Precisely! The one thing for which I am grateful," he went on, "is
that I always refused to let my wife take a big country house. I
insisted upon an unpretentious place for the times when I could rest. I
think that I shall settle down here altogether. I can just afford to
live here if I shoot plenty of rabbits, and if Robert's rheumatism is
not too bad for him to look after the vegetable garden." "Of course you are talking nonsense," she pronounced, a little curtly. "Why nonsense?" "You must go back to your work," she insisted. "Keep this place for your holiday moments, certainly, but for the rest,
to talk of settling down here is simply wicked." "What is my work?" he asked. "I tell you frankly that I do not know
where I belong. A very intelligent constituency, stuffed up to the
throat with schoolboard education, has determined that it would prefer a
representative who has changed his politics already four times. I seem
to be nobody's man. Horlock at heart is frightened of me, because he is
convinced that I am not sound, and he has only tried to make use of me
as a sop to democracy. The Whigs hate me like poison, hate me even
worse than Horlock. If I were in Parliament, I should not know which
Party to support. I think I shall devote my time to roses." "And between September and May?" "I shall hibernate and think about them." "Of course," she said, with the air of one humoring a child, "you are
not in earnest. You have just been through a very painful experience
and you are suffering from it. As for the rest, you are talking
nonsense." "Explain, please," he begged. "You said just now that you did not know where your place was," she
continued. "You called yourself nobody's man. Why, the most ignorant
person who thinks about things could tell you where you belong. Even I
could tell you." "Please do," he invited. She rose to her feet. "Walk round the garden with me," she begged, brushing the cigarette ash
from her skirt. "You know what a terrible out-of-door person I am. This room seems to me close. I want to smell the sea from one of those
wonderful lookouts of yours." He walked with her along one of the lower paths, deliberately avoiding
the upper lookouts. They came presently to a grass-grown pier. She
stood at the end, her firm, capable fingers clenching the stone wall,
her eyes looking seaward. "I will tell you where you belong," she said. "In your heart you must
know it, but you are suffering from that reaction which comes from
failure to those people who are not used to failure. You belong to the
head of things. You should hold up your right, hand, and the party you
should lead should form itself about you. No, don't interrupt me," she
went on. "You and all of us know that the country is in a bad way. She
is feeling all the evils of a too-great prosperity, thrust upon her
after a period of suffering. You can see the dangers ahead--I learnt
them first from you in the pages of the reviews, when after the war you
foretold the exact position in which we find ourselves to-day. Industrial wealth means the building up of a new democracy. The
democracy already exists but it is unrepresented, because those people
who should form its bulwark and its strength are attached to various
factions of what is called the Labour Party. They don't know themselves
yet. No Rienzi has arisen to hold up the looking-glass. If some one
does not teach them to find themselves, there will be trouble. Mind, I
am only repeating what you have told others." "It is all true," he agreed. "Then can't you see," she continued eagerly, "what party it is to which
you ought to attach yourself--the party which has broken up now into
half a dozen factions? They are all misnamed but that is no matter. You should stand for Parliament as a Labour or a Socialist candidate,
because you understand what the people want and what they ought to have. You should draw up a new and final programme." "You are a wonderful person," he said with conviction, "but like all
people who are clear-sighted and who have imagination, you are also a
theorist. I believe your idea is the true one, but to stand for
Parliament as a Labour member you have to belong to one of the
acknowledged factions to be sure of any support at all. An independent
member can count his votes by the capful." "That is the old system," she pointed out firmly. "It is for you to
introduce a new one. If necessary, you must stoop to political cunning. You should make use of those very factions until you are strong enough
to stand by yourself. Through their enmity amongst themselves, one of
them would come to your side, anyway. But I should like to see you
discard all old parliamentary methods. I should like to see you speak
to the heart of the man who is going to record his vote." "It is a slow matter to win votes in units," he reminded her. "But it is the real way," she insisted. "Voting by party and government
by party will soon come to an end. It must. All that it needs is a
strong man with a definite programme of his own, to attack the whole
principle." He looked away from the sea towards the woman by his side. The wind was
blowing in her face, blowing back little strands of her tightly coiled
hair, blowing back her coat and skirt, outlining her figure with soft
and graceful distinction. She was young, healthy and splendid, full of
all the enthusiasm of her age. He sighed a little bitterly. "All that you say," he reminded her, "should have been said to me by the
little brown girl in Paris, years ago. I am too old now for great
tasks." She turned towards him with the pitying yet pleasant air of one who
would correct a child. "You are forty-nine years old and three months," she said. "How on earth did you know that?" he demanded. She smiled. "A valuable little red book called 'Who's Who.' You see, it is no use
your trying to pose as a Methuselah. For a politician you are a young
man. You have time and strength for the greatest of all tasks. Find
some other excuse, sir, if you talk of laying down the sword and picking
up the shuttle." He looked back seawards. His eyes were following the flight of a
seagull, wheeling in the sunlight. "I suppose you are right," he acknowledged. "No man is too old for
work." "I beg your pardon, sir." They turned abruptly around. They had been so engrossed that they had
not noticed the sound of footsteps. Robert, a little out of breath, was
standing at attention. There was a disturbed look in his face, a tremor
in his voice. "I beg your pardon, sir," he repeated, "there is--some one here to see
you." "Some one?" Tallente repeated impatiently. Robert leaned a little forward. The effort at lowering his voice only
made his hoarse whisper sound more agitated. "A police inspector, sir, from Barnstaple, is waiting in the study." CHAPTER IV

Mr Inspector Gillian of Barnstaple had no idea of denying his
profession. He had travelled over in a specially hired motor-car, and
he was wearing his best uniform. He rose to his feet at Tallente's
entrance and saluted a little ponderously. "Mr. Andrew Tallente, sir?" he enquired. Tallente silently admitted his identity, waved the inspector back to his
seat--the one high-backed and uncomfortable chair in the room--and took
an easy-chair himself. "I have come over, sir," the man continued, "according to instructions
received by telephone from Scotland Yard. My business is to ask you a
few questions concerning the disappearance of the Honourable Anthony
Palliser, who was, I am given to understand, your secretary." "Dear me!" Tallente exclaimed. "I had no idea that the young man's
temporary absence from polite society would be turned into a
melodramatic disappearance." The inspector took mental note of the levity in Tallente's tone, and
disapproved. "The Honourable Anthony Palliser disappeared from here, sir, on Tuesday
night last, the night of your return from London," he said. "I have
come to ask you certain questions with reference to that disappearance." "Go ahead," Tallente begged. "Care to smoke a cigar?" "Not whilst on duty, thank you, sir," was the dignified reply. "You will forgive my cigarette," Tallente observed, lighting one. "Now
you can go ahead as fast as you like." "Question number one is this, sir. I wish to know whether Mr.
Palliser's abrupt departure from the Manor was due to any disagreement
with you?" "In a sense I suppose it was," the other acknowledged. "I turned him
out of the house." The inspector did not attempt to conceal his gratification. He made a
voluminous note in his pocketbook. "Am I to conclude, then, that there was a quarrel?" he enquired. "I do not quarrel with people to whom I pay a salary," Tallente replied. "When you say that you turned him out of the house, that rather implies
a quarrel, doesn't it? It might even imply--blows." "You can put your own construction upon it," was the cool reply. "Had you any idea where the honourable Anthony Palliser was going to?" "I suggested the devil," Tallente confided blandly. "I expect he will
get there some time. I put up with him because I knew his father, but
he is not a young man to make a fuss about." The inspector was a little staggered. "I am to conclude, then," he said, "that you were dissatisfied with his
work as your secretary?" "Absolutely," was the firm reply. "You have no idea what a mess he was
liable to make of things if he was left alone." The inspector coughed. "Mr. Tallente, sir," he said, "my instructions are to ask you to
disclose the nature of your displeasure, if any, with the Honourable Mr.
Anthony Palliser. In plain words, Scotland Yard desires to know why he
was turned away from his place at a moment's notice." "I suppose it is the duty of Scotland Yard to be inquisitive in cases of
this sort," Tallente observed. "You can report to them the whole of the
valuable information with which I have already furnished you, and you
can add that I absolutely refuse to give any information respecting
the--er--difference of opinion between the young man and myself." The inspector did not conceal his dissatisfaction. "I shall ask, you, sir," he said with dignity, "to reconsider that
decision. Remember that it is the police who ask, and in cases of this
sort they have special privileges." "As soon as any criminal case arises from Anthony Palliser's
disappearance," Tallente pointed out, "you will be in a position to ask
me questions from a different standpoint. For the present I have given
you just as much information as I feel inclined to. Shall we leave it
at that?" The inspector appeared to have become hard of hearing. He did not
attempt to rise from his chair. "Being your private secretary, sir," he said, "the Honourable Anthony
Palliser would no doubt have access to your private papers?" "Naturally," Tallente conceded. "There might be amongst them papers of importance, papers whose
possession by parties in the other camp of politics--"

"Stop!" Tallente interrupted. "Inspector Gillan, you are an astute man. Excuse me." He crossed the room and, with a key which he took from a chain attached
to his trouser button, opened a small but powerful safe fitted into the
wall. He opened it confidently enough, gazed inside and remained for a
moment transfixed. Then he took up a few little packets of papers,
glanced them through and replaced them. He still stood there, dangling
the key in his hard. The inspector watched him curiously. "Anything missing, sir?" he asked. Tallente swung the door to and came back to his chair. "Yes!" he admitted. "Can I make a note of the nature of the loss, sir?" the man asked,
moistening his pencil. "A political paper of some personal consequence," Tallente replied. "Its absence disquiets me. It also confirms my belief that Palliser is
lying doggo for a time." "A hint as to the contents of the missing paper would be very
acceptable, sir," Inspector Gillian begged. Tallente shook his head. "For the present," he decided, "I can only repeat what I said a few
moments ago--I have given you just as much information as I feel
inclined to." The inspector rose to his feet. "My report will not be wholly satisfactory to Scotland Yard, sir," he
declared. "My experience of the estimable body is that they take a lot of
satisfying," Tallente replied. "Will you take anything before you go,
Inspector?" "Nothing whatever, thank you, sir. At the risk of annoying you, I am
bound to ask this question. Will you tell me whether anything in the
nature of blows passed between you and the Honourable Anthony Palliser,
previous to his leaving your house?" "I will not even satisfy your curiosity to that extent," Tallente
answered. "It will be my duty, sir," the inspector said ponderously, "to examine
some of your servants." "Scotland Yard can do that for themselves," Tallente observed. "My wife
and the greater part of the domestic staff left here for London a week
ago." The representative of the law saluted solemnly. "I am sorry that you have not felt inclined to treat me with more
confidence in this matter, Mr. Tallente," he said. He took his leave then. Tallente heard him conversing for some time
with Robert and saw him in the garden, interviewing the small boy. Afterwards, he climbed into his car and drove away. Tallente opened his
safe and once more let the little array of folded papers slip through
his hands. Then he rang the bell for Robert, who presently appeared. "The inspector has quite finished with you?" his master asked. Robert was a portly man, a little unhealthy in colour and a little short
of breath. He had been gassed in the war and his nerves were not what
they had been. It was obvious, as he stood on the other side of the
table, that he was trembling. "Quite, sir. He was enquiring about Mr. Palliser." His master nodded. "I am afraid he will find it a little difficult to obtain any
information round here," he remarked. "There are certain things
connected with that young man which may throw a new light upon his
disappearance." "Indeed, sir?" Robert murmured. Tallente glanced towards the safe. "Robert," he confided, "I have been robbed." The man started a little. "Indeed, sir?" he replied. "Nothing very valuable, I hope?" "I have been robbed of papers," Tallente said quietly, "which in the
wrong hands might ruin me. Mr. Palliser had a key to that safe. Have
you ever seen it open?" "Never, sir." "When did Mr. Palliser arrive here?" "On the evening train of the Monday, sir, that you arrived by on the
Tuesday." "Tell me, did he receive any visitors at all on the Tuesday?" "There was a man came over from a house near Lynton, sir, said his name
was Miller." "Have you any idea what he wanted?" "No certain idea, sir," Robert replied doubtfully. "Now I come to think
of it, though, it seemed as though he had come to make Mr. Palliser
some sort of an offer. After I had let him out, he came back and said
something to Mr. Palliser about three thousand pounds, and Mr.
Palliser said he would let him know. I got the idea, somehow or other,
that the transaction, whatever it might have been, was to be concluded
on Tuesday night." "Why didn't you tell me this before, Robert?" his master enquired. "Other things drove it out of my mind, sir," the man confessed. "I
didn't look upon it as of much consequence. I thought it was something
to do with Mr. Palliser's private affairs." Tallente glanced at the safe. "I saw this man Miller at the station," he said, "when I arrived." "That would be on his way back from here, sir," Robert acquiesced. "I
gathered that he was coming back again after dinner in a car." "Did you hear a car at all that night?" "I rather fancied I did," the man asserted. "I didn't take particular
notice, though." Tallente frowned. "I am very much afraid, Robert," he said, "that wherever Mr. Palliser
is, those papers are." Robert shivered. "Very good, sir," he said, in a low tone. "Any speculations as to that young man's whereabouts," Tallente
continued thoughtfully, "must necessarily be a matter of pure guesswork,
but supposing, Robert, he should have wandered in that mist the wrong
way--turned to the left, for instance, outside this window, instead of
to the right--he might very easily have fallen over the cliff." "The walk is very unsafe in the dark, sir," Robert acquiesced, looking
down at the carpet. "It was not my intention," Tallente remarked thoughtfully, "to kill the
young man. A brawl in front of the windows was impossible, so I took
him with me to the lookout. I suppose he was tactless and I lost my
temper. I struck him on the chin and he went backwards, through that
piece of rotten paling, you know, Robert--"

"I know, sir," the man interrupted, with a little moan. "Please don't!" Tallente shrugged his shoulders. "I took him at no disadvantage," he said coolly. "He knew how to use
the gloves and he was twenty years younger than I. However, there it is. Backwards he went, all legs and arms and shrieks. And with him went the
papers he had stolen.--At twelve o'clock to-night, Robert, I must go
down after him." "It's impossible, sir! It's a sheer precipice for four hundred feet!" "Nothing of the sort," was the cool reply. "There are heaps of ledges
and little clumps of pines and yews. All that you will have to do is to
pull up the rope when I am ready. You can fasten it to a tree when I go
down." "It's not worth it, sir," the man protested anxiously. "No one will
ever find the body down there." "Send the boy home to stay with his parents to-night," Tallente
continued. "Your wife, I suppose, can be trusted?" "She is living up at the garage, sir," Robert answered. "Besides, she
is deaf. I'll tell her that I am sleeping in the house to-night as you
are not very well. And forgive me, sir--her ladyship left a message. She hoped you would lunch with her to-morrow." Tallente strolled out again in a few minutes, curiously impatient of the
restraint of walls, and clambered up the precipitous field at the back
of the Manor. Far up the winding road which led back into the world, a
motor-car was crawling on its way up over. He watched it through a pair
of field glasses. Leaning back in the tonneau with folded arms, as
though solemnly digesting a problem, was Inspector Gillian. Tallente
closed the glasses with a little snap and smiled. "The Bucket type," he murmured to himself, "very much the Bucket type." CHAPTER V

The moon that night seemed to be indulging in strange vagaries, now
dimly visible behind a mist of thin grey vapour, now wholly obscured
behind jagged masses of black cloud, and occasionally shining
brilliantly from a little patch of clear sky. Tallente waited for one
of the latter moments before he finally tested the rope which was wound
around the strongest of the young pine trees and stepped over the rustic
wooden paling at the edge of the lookout He stood there balanced between
earth and sky, until Robert, who watched him, shivered. "There is
nothing to fear," his master said coolly. "Remember, I am an old hand
at mountain climbing, Robert. All the same, if anything should happen,
you'd better say that we fancied we heard a cry from down below and I
went to see what it was. You understand?" "Yes, sir!" Tallente took a step into what seemed to be Eternity. The rope cut into
his hands for the first three or four yards, as the red sand crumbled
away beneath his feet, and he was obliged to grip for his life. Presently he gained a little ledge, from which a single yew tree was
growing, and paused for breath. "Are you all right, sir?" Robert called out from above. "Quite," was the confident answer. "I shall be off again in a minute." Tallente's head had been the wonder even of members of the Alpine Club,
years ago in Switzerland. He found himself now in this strangest of all
positions, absolutely steady and unmoved. Sheer below him, dark,
rushing waves broke upon the rocks, sending showers of glittering spray
upwards. Above, the little lookout with its rustic paling seemed almost
more than directly overhead. The few stars and the fugitive moon seemed
somehow set in a different sky. He felt a new kinship with a great gull
who came floating by. He had become himself a creature of the wild
places. Presently he began once more to let himself down, hand over
hand, to where the next little clump of trees showed a chance of a
precarious foothold. The rope chafed his fingers but he remained
absolutely steady. Once he trusted for a moment to a yew tree, growing
out of a fissure in the rock, which came out by the roots and went
hurtling down into space. From overhead he heard Robert's terrified
cry. The rope stood the strain of his sudden clutch, however, and all
was well. A little lower down, holding on with one hand, he took his
torch from his pocket and examined the surface of the cliff. Nothing
apparently had been disturbed, nor was there any sign of any heavy body
having been dashed through the undergrowth. Soon he went on again,
and, working a little to the left, stood for a moment upon a green,
turf-covered crag, a tiny plateau covered with the refuse of seagulls
and a few stunted trees, from amongst which a startled hawk rose with a
wild cry. He waited here until the moon shone once more and he could
see the little strip of shingle below. Nowhere could he find any trace
of the thing he sought. At the end of half an hour's climbing, he reached the end of the rope. The little cove, filled with tumbled rocks and a narrow strip of beach,
was still about eighty feet below. The slope here was far less
precipitous and there was a foothold in many places amongst the thinly
growing firs and dwarfed oaks. Calmly he let go the rope and commenced
to scramble. More than once his foot slipped, but he was always in a
position to save himself. The time came at last when he stood upon the
pebbly beach, surprised to find that his knees were shaking and his
breath coming fast. The little place was so enclosed that when he
looked upwards it seemed as though he were at the bottom of a pit, as
though the stars and the doubtful moon had receded and he was somehow in
the bowels of the earth instead of being on the sea level. There were
only a few feet of the shingle dry, and a great wave, breaking amongst
the huge rocks, drenched him with spray. He proceeded with his task,
however, searching methodically amongst the rocks, scanning the pebbly
beach with his torch, always amazed that nowhere could he find the
slightest trace of what he sought. Finally, drenched to the skin and
utterly exhausted, he commenced once more the upward climb. He was an
hour reaching the end of the rope. Then he blew the whistle and the
rest was easy. Nevertheless, when the paling came into sight and he
felt Robert's arms under his shoulders, he reeled over towards the seat
and lay there, his clothes caked in red mud, the knees of his
knickerbockers cut, blood on his hands and forehead, breathless. Robert
forced brandy down his throat, however, and in a moment or two he was
himself again. "A miracle!" he gasped. "There is nothing there." "There was something dark, I fancied, upon the strip of beach, sir,"
Robert ventured. "I thought so too. It was a tarred plank of timber." "Then the tide must have reached him." Tallente rose to his feet and looked over. "The sea alone knows," he said. "For the first time, though, Robert, I
feel inclined to agree with the newspapers, who speak of the strange
disappearance of the Honourable Antimony Palliser. Could any man go
backwards over that palisading, do you think, and save his life?" Robert shook his head. "Miracles can't happen, sir," he muttered. "Nevertheless," Tallente said, a little gloomily, "the sea never keeps
what the land gives it. My fate will rest with the tides." Robert suddenly gripped his master's arm. The moon had disappeared
underneath a fragment of cloud and they stood in complete darkness. Both men listened. From one of the paths which led through the grounds
from the beach, came the sound of muffled footsteps. A startled owl
flew out and wheeled over their heads with a queer little cry. "Who's that in the grounds, Robert?" Tallente demanded. "I've no idea, sir," the latter replied, his voice shaking. "The
cottage is empty. The boy went home--I saw him start off. There is no
one else about the place." Nevertheless, the footsteps came nearer. By and by, through the trees,
came the occasional flash of an electric torch. Robert turned towards
the house but Tallente gripped him by the arm. "Stop here," he muttered. "We couldn't get away. Any one would hear
our footsteps along this flinty path. Besides, there is the rope." "It's someone else searching!" Robert whispered hoarsely. The light grew nearer and nearer. A little way below, the path branched
to the right and the left. To the left it encircled the tennis lawn and
led to the Manor or back to the road. The path to the right led to the
little lookout upon which the two men were standing. The footsteps for
a moment hesitated. Then the light flashed out and approached. Whoever
the intruder might be, he was making his way directly towards them. Tallente shrugged his shoulders. "We must see this through, Robert," he said. "We were in a tighter
corner at Ypres, remember. Keep as quiet as you can. Now, then." Tallente flashed on his own torch. "Who's there?" he asked sternly. There was no answer. The torch for a moment remained stationary, then
it began again to advance. "What are you doing in my grounds?" Tallente demanded. "Who are you?" A shape loomed into distinctness. A bulky man in dark clothes came into
sight. "I am Gillian--Inspector Gillian. What are you doing out here, Mr. Tallente?" Tallente laughed a little scornfully. "It seems to me that the boot is on the other leg," he said. "I should
like to know what the mischief you mean by wandering around my grounds
at this hour of the night without my permission?" The inspector completed his climb and stood in the little circle of
light. He took note of the rope and of Tallente's condition. "My presence here, sir," the inspector announced, "is connected with the
disappearance of the Honourable Anthony Palliser." "Confidence for confidence," Tallente replied. "So is mine." The inspector moved to the palisading. The top rail had been broken, as
though it had given under the weight of some heavy body. He held up the
loose fragment, glanced downwards into the dark gulf and back again to
Tallente. "You've been over there," he said. "I have," Tallente
admitted. "I've made a search that I don't fancy you'd have tackled
yourself. I've been down the cliff to the beach." "What reason had you for supposing that you might discover Mr.
Palliser's body there?" the other asked bluntly. Tallente sat on the stone seat and lit a cigarette. "I will take you into my confidence, Mr. Inspector," he said. "This
afternoon I strolled round here with a lady caller, just before you
came, and I fancied that I heard a faint cry. I took no notice of it at
the time, but to-night, after dinner, I wandered out here again, and
again I fancied I heard it. It got on my nerves to such an extent that
I fetched Robert here, a coil of rope, put on some shoes with spikes and
tried to remember that I was an Alpine climber." "You've been down to the beach and back, sir?" the inspector asked,
looking over a little wonderingly. "Every inch of the way. The last eighty feet or so I had to scramble." "Did you discover anything, sir?" "Not a thing. I couldn't even find a broken twig in any of the little
clumps of outgrowing trees. There wasn't a sign of the sand having been
disturbed anywhere down the face of the cliff, and I shouldn't think a
human being had been on that beach during our lifetimes. I have had my
night's work for nothing." "It was just the cry you fancied you heard which made you undertake this
expedition?" "Precisely!" The inspector held up the broken rail. "When was this smashed?" he enquired. "I have no idea," Tallente answered. "All the woodwork about the place
is rotten." "Doesn't it occur to you, sir, as being an extraordinarily dangerous
thing to put it back in exactly the same position as though it were
sound?" "Iniquitous," Tallente agreed. The inspector made a mental note. Tallente threw the remains of his
cigarette into the sea. "I am going to bed now." he said. "Can I offer
you any refreshment, Mr. Inspector, or are your investigations not yet
complete?" "I thank you, sir, but I require nothing. I have some men up in the
wood there and I shall join them presently. I am staying in the
neighborhood." Tallente pointed to the rope. "If you would care to search for yourself, Mr. Inspector, we'll help
you down." The man shook his head. "Scarcely a job for a man of my build, sir. I have a professional
climber coming to-morrow. I wish you had informed me of your intention
to go down to-night." "If you had informed me of your intention to remain in the neighborhood,
that might have been possible," was the cool reply. The man took the
loose wooden rail from its place and held it under his arm. "Walking
off with a portion of my fence, eh?" Tallente asked. The inspector made no direct reply. He turned his torch on to the
broken end. "A clue?" Tallente asked him lightly. The other turned away. "It is
not my place, sir," he announced, "to share any discovery I might make
with a person who has deliberately refused to assist the law." "No one has convinced me yet," Tallente replied, "that Palliser's
disappearance is a matter in which the law need concern itself." The
inspector coughed. "I wish you good night, sir." He disappeared along
the narrow path. They listened to his retreating footsteps. Tallente
picked up his end of the rope. "I was right," he said, as he led the
way back to the house. "Quite the Inspector Bucket type." CHAPTER VI

At noon the next day, Tallente, nervously as well as physically
exhausted with the long climb from the Manor, turned aside from the
straight, dusty road and seated himself upon a lichen-covered boulder. He threw his cap on the ground, filled and lighted an old briar pipe,
and gazed with a queer mixture of feelings across the moorland to where
Woolhanger spread itself, a queer medley of dwelling house and farm
buildings, strangely situated at the far end of the table-land he was
crossing, where the moor leaned down to a great hollow in the hills. The open stretch of common which lay between him and his destination had
none of the charm of the surrounding country. It was like a dark spot
set in the midst of the rolling splendours of the moorland proper. There were boulders of rock of unknown age, dark patches of peat land,
where even in midsummer the mud oozed up at the lightest footfall, pools
and sedgy places, the home and sometimes the breeding place of the
melancholy snipe. Of colour there was singularly little. The heather
bushes were stunted, their roots blackened as though with fire, and even
the yellow of the gorse shone with a dimmer lustre. But in the
distance, a flaming carpet of orange and purple stretched almost to the
summit of the brown hills of kindlier soil, and farther round,
westwards, richly cultivated fields, from which the labourers seemed to
hang like insects in the air, rolled away almost to the clouds. Tallente looked at them a little wearily, impressed with the allegorical
significance of his position. It seemed to him that he was in the land
to which he belonged, the barren land of desolation and failure. The
triumphs of the past failed for a moment to thrill his pulses. The
memory of his well-lived and successful life brought him not an atom of
consolation. The present was all that mattered, and the present had
brought him to the gates of failure.--After all, what did a man work
for, he wondered? What was the end and aim of it all? Life at
Martinhoe Manor, with a faithful but terrified manservant, bookshelves
ready to afford him the phantasmal satisfaction of another man's
thoughts, sea and winds, beauties of landscape and colour, to bring him
to the threshold of an epicurean pleasure which needed yet that one
pulsating link with humanity to yield the full meed of joy and content. It all came back to the old story of man's weakness, he thought, as he
rose to his feet, his teeth almost savagely clenching his pipe. He had
become a conqueror of circumstances only to become a victim of the
primitive needs of life. At about a quarter of a mile from the house, the road branched away to
the left to disappear suddenly over the edge of a drop of many hundreds
of feet. Tallente passed through a plain white gate, down an avenue of
dwarfed oaks, to emerge into an unexpectedly green meadow, cloven
through the middle with a straight white avenue. Through another gate
he passed into a drive which led through flaming banks of rhododendrons,
now a little past their full glory, to the front of the house, a long
and amplified building which, by reason of many additions, had become an
abode of some pretensions. A manservant answered his ring at once and
led him into a cool, white stone hall, the walls of which were hung from
floor to ceiling with hunting and sporting trophies. "Her ladyship is still at the farm, sir," the man announced. "She said
if you came before she returned would you care to step round?" Tallente signified his assent and was led through the house, across a
more extensive garden, from which a marvellous view of the valley and
the climbing slopes behind held him spellbound, by the side of a small,
quaintly shaped church, to a circular group of buildings of considerable
extent. The man conducted him to the front of a white-plastered cottage
covered with roses, and knocked at the door. "This is her ladyship's office, sir," he announced. Lady Jane's invitation to enter was clear and friendly. Tallente found
her seated behind a desk, talking to a tall man in riding clothes, who
swung around to eye the newcomer with a curiosity which seemed somehow
not altogether friendly. Lady Jane held out her hand and smiled
delightfully. "Do come in, Mr. Tallente," she begged. "I can't tell you how glad I
am to see you. Now you will believe, won't you, that I am not
altogether an idler in life? This is my agent, Mr. Segerson--Mr. Tallente." Lionel Segerson held out his hand. He was a tall, well-built young
Devonian, sunburnt, with fair curly hair, a somewhat obstinate type of
countenance, and dressed in the dandified fashion of the sporting
farmer. "Glad to know you, Mr. Tallente," he said, in a tone which lacked
enthusiasm. "I hope you're going to stay down in these parts for a
time?" Tallente made only a monosyllabic reply, and Lady Jane, with a little
gesture of apology, continued her conversation with Segerson. "I should like you," she directed, "to see James Crockford for yourself. Try and explain my views to him--you know them quite well. I want him
to own his land. You can tell him that within the last two years I have
sold eleven farms to their tenants, and no one could say that I have not
done so on easy terms. But I need further convincing that Crocker is in
earnest about the matter, and that he will really work to make his farm
a success. In five good years he has only saved a matter of four
hundred pounds, although his rental has been almost insignificant. That
is the worst showing of any of the tenants on the estate, and though if
I had more confidence in him I would sell on a mortgage, I don't feel
inclined to until he has shown that he can do better. 