



Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer





THE AGONY COLUMN

by Earl Derr Biggers



CHAPTER I

London that historic summer was almost unbearably hot. It seems, looking
back, as though the big baking city in those days was meant to serve as
an anteroom of torture--an inadequate bit of preparation for the
hell that was soon to break in the guise of the Great War. About the
soda-water bar in the drug store near the Hotel Cecil many American
tourists found solace in the sirups and creams of home. Through the
open windows of the Piccadilly tea shops you might catch glimpses of
the English consuming quarts of hot tea in order to become cool. It is a
paradox they swear by. About nine o'clock on the morning of Friday, July twenty-fourth, in that
memorable year nineteen hundred and fourteen, Geoffrey West left his
apartments in Adelphi Terrace and set out for breakfast at the Carlton. He had found the breakfast room of that dignified hotel the coolest
in London, and through some miracle, for the season had passed,
strawberries might still be had there. As he took his way through the
crowded Strand, surrounded on all sides by honest British faces wet
with honest British perspiration he thought longingly of his rooms in
Washington Square, New York. For West, despite the English sound of that
Geoffrey, was as American as Kansas, his native state, and only pressing
business was at that moment holding him in England, far from the country
that glowed unusually rosy because of its remoteness. At the Carlton news stand West bought two morning papers--the Times
for study and the Mail for entertainment and then passed on into the
restaurant. His waiter--a tall soldierly Prussian, more blond than West
himself--saw him coming and, with a nod and a mechanical German smile,
set out for the plate of strawberries which he knew would be the first
thing desired by the American. West seated himself at his usual table
and, spreading out the Daily Mail, sought his favorite column. The first
item in that column brought a delighted smile to his face:

"The one who calls me Dearest is not genuine or they would write to me." Any one at all familiar with English journalism will recognize at once
what department it was that appealed most to West. During his three
weeks in London he had been following, with the keenest joy, the daily
grist of Personal Notices in the Mail. This string of intimate
messages, popularly known as the Agony Column, has long been an honored
institution in the English press. In the days of Sherlock Holmes it
was in the Times that it flourished, and many a criminal was tracked
to earth after he had inserted some alluring mysterious message in it. Later the Telegraph gave it room; but, with the advent of halfpenny
journalism, the simple souls moved en masse to the Mail. Tragedy and comedy mingle in the Agony Column. Erring ones are urged to
return for forgiveness; unwelcome suitors are warned that "Father has
warrant prepared; fly, Dearest One!" Loves that would shame by their
ardor Abelard and Heloise are frankly published--at ten cents a
word--for all the town to smile at. The gentleman in the brown derby
states with fervor that the blonde governess who got off the tram at
Shepherd's Bush has quite won his heart. Will she permit his addresses? Answer; this department. For three weeks West had found this sort of
thing delicious reading. Best of all, he could detect in these messages
nothing that was not open and innocent. At their worst they were merely
an effort to side-step old Lady Convention; this inclination was so
rare in the British, he felt it should be encouraged. Besides, he was
inordinately fond of mystery and romance, and these engaging twins
hovered always about that column. So, while waiting for his strawberries, he smiled over the ungrammatical
outburst of the young lady who had come to doubt the genuineness of him
who called her Dearest. He passed on to the second item of the morning. Spoke one whose heart had been completely conquered:

MY LADY sleeps. She of raven tresses. Corner seat from Victoria,
Wednesday night. Carried program. Gentleman answering inquiry desires
acquaintance. Reply here. --LE ROI. West made a mental note to watch for the reply of raven tresses. The
next message proved to be one of Aye's lyrics--now almost a daily
feature of the column:

DEAREST: Tender loving wishes to my dear one. Only to be with you now
and always. None "fairer in my eyes." Your name is music to me. I
love you more than life itself, my own beautiful darling, my proud
sweetheart, my joy, my all! Jealous of everybody. Kiss your dear hands
for me. Love you only. Thine ever. --AYE. Which, reflected West, was generous of Aye--at ten cents a word--and in
striking contrast to the penurious lover who wrote, farther along in the
column:

     --loveu dearly; wantocu; longing; missu--

But those extremely personal notices ran not alone to love. Mystery,
too, was present, especially in the aquatic utterance:

DEFIANT MERMAID: Not mine. Alligators bitingu now. 'Tis well; delighted. --FIRST FISH. And the rather sanguinary suggestion:

DE Box: First round; tooth gone. Finale. You will FORGET ME NOT. At this point West's strawberries arrived and even the Agony Column
could not hold his interest. When the last red berry was eaten he turned
back to read:

WATERLOO: Wed. 11:53 train. Lady who left in taxi and waved, care to
know gent, gray coat? --SINCERE. Also the more dignified request put forward in:

GREAT CENTRAL: Gentleman who saw lady in bonnet 9 Monday morning in
Great Central Hotel lift would greatly value opportunity of obtaining
introduction. This exhausted the joys of the Agony Column for the day, and West, like
the solid citizen he really was, took up the Times to discover what
might be the morning's news. A great deal of space was given to the
appointment of a new principal for Dulwich College. The affairs of the
heart, in which that charming creature, Gabrielle Ray, was at the moment
involved, likewise claimed attention. And in a quite unimportant corner,
in a most unimportant manner, it was related that Austria had sent an
ultimatum to Serbia. West had read part way through this stupid little
piece of news, when suddenly the Thunderer and all its works became an
uninteresting blur. A girl stood just inside the door of the Carlton breakfast room. Yes; he should have pondered that despatch from Vienna. But such a girl! It adds nothing at all to say that her hair was a dull sort of gold; her
eyes violet. Many girls have been similarly blessed. It was her manner;
the sweet way she looked with those violet eyes through a battalion of
head waiters and resplendent managers; her air of being at home here
in the Carlton or anywhere else that fate might drop her down. Unquestionably she came from oversea--from the States. She stepped forward into the restaurant. And now slipped also into
view, as part of the background for her, a middle-aged man, who wore the
conventional black of the statesman. He, too, bore the American label
unmistakably. Nearer and nearer to West she drew, and he saw that in her
hand she carried a copy of the Daily Mail. West's waiter was a master of the art of suggesting that no table in the
room was worth sitting at save that at which he held ready a chair. Thus
he lured the girl and her companion to repose not five feet from where
West sat. This accomplished, he whipped out his order book, and stood
with pencil poised, like a reporter in an American play. "The strawberries are delicious," he said in honeyed tones. The man looked at the girl, a question in his eyes. "Not for me, dad," she said. "I hate them! Grapefruit, please." As the waiter hurried past, West hailed him. He spoke in loud defiant
tones. "Another plate of the strawberries!" he commanded. "They are better than
ever to-day." For a second, as though he were part of the scenery, those violet eyes
met his with a casual impersonal glance. Then their owner slowly spread
out her own copy of the Mail. "What's the news?" asked the statesman, drinking deep from his glass of
water. "Don't ask me," the girl answered, without looking up. "I've found
something more entertaining than news. Do you know--the English papers
run humorous columns! Only they aren't called that. They're called
Personal Notices. And such notices!" She leaned across the table. "Listen to this: 'Dearest: Tender loving wishes to my dear one. Only to
be with you now and always. None "fairer in my eyes." --

The man looked uncomfortably about him. "Hush!" he pleaded. "It doesn't
sound very nice to me." "Nice!" cried the girl. "Oh, but it is--quite nice. And so deliciously
open and aboveboard. 'Your name is music to me. I love you more--'"

"What do we see to-day?" put in her father hastily. "We're going down to the City and have a look at the Temple. Thackeray
lived there once--and Oliver Goldsmith--"

"All right--the Temple it is." "Then the Tower of London. It's full of the most romantic associations. Especially the Bloody Tower, where those poor little princes were
murdered. Aren't you thrilled?" "I am if you say so." "You're a dear! I promise not to tell the people back in Texas that you
showed any interest in kings and such--if you will show just a little. Otherwise I'll spread the awful news that you took off your hat when
King George went by." The statesman smiled. West felt that he, who had no business to, was
smiling with him. The waiter returned, bringing grapefruit, and the strawberries West had
ordered. Without another look toward West, the girl put down her paper
and began her breakfasting. As often as he dared, however, West looked
at her. With patriotic pride he told himself: "Six months in Europe, and
the most beautiful thing I've seen comes from back home!" When he rose reluctantly twenty minutes later his two compatriots were
still at table, discussing their plans for the day. As is usual in such
cases, the girl arranged, the man agreed. With one last glance in her direction, West went out on the parched
pavement of Haymarket. Slowly he walked back to his rooms. Work was waiting there for him;
but instead of getting down to it, he sat on the balcony of his study,
gazing out on the courtyard that had been his chief reason for selecting
those apartments. Here, in the heart of the city, was a bit of the
countryside transported--the green, trim, neatly tailored countryside
that is the most satisfying thing in England. There were walls on which
the ivy climbed high, narrow paths that ran between blooming beds of
flowers, and opposite his windows a seldom-opened, most romantic gate. As he sat looking down he seemed to see there below him the girl of the
Carlton. Now she sat on the rustic bench; now she bent above the envious
flowers; now she stood at the gate that opened out to a hot sudden bit
of the city. And as he watched her there in the garden she would never enter, as he
reflected unhappily that probably he would see her no more--the idea
came to him. At first he put it from him as absurd, impossible. She was, to apply a
fine word much abused, a lady; he supposedly a gentleman. Their sort
did not do such things. If he yielded to this temptation she would be
shocked, angry, and from him would slip that one chance in a thousand he
had--the chance of meeting her somewhere, some day. And yet--and yet--She, too, had found the Agony Column entertaining
and--quite nice. There was a twinkle in her eyes that bespoke a fondness
for romance. She was human, fun-loving--and, above all, the joy of youth
was in her heart. Nonsense! West went inside and walked the floor. The idea was
preposterous. Still--he smiled--it was filled with amusing
possibilities. Too bad he must put it forever away and settle down to
this stupid work! Forever away? Well--

On the next morning, which was Saturday, West did not breakfast at the
Carlton. The girl, however, did. As she and her father sat down the old
man said: "I see you've got your Daily Mail." "Of course!" she answered. "I couldn't do without it. Grapefruit--yes." She began to read. Presently her cheeks flushed and she put the paper
down. "What is it?" asked the Texas statesman. "To-day," she answered sternly, "you do the British Museum. You've put
it off long enough." The old man sighed. Fortunately he did not ask to see the Mail. If he
had, a quarter way down the column of personal notices he would have
been enraged--or perhaps only puzzled--to read:

CARLTON RESTAURANT: Nine A.M. Friday morning. Will the young woman who
preferred grapefruit to strawberries permit the young man who had two
plates of the latter to say he will not rest until he discovers some
mutual friend, that they may meet and laugh over this column together? Lucky for the young man who liked strawberries that his nerve had failed
him and he was not present at the Carlton that morning! He would
have been quite overcome to see the stern uncompromising look on the
beautiful face of a lady at her grapefruit. So overcome, in fact, that
he would probably have left the room at once, and thus not seen the
mischievous smile that came in time to the lady's face--not seen that
she soon picked up the paper again and read, with that smile, to the end
of the column. CHAPTER II

The next day was Sunday; hence it brought no Mail. Slowly it dragged
along. At a ridiculously early hour Monday morning Geoffrey West was on
the street, seeking his favorite newspaper. He found it, found the Agony
Column--and nothing else. Tuesday morning again he rose early, still
hopeful. Then and there hope died. The lady at the Carlton deigned no
reply. Well, he had lost, he told himself. He had staked all on this one bold
throw; no use. Probably if she thought of him at all it was to label him
a cheap joker, a mountebank of the halfpenny press. Richly he deserved
her scorn. On Wednesday he slept late. He was in no haste to look into the Daily
Mail; his disappointments of the previous days had been too keen. At
last, while he was shaving, he summoned Walters, the caretaker of the
building, and sent him out to procure a certain morning paper. Walters came back bearing rich treasure, for in the Agony Column of that
day West, his face white with lather, read joyously:

STRAWBERRY MAN: Only the grapefruit lady's kind heart and her great
fondness for mystery and romance move her to answer. The strawberry-mad
one may write one letter a day for seven days--to prove that he is an
interesting person, worth knowing. Then--we shall see. Address: M. A.
L., care Sadie Haight, Carlton Hotel. All day West walked on air, but with the evening came the problem of
those letters, on which depended, he felt, his entire future happiness. Returning from dinner, he sat down at his desk near the windows that
looked out on his wonderful courtyard. The weather was still torrid,
but with the night had come a breeze to fan the hot cheek of London. It
gently stirred his curtains; rustled the papers on his desk. He considered. Should he at once make known the eminently respectable
person he was, the hopelessly respectable people he knew? Hardly! For
then, on the instant, like a bubble bursting, would go for good all
mystery and romance, and the lady of the grapefruit would lose all
interest and listen to him no more. He spoke solemnly to his rustling
curtains. "No," he said. "We must have mystery and romance. But where--where shall
we find them?" On the floor above he heard the solid tramp of military boots belonging
to his neighbor, Captain Stephen Fraser-Freer, of the Twelfth Cavalry,
Indian Army, home on furlough from that colony beyond the seas. It was
from that room overhead that romance and mystery were to come in mighty
store; but Geoffrey West little suspected it at the moment. Hardly
knowing what to say, but gaining inspiration as he went along, he wrote
the first of seven letters to the lady at the Carlton. And the epistle
he dropped in the post box at midnight follows here:

DEAR LADY OF THE GRAPEFRUIT: You are very kind. Also, you are wise. Wise, because into my clumsy little Personal you read nothing that was
not there. You knew it immediately for what it was--the timid tentative
clutch of a shy man at the skirts of Romance in passing. Believe me,
old Conservatism was with me when I wrote that message. He was fighting
hard. He followed me, struggling, shrieking, protesting, to the post box
itself. But I whipped him. Glory be! I did for him. We are young but once, I told him. After that, what use to signal to
Romance? The lady at least, I said, will understand. He sneered at that. He shook his silly gray head. I will admit he had me worried. But now
you have justified my faith in you. Thank you a million times for that! Three weeks I have been in this huge, ungainly, indifferent city,
longing for the States. Three weeks the Agony Column has been my sole
diversion. And then--through the doorway of the Carlton restaurant--you
came--

It is of myself that I must write, I know. I will not, then, tell you
what is in my mind--the picture of you I carry. It would mean little
to you. Many Texan gallants, no doubt, have told you the same while the
moon was bright above you and the breeze was softly whispering through
the branches of--the branches of the--of the--

Confound it, I don't know! I have never been in Texas. It is a vice in
me I hope soon to correct. All day I intended to look up Texas in the
encyclopedia. But all day I have dwelt in the clouds. And there are no
reference books in the clouds. Now I am down to earth in my quiet study. Pens, ink and paper are before
me. I must prove myself a person worth knowing. From his rooms, they say, you can tell much about a man. But,
alas! these peaceful rooms in Adelphi Terrace--I shall not tell the
number--were sublet furnished. So if you could see me now you would be
judging me by the possessions left behind by one Anthony Bartholomew. There is much dust on them. Judge neither Anthony nor me by that. Judge rather Walters, the caretaker, who lives in the basement with his
gray-haired wife. Walters was a gardener once, and his whole life is
wrapped up in the courtyard on which my balcony looks down. There he
spends his time, while up above the dust gathers in the corners--

Does this picture distress you, my lady? You should see the courtyard! You would not blame Walters then. It is a sample of Paradise left at
our door--that courtyard. As English as a hedge, as neat, as beautiful. London is a roar somewhere beyond; between our court and the great city
is a magic gate, forever closed. It was the court that led me to take
these rooms. And, since you are one who loves mystery, I am going to relate to you
the odd chain of circumstances that brought me here. For the first link in that chain we must go back to Interlaken. Have
you been there yet? A quiet little town, lying beautiful between two
shimmering lakes, with the great Jungfrau itself for scenery. From the
dining-room of one lucky hotel you may look up at dinner and watch the
old-rose afterglow light the snow-capped mountain. You would not say
then of strawberries: "I hate them." Or of anything else in all the
world. A month ago I was in Interlaken. One evening after dinner I strolled
along the main street, where all the hotels and shops are drawn up at
attention before the lovely mountain. In front of one of the shops I saw
a collection of walking sticks and, since I needed one for climbing, I
paused to look them over. I had been at this only a moment when a young
Englishman stepped up and also began examining the sticks. I had made a selection from the lot and was turning away to find
the shopkeeper, when the Englishman spoke. He was lean,
distinguished-looking, though quite young, and had that well-tubbed
appearance which I am convinced is the great factor that has enabled the
English to assert their authority over colonies like Egypt and India,
where men are not so thoroughly bathed. "Er--if you'll pardon me, old chap," he said. "Not that stick--if you
don't mind my saying so. It's not tough enough for mountain work. I
would suggest--"

To say that I was astonished is putting it mildly. If you know the
English at all, you know it is not their habit to address strangers,
even under the most pressing circumstances. Yet here was one of that
haughty race actually interfering in my selection of a stick. I ended
by buying the one he preferred, and he strolled along with me in the
direction of my hotel, chatting meantime in a fashion far from British. We stopped at the Kursaal, where we listened to the music, had a drink
and threw away a few francs on the little horses. He came with me to the
veranda of my hotel. I was surprised, when he took his leave, to find
that he regarded me in the light of an old friend. He said he would call
on me the next morning. I made up my mind that Archibald Enwright--for that, he told me, was
his name--was an adventurer down on his luck, who chose to forget
his British exclusiveness under the stern necessity of getting money
somehow, somewhere. The next day, I decided, I should be the victim of a
touch. But my prediction failed; Enwright seemed to have plenty of money. On
that first evening I had mentioned to him that I expected shortly to be
in London, and he often referred to the fact. As the time approached
for me to leave Interlaken he began to throw out the suggestion that he
should like to have me meet some of his people in England. This, also,
was unheard of--against all precedent. Nevertheless, when I said good-by to him he pressed into my hand a
letter of introduction to his cousin, Captain Stephen Fraser-Freer, of
the Twelfth Cavalry, Indian Army, who, he said, would be glad to make
me at home in London, where he was on furlough at the time--or would be
when I reached there. "Stephen's a good sort," said Enwright. "He'll be jolly pleased to show
you the ropes. Give him my best, old boy!" Of course I took the letter. But I puzzled greatly over the affair. What could be the meaning of this sudden warm attachment that Archie had
formed for me? Why should he want to pass me along to his cousin at a
time when that gentleman, back home after two years in India, would
be, no doubt, extremely busy? I made up my mind I would not present the
letter, despite the fact that Archie had with great persistence wrung
from me a promise to do so. I had met many English gentlemen, and I
felt they were not the sort--despite the example of Archie--to take a
wandering American to their bosoms when he came with a mere letter. By
easy stages I came on to London. Here I met a friend, just sailing for
home, who told me of some sad experiences he had had with letters
of introduction--of the cold, fishy,
"My-dear-fellow-why-trouble-me-with-it?" stares that had greeted their
presentation. Good-hearted men all, he said, but averse to strangers; an
ever-present trait in the English--always excepting Archie. So I put the letter to Captain Fraser-Freer out of my mind. I had
business acquaintances here and a few English friends, and I found
these, as always, courteous and charming. But it is to my advantage to
meet as many people as may be, and after drifting about for a week I set
out one afternoon to call on my captain. I told myself that here was an
Englishman who had perhaps thawed a bit in the great oven of India. If
not, no harm would be done. It was then that I came for the first time to this house on Adelphi
Terrace, for it was the address Archie had given me. Walters let me in,
and I learned from him that Captain Fraser-Freer had not yet arrived
from India. His rooms were ready--he had kept them during his absence,
as seems to be the custom over here--and he was expected soon. Perhaps--said Walters--his wife remembered the date. He left me in the
lower hall while he went to ask her. Waiting, I strolled to the rear of the hall. And then, through an open
window that let in the summer, I saw for the first time that courtyard
which is my great love in London--the old ivy-covered walls of brick;
the neat paths between the blooming beds; the rustic seat; the magic
gate. It was incredible that just outside lay the world's biggest city,
with all its poverty and wealth, its sorrows and joys, its roar and
rattle. Here was a garden for Jane Austen to people with fine ladies
and courtly gentlemen--here was a garden to dream in, to adore and to
cherish. When Walters came back to tell me that his wife was uncertain as to the
exact date when the captain would return, I began to rave about that
courtyard. At once he was my friend. I had been looking for quiet
lodgings away from the hotel, and I was delighted to find that on the
second floor, directly under the captain's rooms, there was a suite to
be sublet. Walters gave me the address of the agents; and, after submitting to an
examination that could not have been more severe if I had asked for the
hand of the senior partner's daughter, they let me come here to live. The garden was mine! And the captain? Three days after I arrived I heard above me, for the
first time, the tread of his military boots. Now again my courage began
to fail. I should have preferred to leave Archie's letter lying in
my desk and know my neighbor only by his tread above me. I felt that
perhaps I had been presumptuous in coming to live in the same house with
him. But I had represented myself to Walters as an acquaintance of the
captain's and the caretaker had lost no time in telling me that "my
friend" was safely home. So one night, a week ago, I got up my nerve and went to the captain's
rooms. I knocked. He called to me to enter and I stood in his study,
facing him. He was a tall handsome man, fair-haired, mustached--the
very figure that you, my lady, in your boarding-school days, would have
wished him to be. His manner, I am bound to admit, was not cordial. "Captain," I began, "I am very sorry to intrude--" It wasn't the thing
to say, of course, but I was fussed. "However, I happen to be a neighbor
of yours, and I have here a letter of introduction from your cousin,
Archibald Enwright. I met him in Interlaken and we became very good
friends." "Indeed!" said the captain. He held out his hand for the letter, as though it were evidence at
a court-martial. I passed it over, wishing I hadn't come. He read it
through. It was a long letter, considering its nature. While I waited,
standing by his desk--he hadn't asked me to sit down--I looked about
the room. It was much like my own study, only I think a little dustier. Being on the third floor it was farther from the garden, consequently
Walters reached there seldom. The captain turned back and began to read the letter again. This was
decidedly embarrassing. Glancing down, I happened to see on his desk
an odd knife, which I fancy he had brought from India. The blade was
of steel, dangerously sharp, the hilt of gold, carved to represent some
heathen figure. Then the captain looked up from Archie's letter and his cold gaze fell
full upon me. "My dear fellow," he said, "to the best of my knowledge, I have no
cousin named Archibald Enwright." A pleasant situation, you must admit! It's bad enough when you come
to them with a letter from their mother, but here was I in this
Englishman's rooms, boldly flaunting in his face a warm note of
commendation from a cousin who did not exist! "I owe you an apology," I said. I tried to be as haughty as he, and fell
short by about two miles. "I brought the letter in good faith." "No doubt of that," he answered. "Evidently it was given me by some adventurer for purposes of his own,"
I went on; "though I am at a loss to guess what they could have been." "I'm frightfully sorry--really," said he. But he said it with the London
inflection, which plainly implies: "I'm nothing of the sort." A painful pause. I felt that he ought to give me back the letter; but he
made no move to do so. And, of course, I didn't ask for it. "Ah--er--good night," said I and hurried toward the door. "Good night," he answered, and I left him standing there with Archie's
accursed letter in his hand. That is the story of how I came to this house in Adelphi Terrace. There
is mystery in it, you must admit, my lady. Once or twice since that
uncomfortable call I have passed the captain on the stairs; but the
halls are very dark, and for that I am grateful. I hear him often above
me; in fact, I hear him as I write this. Who was Archie? What was the idea? I wonder. Ah, well, I have my garden, and for that I am indebted to Archie the
garrulous. It is nearly midnight now. The roar of London has died away
to a fretful murmur, and somehow across this baking town a breeze has
found its way. It whispers over the green grass, in the ivy that climbs
my wall, in the soft murky folds of my curtains. Whispers--what? Whispers, perhaps, the dreams that go with this, the first of my letters
to you. They are dreams that even I dare not whisper yet. And so--good night. THE STRAWBERRY MAN. CHAPTER III

With a smile that betrayed unusual interest, the daughter of the Texas
statesman read that letter on Thursday morning in her room at the
Carlton. There was no question about it--the first epistle from the
strawberry-mad one had caught and held her attention. All day, as she
dragged her father through picture galleries, she found herself looking
forward to another morning, wondering, eager. But on the following morning Sadie Haight, the maid through whom this
odd correspondence was passing, had no letter to deliver. The news
rather disappointed the daughter of Texas. At noon she insisted on
returning to the hotel for luncheon, though, as her father pointed out,
they were far from the Carlton at the time. Her journey was rewarded. Letter number two was waiting; and as she read she gasped. DEAR LADY AT THE CARLTON: I am writing this at three in the morning,
with London silent as the grave, beyond our garden. That I am so late in
getting to it is not because I did not think of you all day yesterday;
not because I did not sit down at my desk at seven last evening to
address you. Believe me, only the most startling, the most appalling
accident could have held me up. That most startling, most appalling accident has happened. I am tempted to give you the news at once in one striking and terrible
sentence. And I could write that sentence. A tragedy, wrapped in mystery
as impenetrable as a London fog, has befallen our quiet little house in
Adelphi Terrace. In their basement room the Walters family, sleepless,
overwhelmed, sit silent; on the dark stairs outside my door I hear at
intervals the tramp of men on unhappy missions--But no; I must go back
to the very start of it all:

Last night I had an early dinner at Simpson's, in the Strand--so early
that I was practically alone in the restaurant. The letter I was about
to write to you was uppermost in my mind and, having quickly dined, I
hurried back to my rooms. I remember clearly that, as I stood in the
street before our house fumbling for my keys, Big Ben on the Parliament
Buildings struck the hour of seven. The chime of the great bell rang out
in our peaceful thoroughfare like a loud and friendly greeting. Gaining my study, I sat down at once to write. Over my head I could
hear Captain Fraser-Freer moving about--attiring himself, probably, for
dinner. I was thinking, with an amused smile, how horrified he would be
if he knew that the crude American below him had dined at the impossible
hour of six, when suddenly I heard, in that room above me, some stranger
talking in a harsh determined tone. Then came the captain's answering
voice, calmer, more dignified. This conversation went along for some
time, growing each moment more excited. Though I could not distinguish a
word of it, I had the uncomfortable feeling that there was a controversy
on; and I remember feeling annoyed that any one should thus interfere
with my composition of your letter, which I regarded as most important,
you may be sure. At the end of five minutes of argument there came the heavy thump-thump
of men struggling above me. It recalled my college days, when we used
to hear the fellows in the room above us throwing each other about in
an excess of youth and high spirits. But this seemed more grim, more
determined, and I did not like it.--However, I reflected that it was
none of my business. I tried to think about my letter. The struggle ended with a particularly heavy thud that shook our ancient
house to its foundations. I sat listening, somehow very much depressed. There was no sound. It was not entirely dark outside--the long
twilight--and the frugal Walters had not lighted the hall lamps. Somebody was coming down the stairs very quietly--but their creaking
betrayed him. I waited for him to pass through the shaft of light that
poured from the door open at my back. At that moment Fate intervened in
the shape of a breeze through my windows, the door banged shut, and a
heavy man rushed by me in the darkness and ran down the stairs. I knew
he was heavy, because the passageway was narrow and he had to push me
aside to get by. I heard him swear beneath his breath. Quickly I went to a hall window at the far end that looked out on the
street. But the front door did not open; no one came out. I was puzzled
for a second; then I reentered my room and hurried to my balcony. I
could make out the dim figure of a man running through the garden at
the rear--that garden of which I have so often spoken. He did not try
to open the gate; he climbed it, and so disappeared from sight into the
alley. For a moment I considered. These were odd actions, surely; but was it my
place to interfere? I remembered the cold stare in the eyes of Captain
Fraser-Freer when I presented that letter. I saw him standing motionless
in his murky study, as amiable as a statue. Would he welcome an
intrusion from me now? Finally I made up my mind to forget these things and went down to find
Walters. He and his wife were eating their dinner in the basement. I
told him what had happened. He said he had let no visitor in to see the
captain, and was inclined to view my misgivings with a cold British eye. However, I persuaded him to go with me to the captain's rooms. The captain's door was open. Remembering that in England the way of the
intruder is hard, I ordered Walters to go first. He stepped into the
room, where the gas flickered feebly in an aged chandelier. "My God, sir!" said Walters, a servant even now. And at last I write that sentence: Captain Fraser-Freer of the Indian
Army lay dead on the floor, a smile that was almost a sneer on his
handsome English face! The horror of it is strong with me now as I sit in the silent morning in
this room of mine which is so like the one in which the captain died. He
had been stabbed just over the heart, and my first thought was of that
odd Indian knife which I had seen lying on his study table. I turned
quickly to seek it, but it was gone. And as I looked at the table
it came to me that here in this dusty room there must be finger
prints--many finger prints. The room was quite in order, despite those sounds of struggle. One or
two odd matters met my eye. On the table stood a box from a florist in
Bond Street. The lid had been removed and I saw that the box contained
a number of white asters. Beside the box lay a scarf-pin--an emerald
scarab. And not far from the captain's body lay what is known--owing to
the German city where it is made--as a Homburg hat. I recalled that it is most important at such times that nothing be
disturbed, and I turned to old Walters. His face was like this paper on
which I write; his knees trembled beneath him. "Walters," said I, "we must leave things just as they are until the
police arrive. Come with me while I notify Scotland Yard." "Very good, sir," said Walters. We went down then to the telephone in the lower hall, and I called up
the Yard. I was told that an inspector would come at once and I went
back to my room to wait for him. You can well imagine the feelings that were mine as I waited. Before
this mystery should be solved, I foresaw that I might be involved to a
degree that was unpleasant if not dangerous. Walters would remember that
I first came here as one acquainted with the captain. He had noted, I
felt sure, the lack of intimacy between the captain and myself, once
the former arrived from India. He would no doubt testify that I had been
most anxious to obtain lodgings in the same house with Fraser-Freer. Then there was the matter of my letter from Archie. I must keep that
secret, I felt sure. Lastly, there was not a living soul to back me up
in my story of the quarrel that preceded the captain's death, of the man
who escaped by way of the garden. Alas, thought I, even the most stupid policeman can not fail to look
upon me with the eye of suspicion! In about twenty minutes three men arrived from Scotland Yard. By that
time I had worked myself up into a state of absurd nervousness. I heard
Walters let them in; heard them climb the stairs and walk about in the
room overhead. In a short time Walters knocked at my door and told me
that Chief Inspector Bray desired to speak to me. As I preceded the
servant up the stairs I felt toward him as an accused murderer must feel
toward the witness who has it in his power to swear his life away. He was a big active man--Bray; blond as are so many Englishmen. His
every move spoke efficiency. Trying to act as unconcerned as an innocent
man should--but failing miserably, I fear--I related to him my story
of the voices, the struggle, and the heavy man who had got by me in the
hall and later climbed our gate. He listened without comment. At the end
he said:

"You were acquainted with the captain?" "Slightly," I told him. Archie's letter kept popping into my mind,
frightening me. "I had just met him--that is all; through a friend of
his--Archibald Enwright was the name." "Is Enwright in London to vouch for you?" "I'm afraid not. I last heard of him in Interlaken." "Yes? How did you happen to take rooms in this house?" "The first time I called to see the captain he had not yet arrived from
India. I was looking for lodgings and I took a great fancy to the garden
here." It sounded silly, put like that. I wasn't surprised that the inspector
eyed me with scorn. But I rather wished he hadn't. Bray began to walk about the room, ignoring me. "White asters; scarab pin; Homburg hat," he detailed, pausing before the
table where those strange exhibits lay. A constable came forward carrying newspapers in his hand. "What is it?" Bray asked. "The Daily Mail, sir," said the constable. "The issues of July
twenty-seventh, twenty-eighth, twenty-ninth and thirtieth." Bray took the papers in his hand, glanced at them and tossed them
contemptuously into a waste-basket. He turned to Walters. "Sorry, sir," said Walters; "but I was so taken aback! Nothing like this
has ever happened to me before. I'll go at once--"

"No," replied Bray sharply. "Never mind. I'll attend to it--"

There was a knock at the door. Bray called "Come!" and a slender boy,
frail but with a military bearing, entered. "Hello, Walters!" he said, smiling. "What's up? I-"

He stopped suddenly as his eyes fell upon the divan where Fraser-Freer
lay. In an instant he was at the dead man's side. "Stephen!" he cried in anguish. "Who are you?" demanded the inspector--rather rudely, I thought. "It's the captain's brother, sir," put in Walters. "Lieutenant Norman
Fraser-Freer, of the Royal Fusiliers." There fell a silence. "A great calamity, sir--" began Walters to the boy. I have rarely seen any one so overcome as young Fraser-Freer. Watching
him, it seemed to me that the affection existing between him and the man
on the divan must have been a beautiful thing. He turned away from his
brother at last, and Walters sought to give him some idea of what had
happened. "You will pardon me, gentlemen," said the lieutenant. "This has been a
terrible shock! I didn't dream, of course--I just dropped in for a word
with--with him. And now--"

We said nothing. We let him apologize, as a true Englishman must, for
his public display of emotion. "I'm sorry," Bray remarked in a moment, his eyes still shifting about
the room--"especially as England may soon have great need of men like
the captain. Now, gentlemen, I want to say this: I am the Chief of the
Special Branch at the Yard. This is no ordinary murder. For reasons
I can not disclose--and, I may add, for the best interests of the
empire--news of the captain's tragic death must be kept for the present
out of the newspapers. I mean, of course, the manner of his going. A
mere death notice, you understand--the inference being that it was a
natural taking off." "I understand," said the lieutenant, as one who knows more than he
tells. "Thank you," said Bray. "I shall leave you to attend to the matter, as
far as your family is concerned. You will take charge of the body. As
for the rest of you, I forbid you to mention this matter outside." And now Bray stood looking, with a puzzled air, at me. "You are an American?" he said, and I judged he did not care for
Americans. "I am," I told him. "Know any one at your consulate?" he demanded. Thank heaven, I did! There is an under-secretary there named Watson--I
went to college with him. I mentioned him to Bray. "Very good," said the inspector. "You are free to go. But you must
understand that you are an important witness in this case, and if you
attempt to leave London you will be locked up." So I came back to my rooms, horribly entangled in a mystery that is
little to my liking. I have been sitting here in my study for some time,
going over it again and again. There have been many footsteps on the
stairs, many voices in the hall. Waiting here for the dawn, I have come to be very sorry for the cold
handsome captain. After all, he was a man; his very tread on the floor
above, which it shall never hear again, told me that. What does it all mean? Who was the man in the hall, the man who had
argued so loudly, who had struck so surely with that queer Indian knife? Where is the knife now? And, above all, what do the white asters signify? And the scarab
scarf-pin? And that absurd Homburg hat? Lady of the Carlton, you wanted mystery. When I wrote that first letter
to you, little did I dream that I should soon have it to give you in
overwhelming measure. And--believe me when I say it--through all this your face has been
constantly before me--your face as I saw it that bright morning in the
hotel breakfast room. You have forgiven me, I know, for the manner
in which I addressed you. I had seen your eyes and the temptation was
great--very great. It is dawn in the garden now and London is beginning to stir. So this
time it is--good morning, my lady. THE STRAWBERRY MAN. CHAPTER IV

It is hardly necessary to intimate that this letter came as something of
a shock to the young woman who received it. For the rest of that day the
many sights of London held little interest for her--so little, indeed,
that her perspiring father began to see visions of his beloved Texas;
and once hopefully suggested an early return home. The coolness with
which this idea was received plainly showed him that he was on the wrong
track; so he sighed and sought solace at the bar. That night the two from Texas attended His Majesty's Theater, where
Bernard Shaw's latest play was being performed; and the witty Irishman
would have been annoyed to see the scant attention one lovely young
American in the audience gave his lines. The American in question
retired at midnight, with eager thoughts turned toward the morning. And she was not disappointed. When her maid, a stolid Englishwoman,
appeared at her bedside early Saturday she carried a letter, which
she handed over, with the turned-up nose of one who aids but does not
approve. Quickly the girl tore it open. DEAR Texas LADY: I am writing this late in the afternoon. The sun is
casting long black shadows on the garden lawn, and the whole world is
so bright and matter-of-fact I have to argue with myself to be convinced
that the events of that tragic night through which I passed really
happened. The newspapers this morning helped to make it all seem a dream; not a
line--not a word, that I can find. When I think of America, and how
by this time the reporters would be swarming through our house if this
thing had happened over there, I am the more astonished. But then, I
know these English papers. The great Joe Chamberlain died the other
night at ten, and it was noon the next day when the first paper to carry
the story appeared--screaming loudly that it had scored a beat. It had. Other lands, other methods. It was probably not difficult for Bray to keep journalists such as these
in the dark. So their great ungainly sheets come out in total ignorance
of a remarkable story in Adelphi Terrace. Famished for real news, they
begin to hint at a huge war cloud on the horizon. Because tottering
Austria has declared war on tiny Serbia, because the Kaiser is to-day
hurrying, with his best dramatic effect, home to Berlin, they see all
Europe shortly bathed in blood. A nightmare born of torrid days and
tossing nights! But it is of the affair in Adelphi Terrace that you no doubt want to
hear. One sequel of the tragedy, which adds immeasurably to the mystery
of it all, has occurred, and I alone am responsible for its discovery. But to go back:

I returned from mailing your letter at dawn this morning, very tired
from the tension of the night. I went to bed, but could not sleep. More and more it was preying on my mind that I was in a most unhappy
position. I had not liked the looks cast at me by Inspector Bray, or his
voice when he asked how I came to live in this house. I told myself
I should not be safe until the real murderer of the poor captain
was found; and so I began to puzzle over the few clues in the
case--especially over the asters, the scarab pin and the Homburg hat. It was then I remembered the four copies of the Daily Mail that Bray had
casually thrown into the waste-basket as of no interest. I had glanced
over his shoulder as he examined these papers, and had seen that each of
them was folded so that our favorite department--the Agony Column--was
uppermost. It happened I had in my desk copies of the Mail for the past
week. You will understand why. I rose, found those papers, and began to read. It was then that I made
the astounding discovery to which I have alluded. For a time after making it I was dumb with amazement, so that no course
of action came readily to mind. In the end I decided that the thing for
me to do was to wait for Bray's return in the morning and then point out
to him the error he had made in ignoring the Mail. Bray came in about eight o'clock and a few minutes later I heard
another man ascend the stairs. I was shaving at the time, but I quickly
completed the operation and, slipping on a bathrobe, hurried up to the
captain's rooms. The younger brother had seen to the removal of the
unfortunate man's body in the night, and, aside from Bray and the
stranger who had arrived almost simultaneously with him, there was no
one but a sleepy-eyed constable there. Bray's greeting was decidedly grouchy. The stranger, however--a tall
bronzed man--made himself known to me in the most cordial manner. He
told me he was Colonel Hughes, a close friend of the dead man; and that,
unutterably shocked and grieved, he had come to inquire whether there
was anything he might do. "Inspector," said I, "last night in this room
you held in your hand four copies of the Daily Mail. You tossed them
into that basket as of no account. May I suggest that you rescue those
copies, as I have a rather startling matter to make clear to you?" Too grand an official to stoop to a waste-basket, he nodded to the
constable. The latter brought the papers; and, selecting one from the
lot, I spread it out on the table. "The issue of July twenty-seventh," I
said. I pointed to an item half-way down the column of Personal Notices. You
yourself, my lady, may read it there if you happen to have saved a copy. It ran as follows:

"RANGOON: The asters are in full bloom in the garden at Canterbury. They
are very beautiful--especially the white ones." Bray grunted, and opened his little eyes. I took up the issue of the
following day--the twenty-eighth:

"RANGOON: We have been forced to sell father's stick-pin--the emerald
scarab he brought home from Cairo." I had Bray's interest now. He leaned heavily toward me, puffing. Greatly
excited, I held before his eyes the issue of the twenty-ninth:

"RANGOON: Homburg hat gone forever--caught by a breeze--into the river." "And finally," said I to the inspector, "the last message of all, in the
issue of the thirtieth of July--on sale in the streets some twelve hours
before Fraser-Freer was murdered. See!" "RANGOON: To-night at ten. Regent Street. --Y.O.G." Bray was silent. "I take it you are aware, Inspector," I said, "that for the past two
years Captain Fraser-Freer was stationed at Rangoon." Still he said nothing; just looked at me with those foxy little eyes
that I was coming to detest. At last he spoke sharply:

"Just how," he demanded, "did you happen to discover those messages? You
were not in this room last night after I left?" He turned angrily to the
constable. "I gave orders--"

"No," I put in; "I was not in this room. I happened to have on file in
my rooms copies of the Mail, and by the merest chance--"

I saw that I had blundered. Undoubtedly my discovery of those messages
was too pat. Once again suspicion looked my way. "Thank you very much," said Bray. "I'll keep this in mind." "Have you communicated with my friend at the consulate?" I asked. "Yes. That's all. Good morning." So I went. I had been back in my room some twenty minutes when there came a knock
on the door, and Colonel Hughes entered. He was a genial man, in the
early forties I should say, tanned by some sun not English, and gray at
the temples. "My dear sir," he said without preamble, "this is a most appalling
business!" "Decidedly," I answered. "Will you sit down?" "Thank you." He sat and gazed frankly into my eyes. "Policemen," he
added meaningly, "are a most suspicious tribe--often without reason. I
am sorry you happen to be involved in this affair, for I may say that
I fancy you to be exactly what you seem. May I add that, if you should
ever need a friend, I am at your service?" I was touched; I thanked him as best I could. His tone was so
sympathetic and before I realized it I was telling him the whole
story--of Archie and his letter; of my falling in love with a garden; of
the startling discovery that the captain had never heard of his cousin;
and of my subsequent unpleasant position. He leaned back in his chair
and closed his eyes. "I suppose," he said, "that no man ever carries an unsealed letter of
introduction without opening it to read just what praises have been
lavished upon him. It is human nature--I have done it often. May I make
so bold as to inquire--"

"Yes," said I. "It was unsealed and I did read it. Considering its
purpose, it struck me as rather long. There were many warm words for
me--words beyond all reason in view of my brief acquaintance with
Enwright. I also recall that he mentioned how long he had been in
Interlaken, and that he said he expected to reach London about the first
of August." "The first of August," repeated the colonel. "That is to-morrow. Now--if
you'll be so kind--just what happened last night?" Again I ran over the events of that tragic evening--the quarrel; the
heavy figure in the hall; the escape by way of the seldom-used gate. "My boy," said Colonel Hughes as he rose to go, "the threads of this
tragedy stretch far--some of them to India; some to a country I will not
name. I may say frankly that I have other and greater interest in the
matter than that of the captain's friend. For the present that is in
strict confidence between us; the police are well-meaning, but they
sometimes blunder. Did I understand you to say that you have copies of
the Mail containing those odd messages?" "Right here in my desk," said I. I got them for him. "I think I shall take them--if I may," he said. "You will, of course,
not mention this little visit of mine. We shall meet again. Good
morning." And he went away, carrying those papers with their strange signals to
Rangoon. Somehow I feel wonderfully cheered by his call. For the first time since
seven last evening I begin to breathe freely again. And so, lady who likes mystery, the matter stands on the afternoon of
the last day of July, nineteen hundred and fourteen. I shall mail you this letter to-night. It is my third to you, and it
carries with it three times the dreams that went with the first; for
they are dreams that live not only at night, when the moon is on the
courtyard, but also in the bright light of day. Yes--I am remarkably cheered. I realize that I have not eaten at
all--save a cup of coffee from the trembling hand of Walters--since
last night, at Simpson's. I am going now to dine. I shall begin with
grapefruit. I realize that I am suddenly very fond of grapefruit. How bromidic to note it--we have many tastes in common! EX-STRAWBERRY MAN. The third letter from her correspondent of the Agony Column increased
in the mind of the lovely young woman at the Carlton the excitement and
tension the second had created. For a long time, on the Saturday morning
of its receipt, she sat in her room puzzling over the mystery of
the house in Adelphi Terrace. When first she had heard that Captain
Fraser-Freer, of the Indian Army, was dead of a knife wound over the
heart, the news had shocked her like that of the loss of some old
and dear friend. She had desired passionately the apprehension of his
murderer, and had turned over and over in her mind the possibilities of
white asters, a scarab pin and a Homburg hat. Perhaps the girl longed for the arrest of the guilty man thus keenly
because this jaunty young friend of hers--a friend whose name she did
not know--to whom, indeed, she had never spoken--was so dangerously
entangled in the affair. For, from what she knew of Geoffrey West, from
her casual glance in the restaurant and, far more, from his letters, she
liked him extremely. And now came his third letter, in which he related the connection of
that hat, that pin and those asters with the column in the Mail which
had first brought them together. As it happened, she, too, had copies
of the paper for the first four days of the week. She went to her
sitting-room, unearthed these copies, and--gasped! For from the
column in Monday's paper stared up at her the cryptic words to Rangoon
concerning asters in a garden at Canterbury. In the other three issues
as well, she found the identical messages her strawberry man had quoted. She sat for a moment in deep thought; sat, in fact, until at her door
came the enraged knocking of a hungry parent who had been waiting a full
hour in the lobby below for her to join him at breakfast. "Come, come!" boomed her father, entering at her invitation. "Don't sit
here all day mooning. I'm hungry if you're not." With quick apologies she made ready to accompany him down-stairs. Firmly, as she planned their campaign for the day, she resolved to put
from her mind all thought of Adelphi Terrace. How well she succeeded
may be judged from a speech made by her father that night just before
dinner:

"Have you lost your tongue, Marian? You're as uncommunicative as a
newly-elected office-holder. If you can't get a little more life into
these expeditions of ours we'll pack up and head for home." She smiled, patted his shoulder and promised to improve. But he appeared
to be in a gloomy mood. "I believe we ought to go, anyhow," he went on. "In my opinion this war
is going to spread like a prairie fire. The Kaiser got back to Berlin
yesterday. He'll sign the mobilization orders to-day as sure as fate. For the past week, on the Berlin Bourse, Canadian Pacific stock has been
dropping. That means they expect England to come in." He gazed darkly into the future. It may seem that, for an American
statesman, he had an unusual grasp of European politics. This is easily
explained by the fact that he had been talking with the bootblack at the
Carlton Hotel. "Yes," he said with sudden decision, "I'll go down to the steamship
offices early Monday morning." CHAPTER V

His daughter heard these words with a sinking heart. She had a most
unhappy picture of herself boarding a ship and sailing out of Liverpool
or Southampton, leaving the mystery that so engrossed her thoughts
forever unsolved. Wisely she diverted her father's thoughts toward
the question of food. She had heard, she said, that Simpson's, in the
Strand, was an excellent place to dine. They would go there, and walk. She suggested a short detour that would carry them through Adelphi
Terrace. It seemed she had always wanted to see Adelphi Terrace. As they passed through that silent Street she sought to guess, from an
inspection of the grim forbidding house fronts, back of which lay the
lovely garden, the romantic mystery. But the houses were so very much
like one another. Before one of them, she noted, a taxi waited. After dinner her father pleaded for a music-hall as against what he
called "some highfaluting, teacup English play." He won. Late that
night, as they rode back to the Carlton, special editions were being
proclaimed in the streets. Germany was mobilizing! The girl from Texas retired, wondering what epistolary surprise the
morning would bring forth. It brought forth this:

DEAR DAUGHTER OF THE SENATE: Or is it Congress? I could not quite
decide. But surely in one or the other of those august bodies your
father sits when he is not at home in Texas or viewing Europe through
his daughter's eyes. One look at him and I had gathered that. But Washington is far from London, isn't it? And it is London that
interests us most--though father's constituents must not know that. It
is really a wonderful, an astounding city, once you have got the feel of
the tourist out of your soul. I have been reading the most enthralling
essays on it, written by a newspaper man who first fell desperately
in love with it at seven--an age when the whole glittering town was
symbolized for him by the fried-fish shop at the corner of the High
Street. With him I have been going through its gray and furtive
thoroughfares in the dead of night, and sometimes we have kicked an
ash-barrel and sometimes a romance. Some day I might show that London
to you--guarding you, of course, from the ash-barrels, if you are that
kind. On second thoughts, you aren't. But I know that it is of Adelphi
Terrace and a late captain in the Indian Army that you want to hear now. Yesterday, after my discovery of those messages in the Mail and the call
of Captain Hughes, passed without incident. Last night I mailed you my
third letter, and after wandering for a time amid the alternate glare
and gloom of the city, I went back to my rooms and smoked on my balcony
while about me the inmates of six million homes sweltered in the heat. Nothing happened. I felt a bit disappointed, a bit cheated, as one might
feel on the first night spent at home after many successive visits to
exciting plays. To-day, the first of August dawned, and still all was
quiet. Indeed, it was not until this evening that further developments
in the sudden death of Captain Fraser-Freer arrived to disturb me. These
developments are strange ones surely, and I shall hasten to relate them. I dined to-night at a little place in Soho. My waiter was Italian, and
on him I amused myself with the Italian in Ten Lessons of which I am
foolishly proud. We talked of Fiesole, where he had lived. Once I rode
from Fiesole down the hill to Florence in the moonlight. I remember
endless walls on which hung roses, fresh and blooming. I remember a
gaunt nunnery and two-gray-robed sisters clanging shut the gates. I remember the searchlight from the military encampment, playing
constantly over the Arno and the roofs--the eye of Mars that, here in
Europe, never closes. And always the flowers nodding above me, stooping
now and then to brush my face. I came to think that at the end Paradise,
and not a second-rate hotel, was waiting. One may still take that ride,
I fancy. Some day--some day--

I dined in Soho. I came back to Adelphi Terrace in the hot, reeking
August dusk, reflecting that the mystery in which I was involved was,
after a fashion, standing still. In front of our house I noticed a taxi
waiting. I thought nothing of it as I entered the murky hallway and
climbed the familiar stairs. My door stood open. It was dark in my study, save for the reflection of
the lights of London outside. As I crossed the threshold there came to
my nostrils the faint sweet perfume of lilacs. There are no lilacs in
our garden, and if there were it is not the season. No, this perfume had
been brought there by a woman--a woman who sat at my desk and raised her
head as I entered. "You will pardon this intrusion," she said in the correct careful
English of one who has learned the speech from a book. "I have come for
a brief word with you--then I shall go." I could think of nothing to say. I stood gaping like a schoolboy. "My word," the woman went on, "is in the nature of advice. We do not
always like those who give us advice. None the less, I trust that you
will listen." I found my tongue then. "I am listening," I said stupidly. "But first--a light--" And I moved
toward the matches on the mantelpiece. Quickly the woman rose and faced me. I saw then that she wore a
veil--not a heavy veil, but a fluffy, attractive thing that was yet
sufficient to screen her features from me. "I beg of you," she cried, "no light!" And as I paused, undecided, she
added, in a tone which suggested lips that pout: "It is such a little
thing to ask--surely you will not refuse." I suppose I should have insisted. But her voice was charming, her manner
perfect, and that odor of lilacs reminiscent of a garden I knew long
ago, at home. "Very well," said I. "Oh--I am grateful to you," she answered. Her tone changed. "I
understand that, shortly after seven o'clock last Thursday evening, you
heard in the room above you the sounds of a struggle. Such has been your
testimony to the police?" "It has," said I. "Are you quite certain as to the hour?" I felt that she was smiling at
me. "Might it not have been later--or earlier?" "I am sure it was just after seven," I replied. "I'll tell you why: I
had just returned from dinner and while I was unlocking the door Big Ben
on the House of Parliament struck--"

She raised her hand. "No matter," she said, and there was a touch of iron in her voice. "You are no longer sure of that. Thinking it over, you have come to the
conclusion that it may have been barely six-thirty when you heard the
noise of a struggle." "Indeed?" said I. I tried to sound sarcastic, but I was really too
astonished by her tone. "Yes--indeed!" she replied. "That is what you will tell Inspector Bray
when next you see him. 'It may have been six-thirty,' you will tell him. 'I have thought it over and I am not certain.'" "Even for a very charming lady," I said "I can not misrepresent the
facts in a matter so important. It was after seven--"

"I am not asking you to do a favor for a lady," she replied. "I am
asking you to do a favor for yourself. If you refuse the consequences
may be most unpleasant." "I'm rather at a loss--" I began. She was silent for a moment. Then she turned and I felt her looking at
me through the veil. "Who was Archibald Enwright?" she demanded. My heart sank. I recognized
the weapon in her hands. "The police," she went on, "do not yet know
that the letter of introduction you brought to the captain was signed by
a man who addressed Fraser-Freer as Dear Cousin, but who is completely
unknown to the family. Once that information reaches Scotland Yard, your
chance of escaping arrest is slim. "They may not be able to fasten this crime upon you, but there will be
complications most distasteful. One's liberty is well worth keeping--and
then, too, before the case ends, there will be wide publicity--"

"'Well?" said I. "That is why you are going to suffer a lapse of memory in the matter of
the hour at which you heard that struggle. As you think it over, it
is going to occur to you that it may have been six-thirty, not seven. Otherwise--"

"Go on." "Otherwise the letter of introduction you gave to the captain will be
sent anonymously to Inspector Bray." "You have that letter!" I cried. "Not I," she answered. "But it will be sent to Bray. It will be pointed
out to him that you were posing under false colors. You could not
escape!" I was most uncomfortable. The net of suspicion seemed closing in about
me. But I was resentful, too, of the confidence in this woman's voice. "None the less," said I, "I refuse to change my testimony. The truth is
the truth--"

The woman had moved to the door. She turned. "To-morrow," she replied, "it is not unlikely you will see Inspector
Bray. As I said, I came here to give you advice. You had better take it. What does it matter--a half-hour this way or that? And the difference is
prison for you. Good night." She was gone. I followed into the hall. Below, in the street, I heard
the rattle of her taxi. I went back into my room and sat down. I was upset, and no mistake. Outside my windows the continuous symphony of the city played on--the
busses, the trains, the never-silent voices. I gazed out. What a
tremendous acreage of dank brick houses and dank British souls! I felt
horribly alone. I may add that I felt a bit frightened, as though that
great city were slowly closing in on me. Who was this woman of mystery? What place had she held in the life--and
perhaps in the death--of Captain Fraser-Freer? Why should she come
boldly to my rooms to make her impossible demand? I resolved that, even at the risk of my own comfort, I would stick to
the truth. And to that resolve I would have clung had I not shortly
received another visit--this one far more inexplicable, far more
surprising, than the first. It was about nine o'clock when Walters tapped at my door and told me
two gentlemen wished to see me. A moment later into my study walked
Lieutenant Norman Fraser-Freer and a fine old gentleman with a face that
suggested some faded portrait hanging on an aristocrat's wall. I had
never seen him before. "I hope it is quite convenient for you to see us," said young
Fraser-Freer. I assured him that it was. The boy's face was drawn and haggard; there
was terrible suffering in his eyes, yet about him hung, like a halo, the
glory of a great resolution. "May I present my father?" he said. "General Fraser-Freer, retired. We
have come on a matter of supreme importance--"

The old man muttered something I could not catch. I could see that
he had been hard hit by the loss of his elder son. I asked them to be
seated; the general complied, but the boy walked the floor in a manner
most distressing. "I shall not be long," he remarked. "Nor at a time like this is one in
the mood to be diplomatic. I will only say, sir, that we have come to
ask of you a great--a very great favor indeed. You may not see fit to
grant it. If that is the case we can not well reproach you. But if you
can--"

"It is a great favor, sir!" broke in the general. "And I am in the odd
position where I do not know whether you will serve me best by granting
it or by refusing to do so." "Father--please--if you don't mind--" The boy's voice was kindly but
determined. He turned to me. "Sir--you have testified to the police that it was a bit past seven when
you heard in the room above the sounds of the struggle which--which--You
understand." In view of the mission of the caller who had departed a scant hour
previously, the boy's question startled me. "Such was my testimony," I answered. "It was the truth." "Naturally," said Lieutenant Fraser-Freer. "But--er--as a matter of
fact, we are here to ask that you alter your testimony. Could you, as a
favor to us who have suffered so cruel a loss--a favor we should never
forget--could you not make the hour of that struggle half after six?" I was quite overwhelmed. "Your--reasons?" I managed at last to ask. "I am not able to give them to you in full," the boy answered. "I can
only say this: It happens that at seven o'clock last Thursday night I
was dining with friends at the Savoy--friends who would not be likely to
forget the occasion." The old general leaped to his feet. "Norman," he cried, "I can not let you do this thing! I simply will
not--"

"Hush, father," said the boy wearily. "We have threshed it all out. You
have promised--"

The old man sank back into the chair and buried his face in his hands. "If you are willing to change your testimony," young Fraser-Freer went
on to me, "I shall at once confess to the police that it was I who--who
murdered my brother. They suspect me. They know that late last Thursday
afternoon I purchased a revolver, for which, they believe, at the last
moment I substituted the knife. They know that I was in debt to him;
that we had quarreled about money matters; that by his death I, and I
alone, could profit." He broke off suddenly and came toward me, holding out his arms with a
pleading gesture I can never forget. "Do this for me!" he cried. "Let me confess! Let me end this whole
horrible business here and now." Surely no man had ever to answer such an appeal before. "Why?" I found myself saying, and over and over I repeated it--"Why? Why?" The lieutenant faced me, and I hope never again to see such a look in a
man's eyes. "I loved him!" he cried. "That is why. For his honor, for the honor of
our family, I am making this request of you. Believe me, it is not easy. I can tell you no more than that. You knew my brother?" "Slightly." "Then, for his sake--do this thing I ask." "But--murder--"

"You heard the sounds of a struggle. I shall say that we quarreled--that
I struck in self-defense." He turned to his father. "It will mean only
a few years in prison--I can bear that!" he cried. "For the honor of our
name!" The old man groaned, but did not raise his head. The boy walked back
and forth over my faded carpet like a lion caged. I stood wondering what
answer I should make. "I know what you are thinking," said the lieutenant. "You can not credit
your ears. But you have heard correctly. And now--as you might put
it--it is up to you. I have been in your country." He smiled pitifully. "I think I know you Americans. You are not the sort to refuse a man when
he is sore beset--as I am." I looked from him to the general and back again. "I must think this over," I answered, my mind going at once to Colonel
Hughes. "Later--say to-morrow--you shall have my decision." "To-morrow," said the boy, "we shall both be called before Inspector
Bray. I shall know your answer then--and I hope with all my heart it
will be yes." There were a few mumbled words of farewell and he and the broken old man
went out. As soon as the street door closed behind them I hurried to the
telephone and called a number Colonel Hughes had given me. It was with a
feeling of relief that I heard his voice come back over the wire. I told
him I must see him at once. He replied that by a singular chance he had
been on the point of starting for my rooms. In the half-hour that elapsed before the coming of the colonel I walked
about like a man in a trance. He was barely inside my door when I began
pouring out to him the story of those two remarkable visits. He made
little comment on the woman's call beyond asking me whether I could
describe her; and he smiled when I mentioned lilac perfume. At mention
of young Fraser-Freer's preposterous request he whistled. "By gad!" he said. "Interesting--most interesting! I am not surprised,
however. That boy has the stuff in him." "But what shall I do?" I demanded. Colonel Hughes smiled. "It makes little difference what you do," he said. "Norman Fraser-Freer
did not kill his brother, and that will be proved in due time." He
considered for a moment. "Bray no doubt would be glad to have you alter
your testimony, since he is trying to fasten the crime on the young
lieutenant. On the whole, if I were you, I think that when the
opportunity comes to-morrow I should humor the inspector." "You mean--tell him I am no longer certain as to the hour of that
struggle?" "Precisely. I give you my word that young Fraser-Freer will not be
permanently incriminated by such an act on your part. And incidentally
you will be aiding me." "Very well," said I. "But I don't understand this at all." "No--of course not. I wish I could explain to you; but I can not. I
will say this--the death of Captain Fraser-Freer is regarded as a most
significant thing by the War Office. Thus it happens that two distinct
hunts for his assassin are under way--one conducted by Bray, the other
by me. Bray does not suspect that I am working on the case and I want to
keep him in the dark as long as possible. You may choose which of these
investigations you wish to be identified with." "I think," said I, "that I prefer you to Bray." "Good boy!" he answered. "You have not gone wrong. And you can do me a
service this evening, which is why I was on the point of coming here,
even before you telephoned me. I take it that you remember and could
identify the chap who called himself Archibald Enwright--the man who
gave you that letter to the captain?" "I surely could," said I. "Then, if you can spare me an hour, get your hat." And so it happens, lady of the Carlton, that I have just been to
Limehouse. You do not know where Limehouse is and I trust you never
will. It is picturesque; it is revolting; it is colorful and wicked. The
weird odors of it still fill my nostrils; the sinister portrait of it is
still before my eyes. It is the Chinatown of London--Limehouse. Down
in the dregs of the town--with West India Dock Road for its spinal
column--it lies, redolent of ways that are dark and tricks that are
vain. Not only the heathen Chinee so peculiar shuffles through its
dim-lit alleys, but the scum of the earth, of many colors and of many
climes. The Arab and the Hindu, the Malayan and the Jap, black men from
the Congo and fair men from Scandinavia--these you may meet there--the
outpourings of all the ships that sail the Seven Seas. There many
drunken beasts, with their pay in their pockets, seek each his favorite
sin; and for those who love most the opium, there is, at all too regular
intervals, the Sign of the Open Lamp. 