

E-text prepared by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Patricia A. Benoy, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration. See 19341-h.htm or 19341-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/3/4/19341/19341-h/19341-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/3/4/19341/19341-h.zip)





A MAKER OF HISTORY

by

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

Author of
"The Kingdom of the Blind," "The Hillman,"
"The Double Traitor," Etc. With Frontispiece







[Illustration: "'Guard this for me,' she whispered." (page 148)
_Frontispiece_]


[Illustration]



A. L. Burt Company
Publishers New York
Published by arrangement with Little, Brown & Company
Copyright, 1905, 1906,
by Little, Brown, and Company. All rights reserved




CONTENTS

   CHAPTER                                    PAGE

          BOOK I

       I. AN ACCIDENTAL SPY                      1

      II. AT THE CAFE MONTMARTRE                11

     III. A MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE            18

      IV. THE FALLING OF THE HANDKERCHIEF       26

       V. LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT                   33

      VI. THE VANISHING LADY                    40

     VII. THE DECOY-HOUSE OF EUROPE             48

    VIII. "DUNCOMBE'S HOLD-UP"                  55

      IX. THE STORY OF A CALL                   64

       X. SPENCER'S SURPRISE                    72

      XI. A WORD OF WARNING                     80

     XII. THE SHADOWING OF DUNCOMBE             87

    XIII. "HER VOICE"                           93

     XIV. LAUGHTER OF WOMEN                    101

      XV. MISS FIELDING FROM AMERICA           107

     XVI. MISS FIELDING ASKS A QUESTION        115

    XVII. GEORGE DUNCOMBE'S LIE                121

   XVIII. "WHO ARE THESE PEOPLE?" 129

     XIX. A HILLSIDE ENCOUNTER                 137

      XX. MR. FIELDING IN A NEW ROLE           143

     XXI. A WOMAN'S CRY                        151

    XXII. LORD RUNTON IS SUSPICIOUS            160

   XXIII. HER FIRST KISS                       171

    XXIV. THE EMPTY ROOM                       179


          BOOK II

       I. GUY POYNTON AGAIN                    185

      II. AN OLD STORY                         192

     III. A BODY FROM THE SEINE                200

      IV. THE INSOLENCE OF MADAME LA MARQUISE  208

       V. THE INTERVIEWING OF PHYLLIS          217

      VI. THE BLUNDERING OF ANDREW             225

     VII. SPENCER GETS HIS CHANCE              234

    VIII. A POLITICAL INTERLUDE                243

      IX. ARRESTED! 251

       X. THE CHECKMATING OF MONSIEUR LOUIS    259

      XI. THE MAKING OF HISTORY                267

     XII. AN OLD FRIEND                        276

    XIII. A NEWSPAPER SENSATION                285

     XIV. THE MAN WHO SAVED HIS COUNTRY        294

      XV. A MERRY MEETING                      301




A MAKER OF HISTORY


BOOK I




CHAPTER I

AN ACCIDENTAL SPY


The boy sat up and rubbed his eyes. He was stiff, footsore, and a little
chilly. There was no man-servant arranging his bath and clothes, no
pleasant smell of coffee--none of the small luxuries to which he was
accustomed. On the contrary, he had slept all night upon a bed of
bracken, with no other covering than the stiff pine needles from the
tall black trees, whose rustling music had lulled him to sleep. He sat up, and remembered suddenly where he was and how he had come
there. He yawned, and was on the point of struggling to his feet when he
became aware of certain changed conditions in his surroundings. Some
instinct, of simple curiosity perhaps, but of far-reaching effect, led
him to crawl back into his hiding-place and watch. Last night, after many hours of painful walking, two things alone had
impressed themselves upon his consciousness: the dark illimitable forest
and the double line of rails, which with the absolute straightness of
exact science had stretched behind and in front till the tree-tops in
the far distance seemed to touch, and the rails themselves to vanish
into the black heart of the close-growing pines. For miles he had
limped along the painfully rough track without seeing the slightest sign
of any break in the woods, or any human being. At last the desire for
sleep had overtaken him. He was a hardy young Englishman, and a night
out of doors in the middle of June under these odorous pines presented
itself merely as a not disagreeable adventure. Five minutes after the
idea had occurred to him he was asleep. And now in the gray morning he looked out upon a different scene. Scarcely a dozen yards from him stood a single travelling-coach of dark
green, drawn by a heavy engine. At intervals of scarcely twenty paces up
and down the line, as far as he could see, soldiers were stationed like
sentries. They were looking sharply about in all directions, and he
could even hear the footsteps of others crashing through the wood. From
the train three or four men in long cloaks had already descended. They
were standing in the track talking together. The young man behind the bracken felt himself in somewhat of a dilemma. There was a delightful smell of fresh coffee from the waiting coach, and
there seemed to be not the slightest reason why he should not emerge
from his hiding-place and claim the hospitality of these people. He was
a quite harmless person, with proper credentials, and an adequate
explanation of his presence there. On the other hand, the spirit of
adventure natural to his years strongly prompted him to remain where he
was and watch. He felt certain that something was going to happen. Besides, those soldiers had exactly the air of looking for somebody to
shoot! Whilst he was hesitating, something did happen. There was a shrill
whistle, a puff of white smoke in the distance, and another train
approached from the opposite direction. It drew up within a few feet of the one which was already waiting. Almost immediately half a dozen men, who were already standing upon the
platform of the car, descended. One of these approached rapidly, and
saluted the central figure of those who had been talking together in the
track. After a few moments' conversation these two, followed by one
other man only who was carrying a writing portfolio, ascended the
platform of the train which had arrived first and disappeared inside. The young man who was watching these proceedings yawned. "No duel, then!" he muttered to himself. "I've half a mind to go out." Then he caught sight of a particularly fierce-looking soldier with his
finger already upon the trigger of his gun, and he decided to remain
where he was. In about half an hour the two men reappeared on the platform of the car. Simultaneously the window of the carriage in which they had been sitting
was opened, and the third man was visible, standing before a small table
and arranging some papers. Suddenly he was called from outside. He
thrust his hat upon the papers, and hastened to obey the summons. A little gust of breeze from the opening and closing of the door
detached one of the sheets of paper from the restraining weight of the
hat. It fluttered out of the window and lay for a moment upon the side
of the track. No one noticed it, and in a second or two it fluttered
underneath the clump of bracken behind which the young Englishman was
hiding. He thrust out his hand and calmly secured it. In less than five minutes the place was deserted. Amidst many hasty
farewells, wholly unintelligible to the watcher, the two groups of men
separated and climbed into their respective trains. As soon as every one
was out of sight the Englishman rose with a little grunt of satisfaction
and stretched himself. He glanced first at the sheet of paper, and finding it written in German
thrust it into his pocket. Then he commenced an anxious search for
smoking materials, and eventually produced a pipe, a crumpled packet of
tobacco, and two matches. "Thank Heaven!" he exclaimed, lighting up. "And now for a tramp." He plodded steadily along the track for an hour or more. All the time he
was in the heart of the forest. Pheasants and rabbits and squirrels
continually crossed in front of him. Once a train passed, and an excited
guard shouted threats and warnings, to which he replied in fluent but
ineffective English. "Johnnies seem to think I'm trespassing!" he remarked to himself in an
aggrieved tone. "I can't help being on their beastly line!" Tall, smooth-faced, and fair, he walked with the long step and lightsome
grace of the athletic young Englishman of his day. He was well dressed
in tweed clothes, cut by a good tailor, a little creased by his night
out of doors, but otherwise immaculate. He hummed a popular air to
himself, and held his head high. If only he were not so hungry. Then he came to a station. It was little more than a few rows of planks,
with a chalet at one end--but a very welcome sight confronted him. A
little pile of luggage, with his initials, G. P., was on the end of the
platform nearest to him. "That conductor was a sensible chap," he exclaimed. "Glad I tipped him. Hullo!" The station-master, in uniform, came hurrying out. The young Englishman
took off his hat, and produced a phrase book from his pocket. He ignored
the stream of words which the station-master, with many gesticulations,
was already pouring out. "My luggage," he said firmly, laying one hand upon the pile, and waving
the phrase book. The station-master acquiesced heartily. He waxed eloquent again, but the
Englishman was busy with the phrase book. "Hungry! Hotel?" he attempted. The station-master pointed to where the smoke was curling upwards from a
score or so of houses about half a mile distant. The Englishman was
getting pleased with himself. Outside was a weird-looking carriage, and
on the box seat, fast asleep, was a very fat man in a shiny hat,
ornamented by a bunch of feathers. He pointed to the luggage, then to
the cab, and finally to the village. "Luggage, hotel, carriage!" he suggested. The station-master beamed all over. With a shout, which must have
reached the village, he awakened the sleeping man. In less than five
minutes the Englishman and his luggage were stored away in the carriage. His ticket had been examined by the station-master, and smilingly
accepted. There were more bows and salutes, and the carriage drove off. Mr. Guy Poynton leaned back amongst the mouldy leather upholstery, and
smiled complacently. "Easiest thing in the world to get on in a foreign country with a phrase
book and your wits," he remarked to himself. "Jove, I am hungry!" He drove into a village of half a dozen houses or so, which reminded him
of the pictured abodes of Noah and his brethren. An astonished
innkeeper, whose morning attire apparently consisted of trousers, shirt,
and spectacles, ushered him into a bare room with a trestle table. Guy
produced his phrase book. "Hungry!" he said vociferously. "Want to eat! Coffee!" The man appeared to understand, but in case there should have been any
mistake Guy followed him into the kitchen. The driver, who had lost no
time, was already there, with a long glass of beer before him. Guy
produced a mark, laid it on the table, touched himself, the innkeeper,
and the driver, and pointed to the beer. The innkeeper understood, and
the beer was good. The driver, who had been of course ludicrously over-paid, settled down
in his corner, and announced his intention of seeing through to the end
this most extraordinary and Heaven-directed occurrence. The innkeeper
and his wife busied themselves with the breakfast, and Guy made remarks
every now and then from his phrase book, which were usually
incomprehensible, except when they concerned a further supply of beer. With a brave acceptance of the courtesies of the country he had accepted
a cigar from the driver, and was already contemplating the awful moment
when he would have to light it. Just then an interruption came. It was something very official, but whether military or of the police
Guy could not tell. It strode into the room with clanking of spurs, and
the driver and innkeeper alike stood up in respect. It saluted Guy. Guy
took off his hat. Then there came words, but Guy was busy with his
phrase book. "I cannot a word of German speak!" he announced at last. A deadlock ensued. The innkeeper and the driver rushed into the breach. Conversation became furious. Guy took advantage of the moment to slip
the cigar into his pocket, and to light a cigarette. Finally, the
officer swung himself round, and departed abruptly. "Dolmetscher," the driver announced to him triumphantly. "Dolmetscher," the innkeeper repeated. Guy turned it up in his phrase book, and found that it meant
interpreter. He devoted himself then to stimulating the preparations for
breakfast. The meal was ready at last. There were eggs and ham and veal,
dark-colored bread, and coffee, sufficient for about a dozen people. The
driver constituted himself host, and Guy, with a shout of laughter, sat
down where he was, and ate. In the midst of the meal the officer
reappeared, ushering in a small wizened-faced individual of unmistakably
English appearance. Guy turned round in his chair, and the newcomer
touched his forelock. "Hullo!" Guy exclaimed. "You're English!" "Yes, sir!" the man answered. "Came over to train polo ponies for the
Prince of Haepsburg. Not in any trouble, I hope, sir?" "Not I," Guy answered cheerily. "Don't mind my going on with my
breakfast, do you? What's it all about? Who's the gentleman with the
fireman's helmet on, and what's he worrying about?" "He is an officer of the police, sir, on special service," the man
answered. "You have been reported for trespassing on the State railway
this morning." "Trespassing be blowed!" Guy answered. "I've got my ticket for the
frontier. We were blocked by signal about half a dozen miles off this
place, and I got down to stretch my legs. I understood them to say that
we could not go on for half an hour or so. They never tried to stop my
getting down, and then off they went without any warning, and left me
there." "I will translate to the officer, sir," the man said. "Right!" Guy declared. "Go ahead." There was a brisk colloquy between the two. Then the little man began
again. "He says that your train passed here at midnight, and that you did not
arrive until past six." "Quite right!" Guy admitted. "I went to sleep. I didn't know how far it
was to the station, and I was dead tired." "The officer wishes to know whether many trains passed you in the
night?" "Can't say," Guy answered. "I sleep very soundly, and I never opened my
eyes after the first few minutes." "The officer wishes to know whether you saw anything unusual upon the
line?" the little man asked. "Nothing at all," Guy answered coolly. "Bit inquisitive, isn't he?" The little man came closer to the table. "He wishes to see your passport, sir," he announced. Guy handed it to him, also a letter of credit and several other
documents. "He wants to know why you were going to the frontier, sir!" "Sort of fancy to say that I'd been in Russia, that's all!" Guy
answered. "You tell him I'm a perfectly harmless individual. Never been
abroad before." The officer listened, and took notes in his pocketbook of the passport
and letter of credit. Then he departed with a formal salute, and they
heard his horse's hoofs ring upon the road outside as he galloped away. The little man came close up to the table. "You'll excuse me, sir," he said, "but you seem to have upset the
officials very much by being upon the line last night. There have been
some rumors going about--but perhaps you're best not to know that. May I
give you a word of advice, sir?" "Let me give you one," Guy declared. "Try this beer!" "I thank you, sir," the man answered. "I will do so with pleasure. But
if you are really an ordinary tourist, sir,--as I have no doubt you
are,--let this man drive you to Streuen, and take the train for the
Austrian frontier. You may save yourself a good deal of unpleasantness." "I'll do it!" Guy declared. "Vienna was the next place I was going to,
anyhow. You tell the fellow where to take me, will you?" The man spoke rapidly to the driver. "I think that you will be followed, sir," he added, turning to Guy, "but
very likely they won't interfere with you. The railway last night for
twenty miles back was held up for State purposes. We none of us know
why, and it doesn't do to be too curious over here, but they have an
idea that you are either a journalist or a spy." "_Civis Britannicus sum!_" the boy answered, with a laugh. "It doesn't quite mean what it used to, sir," the man answered quietly. CHAPTER II

AT THE CAFE MONTMARTRE


Exactly a week later, at five minutes after midnight, Guy Poynton, in
evening dress, entered the Cafe Montmartre, in Paris. He made his way
through the heterogeneous little crowd of men and women who were
drinking at the bar, past the scarlet-coated orchestra, into the inner
room, where the tables were laid for supper. Monsieur Albert, satisfied
with the appearance of his new client, led him at once to a small table,
submitted the wine card, and summoned a waiter. With some difficulty, as
his French was very little better than his German, he ordered supper,
and then lighting a cigarette, leaned back against the wall and looked
around to see if he could discover any English or Americans. The room was only moderately full, for the hour was a little early for
this quarter of Paris. Nevertheless, he was quick to appreciate a
certain spirit of Bohemianism which pleased him. Every one talked to his
neighbor. An American from the further end of the room raised his glass
and drank his health. A pretty fair-haired girl leaned over from her
table and smiled at him. "Monsieur like talk with me, eh?" "English?" he asked. "No. De Wien!" He shook his head smilingly. "We shouldn't get on," he declared. "Can't speak the language." She raised her eyebrows with a protesting gesture, but he looked away
and opened an illustrated paper by his side. He turned over the pages
idly enough at first, but suddenly paused. He whistled softly to himself
and stared at the two photographs which filled the sheet. "By Jove!" he said softly to himself. There was the rustling of skirts close to his table. An unmistakably
English voice addressed him. "Is it anything very interesting? Do show me!" He looked up. Mademoiselle Flossie, pleased with his appearance, had
paused on her way down the room. "Come and sit down, and I'll show it you!" he said, rising. "You're
English, aren't you?" Mademoiselle Flossie waved a temporary adieu to her friends and accepted
the invitation. He poured her out a glass of wine. "Stay and have supper with me," he begged. "I must be off soon, but I'm
tired of being alone. This is my last night, thank goodness." "All right!" she answered gayly. "I must go back to my friends directly
afterwards." "Order what you like," he begged. "I can't make these chaps understand
me." She laughed, and called the waiter. "And now show me what you were looking at in that paper," she insisted. He pointed to the two photographs. "I saw those two together only a week ago," he said. "Want to hear about
it?" She looked startled for a moment, and a little incredulous. "Yes, go on!" she said. He told her the story. She listened with an interest which surprised
him. Once or twice when he looked up he fancied that the lady from
Vienna was also doing her best to listen. When he had finished their
supper had arrived. "I think," she said, as she helped herself to _hors d'oeuvre_, "that
you were very fortunate to get away." He laughed carelessly. "The joke of it is," he said, "I've been followed all the way here. One
fellow, who pretended he got in at Strasburg, was trying to talk to me
all the time, but I saw him sneak in at Vienna, and I wasn't having any. I say, do you come here every evening?" "Very often," she answered. "I dance at the Comique, and then we
generally go to Maxim's to supper, and up here afterwards. I'll
introduce you to my friends afterwards, if you like, and we'll all sit
together. If you're very good I'll dance to you!" "Delighted," he answered, "if they speak English. I'm sick of trying to
make people understand my rotten French." She nodded. "They speak English all right. I wish that horrid Viennese girl wouldn't
try to listen to every word we say." He smiled. "She wanted me to sit at her table," he remarked. Mademoiselle Flossie looked at him warningly, and dropped her voice. "Better be careful!" she whispered. "They say she's a spy!" "On my track very likely," he declared with a grin. She threw herself back in her seat and laughed. "Conceited! Why should any one want to be on your track? Come and see me
dance at the Comique to-morrow night." "Can't," he declared. "My sister's coming over from England." "Stupid!" "Oh, I'll come one night," he declared. "Order some coffee, won't
you--and what liqueurs?" "I'll go and fetch my friends," she declared, rising. "We'll all have
coffee together." "Who are they?" he asked. She pointed to a little group down the room--two men and a woman. The
men were French, one middle-aged and one young, dark, immaculate, and
with the slightly bored air affected by young Frenchmen of fashion; the
woman was strikingly handsome and magnificently dressed. They were quite
the most distinguished-looking people in the room. "If you think they'll come," he remarked doubtfully. "Aren't we rather
comfortable as we are?" She made her way between the tables. "Oh, they'll come," she declared. "They're pals!" She floated down the room with a cigarette in her mouth, very graceful
in her airy muslin skirts and large hat. Guy followed her admiringly
with his eyes. The Viennese lady suddenly tore off a corner of her menu
and scribbled something quickly. She passed it over to Guy. "Read!" she said imperatively. He nodded, and opened it. "_Prenez garde!_" he said slowly. Then he looked at her and shook his
head. She was making signs to him to destroy her message, and he at once
did so. "Don't understand!" he said. "Sorry!" Mademoiselle Flossie was laughing and talking with her friends. Presently they rose, and came across the room with her. Guy stood up and
bowed. The introductions were informal, but he felt his insular
prejudices a little shattered by the delightful ease with which these
two Frenchmen accepted the situation. Their breeding was as obvious as
their _bonhomie_. The table was speedily rearranged to find places for
them all. "Your friends will take coffee with me, Mademoiselle," Guy said. "Do be
hostess, please. My attempts at French will only amuse everybody." The elder of the two Frenchmen, whom the waiter addressed as Monsieur le
Baron, and every one else as Louis, held up his hand. "With pleasure!" he declared, "later on. Just now it is too early. We
will celebrate _l'entente cordiale_. _Garcon_, a magnum of Pommery, _un
neu frappe_! I know you will forgive the liberty," he said, smiling at
Guy. "This bottle is vowed. Flossie has smiled for the first time for
three evenings." She threw a paper fan at him, and sat down again by Guy. "Do tell him the story you told me," she whispered in his ear. "Louis,
listen!" Guy retold his story. Monsieur le Baron listened intently. So did the
lady who had accompanied him. Guy felt that he told it very well, but
for the second time he omitted all mention of that missing sheet of
paper which had come into his possession. Monsieur le Baron was
obviously much interested. "You are quite sure--of the two men?" he asked quietly. "Quite!" Guy answered confidently. "One was----"

Madame--Flossie's friend--dropped a wineglass. Monsieur le Baron raised
his hand. "No names," he said. "It is better not. We understand. A most
interesting adventure, Monsieur Poynton, and--to your health!" The wine was good, and the fun of the place itself went almost to the
head. Always there were newcomers who passed down the room amidst a
chorus of greetings, always the gayest of music. Then amidst cheers
Flossie and another friend whom she called from a distant table danced a
cake-walk--danced very gracefully, and with a marvellous display of
rainbow skirts. She came back breathless, and threw herself down by
Guy's side. "Give me some more wine!" she panted. "How close the place is!" The younger Frenchman, who had scarcely spoken, leaned over. "An idea!" he exclaimed. "My automobile is outside. I will drive you all
round the city. Monsieur Poynton shall see Paris undressed. Afterwards
we will go to Louis' rooms and make his man cook us a _dejeuner
Anglais_." Flossie stood up and laughed. "Who'll lend me a coat?" she cried. "I've nothing but a lace mantle." "Plenty of Frenchmen in the car," the young Frenchman cried. "Are we
all agreed? Good! _Garcon, l'addition!_"

"And mine," Guy ordered. The women departed for their wraps. Guy and the two Frenchmen filled
their pockets with cigarettes. When the bills came Guy found that his
own was a trifle, and Monsieur Louis waved aside all protest. "We are hosts to-night, my young friend," he declared with charming
insistence. "Another time you shall have your turn. You must come round
to the club to-morrow, and we will arrange for some sport. _Allons!_"

They crowded out together amidst a chorus of farewells. Guy took
Flossie's arm going down the stairs. "I say, I'm awfully obliged to you for introducing me to your friends,"
he declared. "I'm having a ripping time!" She laughed. "Oh, they're all right," she declared. "Mind my skirts!" "I say, what does '_prenez garde_' mean?" he asked. "'Take care.' Why?" He laughed again. "Nothing!" CHAPTER III

A MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE


"Mademoiselle," the young man said, with an air of somewhat weary
politeness, "I regret to say that there is nothing more to be done!" He was grieved and polite because Mademoiselle was beautiful and in
trouble. For the rest he was a little tired of her. Brothers of
twenty-one, who have never been in Paris before, and cannot speak the
language, must occasionally get lost, and the British Embassy is not
exactly a transported Scotland Yard. "Then," she declared, with a vigorous little stamp of her shapely foot,
"I don't see what we keep an Ambassador here for at all--or any of you. It is scandalous!" The Hon. Nigel Fergusson dropped his eyeglass and surveyed the young
lady attentively. "My dear Miss Poynton," he said, "I will not presume to argue with you. We are here, I suppose, for some purpose or other. Whether we fulfil it
or not may well be a matter of opinion. But that purpose is certainly
not to look after any young idiot--you must excuse my speaking
plainly--who runs amuck in this most fascinating city. In your case the
Chief has gone out of his way to help you. He has interviewed the chief
of police himself, brought his influence to bear in various quarters,
and I can tell you conscientiously that everything which possibly can
be done is being done at the present moment. If you wish for my advice
it is this: Send for some friend to keep you company here, and try to be
patient. You are in all probability making yourself needlessly
miserable." She looked at him a little reproachfully. He noticed, however, with
secret joy that she was drawing on her gloves. "Patient! He was to meet me here ten days ago. He arrived at the hotel. His clothes are all there, and his bill unpaid. He went out the night of
his arrival, and has never returned. Patient! Well, I am much obliged to
you, Mr. Fergusson. I have no doubt that you have done all that your
duty required. Good afternoon!" "Good afternoon, Miss Poynton, and don't be too despondent. Remember
that the French police are the cleverest in the world, and they are
working for you." She looked up at him scornfully. "Police, indeed!" she answered. "Do you know that all they have done so
far is to keep sending for me to go and look at dead bodies down at the
Morgue? I think that I shall send over for an English detective." "You might do worse," he answered; "but in any case, Miss Poynton, I do
hope that you will send over for some friend or relation to keep you
company. Paris is scarcely a fit place for you to be alone and in
trouble." "Thank you," she said. "I will remember what you have said." The young man watched her depart with a curious mixture of relief and
regret. "The young fool's been the usual round, I suppose, and he's either too
much ashamed of himself or too besotted to turn up. I wish she wasn't
quite so devilish good-looking," he remarked to himself. "If she goes
about alone she'll get badly scared before she's finished." Phyllis Poynton drove straight back to her hotel and went to her room. A
sympathetic chambermaid followed her in. "Mademoiselle has news yet of her brother?" she inquired. Mademoiselle shook her head. Indeed her face was sufficient answer. "None at all, Marie." The chambermaid closed the door. "It would help Mademoiselle, perhaps, if she knew where the young
gentleman spent the evening before he disappeared?" she inquired
mysteriously. "Of course! That is just what I want to find out." Marie smiled. "There is a young man here in the barber's shop, Mademoiselle," she
announced. "He remembers Monsieur Poynton quite well. He went in there
to be shaved, and he asked some questions. I think if Mademoiselle were
to see him!" The girl jumped up at once. "Do you know his name?" she asked. "Monsieur Alphonse, they call him. He is on duty now." Phyllis Poynton descended at once to the ground
floor of the hotel, and pushed open the glass door which led into the
coiffeur's shop. Monsieur Alphonse was waiting upon a customer, and she
was given a chair. In a few minutes he descended the spiral iron
staircase and desired to know Mademoiselle's pleasure. "You speak English?" she asked. "But certainly, Mademoiselle." She gave a little sigh of relief. "I wonder," she said, "if you remember waiting upon my brother last
Thursday week. He was tall and fair, and something like me. He had just
arrived in Paris." Monsieur Alphonse smiled. He rarely forgot a face, and the young
Englishman's tip had been munificent. "Perfectly, Mademoiselle," he answered. "They sent for me because
Monsieur spoke no French." "My chambermaid, Marie, told me that you might perhaps know how he
proposed to spend the evening," she continued. "He was quite a stranger
in Paris, and he may have asked for some information." Monsieur Alphonse smiled, and extended his hands. "It is quite true," he answered. "He asked me where to go, and I say to
the Folies Bergeres. Then he said he had heard a good deal of the supper
cafes, and he asked me which was the most amusing. I tell him the Cafe
Montmartre. He wrote it down." "Do you think that he meant to go there?" she asked. "But certainly. He promised to come and tell me the next day how he
amused himself." "The Cafe Montmartre. Where is it?" she asked. "In the Place de Montmartre. But Mademoiselle pardons--she will
understand that it is a place for men." "Are women not admitted?" she asked. Alphonse smiled. "But--yes. Only Mademoiselle understands that if a lady should go there
she would need to be very well escorted." She rose and slipped a coin into his hand. "I am very much obliged to you," she said. "By the bye, have any other
people made inquiries of you concerning my brother?" "No one at all, Mademoiselle!" the man answered. She almost slammed the door behind when she went out. "And they say that the French police are the cleverest in the world,"
she exclaimed indignantly. Monsieur Alphonse watched her through the glass pane. "_Ciel!_ But she is pretty!" he murmured to himself. *       *       *       *       *

She turned into the writing-room, and taking off her gloves she wrote a
letter. Her pretty fingers were innocent of rings, and her handwriting
was a little shaky. Nevertheless, it is certain that not a man passed
through the room who did not find an excuse to steal a second glance at
her. This is what she wrote:--

     "MY DEAR ANDREW,--I am in great distress here, and
     very unhappy. I should have written to you before, but I know
     that you have your own trouble to bear just now, and I hated
     to bother you. I arrived here punctually on the date arranged
     upon between Guy and myself, and found that he had arrived the
     night before, and had engaged a room for me. He was out when I
     came. I changed my clothes and sat down to wait for him. He
     did not return. I made inquiries and found that he had left
     the hotel at eight o'clock the previous evening. To cut the
     matter short, ten days have now elapsed and he has not yet
     returned. "I have been to the Embassy, to the police, and to the Morgue. Nowhere have I found the slightest trace of him. No one seems
     to take the least interest in his disappearance. The police
     shrug their shoulders, and look at me as though I ought to
     understand--he will return very shortly they are quite sure. At the Embassy they have begun to look upon me as a nuisance. The Morgue--Heaven send that I may one day forget the horror
     of my hasty visits there. I have come to the conclusion,
     Andrew, that I must search for him myself. How, I do not know;
     where, I do not know. But I shall not leave Paris until I have
     found him. "Andrew, what I want is a friend here. A few months ago I
     should not have hesitated a moment to ask you to come to me. To-day that is impossible. Your presence here would only be an
     embarrassment to both of us. Do you know of any one who would
     come? I have not a single relative whom I can ask to help me. Would you advise me to write to Scotland Yard for a detective,
     or go to one of these agencies? If not, can you think of any
     one who would come here and help me, either for your sake as
     your friend, or, better still, a detective who can speak
     French and whom one can trust? All our lives Guy and I have
     congratulated ourselves that we have no relation nearer than
     India. I am finding out the other side of it now. "I know that you will do what you can for me, Andrew. Write to
     me by return. "Yours in great trouble and distress,

       "PHYLLIS POYNTON." She sealed and addressed her letter, and saw it despatched. Afterwards
she crossed the courtyard to the restaurant, and did her best to eat
some dinner. When she had finished it was only half-past eight. She rang
for the lift and ascended to the fourth floor. On her way down the
corridor a sudden thought struck her. She took a key from her pocket and
entered the room which her brother had occupied. His things were still lying about in some disorder, and neither of his
trunks was locked. She went down on her knees and calmly proceeded to go
through his belongings. It was rather a forlorn hope, but it seemed to
her just possible that there might be in some of his pockets a letter
which would throw light upon his disappearance. She found nothing of the
sort, however. There were picture postcards, a few photographs, and a
good many restaurant bills, but they were all from places in Germany and
Austria. At the bottom of the second trunk, however, she found something
which he had evidently considered it worth while to preserve carefully. It was a thick sheet of official-looking paper, bearing at the top an
embossed crown, and covered with German writing. It was numbered at the
top "seventeen," and it was evidently an odd sheet of some document. She
folded it carefully up, and took it back with her to her own room. Then,
with the help of a German dictionary, she commenced to study it. At the
end of an hour she had made out a rough translation, which she read
carefully through. When she had finished she was thoroughly perplexed. She had an uncomfortable sense of having come into touch with something
wholly unexpected and mysterious. "What am I to do?" she said to herself softly. "What can it mean? Where on earth can Guy--have found this?" There was no one to answer her, no one to advise. An overwhelming sense
of her own loneliness brought the tears into her eyes. She sat for some
time with her face buried in her hands. Then she rose up, calmly
destroyed her translation with minute care, and locked away the
mysterious sheet at the bottom of her dressing-bag. The more she thought
of it the less, after all, she felt inclined to connect it with his
disappearance. CHAPTER IV

THE FALLING OF THE HANDKERCHIEF


Monsieur Albert looked over her shoulder for the man who must surely be
in attendance--but he looked in vain. "Mademoiselle wishes a table--for herself alone!" he repeated
doubtfully. "If you please," she answered. It was obvious that Mademoiselle was of the class which does not
frequent night cafes alone, but after all that was scarcely Monsieur
Albert's concern. She came perhaps from that strange land of the free,
whose daughters had long ago kicked over the barriers of sex with the
same abandon that Mademoiselle Flossie would display the soles of her
feet a few hours later in their national dance. If she had chanced to
raise her veil no earthly persuasions on her part would have secured for
her the freedom of that little room, for Monsieur Albert's appreciation
of likeness was equal to his memory for faces. But it was not until she
was comfortably ensconced at a corner table, from which she had a good
view of the room, that she did so, and Monsieur Albert realized with a
philosophic shrug of the shoulders the error he had committed. Phyllis looked about her with some curiosity. It was too early for the
habitues of the place, and most of the tables were empty. The
scarlet-coated band were smoking cigarettes, and had not yet produced
their instruments. The conductor curled his black moustache and stared
hard at the beautiful young English lady, without, however, being able
to attract a single glance in return. One or two men also tried to
convey to her by smiles and glances the fact that her solitude need
continue no longer than she chose. The unattached ladies put their heads
together and discussed her with little peals of laughter. To all of
these things she remained indifferent. She ordered a supper which she
ate mechanically, and wine which she scarcely drank. All the while she
was considering. Now that she was here what could she do? Of whom was
she to make inquiries? She scanned the faces of the newcomers with a
certain grave curiosity which puzzled them. She neither invited nor
repelled notice. She remained entirely at her ease. Monsieur Albert, during one of his peregrinations round the room, passed
close to her table. She stopped him. "I trust that Mademoiselle is well served!" he remarked with a little
bow. "Excellently, I thank you," she answered. He would have passed on, but she detained him. "You have very many visitors here," she remarked. "Is it the same
always?" He smiled. "To-night," he declared, "it is nothing. There are many who come here
every evening. They amuse themselves here." "You have a good many strangers also?" she asked. "But certainly," he declared. "All the time!" "I have a brother," she said, "who was here eleven nights ago--let me
see--that would be last Tuesday week. He is tall and fair, about
twenty-one, and they say like me. I wonder if you remember him." Monsieur Albert shook his head slowly. "That is strange," he declared, "for as a rule I forget no one. Last
Tuesday week I remember perfectly well. It was a quiet evening. La Scala
was here--but of the rest no one. If Mademoiselle's brother was here it
is most strange." Her lip quivered for a moment. She was disappointed. "I am so sorry," she said. "I hoped that you might have been able to
help me. He left the Grand Hotel on that night with the intention of
coming here--and he never returned. I have been very much worried ever
since." She was no great judge of character, but Monsieur Albert's sympathy did
not impress her with its sincerity. "If Mademoiselle desires," he said, "I will make inquiries amongst the
waiters. I very much fear, however, that she will obtain no news here." He departed, and Phyllis watched him talking to some of the waiters and
the leader of the orchestra. Presently he returned. "I am very sorry," he announced, "but the brother of Mademoiselle could
not have come here. I have inquired of the garcons, and of Monsieur
Jules there, who forgets no one. They answer all the same." "Thank you very much," she answered. "It must have been somewhere else!" She was unreasonably disappointed. It had been a very slender chance,
but at least it was something tangible. She had scarcely expected to
have it snapped so soon and so thoroughly. She dropped her veil to hide
the tears which she felt were not far from her eyes, and summoned the
waiter for her bill. There seemed to be no object in staying longer. Suddenly the unexpected happened. A hand, flashing with jewels, was rested for a moment upon her table. When it was withdrawn a scrap of paper remained there. Phyllis looked up in amazement. The girl to whom the hand had belonged
was sitting at the next table, but her head was turned away, and she
seemed to be only concerned in watching the door. She drew the scrap of
paper towards her and cautiously opened it. This is what she read,
written in English, but with a foreign turn to most of the letters:--

     "Monsieur Albert lied. Your brother was here. Wait till I
     speak to you." Instinctively she crumpled up this strange little note in her hand. She
struggled hard to maintain her composure. She had at once the idea that
every one in the place was looking at her. Monsieur Albert, indeed, on
his way down the room wondered what had driven the hopeless expression
from her face. The waiter brought her bill. She paid it and tipped him with prodigality
which for a woman was almost reckless. Then she ordered coffee, and
after a second's hesitation cigarettes. Why not? Nearly all the women
were smoking, and she desired to pass for the moment as one of them. For
the first time she ventured to gaze at her neighbor. It was the young lady from Vienna. She was dressed in a wonderful
demi-toilette of white lace, and she wore a large picture hat adjusted
at exactly the right angle for her profile. From her throat and bosom
there flashed the sparkle of many gems--the finger which held her
cigarette was ablaze with diamonds. She leaned back in her seat smoking
lazily, and she met Phyllis's furtive gaze with almost insolent
coldness. But a moment later, when Monsieur Albert's back was turned,
she leaned forward and addressed her rapidly. "A man will come here," she said, "who could tell you, if he was
willing, all that you seek to know. He will come to-night--he comes all
the nights. You will see I hold my handkerchief so in my right hand. When he comes I shall drop it--so!" The girl's swift speech, her half-fearful glances towards the door,
puzzled Phyllis. "Can you not come nearer to me and talk?" she asked. "No! You must not speak to me again. You must not let any one,
especially the man himself, know what I have told you. No more now. Watch for the handkerchief!" "But what shall I say to him?" The girl took no notice of her. She was looking in the opposite
direction. She seemed to have edged away as far as possible from her. Phyllis drew a long breath. She felt her heart beating with excitement. The place suddenly seemed to
her like part of a nightmare. And then all was clear again. Fortune was on her side. The secret of
Guy's disappearance was in this room, and a few careless words from the
girl at the next table had told her more than an entire police system
had been able to discover. But why the mystery? What was she to say to
the man when he came? The girl from Vienna was talking to some friends
and toying carelessly with a little morsel of lace which she had drawn
from her bosom. Phyllis watched it with the eyes of a cat. Every now
and then she watched also the door. The place was much fuller now. Mademoiselle Flossie had arrived with a
small company of friends from Maxim's. The music was playing all the
time. The popping of corks was almost incessant, the volume of sound had
swelled. The laughter and greeting of friends betrayed more abandon than
earlier in the evening. Old acquaintances had been renewed, and new ones
made. Mademoiselle from Vienna was surrounded by a little circle of
admirers. Still she held in her right hand a crumpled up little ball of
lace. Men passing down the room tried to attract the attention of the
beautiful young English demoiselle who looked out upon the little scene
so indifferently as regarded individuals, and yet with such eager
interest as a whole. No one was bold enough, however, to make a second
effort. Necessity at times gives birth to a swift capacity. Fresh from
her simple country life, Phyllis found herself still able with
effortless serenity to confound the most hardened boulevarders who
paused to ogle her. Her eyes and lips expressed with ease the most
convincing and absolute indifference to their approaches. A man may
sometimes brave anger; he rarely has courage to combat indifference. So
Phyllis held her own and waited. And at last the handkerchief fell. Phyllis felt her own heart almost
stop beating, as she gazed down the room. A man of medium height, dark,
distinguished, was slowly approaching her, exchanging greetings on every
side. His languid eyes fell upon Phyllis. Those who had watched her
previously saw then a change. The cold indifference had vanished from
her face. She leaned forward as though anxious to attract his
attention. She succeeded easily enough. He was almost opposite her table, and her half smile seemed to leave him
but little choice. He touched the back of the chair which fronted hers,
and took off his hat. "Mademoiselle permits?" he asked softly. "But certainly," she answered. "It is you for whom I have been waiting!" "Mademoiselle flatters me!" he murmured, more than a little astonished. "Not in the least," she answered. "I have been waiting to ask you what
has become of my brother--Guy Poynton!" He drew out the chair and seated himself. His eyes never left her face. "Mademoiselle," he murmured, "this is most extraordinary!" She noticed then that his hands were trembling. CHAPTER V

LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT


"I am asking a great deal of you, George! I know it. But you see how
helpless I am--and read the letter--read it for yourself." He passed Phyllis's letter across the small round dining-table. His
guest took it and read it carefully through. "How old is the young lady?" he asked. "Twenty-three!" "And the boy?" "Twenty-one." "Orphans, I think you said?" "Orphans and relationless." "Well off?" "Moderately." Duncombe leaned back in his chair and sipped his port thoughtfully. "It is an extraordinary situation!" he remarked. "Extraordinary indeed," his friend assented. "But so far as I am
concerned you can see how I am fixed. I am older than either of them,
but I have always been their nearest neighbor and their most intimate
friend. If ever they have needed advice they have come to me for it. If
ever I have needed a day's shooting for myself or a friend I have gone
to them. This Continental tour of theirs we discussed and planned out,
months beforehand. If my misfortune had not come on just when it did I
should have gone with them, and even up to the last we hoped that I
might be able to go to Paris with Phyllis." Duncombe nodded. "Tell me about the boy," he said. His host shrugged his shoulders. "You know what they're like at that age," he remarked. "He was at
Harrow, but he shied at college, and there was no one to insist upon his
going. The pair of them had only a firm of lawyers for guardians. He's
just a good-looking, clean-minded, high-spirited young fellow, full of
beans, and needing the bit every now and then. But, of course, he's no
different from the run of young fellows of his age, and if an adventure
came his way I suppose he'd see it through." "And the girl?" Andrew Pelham rose from his seat. "I will show you her photograph," he said. He passed into an inner room divided from the dining-room by curtains. In a moment or two he reappeared. "Here it is!" he said, and laid a picture upon the table. Now Duncombe was a young man who prided himself a little on being
unimpressionable. He took up the picture with a certain tolerant
interest and examined it, at first without any special feeling. Yet in a
moment or two he felt himself grateful for those great disfiguring
glasses from behind which his host was temporarily, at least, blind to
all that passed. A curious disturbance seemed to have passed into his
blood. He felt his eyes brighten, and his breath come a little quicker,
as he unconsciously created in his imagination the living presentment
of the girl whose picture he was still holding. Tall she was, and slim,
with a soft, white throat, and long, graceful neck; eyes rather darker
than her complexion warranted, a little narrow, but bright as stars--a
mouth with the divine lines of humor and understanding. It was only a
picture, but a realization of the living image seemed to be creeping in
upon him. He made the excuse of seeking a better light, and moved across
to a distant lamp. He bent over the picture, but it was not the picture
which he saw. He saw the girl herself, and even with the half-formed
thought he saw her expression change. He saw her eyes lit with sorrow
and appeal--he saw her arms outstretched towards him--he seemed even to
hear her soft cry. He knew then what his answer would be to his friend's
prayer. He thought no more of the excuses which he had been building in
his mind; of all the practical suggestions which he had been prepared to
make. Common-sense died away within him. The matter-of-fact man of
thirty was ready to tread in the footsteps of this great predecessor,
and play the modern knight-errant with the whole-heartedness of Don
Quixote himself. He fancied himself by her side, and his heart leaped
with joy of it. He thought no more of abandoned cricket matches and
neglected house parties. A finger of fire had been laid upon his
somewhat torpid flesh and blood. "Well?" Andrew asked. Duncombe returned to the table, and laid the picture down with a
reluctance which he could scarcely conceal. "Very nice photograph," he remarked. "Taken locally?" "I took it myself," Andrew answered. "I used to be rather great at that
sort of thing before--before my eyes went dicky." Duncombe resumed his seat. He helped himself to another glass of wine. "I presume," he said, "from the fact that you call yourself their
nearest friend, that the young lady is not engaged?" "No," Andrew answered slowly. "She is not engaged." Something a little different in his voice caught his friend's attention. Duncombe eyed him keenly. He was conscious of a sense of apprehension. He leaned over the table. "Do you mean, Andrew----?" he asked hoarsely. "Do you mean----?" "Yes, I mean that," his friend answered quietly. "Nice sort of old fool,
am I not? I'm twelve years older than she is, I'm only moderately well
off and less than moderately good-looking. But after all I'm only human,
and I've seen her grow up from a fresh, charming child into one of God's
wonderful women. Even a gardener, you know, George, loves the roses he
has planted and watched over. I've taught her a little and helped her a
little, and I've watched her cross the borderland." "Does she know?" Andrew shook his head doubtfully. "I think," he said, "that she was beginning to guess. Three months ago I
should have spoken--but my trouble came. I didn't mean to tell you this,
but perhaps it is as well that you should know. You can understand now
what I am suffering. To think of her there alone almost maddens me." Duncombe rose suddenly from his seat. "Come out into the garden, Andrew," he said. "I feel stifled here." His host rose and took Duncombe's arm. They passed out through the
French window on to the gravel path which circled the cedar-shaded lawn. A shower had fallen barely an hour since, and the air was full of fresh
delicate fragrance. Birds were singing in the dripping trees, blackbirds
were busy in the grass. The perfume from the wet lilac shrubs was a very
dream of sweetness. Andrew pointed across a park which sloped down to
the garden boundary. "Up there, amongst the elm trees, George," he said, "can you see a gleam
of white? That is the Hall, just to the left of the rookery." Duncombe nodded. "Yes," he said, "I can see it." "Guy and she walked down so often after dinner," he said quietly. "I
have stood here and watched them. Sometimes she came alone. What a long
time ago that seems!" Duncombe's grip upon his arm tightened. "Andrew," he said, "I can't go!" There was a short silence. Andrew stood quite still. All around them was
the soft weeping of dripping shrubs. An odorous whiff from the walled
rose-garden floated down the air. "I'm sorry, George! It's a lot to ask you, I know." "It isn't that!" Andrew turned his head toward his friend. The tone puzzled him. "I don't understand." "No wonder, old fellow! I don't understand myself." There was another short silence. Andrew stood with his almost sightless
eyes turned upon his friend, and Duncombe was looking up through the elm
trees to the Hall. He was trying to fancy her as she must have appeared
to this man who dwelt alone, walking down the meadow in the evening. "No," he repeated softly, "I don't understand myself. You've known me
for a long time, Andrew. You wouldn't write me down as altogether a
sentimental ass, would you?" "I should not, George. I should never even use the word 'sentimental' in
connection with you." Duncombe turned and faced him squarely. He laid his hands upon his
friend's shoulders. "Old man," he said, "here's the truth. So far as a man can be said to
have lost his heart without rhyme or reason, I've lost mine to the girl
of that picture." Andrew drew a quick breath. "Rubbish, George!" he exclaimed. "Why, you never saw her. You don't know
her!" "It is quite true," Duncombe answered. "And yet--I have seen her
picture." His friend laughed queerly. "You, George Duncombe, in love with a picture. Stony-hearted George, we
used to call you. I can't believe it! I can't take you seriously. It's
all rot, you know, isn't it! It must be rot!" "It sounds like it," Duncombe answered quietly. "Put it this way, if you
like. I have seen a picture of the woman whom, if ever I meet, I most
surely shall love. What there is that speaks to me from that picture I
do not know. You say that only love can beget love. Then there is that
in the picture which points beyond. You see, I have talked like this in
an attempt to be honest. You have told me that you care for her. Therefore I have told you these strange things. Now do you wish me to go
to Paris, for if you say yes I shall surely go!" Again Andrew laughed, and this time his mirth sounded more natural. "Let me see," he said. "We drank Pontet Canet for dinner. You refused
liqueurs, but I think you drank two glasses of port. George, what has
come over you? What has stirred your slow-moving blood to fancies like
these? Bah! We are playing with one another. Listen! For the sake of our
friendship, George, I beg you to grant me this great favor. Go to Paris
to-morrow and help Phyllis!" "You mean it?" "God knows I do. If ever I took you seriously, George--if ever I feared
to lose the woman I love--well, I should be a coward for my own sake to
rob her of help when she needs it so greatly. Be her friend, George, and
mine. For the rest the fates must provide!" "The fates!" Duncombe answered. "Ay, it seems to me that they have been
busy about my head to-night. It is settled, then. I will go!" CHAPTER VI

THE VANISHING LADY


At precisely half-past nine on the following evening Duncombe alighted
from his _petite voiture_ in the courtyard of the Grand Hotel, and
making his way into the office engaged a room. And then he asked the
question which a hundred times on the way over he had imagined himself
asking. A man to whom nervousness in any shape was almost unknown, he
found himself only able to control his voice and manner with the
greatest difficulty. In a few moments he might see her. "You have a young English lady--Miss Poynton--staying here, I believe,"
he said. "Can you tell me if she is in now?" The clerk looked at him with sudden interest. "Miss Poynton is staying here, sir," he said. "I do not believe that she
is in just now. Will you wait one moment?" He disappeared rapidly, and was absent for several minutes. When he
returned he came out into the reception hall. "The manager would be much obliged if you would step into his office for
a moment, sir," he said confidentially. "Will you come this way?" Duncombe followed him into a small room behind the counter. A
gray-haired man rose from his desk and saluted him courteously. "Sir George Duncombe, I believe," he said. "Will you kindly take a
seat?" Duncombe did as he was asked. All the time he felt that the manager was
scrutinizing him curiously. "Your clerk," he said, "told me that you wished to speak to me." "Exactly!" the manager answered. "You inquired when you came in for Miss
Poynton. May I ask--are you a friend of hers?" "I am here on behalf of her friends," Duncombe answered. "I have letters
to her." The manager bowed gravely. "I trust," he said, "that you will soon have an opportunity to deliver
them. We are not, of course, responsible in any way for the conduct or
doings of our clients here, but I am bound to say that both the young
people of the name you mention have been the cause of much anxiety to
us." "What do you mean?" Duncombe asked quickly. "Mr. Guy Poynton," the manager continued, "arrived here about three
weeks ago, and took a room for himself and one for his sister, who was
to arrive on the following day. He went out that same evening, and has
never since returned. Of that fact you are no doubt aware." Duncombe nodded impatiently. "Yes!" he said. "That is why I am here." "His sister arrived on the following day, and was naturally very
distressed. We did all that we could for her. We put her in the way of
communicating with the police and the Embassy here, and we gave her
every assistance that was possible. Four nights ago Mademoiselle went
out late. Since then we have seen nothing of her. Mademoiselle also has
disappeared." Duncombe sprang to his feet. He was suddenly pale. "Good God!" he exclaimed. "Four nights ago! She went out alone, you
say?" "How else? She had no friends here. Once or twice at my suggestion she
had taken one of our guides with her, but she discontinued this as she
fancied that it made her conspicuous. She was all the time going round
to places making inquiries about her brother." Duncombe felt himself suddenly precipitated into a new world--a
nightmare of horrors. He was no stranger in the city, and grim
possibilities unfolded themselves before his eyes. Four nights ago! "You have sent--to the police?" "Naturally. But in Paris--Monsieur must excuse me if I speak plainly--a
disappearance of this sort is never regarded seriously by them. You know
the life here without doubt, Monsieur! Your accent proves that you are
well acquainted with the city. No doubt their conclusions are based upon
direct observation, and in most cases are correct--but it is very
certain that Monsieur the Superintendent regards such disappearances as
these as due to one cause only." Duncombe frowned, and something flashed in his eyes which made the
manager very glad that he had not put forward this suggestion on his own
account. "With regard to the boy," he said, "this might be likely enough. But
with regard to the young lady it is of course wildly preposterous. I
will go to the police myself," he added, rising. "One moment, Sir George," the manager continued. "The disappearance of
the young lady was a source of much trouble to me, and I made all
possible inquiries within the hotel. I found that on the day of her
disappearance Mademoiselle had been told by one of the attendants in
the barber's shop, who had waited upon her brother on the night of his
arrival, that he--Monsieur Guy--had asked for the name of some cafes for
supper, and that he had recommended Cafe Montmartre. Mademoiselle
appears to have decided to go there herself to make inquiries. 