













The Bat


by

Mary Roberts Rinehart and Avery Hopwood





CONTENTS


        ONE  THE SHADOW OF THE BAT
        TWO  THE INDOMITABLE MISS VAN GORDER
      THREE  PISTOL PRACTICE
       FOUR  THE STORM GATHERS
       FIVE  ALOPECIA AND RUBEOLA
        SIX  DETECTIVE ANDERSON TAKES CHARGE
      SEVEN  CROSS-QUESTIONS AND CROOKED ANSWERS
      EIGHT  THE GLEAMING EYE
       NINE  A SHOT IN THE DARK
        TEN  THE PHONE CALL FROM NOWHERE
     ELEVEN  BILLY PRACTICES JIU-JITSU
     TWELVE  "I DIDN'T KILL HIM." THIRTEEN  THE BLACKENED BAG
   FOURTEEN  HANDCUFFS
    FIFTEEN  THE SIGN OF THE BAT
    SIXTEEN  THE HIDDEN ROOM
  SEVENTEEN  ANDERSON MAKES AN ARREST
   EIGHTEEN  THE BAT STILL FLIES
   NINETEEN  MURDER ON MURDER
     TWENTY  "HE IS--THE BAT!" TWENTY-ONE  QUITE A COLLECTION




THE BAT



CHAPTER ONE

THE SHADOW OF THE BAT

"You've got to get him, boys--get him or bust!" said a tired police
chief, pounding a heavy fist on a table. The detectives he bellowed
the words at looked at the floor. They had done their best and failed. Failure meant "resignation" for the police chief, return to the hated
work of pounding the pavements for them--they knew it, and, knowing it,
could summon no gesture of bravado to answer their chief's. Gunmen,
thugs, hi-jackers, loft-robbers, murderers, they could get them all in
time--but they could not get the man he wanted. "Get him--to hell with expense--I'll give you carte blanche--but get
him!" said a haggard millionaire in the sedate inner offices of the
best private detective firm in the country. The man on the other side
of the desk, man hunter extraordinary, old servant of Government and
State, sleuthhound without a peer, threw up his hands in a gesture of
odd hopelessness. "It isn't the money, Mr. De Courcy--I'd give every
cent I've made to get the man you want--but I can't promise you
results--for the first time in my life." The conversation was ended. "Get him? Huh! I'll get him, watch my smoke!" It was young ambition
speaking in a certain set of rooms in Washington. Three days later
young ambition lay in a New York gutter with a bullet in his heart and
a look of such horror and surprise on his dead face that even the
ambulance-Doctor who found him felt shaken. "We've lost the most
promising man I've had in ten years," said his chief when the news came
in. He swore helplessly, "Damn the luck!" "Get him--get him--get him--get him!" From a thousand sources now the
clamor arose--press, police, and public alike crying out for the
capture of the master criminal of a century--lost voices hounding a
specter down the alleyways of the wind. And still the meshes broke and
the quarry slipped away before the hounds were well on the
scent--leaving behind a trail of shattered safes and rifled jewel
cases--while ever the clamor rose higher to "Get him--get him--get--"

Get whom, in God's name--get what? Beast, man, or devil? A specter--a
flying shadow--the shadow of a Bat. From thieves' hangout to thieves' hangout the word passed along
stirring the underworld like the passage of an electric spark. "There's
a bigger guy than Pete Flynn shooting the works, a guy that could have
Jim Gunderson for breakfast and not notice he'd et." The underworld
heard and waited to be shown; after a little while the underworld began
to whisper to itself in tones of awed respect. There were bright stars
and flashing comets in the sky of the world of crime--but this new
planet rose with the portent of an evil moon. The Bat--they called him the Bat. Like a bat he chose the night hours
for his work of rapine; like a bat he struck and vanished, pouncingly,
noiselessly; like a bat he never showed himself to the face of the day. He'd never been in stir, the bulls had never mugged him, he didn't run
with a mob, he played a lone hand, and fenced his stuff so that even
the fence couldn't swear he knew his face. Most lone wolves had a moll
at any rate--women were their ruin--but if the Bat had a moll, not even
the grapevine telegraph could locate her. Rat-faced gunmen in the dingy back rooms of saloons muttered over his
exploits with bated breath. In tawdrily gorgeous apartments, where
gathered the larger figures, the proconsuls of the world of crime,
cold, conscienceless brains dissected the work of a colder and swifter
brain than theirs, with suave and bitter envy. Evil's Four Hundred
chattered, discussed, debated--sent out a thousand invisible tentacles
to clutch at a shadow--to turn this shadow and its distorted genius to
their own ends. The tentacles recoiled, baffled--the Bat worked
alone--not even Evil's Four Hundred could bend him into a willing
instrument to execute another's plan. The men higher up waited. They had dealt with lone wolves before and
broken them. Some day the Bat would slip and falter; then they would
have him. But the weeks passed into months and still the Bat flew
free, solitary, untamed, and deadly. At last even his own kind turned
upon him; the underworld is like the upper in its fear and distrust of
genius that flies alone. But when they turned against him, they turned
against a spook--a shadow. A cold and bodiless laughter from a pit of
darkness answered and mocked at their bungling gestures of hate--and
went on, flouting Law and Lawless alike. Where official trailer and private sleuth had failed, the newspapers
might succeed--or so thought the disillusioned young men of the Fourth
Estate--the tireless foxes, nose-down on the trail of news--the
trackers, who never gave up until that news was run to earth. Star
reporter, leg-man, cub, veteran gray in the trade--one and all they
tried to pin the Bat like a caught butterfly to the front page of their
respective journals--soon or late each gave up, beaten. He was
news--bigger news each week--a thousand ticking typewriters clicked his
adventures--the brief, staccato recital of his career in the morgues of
the great dailies grew longer and more incredible each day. But the
big news--the scoop of the century--the yearned-for headline, "Bat
Nabbed Red-Handed", "Bat Slain in Gun Duel with Police"--still eluded
the ravenous maw of the Linotypes. And meanwhile, the red-scored list
of his felonies lengthened and the rewards offered from various sources
for any clue which might lead to his apprehension mounted and mounted
till they totaled a small fortune. Columnists took him up, played with the name and the terror, used the
name and the terror as a starting point from which to exhibit their own
particular opinions on everything and anything. Ministers mentioned
him in sermons; cranks wrote fanatic letters denouncing him as one of
the even-headed beasts of the Apocalypse and a forerunner of the end of
the world; a popular revue put on a special Bat number wherein eighteen
beautiful chorus girls appeared masked and black-winged in costumes of
Brazilian bat fur; there were Bat club sandwiches, Bat cigarettes, and
a new shade of hosiery called simply and succinctly Bat. He became a
fad--a catchword--a national figure. And yet--he was walking
Death--cold--remorseless. But Death itself had become a toy of
publicity in these days of limelight and jazz. A city editor, at lunch with a colleague, pulled at his cigarette and
talked. "See that Sunday story we had on the Bat?" he asked. "Pretty
tidy--huh--and yet we didn't have to play it up. It's an amazing
list--the Marshall jewels--the Allison murder--the mail truck
thing--two hundred thousand he got out of that, all negotiable, and two
men dead. I wonder how many people he's really killed. We made it six
murders and nearly a million in loot--didn't even have room for the
small stuff--but there must be more--"

His companion whistled. "And when is the Universe's Finest Newspaper going to burst forth with
'Bat Captured by BLADE Reporter?'" he queried sardonically. "Oh, for--lay off it, will you?" said the city editor peevishly. "The
Old Man's been hopping around about it for two months till everybody's
plumb cuckoo. Even offered a bonus--a big one--and that shows how
crazy he is--he doesn't love a nickel any better than his right
eye--for any sort of exclusive story. Bonus--huh!" and he crushed out
his cigarette. "It won't be a Blade reporter that gets that bonus--or
any reporter. It'll be Sherlock Holmes from the spirit world!" "Well--can't you dig up a Sherlock?" The editor spread out his hands. "Now, look here," he said. "We've
got the best staff of any paper in the country, if I do say it. We've
got boys that could get a personal signed story from Delilah on how she
barbered Samson--and find out who struck Billy Patterson and who was
the Man in the Iron Mask. But the Bat's something else again. Oh, of
course, we've panned the police for not getting him; that's always the
game. But, personally, I won't pan them; they've done their damnedest. They're up against something new. Scotland Yard wouldn't do any
better--or any other bunch of cops that I know about." "But look here, Bill, you don't mean to tell me he'll keep on getting
away with it indefinitely?" The editor frowned. "Confidentially--I don't know," he said with a
chuckle: "The situation's this: for the first time the super-crook--the
super-crook of fiction--the kind that never makes a mistake--has come
to life--real life. And it'll take a cleverer man than any Central
Office dick I've ever met to catch him!" "Then you don't think he's just an ordinary crook with a lot of luck?" "I do not." The editor was emphatic. "He's much brainier. Got a
ghastly sense of humor, too. Look at the way he leaves his calling
card after every job--a black paper bat inside the Marshall safe--a bat
drawn on the wall with a burnt match where he'd jimmied the Cedarburg
Bank--a real bat, dead, tacked to the mantelpiece over poor old
Allison's body. Oh, he's in a class by himself--and I very much doubt
if he was a crook at all for most of his life." "You mean?" "I mean this. The police have been combing the underworld for him; I
don't think he comes from there. I think they've got to look higher,
up in our world, for a brilliant man with a kink in the brain. He may
be a Doctor, a lawyer, a merchant, honored in his community by
day--good line that, I'll use it some time--and at night, a
bloodthirsty assassin. Deacon Brodie--ever hear of him--the Scotch
deacon that burgled his parishioners' houses on the quiet? Well--that's our man." "But my Lord, Bill--"

"I know. I've been going around the last month, looking at everybody I
knew and thinking--are you the Bat? Try it for a while. You'll want
to sleep with a light in your room after a few days of it. Look around
the University Club--that white-haired man over
there--dignified--respectable--is he the Bat? Your own lawyer--your
own Doctor--your own best friend. Can happen you know--look at those
Chicago boys--the thrill-killers. Just brilliant students--likeable
boys--to the people that taught them--and cold-blooded murderers all
the same." "Bill! You're giving me the shivers!" "Am I?" The editor laughed grimly. "Think it over. No, it isn't so
pleasant.--But that's my theory--and I swear I think I'm right." He
rose. His companion laughed uncertainly. "How about you, Bill--are you the Bat?" The editor smiled. "See," he said, "it's got you already. No, I can
prove an alibi. The Bat's been laying off the city recently--taking a
fling at some of the swell suburbs. Besides I haven't the brains--I'm
free to admit it." He struggled into his coat. "Well, let's talk about
something else. I'm sick of the Bat and his murders." His companion rose as well, but it was evident that the editor's theory
had taken firm hold on his mind. As they went out the door together he
recurred to the subject. "Honestly, though, Bill--were you serious, really serious--when you
said you didn't know of a single detective with brains enough to trap
this devil?" The editor paused in the doorway. "Serious enough," he said. "And yet
there's one man--I don't know him myself but from what I've heard of
him, he might be able--but what's the use of speculating?" "I'd like to know all the same," insisted the other, and laughed
nervously. "We're moving out to the country next week ourselves--right
in the Bat's new territory." "We-el," said the editor, "you won't let it go any further? Of course
it's just an idea of mine, but if the Bat ever came prowling around our
place, the detective I'd try to get in touch with would be--"  He put
his lips close to his companion's ear and whispered a name. The man whose name he whispered, oddly enough, was at that moment
standing before his official superior in a quiet room not very far
away. Tall, reticently good-looking and well, if inconspicuously,
clothed and groomed, he by no means seemed the typical detective that
the editor had spoken of so scornfully. He looked something like a
college athlete who had kept up his training, something like a pillar
of one of the more sedate financial houses. He could assume and
discard a dozen manners in as many minutes, but, to the casual
observer, the one thing certain about him would probably seem his utter
lack of connection with the seamier side of existence. The key to his
real secret of life, however, lay in his eyes. When in repose, as now,
they were veiled and without unusual quality--but they were the eyes of
a man who can wait and a man who can strike. He stood perfectly easy before his chief for several moments before the
latter looked up from his papers. "Well, Anderson," he said at last, looking up, "I got your report on
the Wilhenry burglary this morning. I'll tell you this about it--if
you do a neater and quicker job in the next ten years, you can take
this desk away from me. I'll give it to you. As it is, your name's
gone up for promotion today; you deserved it long ago." "Thank you, sir," replied the tall man quietly, "but I had luck with
that case." "Of course you had luck," said the chief. "Sit down, won't you, and
have a cigar--if you can stand my brand. Of course you had luck,
Anderson, but that isn't the point. It takes a man with brains to use
a piece of luck as you used it. I've waited a long time here for a man
with your sort of brains and, by Judas, for a while I thought they were
all as dead as Pinkerton. But now I know there's one of them alive at
any rate--and it's a hell of a relief." "Thank you, sir," said the tall man, smiling and sitting down. He took
a cigar and lit it. "That makes it easier, sir--your telling me that. Because--I've come to ask a favor." "All right," responded the chief promptly. "Whatever it is, it's
granted." Anderson smiled again. "You'd better hear what it is first, sir. I
don't want to put anything over on you." "Try it!" said the chief. "What is it--vacation? Take as long as you
like--within reason--you've earned it--I'll put it through today." Anderson shook his head, "No sir--I don't want a vacation." "Well," said the chief impatiently. "Promotion? I've told you about
that. Expense money for anything--fill out a voucher and I'll O.K. it--be best man at your wedding--by Judas, I'll even do that!" Anderson laughed. "No, sir--I'm not getting married and--I'm pleased
about the promotion, of course--but it's not that. I want to be
assigned to a certain case--that's all." The chief's look grew searching. "H'm," he said. "Well, as I say,
anything within reason. What case do you want to be assigned to?" The muscles of Anderson's left hand tensed on the arm of his chair. He
looked squarely at the chief. "I want a chance at the Bat!" he replied
slowly. The chief's face became expressionless. "I said--anything within
reason," he responded softly, regarding Anderson keenly. "I want a chance at the Bat!" repeated Anderson stubbornly. "If I've
done good work so far--I want a chance at the Bat!" The chief drummed on the desk. Annoyance and surprise were in his
voice when he spoke. "But look here, Anderson," he burst out finally. "Anything else and
I'll--but what's the use? I said a minute ago, you had brains--but
now, by Judas, I doubt it! If anyone else wanted a chance at the Bat,
I'd give it to them and gladly--I'm hard-boiled. But you're too
valuable a man to be thrown away!" "I'm no more valuable than Wentworth would have been." "Maybe not--and look what happened to him! A bullet hole in his
heart--and thirty years of work that he might have done thrown away! No, Anderson, I've found two first-class men since I've been at this
desk--Wentworth and you. He asked for his chance; I gave it to
him--turned him over to the Government--and lost him. Good detectives
aren't so plentiful that I can afford to lose you both." "Wentworth was a friend of mine," said Anderson softly. His knuckles
were white dints in the hand that gripped the chair. "Ever since the
Bat got him I've wanted my chance. Now my other work's cleaned up--and
I still want it." "But I tell you--" began the chief in tones of high exasperation. Then
he stopped and looked at his protege. There was a silence for a time. "Oh, well--" said the chief finally in a hopeless voice. "Go
ahead--commit suicide--I'll send you a 'Gates Ajar' and a card, 'Here
lies a damn fool who would have been a great detective if he hadn't
been so pig-headed.' Go ahead!" Anderson rose. "Thank you, sir," he said in a deep voice. His eyes
had light in them now. "I can't thank you enough, sir." "Don't try," grumbled the chief. "If I weren't as much of a damn fool
as you are I wouldn't let you do it. And if I weren't so damn old, I'd
go after the slippery devil myself and let you sit here and watch me
get brought in with an infernal paper bat pinned where my shield ought
to be. The Bat's supernatural, Anderson. You haven't a chance in the
world but it does me good all the same to shake hands with a man with
brains and nerve," and he solemnly wrung Anderson's hand in an iron
grip. Anderson smiled. "The cagiest bat flies once too often," he said. "I'm
not promising anything, chief, but--"

"Maybe," said the chief. "Now wait a minute, keep your shirt on,
you're not going out bat hunting this minute, you know--"

"Sir? I thought I--"

"Well, you're not," said the chief decidedly. "I've still some little
respect for my own intelligence and it tells me to get all the work out
of you I can, before you start wild-goose chasing after this--this bat
out of hell. The first time he's heard of again--and it shouldn't be
long from the fast way he works--you're assigned to the case. That's
understood. Till then, you do what I tell you--and it'll be work,
believe me!" "All right, sir," Anderson laughed and turned to the door. "And--thank
you again." He went out. The door closed. The chief remained for some minutes
looking at the door and shaking his head. "The best man I've had in
years--except Wentworth," he murmured to himself. "And throwing
himself away--to be killed by a cold-blooded devil that nothing human
can catch--you're getting old, John Grogan--but, by Judas, you can't
blame him, can you? If you were a man in the prime like him, by Judas,
you'd be doing it yourself. And yet it'll go hard--losing him--"

He turned back to his desk and his papers. But for some minutes he
could not pay attention to the papers. There was a shadow on them--a
shadow that blurred the typed letters--the shadow of bat's wings. CHAPTER TWO

THE INDOMITABLE MISS VAN GORDER

Miss Cornelis Van Gorder, indomitable spinster, last bearer of a name
which had been great in New York when New York was a red-roofed Nieuw
Amsterdam and Peter Stuyvesant a parvenu, sat propped up in bed in the
green room of her newly rented country house reading the morning
newspaper. Thus seen, with an old soft Paisley shawl tucked in about
her thin shoulders and without the stately gray transformation that
adorned her on less intimate occasions,--she looked much less
formidable and more innocently placid than those could ever have
imagined who had only felt the bite of her tart wit at such functions
as the state Van Gorder dinners. Patrician to her finger tips,
independent to the roots of her hair, she preserved, at sixty-five, a
humorous and quenchless curiosity in regard to every side of life,
which even the full and crowded years that already lay behind her had
not entirely satisfied. She was an Age and an Attitude, but she was
more than that; she had grown old without growing dull or losing touch
with youth--her face had the delicate strength of a fine cameo and her
mild and youthful heart preserved an innocent zest for adventure. Wide travel, social leadership, the world of art and books, a dozen
charities, an existence rich with diverse experience--all these she had
enjoyed energetically and to the full--but she felt, with ingenious
vanity, that there were still sides to her character which even these
had not brought to light. As a little girl she had hesitated between
wishing to be a locomotive engineer or a famous bandit--and when she
had found, at seven, that the accident of sex would probably debar her
from either occupation, she had resolved fiercely that some time before
she died she would show the world in general and the Van Gorder clan in
particular that a woman was quite as capable of dangerous exploits as a
man. So far her life, while exciting enough at moments, had never
actually been dangerous and time was slipping away without giving her
an opportunity to prove her hardiness of heart. Whenever she thought
of this the fact annoyed her extremely--and she thought of it now. She threw down the morning paper disgustedly. Here she was at
65--rich, safe, settled for the summer in a delightful country place
with a good cook, excellent servants, beautiful gardens and
grounds--everything as respectable and comfortable as--as a limousine! And out in the world people were murdering and robbing each other,
floating over Niagara Falls in barrels, rescuing children from burning
houses, taming tigers, going to Africa to hunt gorillas, doing all
sorts of exciting things! She could not float over Niagara Falls in a
barrel; Lizzie Allen, her faithful old maid, would never let her! She
could not go to Africa to hunt gorillas; Sally Ogden, her sister, would
never let her hear the last of it. She could not even, as she
certainly would if the were a man, try and track down this terrible
creature, the Bat! She sniffed disgruntledly. Things came to her much too easily. Take
this very house she was living in. Ten days ago she had decided on the
spur of the moment--a decision suddenly crystallized by a weariness of
charitable committees and the noise and heat of New York--to take a
place in the country for the summer. It was late in the renting
season--even the ordinary difficulties of finding a suitable spot would
have added some spice to the quest--but this ideal place had
practically fallen into her lap, with no trouble or search at all. Courtleigh Fleming, president of the Union Bank, who had built the
house on a scale of comfortable magnificence--Courtleigh Fleming had
died suddenly in the West when Miss Van Gorder was beginning her house
hunting. The day after his death her agent had called her up. Richard
Fleming, Courtleigh Fleming's nephew and heir, was anxious to rent the
Fleming house at once. If she made a quick decision it was hers for
the summer, at a bargain. Miss Van Gorder had decided at once; she
took an innocent pleasure in bargains. The next day the keys were
hers--the servants engaged to stay on--within a week she had moved. All very pleasant and easy no doubt--adventure--pooh! And yet she could not really say that her move to the country had
brought her no adventures at all. There had been--things. Last night
the lights had gone off unexpectedly and Billy, the Japanese butler and
handy man, had said that he had seen a face at one of the kitchen
windows--a face that vanished when he went to the window. Servants'
nonsense, probably, but the servants seemed unusually nervous for
people who were used to the country. And Lizzie, of course, had sworn
that she had seen a man trying to get up the stairs but Lizzie could
grow hysterical over a creaking door. Still--it was queer! And what
had that affable Doctor Wells said to her--"I respect your courage,
Miss Van Gorder--moving out into the Bat's home country, you know!" She picked up the paper again. There was a map of the scene of the
Bat's most recent exploits and, yes, three of his recent crimes had
been within a twenty-mile radius of this very spot. She thought it
over and gave a little shudder of pleasurable fear. Then she dismissed
the thought with a shrug. No chance! She might live in a lonely house,
two miles from the railroad station, all summer long--and the Bat would
never disturb her. Nothing ever did. She had skimmed through the paper hurriedly; now a headline caught her
eye. Failure of Union Bank--wasn't that the bank of which Courtleigh
Fleming had been president? She settled down to read the article but
it was disappointingly brief. The Union Bank had closed its doors; the
cashier, a young man named Bailey, was apparently under suspicion; the
article mentioned Courtleigh Fleming's recent and tragic death in the
best vein of newspaperese. She laid down the paper and
thought--Bailey--Bailey--she seemed to have a vague recollection of
hearing about a young man named Bailey who worked in a bank--but she
could not remember where or by whom his name had been mentioned. Well--it didn't matter. She had other things to think about. She must
ring for Lizzie--get up and dress. The bright morning sun, streaming
in through the long window, made lying in bed an old woman's luxury and
she refused to be an old woman. "Though the worst old woman I ever knew was a man!" she thought with a
satiric twinkle. She was glad Sally's daughter--young Dale Ogden--was
here in the house with her. The companionship of Dale's bright youth
would keep her from getting old-womanish if anything could. She smiled, thinking of Dale. Dale was a nice child--her favorite
niece. Sally didn't understand her, of course--but Sally wouldn't. Sally read magazine articles on the younger generation and its wild
ways. "Sally doesn't remember when she was a younger generation
herself," thought Miss Cornelia. "But I do--and if we didn't have
automobiles, we had buggies--and youth doesn't change its ways just
because it has cut its hair. Before Mr. and Mrs. Ogden left for
Europe, Sally had talked to her sister Cornelia ... long and weightily,
on the problem of Dale." "Problem of Dale, indeed!" thought Miss
Cornelia scornfully. "Dale's the nicest thing I've seen in some time. She'd be ten times happier if Sally wasn't always trying to marry her
off to some young snip with more of what fools call 'eligibility' than
brains! But there, Cornelia Van Gorder--Sally's given you your innings
by rampaging off to Europe and leaving Dale with you all summer and
you've a lot less sense than I flatter myself you have, if you can't
give your favorite niece a happy vacation from all her immediate
family--and maybe find her someone who'll make her happy for good and
all in the bargain." Miss Cornelia was an incorrigible matchmaker. Nevertheless, she was more concerned with "the problem of Dale" than
she would have admitted. Dale, at her age, with her charm and
beauty--why, she ought to behave as if she were walking on air, thought
her aunt worriedly. "And instead she acts more as if she were walking
on pins and needles. She seems to like being here--I know she likes
me--I'm pretty sure she's just as pleased to get a little holiday from
Sally and Harry--she amuses herself--she falls in with any plan I want
to make, and yet--"  And yet Dale was not happy--Miss Cornelia felt
sure of it. "It isn't natural for a girl to seem so lackluster
and--and quiet--at her age and she's nervous, too--as if something were
preying on her mind--particularly these last few days. If she were in
love with somebody--somebody Sally didn't approve of
particularly--well, that would account for it, of course--but Sally
didn't say anything that would make me think that--or Dale
either--though I don't suppose Dale would, yet, even to me. I haven't
seen so much of her in these last two years--"

Then Miss Cornelia's mind seized upon a sentence in a hurried flow of
her sister's last instructions--a sentence that had passed almost
unnoticed at the time--something about Dale and "an unfortunate
attachment--but of course, Cornelia, dear, she's so young--and I'm sure
it will come to nothing now her father and I have made our attitude
plain!" "Pshaw--I bet that's it," thought Miss Cornelia shrewdly. "Dale's
fallen in love, or thinks she has, with some decent young man without a
penny or an 'eligibility' to his name--and now she's unhappy because
her parents don't approve--or because she's trying to give him up and
finds she can't. Well--"  and Miss Cornelia's tight little gray curls
trembled with the vehemence of her decision, "if the young thing ever
comes to me for advice I'll give her a piece of my mind that will
surprise her and scandalize Sally Van Gorder Ogden out of her seven
senses. Sally thinks nobody's worth looking at if they didn't come
over to America when our family did--she hasn't gumption enough to
realize that if some people hadn't come over later, we'd all still be
living on crullers and Dutch punch!" She was just stretching out her hand to ring for Lizzie when a knock
came at the door. She gathered her Paisley shawl more tightly about
her shoulders. "Who is it--oh, it's only you, Lizzie," as a pleasant
Irish face, crowned by an old-fashioned pompadour of graying hair,
peeped in at the door. "Good morning, Lizzie--I was just going to ring
for you. Has Miss Dale had breakfast--I know it's shamefully late." "Good morning, Miss Neily," said Lizzie, "and a lovely morning it is,
too--if that was all of it," she added somewhat tartly as she came into
the room with a little silver tray whereupon the morning mail reposed. We have not yet described Lizzie Allen--and she deserves description. A fixture in the Van Gorder household since her sixteenth year, she had
long ere now attained the dignity of a Tradition. The slip of a
colleen fresh from Kerry had grown old with her mistress, until the
casual bond between mistress and servant had changed into something
deeper; more in keeping with a better-mannered age than ours. One
could not imagine Miss Cornelia without a Lizzie to grumble at and
cherish--or Lizzie without a Miss Cornelia to baby and scold with the
privileged frankness of such old family servitors. The two were at
once a contrast and a complement. Fifty years of American ways had not
shaken Lizzie's firm belief in banshees and leprechauns or tamed her
wild Irish tongue; fifty years of Lizzie had not altered Miss
Cornelia's attitude of fond exasperation with some of Lizzie's more
startling eccentricities. Together they may have been, as one of the
younger Van Gorder cousins had, irreverently put it, "a scream," but
apart each would have felt lost without the other. "Now what do you mean--if that were all of it, Lizzie?" queried Miss
Cornelia sharply as she took her letters from the tray. Lizzie's face assumed an expression of doleful reticence. "It's not my place to speak," she said with a grim shake of her head,
"but I saw my grandmother last night, God rest her--plain as life she
was, the way she looked when they waked her--and if it was my doing
we'd be leaving this house this hour!" "Cheese-pudding for supper--of course you saw your grandmother!" said
Miss Cornelia crisply, slitting open the first of her letters with a
paper knife. "Nonsense, Lizzie, I'm not going to be scared away from
an ideal country place because you happen to have a bad dream!" "Was it a bad dream I saw on the stairs last night when the lights went
out and I was looking for the candles?" said Lizzie heatedly. "Was it a
bad dream that ran away from me and out the back door, as fast as
Paddy's pig? No, Miss Neily, it was a man--Seven feet tall he was, and
eyes that shone in the dark and--"

"Lizzie Allen!" "Well, it's true for all that," insisted Lizzie stubbornly. "And why
did the lights go out--tell me that, Miss Neily? They never go out in
the city." "Well, this isn't the city," said Miss Cornelia decisively. "It's the
country, and very nice it is, and we're staying here all summer. I
suppose I may be thankful," she went on ironically, "that it was only
your grandmother you saw last night. It might have been the Bat--and
then where would you be this morning?" "I'd be stiff and stark with candles at me head and feet," said Lizzie
gloomily. "Oh, Miss Neily, don't talk of that terrible creature, the
Bat!" She came nearer to her mistress. "There's bats in this house,
too--real bats," she whispered impressively. "I saw one yesterday in
the trunk room--the creature! It flew in the window and nearly had the
switch off me before I could get away!" Miss Cornelia chuckled. "Of course there are bats," she said. "There
are always bats in the country. They're perfectly harmless,--except to
switches." "And the Bat ye were talking of just then--he's harmless too, I
suppose?" said Lizzie with mournful satire. "Oh, Miss Neily, Miss
Neily--do let's go back to the city before he flies away with us all!" "Nonsense, Lizzie," said Miss Cornelia again, but this time less
firmly. Her face grew serious. "If I thought for an instant that
there was any real possibility of our being in danger here--" she said
slowly. "But--oh, look at the map, Lizzie! The Bat has been flying in
this district--that's true enough--but he hasn't come within ten miles
of us yet!" "What's ten miles to the Bat?" the obdurate Lizzie sighed. "And what
of the letter ye had when ye first moved in here? 'The Fleming house
is unhealthy for strangers,' it said. Leave it while ye can." "Some silly boy or some crank." Miss Cornelia's voice was firm. "I
never pay any attention to anonymous letters." "And there's a funny-lookin' letter this mornin', down at the bottom of
the pile--" persisted Lizzie. "It looked like the other one. I'd half
a mind to throw it away before you saw it!" "Now, Lizzie, that's quite enough!" Miss Cornelia had the Van Gorder
manner on now. "I don't care to discuss your ridiculous fears any
further. Where is Miss Dale?" Lizzie assumed an attitude of prim rebuff, "Miss Dale's gone into the
city, ma'am." "Gone into the city?" "Yes, ma'am. She got a telephone call this morning, early--long
distance it was. I don't know who it was called her." "Lizzie! You didn't listen?" "Of course not, Miss Neily." Lizzie's face was a study in injured
virtue. "Miss Dale took the call in her own room and shut the door." "And you were outside the door?" "Where else would I be dustin' that time in the mornin'?" said Lizzie
fiercely. "But it's yourself knows well enough the doors in this house
is thick and not a sound goes past them." "I should hope not," said Miss Cornelia rebukingly. "But--tell me,
Lizzie, did Miss Dale seem--well--this morning?" "That she did not," said Lizzie promptly. "When she came down to
breakfast, after the call, she looked like a ghost. I made her the
eggs she likes, too--but she wouldn't eat 'em." "H'm," Miss Cornelia pondered. "I'm sorry if--well, Lizzie, we mustn't
meddle in Miss Dale's affairs." "No, ma'am." "But--did she say when she would be back?" "Yes, Miss Neily. On the two o'clock train. Oh, and I was almost
forgettin'--she told me to tell you, particular--she said while he was
in the city she'd be after engagin' the gardener you spoke of." "The gardener? Oh, yes--I spoke to her about that the other night. The
place is beginning to look run down--so many flowers to attend to. Well--that's very kind of Miss Dale." "Yes, Miss Neily." Lizzie hesitated, obviously with some weighty news
on her mind which she wished to impart. Finally she took the plunge. "I might have told Miss Dale she could have been lookin' for a cook as
well--and a housemaid--" she muttered at last, "but they hadn't spoken
to me then." Miss Cornelia sat bolt upright in bed. "A cook--and a housemaid? But
we have a cook and a housemaid, Lizzie! You don't mean to tell me--"

Lizzie nodded her head. "Yes'm. They're leaving. Both of 'em. Today." "But good heav--  Lizzie, why on earth didn't you tell me before?" Lizzie spoke soothingly, all the blarney of Kerry in her voice. "Now,
Miss Neily, as if I'd wake you first thing in the morning with bad news
like that! And thinks I, well, maybe 'tis all for the best after
all--for when Miss Neily hears they're leavin'--and her so
particular--maybe she'll go back to the city for just a little and
leave this house to its haunts and its bats and--"

"Go back to the city? I shall do nothing of the sort. I rented this
house to live in and live in it I will, with servants or without them. You should have told me at once, Lizzie. I'm really very much annoyed
with you because you didn't. I shall get up immediately--I want to
give those two a piece of my mind. Is Billy leaving too?" "Not that I know of--the heathern Japanese!" said Lizzie sorrowfully. "And yet he'd be better riddance than cook or housemaid." "Now, Lizzie, how many times have I told you that you must conquer your
prejudices? Billy is an excellent butler--he'd been with Mr. Fleming
ten years and has the very highest recommendations. I am very glad
that he is staying, if he is. With you to help him, we shall do very
well until I can get other servants." Miss Cornelia had risen now and
Lizzie was helping her with the intricacies of her toilet. "But it's
too annoying," she went on, in the pauses of Lizzie's deft
ministrations. "What did they say to you, Lizzie--did they give any
reason? It isn't as if they were new to the country like you. They'd
been with Mr. Fleming for some time, though not as long as Billy." "Oh, yes, Miss Neily--they had reasons you could choke a goat with,"
said Lizzie viciously as she arranged Miss Cornelia's transformation. "Cook was the first of them--she was up late--I think they'd been
talking it over together. She comes into the kitchen with her hat on
and her bag in her hand. 'Good morning,' says I, pleasant enough,
'you've got your hat on,' says I. 'I'm leaving,' says she. 'Leaving,
are you?' says I. 'Leaving,' says she. 'My sister has twins,' says
she. 'I just got word--I must go to her right away.' 'What?' says I,
all struck in a heap. 'Twins,' says she, 'you've heard of such things
as twins.' 'That I have,' says I, 'and I know a lie on a face when I
see it, too.'" "Lizzie!" "Well, it made me sick at heart, Miss Neily. Her with her hat and her
bag and her talk about twins--and no consideration for you. Well, I'll
go on. 'You're a clever woman, aren't you?' says she--the impudence! 'I can see through a millstone as far as most,' says I--I wouldn't put
up with her sauce. 'Well!' says she, 'you can see that Annie the
housemaid's leaving, too.' 'Has her sister got twins as well?' says I
and looked at her. 'No,' says she as bold as brass, 'but Annie's got a
pain in her side and she's feared it's appendycitis--so she's leaving
to go back to her family.' 'Oh,' says I, 'and what about Miss Van
Gorder?' 'I'm sorry for Miss Van Gorder,' says she--the falseness of
her!--'But she'll have to do the best she can for twins and
appendycitis is acts of God and not to be put aside for even the best
of wages.' 'Is that so?' says I and with that I left her, for I knew if
I listened to her a minute longer I'd be giving her bonnet a shake and
that wouldn't be respectable. So there you are, Miss Neily, and that's
the gist of the matter." Miss Cornelia laughed. "Lizzie--you're unique," she said. "But I'm
glad you didn't give her bonnet a shake--though I've no doubt you
could." "Humph!" said Lizzie snorting, the fire of battle in her eye. "And is
it any Black Irish from Ulster would play impudence to a Kerrywoman
without getting the flat of a hand in--but that's neither here nor
there. The truth of it is, Miss Neily," her voice grew solemn, "it's
my belief they're scared--both of them--by the haunts and the banshees
here--and that's all." "If they are they're very silly," said Miss Cornelia practically. "No,
they may have heard of a better place, though it would seem as if when
one pays the present extortionate wages and asks as little as we do
here--but it doesn't matter. If they want to go, they may. Am I
ready, Lizzie?" "You look like an angel, ma'am," said Lizzie, clasping her hands. "Well, I feel very little like one," said Miss Cornelia, rising. "As
cook and housemaid may discover before I'm through with them. Send them
into the livingroom, Lizzie, when I've gone down. I'll talk to them
there." An hour or so later, Miss Cornelia sat in a deep chintz chair in the
comfortable living-room of the Fleming house going through the pile of
letters which Lizzie's news of domestic revolt had prevented her
reading earlier. Cook and housemaid had come and gone--civil enough,
but so obviously determined upon leaving the house at once that Miss
Cornelia had sighed and let them go, though not without caustic
comment. Since then, she had devoted herself to calling up various
employment agencies without entirely satisfactory results. A new cook
and housemaid were promised for the end of the week--but for the next
three days the Japanese butler, Billy, and Lizzie between them would
have to bear the brunt of the service. Oh, yes--and then there's
Dale's gardener, if she gets one, thought Miss, Cornelia. "I wish he
could cook--but I don't suppose gardeners can--and Billy's a treasure. Still, its inconvenient--now, stop--Cornelia Van Gorder--you were
asking for an adventure only this morning and the moment the littlest
sort of one comes along, you want to crawl out of it." She had reached the bottom of her pile of letters--these to be thrown
away, these to be answered--ah, here was one she had overlooked
somehow. She took it up. It must be the one Lizzie had wanted to
throw away--she smiled at Lizzie's fears. The address was badly typed,
on cheap paper--she tore the envelope open and drew out a single
unsigned sheet. If you stay in this house any longer--DEATH. Go back to the city at
once and save your life. Her fingers trembled a little as she turned the missive over but her
face remained calm. She looked at the envelope--at the postmark--while
her heart thudded uncomfortably for a moment and then resumed its
normal beat. It had come at last--the adventure--and she was not
afraid! CHAPTER THREE

PISTOL PRACTICE

She knew who it was, of course. The Bat! No doubt of it. And
yet--did the Bat ever threaten before he struck? She could not
remember. But it didn't matter. The Bat was unprecedented--unique. At
any rate, Bat or no Bat, she must think out a course of action. The
defection of cook and housemaid left her alone in the house with Lizzie
and Billy--and Dale, of course, if Dale returned. Two old women, a
young girl, and a Japanese butler to face the most dangerous criminal
in America, she thought grimly. And yet--one couldn't be sure. The
threatening letter might be only a joke--a letter from a crank--after
all. Still, she must take precautions; look for aid somewhere. But
where could she look for aid? She ran over in her mind the new acquaintances she had made since she
moved to the country. There was Doctor Wells, the local physician, who
had joked with her about moving into the Bat's home territory--He
seemed an intelligent man--but she knew him only slightly--she couldn't
call a busy Doctor away from his patients to investigate something
which might only prove to be a mare's-nest. The boys Dale had met at
the country club--"Humph!" she sniffed, "I'd rather trust my gumption
than any of theirs." The logical person to call on, of course, was
Richard Fleming, Courtleigh Fleming's nephew and heir, who had rented
her the house. He lived at the country club--she could probably reach
him now. She was just on the point of doing so when she decided
against it--partly from delicacy, partly from an indefinable feeling
that he would not be of much help. Besides, she thought sturdily, it's
my house now, not his. He didn't guarantee burglar protection in the
lease. As for the local police--her independence revolted at summoning them. They would bombard her with ponderous questions and undoubtedly think
she was merely a nervous old spinster. If it was just me, she thought,
I swear I wouldn't say a word to anybody--and if the Bat flew in he
mightn't find it so easy to fly out again, if I am sixty-five and never
shot a burglar in my life! But there's Dale--and Lizzie. I've got to
be fair to them. For a moment she felt very helpless, very much alone. Then her courage
returned. "Pshaw, Cornelia, if you have got to get help--get the help you want
and hang the consequences!" she adjured herself. "You've always
hankered to see a first-class detective do his detecting--well, get
one--or decide to do the job yourself. I'll bet you could at that." She tiptoed to the main door of the living-room and closed it
cautiously, smiling as she did so. Lizzie might be about and Lizzie
would promptly go into hysterics if she got an inkling of her
mistress's present intentions. Then she went to the city telephone and
asked for long distance. When she had finished her telephoning, she looked at once relieved and
a little naughty--like a demure child who has carried out some piece of
innocent mischief unobserved. "My stars!" she muttered to herself. "You never can tell what you can do till you try." Then she sat down
again and tried to think of other measures of defense. Now if I were the Bat, or any criminal, she mused, how would I get into
this house? Well, that's it--I might get in 'most any way--it's so big
and rambling. All the grounds you want to lurk in, too; it'd take a
company of police to shut them off. Then there's the house itself. Let's see--third floor--trunk room, servants' rooms--couldn't get in
there very well except with a pretty long ladder--that's all right. Second floor--well, I suppose a man could get into my bedroom from the
porch if he were an acrobat, but he'd need to be a very good acrobat
and there's no use borrowing trouble. Downstairs is the problem,
Cornelia, downstairs is the problem. "Take this room now." She rose and examined it carefully. "There's
the door over there on the right that leads into the billiard room. There's this door over here that leads into the hall. Then there's
that other door by the alcove, and all those French windows--whew!" She
shook her head. It was true. The room in which she stood, while comfortable and
charming, seemed unusually accessible to the night prowler. A row of
French windows at the rear gave upon a little terrace; below the
terrace, the drive curved about and beneath the billiard-room windows
in a hairpin loop, drawing up again at the main entrance on the other
side of the house. At the left of the French windows (if one faced the
terrace as Miss Cornelia was doing) was the alcove door of which she
spoke. When open, it disclosed a little alcove, almost entirely
devoted to the foot of a flight of stairs that gave direct access to
the upper regions of the house. The alcove itself opened on one side
upon the terrace and upon the other into a large butler's pantry. The
arrangement was obviously designed so that, if necessary, one could
pass directly from the terrace to the downstairs service quarters or
the second floor of the house without going through the living-room,
and so that trays could be carried up from the pantry by the side
stairs without using the main staircase. The middle pair of French windows were open, forming a double door. Miss Cornelia went over to them--shut them--tried the locks. Humph! Flimsy enough! she thought. Then she turned toward the billiard room. The billiard room, as has been said, was the last room to the right in
the main wing of the house. A single door led to it from the
living-room. Miss Cornelia passed through this door, glanced about the
billiard room, noting that most of its windows were too high from the
ground to greatly encourage a marauder. She locked the only one that
seemed to her particularly tempting--the billiard-room window on the
terrace side of the house. Then she returned to the living-room and
again considered her defenses. Three points of access from the terrace to the house--the door that led
into the alcove, the French windows of the living room--the
billiard-room window. On the other side of the house there was the
main entrance, the porch, the library and dining-room windows. The
main entrance led into a hall-living-room, and the main door of the
living-room was on the right as one entered, the dining-room and
library on the left, main staircase in front. "My mind is starting to
go round like a pinwheel, thinking of all those windows and doors," she
murmured to herself. She sat down once more, and taking a pencil and a
piece of paper drew a plan of the lower floor of the house. And now I've studied it, she thought after a while, I'm no further than
if I hadn't. As far as I can figure out, there are so many ways for a
clever man to get into this house that I'd have to be a couple of
Siamese twins to watch it properly. The next house I rent in the
country, she decided, just isn't going to have any windows and
doors--or I'll know the reason why. But of course she was not entirely shut off from the world, even if the
worst developed. She considered the telephone instruments on a table
near the wall, one the general phone, the other connecting a house line
which also connected with the garage and the greenhouses. The garage
would not be helpful, since Slocum, her chauffeur for many years, had
gone back to England for a visit. Dale had been driving the car. But
with an able-bodied man in the gardener's house--

She pulled herself together with a jerk. "Cornelia Van Gorder, you're going to go crazy before nightfall if you
don't take hold of yourself. What you need is lunch and a nap in the
afternoon if you can make yourself take it. You'd better look up that
revolver of yours, too, that you bought when you thought you were going
to take a trip to China. You've never fired it off yet, but you've got
to sometime today--there's no other way of telling if it will work. You can shut your eyes when you do it--no, you can't either--that's
silly. "Call you a spirited old lady, do they? Well, you never had a better
time to show your spirit than now!" And Miss Van Gorder, sighing, left the living-room to reach the kitchen
just in time to calm a heated argument between Lizzie and Billy on the
relative merits of Japanese and Irish-American cooking. Dale Ogden, taxiing up from the two o'clock train some time later, to
her surprise discovered the front door locked and rang for some time
before she could get an answer. At last, Billy appeared, white-coated,
with an inscrutable expression on his face. "Will you take my bag, Billy--thanks. Where is Miss Van Gorder--taking
a nap?" "No," said Billy succinctly. "She take no nap. She out in srubbery
shotting." Dale stared at him incredulously. "Shooting, Billy?" "Yes, ma'am. At least--she not shoot yet but she say she going to
soon." "But, good heavens, Billy--shooting what?" "Shotting pistol," said Billy, his yellow mask of a face preserving its
impish repose. He waved his hand. "You go srubbery. You see." The scene that met Dale's eyes when she finally found the "srubbery"
was indeed a singular one. Miss Van Gorder, her back firmly planted
against the trunk of a large elm tree and an expression of ineffable
distaste on her features, was holding out a blunt, deadly looking
revolver at arm's length. Its muzzle wavered, now pointing at the
ground, now at the sky. Behind the tree Lizzie sat in a heap, moaning
quietly to herself, and now and then appealing to the saints to avert a
visioned calamity. As Dale approached, unseen, the climax came. The revolver steadied,
pointed ferociously at an inoffensive grass-blade some 10 yards from
Miss Van Gorder and went off. Lizzie promptly gave vent to a shrill
Irish scream. Miss Van Gorder dropped the revolver like a hot potato
and opened her mouth to tell Lizzie not to be such a fool. Then she
saw Dale--her mouth went into a round O of horror and her hand clutched
weakly at her heart. "Good heavens, child!" she gasped. "Didn't Billy tell you what I was
doing? I might have shot you like a rabbit!" and, overcome with
emotion, she sat down on the ground and started to fan herself
mechanically with a cartridge. Dale couldn't help laughing--and the longer she looked at her aunt the
more she laughed--until that dignified lady joined in the mirth herself. "Aunt Cornelia--Aunt Cornelia!" said Dale when she could get her
breath. "That I've lived to see the day--and they call US the wild
generation! Why on earth were you having pistol practice, darling--has
Billy turned into a Japanese spy or what?" Miss Van Gorder rose from the ground with as much stateliness as she
could muster under the circumstances. "No, my dear--but there's no fool like an old fool--that's all," she
stated. "I've wanted to fire that infernal revolver off ever since I
bought it two years ago, and now I have and I'm satisfied. Still," she
went on thoughtfully, picking up the weapon, "it seems a very good
revolver--and shooting people must be much easier than I supposed. All
you have to do is to point the--the front of it--like this and--"

"Oh, Miss Dale, dear Miss Dale!" came in woebegone accents from the
other side of the tree. "For the love of heaven, Miss Dale, say no
more but take it away from her--she'll have herself all riddled through
with bullets like a kitchen sieve--and me too--if she's let to have it
again." "Lizzie, I'm ashamed of you!" said Lizzie's mistress. "Come out from
behind that tree and stop wailing like a siren. This weapon is
perfectly safe in competent hands and--"  She seemed on the verge of
another demonstration of its powers. "MISS DALE, FOR THE DEAR LOVE O' GOD WILL YOU MAKE HER PUT IT AWAY?" Dale laughed again. "I really think you'd better, Aunt Cornelia. Or
both of us will have to put Lizzie to bed with a case of acute
hysteria." "Well," said Miss Van Gorder, "perhaps you're right, dear." Her eyes
gleamed. "I should have liked to try it just once more though," she
confided. "I feel certain that I could hit that tree over there if my
eye wouldn't wink so when the thing goes off." "Now, it's winking eyes," said Lizzie on a note of tragic chant, "but
next time it'll be bleeding corpses and--"

Dale added her own protestations to Lizzie's. "Please, darling, if you
really want to practice, Billy can fix up some sort of target
range--but I don't want my favorite aunt assassinated by a ricocheted
bullet before my eyes!" "Well, perhaps it would be best to try again another time," admitted
Miss Van Gorder. But there was a wistful look in her eyes as she gave
the revolver to Dale and the three started back to the house. "I should never have allowed Lizzie to know what I was doing," she
confided in a whisper, on the way. "A woman is perfectly capable of
managing firearms--but Lizzie is really too nervous to live, sometimes." "I know just how you feel, darling," Dale agreed, suppressed mirth
shaking her as the little procession reached the terrace. "But--oh,"
she could keep it no longer, "oh--you did look funny, darling--sitting
under that tree, with Lizzie on the other side of it making banshee
noises and--"

Miss Van Gorder laughed too, a little shamefacedly. "I must have," she said. "But--oh, you needn't shake your head, Lizzie
Allen--I am going to practice with it. There's no reason I shouldn't
and you never can tell when things like that might be useful," she
ended rather vaguely. She did not wish to alarm Dale with her
suspicions yet. "There, Dale--yes, put it in the drawer of the table--that will
reassure Lizzie. Lizzie, you might make us some lemonade, I
think--Miss Dale must be thirsty after her long, hot ride." "Yes, Miss Cornelia," said Lizzie, recovering her normal calm as the
revolver was shut away in the drawer of the large table in the
living-room. But she could not resist one parting shot. "And thank
God it's lemonade I'll be making--and not bandages for bullet wounds!" she muttered darkly as she went toward the service quarters. Miss Van Gorder glared after her departing back. "Lizzie is really
impossible sometimes!" she said with stately ire. Then her voice
softened. "Though of course I couldn't do without her," she added. Dale stretched out on the settee opposite her aunt's chair. "I know
you couldn't, darling. Thanks for thinking of the lemonade." She
passed her hand over her forehead in a gesture of fatigue. "I AM
hot--and tired." Miss Van Gorder looked at her keenly. The young face seemed curiously
worn and haggard in the clear afternoon light. "You--you don't really feel very well, do you, Dale?" "Oh--it's nothing. I feel all right--really." "I could send for Doctor Wells if--"

"Oh, heavens, no, Aunt Cornelia." She managed a wan smile. "It isn't
as bad as all that. I'm just tired and the city was terribly hot and
noisy and--"  She stole a glance at her aunt from between lowered lids. "I got your gardener, by the way," she said casually. "Did you, dear? That's splendid, though--but I'll tell you about that
later. Where did you get him?" "That good agency, I can't remember its name." Dale's hand moved
restlessly over her eyes, as if remembering details were too great an
effort. "But I'm sure he'll be satisfactory. He'll be out here this
evening--he--he couldn't get away before, I believe. What have you
been doing all day, darling?" Miss Cornelia hesitated. Now that Dale had returned she suddenly
wanted very much to talk over the various odd happenings of the day
with her--get the support of her youth and her common sense. Then that
independence which was so firmly rooted a characteristic of hers
restrained her. No use worrying the child unnecessarily; they all
might have to worry enough before tomorrow morning. She compromised. "We have had a domestic upheaval," she said. "The
cook and the housemaid have left--if you'd only waited till the next
train you could have had the pleasure of their company into town." "Aunt Cornelia--how exciting! I'm so sorry! Why did they leave?" "Why do servants ever leave a good place?" asked Miss Cornelia grimly. "Because if they had sense enough to know when they were well off, they
wouldn't be servants. Anyhow, they've gone--we'll have to depend on
Lizzie and Billy the rest of this week. I telephoned--but they
couldn't promise me any others before Monday." "And I was in town and could have seen people for you--if I'd only
known!" said Dale remorsefully. "Only," she hesitated, "I mightn't
have had time--at least I mean there were some other things I had to
do, besides getting the gardener and--"  She rose. "I think I will go
and lie down for a little if you don't mind, darling." Miss Van Gorder was concerned. "Of course I don't mind but--won't you
even have your lemonade?" "Oh, I'll get some from Lizzie in the pantry before I go up," Dale
managed to laugh. "I think I must have a headache after all," she
said. "Maybe I'll take an aspirin. Don't worry, darling." "I shan't. I only wish there were something I could do for you, my
dear." Dale stopped in the alcove doorway. "There's nothing anybody can do
for me, really," she said soberly. "At least--oh, I don't know what
I'm saying! But don't worry. I'm quite all right. I may go over to
the country club after dinner--and dance. Won't you come with me, Aunt
Cornelia?" "Depends on your escort," said Miss Cornelia tartly. "If our landlord,
Mr. Richard Fleming, is taking you I certainly shall--I don't like his
looks and never did!" Dale laughed. "Oh, he's all right," she said. "Drinks a good deal and
wastes a lot of money, but harmless enough. No, this is a very sedate
party; I'll be home early." "Well, in that case," said her aunt, "I shall stay here with my Lizzie
and my ouija-board. Lizzie deserves some punishment for the very
cowardly way she behaved this afternoon--and the ouija-board will
furnish it. She's scared to death to touch the thing. I think she
believes it's alive." "Well, maybe I'll send you a message on it from the country club," said
Dale lightly. She had paused, half-way up the flight of side stairs in
the alcove, and her aunt noticed how her shoulders drooped, belying the
lightness of her voice. "Oh," she went on, "by the way--have the
afternoon papers come yet? I didn't have time to get one when I was
rushing for the train." "I don't think so, dear, but I'll ask Lizzie." Miss Cornelia moved
toward a bell push. "Oh, don't bother; it doesn't matter. Only if they have, would you ask
Lizzie to bring me one when she brings up the lemonade? I want to read
about--about the Bat--he fascinates me." "There was something else in the paper this morning," said Miss
Cornelia idly. "Oh, yes--the Union Bank--the bank Mr. Fleming, Senior,
was president of has failed. They seem to think the cashier robbed it. Did you see that, Dale?" The shoulders of the girl on the staircase straightened suddenly. Then
they drooped again. "Yes--I saw it," she said in a queerly colorless
voice. "Too bad. It must be terrible to--to have everyone suspect
you--and hunt you--as I suppose they're hunting that poor cashier." "Well," said Miss Cornelia, "a man who wrecks a bank deserves very
little sympathy to my way of thinking. But then I'm old-fashioned. Well, dear, I won't keep you. Run along--and if you want an aspirin,
there's a box in my top bureau-drawer." "Thanks, darling. Maybe I'll take one and maybe I won't--all I really
need is to lie down for a while." She moved on up the staircase and disappeared from the range of Miss
Cornelia's vision, leaving Miss Cornelia to ponder many things. Her
trip to the city had done Dale no good, of a certainty. If not
actually ill, she was obviously under some considerable mental strain. And why this sudden interest, first in the Bat, then in the failure of
the Union Bank? Was it possible that Dale, too, had been receiving
threatening letters? I'll be glad when that gardener comes, she thought to herself. He'll
make a MAN in the house at any rate. When Lizzie at last came in with the lemonade she found her mistress
shaking her head. "Cornelia, Cornelia," she was murmuring to herself, "you should have
taken to pistol practice when you were younger; it just shows how
children waste their opportunities." CHAPTER FOUR

THE STORM GATHERS

The long summer afternoon  wore away, sunset came, red and angry, a
sunset presaging storm. A chill crept into the air with the twilight. When night fell, it was not a night of silver patterns enskied, but a
dark and cloudy cloak where a few stars glittered fitfully. Miss
Cornelia, at dinner, saw a bat swoop past the window of the dining room
in its scurrying flight, and narrowly escaped oversetting her glass of
water with a nervous start. The tension of waiting--waiting--for some
vague menace which might not materialize after all--had begun to prey
on her nerves. She saw Dale off to the country club with relief--the
girl looked a little better after her nap but she was still not her
normal self. When Dale was gone, she wandered restlessly for some time
between living-room and library, now giving an unnecessary dusting to a
piece of bric-a-brac with her handkerchief, now taking a book from one
of the shelves in the library only to throw it down before she read a
page. This house was queer. She would not have admitted it to Lizzie, for
her soul's salvation--but, for the first time in her sensible life, she
listened for creakings of woodwork, rustling of leaves, stealthy steps
outside, beyond the safe, bright squares of the windows--for anything
that was actual, tangible, not merely formless fear. "There's too much ROOM in the country for things to happen to you!" she
confided to herself with a shiver. "Even the night--whenever I look
out, it seems to me as if the night were ten times bigger and blacker
than it ever is in New York!" To comfort herself she mentally rehearsed her telephone conversation of
the morning, the conversation she had not mentioned to her household. At the time it had seemed to her most reassuring--the plans she had
based upon it adequate and sensible in the normal light of day. But
now the light of day had been blotted out and with it her security. Her plans seemed weapons of paper against the sinister might of the
darkness beyond her windows. A little wind wailed somewhere in that
darkness like a beaten child--beyond the hills thunder rumbled, drawing
near, and with it lightning and the storm. She made herself sit down in the chair beside her favorite lamp on the
center table and take up her knitting with stiff fingers. Knit
two--purl two--Her hands fell into the accustomed rhythm
mechanically--a spy, peering in through the French windows, would have
deemed her the picture of calm. But she had never felt less calm in
all the long years of her life. She wouldn't ring for Lizzie to come and sit with her, she simply
wouldn't. But she was very glad, nevertheless, when Lizzie appeared at
the door. "Miss Neily." "Yes, Lizzie?" Miss Cornelia's voice was composed but her heart felt a
throb of relief. "Can I--can I sit in here with you, Miss Neily, just a minute?" Lizzie's voice was plaintive. "I've been sitting out in the kitchen
watching that Jap read his funny newspaper the wrong way and listening
for ghosts till I'm nearly crazy!" "Why, certainly, Lizzie," said Miss Cornelia primly. "Though," she
added doubtfully, "I really shouldn't pamper your absurd fears, I
suppose, but--"

"Oh, please, Miss Neily!" "Very well," said Miss Cornelia brightly. "You can sit here,
Lizzie--and help me work the ouija-board. That will take your mind off
listening for things!" Lizzie groaned. "You know I'd rather be shot than touch that uncanny
ouijie!" she said dolefully. "It gives me the creeps every time I put
my hands on it!" "Well, of course, if you'd rather sit in the kitchen, Lizzie--"

"Oh, give me the ouijie!" said Lizzie in tones of heartbreak. "I'd
rather be shot and stabbed than stay in the kitchen any more." "Very well," said Miss Cornelia, "it's your own decision,
Lizzie--remember that." Her needles clicked on. "I'll just finish
this row before we start," she said. "You might call up the light
company in the meantime, Lizzie--there seems to be a storm coming up
and I want to find out if they intend to turn out the lights tonight as
they did last night. Tell them I find it most inconvenient to be left
without light that way." "It's worse than inconvenient," muttered Lizzie, "it's criminal--that's
what it is--turning off all the lights in a haunted house, like this
one. As if spooks wasn't bad enough with the lights on--"

"Lizzie!" "Yes, Miss Neily--I wasn't going to say another word." She went to the
telephone. Miss Cornelia knitted on--knit two--purl two--  In spite of
her experiments with the ouija-board she didn't believe in ghosts--and
yet--there were things one couldn't explain by logic. Was there
something like that in this house--a shadow walking the corridors--a
vague shape of evil, drifting like mist from room to room, till its
cold breath whispered on one's back and--there! She had ruined her
knitting, the last two rows would have to be ripped out. That came of
mooning about ghosts like a ninny. She put down the knitting with an exasperated little gesture. Lizzie
had just finished her telephoning and was hanging up the receiver. "Well, Lizzie?" "Yes'm," said the latter, glaring at the phone. "That's what he
says--they turned off the lights last night because there was a storm
threatening. He says it burns out their fuses if they leave 'em on in
a storm." A louder roll of thunder punctuated her words. "There!" said Lizzie. "They'll be going off again to-night." She took
an uncertain step toward the French windows. "Humph!" said Miss Cornelia, "I hope it will be a dry summer." Her
hands tightened on each other. Darkness--darkness inside this house of
whispers to match with the darkness outside! She forced herself to
speak in a normal voice. "Ask Billy to bring some candles, Lizzie--and have them ready." Lizzie had been staring fixedly at the French windows. At Miss
Cornelia's command she gave a little jump of terror and moved closer to
her mistress. "You're not going to ask me to go out in that hall alone?" she said in
a hurt voice. It was too much. Miss Cornelia found vent for her feelings in crisp
exasperation. "What's the matter with you anyhow, Lizzie Allen?" The nervousness in her own tones infected Lizzie's. She shivered
frankly. "Oh, Miss Neily--Miss Neily!" she pleaded. "I don't like it! I want
to go back to the city!" Miss Cornelia braced herself. "I have rented this house for four
months and I am going to stay," she said firmly. Her eyes sought
Lizzie's, striving to pour some of her own inflexible courage into the
latter's quaking form. But Lizzie would not look at her. Suddenly she
started and gave a low scream;

"There's somebody on the terrace!" she breathed in a ghastly whisper,
clutching at Miss Cornelia's arm. For a second Miss Cornelia sat frozen. Then, "Don't do that!" she said
sharply. "What nonsense!" but she, looked over her shoulder as she
said it and Lizzie saw the look. Both waited, in pulsing
stillness--one second--two. "I guess it was the wind," said Lizzie at last, relieved, her grip on
Miss Cornelia relaxing. She began to look a trifle ashamed of herself
and Miss Cornelia seized the opportunity. "You were born on a brick pavement," she said crushingly. "You get
nervous out here at night whenever a cricket begins to sing--or scrape
his legs--or whatever it is they do!" Lizzie bowed before the blast of her mistress's scorn and began to move
gingerly toward the alcove door. But obviously she was not entirely
convinced. "Oh, it's more than that, Miss Neily," she mumbled. "I--"

Miss Cornelia turned to her fiercely. If Lizzie was going to behave
like this, they might as well have it out now between them--before Dale
came home. "What did you really see last night?" she said in a minatory voice. The instant relief on Lizzie's face was ludicrous; she so obviously
preferred discussing any subject at any length to braving the dangers
of the other part of the house unaccompanied. "I was standing right there at the top of that there staircase," she
began, gesticulating toward the alcove stairs in the manner of one who
embarks upon the narration of an epic. "Standing there with your
switch in my hand, Miss Neily--and then I looked down and," her voice
dropped, "I saw a gleaming eye! It looked at me and winked! I tell
you this house is haunted!" "A flirtatious ghost?" queried Miss Cornelia skeptically. She snorted. "Humph! Why didn't you yell?" "I was too scared to yell! And I'm not the only one." She started to
back away from the alcove, her eyes still fixed upon its haunted
stairs. "Why do you think the servants left so sudden this morning?" she went on. "Do you really believe the housemaid had appendicitis? Or
the cook's sister had twins?" She turned and gestured at her mistress with a long, pointed
forefinger. Her voice had a note of doom. "I bet a cent the cook never had any sister--and the sister never had
any twins," she said impressively. "No, Miss Neily, they couldn't put
it over on me like that! They were scared away. They saw--It!" She concluded her epic and stood nodding her head, an Irish Cassandra
who had prophesied the evil to come. "Fiddlesticks!" said Miss Cornelia briskly, more shaken by the recital
than she would have admitted. She tried to think of another topic of
conversation. "What time is it?" she asked. Lizzie glanced at the mantel clock. "Half-past ten, Miss Neily." Miss Cornelia yawned, a little dismally. She felt as if the last two
hours had not been hours but years. "Miss Dale won't be home for half an hour," she said reflectively. And
if I have to spend another thirty minutes listening to Lizzie shiver,
she thought, Dale will find me a nervous wreck when she does come home. She rolled up her knitting and put it back in her knitting-bag; it was
no use going on, doing work that would have to be ripped out again and
yet she must do something to occupy her thoughts. She raised her head
and discovered Lizzie returning toward the alcove stairs with the
stealthy tread of a panther. The sight exasperated her. "Now, Lizzie Allen!" she said sharply, "you forget all that
superstitious nonsense and stop looking for ghosts! There's nothing in
that sort of thing." She smiled--she would punish Lizzie for her
obdurate timorousness. "Where's that ouija-board?" she questioned,
rising, with determination in her eye. Lizzie shuddered violently. "It's up there--with a prayer book on it
to keep it quiet!" she groaned, jerking her thumb in the direction of
the farther bookcase. "Bring it here!" said Miss Cornelia implacably; then as Lizzie still
hesitated, "Lizzie!" Shivering, every movement of her body a conscious protest, Lizzie
slowly went over to the bookcase, lifted off the prayer book, and took
down the ouija-board. Even then she would not carry it normally but
bore it over to Miss Cornelia at arms'-length, as if any closer contact
would blast her with lightning, her face a comic mask of loathing and
repulsion. She placed the lettered board in Miss Cornelia's lap with a sigh of
relief. "You can do it yourself! I'll have none of it!" she said
firmly. "It takes two people and you know it, Lizzie Allen!" Miss Cornelia's
voice was stern but--it was also amused. Lizzie groaned, but she knew her mistress. She obeyed. She carefully
chose the farthest chair in the room and took a long time bringing it
over to where her mistress sat waiting. "I've been working for you for twenty years," she muttered. "I've been
your goat for twenty years and I've got a right to speak my mind--"

Miss Cornelia cut her off. "You haven't got a mind. Sit down," she
commanded. Lizzie sat--her hands at her sides. With a sigh of tried patience,
Miss Cornelia put her unwilling fingers on the little moving table that
is used to point to the letters on the board itself. Then she placed
her own hands on it, too, the tips of the fingers just touching
Lizzie's. "Now make your mind a blank!" she commanded her factotum. "You just said I haven't got any mind," complained the latter. "Well;" said Miss Cornelia magnificently, "make what you haven't got a
blank." The repartee silenced Lizzie for the moment, but only for the moment. As soon as Miss Cornelia had settled herself comfortably and tried to
make her mind a suitable receiving station for ouija messages, Lizzie
began to mumble the sorrows of her heart. "I've stood by you through thick and thin," she mourned in a low voice. "I stood by you when you were a vegetarian--I stood by you when you
were a theosophist--and I seen you through socialism, Fletcherism and
rheumatism--but when it comes to carrying on with ghosts--"

"Be still!" ordered Miss Cornelia. "Nothing will come if you keep
chattering!" "That's why I'm chattering!" said Lizzie, driven to the wall. "My
teeth are, too," she added. "I can hardly keep my upper set in," and a
desolate clicking of artificial molars attested the truth of the
remark. Then, to Miss Cornelia's relief, she was silent for nearly two
minutes, only to start so violently at the end of the time that she
nearly upset the ouija-board on her mistress's toes. "I've got a queer feeling in my fingers--all the way up my arms," she
whispered in awed accents, wriggling the arms she spoke of violently. "Hush!" said Miss Cornelia indignantly. Lizzie always exaggerated, of
course--yet now her own fingers felt prickly, uncanny. There was a
little pause while both sat tense, staring at the board. "Now, Ouija," said Miss Cornelia defiantly, "is Lizzie Allen right
about this house or is it all stuff and nonsense?" For one second--two--the ouija remained anchored to its resting place
in the center of the board. Then--

"My Gawd! It's moving!" said Lizzie in tones of pure horror as the
little pointer began to wander among the letters. "You shoved it!" "I did not--cross my heart, Miss Neily--I--" Lizzie's eyes were round,
her fingers glued rigidly and awkwardly to the ouija. As the movements
of the pointer grew more rapid her mouth dropped open--wider and
wider--prepared for an ear-piercing scream. "Keep quiet!" said Miss Cornelia tensely. There was a pause of a few
seconds while the pointer darted from one letter to another wildly. "B--M--C--X--P--R--S--K--Z--" murmured Miss Cornelia trying to follow
the spelled letters. "It's Russian!" gasped Lizzie breathlessly and Miss Cornelia nearly
disgraced herself in the eyes of any spirits that might be present by
inappropriate laughter. The ouija continued to move--more
letters--what was it spelling?--it couldn't be--good
heavens--"B--A--T--Bat!" said Miss Cornelia with a tiny catch in her
voice. The pointer stopped moving: She took her hands from the board. "That's queer," she said with a forced laugh. She glanced at Lizzie to
see how Lizzie was taking it. But the latter seemed too relieved to
have her hands off the ouija-board to make the mental connection that
her mistress had feared. All she said was, "Bats indeed! That shows it's spirits. There's been
a bat flying around this house all evening." She got up from her chair tentatively, obviously hoping that the seance
was over. "Oh, Miss Neily," she burst out. "Please let me sleep in your room
tonight! It's only when my jaw drops that I snore--I can tie it up
with a handkerchief!" "I wish you'd tie it up with a handkerchief now," said her mistress
absent-mindedly, still pondering the message that the pointer had
spelled. "B--A--T--Bat!" 