



Produced by Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team





THE GRELL MYSTERY

BY FRANK FROEST

[Illustration: Publisher's logo]

NEW YORK
GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS

COPYRIGHT, 1913,
BY FRANK FROEST

COPYRIGHT, 1914,
BY EDWARD J. CLODE




THE GRELL MYSTERY

CHAPTER I


Outside the St. Jermyn's Club the rain pelted pitilessly upon deserted
pavements. Mr. Robert Grell leaned his arms on the table and stared
steadily out through the steaming window-panes for a second. His
shoulders lifted in a shrug that was almost a shiver. "It's a deuce of a night," he exclaimed with conviction. There was a faint trace of accent in his voice--an almost imperceptible
drawl, such as might remain in the speech of an American who had
travelled widely and rubbed shoulders with all sorts and conditions of
men. His companion lifted his eyebrows whimsically and nipped the end from a
cigar. "It is," he agreed. "But the way you put it is more like plain Bob Grell
of the old days than the polished Mr. Robert Grell, social idol,
millionaire and diplomat, and winner of the greatest matrimonial prize
in London." Grell tugged at his drooping iron-grey moustache. "That's all right," he
said. "This is not a meeting of the Royal Society. Here, in my own club,
I claim the right of every free-born citizen to condemn the weather--or
anything else--in any language I choose. Great Scott, Fairfield! You
don't expect me to wear my mantle all the time. I should explode if I
didn't have a safety valve." Sir Ralph Fairfield nodded. He understood. For years the two had been
close friends, and in certain phases of temperament they were much
alike. Both had tasted deeply of the sweets and hardships of life. Both
had known the fierce wander-lust that drives men into strange places to
suffer hunger, thirst, hardship and death itself for the sheer love of
the game, and both had achieved something more than national fame. Fairfield as a fertile writer on ethnography and travel; and Grell
equally as a daring explorer, and as a man who had made his mark in the
politics and finance of the United States. More than once he had been
employed on delicate diplomatic missions for his Government, and always
he had succeeded. Great things were within his reach when he had
suddenly announced his intention of giving up business, politics and
travel to settle in England and lead the life of a gentleman of leisure. He had bought a thousand acres in Sussex, and rented a town house in
Grosvenor Gardens. Then he had met Lady Eileen Meredith, daughter of the Duke of Burghley. Like others, he had fallen a victim to her grey eyes. The piquant
beauty, the supple grace, the intangible charm of the girl had aroused
his desire. A man who always achieved his ends, he set himself to woo
and win her with fierce impetuosity. He had won. Now he was spending his
last night of bachelordom at his club. A man of about forty-five, he carried himself well and the evening dress
he wore showed his upright muscular figure to advantage. Every movement
he made had a swift grace that reminded one irresistibly of a tiger,
with its suggestion of reserve force. His close-cropped hair and a
drooping moustache were prematurely grey. He had a trick of looking at
one through half-closed eyelids that gave the totally erroneous
impression that he was half asleep. The face was square, the chin
dogged, the lips, half-hidden by the moustache, thin and tightly pressed
together. He was the type of man who emerges victor in any contest,
whether of wits or muscle. Plain and direct when it suited his purpose;
subtle master of intrigue when subtlety was needed. A nervous gust of wind flung the rain fiercely against the window. Sir
Ralph Fairfield uncrossed his knees with care for the scrupulous crease
in his trousers. "You're a great man, Bob," he said slowly. "You take it quite as a
matter of course that you should win the prettiest girl in the three
kingdoms." His voice became meditative. "I wonder how married life will
suit you. You know, you're not altogether the type of a man one
associates with the domestic hearthstone." Their eyes met. The twinkle of humour which was in the baronet's did not
reflect itself in the other's. Grell, too, was wondering whether he was
fitted for domestic life. He had a taste for introspection, and was
speculating how far the joyous girl who had confided her heart to his
keeping would fit in with the scheme of things. He roused himself with
an effort and glanced at his watch. It was half-past nine. "You make a mistake, Fairfield," he laughed. "Eileen and I fit each
other, and you'll see we'll settle down all right. Care to see the
present I'm giving her to-morrow? It's to be a little surprise. Look
here!" He inserted a hand in his breast pocket and produced a flat case of blue
Morocco leather. He touched a spring: "There!" Soft, shimmering white against the sombre velvet lining reposed a string
of pearls which even the untrained eye of Fairfield knew must be of
enormous value. Each gem was perfect in its soft purity, and they had
been matched with scrupulous care. Grell picked it up and dangled it on
his forefinger, so that the crimson glow of the shaded electric lights
was reflected in the smooth surface of the jewels. "Pretty toy, isn't it?" he commented. "I gave Streeters _carte blanche_
to do the best they could." He dropped the necklace carelessly back in its case, snapped the catch,
and placed it in his pocket. Fairfield's jerk of the head was
significant. "And you are fool enough to carry the thing around loose in your pocket. Good heavens, man! Do you know that there are people who would not stick
at murder to get a thing like that?" The other laughed easily. "Don't you worry, Fairfield. You're the only
person I've shown it to, and I'm not afraid you'll sandbag me." He
changed the subject abruptly. "By the way, I've got an engagement I want
to keep. Do you mind answering the telephone if I'm rung up by any one? Say I'm here, but I'm frightfully busy clearing up some business
matters, will you?" The baronet frowned half in perplexity, half in protest. "Why--forgive
me, Bob--why not say that you are gone out to keep an appointment?" Grell was plainly a little embarrassed, but he strove to disguise the
fact. "Oh, it's only a fancy of mine," he retorted lightly. "I shan't be
gone long. You'll do it, won't you?" "Of course," agreed Sir Ralph, still frowning. "That's all right, then. Thanks. I'll be back in half an hour." He strode away with an abrupt nod. Shortly afterwards Fairfield heard a
taxicab scurry away down the sodden street. He leaned back in his chair
and puffed a cloud of smoke towards the ceiling. There was a dim
uneasiness in his mind, though he could have given no reason for it. He
picked up an evening paper and threw it aside. Then he strolled up into
the cardroom and tried to interest himself in watching a game of bridge. But the play only bored him. Time hung heavily on his hands. A servant
spoke to him. Instantly he rose and made his way to the telephone. A
call had been made for Grell. "Hello! Is that you, dear? This is Eileen speaking.... I can't hear. What do you say?" It was the clear, musical voice of the girl Robert Grell was to marry. Fairfield wondered if his friend had expected this. "This is not Mr. Grell," he said. "This is Fairfield--Sir Ralph
Fairfield--speaking." "Oh!" He could detect the disappointment in her voice. "Is he there? I
am Lady Eileen Meredith." Fairfield mentally cursed the false position in which he found himself. He was usually a ready-witted man, but now he found himself stammering
almost incoherently. "Yes--no--yes. He is here, Lady Eileen, but he has a guest whom it is
impossible for him to leave. It's a matter of settling up an important
diplomatic question, I believe. Can I give him any message?" "No, thank you, Sir Ralph." The voice had become cold and dignified. He
could picture her chagrin, and again anathematised Grell in his
thoughts. "Has he been there long? When do you think he will be free?" "I can't say, I'm sure. He met me here for dinner at seven and has been
here since." He hung up the receiver viciously. He had not expected to have to lie to
Grell's _fiancee_ when he had promised not to disclose his friend's
absence from the club. It was too bad of Grell. His eye met the clock,
and with a start he realised that it was a few minutes to eleven
o'clock. Grell had been gone an hour and a half. "Queer chap," he murmured to himself, as he lit a fresh cigar and
selected a comfortable chair in the deserted smoking-room. "He's
certainly in love with her all right, but it's strange that he should
have used me to put her off to-night like that. Wonder what it means." *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later a wild-eyed, breathless servant bareheaded in the
pouring rain, was stammering incoherently to a police-constable in
Grosvenor Gardens that Mr. Robert Grell had been found murdered in his
study. CHAPTER II


The shattering ring of the telephone awoke Heldon Foyle with a start. There was only one place from which he was likely to be rung up at one
o'clock in the morning, and he was reaching for his clothes with one
hand even while he answered. "That you, sir?"... The voice at the other end was tremulous and
excited. "This is the Yard speaking--Flack. Mr. Grell, the American
explorer, has been killed--murdered ... yes ... at his house in
Grosvenor Gardens. The butler found him...."

When a man has passed thirty years in the service of the Criminal
Investigation Department at New Scotland Yard his nerves are pretty well
shock-proof. Few emergencies can shake him--not even the murder of so
distinguished a man as Robert Grell. Heldon Foyle gave a momentary gasp,
and then wasted no further time in astonishment. There were certain
obvious things to be done at once. For, up to a point, the science of
detection is merely a matter of routine. He flung back his orders curtly
and concisely. "Right. I'm coming straight down. I suppose the local division inspector
is on it. Send for Chief Inspector Green and Inspector Waverley, and let
the finger-print people know. I shall want one of their best men. Let
one of our photographers go to the house and wait for me. Send a
messenger to Professor Harding, and telephone to the assistant
commissioner. Tell any of the people who are at the house not to touch
anything and to detain every one there. And Flack--Flack. Not a word to
the newspaper men. We don't want any leakage yet." He hung up the receiver and began to dress hurriedly, but methodically. He was a methodical man. Resolutely he put from his mind all thoughts of
the murder. No good would come of spinning theories until he had all the
available facts. For ten years Heldon Foyle had been the actual executive chief of the
Criminal Investigation Department. He rarely wore a dressing-gown and
never played the violin. But he had a fine taste in cigars, and was as
well-dressed a man as might be found between Temple Bar and Hyde Park
Corner. He did not wear policemen's boots, nor, for the matter of that,
would he have allowed any of the six hundred odd men who were under his
control to wear them. He would have passed without remark in a crowd of
West-end clubmen. It is an aim of the good detective to fit his
surroundings, whether they be in Kensington or the Whitechapel Road. A suggestion of immense strength was in his broad shoulders and deep
chest. His square, strong face and heavy jaw was redeemed from sternness
by a twinkle of humour in the eyes. That same sense of humour had often
saved him from making mistakes, although it is not a popular attribute
of story-book detectives. His carefully kept brown moustache was
daintily upturned at the ends. There was grim tenacity written all over
the man, but none but his intimates knew how it was wedded to pliant
resource and fertile invention. Down a quiet street a motor-car throbbed its way and stopped before the
door of his quiet suburban home. It had been sent from Scotland Yard. "Don't worry about speed limits," he said quietly as he stepped in. "Refer any one to me who tries to stop you. Get to Grosvenor Gardens as
quickly as you can." The driver touched his hat, and the car leapt forward with a jerk. A man
with tenderer nerves than Foyle would have found it a startling journey. They swept round corners almost on two wheels, skidded on the greasy
roads, and once narrowly escaped running down one of London's outcasts
who was shuffling across the road with the painful shamble that seems to
be the hall-mark of beggars and tramps. Few, save policemen on night
duty, were about to mark their wild career. As they drew up before the pillared portico of the great house in
Grosvenor Gardens a couple of policemen moved out of the shadow of the
railing and saluted. Foyle nodded and walked up the steps. The door had flown open before he
touched the bell, and a lanky man with slightly bent shoulders was
outlined in the radiant glow of the electric light. It was Bolt, the
divisional detective inspector, a quiet, grave man who, save on
exceptional occasions, was with his staff responsible for the
investigation of all crime in his district. "You're the first to come, sir," he said in a quiet, melancholy tone. "It's a terrible job, this." He spoke professionally. Living as they do in an atmosphere of crime,
always among major and minor tragedies, C.I.D. men--official detectives
prefer the term--are forced to view their work objectively, like doctors
and journalists. All murders are terrible--as murders. A detective
cannot allow his sympathies or sensibility to pain or grief to hamper
him in his work. In Bolt's sense the case was terrible because it was
difficult to investigate; because, unless the perpetrators were
discovered and arrested, discredit would be brought upon the service and
glaring contents-bills declare the inefficiency of the department to the
world. The C.I.D. is very jealous of its reputation. "Yes," agreed Foyle. "Where is the butler? He found the body, I'm told. Fetch him into some room where I can talk to him." The butler, a middle-aged man, nervous, white-faced and half-distracted,
was brought into a little sitting-room. His eyes moved restlessly to and
from the detective: his fingers were twitching uneasily. Foyle shot one swift appraising glance at him. Then he nodded to a
chair. "Sit down, my man," he said, and his voice was silky and smooth. "Get
him a drink, Bolt. He'll feel better after that. Now, what's your
name?--Wills?--Pull yourself together. There's nothing to be alarmed
about. Just take your own time and tell us all about it." There was no hint of officialdom in his manner. It was the sympathetic
attitude of one friend towards another. Wills gulped down a strong
mixture of brandy and soda which Bolt held out to him, and a tinge of
colour returned to his pale cheeks. "It was awful, sir--awful," he said shakily. "Mr. Grell came in shortly
before ten, and left word that if a lady came to see him she was to be
brought straight into his study. She drove up in a motor-car a few
minutes afterwards and went up to him." "What was her name? What was she like?" interrupted Bolt. Foyle held up
his hand warningly to his subordinate. Wills quivered all over, and words forsook him for a moment. Then he
went on--

"I--I don't know. Ivan, Mr. Grell's valet, let her in. I saw her pass
through the hall. She was tall and slim, but she wore a heavy veil, so I
didn't see her face. I don't know when she left, but I went up to the
study at one o'clock to ask if anything was needed before I went to bed. I could get no answer, although I knocked loudly two or three times; so
I opened the door. My God! I..."

He flung his hands over his eyes and collapsed in an infantile paroxysm
of tears. Foyle rose and touched him gently on the shoulder. "Yes, then?" "The room was only dimly lit, sir, and I could see that he was lying on
the couch, rather awkwardly, his face turned from me. I thought he might
have dozed off, and I went into the room and touched him on the
shoulder. My hand came away wet!" His voice rose to a scream. "It was
blood--blood everywhere--and he with a knife in his heart." Foyle leaned over the table. "Where's Ivan?--Russian, I suppose, by the
name? He must be about the house somewhere." "I haven't seen him since he let the lady in," faltered the butler. The superintendent never answered. Bolt had silently disappeared. For
five minutes silence reigned in the little room. Then the door was
pushed open violently and Bolt entered like a stone propelled from a
catapult. "Ivan has gone--vanished!" he cried. CHAPTER III


Foyle caressed his chin with his well-manicured hand. "H'm!" he said reflectively. "Don't let's jump to conclusions too
quickly, Mr. Bolt. There's a doctor here, I suppose? Take this man to
him, and when he's a bit calmer take a statement from him. I'll leave
Ivan to you. Get some of the servants to give you a description of him,
and 'phone it through to Flack at the Yard. Let him send it out as an
'all station' message, and get in touch with the railway stations. The
chap can't have got far. Detain on suspicion. No arrest. Hello, there's
the bell. That's some of our people, I expect. All right, I'll answer. You get on with that." He had not raised his voice in giving his directions. He was as cool and
matter-of-fact as a business man giving instructions to his secretary,
yet he was throwing a net round London. Within five minutes of the time
Bolt had gathered his description, the private telegraph that links
Scotland Yard with all the police stations of London would be setting
twenty thousand men on the alert for the missing servant. The great
railway stations would be watched, and every policeman and detective
wherever he might be stationed would know exactly the appearance of the
man wanted, from the colour of his hair and his eyes to the pattern of
his socks. Foyle opened the door to a little cluster of grave-faced men. Sir
Hilary Thornton, the assistant commissioner, was there; Professor
Harding, an expert retained by the authorities, and a medical man whose
scientific researches in connection with the Gould poisoning case had
sent a man to the gallows, and whose aid had been most important in
solving many murder mysteries; Grant of the finger-print department, a
wizard in all matters relating to identification; a couple of men from
his department bearing cameras, and lastly the senior officer of the
Criminal Investigation Department, Green, and his assistant, Waverley. Sir Hilary drew Foyle a little aside, and they conversed in low tones. Professor Harding, with a nod to the superintendent, had gone upstairs
to where the divisional surgeon and another doctor were waiting with
Lomont, the secretary of the murdered man, outside the door of the room
where Robert Grell lay dead. The doctors had done no more than ascertain he was dead, and Foyle
himself had purposely not gone near the room until Harding had an
opportunity of making his examinations. "I shall take charge of this myself, if you do not mind, Sir Hilary,"
Foyle was saying. "Mainland is capable of looking after the routine work
of the department, and in the case of a man of Mr. Grell's
importance----"

"That is what I should have suggested," said Sir Hilary. "We must get to
the bottom of this at all costs. You know Mr. Grell was to have been
married to Lady Eileen Meredith at St. Margaret's, Westminster, this
morning. It's a bad business. Let's see what Harding's got to say." Their feet sank noiselessly into the thick carpet of the stairs as they
moved towards the death-chamber. From an open doorway near the landing a
flood of light issued. "Very handy for any one to get away," commented Foyle. "The stairs lead
direct to the hall, and there are only two rooms to pass. This carpet
would deaden footsteps too." They entered softly. Some one had turned all the lights on in the room,
and it was bathed in brilliance. A dying fire flickered in the grate; bookcases lined the red-papered
walls, which were broken here and there by curios and sporting trophies
gathered from many countries. There were a few etchings, which had
evidently been chosen with the skill of a connoisseur. Parallel with the window was a desk, scrupulously tidy. Half a dozen
chairs were scattered about, and in a recess was a couch, over which the
angular frock-coated figure of Professor Harding was bent. He looked up
as the two men approached. "It's clearly murder," he said. "He was probably killed between ten and
eleven--stabbed through the heart. Curious weapon used too--look!" He moved aside and for the first time Foyle got a view of the body. Robert Grell lay sprawled awkwardly on the couch, his face turned
towards the wall, one leg trailing on the floor. A dark crimson stain
soiled the white surface of his shirt, and one side of his dinner jacket
was wringing wet. The dagger still remained in the wound, and it was
that riveted Foyle's attention. He stepped back quickly to one of the
men at the door. "Send Mr. Grant to me," he ordered. Returning to the body, he gently withdrew the knife, handling it with
the most delicate care. "I've never seen anything like this before," he
said. "Queer thing, isn't it?" It was a sheath knife with a blade of finely tempered steel about three
inches long and as sharp as a razor. Its abnormality lay in a hilt of
smooth white ivory set horizontally and not vertically to the blade, as
is a rule with most knives. Foyle carried it in the palm of his hand nearer to the light and
squinted at it from various angles. One at least of the observers
guessed his purpose. But the detective seemed dissatisfied. "Can't see anything," he grumbled peevishly. "Ah, there you are, Grant. I want to see whether we can make anything of this. Let me have a little
graphite, will you?" The finger-print expert took an envelope from his pocket and handed it
to the superintendent. From it Foyle scattered fine black powder on the
hilt. A little cry of satisfaction came from his lips as he blew the
stuff away in a little dark cloud. Those in the room crowded around. Outlined in black against the white surface of the ivory were four
finger-prints. The two centre ones were sharp and distinct, the outside
prints were fainter and more blurred. "By Jove, that's good!" exclaimed the professor. Foyle rubbed his chin and handed the weapon to Grant without replying. "Get one of your men to photograph those and have them enlarged. At any
rate, it's something to go on with. It would be as well to compare 'em
with the records, though I doubt whether that will be of much use." He
drew his watch from his pocket and glanced at it. "Now, if you will
excuse me, gentlemen, I should like to have the room to myself for a
little while. And, Grant, send Green and the photographer up, and tell
Waverley to act with Bolt in examining the servants." The room cleared. Harding lingered to exchange a few words with the
superintendent. "I can do nothing, Mr. Foyle," he said. "From a medical point of view it
is all straightforward. There can be no question about the time and
cause of death. Good night,--or rather, good morning." "Thank you, Mr. Harding, good morning." His eyes were roving restlessly about the room, and he dictated the work
the photographer was to do with scrupulous care. Half a dozen times a
dazzling flash of magnesium powder lit up the place. Photographs of the
room in sections were being taken. Then with a curt order to the
photographer to return immediately to Scotland Yard and develop his
negatives, he drew up a chair to the couch and began to go methodically
through the pockets of the dead man. Green stood by, a note-book in hand. Now and again Foyle dictated
swiftly. He was a man who knew the value of order and system. Every step
in the investigation of a crime is reduced to writing, collected,
indexed, and filed together, so that the whole history of a case is
instantly available at any time. He was carrying out the regular
routine. Only two things of any consequence rewarded his search--one was a note
from Sir Ralph Fairfield confirming an appointment with Grell to dine at
the St. Jermyn's Club the previous evening; the other was a miniature
set in diamonds of a girl, dark and black-haired, with an insolent
piquant beauty. "I've seen that face before somewhere," mused the superintendent. "Green, there's a 'Who's Who' on the desk behind you. I want Sir Ralph
Fairfield." Rapidly he scanned the score of lines of small type devoted to the
baronet. They told him little that he had not known before. Fairfield
was in his forty-third year, was the ninth baronet, and had great
estates in Hampshire and Scotland. He was a traveller and a student. His
town address was given as the Albany. "You'd better go round to Fairfield's place, Green. Tell him what's
happened and bring him here at once." As the chief inspector, a grim, silent man, left, Foyle turned again to
his work. He began a careful search of the room, even rummaging among
the litter in the waste-paper basket. But there was nothing else that
might help to throw the faintest light on the tragedy. A discreet knock on the door preceded Waverley's entrance with a report
of the examination of every one in the house. He had gathered little
beyond the fact that Grell, when not concerned in social duties, was a
man of irregular comings and goings, and that Ivan, his personal valet,
was a man he had brought from St. Petersburg, who spoke French but
little English, and had consequently associated little with the other
servants. Foyle subsided into his chair with his forehead puckered into a series
of little wrinkles. He rested his chin on his hand and gazed into
vacancy. There might be a hundred solutions to the riddle. Where was the
motive? Was it blackmail? Was it revenge? Was it jealousy? Was it
robbery? Was it a political crime? Was it the work of a madman? Who was
the mysterious veiled woman? Was she associated with the crime? These and a hundred other questions beat insistently on his brain, and
to none of them could he see the answer. He pictured the queer dagger,
but flog his memory as he would he could not think where it might have
been procured. In the morning he would set a score of men making
inquiries at every place in London where such a thing was likely to have
been obtained. He was in the position of a man who might solve a puzzle by hard,
painstaking experiment and inquiry, but rather hoped that some brilliant
flash of inspiration or luck might give him the key that would fit it
together at once. They rarely do come. Once Lomont, Grell's secretary, knocked and entered with a question on
his lips. Foyle waved him impatiently away. "I will see you later on, Mr. Lomont. I am too busy to see you now. Mr.
Waverley or Mr. Bolt will see to you." The man vanished, and a moment or two later a discreet tap at the door
heralded the return of Green, accompanied by Sir Ralph Fairfield. The baronet's hand was cold as it met that of Foyle, and his haggard
face was averted as though to avoid the searching gaze of the
detective. CHAPTER IV


Fairfield, awakened from sleep by the news of the murder of his friend,
had stared stupidly at the detective Foyle had sent to him. "Grell killed!" he exclaimed, "Why, he was with me last night. It is
incredible--awful. Of course, I'll come at once--though I don't see what
use I can be. What time was he murdered?" "About ten o'clock. So far as we know you were the last person to see
him alive--except the murderer," said Green. "Believe me, we're sorry to
have to trouble you." The baronet's face had suddenly gone the colour of white paper. A
sickening dread had suddenly swept over him. His hands trembled as he
adjusted his overcoat. He remembered that he had assured Lady Eileen
that Grell had been with him at the club from six till eleven. What
complexion would that statement bear when it was exposed as a lie--in
the light of the tragedy? His throat worked as he realised that he might
even be suspected of the crime. The ordinary person suddenly involved in the whirlpool of crime is
always staggered. There is ever the feeling, conscious or unconscious:
"Why out of so many millions of people should this happen to _me_?" So
it was with Sir Ralph Fairfield. He pictured the agony in Eileen
Meredith's eyes when she heard of the death of her lover, pictured her
denunciation of his lie. The truth would only sound lame if he were to
tell it. Who would believe it? Like a man stricken dumb he descended in
the lift with Green, out into the wild night in a taxicab, his thoughts
a chaos. He was neither a coward nor a fool. He had known close acquaintance with
sudden death before. But that was different. It had not happened so. He
was incapable of connected thought. One thing only he was clear upon--he
must see Eileen, tell her the truth and throw himself on her mercy. Meanwhile he would answer no questions until he had considered the
matter quietly. This was his state of mind when he shook hands with Foyle. He had
schooled his voice, and it was in a quiet tone that he spoke. "It's a horrible thing, this," he said, twirling his hat between his
long, nervous fingers. Foyle was studying him closely. The movement of the hands was not lost
upon him. "Yes," he agreed, stroking his chin. "I asked you to come here because
Mr. Grell dined with you last night. Do you know if he left you to keep
an appointment?" "No--that is, it might have been so. He left me, and I understood he
would be back. He did not return." "At what time?" Fairfield hesitated a second before replying. Then, "I haven't the
remotest idea." The face of Foyle gave no indication of the surprise he felt. He did not
press the question, but slid off to another. "Do you know of any woman who was likely to visit him at that time of
night?" "Great heavens, no, man! Do you suspect a woman? He----" He checked
himself, and looked curiously at the detective. "Mr. Grell was a friend
of mine," he went on more quietly. "Things are bad enough as they are,
but you know that he had influential friends both here and in America. They won't thank you, Mr. Foyle, for trying to go into such things." Heldon Foyle's eyes lingered in quiet scrutiny on the other's face. "I shall do what I consider to be my duty," he said, his voice a little
hard. "Come, Sir Ralph, you will see I must do my best to bring the
murderer of this man to justice. Had Mr. Grell any relations?" "I don't believe there's one in the wide world." "And you don't remember what time he left? Try, Sir Ralph. It is
important. Before you came I sent a man to the club, and none of the
servants recollects seeing either of you go. They say he was with you
most of the evening. You can clear up this matter of time." "I don't remember what time he left me." The baronet's voice was hoarse and strained. Foyle rose and stood
towering over him. "You are lying," he said deliberately. Sir Ralph recoiled as though he had been struck in the face. A quick
wave of crimson had mounted to his temples. Instinctively his hands
clenched. Then regaining a little control of himself he wheeled about
without a word. His hand was on the handle of the door when the
superintendent's suave voice brought him to a halt. "Oh, by the way, Sir Ralph, you might look at this before you go, and
say whether you recognise it." He held his clenched hand out, and suddenly unclasped it to disclose the
miniature set in diamonds. Sir Ralph gave a start. "By Jove, it's little Lola of Vienna!" he
exclaimed. Then realised that he had been trapped. "But I shall tell you
nothing about her," he snapped. "Thank you, Sir Ralph," said the other quietly. "But this I think it right you should know," went on Fairfield, standing
with one hand still on the handle of the door: "When Grell was with me
last night he showed me a pearl necklace, which he said he had bought as
a wedding present for Lady Eileen Meredith. If you have not found it, it
may give you some motive for the tragedy." "Ah!" said Foyle unemotionally. CHAPTER V


Day had long dawned ere Foyle and his staff had finished their work at
the great house in Grosvenor Gardens. There had been much to do, for
every person who might possibly throw a light on the tragedy had to be
questioned and requestioned. The place had been thoroughly searched from
attic to cellar, for letters or for the jewels that, if Sir Ralph
Fairfield were right, were missing. Much more there would be to do, but for the moment they could go no
further. Foyle returned wearily to Scotland Yard to learn that of the
finger-prints on the dagger two were too blurred to serve for purposes
of identification. He ordered the miniature to be photographed, and held
a short consultation with the assistant commissioner. The watch kept for
Ivan had so far been without avail. In the corridor, early as it was, a
dozen journalists were waiting. Foyle submitted good-humouredly to their
questions as they grouped themselves about his room. "Yes. Of course, I'll let you know all about it," he protested. "I'll
have the facts typed out for you, and you can embroider them yourselves. There's a description of a man we'd like to get hold of--not necessarily
the murderer, but he might be an important witness. Be sure and put that
in." He always had an air of engaging candour when dealing with newspaper
men. Sometimes they were useful, and he never failed to supply them with
just as much information about a case as would in any event leak out. That saved them trouble and made them grateful. He went away now to have
the bare details of the murder put into shape. When he returned he held
the diamond-set miniature in his hand. "This has been left at the Lost Property Office," he declared
unblushingly. "It's pretty valuable, so they've put it into our hands to
find the owner. Any of you boys know the lady?" Some of them examined it with polite interest. They were more concerned
with the murder of a famous man. Lost trinkets were small beer at such
time. Only Jerrold of _The Wire_ made any suggestion. "Reminds me of that Russian princess woman who's been staying at the
Palatial, only it's too young for her. What's her name?--Petrovska, I
think." "Thanks," said Foyle; "it doesn't matter much. Ah, here's your stuff. Good-bye, boys, and don't worry me more than you can help. This thing is
going to keep us pretty busy." He saw them out of the room and carefully closed the door. Sitting at
his desk he lifted the receiver from the telephone. "Get the Palatial Hotel," he ordered. "Hello! That the Palatial? Is the
Princess Petrovska there? What? Left last night at ten o'clock? Did she
say where she was going? No, I see. Good-bye." He scribbled a few words on a slip of paper, and touching the bell gave
it to the man who answered. "Send that to St. Petersburg at once." It was a communication to the Chief of the Russian police, asking that
inquiries should be made as to the antecedents of the Princess. For the next three hours men were coming rapidly in and out of the
superintendent's office, receiving instructions and making reports. Practically the whole of the six hundred men of the C.I.D. were engaged
on the case, for there was no avenue of investigation so slender but
that there might be something at the end of it. Neither Foyle nor his
lieutenants were men to leave anything to chance. Green was seated
opposite to him, discussing the progress they had made. The superintendent leaned back wearily in his chair. Some one handed him
a slim envelope. He tore it open and slowly studied the cipher in which
the message was written. It read--

     "Silinsky, Chief of Police, St. Petersburg. To Foyle,
        Superintendent C.I.D., London. "Woman you mention formerly Lola Rachael, believed
           born Paris; formerly on stage, Vienna; married
           Prince Petrovska, 1898. Husband died suddenly
           1900. Travels much. No further particulars known." Foyle stroked his chin gravely. "Formerly Lola Rachael," he murmured. "And Sir Ralph recognised the miniature as little Lola of Vienna. She's
worth looking after. We must find her, Green. What about this man Ivan?" "No trace of him yet, sir, but I don't think he can give us the slip. He hadn't much time to get away. By the way, sir, what do you think of
Sir Ralph?" "I don't know. He's keeping something back for some reason. You'd better
have him shadowed, Green. Go yourself, and take a good man with you. He
mustn't be let out of sight night or day. I may tackle him again later
on." "Very good, sir. Waverley's still at Grosvenor Gardens. Will you be
going back there?" "I don't know. I want to look through the records of the Convict
Supervision Office for the last ten years. I have an idea that I may
strike something." Green was too wise a man to ask questions of his chief. He slipped from
the room. Half an hour later Foyle dashed out of the room hatless, and,
picking up a taxicab, drove at top speed to Grosvenor Gardens. He was
greeted at the door by Lomont. "What is it?" he demanded, the excitement of the detective communicating
itself to him. "Have you carried the case any further?" "I don't know," replied the detective. "I must see the body again. Come
up with me." In the death-chamber he carefully locked the door. A heavy ink-well
stood on the desk. He twisted up a piece of paper and dipped it in. Then, approaching the murdered man, he smeared the fingers of his right
hand with the blackened paper and pressed them lightly on a piece of
blotting paper. The secretary, in utter bewilderment, watched him
compare the prints with a piece of paper he took from his pocket. "What is it?" he repeated again. "Mr. Lomont," replied the detective gravely, "I wish I knew. Unless our
whole system of identification is wrong--and that is incredible--that
man who lies dead there is not Robert Grell." CHAPTER VI


Lomont reeled dizzily, and his hand sought the support of the wall. To
him Foyle's voice sounded unreal. He stared at the detective as though
doubtful of his sanity. His life had been hitherto ordered, placid. That
there were such things as crimes, murders, detectives, he knew. He had
read of them in the newspapers. But hitherto they had only been names to
him--something to make the paper more readable. He was a thin-faced man of about thirty, with somewhat sallow cheeks on
which there was now a hectic flush, a high-pitched forehead that seemed
to have contracted into a perpetual frown, and colourless eyes. The son
of a well-known barrister, he had tried his luck in the City after
leaving Cambridge. In a few years the respectable income he had started
with had dwindled under the drain of his speculations, and it was then
that a friend had recommended him to Robert Grell, who was about to take
up his residence in England. James Lomont had jumped at the chance, for
the salary was respectable and would enable him to maintain a certain
footing in society. "Not Robert Grell!" he echoed incredulously. Foyle fancied that there was some quality other than incredulity in the
tone, but decided that he was mistaken. The young man's nerves were
shaken up. So far as time would allow he had gathered all there was to
know about him. Lomont had not escaped the network of inquiry that was
being woven about all who had associated with Robert Grell. No fewer than three chapters in a book the Criminal Investigation
Department had commenced compiling were devoted to him. They lay with
others neatly typed and indexed in Heldon Foyle's office. One was his signed statement of events on the night of the tragedy. The
last time he had seen Grell alive was at half-past six, when his
employer had left for the St. Jermyn's Club. He himself had gone to the
Savoy Theatre, and, returning some time after eleven, had let himself in
with his own key and gone straight to bed. He had only been aroused when
the police took possession of the house. The third was headed:
"Inquiries as to career of, and corroboration of statements made by,
James Lomont." The curtains had remained drawn, and only a dim light filtered through
into the room. Foyle lifted a little green-shaded electric lamp from the
table, and switched on the light so that it fell on the face of the dead
man. "Look," he said, in a quiet voice, "do you recognise your chief?" The young man flung back his shoulders with a jerk, as though overcoming
his own feelings, and approached the body with evident distaste. His
hands, slender as a woman's, were tight-clenched, and his breath came
and went in nervous spasms. For a moment he gazed, and then shook his
head weakly. "It is not," he whispered with dry lips. "There is an old scar across
the temple. Mr. Grell's face was not disfigured." He stretched out a
hand and clutched the superintendent nervously by the shoulder. "Who is
this man, Mr. Foyle? What does it all mean? Where is Mr. Grell?" Foyle's hand had stolen to his chin and he rubbed it vigorously. "I don't know what it means," he confessed irritably. "You know as much
as I do now. This man is not Robert Grell, though he is astonishingly
like him. Now, Mr. Lomont, I rely on you not to breathe a word of this
to a living soul until I give you permission. This secret must remain
between our two selves for the time being." "Certainly." In spite of his air of candour, Heldon Foyle had not revealed all he
knew. He left the house pondering deeply. "You see, sir," he explained to the Assistant Commissioner later, "no
one who knew Grell had seen the body closely. The butler had taken it
for granted that it was his master. It was pure luck with me. In looking
through the records in search of this woman Petrovska, I hit against the
picture of Goldenburg. It was so like Grell that I went off at once to
compare finger-prints. They tallied; and then young Lomont spoke of the
scar. Though what Harry Goldenburg should be doing in Grell's house,
with Grell's clothes, and with Grell's property in the pockets, is more
than I can fathom." Sir Hilary Thornton drummed on his desk with his right hand. "Isn't this the Goldenburg who engineered the South American gold mine
swindle?" he asked. "That's the man," agreed Foyle, not without a note of rueful admiration. "He'd got half-a-dozen of the best-known and richest peers in England to
promise support, when we spoilt his game. No one would prosecute. He
always had luck, had Goldenburg. He's been at the back of a score of big
things, but we could never get legal proof against him. He was a cunning
rascal--educated, plausible, reckless. Well, he's gone now, and he's
given us as tough a nut to crack as ever he did while he was alive." "How did you get his finger-prints if he was never convicted?" asked Sir
Hilary with interest. Foyle looked his superior full in the face and smiled. "I arrested him myself, on a charge of pocket-picking in Piccadilly," he
said. "Of course, he never picked a pocket in his life--he was too big a
crook for that. But we got a remand, and that gave us a chance to get
his photograph and prints for the records. We offered no evidence on the
second hearing. It was perhaps not strictly legal, but----" The
superintendent's features relaxed into a smile. "He never brought an
action for malicious prosecution." "And about Grell? How do you propose to find him?" Foyle drew his chair up to the table and scribbled busily for a few
minutes on a sheet of paper. He carefully blotted it, and handed the
result of his labours to Sir Hilary, who nodded approval as he read it. "You think we shall catch one man by advertising for another?" "I think it worth trying, sir," retorted the superintendent curtly. "The
description and the photograph fit like a glove--and we shan't be
giving anything away." As Heldon Foyle passed through the little back door leading to the
courtyard of Scotland Yard an hour later, he stopped for an instant to
study a poster that was being placed among the notices on the board in
the door. It ran:

     POLICE NOTICE. L100 REWARD

     HARRY GOLDENBURG, alias THE HON. RUPERT BAXTER, MAX SMITH, JOHN
     BROOKS, etc. Wanted For
     MURDER. DESCRIPTION.--Age, about 45; height, about 6 ft. 1 in. ; complexion,
     bronzed; square features; grey hair; drooping grey moustache;
     upright carriage. NOTE.--Henry Goldenburg has travelled extensively, and is an
     American by birth, but his accent is almost imperceptible. He
     speaks several languages, and has resided in Paris, Madrid, and
     Rome. The above Reward will be paid to any person (other than a member of
     any Police force in the United Kingdom) who gives such information
     as will lead to the apprehension of the above-named person. The superintendent had wasted no time. CHAPTER VII


The first grey daylight had found Sir Ralph Fairfield pacing his
sitting-room with uneven strides, his hands clasped behind his back, the
stump of a cold cigar between his teeth. His interview with Heldon Foyle
had not been calculated to calm him. "I'm a fool--a fool," he told himself. "Why should they suspect me? What
have I to gain by Grell's death?" It was the attitude of a man trying to convince himself. There was one
reason why he might be supposed to wish his friend out of the way, but
he dared not even shape the thought. There was one person who might
guess, and it was she whose lips he hoped to seal. A quick dread came to
him. Suppose the police had already gone to her. The thought stung him
to action. He had not even removed his hat and coat since his return
from Grosvenor Gardens. He made his way to the street and walked briskly
along until he sighted a taxicab. "507 Berkeley Square," he told the driver. It was a surprised footman who opened the door of the Duke of Burghley's
house. Fairfield, at the man's look of astonishment, remembered that he
was unshaven, and that his clothes had been thrown on haphazard. It was
a queer thought to intrude at such a time. But he was usually a
scrupulously dressed man, and the triviality worried him. "Lady Eileen Meredith. I must see her at once," he said peremptorily. "Don't stand staring at me, man. You know me." The footman coughed apologetically. "Yes, Sir Ralph. Lady Eileen is not up yet. If it is important I can get
a maid to call her. Shall I tell his Grace?" "No. It is of the utmost importance that I see her personally
immediately." Sir Ralph breathed a sigh of relief as he was ushered into the cool
morning room and the door closed behind him. At all events, the police
had not seen her yet. He was first. That meant he would have to break
the news to her. How would she take it? "The poor little girl!" he muttered to himself. And then the door
clicked. Eileen Meredith stood there, a pink dressing-gown enveloping her
graceful figure from shoulders to feet. There was questioning wonder in
her grey eyes as she extended her hand, but no alarm. He almost wished
there was. It would have made things easier. "You, Sir Ralph?" she cried. "What has brought you here so early? Has
Bob repented of his bargain and sent you to call it off at the last
moment?" The man fumbled for words. Now that he was face to face with her the
phrase he had so laboriously worked out to lead up to the news had
deserted him. He pushed a chair towards her. "Er--won't you sit down?" he said awkwardly. He was striving for an opening. Both words and tone called the girl's
direct attention to the haggard face, the feverish eyes. Her fears were
alight on the instant. She regarded him with parted lips and gripped
his arm impulsively. "Something has happened!" she cried apprehensively. "Why do you look
like that? What is it?" Her voice rose and she tried to shake the silent
man. "Answer--why don't you answer? Is he ill--dead?" Sir Ralph choked over his reply. "He was killed last night--murdered." It was out at last. He had blundered clumsily, and he knew it. The
colour drained from Eileen's face and she stood rigid as a statue for a
moment. Then slowly she swayed forward. He stretched out his arms to
prevent her from falling. She waved him aside dumbly and tottered to a
couch. His directness had been more merciful than he had thought. She
was stunned, dazed by her calamity. Her very silence frightened the man. She sat bolt upright, her hand resting limply in her lap and her dull
eyes staring into vacancy. A tiny clock on the mantelpiece ticked
loudly. "Dead!" she whispered at last. There was no trace of unsteadiness in her
voice and her eyes were dry. She spoke mechanically. "And it is our
wedding-day! Dead! Bob is dead?" Her hair had fallen about her shoulders, and, beautiful in her grief,
she inspired the man with almost supernatural awe. He had moved to the
mantelpiece and, resting an arm upon it and one foot upon the fender,
remained looking down upon her. He was waiting until the first numbness
of the shock had passed. The little clock on the mantelpiece had ticked
out ten minutes ere she spoke again. But her voice was pitched in more
natural tones, and her face had regained something of its colour. "How did it happen?" Haltingly he gave such details as he knew. Her eyes were fixed on his
face as he narrated his story. He hesitated as he referred to his
telephone conversation with her. In her clear eyes he saw challenging
scorn and stopped abruptly. "You say that Bob asked you to lie to me?" she demanded. "Not to you in particular. To any one who rang up. I couldn't know
whether he wished his instructions to apply to you." "No, no, of course not," she interposed quickly, but with a tightening
of the heart he recognised the bitterness of her tone. For all her soft
daintiness, there was something of the tigress in Eileen Meredith. The man she loved was dead. Well, she would have her vengeance--somehow,
on some one. She was ready to suspect without thinking. And Sir Ralph
Fairfield had laid himself open to suspicion. "He was killed before eleven," she went on remorselessly, "and you told
me he was in the club with you at that time." "You don't believe me." He held out his arms to her imploringly, and
then dropped them to his side. "I give you my word that everything I
have told you is true. Why should I lie now?" She wheeled on him passionately. "You ask me that?" she said tensely. "You who thought he was in your
way--that what you could not gain while he was living you might take
when he was dead. Do you think your smooth-faced hypocrisy deceives me
now? You pretended to accept your dismissal, pretended to be still my
friend--and his." Her anger disconcerted the man more than her anguish had done. His
breath caught sharply. "You don't realise what you are saying," he said, speaking calmly with
an effort. "Because I once loved you--love you still if you will--before
ever Robert Grell came into your life, you hint an unthinkable thing." She crossed the room in a graceful swirl of draperies, and laid a finger
on the bell. Her features were set. She was in no state to weigh the
justice or injustice of the implied accusation she had made. And the
man, for his part, felt his oppression brushed away by anger at her
readiness to judge him. "We shall see whether the police believe it unthinkable," she said
coldly. A servant tapped discreetly and opened the door. "Show this person out," she said. Sir Ralph bowed mechanically. There was nothing more to be said. He knew
that in her present condition an appeal to her to suppress the story of
the telephone message would be worse than useless. As he passed down the
steps and into the street, a man sauntered idly a dozen yards behind
him. And thirty yards behind that man was another whom the baronet might
have recognised as Chief Detective-Inspector Green--had he seen him. Within the house a girl, no longer upheld by the strength of passionate
denunciation, had collapsed on a couch, a huddled heap of draperies,
sobbing as though her heart would break. CHAPTER VIII


It was an hour after Fairfield had left her before Eileen Meredith's
sobs died away in the deserted room. There was none to hear or see, and
she gave way to her grief uncontrolled. Gradually the first shock
passed. Her calmness came back to her, but she was a different woman to
the vivacious, sunny girl who had looked forward to her wedding-day. Her
face was set stonily, and in the grey depths of her eyes there lurked in
place of laughter an implacable determination. She had loved Robert Grell with the fierce, passionate devotion of a
strong nature. The sudden news of his death had brought out the
primitive woman bent on vengeance. It was no impulse of suddenly
shattered nerves that had made her turn on Fairfield. To coldly analyse
the facts for and against him was beyond her. She only thought of the
man who had a possible motive for slaying her lover and had had a
possible opportunity. Yet none would have guessed the burning emotion that thrilled in her
veins as she submitted to the ministrations of her maid. She had not
even troubled to tell her father, although the elderly peer was her only
near relative. Not until he was seated at breakfast did she inform him
in level, passionless tones of what had happened. Even then she said
nothing of her suspicions of Ralph Fairfield. But for her pale face she
might have been speaking of something in which she was but slightly
interested. The Duke of Burghley dropped his knife and fork at her first words. As
she finished, he stood over her and passed a hand tenderly around her. "My poor, poor little girl," he said. "This is terrible. Fairfield ought
to have seen me first. I must telephone for your aunt to come and stay
here until we can get away." She shook her head a trifle impatiently. "I don't want her, father. She cannot help me. I would rather be here
alone with you. It would drive me mad to have sympathy showered on me. I
want to see no one. I want to be left to myself." "But--my dear, I know it is a shock, but you cannot be allowed to
brood----"

She rose abruptly from the table and put him from her. "I shall not brood," she said. "I shall work. I am going to Scotland
Yard to learn what they know." "Yes, yes, if you wish it," he said soothingly. "We will go at once. I
will order the car now." "I would rather go alone, if you don't mind," she said decisively, and
the door closed behind her. "She always was headstrong," remarked the Duke of Burghley to the
devilled kidneys, and stared moodily into the fire. Since his wife had died he had always been governed by his impetuous,
strong-willed daughter, and accepted the situation philosophically so
long as he had his books and his club. He led a complacent life from
which he was rarely stirred. But he was hit harder than he cared to
admit by the way in which she accepted the tragedy. He wondered vaguely
what he ought to do, and decided to consult Brown--Brown being the
senior member of his firm of family solicitors. In his room at Scotland Yard Superintendent Heldon Foyle, a cigar
between his teeth, was studying the book which his staff was compiling. Already it formed a bulky volume of many hundred typewritten pages. Here
were reports, signed statements, photographs, personal descriptions,
facsimiles of finger-prints, telegrams, letters, surveyors' plans,
notes--everything, important and unimportant, that might have a possible
bearing on the case. The superintendent turned over the pages with a
moistened forefinger, and made a note now and again on a writing-pad by
his side. "Puzzling cases are like a jig-saw puzzle," he had once said. "You
juggle about with the facts until you find two or three that fit
together. They give you the key, and you build the rest up round 'em. But it's no good trying to do it unless you've got your box of pieces
complete." His box of pieces was not complete, and he knew it. Nevertheless, he
could not resist trying to fit them together. But the announcement made
by his clerk of the arrival of Lady Eileen Meredith came while he was
still puzzling. She stood in the doorway, a dainty figure in furs, a
heavy veil drawn over her face. "Mr. Foyle?" she asked hesitatingly. He bowed and wheeled a big arm-chair near his desk. "Yes. Won't you sit down, Lady Eileen? You have just missed one of our
men. I sent him round to break the news to you. I need not tell you that
we recognise how you must feel in these terrible circumstances. We
shall trouble you as little as possible after you have answered a few
questions." He was studying her shrewdly while he spoke, and her strange composure
struck him at once. Even to her he had decided to say nothing of the
identity of the murdered man. That could wait until he had had a better
opportunity to judge her. She sat down and rested her chin on one slim, gloved hand, her elbow on
the desk. "That's very good of you," she said formally. And then broke direct into
her mission. "Have you found out anything, Mr. Foyle?" "It's rather early to say anything yet," he hedged. "Our inquiries are
not completed." "There is no need for further inquiry. I can tell you who the murderer
is." Superintendent Foyle coughed and idly shifted a piece of paper over the
notes on his blotting-pad. His face was inscrutable. She could not tell
whether her statement had startled him or not. For all the change in his
expression she might have merely remarked that the weather was fine. Had
it been any one else he would have said that before the day was out he
expected a dozen or more people to tell him that they knew the
murderer--and that in each case the selection would be different. As it
was he merely said with polite interest--

"Ah, that will save us a great deal of trouble. Who is it?" "He is--I believe him to be Sir Ralph Fairfield." The superintendent's eyelids flickered curiously; otherwise he gave no
sign of the quickening of his interest. He was a judge of men, and
although Fairfield had rebuffed him he did not believe him to be a
murderer. Still, one never knew. Those who kill are not cast in one
mould. If Sir Ralph had slain Goldenburg in mistake for Grell, and Lady
Eileen knew there must be a motive--for that motive he had to look no
further than the beautiful, unsmiling face before him. "You realise that you are making a very grave accusation, Lady Eileen?" he said. "What reason should there be?" She spoke rapidly, steadily, and he did not interrupt her. His pen
rushed swiftly across the paper, taking down her words. They would
presently be neatly typed and added to the book. When she paused, he
replaced the pen tidily in its rack. "This is what it comes to--that at eleven o'clock Sir Ralph said Mr.
Grell was with him. You say that you had refused an offer of marriage
from Sir Ralph, and think that he murdered Mr. Grell from jealousy. I
may say that, though we know Sir Ralph was at his club for dinner and at
eleven o'clock, we can find neither servants nor members who can say for
certain that he was there at the time the murder was committed." She caught her breath. "Then it was he!" she exclaimed eagerly. "Bob had
not another enemy in the world. You will arrest him." "Not yet," Foyle retorted, and noted that her face fell. "All this is
only suspicion. We must have proof to satisfy a jury before we can do
anything with a man in Sir Ralph's position. And now, if you don't
mind, I should like to put a few other questions to you." When she left after half an hour, Foyle threw back his head with a jerk. "A pleasant girl," he commented. "Seems wonderfully anxious to have
Fairfield hanged. I suppose she was really infatuated with Grell. You
never know how women are going to take things. I wonder if I can get a
set of his finger-prints. That ought to settle the matter one way or the
other, so far as he is concerned. But it won't clear up what Goldenburg
was doing in Grell's place. I'll have to fix that somehow." CHAPTER IX


The overmastering energy of Heldon Foyle was at once the envy and
despair of his subordinates. There was a story that once he went without
sleep for a week while unravelling the mystery of the robbery of the
Countess of Enver's pearls. That was probably exaggerated, but he
certainly spent no unnecessary time for rest or food when work was
toward--and he saw also that his staff were urged to the limits of human
endurance. Having spent four hours sleeping in his clothes, he deemed that he had
paid full courtesy to nature. He unlocked a drawer, picked out a deadly
little automatic pistol, and dropped it into his jacket pocket. He
rarely went armed, and had never fired a shot in his life save at a
target. But on certain occasions a pistol was useful to "back a bluff." And on the mission he had in mind he might need something. He felt in
his breast-pocket to make certain that the enlarged photograph of the
finger-prints found on the dagger were there, and sallied forth into the
dusk. In his own mind he had definitely decided on the immediately important
points in the inquiry. There was Ivan, the missing servant, to be found,
as also the Princess Petrovska. The police of a dozen countries were
keeping a look-out for them. Then there was the knife with its quaint,
horizontal hilt of ivory. Rigorous inquiry had failed to elicit its
place of origin, yet so strange a weapon once seen would infallibly be
recognised again. Finally, there was the question of Sir Ralph
Fairfield. The evening papers had seized avidly on a mystery after their own heart,
and glaring contents-bills told of "Millionaire Murdered on Wedding Eve. Strange Mystery." But Foyle had already seen the papers. He held
straight on for the Albany. "Was Sir Ralph Fairfield in?" The question was superfluous, for he had
already seen Chief Detective-Inspector Green standing outside apparently
much interested in an evening paper. And Green would not have been there
unless Sir Ralph were about. Foyle was received coldly by the baronet, and his quick eyes noted a
half-empty decanter on the table. Fairfield was palpably nervous and ill
at ease. He was plainly distrustful of his visitor's purpose. The
detective was apologetic and good-humoured. "I have come to apologise for my rudeness at Grosvenor Gardens," he
began. "I was worried, and you were, of course, upset. Now we are both
more calm, I come to ask you if you would like to add anything to what
you said. Of course, you'll be called to give evidence at the inquest,
and it would make it easier for you as well as for us if we knew what
you were going to say." Fairfield shrugged his shoulders. "I have told you all you will learn
from me," he said quickly. "I suppose you've seen Lady Eileen Meredith." "No." The lie was prompt, but the superintendent salved his conscience
with the thought that it was a necessary one. "I don't know that she can
tell us anything of value." An expression of relief flitted over the face of Grell's friend. After
all, it was something to have the worst postponed. A man may face swift
danger with debonair courage, may be undaunted by perils or emergencies
of sport, of travel, of everyday life. But few innocent men can believe
that a net is slowly closing round them which will end in the obloquy of
the Central Criminal Court, or in a shameful death, without feeling
something of the terror of the hunted. "The terror of the law" is very
real in such cases. Fairfield was no coward, but his nerves had begun to
go under the strain of the suspense. It would have been different had he
been able to do anything--to find relief in action. But he had to remain
passively impotent. "Well," he said, "I expect you're very busy, Mr. Foyle. I don't want to
keep you." The detective received the snub with an amiable smile. "I won't force my
company on you, Sir Ralph. If you will just dictate to me a description
of the string of pearls that Grell showed you, I will go. Can you let me
have a pen and some paper?" Ungraciously enough Fairfield flung open a small inlaid writing-desk,
and Foyle took down the description as though he really needed it. As he
finished he held out the pen to Fairfield. "Will you sign that, please? No, here." Their hands were almost touching. Foyle half rose and stumbled clumsily,
clutching the other's wrist to save himself. The baronet's hand and
fingers were pressed down heavily on the still wet writing. The
detective recovered his balance and apologised profusely, at the same
time picking up the sheet of paper. "I don't know how I came to do that. I am very sorry. It's smudged the
paper a bit, but that won't matter. It's still readable. Good-bye, Sir
Ralph." So admirably had the accident been contrived that even Fairfield never
suspected that it was anything but genuine. In a public telephone-box, a
few hundred yards away, Heldon Foyle was examining the half-sheet of
notepaper side by side with the photograph of the finger-prints on the
dagger. A telephone-box is admirably constructed for the private
examination of documents if one's back is towards the door and one is
bent over the directory. Line by line Foyle traced "laterals," "lakes,"
and "accidentals," calling to his aid a magnifying glass from his
waistcoat pocket. When he emerged he was rubbing his chin vigorously. The prints were
totally different. Sir Ralph Fairfield was not the murderer of the man
so astoundingly like Robert Grell. CHAPTER X


The evidence of the finger-prints was entirely negative. Though Foyle
believed that Fairfield was innocent, he never permitted himself to be
swayed by his opinions into neglecting a possibility. It was still
possible that the baronet might have been concerned in the crime even
though they were some one else's prints on the dagger. At any rate
Fairfield was suppressing something. It could do no harm to continue the
watch that had been set upon him. So Foyle left Green and his companion
to continue their unobtrusive vigil. To justify his stay in the box--for he was artist enough to do things
thoroughly even though it might be unnecessary--he lifted the receiver
and put a call through to Scotland Yard. "This is Foyle speaking," he said when at last he had got the man he
asked for. "Is there anything fresh for me?" "Nothing important, sir, except that Blake has found a curiosity dealer
who says that the knife is one that must have come from South America. It is, he says, an unusual sort of Mexican dagger." "Oh. Is the man who says that to be relied on? He isn't just guessing? We can do all the guessing we want ourselves." "No, sir, we think he's all right. It's Marfield--one of the biggest men
in the trade. By the way, sir, there's a lot of newspaper men been
asking for you since you left. They want to know about Goldenburg." "So do I," retorted the other. "You'd better be strictly truthful with
'em, Mainland. Tell 'em you know no more than is on the reward bill. They won't believe you, anyway. You can say I've gone home to bed, and
that there will be nothing more doing this evening. Good-bye." "A Mexican dagger," he muttered to himself as he left the telephone-box. "Now, if I were a story-book detective I should assume that the murderer
was either a South American or had travelled in South America. It looked
the kind of thing a woman might carry in her garter. And a veiled woman
called on him that night"--he made a wry face. "Foyle, my lad, you're
assuming things. That way madness lies. The dagger might have been
bought anywhere as a curiosity, and the veiled woman may have been a
purely innocent caller." 