



Produced by Taavi Kalju, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.) GODFREY MORGAN

A CALIFORNIAN MYSTERY

BY

JULES VERNE

ILLUSTRATED

_AUTHOR'S COPYRIGHT EDITION_

LONDON: SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & COMPANY, _Limited_. [Illustration: "Going! Going!" _page 15_]




CONTENTS. CHAPTER I. PAGE
In which the reader has the opportunity of buying an Island in
the Pacific Ocean                                                  1


CHAPTER II. How William W. Kolderup, of San Francisco, was at loggerheads
with J. R. Taskinar, of Stockton                                  11


CHAPTER III. The conversation of Phina Hollaney and Godfrey Morgan, with
a piano accompaniment                                             24


CHAPTER IV. In which T. Artelett, otherwise Tartlet, is duly introduced
to the reader                                                     35


CHAPTER V.

In which they prepare to go, and at the end of which they go
for good                                                          43


CHAPTER VI. In which the reader makes the acquaintance of a new personage     53


CHAPTER VII. In which it will be seen that William W. Kolderup was probably
right in insuring his ship                                        62


CHAPTER VIII. Which leads Godfrey to bitter reflections on the mania for
travelling                                                        77


CHAPTER IX. In which it is shown that Crusoes do not have everything as
they wish                                                         91


CHAPTER X. In which Godfrey does what any other shipwrecked man would
have done under the circumstances                                104


CHAPTER XI. In which the question of lodging is solved as well as it
could be                                                         117


CHAPTER XII. Which ends with a thunder-bolt                                   129


CHAPTER XIII. In which Godfrey again sees a slight smoke over another part
of the Island                                                    143


CHAPTER XIV. Wherein Godfrey finds some wreckage, to which he and his
companion give a hearty welcome                                  155


CHAPTER XV. In which there happens what happens at least once in the life
of every Crusoe, real or imaginary                               167


CHAPTER XVI. In which something happens which cannot fail to surprise the
reader                                                           179


CHAPTER XVII. In which Professor Tartlet's gun really does marvels             190


CHAPTER XVIII. Which treats of the moral and physical education of a simple
native of the Pacific                                            203


CHAPTER XIX. In which the situation already gravely compromised becomes
more and more complicated                                        216


CHAPTER XX. In which Tartlet reiterates in every key that he would rather
be off                                                           228


CHAPTER XXI. Which ends with quite a surprising reflection by the negro
Carefinotu                                                       242


CHAPTER XXII. Which concludes by explaining what up to now had appeared
inexplicable                                                     260




GODFREY MORGAN. CHAPTER I. IN WHICH THE READER HAS THE OPPORTUNITY OF BUYING AN ISLAND IN THE
PACIFIC OCEAN. "An island to sell, for cash, to the highest bidder!" said Dean Felporg,
the auctioneer, standing behind his rostrum in the room where the
conditions of the singular sale were being noisily discussed. "Island for sale! island for sale!" repeated in shrill tones again and
again Gingrass, the crier, who was threading his way in and out of the
excited crowd closely packed inside the largest saloon in the auction
mart at No. 10, Sacramento Street. The crowd consisted not only of a goodly number of Americans from the
States of Utah, Oregon, and California, but also of a few Frenchmen, who
form quite a sixth of the population. Mexicans were there enveloped in their sarapes; Chinamen in their
large-sleeved tunics, pointed shoes, and conical hats; one or two
Kanucks from the coast; and even a sprinkling of Black Feet,
Grosventres, or Flatheads, from the banks of the Trinity river. The scene is in San Francisco, the capital of California, but not at the
period when the placer-mining fever was raging--from 1849 to 1852. San
Francisco was no longer what it had been then, a caravanserai, a
terminus, an _inn_, where for a night there slept the busy men who were
hastening to the gold-fields west of the Sierra Nevada. At the end of
some twenty years the old unknown Yerba-Buena had given place to a town
unique of its kind, peopled by 100,000 inhabitants, built under the
shelter of a couple of hills, away from the shore, but stretching off to
the farthest heights in the background--a city in short which has
dethroned Lima, Santiago, Valparaiso, and every other rival, and which
the Americans have made the queen of the Pacific, the "glory of the
western coast!" It was the 15th of May, and the weather was still cold. In California,
subject as it is to the direct action of the polar currents, the first
weeks of this month are somewhat similar to the last weeks of March in
Central Europe. But the cold was hardly noticeable in the thick of the
auction crowd. The bell with its incessant clangour had brought
together an enormous throng, and quite a summer temperature caused the
drops of perspiration to glisten on the foreheads of the spectators
which the cold outside would have soon solidified. Do not imagine that all these folks had come to the auction-room with
the intention of buying. I might say that all of them had but come to
see. Who was going to be mad enough, even if he were rich enough, to
purchase an isle of the Pacific, which the government had in some
eccentric moment decided to sell? Would the reserve price ever be
reached? Could anybody be found to work up the bidding? If not, it would
scarcely be the fault of the public crier, who tried his best to tempt
buyers by his shoutings and gestures, and the flowery metaphors of his
harangue. People laughed at him, but they did not seem much influenced
by him. "An island! an isle to sell!" repeated Gingrass. "But not to buy!" answered an Irishman, whose pocket did not hold enough
to pay for a single pebble. "An island which at the valuation will not fetch six dollars an acre!" said the auctioneer. "And which won't pay an eighth per cent.!" replied a big farmer, who was
well acquainted with agricultural speculations. "An isle which measures quite sixty-four miles round and has an area of
two hundred and twenty-five thousand acres!" "Is it solid on its foundation?" asked a Mexican, an old customer at the
liquor-bars, whose personal solidity seemed rather doubtful at the
moment. "An isle with forests still virgin!" repeated the crier, "with prairies,
hills, watercourses--"

"Warranted?" asked a Frenchman, who seemed rather inclined to nibble. "Yes! warranted!" added Felporg, much too old at his trade to be moved
by the chaff of the public. "For two years?" "To the end of the world!" "Beyond that?" "A freehold island!" repeated the crier, "an island without a single
noxious animal, no wild beasts, no reptiles!--"

"No birds?" added a wag. "No insects?" inquired another. "An island for the highest bidder!" said Dean Felporg, beginning again. "Come, gentlemen, come! Have a little courage in your pockets! Who wants
an island in perfect state of repair, never been used, an island in the
Pacific, that ocean of oceans? The valuation is a mere nothing! It is
put at eleven hundred thousand dollars, is there any one will bid? Who
speaks first? You, sir?--you, over there nodding your head like a
porcelain mandarin? Here is an island! a really good island! Who says an
island?" "Pass it round!" said a voice as if they were dealing with a picture or
a vase. And the room shouted with laughter, but not a half-dollar was bid. However, if the lot could not be passed round, the map of the island was
at the public disposal. The whereabouts of the portion of the globe
under consideration could be accurately ascertained. There was neither
surprise nor disappointment to be feared in that respect. Situation,
orientation, outline, altitudes, levels, hydrography, climatology, lines
of communication, all these were easily to be verified in advance. People were not buying a pig in a poke, and most undoubtedly there could
be no mistake as to the nature of the goods on sale. Moreover, the
innumerable journals of the United States, especially those of
California, with their dailies, bi-weeklies, weeklies, bi-monthlies,
monthlies, their reviews, magazines, bulletins, &c., had been for
several months directing constant attention to the island whose sale by
auction had been authorized by Act of Congress. The island was Spencer Island, which lies in the west-south-west of the
Bay of San Francisco, about 460 miles from the Californian coast, in 32 deg. 15' north latitude, and 145 deg. 18' west longitude, reckoning from
Greenwich. It would be impossible to imagine a more isolated position,
quite out of the way of all maritime or commercial traffic, although
Spencer Island was relatively, not very far off, and situated
practically in American waters. But thereabouts the regular currents
diverging to the north and south have formed a kind of lake of calms,
which is sometimes known as the "Whirlpool of Fleurieu." It is in the centre of this enormous eddy, which has hardly an
appreciable movement, that Spencer Island is situated. And so it is
sighted by very few ships. The main routes of the Pacific, which join
the new to the old continent, and lead away to China or Japan, run in a
more southerly direction. Sailing-vessels would meet with endless calms
in the Whirlpool of Fleurieu; and steamers, which always take the
shortest road, would gain no advantage by crossing it. Hence ships of
neither class know anything of Spencer Island, which rises above the
waters like the isolated summit of one of the submarine mountains of the
Pacific. Truly, for a man wishing to flee from the noise of the world,
seeking quiet in solitude, what could be better than this island, lost
within a few hundred miles of the coast? For a voluntary Robinson
Crusoe, it would be the very ideal of its kind! Only of course he must
pay for it. And now, why did the United States desire to part with the island? Was
it for some whim? No! A great nation cannot act on caprice in any
matter, however simple. The truth was this: situated as it was, Spencer
Island had for a long time been known as a station perfectly useless. There could be no practical result from settling there. In a military
point of view it was of no importance, for it only commanded an
absolutely deserted portion of the Pacific. In a commercial point of
view there was a similar want of importance, for the products would not
pay the freight either inwards or outwards. For a criminal colony it was
too far from the coast. And to occupy it in any way, would be a very
expensive undertaking. So it had remained deserted from time immemorial,
and Congress, composed of "eminently practical" men, had resolved to put
it up for sale--on one condition only, and that was, that its purchaser
should be a free American citizen. There was no intention of giving away
the island for nothing, and so the reserve price had been fixed at
$1,100,000. This amount for a financial society dealing with such
matters was a mere bagatelle, if the transaction could offer any
advantages; but as we need hardly repeat, it offered none, and competent
men attached no more value to this detached portion of the United
States, than to one of the islands lost beneath the glaciers of the
Pole. In one sense, however, the amount was considerable. A man must be rich
to pay for this hobby, for in any case it would not return him a
halfpenny per cent. He would even have to be immensely rich for the
transaction was to be a "cash" one, and even in the United States it is
as yet rare to find citizens with $1,100,000 in their pockets, who would
care to throw them into the water without hope of return. And Congress had decided not to sell the island under the price. Eleven
hundred thousand dollars, not a cent less, or Spencer Island would
remain the property of the Union. It was hardly likely that any one would be mad enough to buy it on the
terms. Besides, it was expressly reserved that the proprietor, if one offered,
should not become king of Spencer Island, but president of a republic. He would gain no right to have subjects, but only fellow-citizens, who
could elect him for a fixed time, and would be free from re-electing him
indefinitely. Under any circumstances he was forbidden to play at
monarchy. The Union could never tolerate the foundation of a kingdom, no
matter how small, in American waters. This reservation was enough to keep off many an ambitious millionaire,
many an aged nabob, who might like to compete with the kings of the
Sandwich, the Marquesas, and the other archipelagoes of the Pacific. In short, for one reason or other, nobody presented himself. Time was
getting on, the crier was out of breath in his efforts to secure a
buyer, the auctioneer orated without obtaining a single specimen of
those nods which his estimable fraternity are so quick to discover; and
the reserve price was not even mentioned. However, if the hammer was not wearied with oscillating above the
rostrum, the crowd was not wearied with waiting around it. The joking
continued to increase, and the chaff never ceased for a moment. One
individual offered two dollars for the island, costs included. Another
said that a man ought to be paid that for taking it. And all the time the crier was heard with,--

"An island to sell! an island for sale!" And there was no one to buy it. "Will you guarantee that there are flats there?" said Stumpy, the grocer
of Merchant Street, alluding to the deposits so famous in alluvial
gold-mining. "No," answered the auctioneer, "but it is not impossible that there are,
and the State abandons all its rights over the gold lands." "Haven't you got a volcano?" asked Oakhurst, the bar-keeper of
Montgomery Street. "No volcanoes," replied Dean Felporg, "if there were, we could not sell
at this price!" An immense shout of laughter followed. "An island to sell! an island for sale!" yelled Gingrass, whose lungs
tired themselves out to no purpose. "Only a dollar! only a half-dollar! only a cent above the reserve!" said
the auctioneer for the last time, "and I will knock it down! Once! Twice!" Perfect silence. "If nobody bids we must put the lot back! Once! Twice! "Twelve hundred thousand dollars!" The four words rang through the room like four shots from a revolver. The crowd, suddenly speechless, turned towards the bold man who had
dared to bid. It was William W. Kolderup, of San Francisco. CHAPTER II. HOW WILLIAM W. KOLDERUP, OF SAN FRANCISCO, WAS AT LOGGERHEADS WITH J. R.
TASKINAR, OF STOCKTON. A man extraordinarily rich, who counted dollars by the million as other
men do by the thousand; such was William W. Kolderup. People said he was richer than the Duke of Westminster, whose income is
some $4,000,000 a year, and who can spend his $10,000 a day, or seven
dollars every minute; richer than Senator Jones, of Nevada, who has
$35,000,000 in the funds; richer than Mr. Mackay himself, whose annual
$13,750,000 give him $1560 per hour, or half-a-dollar to spend every
second of his life. I do not mention such minor millionaires as the Rothschilds, the
Vanderbilts, the Dukes of Northumberland, or the Stewarts, nor the
directors of the powerful bank of California, and other opulent
personages of the old and new worlds whom William W. Kolderup would have
been able to comfortably pension. He could, without inconvenience, have
given away a million just as you and I might give away a shilling. It was in developing the early placer-mining enterprises in California
that our worthy speculator had laid the solid foundations of his
incalculable fortune. He was the principal associate of Captain Sutter,
the Swiss, in the localities, where, in 1848, the first traces were
discovered. Since then, luck and shrewdness combined had helped him on,
and he had interested himself in all the great enterprises of both
worlds. He threw himself boldly into commercial and industrial
speculations. His inexhaustible funds were the life of hundreds of
factories, his ships were on every sea. His wealth increased not in
arithmetical but in geometrical progression. People spoke of him as one
of those few "milliardaires" who never know how much they are worth. In
reality he knew almost to a dollar, but he never boasted of it. At this very moment when we introduce him to our readers with all the
consideration such a many-sided man merits, William W. Kolderup had 2000
branch offices scattered over the globe, 80,000 employes in America,
Europe, and Australia, 300,000 correspondents, a fleet of 500 ships
which continually ploughed the ocean for his profit, and he was spending
not less than a million a year in bill-stamps and postages. In short, he
was the honour and glory of opulent Frisco--the nickname familiarly
given by the Americans to the Californian capital. A bid from William W. Kolderup could not but be a serious one. And when
the crowd in the auction room had recognized who it was that by $100,000
had capped the reserve price of Spencer Island, there was an
irresistible sensation, the chaffing ceased instantly, jokes gave place
to interjections of admiration, and cheers resounded through the saloon. Then a deep silence succeeded to the hubbub, eyes grew bigger, and ears
opened wider. For our part had we been there we would have had to hold
our breath that we might lose nothing of the exciting scene which would
follow should any one dare to bid against William W. Kolderup. But was it probable? Was it even possible? No! And at the outset it was only necessary to look at William W.
Kolderup to feel convinced that he could never yield on a question where
his financial gallantry was at stake. He was a big, powerful man, with huge head, large shoulders, well-built
limbs, firmly knit, and tough as iron. His quiet but resolute look was
not willingly cast downwards, his grey hair, brushed up in front, was as
abundant as if he were still young. The straight lines of his nose
formed a geometrically-drawn right-angled triangle. No moustache; his
beard cut in Yankee fashion bedecked his chin, and the two upper points
met at the opening of the lips and ran up to the temples in
pepper-and-salt whiskers; teeth of snowy whiteness were symmetrically
placed on the borders of a clean-cut mouth. The head of one of those
true kings of men who rise in the tempest and face the storm. No
hurricane could bend that head, so solid was the neck which supported
it. In these battles of the bidders each of its nods meant an additional
hundred thousand dollars. There was no one to dispute with him. "Twelve hundred thousand dollars--twelve hundred thousand!" said the
auctioneer, with that peculiar accent which men of his vocation find
most effective. "Going at twelve hundred thousand dollars!" repeated Gingrass the crier. "You could safely bid more than that," said Oakhurst, the bar-keeper;
"William Kolderup will never give in." "He knows no one will chance it," answered the grocer from Merchant
Street. Repeated cries of "Hush!" told the two worthy tradesmen to be quiet. All
wished to hear. All hearts palpitated. Dare any one raise his voice in
answer to the voice of William W. Kolderup? He, magnificent to look
upon, never moved. There he remained as calm as if the matter had no
interest for him. But--and this those near to him noticed--his eyes were
like revolvers loaded with dollars, ready to fire. "Nobody speaks?" asked Dean Felporg. Nobody spoke. "Once! Twice!" "Once! Twice!" repeated Gingrass, quite accustomed to this little
dialogue with his chief. "Going!" "Going!" "For twelve--hundred--thousand--dollars--Spencer--Island--com--plete!" "For twelve--hundred--thousand--dollars!" "That is so? No mistake?" "No withdrawal?" "For twelve hundred thousand dollars, Spencer Island!" The waistcoats rose and fell convulsively. Could it be possible that at
the last second a higher bid would come? Felporg with his right hand
stretched on the table was shaking his ivory hammer--one rap, two raps,
and the deed would be done. The public could not have been more absorbed in the face of a summary
application of the law of Justice Lynch! The hammer slowly fell, almost touched the table, rose again, hovered
an instant like a sword which pauses ere the drawer cleaves the victim
in twain; then it flashed swiftly downwards. But before the sharp rap could be given, a voice was heard giving
utterance to these four words,--

"Thirteen--hundred--thousand--dollars!" There was a preliminary "Ah!" of general stupefaction, then a second
"Ah!" of not less general satisfaction. Another bidder had presented
himself! There was going to be a fight after all! But who was the reckless individual who had dared to come to dollar
strokes with William W. Kolderup of San Francisco? It was J. R. Taskinar, of Stockton. J. R. Taskinar was rich, but he was more than proportionately fat. He
weighed 490 lbs. If he had only run second in the last fat-man show at
Chicago, it was because he had not been allowed time to finish his
dinner, and had lost about a dozen pounds. This colossus, who had had to have special chairs made for his portly
person to rest upon, lived at Stockton, on the San Joachim. Stockton is
one of the most important cities in California, one of the depot centres
for the mines of the south, the rival of Sacramento the centre for the
mines of the north. There the ships embark the largest quantity of
Californian corn. Not only had the development of the mines and speculations in wheat
furnished J. R. Taskinar with the occasion of gaining an enormous
fortune, but petroleum, like another Pactolus, had run through his
treasury. Besides, he was a great gambler, a lucky gambler, and he had
found "poker" most prodigal of its favours to him. But if he was a Croesus, he was also a rascal; and no one would have
addressed him as "honourable," although the title in those parts is so
much in vogue. After all, he was a good war-horse, and perhaps more was
put on his back than was justly his due. One thing was certain, and that
was that on many an occasion he had not hesitated to use his
"Derringer"--the Californian revolver. Now J. R. Taskinar particularly detested William W. Kolderup. He envied
him for his wealth, his position, and his reputation. He despised him as
a fat man despises a lean one. It was not the first time that the
merchant of Stockton had endeavoured to do the merchant of San Francisco
out of some business or other, good or bad, simply owing to a feeling of
rivalry. William W. Kolderup thoroughly knew his man, and on all
occasions treated him with scorn enough to drive him to distraction. The last success which J. R. Taskinar could not forgive his opponent
was that gained in the struggle over the state elections. Notwithstanding his efforts, his threats, and his libels, not to mention
the millions of dollars squandered by his electoral courtiers, it was
William W. Kolderup who sat in his seat in the Legislative Council of
Sacramento. J. R. Taskinar had learnt--how, I cannot tell--that it was the intention
of William W. Kolderup to acquire possession of Spencer Island. This
island seemed doubtless as useless to him as it did to his rival. No
matter. Here was another chance for fighting, and perhaps for
conquering. J. R. Taskinar would not allow it to escape him. And that is why J. R. Taskinar had come to the auction room among the
curious crowd who could not be aware of his designs, why at all points
he had prepared his batteries, why before opening fire, he had waited
till his opponent had covered the reserve, and why when William W.
Kolderup had made his bid of--

"Twelve hundred thousand dollars!" J. R. Taskinar at the moment when William W. Kolderup thought he had
definitely secured the island, woke up with the words shouted in
stentorian tones,--

"Thirteen hundred thousand dollars!" Everybody as we have seen turned to look at him. "Fat Taskinar!" The name passed from mouth to mouth. Yes. Fat Taskinar! He was known
well enough! His corpulence had been the theme of many an article in the
journals of the Union. I am not quite sure which mathematician it was who had demonstrated by
transcendental calculations, that so great was his mass that it actually
influenced that of our satellite and in an appreciable manner disturbed
the elements of the lunar orbit. But it was not J. R. Taskinar's physical composition which interested
the spectators in the room. It was something far different which excited
them; it was that he had entered into direct public rivalry with William
W. Kolderup. It was a fight of heroes, dollar versus dollar, which had
opened, and I do not know which of the two coffers would turn out to be
best lined. Enormously rich were both these mortal enemies! After the
first sensation, which was rapidly suppressed, renewed silence fell on
the assembly. You could have heard a spider weaving his web. It was the voice of Dean Felporg which broke the spell. "For thirteen hundred thousand dollars, Spencer Island!" declaimed he,
drawing himself up so as to better command the circle of bidders. William W. Kolderup had turned towards J. R. Taskinar. The bystanders
moved back, so as to allow the adversaries to behold each other. The
man of Stockton and the man of San Francisco were face to face, mutually
staring, at their ease. Truth compels me to state that they made the
most of the opportunity. Never would one of them consent to lower his
eyes before those of his rival. "Fourteen hundred thousand dollars," said William W. Kolderup. "Fifteen hundred thousand!" retorted J. R. Taskinar. "Sixteen hundred thousand!" "Seventeen hundred thousand!" Have you ever heard the story of the two mechanics of Glasgow, who tried
which should raise the other highest up the factory chimney at the risk
of a catastrophe? The only difference was that here the chimney was of
ingots of gold. Each time after the capping bid of J. R. Taskinar, William W. Kolderup
took a few moments to reflect before he bid again. On the contrary
Taskinar burst out like a bomb, and did not seem to require a second to
think. "Seventeen hundred thousand dollars!" repeated the auctioneer. "Now,
gentlemen, that is a mere nothing! It is giving it away!" And one can well believe that, carried away by the jargon of his
profession, he was about to add,--

"The frame alone is worth more than that!" When--

"Seventeen hundred thousand dollars!" howled Gingrass, the crier. "Eighteen hundred thousand!" replied William W. Kolderup. "Nineteen hundred thousand!" retorted J. R. Taskinar. "Two millions!" quoth William W. Kolderup, and so quickly that this time
he evidently had not taken the trouble to think. His face was a little
pale when these last words escaped his lips, but his whole attitude was
that of a man who did not intend to give in. J. R. Taskinar was simply on fire. His enormous face was like one of
those gigantic railway bull's-eyes which, screened by the red, signal
the stoppage of the train. But it was highly probable that his rival
would disregard the block, and decline to shut off steam. This J. R. Taskinar felt. The blood mounted to his brows, and seemed
apoplectically congested there. He wriggled his fat fingers, covered
with diamonds of great price, along the huge gold chain attached to his
chronometer. He glared at his adversary, and then shutting his eyes so
as to open them with a more spiteful expression a moment afterwards. "Two million, four hundred thousand dollars!" he remarked, hoping by
this tremendous leap to completely rout his rival. "Two million, seven hundred thousand!" replied William W. Kolderup in a
peculiarly calm voice. "Two million, nine hundred thousand!" "Three millions!" Yes! William W. Kolderup, of San Francisco, said three millions of
dollars! Applause rang through the room, hushed, however, at the voice of the
auctioneer, who repeated the bid, and whose oscillating hammer
threatened to fall in spite of himself by the involuntary movement of
his muscles. It seemed as though Dean Felporg, surfeited with the
surprises of public auction sales, would be unable to contain himself
any longer. All glances were turned on J. R. Taskinar. That voluminous personage was
sensible of this, but still more was he sensible of the weight of these
three millions of dollars, which seemed to crush him. He would have
spoken, doubtless to bid higher--but he could not. He would have liked
to nod his head--he could do so no more. After a long pause, however, his voice was heard; feeble it is true, but
sufficiently audible. "Three millions, five hundred thousand!" "Four millions," was the answer of William W. Kolderup. It was the last blow of the bludgeon. J. R. Taskinar succumbed. The
hammer gave a hard rap on the marble table and--

Spencer Island fell for four millions of dollars to William W. Kolderup,
of San Francisco. "I will be avenged!" muttered J. R. Taskinar, and throwing a glance of
hatred at his conqueror, he returned to the Occidental Hotel. But "hip, hip, hurrah," three times thrice, smote the ears of William W.
Kolderup, then cheers followed him to Montgomery Street, and such was
the delirious enthusiasm of the Americans that they even forgot to
favour him with the customary bars of "Yankee Doodle." CHAPTER III. THE CONVERSATION OF PHINA HOLLANEY AND GODFREY MORGAN, WITH A PIANO
ACCOMPANIMENT. William W. Kolderup had returned to his mansion in Montgomery Street. This thoroughfare is the Regent Street, the Broadway, the Boulevard des
Italiens of San Francisco. Throughout its length, the great artery which
crosses the city parallel with its quays is astir with life and
movement; trams there are innumerable; carriages with horses, carriages
with mules; men bent on business, hurrying to and fro over its stone
pavements, past shops thronged with customers; men bent on pleasure,
crowding the doors of the "bars," where at all hours are dispensed the
Californian's drinks. There is no need for us to describe the mansion of a Frisco nabob. With
so many millions, there was proportionate luxury. More comfort than
taste. Less of the artistic than the practical. One cannot have
everything. So the reader must be contented to know that there was a magnificent
reception-room, and in this reception-room a piano, whose chords were
permeating the mansion's warm atmosphere when the opulent Kolderup
walked in. "Good!" he said. "She and he are there! A word to my cashier, and then
we can have a little chat." And he stepped towards his office to arrange the little matter of
Spencer Island, and then dismiss it from his mind. He had only to
realize a few certificates in his portfolio and the acquisition was
settled for. Half-a-dozen lines to his broker--no more. Then William W.
Kolderup devoted himself to another "combination" which was much more to
his taste. Yes! she and he were in the drawing-room--she, in front of the piano;
he, half reclining on the sofa, listening vaguely to the pearly
arpeggios which escaped from the fingers of the charmer. "Are you listening?" she said. "Of course." "Yes! but do you understand it?" "Do I understand it, Phina! Never have you played those 'Auld Robin
Gray' variations more superbly." "But it is not 'Auld Robin Gray,' Godfrey: it is 'Happy Moments.'" "Oh! ah! yes! I remember!" answered Godfrey, in a tone of indifference
which it was difficult to mistake. The lady raised her two hands, held
them suspended for an instant above the keys as if they were about to
grasp another chord, and then with a half-turn on her music-stool she
remained for a moment looking at the too tranquil Godfrey, whose eyes
did their best to avoid hers. Phina Hollaney was the goddaughter of William W. Kolderup. An orphan, he
had educated her, and given her the right to consider herself his
daughter, and to love him as her father. She wanted for nothing. She was
young, "handsome in her way" as people say, but undoubtedly fascinating,
a blonde of sixteen with the ideas of a woman much older, as one could
read in the crystal of her blue-black eyes. Of course, we must compare
her to a lily, for all beauties are compared to lilies in the best
American society. She was then a lily, but a lily grafted into an
eglantine. She certainly had plenty of spirit, but she had also plenty
of practical common-sense, a somewhat selfish demeanour, and but little
sympathy with the illusions and dreams so characteristic of her sex and
age. Her dreams were when she was asleep, not when she was awake. She was not
asleep now, and had no intention of being so. "Godfrey?" she continued. "Phina?" answered the young man. "Where are you now?" "Near you--in this room--"

"Not near me, Godfrey! Not in this room! But far far away, over the
seas, is it not so?" And mechanically Phina's hand sought the key-board and rippled along a
series of sinking sevenths, which spoke of a plaintive sadness,
unintelligible perhaps to the nephew of William W. Kolderup. For such was this young man, such was the relationship he bore towards
the master of the house. The son of a sister of this buyer of islands,
fatherless and motherless for a good many years, Godfrey Morgan, like
Phina, had been brought up in the house of his uncle, in whom the fever
of business had still left a place for the idea of marrying these two to
each other. Godfrey was in his twenty-third year. His education now finished, had
left him with absolutely nothing to do. He had graduated at the
University, but had found it of little use. For him life opened out but
paths of ease; go where he would, to the right or the left, whichever
way he went, fortune would not fail him. Godfrey was of good presence, gentlemanly, elegant--never tying his
cravat in a ring, nor starring his fingers, his wrists or his
shirt-front with those jewelled gimcracks so dear to his
fellow-citizens. I shall surprise no one in saying that Godfrey Morgan was going to
marry Phina Hollaney. Was he likely to do otherwise? All the proprieties
were in favour of it. Besides, William W. Kolderup desired the marriage. The two people whom he loved most in this world were sure of a fortune
from him, without taking into consideration whether Phina cared for
Godfrey, or Godfrey cared for Phina. It would also simplify the
bookkeeping of the commercial house. Ever since their births an account
had been opened for the boy, another for the girl. It would then be only
necessary to rule these off and transfer the balances to a joint account
for the young couple. The worthy merchant hoped that this would soon be
done, and the balances struck without error or omission. But it is precisely that there had been an omission and perhaps an error
that we are about to show. An error, because at the outset Godfrey felt that he was not yet old
enough for the serious undertaking of marriage; an omission, because he
had not been consulted on the subject. In fact, when he had finished his studies Godfrey had displayed a quite
premature indifference to the world, in which he wanted for nothing, in
which he had no wish remaining ungratified, and nothing whatever to do. The thought of travelling round the world was always present to him. Of
the old and new continents he knew but one spot--San Francisco, where he
was born, and which he had never left except in a dream. What harm was
there in a young man making the tour of the globe twice or
thrice--especially if he were an American? Would it do him any good? Would he learn anything in the different adventures he would meet with
in a voyage of any length? If he were not already satiated with a life
of adventure, how could he be answered? Finally, how many millions of
leagues of observation and instruction were indispensable for the
completion of the young man's education? Things had reached this pass; for a year or more Godfrey had been
immersed in books of voyages of recent date, and had passionately
devoured them. He had discovered the Celestial Empire with Marco Polo,
America with Columbus, the Pacific with Cook, the South Pole with Dumont
d'Urville. He had conceived the idea of going where these illustrious
travellers had been without him. In truth, he would not have considered
an exploring expedition of several years to cost him too dear at the
price of a few attacks of Malay pirates, several ocean collisions, and a
shipwreck or two on a desert island where he could live the life of a
Selkirk or a Robinson Crusoe! A Crusoe! To become a Crusoe! What young
imagination has not dreamt of this in reading as Godfrey had often, too
often done, the adventures of the imaginary heroes of Daniel de Foe and
De Wyss? Yes! The nephew of William W. Kolderup was in this state when his uncle
was thinking of binding him in the chains of marriage. To travel in this
way with Phina, then become Mrs. Morgan, would be clearly impossible! He
must go alone or leave it alone. Besides, once his fancy had passed
away, would not she be better disposed to sign the settlements? Was it
for the good of his wife that he had not been to China or Japan, not
even to Europe? Decidedly not. And hence it was that Godfrey was now absent in the presence of Phina,
indifferent when she spoke to him, deaf when she played the airs which
used to please him; and Phina, like a thoughtful, serious girl, soon
noticed this. To say that she did not feel a little annoyance mingled with some
chagrin, is to do her a gratuitous injustice. But accustomed to look
things in the face, she had reasoned thus,--

"If we must part, it had better be before marriage than afterwards!" And thus it was that she had spoken to Godfrey in these significant
words. "No! You are not near me at this moment--you are beyond the seas!" Godfrey had risen. He had walked a few steps without noticing Phina,
and unconsciously his index finger touched one of the keys of the piano. A loud C# of the octave below the staff, a note dismal enough, answered
for him. Phina had understood him, and without more discussion was about to bring
matters to a crisis, when the door of the room opened. William W. Kolderup appeared, seemingly a little preoccupied as usual. Here was the merchant who had just finished one negotiation and was
about to begin another. "Well," said he, "there is nothing more now than for us to fix the
date." "The date?" answered Godfrey, with a start. "What date, if you please,
uncle?" "The date of your wedding!" said William W. Kolderup. "Not the date of
mine, I suppose!" "Perhaps that is more urgent?" said Phina. "Hey?--what?" exclaimed the uncle--"what does that matter? We are only
talking of current affairs, are we not?" "Godfather Will," answered the lady. "It is not of a wedding that we are
going to fix the date to-day, but of a departure." "A departure!" "Yes, the departure of Godfrey," continued Phina, "of Godfrey who,
before he gets married, wants to see a little of the world!" "You want to go away--you?" said William W. Kolderup, stepping towards
the young man and raising his arms as if he were afraid that this
"rascal of a nephew" would escape him. "Yes; I do, uncle," said Godfrey gallantly. "And for how long?" "For eighteen months, or two years, or more, if--"

"If--"

"If you will let me, and Phina will wait for me." "Wait for you! An intended who intends until he gets away!" exclaimed
William W. Kolderup. "You must let Godfrey go," pleaded Phina; "I have thought it carefully
over. I am young, but really Godfrey is younger. Travel will age him,
and I do not think it will change his taste! He wishes to travel, let
him travel! The need of repose will come to him afterwards, and he will
find me when he returns." "What!" exclaimed William W. Kolderup, "you consent to give your bird
his liberty?" "Yes, for the two years he asks." "And you will wait for him?" "Uncle Will, if I could not wait for him I could not love him!" and so
saying Phina returned to the piano, and whether she willed it or no,
her fingers softly played a portion of the then fashionable "Depart du
Fiance," which was very appropriate under the circumstances. But Phina,
without perceiving it perhaps, was playing in "A minor," whereas it was
written in "A major," and all the sentiment of the melody was
transformed, and its plaintiveness chimed in well with her hidden
feelings. But Godfrey stood embarrassed, and said not a word. His uncle took him
by the head and turning it to the light looked fixedly at him for a
moment or two. In this way he questioned him without having to speak,
and Godfrey was able to reply without having occasion to utter a
syllable. And the lamentations of the "Depart du Fiance" continued their sorrowful
theme, and then William W. Kolderup, having made the turn of the room,
returned to Godfrey, who stood like a criminal before the judge. Then
raising his voice,--

"You are serious," he asked. "Quite serious!" interrupted Phina, while Godfrey contented himself with
making a sign of affirmation. "You want to try travelling before you marry Phina! Well! You shall try
it, my nephew!" He made two or three steps and stopping with crossed arms before
Godfrey, asked,--

"Where do you want to go to?" "Everywhere." "And when do you want to start?" "When you please, Uncle Will." "All right," replied William W. Kolderup, fixing a curious look on his
nephew. Then he muttered between his teeth,--

"The sooner the better." At these last words came a sudden interruption from Phina. The little
finger of her left hand touched a G#, and the fourth had, instead of
falling on the key-note, rested on the "sensible," like Ralph in the
"Huguenots," when he leaves at the end of his duet with Valentine. Perhaps Phina's heart was nearly full, she had made up her mind to say
nothing. It was then that William W. Kolderup, without noticing Godfrey,
approached the piano. "Phina," said he gravely, "you should never remain on the 'sensible'!" And with the tip of his large finger he dropped vertically on to one of
the keys and an "A natural" resounded through the room. CHAPTER IV. IN WHICH T. ARTELETT, OTHERWISE TARTLET, IS DULY INTRODUCED TO THE
READER. If T. Artelett had been a Parisian, his compatriots would not have
failed to nickname him Tartlet, but as he had already received this
title we do not hesitate to describe him by it. If Tartlet was not a
Frenchman he ought to have been one. In his "Itineraire de Paris a Jerusalem," Chateaubriand tells of a
little man "powdered and frizzed in the old-fashioned style, with a coat
of apple green, a waistcoat of drouget, shirt-frill and cuffs of muslin,
who scraped a violin and made the Iroquois dance 'Madeleine Friquet.'" The Californians are not Iroquois, far from it; but Tartlet was none the
less professor of dancing and deportment in the capital of their state. If they did not pay him for his lessons, as they had his predecessor in
beaver-skins and bear-hams, they did so in dollars. If in speaking of
his pupils he did not talk of the "bucks and their squaws," it was
because his pupils were highly civilized, and because in his opinion he
had contributed considerably to their civilization. Tartlet was a bachelor, and aged about forty-five at the time we
introduce him to our readers. But for a dozen years or so his marriage
with a lady of somewhat mature age had been expected to take place. Under present circumstances it is perhaps advisable to give "two or
three lines" concerning his age, appearance, and position in life. He
would have responded to such a request we imagine as follows, and thus
we can dispense with drawing his portrait from a moral and physical
point of view. "He was born on the 17th July, 1835, at a quarter-past three in the
morning. "His height is five feet, two inches, three lines. "His girth is exactly two feet, three inches. "His weight, increased by some six pounds during the last year, is one
hundred and fifty one pounds, two ounces. "He has an oblong head. "His hair, very thin above the forehead, is grey chestnut, his forehead
is high, his face oval, his complexion fresh coloured. "His eyes--sight excellent--a greyish brown, eyelashes and eyebrows
clear chestnut, eyes themselves somewhat sunk in their orbits beneath
the arches of the brows. "His nose is of medium size, and has a slight indentation towards the
end of the left nostril. "His cheeks and temples are flat and hairless. "His ears are large and flat. "His mouth, of middling size, is absolutely free from bad teeth. "His lips, thin and slightly pinched, are covered with a heavy moustache
and imperial, his chin is round and also shaded with a many-tinted
beard. "A small mole ornaments his plump neck--in the nape. "Finally, when he is in the bath it can be seen that his skin is white
and smooth. "His life is calm and regular. Without being robust, thanks to his great
temperance, he has kept his health uninjured since his birth. His lungs
are rather irritable, and hence he has not contracted the bad habit of
smoking. He drinks neither spirits, coffee, liqueurs, nor neat wine. In
a word, all that could prejudicially affect his nervous system is
vigorously excluded from his table. Light beer, and weak wine and water
are the only beverages he can take without danger. It is on account of
his carefulness that he has never had to consult a doctor since his life
began. "His gesture is prompt, his walk quick, his character frank and open. His thoughtfulness for others is extreme, and it is on account of this
that in the fear of making his wife unhappy, he has never entered into
matrimony." Such would have been the report furnished by Tartlet, but desirable as
he might be to a lady of a certain age, the projected union had hitherto
failed. The professor remained a bachelor, and continued to give lessons
in dancing and deportment. It was in this capacity that he entered the mansion of William W.
Kolderup. As time rolled on his pupils gradually abandoned him, and he
ended by becoming one wheel more in the machinery of the wealthy
establishment. After all, he was a brave man, in spite of his eccentricities. Everybody
liked him. He liked Godfrey, he liked Phina, and they liked him. He had
only one ambition in the world, and that was to teach them all the
secrets of his art, to make them in fact, as far as deportment was
concerned, two highly accomplished individuals. Now, what would you think? It was he, this Professor Tartlet, whom
William W. Kolderup had chosen as his nephew's companion during the
projected voyage. Yes! He had reason to believe that Tartlet had not a
little contributed to imbue Godfrey with this roaming mania, so as to
perfect himself by a tour round the world. William W. Kolderup had
resolved that they should go together. On the morrow, the 16th of April,
he sent for the professor to his office. The request of the nabob was an order for Tartlet. The professor left
his room, with his pocket violin--generally known as a kit--so as to be
ready for all emergencies. He mounted the great staircase of the mansion
with his feet academically placed as was fitting for a dancing-master;
knocked at the door of the room, entered--his body half inclined, his
elbows rounded, his mouth on the grin--and waited in the third position,
after having crossed his feet one before the other, at half their
length, his ankles touching and his toes turned out. Any one but
Professor Tartlet placed in this sort of unstable equilibrium would have
tottered on his base, but the professor preserved an absolute
perpendicularity. "Mr. Tartlet," said William W. Kolderup, "I have sent for you to tell
you some news which I imagine will rather surprise you." "As you think best!" answered the professor. "My nephew's marriage is put off for a year or eighteen months, and
Godfrey, at his own request, is going to visit the different countries
of the old and new world." "Sir," answered Tartlet, "my pupil, Godfrey, will do honour to the
country of his birth, and--"

"And, to the professor of deportment who has initiated him into
etiquette," interrupted the merchant, in a tone of which the guileless
Tartlet failed to perceive the irony. And, in fact, thinking it the correct thing to execute an "assemblee,"
he first moved one foot and then the other, by a sort of semi-circular
side slide, and then with a light and graceful bend of the knee, he
bowed to William W. Kolderup. "I thought," continued the latter, "that you might feel a little regret
at separating from your pupil?" "The regret will be extreme," answered Tartlet, "but should it be
necessary--"

"It is not necessary," answered William W. Kolderup, knitting his bushy
eyebrows. "Ah!" replied Tartlet. Slightly troubled, he made a graceful movement to the rear, so as to
pass from the third to the fourth position; but he left the breadth of a
foot between his feet, without perhaps being conscious of what he was
doing. "Yes!" added the merchant in a peremptory tone, which admitted not of
the ghost of a reply; "I have thought it would really be cruel to
separate a professor and a pupil so well made to understand each other!" "Assuredly!--the journey?" answered Tartlet, who did not seem to want to
understand. "Yes! Assuredly!" replied William W. Kolderup; "not only will his
travels bring out the talents of my nephew, but the talents of the
professor to whom he owes so correct a bearing." Never had the thought occurred to this great baby that one day he would
leave San Francisco, California, America, to roam the seas. Such an idea
had never entered the brain of a man more absorbed in choregraphy than
geography, and who was still ignorant of the suburbs of the capital
beyond ten miles radius. And now this was offered to him. He was to
understand that _nolens volens_ he was to expatriate himself, he himself
was to experience with all their costs and inconveniences the very
adventures he had recommended to his pupil! Here, decidedly, was
something to trouble a brain much more solid than his, and the
unfortunate Tartlet for the first time in his life felt an involuntary
yielding in the muscles of his limbs, suppled as they were by
thirty-five years' exercise. "Perhaps," said he, trying to recall to his lips the stereotyped smile
of the dancer which had left him for an instant,--"perhaps--am I not--"

"You will go!" answered William W. Kolderup like a a man with whom
discussion was useless. To refuse was impossible. Tartlet did not even think of such a thing. What was he in the house? A thing, a parcel, a package to be sent to
every corner of the world. But the projected expedition troubled him not
a little. "And when am I to start?" demanded he, trying to get back into an
academical position. "In a month." "And on what raging ocean has Mr. Kolderup decided that his vessel
should bear his nephew and me?" "The Pacific, at first." "And on what point of the terrestrial globe shall I first set foot?" "On the soil of New Zealand," answered William W. Kolderup; "I have
remarked that the New Zealanders always stick their elbows out! Now you
can teach them to turn them in!" And thus was Professor Tartlet selected as the travelling-companion of
Godfrey Morgan. A nod from the merchant gave him to understand that the audience had
terminated. He retired, considerably agitated, and the performance of
the special graces which he usually displayed in this difficult act left
a good deal to be desired. In fact, for the first time in his life,
Professor Tartlet, forgetting in his preoccupation the most elementary
principles of his art, went out with his toes turned in! CHAPTER V.

IN WHICH THEY PREPARE TO GO, AND AT THE END OF WHICH THEY GO FOR GOOD. Before the long voyage together through life, which men call marriage,
Godfrey then was to make the tour of the world--a journey sometimes even
more dangerous. But he reckoned on returning improved in every respect;
he left a lad, he would return a man. He would have seen, noted,
compared. His curiosity would be satisfied. There would only remain for
him to settle down quietly, and live happily at home with his wife, whom
no temptation would take him from. Was he wrong or right? Was he to
learn a valuable lesson? The future will show. In short, Godfrey was enchanted. Phina, anxious without appearing to be so, was resigned to this
apprenticeship. Professor Tartlet, generally so firm on his limbs, had lost all his
dancing equilibrium. He had lost all his usual self-possession, and
tried in vain to recover it; he even tottered on the carpet of his room
as if he were already on the floor of a cabin, rolling and pitching on
the ocean. As for William W. Kolderup, since he had arrived at a decision, he had
become very uncommunicative, especially to his nephew. The closed lips,
and eyes half hidden beneath their lids, showed that there was some
fixed idea in the head where generally floated the highest commercial
speculations. "Ah! you want to travel," muttered he every now and then; "travel
instead of marrying and staying at home! Well, you shall travel." Preparations were immediately begun. In the first place, the itinerary had to be projected, discussed, and
settled. Was Godfrey to go south, or east, or west? That had to be decided in the
first place. If he went southwards, the Panama, California and British Columbia
Company, or the Southampton and Rio Janeiro Company would have to take
him to Europe. If he went eastwards, the Union Pacific Railway would take him in a few
days to New York, and thence the Cunard, Inman, White Star,
Hamburg-American, or French-Transatlantic Companies would land him on
the shores of the old world. If he went westwards, the Golden Age Steam Transoceanic would render it
easy for him to reach Melbourne, and thence he could get to the Isthmus
of Suez by the boats of the Peninsular and Oriental Company. The means of transport were abundant, and thanks to their mathematical
agreement the round of the world was but a simple pleasure tour. But it was not thus that the nephew and heir of the nabob of Frisco was
to travel. No! William W. Kolderup possessed for the requirements of his business
quite a fleet of steam and sailing-vessels. He had decided that one of
these ships should be "put at the disposal" of Godfrey Morgan, as if he
were a prince of the blood, travelling for his pleasure--at the expense
of his father's subjects. By his orders the _Dream_, a substantial steamer of 600 tons and 200
horse-power, was got ready. It was to be commanded by Captain Turcott, a
tough old salt, who had already sailed in every latitude in every sea. A
thorough sailor, this friend of tornadoes, cyclones, and typhoons, had
already spent of his fifty years of life, forty at sea. To bring to in a
hurricane was quite child's play to this mariner, who was never
disconcerted, except by land-sickness when he was in port. His
incessantly unsteady existence on a vessel's deck had endowed him with
the habit of constantly balancing himself to the right or the left, or
behind or in front, as though he had the rolling and pitching variety of
St. Vitus's dance. A mate, an engineer, four stokers, a dozen seamen, eighteen men in all,
formed the crew of the _Dream_. And if the ship was contented to get
quietly through eight miles an hour, she possessed a great many
excellent nautical qualities. If she was not swift enough to race the
waves when the sea was high, the waves could not race over her, and that
was an advantage which quite compensated for the mediocrity of her
speed, particularly when there was no hurry. The _Dream_ was brigantine
rigged, and in a favourable wind, with her 400 square yards of canvas,
her steaming rate could be considerably increased. It should be borne in mind all through that the voyage of the _Dream_
was carefully planned, and would be punctually performed. William W.
Kolderup was too practical a man not to put to some purpose a journey of
15,000 or 16,000 leagues across all the oceans of the globe. His ship
was to go without cargo, undoubtedly, but it was easy to get her down to
her right trim by means of water ballast, and even to sink her to her
deck, if it proved necessary. The _Dream_ was instructed to communicate with the different branch
establishments of the wealthy merchant. She was to go from one market to
another. Captain Turcott, never fear, would not find it difficult to pay the
expenses of the voyage! Godfrey Morgan's whim would not cost the
avuncular purse a single dollar! That is the way they do business in the
best commercial houses! All this was decided at long, very secret interviews between William W.
Kolderup and Captain Turcott. But it appeared that the regulation of
this matter, simple as it seemed, could not be managed alone, for the
captain paid numerous visits to the merchant's office. When he came
away, it would be noticed that his face bore a curious expression, that
his hair stood on end as if he had been ruffling it up with fevered
hands, and that all his body rolled and pitched more than usual. High
words were constantly heard, proving that the interviews were stormy. Captain Turcott, with his plain speaking, knew how to withstand William
W. Kolderup, who loved and esteemed him enough to permit him to
contradict him. And now all was arranged. Who had given in? William W. Kolderup or
Turcott? I dare not say, for I do not even know the subject of their
discussion. However, I rather think it must have been the captain. Anyhow, after eight days of interviewing, the merchant and the captain
were in accord, but Turcott did not cease to grumble between his teeth. "May five hundred thousand Davy Joneses drag me to the bottom if ever I
had a job like this before!" However, the _Dream_ fitted out rapidly, and her captain neglected
nothing which would enable him to put to sea in the first fortnight in
June. She had been into dock, and the hull had been gone over with
composition, whose brilliant red contrasted vividly with the black of
her upper works. A great number of vessels of all kinds and nationalities came into the
port of San Francisco. In a good many years the old quays of the town,
built straight along the shore, would have been insufficient for the
embarkation and disembarkation of their cargoes, if engineers had not
devised subsidiary wharves. Piles of red deal were driven into the
water, and many square miles of planks were laid on them and formed huge
platforms. A good deal of the bay was thus taken up, but the bay is
enormous. There were also regular landing-stages, with numberless cranes
and crabs, at which steamers from both oceans, steamboats from the
Californian rivers, clippers from all countries, and coasters from the
American seaboard were ranged in proper order, so as not to interfere
one with the other. It was at one of these artificial quays, at the extremity of Mission
Wharf Street, that the _Dream_ had been securely moored after she had
come out of dock. Nothing was neglected, and the steamer would start under the most
favourable conditions. Provisioning, outfit, all were minutely studied. The rigging was perfect, the boilers had been tested and the screw was
an excellent one. A steam launch was even carried, to facilitate
communication with the shore, and this would probably be of great
service during the voyage. Everything was ready on the 10th of June. They had only to put to sea. The men shipped by Captain Turcott to work the sails or drive the engine
were a picked crew, and it would have been difficult to find a better
one. Quite a stock of live animals, agouties, sheep, goats, poultry,
&c., were stowed between decks, the material wants of the travellers
were likewise provided for by numerous cases of preserved meats of the
best brands. The route the _Dream_ was to follow had doubtless been the subject of
the long conferences which William W. Kolderup had had with his captain. All knew that they were first bound for Auckland, in New Zealand, unless
want of coal necessitated by the persistence of contrary winds obliged
them to refill perhaps at one of the islands of the Pacific or some
Chinese port. All this detail mattered little to Godfrey once he was on the sea, and
still less to Tartlet, whose troubled spirit exaggerated from day to day
the dangers of navigation. There was only one formality to be gone
through--the formality of being photographed. An engaged man could not decently start on a long voyage round the world
without taking with him the image of her he loved, and in return leaving
his own image behind him. Godfrey in tourist costume accordingly handed himself over to Messrs
Stephenson and Co., photographers of Montgomery Street, and Phina, in
her walking-dress, confided in like manner to the sun the task of fixing
her charming but somewhat sorrowing features on the plate of those able
operators. It is also the custom to travel together, and so Phina's portrait had
its allotted place in Godfrey's cabin, and Godfrey's portrait its
special position in Phina's room. As for Tartlet, who had no betrothed
and who was not thinking of having one at present, he thought it better
to confide his image to sensitised paper. But although great was the
talent of the photographers they failed to present him with a
satisfactory proof. The negative was a confused fog in which it was
impossible to recognize the celebrated professor of dancing and
deportment. This was because the patient could not keep himself still, in spite of
all that was said about the invariable rule in studios devoted to
operations of this nature. They tried other means, even the instantaneous process. Impossible. Tartlet pitched and rolled in anticipation as violently as the captain
of the _Dream_. The idea of obtaining a picture of the features of this remarkable man
had thus to be abandoned. Irreparable would be the misfortune if--but
far from us be the thought!--if in imagining he was leaving the new
world for the old world Tartlet had left the new world for the other
world from which nobody returns. On the 9th of June all was ready. The _Dream_ was complete. Her papers,
bills of lading, charter-party, assurance policy, were all in order, and
two days before the ship-broker had sent on the last signatures. On that day a grand farewell breakfast was given at the mansion in
Montgomery Street. They drank to the happy voyage of Godfrey and his
safe return. Godfrey was rather agitated, and he did not strive to hide it. Phina
showed herself much the most composed. As for Tartlet he drowned his
apprehensions in several glasses of champagne, whose influence was
perceptible up to the moment of departure. He even forgot his kit, which
was brought to him as they were casting off the last hawsers of the
_Dream_. The last adieux were said on board, the last handshakings took place on
the poop, then the engine gave two or three turns of the screw and the
steamer was under way. "Good-bye, Phina!" "Good-bye, Godfrey!" "May Heaven protect you!" said the uncle. "And above all may it bring us back!" murmured Professor Tartlet. "And never forget, Godfrey," added William W. Kolderup, "the device
which the _Dream_ bears on her stern, 'Confide, recte agens.'" "Never, Uncle Will! Good-bye, Phina!" "Good-bye, Godfrey!" The steamer moved off, handkerchiefs were shaken as long as she remained
in sight from the quay, and even after. Soon the bay of San Francisco,
the largest in the world, was crossed, the _Dream_ passed the narrow
throat of the Golden Gate and then her prow cleft the waters of the
Pacific Ocean. It was as though the Gates of Gold had closed upon her. CHAPTER VI. IN WHICH THE READER MAKES THE ACQUAINTANCE OF A NEW PERSONAGE. The voyage had begun. There had not been much difficulty so far, it must
be admitted. Professor Tartlet, with incontestable logic, often repeated,--

"Any voyage can begin! But where and how it finishes is the important
point." The cabin occupied by Godfrey was below the poop of the _Dream_ and
opened on to the dining-saloon. Our young traveller was lodged there as
comfortably as possible. He had given Phina's photograph the best place
on the best lighted panel of his room. A cot to sleep on, a lavatory for
toilet purposes, some chests of drawers for his clothes and his linen, a
table to work at, an armchair to sit upon, what could a young man in his
twenty-second year want more? Under such circumstances he might have
gone twenty-two times round the world! Was he not at the age of that
practical philosophy which consists in good health and good humour? Ah! young people, travel if you can, and if you cannot--travel all the same! Tartlet was not in a good humour. His cabin, near that of his pupil,
seemed to him too narrow, his bed too hard, the six square yards which
he occupied quite insufficient for his steps and strides. Would not the
traveller in him absorb the professor of dancing and deportment? No! It
was in the blood, and when Tartlet reached the hour of his last sleep
his feet would be found placed in a horizontal line with the heels one
against the other, in the first position. Meals were taken in common. Godfrey and Tartlet sat opposite to each
other, the captain and mate occupying each end of the rolling table. This alarming appellation, the "rolling table," is enough to warn us
that the professor's place would too often be vacant. At the start, in the lovely month of June, there was a beautiful breeze
from the north-east, and Captain Turcott was able to set his canvas so
as to increase his speed. The _Dream_ thus balanced hardly rolled at
all, and as the waves followed her, her pitching was but slight. This
mode of progressing was not such as to affect the looks of the
passengers and give them pinched noses, hollow eyes, livid foreheads, or
colourless cheeks. It was supportable. They steered south-west over a
splendid sea, hardly lifting in the least, and the American coast soon
disappeared below the horizon. For two days nothing occurred worthy of mention. The _Dream_ made good
progress. The commencement of the voyage promised well--so that Captain
Turcott seemed occasionally to feel an anxiety which he tried in vain to
hide. Each day as the sun crossed the meridian he carefully took his
observations. But it could be noticed that immediately afterwards he
retired with the mate into his cabin, and then they remained in secret
conclave as if they were discussing some grave eventuality. This
performance passed probably unnoticed by Godfrey, who understood nothing
about the details of navigation, but the boatswain and the crew seemed
somewhat astonished at it, particularly as for two or three times during
the first week, when there was not the least necessity for the
manoeuvre, the course of the _Dream_ at night was completely altered,
and resumed again in the morning. In a sailing-ship this might be
intelligible; but in a steamer, which could keep on the great circle
line and only use canvas when the wind was favourable, it was somewhat
extraordinary. During the morning of the 12th of June a very unexpected incident
occurred on board. Captain Turcott, the mate, and Godfrey, were sitting down to breakfast
when an unusual noise was heard on deck. Almost immediately afterwards
the boatswain opened the door and appeared on the threshold. "Captain!" he said. "What's up?" asked Turcott, sailor as he was, always on the alert. "Here's a--Chinee!" said the boatswain. "A Chinese!" "Yes! a genuine Chinese we have just found by chance at the bottom of
the hold!" "At the bottom of the hold!" exclaimed Turcott. "Well, by all
the--somethings--of Sacramento, just send him to the bottom of the sea!" "All right!" answered the boatswain. And that excellent man with all the contempt of a Californian for a son
of the Celestial Empire, taking the order as quite a natural one, would
have had not the slightest compunction in executing it. However, Captain Turcott rose from his chair, and followed by Godfrey
and the mate, left the saloon and walked towards the forecastle of the
_Dream_. There stood a Chinaman, tightly handcuffed, and held by two or three
sailors, who were by no means sparing of their nudges and knocks. He was
a man of from five-and-thirty to forty, with intelligent features, well
built, of lithe figure, but a little emaciated, owing to his sojourn for
sixteen hours at the bottom of a badly ventilated hold. Captain Turcott made a sign to his men to leave the unhappy intruder
alone. "Who are you?" he asked. "A son of the sun." "And what is your name?" "Seng Vou," answered the Chinese, whose name in the Celestial language
signifies "he who does not live." "And what are you doing on board here?" "I am out for a sail!" coolly answered Seng Vou, "but am doing you as
little harm as I can." "Really! as little harm!--and you stowed yourself away in the hold when
we started?" "Just so, captain." "So that we might take you for nothing from America to China, on the
other side of the Pacific?" "If you will have it so." "And if I don't wish to have it so, you yellow-skinned nigger. If I will
have it that you have to swim to China." "I will try," said the Chinaman with a smile, "but I shall probably sink
on the road!" "Well, John," exclaimed Captain Turcott, "I am going to show you how to
save your passage-money." And Captain Turcott, much more angry than circumstances necessitated,
was perhaps about to put his threat into execution, when Godfrey
intervened. "Captain," he said, "one more Chinee on board the _Dream_ is one Chinee
less in California, where there are too many." "A great deal too many!" answered Captain Turcott. "Yes, too many. Well, if this poor beggar wishes to relieve San
Francisco of his presence, he ought to be pitied! Bah! we can throw him
on shore at Shanghai, and there needn't be any fuss about it!" In saying that there were too many Chinese in California Godfrey held
the same language as every true Californian. The emigration of the sons
of the Celestial Empire--there are 300,000,000 in China as against
30,000,000 of Americans in the United States--has become dangerous to
the provinces of the Far West; and the legislators of these States of
California, Lower California, Oregon, Nevada, Utah, and even Congress
itself, are much concerned at this new epidemic of invasion, to which
the Yankees have given the name of the "yellow-plague." At this period there were more than 50,000 Chinese, in the State of
California alone. These people, very industrious at gold-washing, very
patient, living on a pinch of rice, a mouthful of tea, and a whiff of
opium, did an immense deal to bring down the price of manual labour, to
the detriment of the native workmen. They had to submit to special laws,
contrary to the American constitution--laws which regulated their
immigration, and withheld from them the right of naturalization, owing
to the fear that they would end by obtaining a majority in the Congress. Generally ill-treated, much as Indians or negroes, so as to justify the
title of "pests" which was applied to them, they herded together in a
sort of ghetto, where they carefully kept up the manners and customs of
the Celestial Empire. In the Californian capital, it is in the Sacramento Street district,
decked with their banners and lanterns, that this foreign race has taken
up its abode. There they can be met in thousands, trotting along in
their wide-sleeved blouses, conical hats, and turned-up shoes. Here, for
the most part, they live as grocers, gardeners, or laundresses--unless
they are working as cooks or belong to one of those dramatic troupes
which perform Chinese pieces in the French theatre at San Francisco. And--there is no reason why we should conceal the fact--Seng Vou
happened to form part of one of these troupes, in which he filled the
role of "comic lead," if such a description can apply to any Chinese
artiste. As a matter of fact they are so serious, even in their fun,
that the Californian romancer, Bret Harte, has told us that he never
saw a genuine Chinaman laugh, and has even confessed that he is unable
to say whether one of the national pieces he witnessed was a tragedy or
a farce. In short, Seng Vou was a comedian. The season had ended, crowned with
success--perhaps out of proportion to the gold pieces he had amassed--he
wished to return to his country otherwise than as a corpse, for Chinamen
always like to get buried at home and there are special steamers who
carry dead Celestials and nothing else. At all risks, therefore, he had
secretly slipped on board the _Dream_. Loaded with provisions, did he hope to get through, incognito, a passage
of several weeks, and then to land on the coast of China without being
seen? It is just possible. At any rate, the case was hardly one for a death
penalty. So Godfrey had good reason to interfere in favour of the intruder, and
Captain Turcott, who pretended to be angrier than he really was, gave up
the idea of sending Seng Vou overboard to battle with the waves of the
Pacific. Seng Vou, however, did not return to his hiding-place in the hold,
though he was rather an incubus on board. Phlegmatic, methodic, and by
no means communicative, he carefully avoided the seamen, who had always
some prank to play off on him, and he kept to his own provisions. He
was thin enough in all conscience, and his additional weight but
imperceptibly added to the cost of navigating the _Dream_. If Seng Vou
got a free passage it was obvious that his carriage did not cost William
W. Kolderup very much. His presence on board put into Captain Turcott's head an idea which his
mate probably was the only one to understand thoroughly. "He will bother us a bit--this confounded Chinee!--after all, so much
the worse for him." "What ever made him stow himself away on board the _Dream_?" answered
the mate. "To get to Shanghai!" replied Captain Turcott. "Bless John and all
John's sons too!" CHAPTER VII. IN WHICH IT WILL BE SEEN THAT WILLIAM W. KOLDERUP WAS PROBABLY RIGHT IN
INSURING HIS SHIP. During the following days, the 13th, 14th, and 15th of June, the
barometer slowly fell, without an attempt to rise in the slightest
degree, and the weather became variable, hovering between rain and wind
or storm. The breeze strengthened considerably, and changed to
south-westerly. It was a head-wind for the _Dream_, and the waves had
now increased enormously, and lifted her forward. The sails were all
furled, and she had to depend on her screw alone; under half steam,
however, so as to avoid excessive labouring. Godfrey bore the trial of the ship's motion without even losing his
good-humour for a moment. Evidently he was fond of the sea. But Tartlet was not fond of the sea, and it served him out. It was pitiful to see the unfortunate professor of deportment deporting
himself no longer, the professor of dancing dancing contrary to every
rule of his art. Remain in his cabin, with the seas shaking the ship
from stem to stern, he could not. "Air! air!" he gasped. And so he never left the deck. A roll sent him rolling from one side to
the other, a pitch sent him pitching from one end to the other. He clung
to the rails, he clutched the ropes, he assumed every attitude that is
absolutely condemned by the principles of the modern choregraphic art. Ah! why could he not raise himself into the air by some balloon-like
movement, and escape the eccentricities of that moving plane? A dancer
of his ancestors had said that he only consented to set foot to the
ground so as not to humiliate his companions, but Tartlet would
willingly never have come down at all on the deck, whose perpetual
agitation threatened to hurl him into the abyss. What an idea it was for the rich William W. Kolderup to send him here. "Is this bad weather likely to last?" asked he of Captain Turcott twenty
times a day. "Dunno! barometer is not very promising!" was the invariable answer of
the captain, knitting his brows. "Shall we soon get there?" "Soon, Mr. Tartlet? Hum! soon!" "And they call this the Pacific Ocean!" repeated the unfortunate man,
between a couple of shocks and oscillations. It should be stated that, not only did Professor Tartlet suffer from
sea-sickness, but also that fear had seized him as he watched the great
seething waves breaking into foam level with the bulwarks of the
_Dream_, and heard the valves, lifted by the violent beats, letting the
steam off through the waste-pipes, as he felt the steamer tossing like a
cork on the mountains of water. "No," said he with a lifeless look at his pupil, "it is not impossible
for us to capsize." "Take it quietly, Tartlet," replied Godfrey. "A ship was made to float! There are reasons for all this." "I tell you there are none." And, thinking thus, the professor had put on his life-belt. He wore it
night and day, tightly buckled round his waist. He would not have taken
it off for untold gold. Every time the sea gave him a moment's respite
he would replenish it with another puff. In fact, he never blew it out
enough to please him. We must make some indulgence for the terrors of Tartlet. To those
unaccustomed to the sea, its rolling is of a nature to cause some
alarm, and we know that this passenger-in-spite-of-himself had not even
till then risked his safety on the peaceable waters of the Bay of San
Francisco; so that we can forgive his being ill on board a ship in a
stiffish breeze, and his feeling terrified at the playfulness of the
waves. The weather became worse and worse, and threatened the _Dream_ with a
gale, which, had she been near the shore, would have been announced to
her by the semaphores. During the day the ship was dreadfully knocked about, though running at
half steam so as not to damage her engines. Her screw was continually
immerging and emerging in the violent oscillations of her liquid bed. Hence, powerful strokes from its wings in the deeper water, or fearful
tremors as it rose and ran wild, causing heavy thunderings beneath the
stern, and furious gallopings of the pistons which the engineer could
master but with difficulty. One observation Godfrey made, of which at first he could not discover
the cause. This was, that during the night the shocks experienced by the
steamer were infinitely less violent than during the day. Was he then to
conclude that the wind then fell, and that a calm set in after sundown? This was so remarkable that, on the night between the 21st and 22nd of
June, he endeavoured to find out some explanation of it. The day had
been particularly stormy, the wind had freshened, and it did not appear
at all likely that the sea would fall at night, lashed so capriciously
as it had been for so many hours. Towards midnight then Godfrey dressed, and, wrapping himself up warmly,
went on deck. The men on watch were forward, Captain Turcott was on the bridge. The force of the wind had certainly not diminished. The shock of the
waves, which should have dashed on the bows of the _Dream_, was,
however, very much less violent. But in raising his eyes towards the top
of the funnel, with its black canopy of smoke, Godfrey saw that the
smoke, instead of floating from the bow aft, was, on the contrary,
floating from aft forwards, and following the same direction as the
ship. "Has the wind changed?" he said to himself. And extremely glad at the circumstance he mounted the bridge. Stepping
up to Turcott,--

"Captain!" he said. The latter, enveloped in his oilskins, had not heard him approach, and
at first could not conceal a movement of annoyance in seeing him close
to him. "You, Mr. Godfrey, you--on the bridge?" "Yes, I, captain. I came to ask--"

"What?" answered Captain Turcott sharply. "If the wind has not changed?" "No, Mr. Godfrey, no. And, unfortunately, I think it will turn to a
storm!" "But we now have the wind behind us!" "Wind behind us--yes--wind behind us!" replied the captain, visibly
disconcerted at the observation. "But it is not my fault." "What do you mean?" "I mean that in order not to endanger the vessel's safety I have had to
put her about and run before the storm." "That will cause us a most lamentable delay!" said Godfrey. "Very much so," answered Captain Turcott, "but when day breaks, if the
sea falls a little, I shall resume our westerly route. I should
recommend you, Mr. Godfrey, to get back to your cabin. Take my advice,
try and sleep while we are running before the wind. You will be less
knocked about." Godfrey made a sign of affirmation; turning a last anxious glance at the
low clouds which were chasing each other with extreme swiftness, he left
the bridge, returned to his cabin, and soon resumed his interrupted
slumbers. The next morning, the 22nd of June, as Captain Turcott had
said, the wind having sensibly abated, the _Dream_ was headed in proper
direction. This navigation towards the west during the day, towards the east during
the night, lasted for forty-eight hours more; but the barometer showed
some tendency to rise, its oscillations became less frequent; it was to
be presumed that the bad weather would end in northerly winds. And so in
fact it happened. On the 25th of June, about eight o'clock in the morning, when Godfrey
stepped on deck, a charming breeze from the north-east had swept away
the clouds, the sun's rays were shining through the rigging and tipping
its projecting points with touches of fire. The sea, deep green in
colour, glittered along a large section of its surface beneath the
direct influence of its beams. The wind blew only in feeble gusts which
laced the wave-crests with delicate foam. The lower sails were set. Properly speaking, they were not regular waves on which the sea rose and
fell, but only lengthened undulations which gently rocked the steamer. Undulations or waves, it is true, it was all one to Professor Tartlet,
as unwell when it was "too mild," as when it was "too rough." There he
was, half crouching on the deck, with his mouth open like a carp fainted
out of water. The mate on the poop, his telescope at his eye, was looking towards the
north-east. Godfrey approached him. "Well, sir," said he gaily, "to-day is a little better than yesterday." "Yes, Mr. Godfrey," replied the mate, "we are now in smooth water." "And the _Dream_ is on the right road!" "Not yet." "Not yet? and why?" "Because we have evidently drifted north-eastwards during this last
spell, and we must find out our position exactly." "But there is a good sun and a horizon perfectly clear." "At noon in taking its height we shall get a good observation, and then
the captain will give us our course." "Where is the captain?" asked Godfrey. "He has gone off." "Gone off?" "Yes! our look-outs saw from the whiteness of the sea that there were
some breakers away to the east; breakers which are not shown on the
chart. So the steam launch was got out, and with the boatswain and three
men, Captain Turcott has gone off to explore." "How long ago?" "About an hour and a half!" "Ah!" said Godfrey, "I am sorry he did not tell me. I should like to
have gone too." "You were asleep, Mr. Godfrey," replied the mate, "and the captain did
not like to wake you." "I am sorry; but tell me, which way did the launch go?" "Over there," answered the mate, "over the starboard bow,
north-eastwards." "And can you see it with the telescope?" "No, she is too far off." "But will she be long before she comes back?" "She won't be long, for the captain is going to take the sights himself,
and to do that he must be back before noon." At this Godfrey went and sat on the forecastle, having sent some one for
his glasses. He was anxious to watch the return of the launch. Captain
Turcott's reconnaissance did not cause him any surprise. It was natural
that the _Dream_ should not be run into danger on a part of the sea
where breakers had been reported. Two hours passed. It was not until half-past ten that a light line of
smoke began to rise on the horizon. It was evidently the steam launch which, having finished the
reconnaissance, was making for the ship. It amused Godfrey to follow her in the field of his glasses. He saw her
little by little reveal herself in clearer outline, he saw her grow on
the surface of the sea, and then give definite shape to her smoke
wreath, as it mingled with a few curls of steam on the clear depth of
the horizon. She was an excellent little vessel, of immense speed, and as she came
along at full steam, she was soon visible to the naked eye. Towards
eleven o'clock, the wash from her bow as she tore through the waves was
perfectly distinct, and behind her the long furrow of foam gradually
growing wider and fainter like the tail of a comet. At a quarter-past eleven, Captain Turcott hailed and boarded the
_Dream_. "Well, captain, what news?" asked Godfrey, shaking his hand. "Ah! Good morning, Mr. Godfrey!" "And the breakers?" "Only show!" answered Captain Turcott. "We saw nothing suspicious, our
men must have been deceived, but I am rather surprised at that, all the
same." "We are going ahead then?" said Godfrey. "Yes, we are going on now, but I must first take an observation." "Shall we get the launch on board?" asked the mate. "No," answered the captain, "we may want it again. Leave it in tow!" The captain's orders were executed, and the launch, still under steam,
dropped round to the stern of the _Dream_. Three-quarters of an hour afterwards, Captain Turcott, with his sextant
in his hand, took the sun's altitude, and having made his observation,
he gave the course. That done, having given a last look at the horizon,
he called the mate, and taking him into his cabin, the two remained
there in a long consultation. The day was a very fine one. The sails had been furled, and the _Dream_
steamed rapidly without their help. The wind was very slight, and with
the speed given by the screw there would not have been enough to fill
them. Godfrey was thoroughly happy. This sailing over a beautiful sea, under a
beautiful sky, could anything be more cheering, could anything give more
impulse to thought, more satisfaction to the mind? And it is scarcely to
be wondered at that Professor Tartlet also began to recover himself a
little. The state of the sea did not inspire him with immediate
inquietude, and his physical being showed a little reaction. He tried to
eat, but without taste or appetite. Godfrey would have had him take off
the life-belt which encircled his waist, but this he absolutely refused
to do. Was there not a chance of this conglomeration of wood and iron,
which men call a vessel, gaping asunder at any moment. The evening came, a thick mist spread over the sky, without descending
to the level of the sea. The night was to be much darker than would have
been thought from the magnificent daytime. There was no rock to fear in these parts, for Captain Turcott had just
fixed his exact position on the charts; but collisions are always
possible, and they are much more frequent on foggy nights. The lamps were carefully put into place as soon as the sun set. The
white one was run up the mast, and the green light to the right and the
red one to the left gleamed in the shrouds. If the _Dream_ was run down,
at the least it would not be her fault--that was one consolation. To
founder even when one is in order is to founder nevertheless, and if any
one on board made this observation it was of course Professor Tartlet. However, the worthy man, always on the roll and the pitch, had regained
his cabin, Godfrey his; the one with the assurance, the other in the
hope that he would pass a good night, for the _Dream_ scarcely moved on
the crest of the lengthened waves. Captain Turcott, having handed over the watch to the mate, also came
under the poop to take a few hours' rest. 