



Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 THE STRANGE CASE OF
 MORTIMER FENLEY

 BY LOUIS TRACY

 AUTHOR OF

 THE WINGS OF THE MORNING,
 NUMBER SEVENTEEN, ETC. GROSSET & DUNLAP
 PUBLISHERS   NEW YORK

 Made in the United States of America

 COPYRIGHT, 1919, BY
 EDWARD J. CLODE

 PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




 CONTENTS

 CHAPTER                                                     PAGE


    I. THE WATER NYMPHS                                        1

   II. "WHO HATH DONE THIS THING?" 19

  III. THE HOUNDS                                             39

   IV. BREAKING COVER                                         59

    V. A FAMILY GATHERING                                     79

   VI. WHEREIN FURNEAUX SEEKS INSPIRATION                    101

  VII. SOME SIDE ISSUES                                      123

 VIII. COINCIDENCES                                          145

   IX. WHEREIN AN ARTIST BECOMES A MAN OF ACTION             166

    X. FURNEAUX STATES SOME FACTS                            189

   XI. SOME PRELIMINARY SKIRMISHING                          211

  XII. WHEREIN SCOTLAND YARD IS DINED AND WINED              229

 XIII. CLOSE QUARTERS                                        246

  XIV. THE SPREADING OF THE NET                              266

   XV. SOME STAGE EFFECTS                                    286

  XVI. THE CLOSE OF A TRAGEDY                                305

 XVII. THE SETTLEMENT                                        324




THE STRANGE CASE OF MORTIMER FENLEY




CHAPTER I

THE WATER NYMPHS


Does an evil deed cast a shadow in advance? Does premeditated crime
spread a baleful aura which affects certain highly-strung temperaments
just as the sensation of a wave of cold air rising from the spine to
the head may be a forewarning of epilepsy or hysteria? John Trenholme
had cause to think so one bright June morning in 1912, and he has
never ceased to believe it, though the events which made him an
outstanding figure in the "Strange Case of Mortimer Fenley," as the
murder of a prominent man in the City of London came to be known, have
long since been swept into oblivion by nearly five years of war. Even
the sun became a prime agent of the occult that morning. It found a
chink in a blind and threw a bar of vivid light across the face of a
young man lying asleep in the front bedroom of the "White Horse Inn"
at Roxton. It crept onward from a firm, well-molded chin to lips now
tight set, though not lacking signs that they would open readily in a
smile and perhaps reveal two rows of strong, white, even teeth. Indeed, when that strip of sunshine touched and warmed them, the
smile came; so the sleeper was dreaming, and pleasantly. But the earth stays not for men, no matter what their dreams. In a few
minutes the radiant line reached the sleeper's eyes, and he awoke. Naturally, he stared straight at the disturber of his slumbers; and
being a mere man, who emulated not the ways of eagles, was routed at
the first glance. More than that, he was thoroughly aroused, and sprang out of bed with
a celerity that would have given many another young man a headache
during the remainder of the day. But John Trenholme, artist by profession, was somewhat of a
light-hearted vagabond by instinct; if the artist was ready to be
annoyed because of an imaginary loss of precious daylight, the
vagabond laughed cheerily when he blinked at a clock and learned that
the hour still lacked some minutes of half past five in the morning. "By gad," he grinned, pulling up the blind, "I was scared stiff. I
thought the blessed alarm had missed fire, and that I had been lying
here like a hog during the best part of the finest day England has
seen this year." Evidently he was still young enough to deal in superlatives, for there
had been other fine days that Summer; moreover, in likening himself to
a pig, he was ridiculously unfair to six feet of athletic symmetry in
which it would be difficult to detect any marked resemblance to the
animal whose name is a synonym for laziness. On the way to the bathroom he stopped to listen for sounds of an
aroused household, but the inmates of the White Horse Inn were still
taking life easily. "Eliza vows she can hear that alarm in her room," he communed. "Well,
suppose we assist nature, always a laudable thing in itself, and
peculiarly excellent when breakfast is thereby advanced a quarter of
an hour." Eliza was the inn's stout and voluble cook-housekeeper, and her attic
lay directly above Trenholme's room. He went back for the clock, crept
swiftly upstairs, opened a door a few inches, and put the infernal
machine inside, close to the wall. He was splashing in the bath when a
harsh and penetrating din jarred through the house, and a slight
scream showed that Eliza had been duly "alarmed." A few minutes later came a heavy thump on the bathroom door. "All right, Mr. Trenholme!" cried an irate female voice. "You've been
up to your tricks, have you? It'll be my turn when I make your coffee;
I'll pepper an' salt it!" "Why, what's the matter, Eliza?" he shouted. "Matter! Frightenin' a body like that! I thought a lot o' suffrigettes
were smashin' the windows of the snug." Eliza was still touchy when Trenholme ventured to peep into the
kitchen. "I don't know how you dare show your face," she cried wrathfully. "The
impidence of men nowadays! Just fancy you comin' an' openin' my door!" "But, _cherie_, what have I done?" he inquired, his brown eyes wide
with astonishment. "I'm not your cherry, nor your peach, neither. Who put that clock in
my room?" "What clock, _ma belle_?" Eliza picked up an egg, and bent so fiery a glance on the intruder
that he dodged out of sight for a second. "Listen, _carissima_," he pleaded, peering round the jamb of the door
again. "If the alarm found its way upstairs I must have been walking
in my sleep. While you were dreaming of suffragettes I may have been
dreaming of you." "Stop there a bit longer, chatterin' and callin' me names, an' your
bacon will be frizzled to a cinder," she retorted. "But I really hoped to save you some trouble by carrying in the
breakfast tray myself. I hate to see a jolly, good-tempered woman of
your splendid physique working yourself to a shadow." *       *       *       *       *

Eliza squared her elbows as a preliminary to another outburst, when
the stairs creaked. Mary, the "help," was arriving hurriedly, in curl
papers. "Oh, _you_'ve condescended to get up, have you?" was the greeting Mary
received. "Why, it's on'y ten minutes to six!" cried the astonished girl, gazing
at a grandfather's clock as if it were bewitched. "You've never had such a shock since you were born," went on the
sarcastic Eliza. "But don't thank _me_, my girl. Thank Mr. Trenholme,
the gentleman stannin' there grinnin' like a Cheshire cat. Talk to him
nicely, an' p'raps he'll paint your picter, an' then your special
butcher boy will see how beautiful you reelly are." "Jim don't need tellin' anything about that," said the girl, smiling,
for Eliza's bark was notoriously worse than her bite. "Jim!" came the snorting comment. "The first man who ever axed me to
marry him was called Jim, an' when, like a wise woman, I said 'No,' he
went away an' 'listed in the Royal Artillery an' lost his leg in a
war--that's what Jim did." "What a piece of luck you didn't accept him!" put on Trenholme. "An' why, I'd like to know?" "Because he began by losing his head over you. If a leg was missing,
too, there wasn't much of Jim left, was there?" Mary giggled, and Eliza seized the egg again; so Trenholme ran to his
sitting-room. Within half an hour he was passing through the High
Street, bidding an affable "Good morning" to such early risers as he
met, and evidently well content with himself and the world in general. His artist's kit revealed his profession even to the uncritical eye,
but no student of men could have failed to guess his bent were he
habited in the garb of a costermonger. The painter and the poet are
the last of the Bohemians, and John Trenholme was a Bohemian to the
tips of his fingers. He carried himself like a cavalier, but the divine flame of art
kindled in his eye. He had learned how to paint in Julien's studio,
and that same school had taught him to despise convention. He looked
on nature as a series of exquisite pictures, and regarded men and
women in the mass as creatures that occasionally fitted into the
landscape. He was heart whole and fancy free. At twenty-five he had
already exhibited three times in the Salon, and was spoken of by the
critics as a painter of much promise, which is the critical method of
waiting to see how the cat jumps when an artist of genius and
originality arrests attention. He had peculiarly luminous brown eyes set well apart in a face which
won the prompt confidence of women, children and dogs. He was
splendidly built for an out-door life, and moved with a long, supple
stride, a gait which people mistook for lounging until they walked
with him, and found that the pace was something over four miles an
hour. Add to these personal traits the fact that he had dwelt in
Roxton exactly two days and a half, and was already on speaking terms
with most of the inhabitants, and you have a fair notion of John
Trenholme's appearance and ways. There remains but to add that he was commissioned by a magazine to
visit this old-world Hertfordshire village and depict some of its
beauties before a projected railway introduced the jerry-builder and a
sewerage scheme, and his presence in the White Horse Inn is explained. He had sketched the straggling High Street, the green, the inn itself,
boasting a license six hundred years old, the undulating common, the
church with its lych gate, the ivy-clad ruin known as "The Castle,"
with its square Norman keep still frowning at an English countryside,
and there was left only an Elizabethan mansion, curiously misnamed
"The Towers," to be transferred to his portfolio. Here, oddly enough,
he had been rebuffed. A note to the owner, Mortimer Fenley, banker and
super City man, asking permission to enter the park of an afternoon,
had met with a curt refusal. Trenholme, of course, was surprised, since he was paying the man a
rare compliment; he had expressed in the inn his full and free opinion
concerning all money grubbers, and the Fenley species thereof in
particular; whereupon the stout Eliza, who classed the Fenley family
as "rubbish," informed him that there was a right of way through the
park, and that from a certain point near a lake he could sketch the
grand old manor house to his heart's content, let the Fenleys and
their keepers scowl as they chose. The village barber, too, bore out Eliza's statement. "A rare old row there was in Roxton twenty year ago, when Fenley fust
kem here, an' tried to close the path," said the barber. "But we beat
him, we did, an' well he knows it. Not many folk use it nowadays,
'coss the artful ole dodger opened a new road to the station; but some
of us makes a point of strollin' that way on a Sunday afternoon, just
to look at the pheasants an' rabbits, an' it's a treat to see the head
keeper's face when we go through the lodge gates at the Easton end,
for that is the line the path takes." Here followed a detailed description, for the Roxton barber, like
every other barber, could chatter like a magpie; it was in this wise
that Trenholme was able to defy the laws forbidding trespass, and
score off the seemingly uncivil owner of a historical dwelling. He little imagined, that glorious June morning, that he was entering
on a road of strange adventure. He had chosen an early hour purposely. Not only were the lights and shadows perfect for water color, but it
was highly probable that he would be able to come and go without
attracting attention. He had no wish to annoy Fenley, or quarrel with
the man's myrmidons. Indeed, he would not have visited the estate at
all if the magazine editor had not specially stipulated for a
full-page drawing of the house. Now, all would have been well had the barber's directions proved as
bald in spirit as they were in letter. "After passin' 'The Waggoner's Rest,' you'll come to a pair of iron
gates on the right," he had said. "On one side there's a swing gate. Go through, an' make straight for a clump of cedars on top of a little
hill. There mayn't be much of a path, but that's it. It's reelly a
short cut to the Easton gate on the London road." Yet who could guess what a snare for an artist's feet lay in those few
words? How could Trenholme realize that "a pair of iron gates" would
prove to be an almost perfect example of Christopher Wren's genius as
a designer of wrought iron? Trenholme's eyes sparkled when he beheld
this prize, with its acanthus leaves and roses beaten out with
wonderful freedom and beauty of curve. A careful drawing was the
result. Another result, uncounted by him, but of singular importance
in its outcome was the delay of forty minutes thus entailed. He crossed an undulating park, and had no difficulty in tracing an
almost disused path in certain grass-grown furrows leading past the
group of cedars. On reaching this point he obtained a fair view of the
mansion; but the sun was directly behind him, as the house faced
southeast, and he decided to encroach some few yards on private
property. A brier-laden slope fell from the other side of the trees to
a delightful-looking lake fed by a tiny cascade on the east side. An
ideal spot, he thought. This, then, was the stage setting: Trenholme, screened by black cedars
and luxuriant brushwood, was seated about fifty feet above the level
of the lake and some forty yards from its nearest sedges. The lake
itself, largely artificial, lay at the foot of the waterfall, which
gurgled and splashed down a miniature precipice of moss-covered
bowlders. Here and there a rock, a copper beech, a silver larch, or a
few flowering shrubs cast strong shadows on the dark, pellucid mirror
beneath. On a cunningly contrived promontory of brown rock stood a
white marble statue of Venus Aphrodite, and the ripples from the
cascade seemed to endow with life the shimmering reflection of the
goddess. Beyond the lake a smooth lawn, dotted with fine old oaks and
chestnuts, rose gently for a quarter of a mile to the Italian gardens
in front of the house. To the left, the park was bounded by woods. To
the right was another wood, partly concealing a series of ravines and
disused quarries. Altogether a charming setting for an Elizabethan
manor, pastoral, peaceful, quite English, and seeming on that placid
June morning so remote from the crowded mart that it was hard to
believe the nearest milestone, with its "London, 30 miles." Had Trenholme glanced at his watch he would have discovered that the
hour was now half past seven, or nearly an hour later than he had
planned. But Art, which is long-lived, recks little of Time, an
evanescent thing. He was enthusiastic over his subject. He would make
not one sketch, but two. That lake, like the gates, was worthy of
immortality. Of course, the house must come first. He unpacked a
canvas hold-all, and soon was busy. He worked with the speed and assured confidence of a master. By years
of patient industry he had wrested from Nature the secrets of her
tints and tone values. Quickly there grew into being an exquisitely
bright and well balanced drawing, impressionist, but true; a harmony
of color and atmosphere. Leaving subtleties to the quiet thought of
the studio, he turned to the lake. Here the lights and shadows were
bolder. They demanded the accurate appraisement of the half closed
eye. He was so absorbed in his task that he was blithely unconscious
of the approach of a girl from the house, and his first glimpse of
her was forthcoming when she crossed the last spread of velvet sward
which separated a cluster of rhododendrons in the middle distance from
the farther edge of the lake. It was not altogether surprising that he had not seen her earlier. She
wore a green coat and skirt and a most curiously shaped hat of the
same hue, so that her colors blended with the landscape. Moreover, she
was walking rapidly, and had covered the intervening quarter of a mile
in four minutes or less. He thought at first that she was heading straight for his lofty perch,
and was perhaps bent on questioning his right to be there at all. But
he was promptly undeceived. Her mind was set on one object, and her
eyes did not travel beyond it. She no more suspected that an artist
was lurking in the shade of the cedars than she did that the man in
the moon was gazing blandly at her above their close-packed foliage. She came on with rapid, graceful strides, stood for a moment by the
side of the Venus, and then, while Trenholme literally gasped for
breath, shed coat, skirt and shoes, revealing a slim form clad in a
dark blue bathing costume, and dived into the lake. Trenholme had never felt more surprised. The change of costume was so
unexpected, the girl's complete ignorance of his presence so obvious,
that he regarded himself as a confessed intruder, somewhat akin to
Peeping Tom of Coventry. He was utterly at a loss how to act. If he
stood up and essayed a hurried retreat, the girl might be frightened,
and would unquestionably be annoyed. It was impossible to creep away
unseen. He was well below the crest of the slope crowned by the trees,
and the nymph now disporting in the lake could hardly fail to discover
him, no matter how deftly he crouched and twisted. At this crisis, the artistic instinct triumphed. He became aware that
the one element lacking hitherto, the element that lent magic to the
beauty of the lake and its vivid environment of color, was the touch
of life brought by the swimmer. He caught the flash of her limbs as
they moved rhythmically through the dark, clear water, and it seemed
almost as if the gods had striven to be kind in sending this naiad to
complete a perfect setting. With stealthy hands he drew forth a small
canvas. Oil, not mild water color, was the fitting medium to portray
this Eden. Shrinking back under cover of a leafy brier, he began a
third sketch in which the dominant note was the contrast between the
living woman and the marble Venus. For fifteen minutes the girl disported herself like a dolphin. Evidently she was a practiced swimmer, and had at her command all the
resources of the art. At last she climbed out, and stood dripping on
the sun-laved rock beside the statue. Trenholme had foreseen this
attitude--had, in fact, painted with feverish energy in anticipation
of it. The comparison was too striking to be missed by an artist. Were
it not for the tightly clinging garments, the pair would have provided
a charming representation of Galatea in stone and Galatea after
Pygmalion's frenzy had warmed her into life. Trenholme was absolutely deaf now to any consideration save that of
artistic endeavor. With a swift accuracy that was nearly marvelous he
put on the canvas the sheen of faultless limbs and slender neck. He
even secured the spun-gold glint of hair tightly coifed under a
bathing cap--a species of head-dress which had puzzled him at the
first glance--and there was more than a suggestion of a veritable
portrait of the regular, lively and delicately beautiful features
which belonged to a type differing in every essential from the cold,
classic loveliness of the statue, yet vastly more appealing in its
sheer femininity. Then the spell was broken. The girl slipped on her shoes, dressed
herself in a few seconds, and was hurrying back to the house, almost
before Trenholme dared to breathe normally. "Well," he muttered, watching the swaying of the green skirt as its
owner traversed the park, "this is something like an adventure! By
Jove, I've been lucky this morning! I've got my picture for next
year's Salon!" He had got far more, if only he were gifted to peer into the future;
but that is a privilege denied to men, even to artists. Soon, when he
was calmer, and the embryo sketch had assumed its requisite color
notes for subsequent elaboration, he smiled a trifle dubiously. "If that girl's temperament is as attractive as her looks I'd throw
over the Salon for the sake of meeting her," he mused. "But that's
frankly impossible, I suppose. At the best, she would not forgive me
if she knew I had watched her in this thievish way. I could never
explain it, never! She wouldn't even listen. Well, it's better to have
dreamed and lost than never to have dreamed at all." And yet he dreamed. His eyes followed the fair unknown while she
entered the garden through a gateway of dense yews, and sped lightly
up the steps of a terrace adorned with other statues in marble and
bronze. No doorway broke the pleasing uniformity of the south front,
but she disappeared through an open window, swinging herself lightly
over the low sill. He went with her in imagination. Now she was
crossing a pretty drawing-room, now running upstairs to her room, now
dressing, possibly in white muslin, which, if Trenholme had the
choosing of it, would be powdered with tiny _fleurs de lys_, now
arranging her hair with keen eye for effect, and now tripping down
again in obedience to a gong summoning the household to breakfast. He sighed. "If I had the luck of a decent French poodle, this plutocrat Fenley
would eke have invited me to lunch," he grumbled. Then his eyes sought the sketch, and he forgot the girl in her
counterfeit. By Jove, this _would_ be a picture! "The Water Nymphs." But he must change the composition a little--losing none of its
character; only altering its accessories to such an extent that none
would recognize the exact setting. "Luck!" he chortled, with mercurial rise of spirits. "I'm the luckiest
dog in England today. Happy chance has beaten all the tricks of the
studio. O ye goddesses, inspire me to heights worthy of you!" His visions were rudely dispelled by a gunshot, sharp, insistent,
a tocsin of death in that sylvan solitude. A host of rooks arose
from some tall elms near the house; a couple of cock pheasants flew
with startled chuckling out of the wood on the right; the white
tails of rabbits previously unseen revealed their owners' whereabouts
as they scampered to cover. But Trenholme was sportsman enough to
realize that the weapon fired was a rifle; no toy, but of high velocity,
and he wondered how any one dared risk its dangerous use in such a
locality. He fixed the sound definitely as coming from the wood to
the right--the cover quitted so hurriedly by the pheasants--and
instinctively his glance turned to the house, in the half formed
thought that some one there might hear the shot, and look out. The ground floor window by which the girl had entered still remained
open, but now another window, the most easterly one on the first
floor, had been raised slightly. The light was peculiarly strong and
the air so clear that even at the distance he fancied he could
distinguish some one gesticulating, or so it seemed, behind the glass. This went on for a minute or more. Then the window was closed. At the
same time he noticed a sparkling of glass and brasswork behind the
clipped yew hedge which extended beyond the east wing. After some
puzzling, he made out that a motor car was waiting there. That was all. The clamor of the rooks soon subsided. A couple of
rabbits skipped from the bushes to resume an interrupted meal on
tender grass shoots. A robin trilled a roundelay from some neighboring
branch. Trenholme looked at his watch. Half past nine! Why, he must
have been mooning there a good half hour! He gathered his traps, and as the result of seeing the automobile,
which had not moved yet, determined to forego his earlier project of
walking out of the park by the Easton gate. He had just emerged from the trees when a gruff voice hailed him. "Hi!" it cried. "Who're you, an' what are you doin' here!" A man, carrying a shotgun and accompanied by a dog, strode up with
determined air. Trenholme explained civilly, since the keeper was clearly within
his rights. Moreover, the stranger was so patently a gentleman
that Velveteens adopted a less imperative tone. "Did you hear a shot fired somewhere?" he asked. "Yes. Among those trees." And Trenholme pointed. "It was a rifle,
too," he added, with an eye at the twelve-bore. "So _I_ thought," agreed the keeper. "Rather risky, isn't it, firing bullets in a place like this?" "I just want to find out who the ijiot is that did it. Excuse me, sir,
I must be off." And man and dog hurried away. And Trenholme, not knowing that death had answered the shot, took
his own departure, singing as he walked, his thoughts altogether on
life, and more especially on life as revealed by the limbs of a girl
gleaming in the dark waters of a pool. CHAPTER II

"WHO HATH DONE THIS THING?" Trenholme's baritone was strong and tuneful--for the Muses, if
kind, are often lavish of their gifts--so the final refrain of an
impassioned love song traveled far that placid morning. Thus, when he
reached the iron gates, he found the Roxton policeman standing there,
grinning. "Hello!" said the artist cheerily. Of course he knew the policeman. In
a week he would have known every man and dog in the village by name. "Good mornin', sir," said the Law, which was nibbling its chin strap
and had both thumbs stuck in its belt. "That's a fine thing you was
singin'. May I arsk wot it was? I do a bit in that line meself." "It's the _cantabile_ from Saint-Saens' _Samson et Dalila_," replied
Trenholme. "Mon coeur s'ouvre a ta voix!" "Is it now? An' wot may that be, sir?" The policeman's humor was infectious. Trenholme laughed, too. Realizing that the words and accent of Paris had no great vogue in
Hertfordshire, he explained, and added that he possessed a copy of
the song, which was at the service of the force. The man thanked him
warmly, and promised to call at the inn during the afternoon. "By the way, sir," he added, when Trenholme had passed through the
wicket, "did you hear a shot fired while you was in the park?" "Yes." "Jer see anybody?" "A keeper, who seemed rather annoyed about the shooting. Some one had
fired a rifle." "It sounded like that to me, sir, and it's an unusual thing at this
time of the year." "A heavy-caliber rifle must sound unusual at any time of the year in
an enclosed estate near London," commented Trenholme. "My idee exactly," said the policeman. "I think I'll go that way. I
may meet Bates." "If Bates is a bandy-legged person with suspicious eyes, a red tie,
many pockets, brown leggings, and a yellow dog, you'll find him
searching the wood beyond the lake, which is the direction the shot
came from." The policeman laughed. "That's Bates, to a tick," he said. "If he was 'wanted,' your
description would do for the _Police Gazette_." They parted. Since Trenholme's subsequent history is bound up more
closely with the policeman's movements during the next hour than with
his own unhindered return to the White Horse Inn, it is well to trace
the exact course of events as they presented themselves to the ken of
a music-loving member of the Hertfordshire constabulary. Police Constable Farrow did not hurry. Why should he? A gunshot in a
gentleman's park at half past nine on a June morning might be, as he
had put it, "unusual," but it was obviously a matter capable of the
simplest explanation. Such a sound heard at midnight would be
sinister, ominous, replete with those elements of mystery and dread
which cause even a policeman's heart to beat faster than the
regulation pace. Under the conditions, when he met Bates, he would
probably be told that Jenkins, underkeeper and Territorial lance
corporal, had resolved to end the vicious career of a hoodie crow, and
had not scrupled to reach the wily robber with a bullet. So Police Constable Farrow took fifteen minutes to cover the ground
which Trenholme's longer stride had traversed in ten. Allow another
fifteen for the artist's packing of his sketching materials, his
conversation with gamekeeper and policeman, and the leisurely progress
of the latter through the wood, and it will be found that Farrow
reached the long straight avenue leading from the lodge at Easton to
the main entrance of the house about forty minutes after the firing of
the shot. He halted on the grass by the side of the well-kept drive, and looked
at the waiting motor car. The chauffeur was not visible. He had seen
neither Bates nor Jenkins. His passing among the trees had not
disturbed even a pheasant, though the estate was alive with game. The
door of The Towers was open, but no stately manservant was stationed
there. A yellow dog sat in the sunshine. Farrow and the dog exchanged
long-range glances: the policeman consulted his watch, bit his chin
strap, and dug his thumbs into his belt. "Mr. Fenley is late today," he said to himself. "He catches the nine
forty-five. As a rule, he's as reliable as Greenwich. I'll wait here
till he passes, an' then call round an' see Smith." Now, Smith was the head gardener; evidently Police Constable Farrow
was not only well acquainted with the various inmates of the mansion,
but could have prepared a list of the out-door employees as well. He
stood there, calm and impassive as Fate, and, without knowing it,
represented Fate in her most inexorable mood; for had he betaken
himself elsewhere, the shrewdest brains of Scotland Yard might have
been defeated by the enigma they were asked to solve before Mortimer
Fenley's murderer was discovered. Indeed, it is reasonable to suppose that if chance had not brought the
village constable to that identical spot, and at that very hour, the
precise method of the crime might never have been revealed. Moreover,
Farrow himself may climb slowly to an inspectorship, and pass into the
dignified ease of a pension, without being aware of the part he played
in a tragedy that morning. Of course, in his own estimation, he filled
a highly important role as soon as the hue and cry began, but a great
deal of water would flow under London Bridge before the true effect of
his walk through the wood and emergence into sight in the avenue began
to dawn on other minds. His appearance there was a vital fact. It changed the trend of
circumstances much as the path of a comet is deflected by encountering
a heavy planet. Presumably, neither comet nor planet is aware of the
disturbance. That deduction is left to the brooding eye of science. Be that as it may, Police Constable Farrow's serenity was not
disturbed until a doctor's motor car panted along the avenue from
Easton and pulled up with a jerk in front of him. The doctor, frowning
with anxiety, looked out, and recognition was mutual. "Have you got the man?" he asked, and the words were jerked out rather
than spoken. "What man, sir?" inquired Farrows, saluting. "The man who shot Mr. Fenley." "The man who shot Mr. Fenley!" Farrow could only repeat each word in a
crescendo of amazement. Being a singer, he understood the use of a
crescendo, and gave full scope to it. "Good Heavens!" cried the doctor. "Haven't you been told? Why are you
here? Mr. Fenley was shot dead on his own doorstep nearly an hour ago. At least that is the message telephoned by his son. Unfortunately I
was out. Right ahead, Tom!" The chauffeur threw in the clutch, and the car darted on again. Farrow
followed, a quite alert and horrified policeman now. But it was not
ordained that he should enter the house. He was distant yet a hundred
yards, or more, when three men came through the doorway. They were
Bates, the keeper, Tomlinson, the butler, and Mr. Hilton Fenley, elder
son of the man now reported dead. All were bareheaded. The arrival of
the doctor, at the instant alighting from his car, prevented them from
noticing Farrow's rapid approach. When Hilton Fenley saw the doctor he
threw up his hands with the gesture of one who has plumbed the depths
of misery. Farrow could, and did, fit in the accompanying words quite
accurately. "Nothing can be done, Stern! My father is dead!" The two clasped each other's hand, and Hilton Fenley staggered
slightly. He was overcome with emotion. The shock of a terrible crime
had taxed his self-control to its uttermost bounds. He placed a hand
over his eyes and said brokenly to the butler:

"You take Dr. Stern inside, Tomlinson. I'll join you in a few minutes. I must have a breath of air, or I'll choke!" Doctor and butler hurried into the house; then, but not until then,
Hilton Fenley and the keeper became aware of Farrow, now within a few
yards. At sight of him, Fenley seemed to recover his faculties; the
mere possibility of taking some definite action brought a tinge of
color to a pallid and somewhat sallow face. "Ah! Here is the constable," he cried. "Go with him, Bates, and have
that artist fellow arrested!" "Meaning Mr. Trenholme, sir?" inquired the policeman, startled anew by
this unexpected reference to the man he had parted from so recently. "I don't know his name; but Bates met him in the park, near the lake,
just after the shot was fired that killed my father." "But I met him, too, sir. He didn't fire any shot. He hadn't a gun. In
fact, he spoke about the shootin', and was surprised at it." "Look here, Farrow, I am incapable of thinking clearly; so you must
act for the best. Some one fired that bullet. It nearly tore my father
to pieces. I never saw anything like it. It was ghastly--oh, ghastly! The murderer must be found. Why are you losing time? Jump into the
car, and Brodie will take you anywhere you want to go. The roads, the
railway stations, must be scoured, searched. Oh, do something, or I
shall go mad!" Hilton Fenley did, indeed, wear the semblance of a man distraught. Horror stared from his deep-set eyes and lurked in the corners of his
mouth. His father had been struck dead within a few seconds after they
had separated in the entrance hall, both having quitted the breakfast
room together, and the awful discovery which followed the cry of an
alarmed servant had almost shaken the son's reason. Farrow was hardly fitted to deal with a crisis of such magnitude, but
he acted promptly and with fixed purpose--qualities which form the
greater part of generalship. "Bates," he said, turning a determined eye on the keeper, "where was
you when you heard the shot?" "In the kennels, back of the lodge," came the instant answer. "And you kem this way at once?" "Straight. Didn't lose 'arf a minute." "So no one could have left by the Easton gate without meeting you?" "That's right." "And you found Mr. Trenholme--where?" "Comin' away from the cedars, above the lake." "What did he say?" "Tole me about the shot, an' pointed out the Quarry Wood as the place
it kem from." "Was he upset at all in his manner?" "Not a bit. Spoke quite nateral-like." "Well, between the three of us, you an' me an' Mr. Trenholme, we
account for both gates an' the best part of two miles of park. Where
is Jenkins?" "I left him at the kennels." "Ah!" The policeman was momentarily nonplussed. He had formed a theory in
which Jenkins, that young Territorial spark, figured either as a fool
or a criminal. "What's the use of holding a sort of inquiry on the doorstep?" broke
in Hilton Fenley shrilly. His utterance was nearly hysterical. Farrow's judicial calm appeared to stir him to frenzy. He clamored for
action, for zealous scouting, and this orderly investigation by mere
words was absolutely maddening. "I'm not wastin' time, sir," said Farrow respectfully. "It's as
certain as anything can be that the murderer, if murder has been done,
has not got away by either of the gates." "If murder has been done!" cried Fenley. "What do you mean? Go and
look at my poor father's corpse----"

"Of course, Mr. Fenley is dead, sir, an' sorry I am to hear of it; but
the affair may turn out to be an accident." "Accident! Farrow, you're talking like an idiot. A man is shot dead at
his own front door, in a house standing in the midst of a big estate,
and you tell me it's an accident!" "No, sir. I on'y mentioned that on the off chance. Queer things do
happen, an' one shouldn't lose sight of that fact just because it's
unusual. Now, sir, with your permission, I want Brodie, an' Smith, an'
all the men servants you can spare for the next half hour." "Why?" "Brodie can motor to the Inspector's office, an' tell him wot he
knows, stoppin' on the way to send Jenkins here. Some of us must
search the woods thoroughly, while others watch the open park, to make
sure no one escapes without bein' seen. It's my firm belief that the
man who fired that rifle is still hidin' among those trees. He may be
sneakin' off now, but we'd see him if we're quick in reachin' the
other side. Will you do as I ask, sir?" Farrow was already in motion when Fenley's dazed mind recalled
something the policeman ought to know. "I've telephoned to Scotland Yard half an hour ago," he said. "That's all right, sir. The main thing now is to search every inch of
the woods. If nothing else, we may find footprints." "And make plenty of new ones." "Not if the helpers do as I tell 'em, sir." "I can't argue. I'm not fit for it. Still, some instinct warns me you
are not adopting the best course. I think you ought to go in the car
and put the police into combined action." "What are they to do, sir? The murderer won't carry a rifle through
the village, or along the open road. I fancy we'll come across the
weapon itself in the wood. Besides, the Inspector will do all that is
necessary when Brodie sees him. Reelly, sir, I _know_ I'm right." "But should that artist be questioned?" "Of course he will, sir. He won't run away. If he does, we'll soon nab
him. He's been stayin' at the White Horse Inn the last two days, an'
is quite a nice-spoken young gentleman. Why should _he_ want to shoot
Mr. Fenley?" "He is annoyed with my father, for one thing." "Eh? Wot, sir?" Farrow, hitherto eager to be off on the hunt, stopped as if he heard a
statement of real importance. Hilton Fenley pressed a hand to his eyes. "It was nothing to speak of," he muttered. "He wrote asking permission
to sketch the house, and my father refused--just why I don't know;
some business matter had vexed him that day, I fancy, and he dashed
off the refusal on the spur of the moment. But a man does not commit a
terrible crime for so slight a cause.... Oh, if only my head would
cease throbbing!... Do as you like. Bates, see that every assistance
is given." Fenley walked a few paces unsteadily. Obviously he was incapable of
lucid thought, and the mere effort at sustained conversation was a
torture. He turned through a yew arch into the Italian garden, and
threw himself wearily into a seat. "Poor young fellow! He's fair off his nut," whispered Bates. "What can one expect?" said Farrow. "But we must get busy. Where's
Brodie? Do go an' find him." Bates jerked a thumb toward the house. "He's in there," he said. "He helped to carry in the Gov'nor. Hasn't
left him since." "He must come at once. He can't do any good now, an' we've lost nearly
an hour as it is." The chauffeur appeared, red-eyed and white-faced. But he understood
the urgency of his mission, and soon had the car in movement. Others
came--the butler, some gardeners, and men engaged in stables and
garage, for the dead banker maintained a large establishment. Farrow
explained his plan. They would beat the woods methodically, and the
searcher who noted anything "unusual"--the word was often on the
policeman's lips--was not to touch or disturb the object or sign in
any way, but its whereabouts should be marked by a broken branch
stuck in the ground. Of course, if a stranger was seen, an alarm
should be raised instantly. The little party was making for the Quarry Wood, when Jenkins arrived
on a bicycle. The first intimation he had received of the murder was
the chauffeur's message. There was a telephone between house and
lodge, but no one had thought of using it. "Now, Bates," said Farrow, when the squad of men had spread out in
line, "you an' me will take the likeliest line. You ought to know
every spot in the covert where it's possible to aim a gun at any one
stannin' on top of the steps at The Towers. There can't be many such
places. Is there even one? I don't suppose the barefaced scoundrel
would dare come out into the open drive. Brodie said Mr. Fenley was
shot through the right side while facin' the car, so he bears out both
your notion an' Mr. Trenholme's that the bullet kem from the Quarry
Wood. What's _your_ idea about it? Have you one, or are you just as
much in the dark as the rest of us?" Bates was sour-faced with perplexity. The killing of his employer was
already crystallizing in his thoughts into an irrevocable thing, for
the butler had lifted aside the dead man's coat and waistcoat, and
this had shown him the ghastly evidences of a wound which must have
been instantly fatal. Now, a shrewd if narrow intelligence was
concentrated on the one tremendous question, "Who hath done this
thing?" He looked so worried that the yellow dog, watching him, and
quick to interpret his moods, slouched warily at heel; and Farrow,
though agog with excitement, saw that his crony was ill at ease
because of some twinge of fear or suspicion. "Speak out, Jim," he urged, dropping his voice to a confidential
pitch, lest one of the others might overhear. "Gimme the straight tip,
if you can. It need never be known that it kem from you." "I've a good berth here," muttered the keeper, with seeming
irrelevance. "Tell me something fresh," said Farrow, quickening with grateful
memories of many a pheasant and brace of rabbits reposing a brief
space in his modest larder. "So, if I tell you things in confidence like----"

"I've heard 'em from any one but you." Bates drew a deep breath, only to expel it fiercely between puffed
lips. "It's this way," he growled. "Mr. Robert an' the ol' man didn't hit
off, an' there was a deuce of a row between 'em the other day,
Saturday it was. My niece, Mary, was a-dustin' the banisters when the
two kem out from breakfast, an' she heerd the Gov'nor say: 'That's my
last word on the subjec'. I mean to be obeyed this time.' "'But, look here, pater,' said Mr. Robert--he always calls his father
pater, ye know--'I reelly can't arrange matters in that offhand way. You must give me time.' 'Not another minute,' said Mr. Fenley. 'Oh,
dash it all,' said Mr. Robert, 'you're enough to drive a fellow crazy. At times I almost forget that I'm your son. Some fellows would be
tempted to blow their brains out, an' yours, too.' "At that, Tomlinson broke in, an' grabbed Mr. Robert's arm, an' the
Gov'nor went off in the car in a fine ol' temper. Mr. Robert left The
Towers on his motor bike soon afterward, an' he hasn't been back
since." Although the fount of information temporarily ran dry, Farrow felt
that there was more to come if its secret springs were tapped. "Did Mary drop a hint as to what the row was about?" he inquired. "She guessed it had something to do with Miss Sylvia." "Why Miss Sylvia?" "She an' Mr. Robert are pretty good friends, you see." "I see." The policeman saw little, but each scrap of news might fit
into its place presently. "Is that all?" he went on. They were nearing that part of the wood
where care must be exercised, and he wanted Bates to talk while in
the vein. "No, not by a long way," burst out the keeper, seemingly unable to
contain any longer the deadly knowledge weighing on his conscience. "Don't you try an' hold me to it, Farrow, or I'll swear black an' blue
I never said it; but I knew the ring of the shot that killed my poor
ol' guv'nor. It was fired from an express rifle, an' there's on'y one
of the sort in Roxton, so far as _I've_ ever seen. An' it is, or ought
to be, in Mr. Robert's sittin'-room at this very minute. There! Now
you've got it. Do as you like. Get Tomlinson to talk, or anybody else,
but keep me out of it--d'ye hear?" "I hear," said Farrow, thrilling with the consciousness that when some
dandy detective arrived from the "Yard," he would receive an
eye-opener from a certain humble member of the Hertfordshire
constabulary. Not that he quite brought himself to believe Robert
Fenley his father's murderer. That was going rather far. That would,
indeed, be a monstrous assumption as matters stood. But as clues the
quarrel and the rifle were excellent, and Scotland Yard must recognize
them in that light. Certainly, this _was_ an unusual case; most unusual. He was well aware
of the reputation attached to Robert Fenley, the banker's younger son,
who differed from his brother in every essential. Hilton was
steady-going, business-like, his father's secretary and right hand in
affairs, both in the bank and in matters affecting the estate. Robert,
almost unmanageable as a youth, had grown into an exceedingly rapid
young man about town. But Roxton folk feared Hilton and liked Robert;
and local gossip had deplored Robert's wildness, which might erect an
insurmountable barrier against an obviously suitable match between him
and Mr. Mortimer Fenley's ward, the rich and beautiful Sylvia Manning. These things were vivid in the policeman's mind, and he was wondering
how the puzzle would explain itself in the long run, when an
exclamation from Bates brought his vagrom speculations sharply back to
the problem of the moment. The keeper, of course, as Farrow had said, was making straight for the
one place in the Quarry Wood which commanded a clear view of the
entrance to the mansion. The two men were skirting the disused quarry,
now a rabbit warren, which gave the locality its name; they followed
the rising edge of the excavation, treading on a broad strip of turf,
purposely freed of encroaching briers lest any wandering stranger
might plunge headlong into the pit. Near the highest part of the rock
wall there was a slight depression in the ground; and here, except
during the height of a phenomenally dry Summer, the surface was always
moist. Bates, who was leading, had halted suddenly. He pointed to three well
marked footprints. "Who's been here, an' not so long ago, neither?" he said, darting
ferret eyes now at the telltale marks and now into the quarry beneath
or through the solemn aisle of trees. "Stick in some twigs, an' let's hurry on," said Farrow. "Footprints
are first rate, but they'll keep for an hour or two." Thirty yards away, and somewhat to the right, a hump of rock formed
the Mont Blanc of that tiny Alp. From its summit, and from no other
part of the wood, they could see the east front of The Towers. In
fact, while perched there, having climbed its shoulder with great
care lest certain definite tokens of a recent intruder should be
obliterated, they discovered a dusty motor car ranged between the
doctor's runabout and the Fenley limousine, which had returned. The doctor and Miss Sylvia Manning were standing on the broad mosaic
which adorned the landing above the steps, standing exactly where
Mortimer Fenley had stood when he was stricken to death. With them
were two strangers: one tall, burly and official-looking; the other a
shrunken little man, whose straw hat, short jacket, and clean-shaven
face conveyed, at the distance, a curiously juvenile aspect. Halfway down the steps were Hilton Fenley and Brodie, and all were
gazing fixedly at that part of the wood where the keeper and the
policeman had popped into view. "Hello!" said Bates. "Who is that little lot?" Clearly, he meant the big man and his diminutive companion. Farrow
coughed importantly. "That's Scotland Yard," he said. "Who?" "Detectives from the Yard. Mr. Hilton telephoned for 'em. An' wot's
more, they're signalin' to us." "They want us to go back," said Bates. "Mebbe." "There can't be any doubt about it." And, indeed, only a blind man
could have been skeptical as to the wishes of the group near the door. "I'm goin' through this wood first," announced Farrow firmly. "Mind
how you get down. Them marks may be useful. I'm almost sure the
scoundrel fired from this very spot." "Looks like it," agreed Bates, and they descended. Five minutes later they were in the open park, where their assistant
scouts awaited them. None of the others had found any indication of a
stranger's presence, and Farrow led them to the house in Indian file,
by a path. "Scotland Yard is on the job," he announced. "Now we'll be told just
wot we reelly ought to have done!" He did not even exchange a furtive glance with Bates, but, for the
life of him he could not restrain a note of triumph from creeping into
his voice. He noticed, too, that Tomlinson, the butler, not only
looked white and shaken, which was natural under the circumstances,
but had the haggard aspect of a stout man who may soon become thin by
stress of fearsome imaginings. Farrow did not put it that way. "Bates is right," he said to himself. "Tomlinson has something on his
chest. By jingo, this affair _is_ a one-er an' no mistake!" At any rate, local talent had no intention of kowtowing too deeply
before the majesty of the "Yard," for the Chief of the Criminal
Investigation Department himself could have achieved no more in the
time than Police Constable Farrow. CHAPTER III

THE HOUNDS


Superintendent James Leander Winter, Chief of the Criminal
Investigation Department at Scotland Yard, had just opened the
morning's letters, and was virtuously resisting the placid charms of
an open box of cigars, when the telephone bell rang. The speaker was
the Assistant Commissioner. "Leave everything else, and motor to Roxton," said the calm voice of
authority. "Mr. Mortimer Fenley, a private banker in the City, was
shot dead about nine thirty at his own front door. His place is The
Towers, which stands in a park between the villages of Roxton and
Easton, in Hertfordshire. His son, who has just telephoned here,
believes that a rifle was fired from a neighboring wood, but several
minutes elapsed before any one realized that the banker was shot, the
first impression of the servants who ran to his assistance when he
staggered and fell being that he was suffering from apoplexy. By the
time the cause of death was discovered the murderer could have
escaped, so no immediate search was organized. Mr. Hilton Fenley, a
son, who spoke with difficulty, explained that he thought it best to
'phone here after summoning a doctor. The dead man is of some
importance in the City, so I want you to take personal charge of the
inquiry." The voice ceased. Mr. Winter, while listening, had glanced at a clock. "Nine thirty this morning, sir?" he inquired. "Yes. The son lost no time. The affair happened a quarter of an hour
ago." "I'll start in five minutes." "Good. By the way, who will go with you?" "Mr. Furneaux." "Excellent. I leave matters in your hands, Superintendent. Let me hear
the facts if you return to town before six." Evidently the Roxton murder was one of the year's big events. It
loomed large already in the official mind. Winter called up various
departments in quick succession, gave a series of orders, sorted his
letters hastily, thrusting some into a drawer and others into a basket
on the table, and was lighting a cigar when the door opened and his
trusted aide, Detective Inspector Furneaux, entered. "Ha!" cackled the newcomer; for Winter had confided to him, only the
day before, certain reasons why the habit of smoking to excess was
injurious, and his (Winter's) resolve to cut down the day's cigars to
three, one after each principal meal. "Circumstances alter cases," said the Superintendent blandly,
scrutinizing the Havana to make sure that the outer leaf was burning
evenly. "You and I are off for a jaunt in the country, Charles, and
the sternest disciplinarian unbends during holiday time." "Scotland Yard, as well as the other place, is paved with good
intentions," said Furneaux. Winter stooped, and took a couple of automatic pistols from a drawer
in the desk at which he was seated. "Put one of those in your pocket," he said. Again did his colleague smile derisively. "So it is only a 'bus driver's holiday?" he cried. "One never knows. Some prominent banker, name of Fenley, has been
shot. There may be more shooting." "Fenley? Not Mortimer Fenley?" "Yes. Do you know him?" "Better than I know you; because you often puzzle me, whereas he
struck me as a respectable swindler. Don't you remember those bonds
which disappeared so mysteriously two months ago from the safe of the
Mortgage and Discount Bank, and were all sold in Paris before the loss
was discovered?" "By Jove! Is that the Fenley?" "None other. Of course, you were hob-nobbing with royalty at the time,
so such a trifle as the theft of ten thousand pounds' worth of
negotiable securities didn't trouble you a bit. I see you're wearing
the pin today." "So would you wear it, if an Emperor deigned to take notice of such a
shrimp." "Shrimp you call me! Imagine a lobster sticking rubies and diamonds
into a heliotrope tie!" Winter winked solemnly. "I picked up some wrinkles in color blends at the Futurist
Exhibition," he said. "But here's Johnston to tell us the car is
ready." The oddly assorted pair followed the constable in uniform, now
hurrying ahead to ring for the elevator. The big, bluff, bullet-headed
Superintendent was physically well fitted for his responsible
position, though he combined with the official demeanor some of the
easy-going characteristics of a country squire; but Charles Francois
Furneaux was so unlike the detective of romance and the stage that he
often found it difficult to persuade strangers that he was really the
famous detective inspector they had heard of in connection with many a
celebrated trial. On the other hand, if one were told that he hailed from the Comedie
Francaise, the legend would be accepted without demur. He had the
clean-shaven, wrinkled face of the comedian; his black eyes sparkled
with an active intelligence; an expressive mouth bespoke clear and
fluent speech; his quick, alert movements were those of the mimetic
actor. Winter stood six feet in height, and weighed two hundred and
ten pounds; Furneaux was six inches shorter and eighty pounds lighter. The one was a typical John Bull, the other a Channel Islander of pure
French descent, and never did more curiously assorted couple follow
the trail of a criminal. Yet, if noteworthy when acting apart, they were almost infallible in
combination. More than one eminent scoundrel had either blown out his
brains or given himself up to the law when he knew that the Big 'Un
and Little 'Un of the Yard were hot on his track. Winter seldom failed
to arrive at the only sound conclusion from ascertained facts, whereas
Furneaux had an almost uncanny knowledge of the kinks and obliquities
of the criminal mind. In the phraseology of logic, Winter applied the
deductive method and Furneaux the inductive; when both fastened on to
the same "suspect" the unlucky wight was in parlous state. It may be taken for granted, therefore, that the Assistant
Commissioner knew what he was about in uttering his satisfaction at
the Superintendent's choice of an assistant. Possibly he had the
earlier bond robbery in mind, and expected now that another "mystery"
would be solved. Scotland Yard guards many secrets which shirk the
glare of publicity. Some may never be explained; but by far the larger
proportion are cleared up unexpectedly by incidents which may occur
months or years afterward, and whose connection with the original
crime is indiscernible until some chance discovery lays bare the
hidden clue. One queer feature of the partnership between the two was their habit
of chaffing and bickering at each other during the early stages of a
joint hunt. They were like hounds giving tongue joyously when laid on
the scent; dangerous then, they became mute and deadly when the quarry
was in sight. In private life they were firm friends; officially,
Furneaux was Winter's subordinate, but that fact neither silenced the
Jersey man's sarcastic tongue nor stopped Winter from roasting his
assistant unmercifully if an opportunity offered. Their chauffeur took the line through the parks to the Edgware Road,
and they talked of anything save "shop" until the speed limit was off
and the car was responding gayly to the accelerator. Then Winter threw
away the last inch of a good cigar, involuntarily put his hand to a
well-filled case for its successor, sighed, and dropped his hand
again. "Force of habit," he said, finding Furneaux's eye on him. "I didn't even think evil," was the reply. "I really mustn't smoke so much," said Winter plaintively. "Oh, for goodness' sake light up and be happy. If you sit there
nursing your self-righteousness you'll be like a bear with a sore
head before we pass Stanmore. Besides, consider me. I like the smell
of tobacco, though my finer nervous system will not endure its use." "Finer fiddlesticks," said Winter, cutting the end off a fresh Havana. "Now tell me about Fenley and the ten thousand. What's his other name? I forget--Alexander, is it?" "No, nor Xenophon. Just Mortimer. He ran a private bank in Bishopsgate
Street, and that, as you know, generally hides a company promoter. Frankly, I was bothered by Fenley at first. I believe he lost the
bonds right enough, for he gave the numbers, and was horribly upset
when it was found they had been sold in Paris. But, to my idea, he
either stole them himself and was relieved of them later or was
victimized by one of his sons. "The only other person who could have taken them was the cashier, a
hoary-headed old boy who resides at Epping, and has not changed his
method of living since he first wore a silk hat and caught the
eight-forty to the City one morning fifty years ago. I followed him
home on a Saturday afternoon. The bookstall clerk at Liverpool Street
handed him _The Amateur Gardener_, and the old boy read it in the
train. Five minutes after he had reached his house he was out on the
lawn with a daisy fork. No; the cashier didn't arrange the Paris
sale." "What of the sons?" "The elder, Hilton Fenley, is a neurotic, like myself, so he
would shine with equal luster as a saint, or a detective, or a
dyed-in-the-wool thief. The younger, Robert, ought to be an explorer,
or a steeplechase jockey, or an airman. In reality, he is a first-rate
wastrel. In my distress I harked back to the old man, to whom the loss
of the bonds represented something considerably less than a year's
expenditure. He is mixed up in all sorts of enterprises--rubber, tea,
picture palaces, breweries and automobile finance. He lent fifty
thousand pounds on five per cent. first mortgage bonds to one firm at
Coventry, and half that amount to a rival show in West London. So he
has the stuff, and plenty of it. Yet----"

Winter nodded. "I know the sort of man. Dealing in millions today; tomorrow in the
dock at the Old Bailey." "The point is that Fenley has never dealt in millions, and has
kept his head high for twenty years. Just twenty years, by the way. Before that he was unknown. He began by the amalgamation of some tea
plantations in Assam. Fine word, 'amalgamation.' It means money, all
the time. Can't we amalgamate something, or somebody?" "In Fenley's case it led to assassination." "Perhaps. I have a feeling in my bones that if I knew who touched the
proceeds of those bonds I might understand why some one shot Fenley
this morning." "I'll soon tell you a trivial thing like that," said Winter, affecting
a close interest in the landscape. "I shouldn't be at all surprised if you did," said Furneaux. "You have
the luck of a Carnegie. Look at the way you bungled that affair of
Lady Morris's diamonds, until you happened to see her maid meeting
Gentleman George at the White City." Winter smoked complacently. "Smartest thing I ever did," he chortled. "Fixed on the thief within
half an hour, and never lost touch till I knew how she had worked the
job." "The Bow Street method." "Why didn't you try something of the sort with regard to Fenley's
bonds?" "I couldn't be crude, even with a City financier. I put it gently that
the money was in the family; he blinked at me like an owl, said that
he would give thought to the suggestion, and shut down the inquiry by
telephone before I reached the Yard from his office." "Oh, he did, did he? It seems to me you've made a pretty good guess in
associating the bonds and the murder. You've seen both sons, of
course?" "Yes, often." "Are there other members of the family?" "An invalid wife, never away from The Towers; and a young lady, Miss
Sylvia Manning--a ward, and worth a pile. By the way, she's twenty. Mortimer Fenley, had he lived, was appointed her guardian and trustee
till she reached twenty-one." "Twenty!" mused Winter. "Yes, twice ten," snapped Furneaux. "And Fenley has cut a figure in the City for twenty years." "I was sure your gray matter would be stimulated by its favorite
poison." "Charles, this should be an easy thing." "I'm not so sure. Dead men tell no tales, and Fenley himself could
probably supply many chapters of an exciting story. They will be
missing. Look at the repeated failures of eminent authors to complete
'Edwin Drood.' How would they have fared if asked to produce the
beginning?" "Still, I'm glad you attended to those bonds. Who had charge of the
Paris end?" "Jacques Faure." "Ah, a good man." "Pretty fair, for a Frenchman." Winter laughed. "You born frog!" he cried.... "Hello, there's a Roxton sign post. Now
let's compose our features. We are near The Towers." The estate figured on the county map, so the chauffeur pulled up at
the right gate. A woman came from the lodge to inquire their
business, and admitted the car when told that its occupants had been
summoned by Mr. Hilton Fenley. "By the way," said Furneaux carelessly, "is Mr. Robert at home?" "No, sir." "When did he leave?" "I'm sure I don't know, sir." Mrs. Bates knew quite well, and Furneaux knew that she knew. "The country domestic is the detective's aversion," he said as the car
whirred into the avenue. "The lady of the lodge will be a sufficiently
tough proposition if we try to drag information out of her, but the
real tug of war will come when we tackle the family butler." "Her husband is also the head keeper," said Winter. "Name of Bates," added Furneaux. "Oh, you've been here before, then?" "No. While you were taking stock of the kennels generally, I was
deciphering a printed label on a box of dog biscuit." "I hardly feel that I've begun this inquiry yet," said Winter airily. "You'd better pull yourself together. The dead man's limousine is
still waiting at the door, and the local doctor is in attendance." "Walter J. Stern, M.D." "Probably. That brass plate on the Georgian house in the center of
the village positively glistened." They were received by Hilton Fenley himself, all the available men
servants having been transferred to the cohort organized and directed
by Police Constable Farrow. "Good morning, Mr. Furneaux," said Fenley. "I little thought, when
last we met, that I should be compelled to seek your help so soon
again, and under such dreadful circumstances." Furneaux, whose face could display at will a Japanese liveliness of
expression or become a mask of Indian gravity, surveyed the speaker
with inscrutable eyes. "This is Superintendent Winter, Chief of my Department," he said. "The Assistant Commissioner told me to take charge of the inquiry
without delay, sir," explained Winter. He glanced at his watch. "We
have not been long on the road. It is only twenty minutes to eleven." Fenley led them through a spacious hall into a dining-room on the
left. On an oak settee at the back of the hall the outline of a white
sheet was eloquent of the grim object beneath. In the dining-room were
an elderly man and a slim, white-faced girl. Had Trenholme been
present he would have noted with interest that her dress was of white
muslin dotted with tiny blue spots--not _fleurs de lys_, but rather
resembling them. "Dr. Stern, and Miss Sylvia Manning," said Fenley to the newcomers. Then he introduced the Scotland Yard men in turn. By this time the
young head of the family had schooled himself to a degree of
self-control. His sallow skin held a greenish pallor, and as if to
satisfy some instinct that demanded movement he took an occasional
slow stride across the parquet floor or brushed a hand wearily over
his eyes. Otherwise he had mastered his voice, and spoke without the
gasping pauses which had made distressful his words to Farrow. "Ours is a sad errand, Mr. Fenley," began Winter, after a hasty glance
at the table, which still bore the disordered array of breakfast. "But, if you feel equal to the task, you might tell us exactly what
happened." Fenley nodded. "Of course, of course," he said quietly. "That is essential. We
three, my father, Miss Manning and myself, breakfasted together. The
second gong goes every morning at eight forty-five, and we were
fairly punctual today. My father and Sylvia, Miss Manning, came in
together--they had been talking in the hall previously. I saw them
entering the room as I came downstairs. During the meal we chatted
about affairs in the East; that is, my father and I did, and Syl--Miss
Manning--gave us some news of a church bazaar in which she is taking
part. "My father rose first and went to his room, to collect papers brought
from the City overnight. I met him on the stairs, and he gave me some
instructions about a prospectus. (Let me interpolate that I was going
to Victoria by a later train, having an appointment at eleven o'clock
with Lord Ventnor, chairman of a company we are bringing out.) I stood
on the stairs, saying something, while my father crossed the hall and
took his hat and gloves from Harris, the footman. As I passed along
the gallery to my own room I saw him standing on the landing at the
top of the steps. "He was cutting the end off a cigar, and Harris was just behind him
and a little to the left, striking a match. Every fine morning my
father lighted a cigar there. In rain or high wind he would light up
inside the house. By the way, my mother is an invalid, and dislikes
the smell of tobacco, so unless we have guests we don't smoke indoors. "Well, I had reached my room, a sitting-room adjoining my bedroom,
when I heard a gunshot. Apparently it came from the Quarry Wood, and I
was surprised, because there is no shooting at this season. A little
later--some few seconds--I heard Sylvia scream. I did not rush out
instantly to discover the cause. Young ladies sometimes scream at
wasps and caterpillars. Then I heard Tomlinson say, 'Fetch Mr. Hilton
at once,' and I ran into Harris, who blurted out, 'Mr. Fenley has been
shot, sir.' "After that, I scarcely know what I said or how I acted. I remember
running downstairs, and finding my father lying outside the front
door, with Sylvia supporting his head and Tomlinson and Brodie trying
to lift him. I think--in fact, I am sure now from what Dr. Stern tells
me--that my father was dead before I reached him. We all thought at
first that he had yielded to some awfully sudden form of paralysis,
but some one--Tomlinson, I believe--noticed a hole through the right
side of his coat and waistcoat. Then Sylvia--oh, perhaps that is
matterless----"

"Every incident, however slight, is of importance in a case of this
sort," Winter encouraged him. "Well, she said--what was it, exactly? Do you remember, Sylvia?" "Certainly," said the girl, unhesitatingly. "I said that I thought I
recognized the sound of Bob's .450. Why shouldn't I say it? Poor Bob
didn't shoot his father." Her voice, though singularly musical, had a tearful ring which became
almost hysterical in the vehemence of the question and its disclaimer. Fenley moved uneasily, and raised his right hand to his eyes, while
the left grasped the back of a chair. "Bob is my brother Robert, who is away from home at this moment," he
said, and his tone deprecated the mere allusion to the rifle owned by
the absentee. "I only mentioned Miss Manning's words to show how
completely at a loss we all were to account for my father's wound. I
helped Tomlinson and Brodie to carry him to the settee in the hall. Then we--Tomlinson, that is--opened his waistcoat and shirt. Tomlinson
cut the shirt with a scissors, and we saw the wound. Dr. Stern says
there are indications that an expanding bullet was used, so the
injuries must have been something appalling.... Sylvia, don't you
think----"

"I'll not faint, or make a scene, if that is what you are afraid of,
Hilton," said the girl bravely. "That is all, then, or nearly all," went on Fenley, in the same
dreary, monotonous voice. "I telephoned to Dr. Stern, and to Scotland
Yard, deeming it better to communicate with you than with the local
police. But it seems that Bates, our head keeper hurrying to
investigate the cause of the shot, met some artist coming away from
the other side of the wood. The Roxton police constable too, met and
spoke with the same man, who told both Bates and the policeman that he
heard the shot fired. The policeman, Farrow, refused to arrest the
artist, and is now searching the wood with a number of our men----"

"Can't they be stopped?" broke in Furneaux, speaking for the first
time. "Yes, of course," and Hilton Fenley became a trifle more animated. "I
wanted Farrow to wait till you came, but he insisted--said the
murderer might be hiding there." "When did Farrow arrive?" "Oh, more than half an hour after my father was shot. I forgot to
mention that my mother knows nothing of the tragedy yet. That is why
we did not carry my poor father's body upstairs. She might overhear
the shuffling of feet, and ask the cause." "One thing more, Mr. Fenley," said Winter, seeing that the other had
made an end. "Have you the remotest reason to believe that any person
harbored a grievance against your father such as might lead to the
commission of a crime of this nature?" "I've been torturing my mind with that problem since I realized that
my father was dead, and I can say candidly that he had no enemies. Of
course, in business, one interferes occasionally with other men's
projects, but people in the City do not shoot successful opponents." "No private feud? No dismissed servant, sent off because of theft or
drunkenness?" "Absolutely none, to my knowledge. The youngest man on the estate has
been employed here five or six years." "It is a very extraordinary crime, Mr. Fenley." For answer, the other sank into a chair and buried his face in his
hands. "How can we get those clodhoppers out of the wood?" said Furneaux. His
thin, high-pitched voice dispelled the tension, and Fenley dropped his
hands. "Bates is certain to make for a rock which commands a view of the
house," he said. "Perhaps, if we go to the door, we may see them." He arose with obvious effort, but walked steadily enough. Winter
followed with the doctor, and inquired in an undertone--

"Are you sure about the soft-nosed bullet, doctor?" "Quite," was the answer. "I was in the Tirah campaign, and saw
hundreds of such wounds." Furneaux, too, had something to say to Miss Manning. "How were you seated during breakfast?" he asked. She showed him. It was a large room. Two windows looked down the
avenue, and three into the garden, with its background of timber and
park. Mr. Mortimer Fenley could have commanded both views; his son sat
with his back to the park; the girl had faced it. "I need hardly put it to you, but you saw no one in or near the
trees?" said Furneaux. "Not a soul. I bathe in a little lake below those cedars every
morning, and it is an estate order that the men do not go in that
direction between eight and nine o'clock. Of course, a keeper might
have passed at nine thirty, but it is most unlikely." "Did you bathe this morning?" "Yes, soon after eight." "Did you see the artist of whom Mr. Fenley spoke?" "No. This is the first I have heard of any artist. Bates must have
mentioned him while I was with Dr. Stern." When Farrow arrived at the head of his legion he was just in time to
salute his Inspector, who had cycled from Easton after receiving the
news left by the chauffeur at the police station. Farrow was bursting
with impatience to reveal the discoveries he had made, though resolved
to keep locked in his own breast the secret confided by Bates. He was
thoroughly nonplussed, therefore, when Winter, after listening in
silence to the account of the footprints and scratches on the
moss-covered surface of the rock, turned to Hilton Fenley. "With reference to the rifle which has been mentioned--where is it
kept?" he said. "In my brother's room. He bought it nearly a year ago, when he was
planning an expedition to Somaliland." "May I see it?" Fenley signed to the butler, who was standing with the others at a
little distance. "You know the .450 Express which is in the gun rack in Mr. Robert's
den?" he said. "Bring it to the Superintendent." Tomlinson, shaken but dignified, and rather purple of face as the
result of the tramp through the trees, went indoors. Soon he came
back, and the rich tint had faded again from his complexion. "Sorry, sir," he said huskily, "but the rifle is not there." "Not there!" It was Sylvia Manning who spoke; the others received this sinister
fact in silence. "No, miss." "Are you quite sure?" asked Fenley. "It is not in the gun rack, sir, nor in any of the corners." There was a pause. Fenley clearly forced the next words. "That's all right. Bates may have it in the gun room. We'll ask him. Or Mr. Robert may have taken it to the makers. I remember now he spoke
of having the sight fitted with some new appliance." He called Bates. No, the missing rifle was not in the gun room. Somehow the notion was forming in certain minds that it could not be
there. Indeed, the keeper's confusion was so marked that Furneaux's
glance dwelt on him for a contemplative second. CHAPTER IV

BREAKING COVER


Winter drew the local Inspector aside. "This inquiry rests with you in
the first instance," he said. "Mr. Furneaux and I are here only to
assist. Mr. Fenley telephoned to the Commissioner, mainly because
Scotland Yard was called in to investigate a bond robbery which took
place in the Fenley Bank some two months ago. Probably you never heard
of it. Will you kindly explain our position to your Chief Constable? Of course, we shall work with you and through you, but my colleague
has reason to believe that the theft of the bonds may have some
bearing on this murder, and, as the securities were disposed of in
Paris, it is more than likely that the Yard may be helpful." "I fully understand, sir," said the Inspector, secretly delighted at
the prospect of joining in the hunt with two such renowned detectives. The combined parishes of Easton and Roxton seldom produced a crime of
greater magnitude than the theft of a duck. The arrest of a burglar
who broke into a villa, found a decanter of whisky, and got so
hopelessly drunk that he woke up in a cell at the police station, was
an event of such magnitude that its memory was still lively, though
the leading personage was now out on ticket of leave after serving
five years in various penal settlements. "You will prepare and give the formal evidence at the inquest, which
will be opened tomorrow," went on Winter. "All that is really
necessary is identification and a brief statement by the doctor. Then
the coroner will issue the burial certificate, and the inquiry should
be adjourned for a fortnight. I would recommend discretion in choosing
a jury. Avoid busybodies like the plague. Summons only sensible men,
who will do as they are told and ask no questions." "Exactly," said the Inspector; he found Machiavellian art in these
simple instructions. How it broadened the horizon to be brought in
touch with London! Winter turned to look for Furneaux. The little man was standing where
Mortimer Fenley had stood in the last moment of his life. His eyes
were fixed on the wood. He seemed to be dreaming, but his friend well
knew how much clarity and almost supernatural vision was associated
with Furneaux's dreams. "Charles!" said the Superintendent softly. Furneaux awoke, and ran down the steps. In his straw hat and light
Summer suit he looked absurdly boyish, but the Inspector, who had
formed an erroneous first impression, was positively startled when he
met those blazing black eyes. "Mr. Fenley should warn all his servants to speak fully and candidly,"
said Winter. "Then we shall question the witnesses separately. What do
you think? Shall we start now?" "First, the boots," cried Furneaux, seemingly voicing a thought. "We
want a worn pair of boots belonging to each person in the house and
employed on the estate, men and women, no exceptions, including the
dead man's. Then we'll visit that wood. After that, the inquiry." Winter nodded. When Furneaux and he were in pursuit of a criminal they
dropped all nice distinctions of rank. If one made a suggestion the
other adopted it without comment unless he could urge some convincing
argument against it. "Mr. Fenley should give his orders now," added Furneaux. Winter explained his wishes to the nominal head of the household, and
Fenley's compliance was ready and explicit. "These gentlemen from Scotland Yard are acting in behalf of Mrs.
Fenley, my brother and myself," he said to the assembled servants. "You must obey them as you would obey me. I place matters unreservedly
in their hands." "And our questions should be answered without reserve," put in Winter. "Yes, of course. I implied that. At any rate, it is clear now." "Brodie," said Furneaux, seeming to pounce on the chauffeur, "you were
seated at the wheel when the shot was fired?" "Ye--yes, sir," stuttered Brodie, rather taken aback by the little
man's suddenness. "Were you looking at the wood?" "In a sort of a way, sir." "Did you see any one among the trees?" "No, sir, that I didn't." This more confidently. "Place your car where it was stationed then. Take your seat, and try
to imagine that you are waiting for your master. Start the engine, and
behave exactly as though you expected him to enter the car. Don't
watch the wood. I mean that you are not to avoid looking at it, but
just throw yourself back to the condition of mind you were in at nine
twenty-five this morning. Can you manage that?" "I think so, sir." "No chatting with others, you know. Fancy you are about to take Mr.
Fenley to the station. If you should happen to see me, wave your hand. Then you can get down and stop the engine. You understand you are not
to keep a sharp lookout for me?" "Yes, sir." The butler thought it would take a quarter of an hour to collect
sample pairs of boots from the house and outlying cottages. Police
Constable Farrow was instructed to bring the butler and the array of
boots to the place where the footprints were found, and Bates led the
detectives and the Inspector thither at once. Soon the four men were gazing at the telltale marks, and the
Inspector, of course, was ready with a shrewd comment. "Whoever it was that came this way, he didn't take much trouble to
hide his tracks," he said. The Scotland Yard experts were so obviously impressed that the
Inspector tried a higher flight. "They're a man's boots," he continued. "We needn't have worried
Tomlinson to gather the maids' footgear." Furneaux left two neat imprints in the damp soil. "Bet you a penny whistle there are at least two women in The Towers
who will make bigger blobs than these," he said. A penny whistle, as a wager, is what Police Constable Farrow would
term "unusual." "Quite so," said the Inspector thoughtfully. Winter caught Furneaux's eye, and frowned. There was nothing to be
gained by taking a rise out of the local constabulary. Still, he gave
one sharp glance at both sets of footprints. Then he looked at
Furneaux again, this time with a smile. The party passed on to the rock on the higher ground. Bates pointed
out the old scratches, and those made by Farrow and himself. "Me first!" cried Furneaux, darting nimbly to the summit. He was not
there a second before he signaled to some one invisible from beneath. Winter joined him, and the east front of the house burst into view. Brodie was in the act of descending from the car. The doctor had gone. A small group of men were gazing at the wood, but Hilton Fenley and
Sylvia Manning were not to be seen. Neither man uttered a word. They looked at the rock under their feet,
at the surrounding trees, oak and ash, elm and larch, all of mature
growth, and towering thirty to forty feet above their heads, while the
rock itself rose some twelve feet from the general level of the
sloping ground. Bates was watching them. "The fact is, gentlemen, that if an oak an' a couple o' spruce first
hadn't been cut down you wouldn't see the house even from where you
are," he said. "Mr. Fenley had an idee of buildin' a shelter on this
rock, but he let it alone 'coss o' the birds. Ladies would be comin'
here, an' a-disturbin' of 'em." 