



Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer





THE DEVIL'S PAW

By E. Phillips Oppenheim




CHAPTER I



The two men, sole occupants of the somewhat shabby cottage parlour,
lingered over their port, not so much with the air of wine lovers,
but rather as human beings and intimates, perfectly content with
their surroundings and company. Outside, the wind was howling over the
marshes, and occasional bursts of rain came streaming against the
window panes. Inside at any rate was comfort, triumphing over varying
conditions. The cloth upon the plain deal table was of fine linen, the
decanter and glasses were beautifully cut; there were walnuts and, in
a far Corner, cigars of a well-known brand and cigarettes from a famous
tobacconist. Beyond that little oasis, however, were all the evidences
of a hired abode. A hole in the closely drawn curtains was fastened
together by a safety pin. The horsehair easy-chairs bore disfiguring
antimacassars, the photographs which adorned the walls were grotesque
but typical of village ideals, the carpet was threadbare, the closed
door secured by a latch instead of the usual knob. One side of the
room was littered with golf clubs, a huge game bag and several boxes
of cartridges. Two shotguns lay upon the remains of a sofa. It scarcely
needed the costume of Miles Furley, the host, to demonstrate the fact
that this was the temporary abode of a visitor to the Blakeney marshes
in search of sport. Furley, broad-shouldered, florid, with tanned skin and grizzled hair,
was still wearing the high sea boots and jersey of the duck shooter. His companion, on the other hand, a tall, slim man, with high forehead,
clear eyes, stubborn jaw, and straight yet sensitive mouth, wore the
ordinary dinner clothes of civilisation. The contrast between the two
men might indeed have afforded some ground for speculation as to the
nature of their intimacy. Furley, a son of the people, had the air
of cultivating, even clinging to a certain plebeian strain, never
so apparent as when he spoke, or in his gestures. He was a Member of
Parliament for a Labour constituency, a shrewd and valuable exponent of
the gospel of the working man. What he lacked in the higher qualities
of oratory he made up in sturdy common sense. The will-o'-the-wisp
Socialism of the moment, with its many attendant "isms" and theories,
received scant favour at his hands. He represented the solid element
in British Labour politics, and it was well known that he had refused
a seat in the Cabinet in order to preserve an absolute independence. He
had a remarkable gift of taciturnity, which in a man of his class made
for strength, and it was concerning him that the Prime Minister had made
his famous epigram, that Furley was the Labour man whom he feared the
most and dreaded the least. Julian Orden, with an exterior more promising in many respects than
that of his friend, could boast of no similar distinctions. He was
the youngest son of a particularly fatuous peer resident in the
neighbourhood, had started life as a barrister, in which profession he
had attained a moderate success, had enjoyed a brief but not inglorious
spell of soldiering, from which he had retired slightly lamed for life,
and had filled up the intervening period in the harmless occupation
of censoring. His friendship with Furley appeared on the surface too
singular to be anything else but accidental. Probably no one save the
two men themselves understood it, and they both possessed the gift of
silence. "What's all this peace talk mean?" Julian Orden asked, fingering the
stem of his wineglass. "Who knows?" Furley grunted. "The newspapers must have their daily
sensation." "I have a theory that it is being engineered." "Bolo business, eh?" Julian Orden moved in his place a little uneasily. His long, nervous
fingers played with the stick which stood always by the side of his
chair. "You don't believe in it, do you?" he asked quietly. Furley looked straight ahead of him. His eyes seemed caught by the
glitter of the lamplight upon the cut-glass decanter. "You know my opinion of war, Julian," he said. "It's a filthy,
intolerable heritage from generations of autocratic government. No
democracy ever wanted war. Every democracy needs and desires peace." "One moment," Julian interrupted. "You must remember that a democracy
seldom possesses the imperialistic spirit, and a great empire can
scarcely survive without it." "Arrant nonsense!" was the vigorous reply. "A great empire, from
hemisphere to hemisphere, can be kept together a good deal better by
democratic control. Force is always the arriere pensee of the individual
and the autocrat." "These are generalities," Julian declared. "I want to know your opinion
about a peace at the present moment." "Not having any, thanks. You're a dilettante journalist by your own
confession, Julian, and I am not going to be drawn." "There is something in it, then?" "Maybe," was the careless admission. "You're a visitor worth having,
Julian. '70 port and homegrown walnuts! A nice little addition to my
simple fare! Must you go back to-morrow?" Julian nodded. "We've another batch of visitors coming,--Stenson amongst them, by the
bye." Furley nodded. His eyes narrowed, and little lines appeared at their
corners. "I can't imagine," he confessed. "What brings Stenson down to Maltenby. I should have thought that your governor and he could scarcely spend ten
minutes together without quarrelling!" "They never do spend ten minutes together alone," Julian replied drily. "I see to that. Then my mother, you know, has the knack of getting
interesting people together. The Bishop is coming, amongst others. And,
Furley, I wanted to ask you--do you know anything of a young woman--she
is half Russian, I believe--who calls herself Miss Catherine Abbeway?" "Yes, I know her," was the brief rejoinder. "She lived in Russia for some years, it seems," Julian continued. "Her
mother was Russian--a great writer on social subjects." Furley nodded. "Miss Abbeway is rather that way herself," he remarked. "I've heard her
lecture in the East End. She has got hold of the woman's side of the
Labour question as well as any one I ever came across." "She is a most remarkably attractive young person," Julian declared
pensively. "Yes, she's good-looking. A countess in her own right, they tell me, but
she keeps her title secret for fear of losing influence with the working
classes. She did a lot of good down Poplar way. Shouldn't have thought
she'd have been your sort, Julian." "Why?" "Too serious." Julian smiled--rather a peculiar, introspective smile. "I, too, can, be serious sometimes," he said. His friend thrust his hands into his trousers pocket and, leaning back
in his chair, looked steadfastly at his guest. "I believe you can, Julian," he admitted. "Sometimes I am not quite
sure that I understand you. That's the worst of a man with the gift for
silence." "You're not a great talker yourself," the younger man reminded his host. "When you get me going on my own subject," Furley remarked, "I find it
hard to stop, and you are a wonderful listener. Have you got any views
of your own? I never hear them." Julian drew the box of cigarettes towards him. "Oh, yes, I've views of my own," he confessed. "Some day, perhaps, you
shall know what they are." "A man of mystery!" his friend jeered good-naturedly. Julian lit his cigarette and watched the smoke curl upward. "Let's talk about the duck," he suggested. The two men sat in silence for some minutes. Outside, the storm seemed
to have increased in violence. Furley rose, threw a log on to the fire
and resumed his place. "Geese flew high," he remarked. "Too high for me," Julian confessed. "You got one more than I did." "Sheer luck. The outside bird dipped down to me." Furley filled his guest's glass and then his own. "What on earth have you kept your shooting kit on for?" the latter
asked, with lazy curiosity. Furley glanced down at his incongruous attire and seemed for a moment
ill at ease. "I've got to go out presently," he announced. Julian raised his eyebrows. "Got to go out?" he repeated. "On a night like this? Why, my dear
fellow--"

He paused abruptly. He was a man of quick perceptions, and he realised
his host's embarrassment. Nevertheless, there was an awkward pause in
the conversation. Furley rose to his feet and frowned. He fetched a jar
of tobacco from a shelf and filled his pouch deliberately:

"Sorry to seem mysterious, old chap," he said. "I've just a bit of a job
to do. It doesn't amount to anything, but--well, it's the sort of affair
we don't talk about much." "Well, you're welcome to all the amusement you'll get out of it, a night
like this." Furley laid down his pipe, ready-filled, and drank off his port. "There isn't much amusement left in the world, is there, just now?" he
remarked gravely. "Very little indeed. It's three years since I handled a shotgun before
to-night." "You've really chucked the censoring?" "Last week. I've had a solid year at it." "Fed up?" "Not exactly that. My own work accumulated so." "Briefs coming along, eh?" "I'm a sort of hack journalist as well, as you reminded me just now,"
Julian explained a little evasively. "I wonder you stuck at the censoring so long. Isn't it terribly
tedious?" "Sometimes. Now and then we come across interesting things, though. For
instance, I discovered a most original cipher the other day." "Did it lead to anything?" Furley asked curiously. "Not at present. I discovered it, studying a telegram from Norway. It was addressed to a perfectly respectable firm of English timber
merchants who have an office in the city. This was the original: `Fir
planks too narrow by half.' Sounds harmless enough, doesn't it?" "Absolutely. What's the hidden meaning?" "There I am still at a loss," Julian confessed, "but treated with the
cipher it comes out as `Thirty-eight steeple on barn.'" Furley stared for a moment, then he lit his pipe. "Well, of the two," he declared, "I should prefer the first rendering
for intelligibility." "So would most people," Julian assented, smiling, "yet I am sure there
is something in it--some meaning, of course, that needs a context to
grasp it." "Have you interviewed the firm of timber merchants?" "Not personally. That doesn't come into my department. The name of the
man who manages the London office, though, is Fenn--Nicholas Fenn." Furley withdrew the pipe from his mouth. His eyebrows had come together
in a slight frown. "Nicholas Fenn, the Labour M.P.?" "That's the fellow. You know him, of course?" "Yes, I know him," Furley replied thoughtfully. "He is secretary of the
Timber Trades Union and got in for one of the divisions of Hull last
year." "I understand that there is nothing whatever against him personally,"
Julian continued, "although as a politician he is of course beneath
contempt. He started life as a village schoolmaster and has worked
his way up most creditably. He professed to understand the cable as it
appeared in its original form. All the same, it's very odd that, treated
by a cipher which I got on the track of a few days previously, this same
message should work out as I told you." "Of course," Furley observed, "ciphers can lead you--"

He stopped short. Julian, who had been leaning over towards the
cigarette bog, glanced around at his friend. There was a frown on
Furley's forehead. He withdrew his pipe from between his teeth. "What did you say you made of it?" he demanded. "`Thirty-eight steeple on barn.'" "Thirty-eight! That's queer!" "Why is it queer?" There was a moment's silence. Furley glanced at the little clock upon
the mantelpiece. It was five and twenty minutes past nine. "I don't know whether you have ever heard, Julian," he said, "that our
enemies on the other side of the North Sea are supposed to have divided
the whole of the eastern coast of Great Britain into small, rectangular
districts, each about a couple of miles square. One of our secret
service chaps got hold of a map some time ago." "No, I never heard this," Julian acknowledged. "Well?" "It's only a coincidence, of course," Furley went on, "but number
thirty-eight happens to be the two-mile block of seacoast of which this
cottage is just about the centre. It stretches to Cley on one side and
Salthouse on the other, and inland as far as Dutchman's Common. I am not
suggesting that there is any real connection between your cable and this
fact, but that you should mention it at this particular moment--well, as
I said, it's a coincidence." "Why?" Furley had risen to his feet. He threw open the door and listened for a
moment in the passage. When he came back he was carrying some oilskins. "Julian," he said, "I know you area bit of a cynic about espionage
and that sort of thing. Of course, there has been a terrible lot of
exaggeration, and heaps of fellows go gassing about secret service jobs,
all the way up the coast from here to Scotland, who haven't the least
idea what the thing means. But there is a little bit of it done, and in
my humble way they find me an occasional job or two down here. I won't
say that anything ever comes of our efforts--we're rather like the
special constables of the secret service--but just occasionally we come
across something suspicious." "So that's why you're going out again to-night, is it?" Furley nodded. "This is my last night. I am off up to town on Monday and sha'n't be
able to get down again this season." "Had any adventures?" "Not the ghost of one. I don't mind admitting that I've had a good many
wettings and a few scares on that stretch of marshland, but I've never
seen or heard anything yet to send in a report about. It just happens,
though, that to-night there's a special vigilance whip out." "What does that mean?" Julian enquired curiously. "Something supposed to be up," was the dubious reply. "We've a very
imaginative chief, I might tell you." "But what sort of thing could happen?" Julian persisted. "What are you
out to prevent, anyway?" Furley relit his pipe, thrust a flask into his pocket, and picked up a
thick stick from a corner of the room. "Can't tell," he replied laconically. "There's an idea, of course, that
communications are carried on with the enemy from somewhere down this
coast. Sorry to leave you, old fellow," he added. "Don't sit up. I never
fasten the door here. Remember to look after your fire upstairs, and the
whisky is on the sideboard here." "I shall be all right, thanks," Julian assured his host. "No use my
offering to come with you, I suppose?" "Not allowed," was the brief response. "Thank heavens!" Julian exclaimed piously, as a storm of rain blew in
through the half-open door. "Good night and good luck, old chap!" Furley's reply was drowned in the roar of wind. Julian secured the
door, underneath which a little stream of rain was creeping in. Then he
returned to the sitting room, threw a log upon the fire, and drew one of
the ancient easy-chairs close up to the blaze. CHAPTER II


Julian, notwithstanding his deliberate intention of abandoning himself
to an hour's complete repose, became, after the first few minutes of
solitude, conscious of a peculiar and increasing sense of restlessness. With the help of a rubber-shod stick which leaned against his chair,
he rose presently to his feet and moved about the room, revealing
a lameness which had the appearance of permanency. In the small,
white-ceilinged apartment his height became more than ever noticeable,
also the squareness of his shoulders and the lean vigour of his frame. He handled his gun for a moment and laid it down; glanced at the card
stuck in the cheap looking glass, which announced that David Grice let
lodgings and conducted shooting parties; turned with a shiver from the
contemplation of two atrocious oleographs, a church calendar pinned upon
the wall, and a battered map of the neighbourhood, back to the table at
which he had been seated. He selected a cigarette and lit it. Presently
he began to talk to himself, a habit which had grown upon him during
the latter years of a life whose secret had entailed a certain amount of
solitude. "Perhaps," he murmured, "I am psychic. Nevertheless, I am convinced that
something is happening, something not far away." He stood for a while, listening intently, the cigarette burning away
between his fingers. Then, stooping a little, he passed out into the
narrow passage and opened the door into the kitchen behind, from
which the woman who came to minister to their wants had some time ago
departed. Everything was in order here and spotlessly neat. He climbed
the narrow staircase, looked in at Furley's room and his own, and at
the third apartment, in which had been rigged up a temporary bath. The
result was unilluminating. He turned and descended the stairs. "Either," he went on, with a very slight frown, "I am not psychic, or
whatever may be happening is happening out of doors." He raised the latch of the door, under which a little pool of water was
now standing, and leaned out. There seemed to be a curious cessation
of immediate sounds. From somewhere straight ahead of him, on the other
side of that black velvet curtain of darkness, came the dull booming of
the wind, tearing across the face of the marshes; and beyond it, beating
time in a rhythmical sullen roar, the rise and fall of the sea upon the
shingle. But near at hand, for some reason, there was almost silence. The rain had ceased, the gale for a moment had spent itself. The strong,
salty moisture was doubly refreshing after the closeness of the small,
lamplit room. Julian lingered there for several moments. "Nothing like fresh air," he muttered, "for driving away fancies." Then he suddenly stiffened. He leaned forward into the dark, listening. This time there was no mistake. A cry, faint and pitiful though it was,
reached his ears distinctly. "Julian! Julian!" "Coming, old chap," he shouted. "Wait until I get a torch." He stepped quickly back into the sitting room, drew an electric torch
from the drawer of the homely little chiffonier and, regardless of
regulations, stepped once more out into the darkness, now pierced for
him by that single brilliant ray. The door opened on to a country road
filled with gleaming puddles. On the other side of the way was a strip
of grass, sloping downwards; then a broad dyke, across which hung the
remains of a footbridge. The voice came from the water, fainter now but
still eager. Julian hurried forward, fell on his knees by the side of
the dyke and, passing his hands under his friend's shoulders, dragged
him out of the black, sluggish water. "My God!" he exclaimed. "What happened, Miles? Did you slip?" "The bridge gave way when I was half across," was the muttered response. "I think my leg's broken. I fell in and couldn't get clear--just managed
to raise my head out of the water and cling to the rail." "Hold tight," Julian enjoined. "I'm going to drag you across the road. It's the best I can do." They reached the threshold of the sitting room. "Sorry, old chap," faltered Furley--and fainted. He came to himself in front of the sitting-room fire, to find his lips
wet with brandy and his rescuer leaning over him. His first action was
to feel his leg. "That's all right," Julian assured him. "It isn't broken. I've been over
it carefully. If you're quite comfortable, I'll step down to the village
and fetch the medico. It isn't a mile away." "Don't bother about the doctor for a moment," Furley begged. "Listen to
me. Take your torch--go out and examine that bridge. Come back and tell
me what's wrong with it." "What the dickens does that matter?" Julian objected. "It's the doctor
we want. The dyke's flooded, and I expect the supports gave way." "Do as I ask," Furley insisted. "I have a reason." Julian rose to his feet, walked cautiously to the edge of the dyke,
turned on his light, and looked downwards. One part of the bridge
remained; the other was caught in the weeds, a few yards down, and the
single plank which formed its foundation was sawn through, clean and
straight. He gazed at it for a moment in astonishment. Then he turned
back towards the cottage, to receive another shock. About forty yards up
the lane, drawn in close to a straggling hedge, was a small motor-car,
revealed to him by a careless swing of his torch. He turned sharply
towards it, keeping his torch as much concealed as possible. It was
empty--a small coupe of pearl-grey--a powerful two-seater, with deep,
cushioned seats and luxuriously fitted body. He flashed his torch on to
the maker's name and returned thoughtfully to his friend. "Miles," he confessed, as he entered the sitting room, "there are some
things I will never make fun of again. Have you a personal enemy here?" "Not one," replied Furley. "The soldiers, who are all decent fellows,
the old farmer at the back, and your father and mother are the only
people with whom I have the slightest acquaintance in these parts." "The bridge has been deliberately sawn through," Julian announced
gravely. Furley nodded. He seemed prepared for the news. "There is something doing in this section, then," he muttered. "Julian,
will you take my job on?" "Like a bird," was the prompt response. "Tell me exactly what to do?" Furley sat up, still nursing his leg. "Put on your sea boots, and your oilskins over your clothes," he
directed. "You will want your own stick, so take that revolver and an
electric torch. You can't get across the remains of the bridge, but
about fifty yards down to the left, as you leave the door, the water's
only about a foot deep. Walk through it, scramble up the other side, and
come back again along the edge of the dyke until you come to the place
where one lands from the broken bridge. Is that clear?" "Entirely." "After that, you go perfectly straight along a sort of cart track until
you come to a gate. When you have passed through it, you must climb a
bank on your lefthand side and walk along the top. It's a beastly path,
and there are dykes on either side of you." "Pooh!" Julian exclaimed. "You forget that I am a native of this part of
the world." "You come to a sort of stile at the end of about three hundred yards,"
Furley continued. "You get over that, and the bank breaks up into two. You keep to the left, and it leads you right down into the marsh. Turn
seaward. It will be a nasty scramble, but there will only be about
fifty yards of it. Then you get to a bit of rough ground--a bank of
grass-grown sand. Below that there is the shingle and the sea. That is
where you take up your post." "Can I use my torch," Julian enquired, "and what am I to look out for?" "Heaven knows," replied Furley, "except that there's a general
suggestion of communications between some person on land and some person
approaching from the sea. I don't mind confessing that I've done this
job, on and off, whenever I've been down here, for a couple of years,
and I've never seen or heard a suspicious thing yet. We are never told
a word in our instructions, either, or given any advice. However, what I
should do would be to lie flat down on the top of that bank and listen. If you hear anything peculiar, then you must use your discretion about
the torch. It's a nasty job to make over to a pal, Julian, but I know
you're keen on anything that looks like an adventure." "All over it," was the ready reply. "What about leaving you alone,
though, Miles?" "You put the whisky and soda where I can get at it," Furley directed,
"and I shall be all right. I'm feeling stronger every moment. I expect
your sea boots are in the scullery. And hurry up, there's a good fellow. We're twenty minutes behind time, as it is." Julian started on his adventure without any particular enthusiasm. He
found the crossing, returned along the side of the bank, trudged along
the cart track until he arrived at the gate, and climbed up on the dyke
without misadventure. From here he made his way more cautiously, using
his stick with his right hand, his torch, with his thumb upon the
knob, in his left. The lull in the storm seemed to be at an end. Black,
low-hanging clouds were closing in upon him. Away to the right, where
the line of marshes was unbroken, the boom of the wind grew louder. A
gust very nearly blew him down the bank. He was compelled to shelter for
a moment on its lee side, whilst a scud of snow and sleet passed like an
icy whirlwind. The roar of the sea was full in his ears now, and though
he must still have been fully two hundred yards away from it, little
ghostly specks of white spray were dashed, every now and then, into his
face. From here he made his way with great care, almost crawling, until
he came to the stile. In the marshes he was twice in salt water over his
knees, but he scrambled out until he reached the grass-grown sand bank
which Furley had indicated. Obeying orders, he lay down and listened
intently for any fainter sounds mingled with the tumult of nature. After
a few minutes, it was astonishing how his eyes found themselves able to
penetrate the darkness which at first had seemed like a black wall. Some
distance to the right he could make out the outline of a deserted barn,
once used as a coast-guard station and now only a depository for the
storing of life belts. In front of him he could trace the bank of
shingle and the line of the sea, and presently the outline of some dark
object, lying just out of reach of the breaking waves, attracted his
attention. He watched it steadily. For some time it was as motionless
as the log he presumed it to be. Then, without any warning, it hunched
itself up and drew a little farther back. There was no longer any doubt. It was a human being, lying on its stomach with its head turned to the
sea. Julian, who had entered upon his adventure with the supercilious
incredulity of a staunch unbeliever invited to a spiritualist's seance,
was conscious for a moment of an absolutely new sensation. A person of
acute psychological instincts, he found himself analysing that sensation
almost as soon as it was conceived. "There is no doubt," he confessed under his breath, "that I am afraid!" His heart was beating with unaccustomed vigour; he was conscious of
an acute tingling in all his senses. Then, still lying on his stomach,
almost holding his breath, he saw the thin line of light from an
electric torch steal out along the surface of the sea, obviously from
the hand of his fellow watcher. Almost at that same moment the undefined
agitation which had assailed him passed. He set his teeth and watched
that line of light. It moved slowly sideways along the surface of the
sea, as though searching for something. Julian drew himself cautiously,
inch by inch, to the extremity of the sand hummock. His brain was
working with a new clearness. An inspiration flashed in upon him during
those few seconds. He knew the geography of the place well,--the corner
of the barn, the steeple beyond, and the watcher lying in a direct line. His cipher was explained! Perfectly cool now, Julian thought with some regret of the revolver
which he had scorned to bring. He occupied himself, during these seconds
of watching, by considering with care what his next action was to be. If he even set his foot upon the shingle, the watcher below would take
alarm, and if he once ran away, pursuit was hopeless. The figure, so
far as he could distinguish it, was more like that of a boy than a
man. Julian began to calculate coolly the chances of an immediate
intervention. Then things happened, and for a moment he held his breath. The line of light had shot out once more, and this time it seemed to
reveal something, something which rose out of the water and which looked
like nothing so much as a long strip of zinc piping. The watcher at
the edge of the sea threw down his torch and gripped the end of it,
and Julian, carried away with excitement, yielded to an instant and
overpowering temptation. He flashed on his own torch and watched while
the eager figure seemed by some means to unscrew the top of the coil and
drew from it a dark, rolled-up packet. Even at that supreme moment,
the slim figure upon the beach seemed to become conscious of the
illumination of which he was the centre. He swung round,--and that was
just as far as Julian Orden got in his adventure. After a lapse of time,
during which he seemed to live in a whirl of blackness, where a thousand
men were beating at a thousand anvils, filling the world with sparks,
with the sound of every one of their blows reverberating in his ears,
he opened his eyes to find himself lying on his back, with one leg in a
pool of salt water, which was being dashed industriously into his face
by an unseen hand. By his side he was conscious of the presence of
a thick-set man in a fisherman's costume of brown oilskins and a
southwester pulled down as though to hide his features, obviously the
man who had dealt him the blow. Then he heard a very soft, quiet voice
behind him. "He will do now. Come." The man by his side grunted. "I am going to make sure of him," he said thickly. Again he heard that
clear voice from behind, this time a little raised. The words failed
to reach his brain, but the tone was one of cold and angry dissent,
followed by an imperative order. Then once more his senses seemed to be
leaving him. He passed into the world which seemed to consist only of
himself and a youth in fisherman's oilskins, who was sometimes Furley,
sometimes his own sister, sometimes the figure of a person who for the
last twenty-four hours had been continually in his thoughts, who seemed
at one moment to be sympathising with him and at another to be playing
upon his face with a garden hose. Then it all faded away, and a sort of
numbness crept over him. He made a desperate struggle for consciousness. There was something cold resting against his cheek. His fingers stole
towards it. It was the flask, drawn from his own pocket and placed there
by some unseen hand, the top already unscrewed, and the reviving odour
stealing into his nostrils. He guided it to his lips with trembling
fingers. A pleasant sense of warmth crept over him. His head fell back. When he opened his eyes again, he first turned around for the tea by his
bedside, then stared in front of him, wondering if these things which
he saw were indeed displayed through an upraised blind. There was
the marsh--a picture of still life--winding belts of sea creeping,
serpent-like, away from him towards the land, with broad pools, in whose
bosom, here and there, were flashes of a feeble sunlight. There were
the clumps of wild lavender he had so often admired, the patches of deep
meadow green, and, beating the air with their wings as they passed, came
a flight of duck over his head. Very stiff and dazed, he staggered to
his feet. There was the village to his right, red-tiled, familiar; the
snug farmhouses, with their brown fields and belts of trees; the curve
of the white road. And then, with a single flash of memory, it all came back to him. He
felt the top of his head, still sore; looked down at the stretch of
shingle, empty now of any reminiscences; and finally, leaning heavily
on his stick, he plodded back to the cottage, noticing, as he drew near,
the absence of the motor-car from its place of shelter. Miles Furley
was seated in his armchair, with a cup of tea in his hand and Mrs. West
fussing over him, as Julian raised the latch and dragged himself into
the sitting room. They both turned around at his entrance. Furley
dropped his teaspoon and Mrs. West raised her hands above her head and
shrieked. Julian sank into the nearest chair. "Melodrama has come to me at last," he murmured. "Give me some tea--a
whole teapotful, Mrs. West--and get a hot bath ready." He waited until their temporary housekeeper had bustled out of the room. Then he concluded his sentence. "I have been sandbagged," he announced impressively, and proceeded to
relate the night's adventure to his host. "This," declared Julian, about a couple of hours later, as he helped
himself for the second time to bacon and eggs, "is a wonderful tribute
to the soundness of our constitutions. Miles, it is evident that you and
I have led righteous lives." "Being sandbagged seems to have given you an appetite," Furley observed. "And a game leg seems to have done the same for you," Julian rejoined. "Did the doctor ask you how you did it?" Furley nodded. "I just said that I slipped on the marshes. One doesn't talk of such
little adventures as you and I experienced last night." "By the bye, what does one do about them?" Julian enquired. "I feel a
little dazed about it all, even now living in an unreal atmosphere and
that sort of thing, you know. It seems to me that we ought to have out
the bloodhounds and search for an engaging youth and a particularly
disagreeable bully of a man, both dressed in brown oilskins and--"

"Oh, chuck it!" Furley intervened. "The intelligence department in
charge of this bit of coast doesn't do things like that. What you want
to remember, Julian, is to keep your mouth shut. I shall have a chap
over to see me this afternoon, and I shall make a report to him." "All the same," persisted Julian, "we--or rather I--was without a doubt
a witness to an act of treason. By some subtle means connected with what
seemed to be a piece of gas pipe, I have seen communication with the
enemy established." "You don't know that it was the enemy at all," Furley grunted. "For us others," Julian replied, "there exists the post office, the
telegraph office and the telephone. I decline to believe that any
reasonable person would put out upon the sea in weather like last
night's for the sake of delivering a letter to any harmless inhabitant
of these regions. I will have my sensation, you see, Furley. I have
suffered--thank heavens mine is a thick skull!--and I will not be
cheated of my compensations." "Well, keep your mouth shut, there's a good fellow, until after I have
made my report to the Intelligence Officer," Furley begged. "He'll be
here about four. You don't mind being about?" "Not in the least," Julian promised. "So long as I am home for dinner,
my people will be satisfied." "I don't know how you'll amuse yourself this morning," Furley observed,
"and I'm afraid I sha'n't be able to get out for the flighting this
evening." "Don't worry about me," Julian begged. "Remember that I am practically
at home. It's only three miles to the Hall from here so you mustn't look
upon me as an ordinary guest. I am going for a tramp in a few minutes." "Lucky chap!" Furley declared enviously. "Sunshine like this makes one
feel as though one were on the Riviera instead of in Norfolk. Shall you
visit the scene of your adventure?" "I may," Julian answered thoughtfully. "The instinct of the sleuthhound
is beginning to stir in me. There is no telling how far it may lead." Julian started on his tramp about half an hour later. He paused first at
a bend in the road, about fifty yards down, and stepped up close to the
hedge. "The instinct of the sleuthhound," he said to himself, "is all very
well, but why on earth haven't I told Furley about the car?" He paused to consider the matter, conscious only of the fact that each
time he had opened his lips to mention it, he had felt a marked but
purposeless disinclination to do so. He consoled himself now with the
reflection that the information would be more or less valueless until
the afternoon, and he forthwith proceeded upon the investigation which
he had planned out. The road was still muddy, and the track of the tyres, which were of
somewhat peculiar pattern, clearly visible. He followed it along the
road for a matter of a mile and a half. Then he came to a standstill
before a plain oak gate and was conscious of a distinct shock. On the
top bar of the gate was painted in white letters. MALTENBY HALL

                        TRADESMEN'S ENTRANCE

and it needed only the most cursory examination to establish the fact
that the car whose track he had been following had turned in here. He
held up his hand and stopped a luggage trolley which had just turned the
bend in the avenue. The man pulled up and touched his hat. "Where are you off to, Fellowes?" Julian enquired. "I am going to Holt station, sir," the man replied, "after some
luggage." "Are there any guests at the Hall who motored here, do you know?" Julian
asked. "Only the young lady, sir," the man replied, "Miss Abbeway. She came in
a little coupe Panhard." Julian frowned thoughtfully. "Has she been out in it this morning?" he asked. The man shook his head. "She broke down in it yesterday afternoon, sir," he answered, "about
halfway up to the Hall here." "Broke down?" Julian repeated. "Anything serious? Couldn't you put it
right for her?" "She wouldn't let me touch it, sir," the man explained. "She said she
had two cracked sparking plugs, and she wanted to replace them herself. She has had some lessons, and I think she wanted a bit of practice." "I see. Then the car is in the avenue now?" "About half a mile up, on the left-hand side, sir, just by the big elm. Miss Abbeway said she was coming down this afternoon to put new plugs
in." "Then it's been there all the time since yesterday afternoon?" Julian
persisted. "The young lady wished it left there, sir. I could have put a couple
of plugs in, in five minutes, and brought her up to the house, but she
wouldn't hear of it." "I see, Fellowes." "Any luck with the geese last night, sir?" the man asked. "I heard there
was a pack of them on Stiffkey Marshes." "I got one. They came badly for us," Julian replied. He made his way up the avenue. At exactly the spot indicated by the
chauffeur a little coupe car was standing, drawn on to the turf. He
glanced at the name of the maker and looked once more at the tracks upon
the drive. Finally, he decided that his investigations were leading him
in a most undesirable direction. He turned back, walked across the marshes, where he found nothing to
disturb him, and lunched with Furley, whose leg was now so much better
that he was able to put it to the ground. "What about this visitor of yours?" Julian asked, as they sat smoking
afterwards. "I must be back at the Hall in time to dine to-night, you
know. My people made rather a point of it." Furley nodded. "You'll be all right," he replied. "As a matter of fact, he isn't
coming." "Not coming?" Julian repeated. "Jove, I should have thought you'd have
had intelligence officers by the dozen down here!" "For some reason or other," Furley confided, "the affair has been handed
over to the military authorities. I have had a man down to see me this
morning, and he has taken full particulars. I don't know that they'll
even worry you at all--until later on, at any rate." "Jove, that seems queer!" "Last night's happening was queer, for that matter," Furley continued. "Their only chance, I suppose, of getting to the bottom of it is to lie
doggo as far as possible. It isn't like a police affair, you see. They
don't want witnesses and a court of justice. One man's word and a rifle
barrel does the trick." Julian sighed. "I suppose," he observed, "that if I do my duty as a loyal subject,
I shall drop the curtain on last night. Seems a pity to have had an
adventure like that and not be able to open one's mouth about it." Furley grunted. "You don't want to join the noble army of gas bags," he said. "Much
better make up your mind that it was a dream." "There are times," Julian confided, "when I am not quite sure that it
wasn't." CHAPTER III


Julian entered the drawing-room at Maltenby Hall a few minutes before
dinner time that evening. His mother, who was alone and, for a wonder,
resting, held out her hand for him to kiss and welcomed him with
a charming smile. Notwithstanding her grey hair, she was still a
remarkably young-looking woman, with a great reputation as a hostess. "My dear Julian," she exclaimed, "you look like a ghost! Don't tell me
that you had to sit up all night to shoot those wretched duck?" Julian drew a chair to his mother's side and seated himself with a
little air of relief. "Never have I been more conscious of the inroads of age," he confided. "I can remember when, ten or fifteen years ago, I used to steal out
of the house in the darkness and bicycle down to the marsh with a
twenty-bore gun, on the chance of an odd shot." "And I suppose," his mother went on, "after spending half the night
wading about in the salt water, you spent the other half talking to that
terrible Mr. Furley." "Quite right. We got cold and wet through in the evening; we sat
up talking till the small hours; we got cold and wet again this
morning--and here I am." "A converted sportsman," his mother observed. "I wish you could convert
your friend, Mr. Furley. There's a perfectly terrible article of his in
the National this month. I can't understand a word of it, but it reads
like sheer anarchy." "So long as the world exists," Julian remarked, "there must be
Socialists, and Furley is at least honest." "My dear Julian," his mother protested, "how can a Socialist be honest! Their attitude with regard to the war, too, is simply disgraceful. I
am sure that in any other country that man Fenn, for instance, would be
shot." "What about your house party?" Julian enquired, with bland irrelevance. "All arrived. I suppose they'll be down directly. Mr. Hannaway Wells is
here." "Good old Wells!" Julian murmured. "How does he look since he became a
Cabinet Minister?" "Portentous," Lady Maltenby replied; with a smile. "He doesn't look
as though he would ever unbend. Then the Shervintons are here, and the
Princess Torski--your friend Miss Abbeway's aunt." "The Princess Torski?" Julian repeated. "Who on earth is she?" "She was English," his mother explained, "a cousin of the Abbeways. She
married in Russia and is on her way now to France to meet her husband,
who is in command of a Russian battalion there. She seems quite a
pleasant person, but not in the least like her niece." "Miss Abbeway is still here, of course?" "Naturally. I asked her for a week, and I think she means to stay. We talked for an hour after tea this afternoon, and I found her most
interesting. She has been living in England for years, it seems, down in
Chelsea, studying sculpture." "She is a remarkably clever young woman," Julian said thoughtfully, "but
a little incomprehensible. If the Princess Torski is her aunt, who were
her parents?" "Her father," the Countess replied, "was Colonel Richard Abbeway, who
seems to have been military attache at St. Petersburg, years ago. He
married a sister of the Princess Torski's husband, and from her this
young woman inherited a title which she won't use and a large fortune. Colonel Abbeway was killed accidentally in the Russo-Japanese War, and
her mother died a few years ago." "No German blood, or anything of that sort, then?" "My dear boy, what an idea!" his mother exclaimed reprovingly. "On
the contrary, the Torskis are one of the most aristocratic families
in Russia, and you know what the Abbeways are. The girl is excellently
bred, and I think her charming in every way. Whatever made you suggest
that she might have German blood in her?" "No idea! Anyhow, I am glad she hasn't. Who else?" "The Bishop," his mother continued, "looking very tired, poor dear! Doctor George Lennard, from Oxford, two young soldiers from Norwich,
whom Charlie asked us to be civil to--and the great man himself." "Tell me about the great man? I don't think I've seen him to speak to
since he became Prime Minister." "He declares that this is his first holiday this year. He is looking
rather tired, but he has had an hour's shooting since he arrived, and
seemed to enjoy it. Here's your father." The Earl of Maltenby, who entered a moment later, was depressingly
typical. He was as tall as his youngest son, with whom he shook
hands absently and whom he resembled in no other way. He had the
conventionally aristocratic features, thin lips and steely blue eyes. He
was apparently a little annoyed. "Anything wrong, dear?" Lady Maltenby asked. Her husband took up his position on the hearthrug. "I am annoyed with Stenson," he declared. The Countess shook her head. "It's too bad of you, Henry," she expostulated. "You've been trying to
talk politics with him. You know that the poor man was only longing
for forty-eight hours during which he could forget that he was Prime
Minister of England." "Precisely, my dear," Lord Maltenby agreed. "I can assure you that I
have not transgressed in any way. A remark escaped me referring to the
impossibility of providing beaters, nowadays, and to the fact that out
of my seven keepers, five are fighting. I consider Mr. Stenson's comment
was most improper, coming from one to whom the destinies of this country
are confided." "What did he say?" the Countess asked meekly. "Something about wondering whether any man would be allowed to have
seven keepers after the war," her husband replied, with an angry
light in his eyes. "If a man like Stenson is going to encourage these
socialistic ideas. I beg your pardon--the Bishop, my dear." The remaining guests drifted in within the next few moments,--the
Bishop, Julian's godfather, a curious blend of the fashionable and
the devout, the anchorite and the man of the people; Lord and Lady
Shervinton, elderly connections of the nondescript variety; Mr. Hannaway
Wells, reserved yet, urbane, a wonderful type of the supreme success of
mediocrity; a couple of young soldiers, light-hearted and out for a good
time, of whom Julian took charge; an Oxford don, who had once been Lord
Maltenby's tutor; and last of all the homely, very pleasant-looking,
middle-aged lady, Princess Torski, followed by her niece. There were a
few introductions still to be effected. Whilst Lady Maltenby was engaged in this task, which she performed at
all times with the unfailing tact of a great hostess, Julian broke off
in his conversation with the two soldiers and looked steadfastly across
the room at Catherine Abbeway, as though anxious to revise or
complete his earlier impressions of her. She was of medium height, not
unreasonably slim, with a deliberate but noticeably graceful carriage. Her complexion was inclined to be pale. She had large, soft brown eyes,
and hair of an unusual shade of chestnut brown, arranged with remarkably
effective simplicity. She wore a long string of green beads around her
neck, a black tulle gown without any relief of colour, but a little
daring in its cut. Her voice and laugh, as she stood talking to the
Bishop, were delightful, and neither her gestures nor her accent
betrayed the slightest trace of foreign blood. She was, without a doubt,
extraordinarily attractive, gracious almost to freedom in her manner,
and yet with that peculiar quality of aloofness only recognisable in the
elect,--a very appreciable charm. Julian found his undoubted admiration
only increased by his closer scrutiny. Nevertheless, as he watched
her, there was a slightly puzzled frown upon his forehead, a sense
of something like bewilderment mingled with those other feelings. His mother, who had turned to speak to the object of his attentions,
beckoned him, and he crossed the room at once to their side. "Julian is going to take you in to dinner, Miss Abbeway," the Countess
announced, "and I hope you will be kind to him, for he's been out all
night and a good part of the morning, too, shooting ducks and talking
nonsense with a terrible Socialist." Lady Maltenby passed on. Julian, leaning on his stick, looked down with
a new interest into the face which had seldom been out of his thoughts
since their first meeting, a few weeks ago. "Tell me, Mr. Orden," she asked, "which did you find the more
exhausting--tramping the marshes for sport, or discussing sociology with
your friend?" "As a matter of fact," he replied, "we didn't tramp the marshes. We
stood still and got uncommonly wet. And I shot a goose, which made me
very happy." "Then it must have been the conversation," she declared. "Is your friend
a prophet or only one of the multitude?" "A prophet, most decidedly. He is a Mr. Miles Furley, of whom you must
have heard." She started a little. "Miles Furley!" she repeated. "I had no idea that he lived in this part
of the world." "He has a small country house somewhere in Norfolk," Julian told
her, "and he takes a cottage down here at odd times for the wild-fowl
shooting." "Will you take me to see him to-morrow?" she asked. "With pleasure, so long as you promise not to talk socialism with him." "I will promise that readily, out of consideration to my escort. I
wonder how it is," she went on, looking up at him a little thoughtfully,
"that you dislike serious subjects so much." "A frivolous turn of mind, I suppose," he replied. "I certainly prefer
to talk art with you." "But nowadays," she protested, "it is altogether the fashion down at
Chelsea to discard art and talk politics." "It's a fashion I shouldn't follow," he advised. "I should stick to art,
if I were you." "Well, that depends upon how you define politics, of course. I don't
mean Party politics. I mean the science of living, as a whole, not as a
unit." The Princess ambled up to them. "I don't know what your political views are, Mr. Orden," she said, "but
you must look out for shocks if you discuss social questions with my
niece. In the old days they would never have allowed her to live in
Russia. Even now, I consider some of her doctrines the most pernicious I
ever heard." "Isn't that terrible from an affectionate aunt!" Catherine laughed, as the Princess passed on. "Tell me some more about
your adventures last night?" She looked up into his face, and Julian was suddenly conscious from
whence had come that faint sense of mysterious trouble which had been
with him during the last few minutes. The slight quiver of her lips
brought it all back to him. Her mouth, beyond a doubt, with its half
tender, half mocking curve, was the mouth which he had seen in that
tangled dream of his, when he had lain fighting for consciousness upon
the marshes. CHAPTER IV


Julian, absorbed for the first few minutes of dinner by the
crystallisation of this new idea which had now taken a definite place
in his brain, found his conversational powers somewhat at a discount. Catherine very soon, however, asserted her claim upon his attention. "Please do your duty and tell me about things," she begged. "Remember
that I am Cinderella from Bohemia, and I scarcely know a soul here." "Well, there aren't many to find out about, are there?" he replied. "Of
course you know Stenson?" "I have been gazing at him with dilated eyes," she confided. "Is that
not the proper thing to do? He seems to me very ordinary and very
hungry." "Well, then, there is the Bishop." "I knew him at once from his photographs. He must spend the whole of the
time when he isn't in church visiting the photographer. However, I like
him. He is talking to my aunt quite amiably. Nothing does aunt so much
good as to sit next a bishop." "The Shervintons you know all about, don't you?" he went on. "The
soldiers are just young men from the Norwich barracks, Doctor Lennard
was my father's tutor at Oxford, and Mr. Hannaway Wells is our latest
Cabinet Minister." "He still has the novice's smirk," she remarked. "A moment ago I heard
him tell his neighbour that he preferred not to discuss the war. He
probably thinks that there is a spy under the table." "Well, there we are--such as we are," Julian concluded. "There is no one
left except me." "Then tell me all about yourself," she suggested. "Really, when I come
to think of it, considering the length of our conversations, you have
been remarkably reticent. You are the youngest of the family, are you
not? How many brothers are there?" "There were four," he told her. "Henry was killed at Ypres last year. Guy is out there still. Richard is a Brigadier." "And you?" "I am a barrister by profession, but I went out with the first Inns of
Court lot for a little amateur soldiering and lost part of my foot at
Mons. Since then I have been indulging in the unremunerative and highly
monotonous occupation of censoring." "Monotonous indeed, I should imagine," she agreed. "You spend your time
reading other people's letters, do you not, just to be sure that there
are no communications from the enemy?" "Precisely," he assented. "We discover ciphers and all sorts of things." "What brainy people you must be!" "We are, most of us." "Do you do anything else?" "Well, I've given up censoring for the present," he confided. "I am
going back to my profession." "As a barrister?" "Just so. I might add that I do a little hack journalism." "How modest!" she murmured. "I suppose you write the leading articles
for the Times!" "For a very young lady," Julian observed impressively, "you have
marvellous insight. How did you guess my secret?" "I am better at guessing secrets than you are," she retorted a little
insolently. He was silent for some moments. The faint curve of her lips had again
given him almost a shock. "Have you a brother?" he asked abruptly. "No. Why?" "Because I met some one quite lately--within the last few hours, as a
matter of fact--with a mouth exactly like yours." "But what a horrible thing!" she exclaimed, drawing out a little mirror
from the bag by her side and gazing into it. "How unpleasant to have any
one else going about with a mouth exactly like one's own! No, I never
had a brother, Mr. Orden, or a sister, and, as you may have heard, I am
an enfant mechante. I live in London, I model very well, and I talk
very bad sociology. As I think I told you, I know your anarchist friend,
Miles Furley." "I shouldn't call Furley an anarchist," protested Julian. "Well, he is a Socialist. I admit that we are rather lax in our
definitions. You see, there is just one subject, of late years, which
has brought together the Socialists and the Labour men, the Syndicalists
and the Communists, the Nationalists and the Internationalists. All
those who work for freedom are learning breadth. If they ever find a
leader, I think that this dear, smug country of yours may have to face
the greatest surprise of its existence." Julian looked at her curiously. "You have ideas, Miss Abbeway." "So unusual in a woman!" she mocked. "Do you notice how every one is
trying to avoid the subject of the war? I give them another half-course,
don't you? I am sure they cannot keep it up." "They won't go the distance," Julian whispered. "Listen." "The question to be considered," Lord Shervinton pronounced, "is not so
much when the war will be over as what there is to stop it? That is
a point which I think we can discuss without inviting official
indiscretions." "If other means fail," declared the Bishop, "Christianity will stop it. The conscience of the world is already being stirred." "Our enemies," the Earl pronounced confidently from his place at the
head of the table, "are already a broken race. They are on the point
of exhaustion. Austria is, if possible, in a worse plight. That is what
will end the war--the exhaustion of our opponents." "The deciding factor," Mr. Hannaway Wells put in, with a very
non-committal air, "will probably be America. She will bring her full
strength into the struggle just at the crucial moment. She will probably
do what we farther north have as yet failed to do: she will pierce the
line and place the German armies in Flanders in peril." The Cabinet Minister's views were popular. There was a little murmur of
approval, something which sounded almost like a purr of content. It
was just one more expression of that strangely discreditable yet almost
universal failing,--the over-reliance upon others. The quiet remark of
the man who suddenly saw fit to join in the discussion struck a chilling
and a disturbing note. "There is one thing which could end the war at any moment," Mr. Stenson
said, leaning a little forward, "and that is the will of the people." There was perplexity as well as discomfiture in the minds of his
hearers. "The people?" Lord Shervinton repeated. "But surely the people speak
through the mouths of their rulers?" "They have been content to, up to the present," the Prime Minister
agreed, "but Europe may still see strange and dramatic events before
many years are out." "Do go on, please," the Countess begged. Mr. Stenson shook his head. "Even as a private individual I have said more than I intended," he
replied. "I have only one thing to say about the war in public, and that
is that we are winning, that we must win, that our national existence
depends upon winning, and that we shall go on until we do win. The
obstacles between us and victory, which may remain in our minds, are not
to be spoken of." There was a brief and somewhat uncomfortable pause. It was understood
that the subject was to be abandoned. Julian addressed a question to the
Bishop across the table. Lord Maltenby consulted Doctor Lennard as
to the date of the first Punic War. Mr. Stenson admired the flowers. Catherine, who had been sitting with her eyes riveted upon the Prime
Minister, turned to her neighbour. "Tell me about your amateur journalism, Mr. Orden?" she begged. "I have
an idea that it ought to be interesting." "Deadly dull, I can assure you." "You write about politics? Or perhaps you are an art critic? I ought to
be on my best behaviour, in case." "I know little about art," he assured her. "My chief interest in
life--outside my profession, of course--lies in sociology." His little confession had been impulsive. She raised her eyebrows. "You are in earnest, I believe!" she exclaimed. "Have I really found an
Englishman who is in earnest?" "I plead guilty. It is incorrect philosophy but a distinct stimulus to
life." "What a pity," she sighed, "that you are so handicapped by birth! Sociology cannot mean anything very serious for you. Your perspective is
naturally distorted." "What about yourself?" he asked pertinently. "The vanity of us women!" she murmured. "I have grown to look upon
myself as being an exception. I forget that there might be others. You
might even be one of our prophets--a Paul Fiske in disguise." His eyes narrowed a little as he looked at her closely. From across the
table, the Bishop broke off an interesting discussion on the subject
of his addresses to the working classes, and the Earl set down his
wineglass with an impatient gesture. "Does no one really know," Mr. Stenson asked, "who Paul Fiske is?" "No one, sir," Mr. Hannaway Wells replied. "I thought it wise, a short
time ago, to set on foot the most searching enquiries, but they were
absolutely fruitless." The Bishop coughed. "I must plead guilty," he confessed, "to having visited the offices of
The Monthly Review with the same object. I left a note for him there,
in charge of the editor, inviting him to a conference at my house. I
received no reply. His anonymity seems to be impregnable." "Whoever he may be," the Earl declared, "he ought to be muzzled. He is a
traitor to his country." "I cannot agree with you, Lord Maltenby," the Bishop said firmly. "The
very danger of the man's doctrines lies in their clarity of thought,
their extraordinary proximity to the fundamental truths of life." "The man is, at any rate," Doctor Lennard interposed, "the most
brilliant anonymous writer since the days of Swift and the letters of
Junius." Mr. Stenson for a moment hesitated. He seemed uncertain whether or no to
join in the conversation. Finally, impulse swayed him. "Let us all be thankful," he said, "that Paul Fiske is content with the
written word. If the democracy of England found themselves to-day with
such a leader, it is he who would be ruling the country, and not I." "The man is a pacifist!" the Earl protested. "So we all are," the Bishop declared warmly. "We are all pacifists in
the sense that we are lovers of peace. There is not one of us who does
not deplore the horrors of to-day. There is not one of us who is not
passionately seeking for the master mind which can lead us out of it." "There is only one way out," the Earl insisted, "and that is to beat the
enemy." "It is the only obvious way," Julian intervened, joining in the
conversation for the first time, "but meanwhile, with every tick of the
clock a fellow creature dies." "It is a question," Mr. Hannaway Wells reflected, "whether the present
generation is not inclined to be mawkish with regard to human life. History has shown us the marvellous benefits which have accrued to
the greatest nations through the lessening of population by means of
warfare." "History has also shown us," Doctor Lennard observed, "that the last
resource of force is force. No brain has ever yet devised a logical
scheme for international arbitration." "Human nature, I am afraid, has changed extraordinarily little since the
days of the Philistines," the Bishop confessed. Julian turned to his companion. "Well, they've all settled it amongst themselves, haven't they?" he
murmured. "Here you may sit and listen to what may be called the modern
voice." "Yet there is one thing wanting," she whispered. "What do you suppose,
if he were here at this moment, Paul Fiske would say? Do you think that
he would be content to listen to these brazen voices and accept their
verdict?" "Without irreverence," Julian answered, "or comparison, would Jesus
Christ?" "With the same proviso," she retorted, "I might reply that Jesus Christ,
from all we know of him, might reign wonderfully in the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he certainly wouldn't be able to keep together a Cabinet in
Downing Street! Still, I am beginning to believe in your sincerity. Do
you think that Paul Fiske is sincere?" "I believe," Julian replied, "that he sees the truth and struggles to
express it." The women were leaving the table. She leaned towards him. "Please do not be long," she whispered. "You must admit that I have been
an admirable dinner companion. I have talked to you all the time on your
own subject. You must come and talk to me presently about art." Julian, with his hand on the back of his chair, watched the women pass
out of the soft halo of the electric lights into the gloomier shadows
of the high, vaulted room, Catherine a little slimmer than most of the
others, and with a strange grace of slow movement which must have come
to her from some Russian ancestor. Her last words lingered in his mind. He was to talk to her about art! A fleeting vision of the youth in the
yellow oilskins mocked him. He remembered his morning's tramp and the
broken-down motor-car under the trees. The significance of these things
was beginning to take shape in his mind. He resumed his seat, a little
dazed. CHAPTER V


Maltenby was one of those old-fashioned houses where the port is served
as a lay sacrament and the call of the drawing-room is responded to
tardily. After the departure of the women, Doctor Lennard drew his chair
up to Julian's. "An interesting face, your dinner companion's," he remarked. "They tell
me that she is a very brilliant young lady." "She certainly has gifts," acknowledged Julian. "I watched her whilst she was talking to you," the Oxford don continued. "She is one of those rare young women whose undoubted beauty is put
into the background by their general attractiveness. Lady Maltenby was
telling me fragments of her history. It appears that she is thinking of
giving up her artistic career for some sort of sociological work." "It is curious," Julian reflected, "how the cause of the people has
always appealed to gifted Russians. England, for instance, produces no
real democrats of genius. Russia seems to claim a monopoly of them." "There is nothing so stimulating as a sense of injustice for bringing
the best out of a man or woman," Doctor Lennard pointed out. "Russia, of
course, for many years has been shamefully misgoverned." The conversation, owing to the intervention of other of the guests,
became general and platitudinal. Soon after, Mr. Stenson rose and
excused himself. His secretary; who had been at the telephone, desired a
short conference. There was a brief silence after his departure. "Stenson," the Oxonian observed, "is beginning to show signs of strain." "Why not?" Lord Shervinton pointed out. "He came into office full of the
most wonderful enthusiasm. His speeches rang through the world like a
clarion note. He converted waverers. He lit fires which still burn. But
he is a man of movement. This present stagnation is terribly irksome to
him. I heard him speak last week, and I was disappointed. He seems to
have lost his inspiration. What he needs is a stimulus of some sort,
even of disaster." "I wonder," the Bishop reflected, "if he is really afraid of the
people?" "I consider his remark concerning them most ill-advised," Lord Maltenby
declared pompously. "I know the people," the Bishop continued, "and I love them. I
think, too, that they trust me. Yet I am not sure that I cannot see a
glimmering of what is at the back of Stenson's mind. There are a good
many millions in the country who honestly believe that war is primarily
an affair of the politicians; who believe, too, that victory means a
great deal more to what they term `the upper classes' than it does to
them. Yet, in every sense of the word, they are bearing an equal portion
of the fight, because, when it comes down to human life, the life of the
farm labourer's son is of the same intrinsic value as the life of the
peer's." Lord Maltenby moved a little in his chair. There was a slight frown upon
his aristocratic forehead. He disagreed entirely with the speaker, with
whom he feared, however, to cross swords. Mr. Hannaway Wells, who had
been waiting for his opportunity, took charge of the conversation. He
spoke in a reserved manner, his fingers playing with the stem of his
wineglass. "I must confess," he said, "that I feel the deepest interest in what
the Bishop has just said. I could not talk to you about the military
situation, even if I knew more than you do, which is not the case, but
I think it is clear that we have reached something like a temporary
impasse. There certainly seems to be no cause for alarm upon any front,
yet, not only in London, but in Paris and even Rome, there is a curious
uneasiness afoot, for which no one can, account which no one can bring
home to any definite cause. In the same connection, we have confidential
information that a new spirit of hopefulness is abroad in Germany. It
has been reported to us that sober, clear-thinking men--and there are
a few of them, even in Germany--have predicted peace before a month is
out." "The assumption is," Doctor Lennard interpolated, "that Germany has
something up her sleeve." "That is not only the assumption," the Cabinet Minister replied, "but it
is also, I believe, the truth." "One could apprehend and fear a great possible danger," Lord Shervinton
observed, "if the Labour Party in Germany were as strong as ours, or
if our own Labour, Party were entirely united. The present conditions,
however, seem to me to give no cause for alarm." "That is where I think you are wrong," Hannaway Wells declared. "If the
Labour Party in Germany were as strong as ours, they would be strong
enough to overthrow the Hohenzollern clique, to stamp out the militarism
against which we are at war, to lay the foundations of a great German
republic with whom we could make the sort of peace for which every
Englishman hopes. The danger, the real danger which we have to face,
would lie in an amalgamation of the Labour Party, the Socialists and the
Syndicalists in this country, and in their insisting upon treating with
the weak Labour Party in Germany." "I agree with the Bishop," Julian pronounced. "The unclassified
democracy of our country may believe itself hardly treated, but
individually it is intensely patriotic. I do not believe that its
leaders would force the hand of the country towards peace, unless they
received full assurance that their confreres in Germany were able to
assume a dominant place in the government of that country--a place at
least equal to the influence of the democracy here." Doctor Lennard glanced at the speaker a little curiously. He had known
Julian since he was a boy but had never regarded him as anything but a
dilettante. "You may not know it," he said, "but you are practically expounding
the views of that extraordinary writer of whom we were speaking--Paul
Fiske." "I have been told," the Bishop remarked, cracking a walnut, "that Paul
Fiske is the pseudonym of a Cabinet Minister." "And I," Hannaway Wells retorted, "have been informed most credibly that
he is a Church of England clergyman." "The last rumour I heard," Lord Shervinton put in, "was that he is a
grocer in a small way of business at Wigan." "Dear me!" Doctor Lennard remarked. "The gossips have covered enough
ground! A man at a Bohemian club of which I am a member--the Savage
Club, in fact--assured me that he was an opium drugged journalist, kept
alive by the charity of a few friends; a human wreck, who was once the
editor of an important London paper." "You have some slight connection with journalism, have you not, Julian?" the Earl asked his son condescendingly. "Have you heard no reports?" "Many," Julian replied, "but none which I have been disposed to credit. I should imagine, myself, that Paul Fiske is a man who believes, having
created a public, that his written words find an added value from the
fact that he obviously desires neither reward nor recognition; just in
the same way as the really earnest democrats of twenty years ago scoffed
at the idea of a seat in Parliament, or of breaking bread in any way
with the enemy." "It was a fine spirit, that," the Bishop declared. "I am not sure that
we are not all of us a little over-inclined towards compromises. The
sapping away of conscience is so easy." The dining-room door was thrown open, and the butler announced a
visitor. "Colonel Henderson, your lordship." They all turned around in their places. The colonel, a fine,
military-looking figure of a man, shook hands with Lord Maltenby. "My most profound apologies, sir," he said, as he accepted a chair. "The
Countess was kind enough to say that if I were not able to get away in
time for dinner, I might come up afterwards." "You are sure that you have dined?" "I had something at Mess, thank you." "A glass of port, then?" The Colonel helped himself from the decanter which was passed towards
him and exchanged greetings with several of the guests to whom his host
introduced him. "No raids or invasions, I hope, Colonel?" the latter asked. "Nothing quite so serious as that, I am glad to say. We have had a
little excitement of another sort, though. One of my men caught a spy
this morning." Every one was interested. Even after three years of war, there was still
something fascinating about the word. "Dear me!" Lord Maltenby exclaimed. "I should scarcely have considered
our out-of-the-way part of the world sufficiently important to attract
attentions of that sort." "It was a matter of communication," the Colonel confided. "There was an
enemy submarine off here last night, and we have reason to believe that
a message was landed. We caught one fellow just at dawn." "What did you do with him?" the Bishop asked. "We shot him an hour ago," was the cool reply. "Are there any others at large?" Julian enquired, leaning forward. "One other," the Colonel acknowledged, sipping his wine appreciatively. "My military police here, however, are very intelligent, and I should
think it very doubtful whether he can escape." "Was the man who was shot a foreigner?" the Earl asked. "I trust that he
was not one of my tenants?" "He was a stranger," was the prompt assurance. "And his companion?" Julian ventured. "His companion is believed to have been quite a youth. There is a
suggestion that he escaped in a motor-car, but he is probably hiding in
the neighbourhood." Lord Maltenby frowned. There seemed to him something incongruous in the
fact that a deed of this sort should have been committed in his domain
without his knowledge. He rose to his feet. "The Countess is probably relying upon some of us for bridge," he said. "I hope, Colonel, that you will take a hand." The men rose and filed slowly out of the room. The Colonel, however,
detained his host, and Julian also lingered. "I hope, Lord Maltenby," the former said, "that you will excuse my men,
but they tell me that they find it necessary to search your garage for a
car which has been seen in the neighbourhood." "Search my garage?" Lord Maltenby repeated, frowning. 