



Produced by Annie McGuire








THE

CHESTERMARKE

INSTINCT




THE MYSTERY STORIES OF

J. S. FLETCHER

"_We always feel as though we were really spreading happiness when we
can announce a genuinely satisfactory mystery story, such as J. B.
Fletcher's new one._"--N. P. D. in the New York Globe. THE MIDDLE TEMPLE MURDER [1918]

"Unquestionably, the detective story of the season and, therefore, one
which no lover of detective fiction should miss." --_The Broadside._

THE TALLEYRAND MAXIM [1920]

"A crackerjack mystery tale; the story of Linford Pratt, who earnestly
desired to get on in life, by hook or by crook--with no objection
whatever to crookedness, so long as it could be performed in safety and
secrecy." --_Knickerbocker Press._

THE PARADISE MYSTERY [1920]

"As a weaver of detective tales Mr. Fletcher is entitled to a seat among
the elect. His numerous followers will find his latest book fully as
absorbing as anything from his pen that has previously appeared." --_New
York Times._

DEAD MEN'S MONEY [1920]

"The story is one that holds the reader with more than the mere interest
of sensational events: Mr. Fletcher writes in a notable style, and he
has a knack for sketching character rapidly. Reminds one of
Stevenson--and Mr. Fletcher sustains the comparison well." --_Newark
Evening News._

THE ORANGE-YELLOW DIAMOND [1921]

"... A rattling good yarn.... The excellence of The Orange yellow
Diamond does not depend, however, entirely upon its plot. It is an
uncommonly well written tale." --_New York Times._

_To be published July 1st, 1921:_

THE BOROUGH TREASURER

Blackmail, murder and the secret of an ancient quarry go to make a very
exciting yarn. _$2.00 net each at all booksellers or from the Publisher_

ALFRED A. KNOPF, New York. THE

CHESTERMARKE

INSTINCT


BY
J. S. FLETCHER


NEW YORK
ALFRED A KNOPF
MCMXXI


COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC. PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS

  CHAPTER

       I. The Missing Bank Manager,                              9

      II. The Ellersdeane Deposit,                              19

     III. Mr. Chestermarke Disclaims Liability,                 29

      IV. The Modern Young Woman,                               39

       V.       The Search Begins,                                    49

      VI. Ellersdeane Hollow,                                   59

     VII. The Travelling Tinker,                                69

    VIII. The Saturday Night Stranger,                          79

      IX. No Further Information,                               89

       X. The Chestermarke Way,                                 99

      XI. The Search-Warrant,                                  109

     XII. The First Find,                                      119

    XIII. The Partners Unbend,                                 129

     XIV. The Midnight Summons,                                139

      XV. Mr. Frederick Hollis,                                149

     XVI. The Lead Mine,                                       159

    XVII. Accident or Murder? 170

   XVIII. The Incomplete Cheque,                               179

     XIX. The Dead Man's Brother,                              189

      XX. The Other Cheque,                                    200

     XXI. About Cent per Cent,                                 209

    XXII. Speculation--and Certainty,                          221

   XXIII. The Aggrieved Victim,                                230

    XXIV. Mrs. Carswell? 240

     XXV. The Portrait,                                        248

    XXVI. The Lightning Flash,                                 257

   XXVII. The Old Dove-Cot,                                    266

  XXVIII. Sound-Proof,                                         273

    XXIX. The Sparrows and the Sphere,                         279

     XXX. Wreckage,                                            289

    XXXI. The Prisoner Speaks,                                 295




CHAPTER I

THE MISSING BANK MANAGER


Every Monday morning, when the clock of the old parish church in
Scarnham Market-Place struck eight, Wallington Neale asked himself why
on earth he had chosen to be a bank clerk. On all the other mornings of
the week this question never occurred to him: on Sunday he never allowed
a thought of the bank to cross his mind: from Sunday to Saturday he was
firmly settled in the usual rut, and never dreamed of tearing himself
out of it. But Sunday's break was unsettling: there was always an effort
in starting afresh on Monday. The striking of St. Alkmund's clock at
eight on Monday morning invariably found him sitting down to his
breakfast in his rooms, overlooking the quaint old Market-Place, once
more faced by the fact that a week of dull, uninteresting work lay
before him. He would go to the bank at nine, and at the bank he would
remain, more or less, until five. He would do that again on Tuesday, and
on Wednesday, and on Thursday and on Friday, and on Saturday. One
afternoon, strolling in the adjacent country, he had seen a horse
walking round and round and round in a small paddock, turning a crank
which worked some machine or other in an adjoining shed: that horse had
somehow suggested himself to himself. On this particular Monday morning, Neale, happening to catch sight of
his reflection in the mirror which stood on his parlour mantelpiece,
propounded the usual question with added force. There were reasons. It
was a beautiful morning. It was early spring. There was a blue sky, and
the rooks and jackdaws were circling in a clear air about the church
tower and over the old Market-Cross. He could hear thrushes singing in
the trees in the Vicarage garden, close by. Everything was young. And he
was young. It would have been affectation on his part to deny either his
youth or his good looks. He glanced at his mirrored self without pride,
but with due recognition of his good figure, his strong muscles, his
handsome, boyish face, with its cluster of chestnut hair and steady grey
eyes. All that, he knew, wanted life, animation, movement. At
twenty-three he was longing for something to take him out of the
treadmill round in which he had been fixed for five years. He had no
taste for handing out money in exchange for cheques, in posting up
ledgers, in writing dull, formal letters. He would have been much
happier with an old flannel shirt, open at the throat, a pick in his
hands, making a new road in a new country, or in driving a path through
some primeval wood. There would have been liberty in either occupation:
he could have flung down the pick at any moment and taken up the
hunter's gun: he could have turned right or left at his own will in the
unexplored forest. But there at the bank it was just doing the same
thing over and over again: what he had done last week he would do again
this week: what had happened last year would happen again this year. It
was all pure, unadulterated, dismal monotony. Like most things, it had come about without design: he had just drifted
into it. His father and mother had both died when he was a boy; he had
inherited a small property which brought in precisely one hundred and
fifty pounds a year: it was tied up to him in such a fashion that he
would have his three pounds a week as long as ever he lived. But as his
guardian, Mr. John Horbury, the manager of Chestermarke's Bank at
Scarnham, pointed out to him when he left school, he needed more than
three pounds a week if he wished to live comfortably and like a
gentleman. Still, a hundred and fifty a year of sure and settled income
was a fine thing, an uncommonly fine thing--all that was necessary was
to supplement it. Therefore--a nice, quiet, genteel profession--banking,
to wit. Light work, an honourable calling, an eminently respectable one. In a few years he would have another hundred and fifty a year: a few
years more, and he would be a manager, with at least six hundred: he
might, well before he was a middle-aged man, be commanding a salary of a
thousand a year. Banking, by all means, counselled Mr. Horbury--and
offered him a vacancy which had just then arisen at Chestermarke's. And
Neale, willing to be guided by a man for whom he had much respect, took
the post, and settled down in the old bank in the quiet, sleepy
market-town, wherein one day was precisely like another day--and every
year his dislike for his work increased, and sometimes grew unbearably
keen, especially when spring skies and spring air set up a sudden
stirring in his blood. On this Monday morning that stirring amounted to
something very like a physical ache. "Hang the old bank!" he muttered. "I'd rather be a ploughman!" Nevertheless, the bank must be attended, and, at ten minutes to nine,
Neale lighted a cigarette, put on his hat, and strolled slowly across
the Market-Place. Although he knew every single one of its cobblestones,
every shop window, every landmark in it, that queer old square always
fascinated him. It was a bit of old England. The ancient church and
equally ancient Moot Hall spread along one side of it; the other three
sides were filled with gabled and half-timbered houses; the Market-Cross
which stood in the middle of the open space had been erected there in
Henry the Seventh's time. Amidst all the change and development of the
nineteenth century, Scarnham had been left untouched: even the bank
itself was a time-worn building, and the manager's house which flanked
it was still older. Underneath all these ancient structures were queer
nooks and corners, secret passages and stairs, hiding-places, cellarings
going far beneath the gardens at the backs of the houses: Neale, as a
boy, had made many an exploration in them, especially beneath the
bank-house, which was a veritable treasury of concealed stairways and
cunningly contrived doors in the black oak of the panellings. But on this occasion Neale did not stare admiringly at the old church,
nor at the pilastered Moot Hall, nor at the toppling gables: his eyes
were fixed on something else, something unusual. As soon as he walked
out of the door of the house in which he lodged he saw his two
fellow-clerks, Shirley and Patten, standing on the steps of the hall by
which entrance was joined to the bank and to the bank-house. They stood
there looking about them. Now they looked towards Finkleway--a narrow
street which led to the railway station at the far end of the town. Now
they looked towards Middlegate--a street which led into the open
country, in the direction of Ellersdeane, where Mr. Gabriel
Chestermarke, senior proprietor of the bank, resided. All that was
unusual. If Patten, a mere boy, had been lounging there, Neale would not
have noticed it. But it was Shirley's first duty, on arriving every
morning, to get the keys at the house door, and to let himself into the
bank by the adjoining private entrance. It was Patten's duty, on
arrival, to take the letter-bag to the post-office and bring the bank's
correspondence back in it. Never, in all his experience, had Neale seen
any of Chestermarke's clerks lounging on the steps at nine o'clock in
the morning, and he quickened his pace. Shirley, turning from a
prolonged stare towards Finkleway, caught sight of him. "Can't get in," he observed laconically, in answer to Neale's inquiring
look. "Mr. Horbury isn't there, and he's got the keys." "What do you mean--isn't there!" asked Neale, mounting the steps. "Not
in the house?" "Mean just what I say," replied Shirley. "Mrs. Carswell says she hasn't
seen him since Saturday. She thinks he's been week-ending. I've been
looking out for him coming along from the station. But if he came in by
the 8.30, he's a long time getting up here. And if he hasn't come by
that, there's no other train till the 10.45." Neale made no answer. He, too, glanced towards Finkleway, and then at
the church clock. It was just going to strike nine--and the station was
only eight minutes away at the most. He passed the two junior clerks,
went down the hall to the door of the bank-house, and entered. And just
within he came face to face with the housekeeper, Mrs. Carswell. Mrs. Carswell had kept house for Mr. John Horbury for some years--Neale
remembered her from boyhood. He had always been puzzled about her age. Of late, since he knew more of grown-up folk, he had been still more
puzzled. Sometimes he thought she was forty; sometimes he was sure she
could not be more than thirty-two or three. Anyway, she was a fine,
handsome woman--tall, perfectly shaped, with glossy black hair and dark
eyes, and a firm, resolute mouth. It was rarely that Mrs. Carswell went
out; when she did, she was easily the best-looking woman in Scarnham. Few Scarnham people, however, had the chance of cultivating her
acquaintance; Mrs. Carswell kept herself to herself and seemed content
to keep up her reputation as a model housekeeper. She ordered Mr.
Horbury's domestic affairs in perfect fashion, and it had come upon
Neale as a surprise to hear Shirley say that Mrs. Carswell did not know
where the manager was. "What's all this?" he demanded, as he met her within the hall. "Shirley
says Mr. Horbury isn't at home? Where is he, then?" "But I don't know, Mr. Neale," replied the housekeeper. "I know no more
than you do. I've been expecting him to come in by that 8.30 train, but
he can't have done that, or he'd have been up here by now." "Perhaps it's late," suggested Neale. "No--it's in," she said. "I saw it come in from my window, at the back. It was on time. So--I don't know what's become of him." "But--what about Saturday?" asked Neale. "Shirley says you said Mr.
Horbury went off on Saturday. Didn't he leave any word--didn't he say
where he was going?" "Mr. Horbury went out on Saturday evening," answered Mrs. Carswell. "He
didn't say a word about where he was going. He went out just before
dusk, as if for a walk. I'd no idea that he wasn't at home until Sunday
morning. You see, the servants and I went to bed at our usual time on
Saturday night, and though he wasn't in then, I thought nothing of it,
because, of course, he'd his latch-key. He was often out late at night,
as you know, Mr. Neale. And when I found that he hadn't come back, as I
did find out before breakfast yesterday, I thought nothing of that
either--I thought he'd gone to see some friend or other, and had been
persuaded to stop the night. Then, when he didn't come home yesterday at
all, I thought he was staying the week-end somewhere. So I wasn't
anxious, nor surprised. But I am surprised he's not back here first
thing this morning." "So am I," agreed Neale. "And more than surprised." He stood for a
moment, running over the list of the manager's friends and acquaintances
in the neighbourhood, and he shook his head as he came to the end of his
mental reckoning of it. "It's very odd," he remarked. "Very surprising,
Mrs. Carswell." "It's all the more surprising," remarked the housekeeper, "because of
his going off for his holiday tomorrow. And Miss Fosdyke's coming down
from London today to go with him." Neale pricked his ears. Miss Fosdyke was the manager's niece--a young
lady whom Neale remembered as a mere slip of a girl that he had met
years before and never seen since. "I didn't know that," he remarked. "Neither did Mr. Horbury until Saturday afternoon--that is, for
certain," said Mrs. Carswell. "He'd asked her to go with him to Scotland
on this holiday, but it wasn't settled. However, he got a wire from her,
about tea-time on Saturday, to say she'd go, and would be down here
today. They're to start tomorrow morning." Neale turned to the door. He was distinctly puzzled and uneasy. He had
known John Horbury since his own childhood, and had always regarded him
as the personification of everything that was precise, systematic, and
regular. All things considered, it was most remarkable that he should
not be at the bank at opening hours. And already a vague suspicion that
something had happened began to steal into his mind. "Did you happen to notice which way he went, Mrs. Carswell?" he asked. "Was it towards the station?" "He went out down the garden and through the orchard," replied the
housekeeper. "He could have got to the station that way, of course. But
I do know that he never said a word about going anywhere by train, and
he'd no bag or anything with him--he'd nothing but that old oak stick he
generally carried when he went out for his walks." Neale pushed open the house door and went into the outer hall to the
junior clerks. Little as he cared about banking as a calling, he was
punctilious about rules and observances, and it seemed to him somewhat
indecorous that the staff of a bank should hang about its front door, as
if they were workshop assistants awaiting the arrival of a belated
foreman. "Better come inside the house, Shirley," he said. "Patten, you go to the
post-office and get the letters." "No good without the bag," answered Patten, a calm youth of seventeen. "Tried that once before. Don't you know!--they've one key--we've
another." "Well, come inside, then," commanded Neale. "It doesn't look well to
hang about those steps." "Might just as well go away," muttered Shirley, stepping into the hall. "If Horbury's got to come back by train from wherever he's gone to, he
can't get here till the 10.45, and then he's got to walk up. Might as
well go home for an hour." "The partners'll be here before an hour's over," said Neale. "One of
them's always here by ten." Shirley, a somewhat grumpy-countenanced young man, made no answer. He
began to pace the hall with looks of eminent dissatisfaction. But he had
only taken a turn or two when a quietly appointed one-horse coupe
brougham came up to the open door, and a well-known face was seen at its
window. Mr. Gabriel Chestermarke, senior proprietor, had come an hour
before his time. CHAPTER II

THE ELLERSDEANE DEPOSIT


Had the three young men waiting in that hall not been so familiar with
him by reason of daily and hourly acquaintance, the least observant
amongst them would surely have paused in whatever task he was busied
with, if Mr. Gabriel Chestermarke had crossed his path for the first
time. The senior partner of Chestermarke's Bank was a noticeable person. Wallington Neale, who possessed some small gift of imagination, always
felt that his principal suggested something more than was accounted for
by his mere presence. He was a little, broadly built man, somewhat
inclined to stoutness, who carried himself in very upright fashion, and
habitually wore the look of a man engaged in operations of serious and
far-reaching importance, further heightened by an air of reserve and a
trick of sparingness in speech. But more noticeable than anything else
in Mr. Gabriel Chestermarke was his head, a member of his body which was
much out of proportion to the rest of it. It was a very big, well-shaped
head, on which, out of doors, invariably rested the latest-styled and
glossiest of silk hats--no man had ever seen Gabriel Chestermarke in any
other form of head-gear, unless it was in a railway carriage, there he
condescended to assume a checked cap. Underneath the brim of the silk
hat looked out a countenance as remarkable as the head of which it was
a part. A broad, smooth forehead, a pair of large, deep-set eyes, the
pupils of which were black as sloes, a prominent, slightly hooked nose,
a firm, thin-lipped mouth, a square, resolute jaw--these features were
thrown into prominence by the extraordinary pallor of Mr. Chestermarke's
face, and the dark shade of the hair which framed it. That black hair,
those black eyes, burning always with a strange, slumbering fire, the
colourless cheeks, the vigorous set of the lips, these made an effect on
all who came in contact with the banker which was of a not wholly
comfortable nature. It was as if you were talking to a statue rather
than to a fellow-creature. Mr. Chestermarke stepped quietly from his brougham and walked up the
steps. He was one of those men who are never taken aback and never show
surprise, and as his eyes ran over the three young men, there was no
sign from him that he saw anything out of the common. But he turned to
Neale, as senior clerk, with one word. "Well?" Neale glanced uncomfortably at the house door. "Mr. Horbury is not at
home," he answered. "He has the keys." Mr. Chestermarke made no reply. His hand went to his waistcoat pocket,
his feet moved lower down the hall to a side-door sacred to the
partners. He produced a key, opened the door, and motioned the clerks to
enter. Once within, he turned into the partners' room. Five minutes
passed before his voice was heard. "Neale!" Neale hurried in and found the banker standing on the hearth-rug,
beneath the portrait of a former Chestermarke, founder of the bank in a
bygone age. He was suddenly struck by the curious resemblance between
that dead Chestermarke and the living one, and he wondered that he had
never seen it before. But Mr. Chestermarke gave him no time for
speculation. "Where is Mr. Horbury?" he asked. Neale told all he knew: the banker listened in his usual fashion,
keeping his eyes steadily fixed on his informant. When Neale had
finished, Mr. Chestermarke shook his head. "If Horbury had meant to come into town by the 8.30 train and had missed
it," he remarked, "he would have wired or telephoned by this. Telephoned, of course: there are telephones at every station on that
branch line. Very well, let things go on." Neale went out and set his fellow-clerks to the usual routine. Patten
went for the letters. Neale carried them into the partners' room. At ten
o'clock the street door was opened. A customer or two began to drop in. The business of the day had begun. It went on just as it would have gone
on if Mr. Horbury had been away on holiday. And at half-past ten in
walked the junior partner, Mr. Joseph Chestermarke. Mr. Joseph was the exact opposite of his uncle. He was so much his
opposite that it was difficult to believe, seeing them together, that
they were related to each other. Mr. Joseph Chestermarke, a man of
apparently thirty years of age, was tall and loose of figure, easy of
demeanour, and a little untidy in his dress. He wore a not over
well-fitting tweed suit, a slouch hat, a flannel shirt. His brown beard
usually needed trimming; he affected loose, flowing neckties, more
suited to an artist than to a banker. His face was amiable in
expression, a little weak, a little speculative. All these
characteristics came out most strongly when he and his uncle were seen
in company: nothing could be more in contrast to the precise severity of
Gabriel than the somewhat slovenly carelessness of Joseph. Joseph,
indeed, was the last man in the world that any one would ever have
expected to see in charge and direction of a bank, and there were people
in Scarnham who said that he was no more than a lay-figure, and that
Gabriel Chestermarke did all the business. The junior partner passed through the outer room, nodding affably to the
clerks and went into the private parlour. Several minutes elapsed: then
a bell rang. Neale answered it, and Shirley and Patten glanced at each
other and shook their heads: already they scented an odour of suspicion
and uncertainty. "What's up?" whispered Patten, leaning forward over his desk to Shirley,
who stood between it and the counter. "Something wrong?" "Something that Gabriel doesn't like, anyhow," muttered Shirley. "Did
you see his eyes when Neale said that Horbury wasn't here? If Horbury
doesn't turn up by this next train--ah!" "Think he's sloped?" asked Patten, already seething with boyish desire
of excitement. "Done a bunk with the money?" But Shirley shook his head at the closed door through which Neale had
vanished. "They're carpeting Neale about it, anyhow," he answered. "Gabriel'll
want to know the whys and wherefores, you bet. But Neale won't tell us
anything--he's too thick with Horbury." Neale, entering the partners' room, found them in characteristic
attitudes. The senior partner sat at his desk, stern, upright, his eyes
burning a little more fiercely than usual: the junior, his slouch hat
still on his head, his hands thrust in his pockets, lounged against the
mantelpiece, staring at his uncle. "Now, Neale," said Gabriel Chestermarke. "What do you know about this? Have you any idea where Mr. Horbury is?" "None," replied Neale. "None whatever!" "When did you see him last?" demanded Gabriel. "You often see him out of
bank hours, I know." "I last saw him here at two o'clock on Saturday," replied Neale. "I have
not seen him since." "And you never heard him mention that he was thinking of going away for
the week-end?" asked Gabriel. "No!" replied Neale. He made his answer tersely and definitely, having an idea that the
senior partner looked at him as if he thought that something was being
kept back. And Gabriel, after a moment's pause, shifted some of the
papers on his desk, with an impatient movement. "Ask Mr. Horbury's housekeeper to step in here for a few minutes," he
said. Neale went out by the private door, and presently returned with Mrs.
Carswell. By that time Joseph had lounged over to his own desk and seated himself,
and when the housekeeper came in he tilted his chair back and sat idly
swaying in it while he watched her and his uncle. But Gabriel, waving
Mrs. Carswell to a seat, remained upright as ever, and as he turned to
the housekeeper, he motioned Neale to stay in the room. "Just tell us all you know about Mr. Horbury's movements on Saturday
afternoon and evening, Mrs. Carswell," he said. "This is a most
extraordinary business altogether, and I want to account for it. You say
he went out just about dusk." Mrs. Carswell repeated the story which she had told to Neale. The two
partners listened; Gabriel keenly attentive; Joseph as if he were no
more than mildly interested. "Odd!" remarked Gabriel, when the story had come to an end. "Most
strange! Very well--thank you, Mrs. Carswell. Neale," he added, when the
housekeeper had gone away, "Mr. Horbury always carried the more
important keys on him, didn't he?" "Always," responded Neale. "Very good! Let things go on," said Gabriel. "But don't come bothering
me or Mr. Joseph Chestermarke unless you're obliged to. Of course, Mr.
Horbury may come in by the next train. That'll do, Neale." Neale went back to the outer room. Things went on, but the missing
manager did not come in by the 10.45, and nothing had been heard or seen
of him at noon, when Patten went to get his dinner. Nor had anything
been seen or heard at one o'clock, when Patten came back, and it became
Shirley and Neale's turn to go out. And thereupon arose a difficulty. In
the ordinary course the two elder clerks would have left for an hour and
the manager would have been on duty until they returned. But now the
manager was not there. "You go," said Neale to Shirley. "I'll wait. Perhaps Mr. Joseph will
come out." Shirley went--but neither of the partners emerged from the private room. As a rule they both went across to the Scarnham Arms Hotel at half-past
one for lunch--a private room had been kept for them at that old-world
hostelry from time immemorial--but now they remained within their
parlour, apparently interned from their usual business world. And Neale
had a very good idea of what they were doing. The bank's strong room was
entered from that parlour--Gabriel and Joseph were examining and
checking its contents. The knowledge distressed Neale beyond measure,
and it was only by a resolute effort that he could give his mind to his
duties. Two o'clock had gone, and Shirley had come back, before the bell rang
again. Neale went into the private room and knew at once that something
had happened. Gabriel stood by his desk, which was loaded with papers
and documents; Joseph leaned against a sideboard, whereon was a decanter
of sherry and a box of biscuits; he had a glass of wine in one hand, and
a half-nibbled biscuit in the other. The smell of the sherry--fine old
brown stuff, which the clerks were permitted to taste now and then, on
such occasions as the partners' birthdays--filled the room. "Neale," said Gabriel, "have you been out to lunch? No? Take a glass of
wine and eat a biscuit--we shall all have to put off our lunches for an
hour or so." Neale obeyed--more because he was under order than because he was
hungry. He was too much bothered, too full of vague fears, to think of
his midday dinner. He took the glass which Joseph handed to him, and
picked a couple of biscuits out of the box. And at the first sip Gabriel
spoke again. "Neale!" he said. "You've been here five years, so one can speak
confidentially. There's something wrong--seriously wrong. Securities are
missing. Securities representing--a lot!" Neale's face flushed as if he himself had been charged with abstracting
those securities. His hand shook as he set down his glass, and he looked
helplessly from one partner to another. Joseph merely shook his head,
and poured out another glass of sherry for himself: Gabriel shook his
head, too, but with a different expression. "We don't know exactly how things are," he continued. "But there's the
fact--on a superficial examination. And--Horbury! Of all men in the
world, Horbury!" "I can't believe it, Mr. Chestermarke!" exclaimed Neale. "Surely, sir,
there's some mistake!" Joseph brushed crumbs of biscuit off his beard and wagged his head. "No mistake!" he said softly. "None! The thing is--what's best to do? Because--he'd have laid his plans. It'll all have been thought
out--carefully." "I'm afraid so," assented Gabriel. "That's the worst of it. Everything
points to premeditation. And when a man has been so fully trusted----"

A knock at the door prefaced the introduction of Shirley's head. He
glanced into the room with an obvious desire to see what was going on,
but somehow contrived to fix his eyes on the senior partner. "Lord Ellersdeane, sir," he announced. "Can he see you?" The two partners looked at each other in evident surprise; then Gabriel
moved to the door and bowed solemnly to some person outside. "Will your lordship come in?" he said politely. Lord Ellersdeane, a big, bustling, country-squire type of man, came into
the room, nodding cheerily to its occupants. "Sorry to disturb you, Mr. Chestermarke," he said. "I understand Horbury
isn't at home, but of course you'll do just as well. The Countess and I
only got back from abroad night before last. She wants her jewels, so
I'll take 'em with me, if you please." Gabriel Chestermarke, who was drawing forward a chair, took his hand off
it and stared at his visitor. "The Countess's--jewels!" he said. "Does your lordship mean----"

"Deposited them with Horbury, you know, some weeks ago--when we went
abroad," replied Lord Ellersdeane. "Safe keeping, you know--said he'd
lock 'em up." Gabriel turned slowly to Joseph. But Joseph shook his head--and Neale,
glancing from one partner to the other, felt himself turning sick with
apprehension. CHAPTER III

MR. CHESTERMARKE DISCLAIMS LIABILITY


Gabriel Chestermarke, after that one look at his nephew, turned again to
the Earl, politely motioning him to the chair which he had already drawn
forward. And the Earl, whose eyes had been wandering over the pile of
documents on the senior partner's desk, glancing curiously at the open
door of the strong room, and generally taking in a sense of some unusual
occurrence, dropped into it and looked expectantly at the banker. "There's nothing wrong?" he asked suddenly. "You look--surprised." Gabriel stiffened his already upright figure. "Surprised--yes!" he answered. "And something more than surprised--I am
astonished! Your lordship left the Countess's jewels with our manager? May I ask when--and under what circumstances?" "About six weeks ago," replied the Earl promptly. "As a rule the jewels
are kept at my bankers in London. The Countess wanted them to wear at
the Hunt Ball, so I fetched them from London myself. Then, as we were
going off to the Continent two days after the ball, and sailing direct
from Kingsport to Hamburg, I didn't want the bother of going up to town
with them, and I thought of Horbury. So I drove in here with them one
evening--the night before we sailed, as a matter of fact--and asked him
to lock them up until our return. And as I said just now, we only got
home the night before last, and we're going up to town tomorrow, and the
Countess wants them to take with her. Of course, you've got 'em all
right?" Gabriel Chestermarke spread out his hands. "I know nothing whatever about them!" he said. "I never heard of them
being here." "Nor I," affirmed Joseph. "Not a word!" Gabriel looked at Neale, and drew Lord Ellersdeane's attention to him. "Our senior clerk--Mr. Neale," he said. "Neale--have you heard of this
transaction?" "Never!" replied Neale. "Mr. Horbury never mentioned it to me." Gabriel waved his hand towards the open door of the strong room. "Any valuables of that sort would have been in there," he remarked. "There is nothing of that sort there--beyond what I and my nephew know
of. I am sure your lordship's jewels are not there." "But--Horbury?" exclaimed the Earl. "Where is he? He would tell you!" "We don't know where Mr. Horbury is," answered Gabriel "The truth may as
well be told--he's missing. And so are some of our most valuable
securities." The Earl slowly looked from one partner to another. His face flushed,
almost as hotly as if he himself had been accused of theft. "Oh, come!" he said. "Horbury, now, of all men! Come--come!--you don't
mean to tell me that Horbury's been playing games of that sort? There
must be some mistake." "I shall be glad to be assured that I am making it," said Gabriel
coolly. "But it will be more to the purpose if your lordship will tell
us all about the deposit of these jewels. And--there's an important
matter which I must first mention. We have not the honour of reckoning
your lordship among our customers. Therefore, whatever you handed to
Horbury was handed to him privately--not to us." Joseph Chestermarke nodded his head at that, and the Earl stirred a
little uneasily in his chair. "Oh, well!" he said. "I--to tell you the truth, I didn't think about
that, Mr. Chestermarke. It's true I don't keep any account with
you--it's never seemed--er, necessary, you know. But, of course, I knew
Horbury so well--he's a member of our golf club and our archaeological
society--that----"

"Precisely," interrupted Gabriel, with a bow. "You came to Mr. Horbury
privately. Not to the firm." "I came to him knowing that he was your manager, and a man to be
thoroughly trusted, and that he'd have safes and things in which he
could deposit valuables in perfect safety," answered the Earl. "I never
reflected for a moment on the niceties of the matter. I just explained
to him that I wanted those jewels taken care of, and handed them over. That's all!" "And--their precise nature?" asked Gabriel. "And--their value?" added Joseph. "As to their nature," replied the Earl, "there was my wife's coronet,
her diamond necklace, and the Ellersdeane butterfly, of which I suppose
all the world's heard--heirloom, you know. It's a thing that can be worn
in a lady's hair or as a pendant--diamonds, of course. As to their
value--well, I had them valued some years ago. They're worth about a
hundred thousand pounds." Gabriel turned to his desk and began to arrange some papers on it, and
Neale, who was watching everything with close attention, saw that his
fingers trembled a little. He made no remark, and the silence was next
broken by Joseph Chestermarke's soft accents. "Did Horbury give your lordship any receipt, or acknowledgment that he
had received these jewels on deposit?" he asked. "I mean, of course, in
our name?" The Earl twisted sharply in his chair, and Neale fancied that he saw a
shade of annoyance pass over his good-natured face. "Certainly not!" he answered. "I should never have dreamt of asking for
a receipt from a man whom I knew as well as I knew--or thought I
knew--Horbury. The whole thing was just as if--well, as if I should ask
any friend to take care of something for me for a while." "Did Horbury know what you were giving him?" asked Joseph. "Of course!" replied the Earl. "As a matter of fact, he'd never seen
these things, and I took them out of their case and showed them to him." "And he said he would lock them up?--in our strong room?" suggested the
soft voice. "He said nothing about your strong room," answered the Earl. "Nor about
where he'd put them. That was understood. It was understood--a tacit
understanding--that he'd take care of them until our return." "Did your lordship give him the date of your return?" persisted Joseph,
with the thorough-going air of a cross-examiner. "Yes--I told him exactly when we should be back," replied the Earl. "The
twelfth of May--day before yesterday." Joseph moved away from the sideboard towards the hearth, and leaning
against the mantelpiece threw a glance at the strong room. "The jewels are not in our possession," he said, half indolently. "There
is nothing of that sort in there. There are two safes in the outer room
of the bank--I should say that Mr. Neale here knows everything that is
in them. Do you know anything of these jewels, Neale?" "Nothing!" said Neale. "I never heard of them." Gabriel looked up from his papers. "None of us have heard of them," he remarked. "Horbury could not have
put them in this strong room without my knowledge. They are certainly
not there. The safes my nephew mentioned just now are used only for
books and papers. Your lordship's casket is not in either." The Earl rose slowly from his chair. It was evident to Neale that he was
more surprised than angry: he looked around him as a man looks whose
understanding is suddenly brought up against something unexplainable. "All I know is that I handed that casket to Mr. Horbury in his own
dining-room one evening some weeks ago," he said. "That's certain! So I
naturally expect to find it--here." "And it is not here--that is equally certain," observed Gabriel. "What
is also certain is that our manager--trusted in more than he should have
been!--is missing, and many of our valuable securities with him. Therefore----"

He spread his hands again with an expressive gesture and once more bent
over his papers. Once more there was silence. Then the Earl started--as
if a thought had suddenly occurred to him. "I say!" he exclaimed, "don't you think Horbury may have put those
jewels away in his own house?" Joseph Chestermarke smiled a little derisively. "A hundred thousand pounds' worth!" he said softly. "Not very likely!" "But he may have a safe there," urged the Earl. "Most people have a safe
in their houses nowadays--they're so handy, you know, and so cheap. Don't you think that may be it?" "I am not familiar with Horbury's domestic arrangements," said Gabriel. "I have not been in his house for some years. But as we are desirous of
giving your lordship what assistance we can, we will go into the house
and see if there is anything of the sort. Just tell the housekeeper we
are coming in, Neale." The Earl nodded to Mrs. Carswell as she received him and the two
partners in the adjacent hall. "This lady will remember my calling on Mr. Horbury one evening a few
weeks ago," he said. "She saw me with him in that room." "Certainly!" assented Mrs. Carswell, readily enough. "I remember your
lordship calling on Mr. Horbury very well. One night after dinner--your
lordship was here an hour or so." Gabriel Chestermarke opened the door of the dining-room--an
old-fashioned apartment which looked out on a garden and orchard at the
rear of the house. "Mrs. Carswell," he said, as they all went in, "has Mr. Horbury a safe
in this room, or in any other room? You know what I mean." But the housekeeper shook her head. There was no safe in the house. There was a plate-chest--there it was, standing in a recess by the
sideboard; she had the key of it. "Open that, at any rate," commanded Gabriel. "It's about as unlikely as
anything could be, but well leave nothing undone." There was nothing in the plate-chest but what Gabriel expected to find
there. He turned again to the housekeeper. "Is there anything in this house--cupboard, chest, trunk, anything--in
which Mr. Horbury kept valuables?" he asked. "Any place in which he was
in the habit of locking up papers, for instance?" Mrs. Carswell again shook her head. No, she knew of no such place or
receptacle. There was Mr. Horbury's desk, but she believed all its
drawers were open. Her belief proved to be correct: Gabriel himself
opened drawer after drawer, and revealed nothing of consequence. He
turned to the Earl with another expressive spreading out of his hands. "I don't see what more we can do to assist your lordship," he said. "I
don't know what more can be done." "The question is--so it seems to me--what is to be done," replied the
Earl, whose face had been gradually growing graver. "What, for instance,
are you going to do, Mr. Chestermarke? Let us be plain with each other. You disclaim all liability in connection with my affair?" "Most certainly!" exclaimed Gabriel. "We know nothing of that
transaction. As I have already said, if Horbury took charge of your
lordship's property, he did so as a private individual, not on our
behalf, not in his capacity as our manager. If your lordship had been a
customer of ours----"

"That would have been a very different matter," said Joseph. "But as we
have never had any dealings with your lordship----"

"We have, of course, no liability to you," concluded Gabriel. "The true
position of the case is that your lordship handed your property to
Horbury as a friend, not as manager of Chestermarke's Bank." "Then let me ask you, what are you going to do?" said the Earl. "I mean,
not about my affair, but about finding your manager?" Gabriel looked at his nephew: Joseph shook his head. "So far," said Joseph, "we have not quite considered that. We are not
yet fully aware of how things stand. We have a pretty good idea, but it
will take another day." "You don't mean to tell me that you're going to let another day elapse
before doing something?" exclaimed the Earl. "Bless my soul!--I'd have
had the hue and cry out before noon today, if I'd been you!" "If you'd been Chestermarke's Bank, my lord," remarked Joseph, in his
softest manner, "that's precisely what you would not have done. We don't
want it noised all over the town and neighbourhood that our trusted
manager has suddenly run away with our money--and your jewels--in his
pocket." There was a curious note--half-sneering, half-sinister--in the junior
partner's quiet voice which made the Earl turn and look at him with a
sudden new interest. Before either could speak, Neale ventured to say
what he had been wanting to say for half an hour. "May I suggest something, sir?" he said, turning to Gabriel. "Speak--speak!" assented Gabriel hastily. "Anything you like!" "Mr. Horbury may have met with an accident," said Neale. "He was fond of
taking his walks in lonely places--there are plenty outside the town. He
may be lying somewhere even now--helpless." "Capital suggestion!--much obliged to you," exclaimed the Earl. "Gad! I
wonder we never thought of that before! Much the most likely thing. I
can't believe that Horbury----"

Before he could say more, the door of the dining-room was thrown open, a
clear, strong voice was heard speaking to some one without, and in
walked a handsome young woman, who pulled herself up on the threshold to
stare out of a pair of frank grey eyes at the four startled men. CHAPTER IV

THE MODERN YOUNG WOMAN


Mrs. Carswell, who had left the gentlemen to themselves after opening
the plate-chest, followed the new-comer into the room and looked
appealingly at the senior partner. "This is Miss Fosdyke, sir," she said, as if accounting for the
unceremonious entrance. "Mr. Horbury's----"

But Miss Fosdyke, having looked round her, entered the arena of
discussion as abruptly as she had entered the room. "You're Mr. Chestermarke!" she said, turning to Gabriel. "I remember
you. What's all this, Mr. Chestermarke? I come down from London to meet
my uncle, and to go on with him to Scotland for a holiday, and I learn
that he's disappeared! What is it? What has happened? Why are you all
looking so mysterious? Is something wrong? Where is my uncle?" Gabriel, who had assumed his stereotyped expression of calm attention
under this tornado of questions, motioned Joseph to place a chair for
the young lady. But Miss Fosdyke shook her head and returned to the
attack. "Please don't keep anything back!" she said. "I am not of the
fainting-to-order type of young woman. Just say what is the matter, if
you please. Mrs. Carswell knows no more----"

"Than we do," interrupted Joseph, with one of his peculiar smiles. "Hadn't you better sit down?" "Not until I know what has happened," retorted the visitor. "Because if
anything has happened there will be something for me to do, and it's
foolish to sit down when one's got to get up again immediately. Mr.
Chestermarke, are you going to answer my questions?" Gabriel bowed stiffly. "I have the honour of addressing----" he began. "You have the honour--if you like to put it so--of addressing Miss Betty
Fosdyke, who is Mr. John Horbury's niece," replied the young lady
impatiently. "Mrs. Carswell has told you that already. Besides--you saw
me, more than once, when I was a little girl. And that's not so very
long ago. Now, Mr. Chestermarke, where is my uncle?" "I do not know where your uncle is," replied Gabriel suddenly, and
losing his starchiness. "I wish to Heaven I did!" "None of us know where Mr. John Horbury is," repeated Joseph, in his
suavest tones. "We all wish to Heaven we did!" The girl turned and gave the junior partner a look which took in every
inch of him. It was a look which began with a swift speculation and
ended in something very like distaste. But Joseph Chestermarke met it
with his usual quiet smile. "It would make such a lot of difference--if we knew!" he murmured. "As
it is--things are unpleasant." Miss Fosdyke finished her reflection and turned away. "I remember you now," she said calmly. "You're Joseph Chestermarke. Now
I will sit down. And I insist on being told--everything!" "My dear young lady!" exclaimed Gabriel, "there is next to nothing to
tell. If you will have the unpleasant truth, here it is. Your uncle,
whom we have trusted for more years than I care to mention, disappeared
on Saturday evening, and nobody knows where he is, nor whither he went. All we know is that we find some of our property missing--valuable
securities. And this gentleman--Lord Ellersdeane--tells us that six
weeks ago he entrusted jewels worth a hundred thousand pounds to your
uncle's keeping--they, too, are missing. What can we think?" The girl's face had flushed, and her brows had drawn together in an
angry frown by the time Gabriel had finished, and Neale, silently
watching her from the background, saw her fingers clench themselves. She
gave a swift glance at the Earl, and then fixed her eyes steadily on
Gabriel. "Are you telling me that my uncle is a--thief?" she demanded. "Are you,
Mr. Chestermarke?" "I'm not, anyhow!" exclaimed the Earl. "I--I--so far as I'm concerned, I
say there's some mistake." "Thank you!" she answered quietly. "But--you, Mr. Chestermarke? Come--I'm entitled to an answer." Gabriel showed signs of deep annoyance. He had the reputation of being a
confirmed woman-hater, and it was plain that he was ill at ease in
presence of this plain-spoken young person. "You appear to be a lady of much common sense!" he said. "Therefore----"

"I have some common sense," interrupted Miss Fosdyke coolly. "And what
amount I possess tells me that I never heard anything more ridiculous in
my life than the suggestion that my uncle should steal anything from
anybody! Why, he was, and is, I hope, a fairly well-to-do man! And if he
wanted money, he'd only to come to me. It so happens that I'm one of the
wealthiest young women in England. If my uncle had wanted a few
thousands or tens of thousands to play ducks and drakes with, he'd only
to ring me up on the telephone, and he'd have had whatever he asked for
in a few hours. That's not boasting, Mr. Chestermarke--that's just plain
truth. My uncle a thief! Mr. Chestermarke!--there's only one word for
your suggestion. Don't think me rude if I tell you what it is. It's--bosh!" Gabriel's colourless face twitched a little, and he drew himself up. "I have no acquaintance with modern young ladies," he remarked icily. "I
daresay they have their own way of looking at things--and of expressing
themselves. I, too, have mine. Also I have my own conclusions, and----"

"I say, Mr. Chestermarke!" said the Earl, hastening to intervene in what
seemed likely to develop into a passage-at-arms. "We're forgetting the
suggestion made just before this lady--Miss Fosdyke, I think?--entered. Don't let's forget it--it's a good one." Miss Fosdyke turned eagerly to the Earl. "What suggestion was it?" she asked. "Do tell me? I'm sure you agree
with me--I can see you do. Thank you, again!" "This gentleman," said the Earl, pointing to Neale, who had retreated
into a corner and was staring out of the window, "suggests that Horbury
may have met with an accident, you know, and be lying helpless
somewhere. I sincerely hope he isn't but----"

Miss Fosdyke jumped from her chair. She turned an indignant look on
Gabriel and let it go on to Joseph. "You don't mean to tell me that you have not done anything to find my
uncle?" she exclaimed with fiery emphasis. "You've surely had some
search made?--surely!" "We knew nothing of his disappearance until ten o'clock this morning,"
replied Gabriel, half-angrily. "But--since then? Why, you've had five hours!" she said. "Has nothing
been done? Haven't you even told the police?" "Certainly not!" answered Gabriel. "It is not our policy." Miss Fosdyke made one step to the door and flung it open. "Then I shall!" she exclaimed. "Policy, indeed! High time I came down
here, I think! Thank you, Lord Ellersdeane--and the other gentleman--for
the suggestion. Now I'll go and act on it. And when I act, Mr.
Chestermarke, I do it thoroughly!" The next moment she had slammed the door, and Gabriel Chestermarke
glanced at his partner. "Annoying!" he said. "A most unpleasant young woman! I should have
preferred not to tell the police until--well, at any rate, tomorrow. We
really do not know to what extent we are--but then, what's the use of
talking of that now? We can't prevent her going to the police-station." "Why, really, Mr. Chestermarke," observed the Earl, "don't you think
it's the best thing to do? To tell you the truth, considering that I'm
concerned, I was going to do the very same thing myself." Gabriel bowed stiffly. "We could not have prevented your lordship either," he said, with
another wave of the white hands which seemed to go so well with the
habitual pallor of his face. "All that is within your lordship's
jurisdiction--not in ours. But--especially since this young lady seems
determined to do things in her way--I will tell your lordship why we are
allow to move. It is purely a business reason. It was, as I said, ten
o'clock when we heard that Horbury was missing. That in itself was such
a very strange and unusual thing that my partner and I at once began to
examine the contents of our strong room. We had been so occupied five
hours when your lordship called. Do you think we could examine
everything in five hours? No--nor in ten, nor in twenty! Our task is not
one quarter complete! And why we don't wish publicity at once in
here--we hold a vast number of securities and valuables belonging to
customers. Title-deeds, mortgages--all sorts of things. We have
valuables deposited with us. Up to now we don't know what is safe and
what isn't. We do know this--certain securities of our own, easily
convertible on the market, are gone! Now if we had allowed it to be
known before, say, noon today, that our manager had disappeared, and
these securities with him, what would have been the result? The bank
would have been besieged! Before we let the public know, we ourselves
want to know exactly where we are. We want to be in a position to say to
Smith, 'Your property is safe! '; to Jones, 'Your deeds are here!' Does
your lordship see that? But now, of course," concluded Gabriel, "as this
Miss Fosdyke can and will spread the news all over the town--why, we
must face things." The Earl, who had listened to all this with an evident desire to
comprehend and to sympathize, nodded his head. "I see--I see, Mr. Chestermarke," he said. "But I say!--I've got another
notion--I'm not a very quick thinker, and I daresay my idea came out of
Mr. Neale's suggestion. Anyway, it's this--for whatever it's worth. I
told you that we only got home night before last--early on Saturday
evening, as a matter of fact. Now, it was known in the town here that
we'd returned--we drove through the Market-Place. Mayn't it be that
Horbury saw us, or heard of our return, and that when he went out that
evening he had the casket in his pocket and was on his way to
Ellersdeane, to return it to me? And that--on his way--he met with some
mishap? Worth considering, you know." "I daresay a great many theories might--and will--be raised, my lord,"
replied Gabriel. "But----"

"Does your lordship also think--or suggest--that Horbury also carried
our missing securities in his pocket?" asked Joseph quietly. "Because
we, at any rate, know they're gone!" "Oh, well!" said the Earl, "I--I merely suggest it, you know. The
country between here and Ellersdeane is a bit rough and wild--there's
Ellersdeane Hollow, you know--a queer place on a dark night. And if a
man took a short cut--as many people do--through the Hollow, there are
places he could fall into. But, as I say, I merely suggest that as a
reasonable theory." "What does your lordship propose to do?" asked Gabriel. "I certainly think inquiry should be set going," answered the Earl. "Already done," remarked Joseph drily. "Miss Fosdyke has been with the
police five minutes." "I mean--it should be done by us," said the Earl. "Very well," said Gabriel suddenly, "it shall be done, then. No doubt
your lordship would like to give the police your own story. Mr. Neale,
will you go with Lord Ellersdeane to Superintendent Polke? Your duty
will be to give him the mere information that Mr. Horbury left his house
at a quarter to eight on Saturday evening and has not been heard of
since. No more, Neale. And now," he concluded, with a bow to the Earl,
"your lordship will excuse my partner and myself if we return to a
singularly unpleasant task." Lord Ellersdeane and Neale left the bank-house and walked towards the
police-station. They crossed the Market-Place in silence, but as they
turned the corner of the Moot Hall, the elder man spoke, touching his
companion's shoulder with a confidential gesture. "I don't believe a word of all that, Mr. Neale!" he said. "Not one
word!" Neale started and glanced at the Earl's moody face. "Your lordship doesn't believe--?" he began, and checked himself. "I don't believe that Horbury's done what those two accuse him of,"
affirmed the Earl. "Not for one moment! I can't account for those
missing securities they talk about, but I'll stake my honour that
Horbury hasn't got 'em! Nor my wife's jewels either. You heard and saw
how astounded that girl was. By the by--who is she!" "Mr. Horbury's niece--Miss Fosdyke--from London," replied Neale. "She spoke of her wealth," remarked the Earl. "Yes," said Neale. "She must be wealthy, too. She's the sole proprietor
of Fosdyke's Brewery." "Ho-ho!" laughed the Earl. "That's it, eh? Fosdyke's Entire! Of
course--I've seen the name on no end of public-houses in London. Sole
proprietor? Dear me!--why, I have some recollection that Fosdyke, of
that brewery, was at one time a member of Parliament." "Yes," assented Neale. "He married Mr. Horbury's sister. Miss Fosdyke is
their only child. Mr. Fosdyke died a few years ago, and she came into
the property last year when she was twenty-one." "Lucky young woman!" muttered the Earl. "Fine thing to own a big
brewery. Um! A very modern and up-to-date young lady, too: I liked the
way she stood up to your principals. Of course, she'll have told Polke
all the story by this time. As for ourselves--what had we better do?" Neale had considered that question as he came along. "There's only one thing to do, my lord," he answered. "We want the
solution of a problem: what became of Mr. Horbury last Saturday night?" CHAPTER V

THE SEARCH BEGINS


Polke, superintendent of the Scarnham police force, a little, round,
cheery-faced man, whose mutton-chop whiskers suggested much
business-like capacity and an equal amount of common sense, rose from
his desk and bowed as the Earl of Ellersdeane entered his office. "I know what your lordship's come for!" he said, with a twinkle of the
eye which betokened infinite comprehension. "The young lady's been
here." "And has no doubt told you everything?" remarked the Earl, as he dropped
into the chair which the superintendent drew forward. "Has she?" "Pretty well, my lord," replied Polke, with a chuckle. "She's not one to
let much grass grow under her feet, I think." "Given you the facts, I suppose?" asked the Earl. Polke motioned to Neale to seat himself, and resumed his own seat. He
put his fingers together over his desk and looked from one to the other
of his visitors. "I'll give the young lady this much credit," he said. "She can tell one
what she wants in about as few words as could possibly be used! Yes, my
lord--she told me the facts in a couple of sentences. Her uncle
disappeared--nobody knows where he is--suspected already of running away
with your lordship's jewels and Chestermarke's securities. A very nice
business indeed!" "What do you think of it?" asked the Earl. "As a policeman, nothing--so far," answered Polke, with another twinkle. "As a man, that I don't believe it!" "Nor do I!" said the Earl. "That is, I don't believe that Horbury's
appropriated anything. There's some mistake--and some mystery." "We can't get away from the fact that Mr. Horbury has disappeared,"
remarked Neale, looking at the superintendent. "That's all I'm sent here
to tell you, Mr. Polke." "That's an accepted fact," agreed Polke. "But he's not the first man
who's disappeared under mysterious circumstances. Some men, as your
lordship knows, disappear--and reappear with good reasons for their
absence. Some never reappear. Some men aren't wanted to reappear. When a
man disappears and he's wanted--why, the job is to find him." "What does Miss Fosdyke wish?" asked the Earl, nodding assent to these
philosophies. "She would say, of course." "Miss Fosdyke's way, my lord--so far as I could gather from ten minutes'
talk with her--is to tell people what to do," answered Polke drily. "She
doesn't ask--she commands! We're to find her uncle--quick. At once. No
pains to be spared. Money no object. A hundred pounds, spot cash, to the
first man, woman, child, who brings her the least fragment of news of
him. That's Miss Fosdyke's method. It's not a bad one--it's only rich
young ladies who can follow it. So I've already put things in train. Handbills and posters, of course--and the town-crier. I suggested to her
that by tonight, or tomorrow morning, there might be news of Mr. Horbury
without doing all that. No good! Miss Fosdyke--she can tell you a lot
inside a minute--informed me that since she was seventeen she had only
had one motto in life. It's--do it now!" "Good!" laughed the Earl. "But--where are you going to begin?" "That's the difficulty," agreed Polke. "A gentleman walks out of his
back garden into the dusk--and he's never seen again. I don't know. We
must wait and see if anybody comes forward to say that he, she, or it
saw Mr. Horbury after he left his house on Saturday night. That's all." "Somebody must have seen him," said the Earl. "Well, you'd think so, my lord," replied Polke, "but he could get away
from the back of his orchard into the open country without being seen. The geographical position of our town's a bit curious, so your lordship
knows. Here we are on a ridge. Horbury's garden and orchard run down to
the foot of that ridge. At that foot is the river. There's a foot-bridge
over the river, immediately opposite his orchard gate. He could cross
that foot-bridge, and be in the wood on the other side in two minutes
from leaving his house. That wood extends for a good mile into the
country. Oh, yes! he could get away without being seen, and once in that
country, why, he could make his way to one or other of half a dozen
small railway stations. We shall telephone to all of them. That's all in
the routine. But then, that's all supposing that he left the town. Perhaps he didn't leave the town." The Earl started, and Neale looked quickly up from a brown study. "Eh?" said the Earl. "Didn't leave the town?" "Speaking as a policeman," answered Polke, with a knowing smile, "I
don't know that he even left his house. I only know that his housekeeper
says he did. That's a very different matter. For anything we
know--absolutely know!--Mr. Horbury may have been murdered in his own
house, and buried in his own cellar." "You're not joking?" said Neale. "Or--you are!" "Far from it, Mr. Neale," answered Polke. "That may seem a very, very
outrageous thing to say, but, I assure you, one never knows what may not
have happened in these cases. However, Mrs. Carswell says he did leave
the house, so we must take her word to begin with, and see if we can
find out where he went. And as your lordship is here, there's just a
question or two I should like to have answered. How many people know
that your lordship handed over these valuables to Mr. Horbury?" "So far as I know, no one but the Countess and myself," replied the
Earl. "I never mentioned the matter to any one, and I don't think my
wife would either. There was no need to mention it." "Well, I don't know," remarked Polke. "One's got to consider all sorts
of little things in these affairs, or else I wouldn't ask another
question. Does your lordship think it possible the Countess mentioned it
to her maid?" The Earl started in his chair. "Ah!" he said. "That may be! She may have done that, of course. I hadn't
thought of it." "Is the maid a trustworthy woman?" inquired Polke. "She's been in our service twelve or fourteen years," replied the Earl. "We've always found her quite trustworthy. So much so that I've more
than once sent her to my bankers with those very jewels." "You took her with you to the Continent, of course, my lord?" asked
Polke. "No, we didn't," replied the Earl. "The fact is--we wanted to have, for
once in our lives, a thoroughly unconventional holiday. You know that
the Countess and I are both very fond of walking--well, we had always
had a great desire to have a walking tour, alone, in the Ardennes
district, in early spring. We decided some time ago to have it this
year. So when we set off, six weeks ago, we took no servants--and
precious little luggage--and we enjoyed it all the more. Therefore, of
course, my wife's maid was not with us. She remained at
Ellersdeane--with the rest of the servants." Polke seemed to ponder over this last statement. Then he rose from his
chair. "Um!" he said. "Well--I'm doing what I can. There's something your
lordship might do." "Yes?" asked the Earl. "What, now! It shall be done." "Let some of your men take a look round your neighbourhood," answered
the superintendent. "Gamekeepers, now--they're the fellows! Just now
we're having some grand moonlight nights. If your men would look about
the country between here and Ellersdeane, now? And tell the farmers, and
the cottagers, and so forth, and take a particular look round
Ellersdeane Hollow. It would be a help." "Excellent idea, Polke," said the Earl. "I'll ride home and set things
going at once. And you'll let me know if anything turns up here during
the evening or the night." He strode off to the door and Neale followed. But on the threshold Neale
was pulled up by the superintendent. "Mr. Neale!" said Polke. Neale turned to see his questioner looking at him with a rather
quizzical expression. "What precise message had you for me?" asked Polke. "Just what I said," replied Neale. "I was merely to tell you that Mr.
Horbury disappeared from his house on Saturday evening, and has not been
seen since." "No further message--from your principals?" suggested Polke. "Nothing," said Neale. Polke nodded, and with a bow to the Earl sat down again to his desk. He
took up a pen when the door had closed on his visitors, and for a while
busied himself in writing. He was thus occupied when the telephone bell
rang in the farthest corner of his room. He crossed over and laid hold
of the receiver. "Yes?" he said quietly. "Yes--this is Polke, superintendent, Scarnham--I
rang you up twenty minutes since. I want you to send me, at once, the
smartest man you have available. Case is disappearance, under mysterious
circumstances, of a bank manager. Securities to a large amount are
missing; valuables also. No expense will be spared here--money no
object. You understand--a first-class man? Tonight? Yes. Good train from
town five-twenty--gets here nine-fifteen. He will catch that? Good. Tell
him report here on arrival. All right. Good-bye." Polke rang off and went back to his desk. "What New Scotland Yard calls a first-class is very often what I should
call a third-class," he muttered as he picked up his pen. "However,
we'll live in hope that something out of the usual will arrive. Now what
are those two Chestermarkes after? Why didn't one of them come here? What are they doing? And what's the mystery? James Polke, my boy, here's
a handful for you!" If Polke had been able to look into Chestermarke's Bank just then, he
would have failed to notice any particular evidences of mystery. It was
nearly the usual hour for closing when Wallington Neale went back, and
Gabriel Chestermarke immediately told him to follow out the ordinary
routine. The clerks were to finish their work and go their ways, as if
nothing had happened, and, as far as they could, they were to keep their
tongues quiet. As for the partners, food was being sent over for them
from the hotel: they would be obliged to remain at the bank for some
time yet. But there was no need for Neale to stay; he could go when the
day's balancing was done. "You heard what instructions this Miss Fosdyke had given the police, I
suppose?" asked Gabriel, as Neale was leaving the parlour. "Raising the
whole town, no doubt?" Neale briefly narrated all he knew; the partners listened with the
expression characteristic of each, and made no comment. And in half an
hour Neale handed over the keys to Joseph Chestermarke and went out into
the hall, his labours over. That had been the most exciting day he had
ever known in his life--was what was left of it going to yield anything
still more exciting? He stood in the outer hall trying to make up his mind about something. He wanted to speak to Betty Fosdyke--to talk to her. She had evidently
not recognized him when she came so suddenly into the dining-room of the
bank-house. But why should she, he asked himself?--they had only met
once, when both were children, and she had no doubt forgotten his very
existence. Still--

He rang the house bell at last and asked for Mrs. Carswell. The
housekeeper came hurrying to him, a look of expectancy on her face. "Has anything been heard, Mr. Neale?" she asked. "Or found out? Have the
police been told yet?" "The police know," answered Neale. "And nothing has been heard. Where is
Miss Fosdyke, Mrs. Carswell? I should like to speak to her." "Gone to the Scarnham Arms, Mr. Neale," replied the housekeeper. 