

E-text prepared by D Alexander and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations. See 32732-h.htm or 32732-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32732/32732-h/32732-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32732/32732-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/jacobsladder00oppe





JACOB'S LADDER

by

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

With Frontispiece by F. Vaux Wilson







Boston
Little, Brown, and Company
1921

Copyright, 1921,
By Little, Brown, and Company. All rights reserved

Published February, 1921

The Colonial Press
C. H. Simonds Co., Boston, U. S. A. [Illustration: "I AM OBLIGED TO YOU ALL FOR PUTTING UP WITH MY
COMPANY FOR SO LONG." FRONTISPIECE. _See page 17._]




JACOB'S LADDER




PROLOGUE


Seated at breakfast on that memorable July morning, Jacob Pratt
presented all the appearance of a disconsolate man. His little country
sitting-room was as neat and tidy as the capable hands of the
inimitable Mrs. Harris could make it. His coffee was hot and his eggs
were perfectly boiled. Through the open windows stretched a little
vista of the many rows of standard roses which had been the joy of his
life. Yet blank misery dwelt in the soul of this erstwhile cheerful
little man, and the spirit of degradation hung like a gloomy pall over
his thoughts and being. Only the day before he had filed his petition
in bankruptcy. The usual morning programme was carried out, only, alas! in different
fashion. Five and twenty minutes before the departure of the train,
Mrs. Harris--but not the Mrs. Harris of customary days--presented
herself, bearing his hat and stick. Her cheerful smile had departed. There were traces of something very much like tears in her eyes. She
carried a small article in her hand, which she spent most of the time
trying to conceal behind her apron. "You'll be home at the usual time, sir?" she asked. "So far as I know, Mrs. Harris," was the listless reply. His landlady looked at the practically undisturbed breakfast table and
gathered strength of purpose. "Me and Harris, sir," she declared, "we offers our respects and we
hopes nothing ain't going to be changed here." "You are very good--both of you," Jacob said, with a weak smile. "For
the present I don't think that I could live cheaper anywhere else,
nor, I am sure, as comfortably. I have had quite a decent situation
offered me. The only thing is I may be away a little more." "That's good news, sir, anyway," the woman replied heartily. "I mean
to say," she added, "it's good news about your staying on here. And me
and Harris," she went on, "having no children, so to speak, and you
having paid liberal and regular for the last four years, we seem to
have a bit of money we've no use for," she added, producing at last
that bulging purse, "and we thought maybe you might do us the
honour--"

Jacob took her by the shoulders and shook her. "For God's sake, don't, Mrs. Harris!" he broke in. "If I want it, I'll
come to you. And--God bless you!" Whereupon he picked up his hat and stick, stepped through the open
French window, cut a rose for his buttonhole as usual, and started on
his purgatorial walk, making a tremendous effort to look as though
nothing had happened. That walk, alas! surpassed his worst imaginings. Jacob Pratt was a
sensitive little man, notwithstanding his rotund body, his fresh
complexion and humorous mouth; and all the way from his modest abode
to the railway station, he was a prey to fancies which were in some
cases, without a doubt, founded upon fact. Mr. Gregson, the manager of
the International Stores, at the passing of his discredited customer
had certainly retreated from his position on the threshold of his
shop, usual at that hour of the morning, and disclosed a morbid but
absorbing interest in a tub of margarine. The greengrocer's wife had
looked at him reproachfully from behind a heap of cooking apples, and
her response to his diffident greeting was accompanied by a sorrowful
wag of the head. The newspaper boy at the entrance to the station had
extended his _Express_ almost doubtfully and had clutched with
significant caution at the copper coin tendered in exchange for it. The station master had answered his "Good morning" without troubling
to turn his head, and the ticket collector had yawned as he moved
away from the barrier. Each one of these incidents, trifling though
they were in themselves, had been like pinpricks of humiliation to the
little man whose geniality had been almost a byword. The worst trial of all, however, arrived when Jacob entered the
carriage in which he had been accustomed, for six days out of seven,
to make his journey to the city. As usual, it was occupied by two men,
strangers to him commercially, but with whom he had developed a very
pleasant acquaintance; Mr. Stephen Pedlar, the well-known accountant
to the trade in which Jacob was interested; Mr. Lionel Groome, whose
life was spent in a strenuous endeavour to combine the two avocations
of man of fashion and liquid glue manufacturer; and--Mr. Edward
Bultiwell, of Bultiwell and Sons, Bermondsey, his former condescending
patron and occasional host, now, alas! his largest creditor. The
porter, being for the first time unaccountably absent, Jacob was
compelled to open the door for himself, thereby rendering his nervous
entrance more self-conscious than ever. He found himself confronted
and encircled by a solid wall of newspapers, stumbled over an
outstretched foot, relapsed into the vacant place and looked
helplessly around him. A kind word just then might not have helped the
lump in Jacob's throat, but it would certainly have brought a fortune
in later life to any one who had uttered it. "Good morning, gentlemen," the newcomer ventured. There was a muttered response from either side of him,--none from the
august figure in the opposite corner. Jacob fingered with tentative
wistfulness the very choice rose which he was wearing in his
buttonhole. Perhaps he ought not to have plucked and worn it. Perhaps
it ought not to have opened its soft, sweet petals for an owner who
was dwelling in the Valley of Impecunious Disgrace. Perhaps he ought
to have ended there and then the good-natured rivalry of years and
offered the cherished blossom to his silent creditor in the corner,
in place of the very inferior specimen which adorned the lapel of
the great man's coat. Even in that moment of humiliation, Jacob felt
a little thrill of triumph at the thought of Mr. Bultiwell's three
gardeners. It took more than gardeners to grow such a rose as he
was wearing. He liked to fancy that it took personal care, personal
sympathy, personal love. The sweetest and rarest flowers must have
their special atmosphere. Quite suddenly Mr. Edward Bultiwell laid down his _Times_ and glared
across at Jacob. He was a large man, with an ugly red face, a neck
which hung over his collar in rolls, and a resonant voice. Directly
he began to speak, Jacob began to shiver. "Pratt," he said, "am I to understand that the greeting which you
offered to the occupants of this carriage, when you entered, was
intended to include me?" "I--I certainly meant it to," was the tremulous reply. "Then let me beg that such a liberty be not repeated," Mr. Bultiwell
continued brutally. "I look upon a man who has compounded with his
creditors as a person temporarily, at any rate, outside the pale
of converse with his fellows on--er--equal terms. I look upon your
presence in a first-class carriage, wearing a floral adornment,"
Mr. Bultiwell added, with a jealous glance at the very beautiful
rose, "which is, to say the least of it, conspicuous, as--er--an
impertinence to those who have had the misfortune to suffer from
your insolvency." The healthy colour faded from Jacob's cheeks. He had the air of one
stricken by a lash--dazed for the moment and bewildered. "My rose cost me nothing," he faltered, "and my season ticket doesn't
expire till next month. I must go up to the City. My help is
needed--with the books." Mr. Bultiwell shook his paper preparatory to disappearing behind it. "Your presence here may be considered a matter of taste," he fired
off, as a parting shot. "I call it damned bad taste!" Mr. Jacob Pratt sat like a hurt thing till the train stopped at the
next station. Then he stumbled out on to the platform, and, making
his way through an unaccountable mist, he climbed somehow or other
into a third-class carriage. Richard Dauncey, the melancholy man who
lived in the cottage opposite to his, looked up at the newcomer's
entrance, and, for the first time within his recollection, Jacob saw
him smile. "Good morning, Mr. Pratt," the former said, with a strenuous attempt
at cordiality. "If you'll excuse my saying so, that's the finest rose
I've ever seen in my life." Richard Dauncey made his fortune by that speech--and Jacob had to
swallow very hard and look very fixedly out of the window. CHAPTER I


Precisely two years later, Jacob Pratt sat once more in his cottage
sitting-room, contemplating the remains of a barely tasted breakfast. Before him, read for the fiftieth time, were the wonderful letters, in
his brain a most amazing confusion, in his heart an almost hysterical
joy. Presently Mrs. Harris brought in his hat and stick. "You'll excuse my mentioning it, sir," she said, looking at the former
a little disparagingly, "but, brush though I may, there's no doing
much with this hat of yours. The nap's fair gone. Maybe you haven't
noticed it, sir, but, with the summer coming on, a straw hat--"

"I'll buy a straw hat to-day, Mrs. Harris," Jacob promised. "And you'll be home at the usual time for your supper, sir?" "I--I expect so. I am not quite sure, Mrs. Harris. I shall be home
sometime during the day, all right." Mrs. Harris shook her head at the sight of the untasted egg. "You'll excuse my saying so, sir," she pronounced severely, "but
there's no good work done on an empty stomach. Times is hard, as we
all know, but eggs is cheap." "Mrs. Harris," Jacob reminded her, "it is two years since I left one
of your eggs. I left it then because I was miserable. I am leaving
it this morning because--I have had good news. I can't eat. Later
on--later on, Mrs. Harris." "And a bit of good news is what you deserve, sir," the latter
declared, lingering while he cut his accustomed rose with fingers
which trembled strangely. "Thank you very much, Mrs. Harris," he said. "When I come back
to-night, I'll tell you all about it." Once more, then, two years almost to a day after Mr. Edward Bultiwell,
of the great firm of Bultiwell and Sons, had laid down his newspaper
and spoken his mind, Jacob was on his way to the station, again
wearing a choice rose in his buttonhole. He had found no occasion to
change his lodgings, for he had been an economical man who took great
care of his possessions even in the days of his prosperity, and his
moderate salary as traveller for a Bermondsey firm of merchants
brought him in quite enough for his simple needs. He had to some
extent lived down his disgrace. The manager of the International
Stores nodded to him now, a trifle condescendingly, yet with tacit
acknowledgement of the fact that in domestic affairs Jacob was a man
of principle who always paid his way. The greengrocer's wife passed
the time of day when not too preoccupied, and the newspaper boy no
longer clutched for his penny. Jacob generally met the melancholy man
at the corner of the avenue and walked to the station with him. And he
still grew roses and worshipped them. On the way to the station, on this particular morning, he amazed his
friend. "Richard," he said, "I shall not travel to the City with you to-day. At least I shall not start with you. I shall change carriages at
Wendley, as I did once before." "The devil!" Richard exclaimed. They were passing the plate-glass window of a new emporium, and Jacob
paused to glance furtively at his reflection. He was an exceedingly
neat man, and his care for his clothes and person had survived two
years of impecuniosity. Nevertheless, although he passed muster well
enough to the casual observer, there were indications in his attire of
the inevitable conflict between a desire for adornment and the lack of
means to indulge it. His too often pressed trousers were thin at the
seams; his linen, though clean, was frayed; there were cracks in his
vigorously polished shoes. He looked at himself, and he was suddenly
conscious of a most amazing thrill. One of the cherished desires of
his life loomed up before him. Even Savile Row was not an
impossibility. At the station he puzzled the booking clerk by presenting himself at
the window and demanding a first single to Liverpool Street. The youth handed him the piece of pasteboard with a wondering glance. "Your season ain't up yet, Mr. Pratt." "It is not," Jacob acquiesced, "but this morning I desire to travel to
town first-class." Whilst he waited for the train, Jacob read again the wonderful
letters, folded them up, and was ready, with an air of anticipation,
when the little train with its reversed engine came puffing around the
curve and brought its few antiquated and smoke-encrusted carriages
to a standstill. Everything went as he had hoped. In that familiar
first-class carriage, into which he stepped with beating heart, sat
Mr. Bultiwell in the farthest corner, with his two satellites, Stephen
Pedlar, the accountant, and Lionel Groome. They all stared at him in
blank bewilderment as he entered. Mr. Bultiwell, emerging from behind
the _Times_, sat with his mouth open and a black frown upon his
forehead. "Good morning, all," Jacob remarked affably, as he sprawled in his
place and put his legs up on the opposite seat. He might have dropped a bombshell amongst them with less effect. Every
newspaper was lowered, and every one stared at this bold intruder. Then they turned to Mr. Bultiwell. It seemed fittest that he should
deal with the matter. Unfortunately, he, too, seemed temporarily
bereft of words. "I seem to have startled you all a bit, what?" Jacob continued, with
the air of one thoroughly enjoying the sensation he had produced. "I've got my ticket all right. Here you are," he went on, producing
it,--"first-class to Liverpool Street. Thought I'd like to have a look
at you all once more. Sorry to see you're not looking quite your old
self, Mr. Bultiwell. Nasty things, these bad debts, eh? Three last
week, I noticed. You'll have to be careful down Bristol way. Things
there are pretty dicky." "It would be more becoming on your part, sir," Mr. Bultiwell
pronounced furiously, "if you were to hold your tongue about bad
debts." Jacob snapped his fingers. "I don't owe any man a farthing," he declared. "An undischarged bankrupt--"

"Sold again," Jacob interrupted amiably. "Got my discharge last week." Mr. Bultiwell found his tongue at the same time that he lost his
temper. "So that's the reason you're butting in here amongst gentlemen whom
you've lost the right to associate with!" he exclaimed. "You think
because you're whitewashed by the courts you can count yourself an
honest man again, eh? You think that because--"

"Wrong--all wrong," Jacob interrupted once more, with ever-increasing
geniality. "You'll have to guess again." Mr. Groome--the very superior Mr. Groome, who had married a relative
of Mr. Bultiwell's, and who occasionally wore an eyeglass and was seen
in the West End--intervened with gentle sarcasm. "Mr. Pratt has perhaps come to tell us that it is his intention to
celebrate the granting of his discharge by paying his debts in full." Jacob glanced at the speaker with the air of one moved to admiration. "Mr. Groome, sir," he pronounced, "you are a wizard! You must have
seen right through into the breast pocket of my coat. Allow me to read
you a couple of letters." He produced these amazing documents, leisurely unfolding the first. There was no question of newspapers now. "You will remember," he said, "that I came to grief because I stood
bondsman to my brother, who was out prospecting for oil lands in
America. 'Disgraceful speculation' Mr. Bultiwell called it, I think. Well, this letter is from Sam:"

     Ritz-Carlton Hotel,
     New York. My dear Jacob,

     I cabled you this morning to prepare for good news, so don't
     get heart failure when you receive this letter. We've struck
     it rich, as I always told you we should. I sold the worse
     half of our holdings in Arizona for four million dollars last
     week, and Lord knows what we'll get for the rest. I've cabled
     you a hundred thousand pounds, to be going on with, to the
     Bank of England. Sorry you've had such a rough time, old chap, but you're on
     velvet for the rest of your life. Have a bottle with your
     best pal when you get this, and drink my health. Cheerio! Sam. P. S. I should say, roughly speaking, that your share of
     the rest of the land will work out at something like five
     million dollars. I hope you'll chuck your humdrum life now
     and come out into the world of adventure. "It's a fairy tale!" Mr. Groome gasped. "Let me see the letter," the accountant implored. Mr. Bultiwell only breathed hard. "The other communication," Jacob continued, unfolding a stiff sheet of
paper, "is from the Bank of England, and it is what you might call
short and sweet:"

     Dear Sir,

     We beg to inform you that we have to-day received a credit
     on your behalf, from our New York branch, amounting to one
     hundred thousand pounds sterling, which sum we hold at your
     disposal. Faithfully yours,
                         BANK OF ENGLAND. p. p. J. Woodridge Smith. "One hundred thousand pounds! God bless my soul!" Mr. Bultiwell
gasped. "I shall be at your office, Mr. Pedlar," Jacob announced, folding up
the letters, "at eleven o'clock." "It is your intention, I presume," the accountant enquired, "to pay
your debts in full?" "Certainly," Jacob replied. "I thought I had made that clear." "A very laudable proceeding," Mr. Pedlar murmured approvingly. The train was beginning to slacken speed. Jacob rose to his feet. "I am changing carriages here," he remarked. "I am obliged to you all
for putting up with my company for so long." Mr. Bultiwell cleared his throat. There was noticeable in his tone
some return of his former pomposity. "Under the present circumstances, Mr. Pratt," he said, "I see no
reason why you should leave us. I should like to hear more about your
wonderful good fortune and to discuss with you your plans for the
future. If you are occupied now, perhaps this evening at home. My
roses are worth looking at." Jacob smiled in a peculiar fashion. "I have a friend waiting for me in the third-class portion of the
train," he replied. "Until eleven o'clock, Mr. Pedlar." CHAPTER II


The melancholy man was seated in his favourite corner, gazing out at
the landscape. He scarcely looked up as Jacob entered. It chanced that
they were alone. "Richard Dauncey," Jacob said impressively, as soon as the train had
started again, "you once sat in that corner and smiled at me when I
got in. I think you also wished me good morning and admired my rose." "It was two years ago," Dauncey assented. "Did you ever hear of a man," Jacob went on, "who made his fortune
with a smile? Of course not. You are probably the first. Look at me
steadfastly. This is to be a heart-to-heart talk. Why do you go about
looking as though you were the most miserable creature on God's
earth?" Richard Dauncey sighed. "You needn't rub it in. My appearance is against me in business and in
every way. I can't help it. I have troubles." "They are at an end," Jacob declared. "Don't jump out of the window or
do anything ridiculous, my friend, but sit still and listen. You have
been starving with a wife and two children on three pounds a week. Your salary from to-day is ten pounds a week, with expenses." Dauncey shook his head. "You are not well this morning, man." Jacob produced the letters and handed them over to his friend, who
read them with many exclamations of wonder. When he returned them,
there was a little flush in his face. "I congratulate you, Jacob," he said heartily. "You are one of those
men who have the knack of keeping a stiff upper lip, but I know what
you have suffered." "Congratulate yourself, too, old chap," Jacob enjoined, holding out
his hand. "Exactly what I am going to do in the future I haven't quite
made up my mind, but this I do know--we start a fresh life from
lunch-time to-day, you and I. You can call yourself my secretary, for
want of a better description, until we settle down. Your screw will be
ten pounds a week, and if you refuse the hundred pounds I am going to
offer you at our luncheon table at Simpson's to-day, I shall knock you
down." Dauncey apologised shamefacedly, a few minutes later, for a brief
period of rare weakness. "It's the wife, old chap," he explained, as they drew near the
terminus. "You see, I married a little above my station, but there was
never any money, and the two kids came and there didn't seem enough
to clothe them properly, or feed them properly, or put even a trifle
by in case anything should happen to me. Life's been pretty hard,
Jacob, and I can't make friends. Or rather I never have been able to
until you came along." They shook hands once more, a queer but very human proceeding in those
overwrought moments. "Just you walk to the office this morning," Jacob said, "with your
head in the air, and keep on telling yourself there's no mistake about
it. You're going home to-night with a hundred pounds in bank notes in
your pocket, with a bottle of wine under one arm, and a brown paper
parcel as big as you can carry under the other. You're out of the
wood, young fellow, and you be thankful for the rest of your life that
you found the way to smile one morning. So long till one o'clock at
Simpson's," he added, as they stepped out on to the platform. "Hi,
taxi!" Mr. Bultiwell came hurrying along, with a good deal less than his
usual dignity. He was not one of those men who were intended by nature
to proceed at any other than a leisurely pace. "Pratt," he called out, "wait a minute. We'll share that taxi, eh?" Jacob glanced over his shoulder. "Sorry," he answered, "I'm not going your way." *       *       *       *       *

Soon after the opening of that august establishment, Jacob, not
without some trepidation, visited the Bank of England. At half-past
ten, he strolled into the warehouse of Messrs. Smith and Joyce,
leather merchants, Bermondsey Street, the firm for which he had been
working during the last two years. Mr. Smith frowned at him from
behind a stack of leather. "You're late this morning, Pratt," he growled. "I thought perhaps you
had gone over to see that man at Tottenham." "The man at Tottenham," Jacob remarked equably, "can go to hell." Mr. Smith was a short, thin man with a cynical expression, a bloodless
face and a loveless heart. He opened his mouth a little, a habit of
his when surprised. "I suppose it is too early in the morning to suggest that you have
been drinking," he said. "You are right," Jacob acknowledged. "A little later in the day I
shall be able to satisfy everybody in that respect." Mr. Smith came out from behind the stack of leather. He was wearing a
linen smock over his clothes and paper protectors over his cuffs. "I don't think you're quite yourself this morning, Pratt," he observed
acidly. "I am not," Jacob answered. "I have had good news." Mr. Smith was a farseeing man, with a brain which worked quickly. He
remembered in a moment the cause of Jacob's failure. Oil might be
found at any time! "I am very glad to hear it, Pratt," he said. "Would you like to come
into the office and have a little chat?" Jacob looked his employer squarely in the face. "Never so long as I live," he replied. "Just the few words I want to
say to you, Mr. Smith, can be said here. You gave me a job when I was
down and out. You gave it to me not out of pity but because you knew I
was a damned good traveller. I've trudged the streets for you, ridden
in tram-cars, 'buses and tubes, sold your leather honestly and
carefully for two years. I've doubled your turnover; I've introduced
you to the soundest connection you ever had on your books. Each
Christmas a clerk in the counting house has handed me an extra
sovereign--to buy sweets with, I suppose! You've never raised my
salary, you've never uttered a word of thanks. I've brought you in
three of the biggest contracts you ever had in your life, and you
accepted them with grudging satisfaction, pretended they didn't pay
you, forgot that I knew what you gave for every ton of your leather
that passed through my hands. You've been a cold, calculating and
selfish employer. You'll never be a rich man because you haven't the
imagination, and you'll never be a poor one because you're too stingy. And now you can go on with your rotten little business and find
another traveller, for I've finished with you." "You can't leave without a week's notice," Mr. Smith snapped. "Sue me, then," Jacob retorted, as he turned away. "Put me in the
County Court. I shall have the best part of a million to pay the
damage with. Good morning to you, Mr. Smith, and I thank Providence
that never again in this life have I got to cross the threshold of
your warehouse!" Jacob passed out into the street, whistling lightly. He was beginning
to feel himself. Half an hour later, seated in the most comfortable easy chair of Mr.
Pedlar's private office, a sanctum into which he had never before been
asked to penetrate, Jacob discussed the flavour of a fine Havana cigar
and issued his instructions for the payment of his debts in full. Mr.
Stephen Pedlar, a suave, shrewd man of much versatility, congratulated
himself that he had, at all times during his connection with Jacob,
treated this erstwhile insignificant defaulter with the courtesy which
at least had cost him nothing. "Most interesting position, yours, Pratt," the man of figures
declared, loitering a little over the final details. "I should like to
talk it over with you sometime. What about a little lunch up in the
West End to-day?" Jacob shook his head. "I am lunching with a friend," he said. "Thank you very much, all the
same." "Some other time, then," Mr. Pedlar continued. "Have you made any
plans at all for the future?" "None as yet worth speaking of." "You are a young man," the accountant continued. "You must have
occupation. If the advice of a man of the world is worth having, count
me at your disposal." "I am very much obliged," Jacob acknowledged. "I can be considered wholly impartial," Mr. Pedlar went on, "because
I have no direct interest in whatever you may choose to do with your
money, but my advice to you, Mr. Pratt, would be to buy a partnership
in one of the leading firms engaged in the industry with which you
have been associated." "I see," Jacob reflected. "Go into business again on a larger scale?" "Exactly," the accountant assented, "only, go into an established
business, with a partner, where you are not too much tied down. You'll
want to enjoy yourself and see a little of the world now. A bungalow
down the river for the summer, eh? A Rolls-Royce, of course, and a
month or so on the Riviera in the winter. Plenty of ways of getting
something out of life, Mr. Pratt, if only one has the means." Jacob drew a deep sigh and murmured something noncommittal. "My advice to you," his mentor continued, "would be to enjoy
yourself, get value for your money, but--don't give up work
altogether. With the capital at your command, you could secure an
interest in one of the leading firms in the trade." "Were you thinking of any one in particular?" Jacob asked quietly. Mr. Pedlar hesitated. "To tell you the truth, Mr. Pratt," he admitted candidly, "I was. I know of a firm at the present moment, one of the oldest and most
respected in the trade--I might almost say the most prominent
firm--who would be disposed to admit into partnership a person of
your standing and capital." "You don't, by any chance, mean Bultiwell's?" The accountant's manner became more earnest. He had the air of one who
releases a great secret. "Don't mention it, Pratt, whatever you do," he begged. "Mr. Bultiwell
would probably be besieged by applications from people who would be
quite useless to him." "I shall not tell a soul," Jacob promised. "You see," his companion went on, watching the ash of his cigar for a
moment, "the Mortimers and the Craigs have both come to an end so far
as regards participation in the business. Colonel Craig was killed
playing polo in India, and had no sons, and old Mortimer, too, had
only one son, who went into the diplomatic service. That leaves Mr.
Bultiwell the sole representative of the firm, and though he has, as
you know, a great dislike for new associations, it is certainly too
much responsibility for one man." "The Mortimer and Craig interests have had to be paid out, I suppose?" Jacob enquired. "To a certain extent, yes," Mr. Pedlar admitted. "That is where the
opportunity for new capital comes in." "I have made no plans yet," Jacob declared, rising to take his leave. "If you like to place the figures before me within the course of the
next week or so, and the suggested terms, I might consider the
matter--that is, if I decide to go into business at all." "I can't conceive a more comfortable position for a young man with
your knowledge of the trade," Mr. Pedlar said, as he wished his guest
good morning. "You shall have all the figures placed before you. Good
morning, and once more my heartiest congratulations, Mr. Pratt." CHAPTER III


At twelve o'clock, Jacob was in Regent Street, and at one o'clock, in
a new blue serge suit, shirt, collar and tie of the latest pattern, he
was dividing his time between admiring his reflection in the mirror
and waiting in the entrance hall of Simpson's. Dauncey's coming was,
in its way, pathetic. With a pessimism engendered by years of
misfortune, he had found it impossible to preserve throughout the
morning the exultation of those first few minutes with Jacob in the
railway carriage. He entered the restaurant and came towards his
friend with a feverish light in his eyes and a trembling of the lips
which the latter only too well understood. "It's all right, old fellow," Jacob assured him emphatically. "Throw
in your hat with mine. Here's our table--two cocktails waiting, you
see, and a bottle of the best the place has--I tell you the old
gentleman in Threadneedle Street parted without a murmur. I'm simply
bursting with money--Steady, old chap!" In the crowd of people waiting for their tables, they were little
noticed, these two--Dauncey struggling against the faintness, the
rising in his throat, the strange moisture in his eyes, Jacob talking
nonsense as hard as he could and affecting to disregard these unusual
conditions. Soon he had his friend safely seated opposite him, forced
him to drink his cocktail, gave cheerful orders to the waiter, and
produced a brand new pocketbook, which he laid upon the table. "Richard," he announced, "there's a hundred pounds in that. Away with
it, pocketbook and all. Now put the soles of your feet firmly on the
ground and think what you're going to say to Nora when you get home. You've stood up against some nasty knocks. Now just tell yourself that
they're all over. We'll take a feast home to-night. Waiter, open the
wine. By Jove, I've heard that pop for other fellows often enough, but
not one for myself for two years and more." "Jacob," Dauncey faltered, "I can't say a word, but I'm all right. And
God bless you," he added, raising his glass and drinking. "God bless
you, Jacob! You're a pal." After that, the thing was accepted as part of their lives, and they
talked reasonably. "This afternoon," Jacob confided, "I am going to be measured for half
a dozen suits of clothes. I am going to prowl about Bond Street and
gratify the longings of a lifetime for variegated hosiery. At five
o'clock, Richard, I shall call for you at your office. By the bye, you
had better ask them how soon they can let you go." "They won't worry about that," Dauncey answered, a little bitterly. "Every Saturday for months has been a nightmare to me, for fear I'd
get the sack. They don't think I'm smart enough for my job there--not
smart enough even for three pounds a week!" "Just let them know what you think about them, for a change," Jacob
enjoined. "Three pounds a week, indeed! Tell them you've accepted a
post at five hundred a year with a financier who needs your advice
with his investments. That'll give them something to think about!" "It will!" Dauncey admitted, with a smile. "They'll think I've gone
mad." "Let 'em think what they choose," Jacob insisted. "You come out of it
with your nose in the air and leave your office coat behind for the
errand boy. They'll always be worried to think that you must have been
a great deal smarter than they gave you credit for." "I'll do my best," Dauncey promised. "I shall call for you in my motor-car," Jacob continued; "we shall
make purchases on our way, and we shall return to Marlingden in state. Thank heavens, Dick, for small ambitions! Just for the moment, I feel
that nothing could make me happier than to be driven down the village
street, pull up at the shops on the way home, and spend a few
five-pound notes where I've had to look twice at a shilling." Dauncey smiled with the air of a man who sees more wonderful things. "That's all very well in its way, old fellow," he admitted, "but
to appreciate this absolutely you ought to be married. I can think
of nothing but Nora's face when I tell her--when I show her the
pocketbook--when she begins to realise! Jacob, it's worth all the
misery of the last few years. It's worth--anything." Jacob's face glowed with sympathy, but he made a brave attempt to
whistle under his breath a popular tune. "Fact of it is, old chap," he said, as he gripped the bottle for
support and watched the bubbles rise in Dauncey's glass, "we are both
altogether too emotional." *       *       *       *       *

Jacob's programme, for the remainder of the day, was carried out very
nearly as he had planned it. The car was hired without difficulty, and
the sensation created in the village shops by his arrival in it, his
lavish orders and prompt payment, was ample and gratifying. Mrs.
Harris alone seemed curiously unmoved when he confided to her the
story of this great change in his circumstances. She who had been all
kindness and sympathy in the days of his misfortune listened to the
story of his newly arrived wealth with a striking absence of
enthusiasm. "You'll be giving up your rooms now, I suppose?" she observed with a
sigh. "Want to go and live in the West End of London, or some such
place." Jacob extended his arm as far as possible around her ample waist. "Mrs. Harris," he said, "no one else in the world could have looked
after me so well when I was poor. No one else shall look after me now
that I am rich. If I leave here, you and Harris must come too, but I
don't think that I shall--not altogether. There are the roses, you
see." "And what's in that cardboard box?" she asked suspiciously. "A black silk dress for you," Jacob replied. "You'll give me a kiss
when you see it." "A black silk dress--for me?" Mrs. Harris faltered, her eyes agleam. "I don't know what Harris will say!" "There's a bicycle at the station for him," Jacob announced. "No more
two-mile trudges to work, eh?" Mrs. Harris sat down suddenly and raised her apron to her eyes. Jacob
made his escape and crossed the road. It had seemed to him that he
must have exhausted the whole gamut of emotions during the day, but
there was still a moment's revelation for him when the pale, shy,
little woman whom he had known as his friend's wife came running out
to greet him with shining eyes and outstretched hands. "Mr. Pratt!" she cried. "Is it all true?" "It's all true, and more of it," he assured her. "Your man's set up
comfortably for life, and I am a starving millionaire. Anything to
eat?" She laughed a little hysterically. "Why, there's everything in the world to eat, and to drink, too, I
should think," she answered. "What they must have thought of you two
men in the shops, I can't imagine! Come into the dining-room, won't
you? Dick's opening some wine." Then followed the second feast of the day, at which Jacob had to
pretend to be unconscious of the fact that his host and hostess were
alternately ecstatically happy and tremulously hysterical. They all
waited upon themselves and ate many things the names of which only
were familiar to them. Dauncey opened champagne as though he had been
used to it all his life. Jacob carved chickens with great skill, but
was a little puzzled as to the location of caviare in the meal and
more than a little generous with the _pate-de-foie-gras_. The
strawberries and real Devonshire cream were an immense success, and
Mrs. Dauncey's eyes grew round with pleasure at the sight of the boxes
of bonbons and chocolates. Afterwards the two men wandered out into
the garden, a quaint strip of uncultivated land, with wanton beds of
sweet-smelling flowers, and separated from the meadow beyond only by
an untrimmed and odoriferous hedge, wreathed in honeysuckle. Over
wonderful cigars, the like of which neither of them had ever smoked
before, they talked for a moment or two seriously. "What are you really going to do with your money, Jacob?" Dauncey
asked. "And where do I come in? I do hope I am going to have a chance
of earning my salary." Jacob was silent for a few moments. In the half light, a new sternness
seemed to have stolen into his face. "Richard," he said, "you've seen men come out of a fight covered with
scars,--wounds that burn and remind them of their sufferings. Well,
I'm rather like that. I was never a very important person, you know,
but in the old days I was proud of my little business and my good
name. It hurt me like hell to go under. It was bad enough when people
were kind. Sometimes they weren't." "I know," Dauncey murmured sympathetically. "My scars are there," Jacob went on. "If I had such a thing, Dick, I
should say that they had burned their way into my soul. I haven't made
any plans. Don't think that I am going to embark upon any senseless
scheme of revenge--but if this promise of great wealth is fulfilled, I
have some sort of a fancy for using it as a scourge to cruelty, or for
giving the unfortunate a leg up where it's deserved. There are one or
two enterprises already shaping themselves in my mind, which might be
brought to a successful conclusion." "Enterprises?" Dauncey repeated a little vaguely. Jacob laid his hand upon his friend's shoulder. There was a strange
light in his eyes. "Dick," he said, "you'd think I was a commonplace sort of fellow
enough, wouldn't you? So I am, in a way, and yet I've got something
stirring in my blood of the fever which sent Sam out to the far west
of America, more for the sheer love of going than for any hope of
making a fortune. I've lived an everyday sort of life, but I've had
my dreams." "We're not going around the world treasure hunting, or anything of
that sort, are we?" Dauncey asked anxiously. "All the treasure hunting we shall do," Jacob replied, with a little
thrill in his tone, "will be on the London pavements. All the
adventures which the wildest buccaneers the world has ever known might
crave are to be found under the fogs of this wonderful city. We shan't
need to travel far in the body, Dick. A little office somewhere in the
West End, a little ground bait which I know about, and the sharks of
the world will come stealing around us. There are seven or eight
million people in London, Dick. A detective I once knew--kind of
thoughtful chap he was--once told me that on a moderate computation
there were twenty-five thousand of them who would commit murder
without hesitation if they could get their hand deep enough into their
neighbour's pocket." "Talking through his hat," Dauncey muttered. "That is what we shall find out. Only remember this, Richard. I am
convinced that I possess in some degree that sixth sense the French
criminologist talked about,--the sense for Adventure. I've had to keep
my nose to the grindstone, worse luck, but there have been times when
I've lifted my head and sniffed it in the air. In queer places, too! In the dark, shadowy streets of old towns which I have visited as a
commercial traveller, selling goods by day and wandering out alone by
night into the backwaters. I've felt the thrill there, Dick, trying to
look through the curtained windows of some of those lonely houses. I've been brushed by a stranger in Fleet Street and felt it; looked
into a woman's mysterious eyes as she turned around, with a latchkey
in her hand, before a house in Bloomsbury. We shan't need to wander
far away, Richard." "Seems to me," the latter observed, "that I am to play Man Friday
to--"

He suddenly stood rigid. He gripped his friend's arm, his lips a
little parted. He was listening in a paroxysm of subdued joy. From out
of the sitting-room window came faint sounds of melody. "It's Nora," he murmured ecstatically. "It's the first time for years! She's singing!" He moved involuntarily towards the house. Jacob filled his pipe and
strolled across the way, homewards. CHAPTER IV


Mr. Edward Bultiwell, of the House of Bultiwell and Sons, sat alone in
his private office, one morning a week or so later, and communed with
ghosts. It was a large apartment, furnished in mid-Victorian fashion,
and, with the exception of the telephone and electric light, destitute
of any of the modern aids to commercial enterprise. Oil paintings of
Mr. Bultiwell's father and grandfather hung upon the walls. A row of
stiff, horsehair chairs with massive frames stood around the room,
one side of which was glass-fronted, giving a view of the extensive
warehouse beyond. It was here that Mr. Bultiwell's ghosts were
gathered together,--ghosts of buyers from every town in the United
Kingdom, casting occasional longing glances towards where the
enthroned magnate sat, hoping that he might presently issue forth and
vouchsafe them a word or two of greeting; ghosts of sellers, too,
sellers of hides and skins from India and South America, Mexico and
China, all anxious to do business with the world-famed House of
Bultiwell. Every now and then the great man would condescend to
exchange amenities with one of these emissaries from distant parts. Everywhere was stir and bustle. Every few minutes a salesman would
present himself, with a record of his achievements. All the time the
hum of voices, the clattering of chains, the dust and turmoil of
moving merchandise, the coming and going of human beings, all helping
to drive the wheel of prosperity for the House of Bultiwell!... The ghosts faded away. Two old men were outside, dusting stacks of
leather. There was no one else, no sound of movement or life. Bultiwell glanced at his watch, as he sat there and waited. Presently
he struck the bell in front of him, and a grey-haired bookkeeper
shuffled in. "What time did Pedlar say Mr. Pratt would be round?" he asked harshly. "Between eleven and twelve, sir." Mr. Bultiwell glanced at his watch and grunted. "Where's Mr. Haskall?" "Gone round to the sale, sir." "He got my message?" Mr. Bultiwell asked anxiously. "I told him that he was on no account to buy, sir," the cashier
assented. "He was somewhat disappointed. There is a probability of a
rise in hides, and most of the pits down at the tannery are empty." Mr. Bultiwell groaned under his breath. His eyes met the eyes of his
old employe. "You know why we can't buy--at the sales, Jenkins," he muttered. The man sighed as he turned away. "I know, sir." Then there was a little stir in the place. The two men left off
dusting; the clerks in the counting-house raised their heads
hopefully. Jacob Pratt arrived and was ushered into the presence of
the head of the firm. It was a trying moment for Mr. Bultiwell, but
he did his best. He wished to be patronising, kindly and gracious. He succeeded in being cringing. "Glad to see you, Pratt. Glad to see you," he said. "Try that
easy-chair. A cigar, eh? No? Quite right! Don't smoke much myself
till after lunch. Seen Pedlar this morning?" "I've just come from his office," Jacob replied. Mr. Bultiwell thrust his hands into his trousers pockets and leaned
back in his chair. "Clever fellow, Pedlar, but not so clever as he thinks himself. I
don't mind telling you, Pratt, between ourselves, that it was entirely
my idea that you should be approached with a view to your coming in
here." "Is that so?" Jacob observed quietly. "I knew perfectly well that you wouldn't be content to do nothing, a
young man like you, and if you're going to keep in the leather trade
at all, why not become associated with a firm you know all about, eh? I don't want to flatter myself," Mr. Bultiwell proceeded, with a touch
of his old arrogance, "but Bultiwell's, although we haven't been so
energetic lately, is still pretty well at the top of the tree, eh?" "Not quite where it was, I am afraid, Mr. Bultiwell," Jacob objected. "I've been looking through the figures, you know. Profits seem to have
been going down a good deal." "Pooh! That's nothing! Hides were ridiculously high all last year, but
they're on the drop now. Besides, these accountants always have to
make out balance sheets from a pessimistic point of view." "The present capital of the firm," Jacob commented, "seems to me
astonishingly small." "What's it figure out at?" Mr. Bultiwell enquired, with a fine show of
carelessness. "Forty thousand pounds? Well, that is small--smaller
than it's been at any time during the last ten years. Perhaps I have
embarked in a few too many outside investments. They are all good
'uns, though. No use having money lying idle, Mr. Pratt, these days. Now my idea was," he went on, striving to hide a slight quaver in his
voice, "that you put in, say, eighty thousand pounds, and take an
equal partnership--a partnership, Pratt, remember, in Bultiwell's....
Eh? What's that?" Mr. Bultiwell looked up with a well-assumed frown of annoyance. A very
fashionably dressed young lady, attractive notwithstanding a certain
sullenness of expression, had entered the room carrying a great bunch
of roses. "So sorry, dad," she said, strolling up to the table. "I understood
that you were alone. Here are the roses," she added, laying them upon
the table without enthusiasm. "Are you coming up west for luncheon
to-day?" "My dear," Mr. Bultiwell replied, "I am engaged just now. By the bye,
you know Mr. Pratt, don't you? Pratt, you remember my daughter?" Jacob, whose memories of that young lady, with her masses of yellow
hair and most alluring smile, had kept him in fairyland for three
months, and a little lower than hell for the last two years, took
fierce command of himself as he rose to his feet and received a very
cordial but somewhat forced greeting from this unexpected visitor. "Of course I know Mr. Pratt," she answered, "and I hope he hasn't
altogether forgotten me. The last time I saw you, you bicycled over
one evening, didn't you, to see my father's roses, and we made you
play tennis. I remember how cross dad was because you played without
shoes." "Mr. Pratt is doubtless better provided in these days," Bultiwell
observed with an elephantine smile. "What about running over to see us
to-night or to-morrow night in that new car of yours, Pratt, eh?" "Do come," the young lady begged, with a very colourable imitation of
enthusiasm. "I am longing for some tennis." "You are very kind," Jacob replied. "May I leave it open just for a
short time?" "Certainly, certainly!" Mr. Bultiwell agreed. "Sybil, run along and
sit in the waiting-room for a few minutes. I'll take you up to the
Carlton, if I can spare the time. May take Mr. Pratt, perhaps." Sybil passed out, flashing a very brilliant if not wholly natural
smile into Jacob's face, as he held open the door. Mr. Bultiwell
watched the latter anxiously as he returned slowly to his place. He
was not altogether satisfied with the result of his subtle little
plot. "Where were we?" he continued, struggling hard to persevere in that
cheerfulness which sat upon him in these days like an ill-fitting
garment. "Ah! I know--eighty thousand pounds and an equal partnership. How does that appeal to you, Mr. Pratt?" "There were one or two points in the balance sheet which struck me,"
Jacob confessed, gazing down at his well-creased trousers. "The margin
between assets and liabilities, though small, might be considered
sufficient, but the liability on bills under discount seemed to me
extraordinarily large." Mr. Bultiwell's pencil, which had been straying idly over the blotting
pad by his side, stopped. He looked at his visitor with a frown. "Credits must always be large in our trade," he said sharply. "You
know that, Mr. Pratt." "Your credits, however," Jacob pointed out, "are abnormal. I ventured
to take out a list of six names, on each one of whom you have
acceptances running to the tune of twenty or thirty thousand pounds." "The majority of my customers," Mr. Bultiwell declared, with a little
catch in his breath, "are as safe as the Bank of England." Jacob produced a very elegant morocco pocketbook, with gold edges, and
studied a slip of paper which he held towards his companion. "Here is a list of the firms," he continued. "I have interviewed most
of them and made it worth their while to tell me the truth. There
isn't one of them that isn't hopelessly insolvent. They are being kept
on their legs by you and your bankers, simply and solely to bolster up
the credit of the House of Bultiwell." "Sir!" Mr. Bultiwell thundered. "I should drop that tone, if I were you," Jacob advised coldly. "You
have been a bully all your life, and a cruel one at that. Lately you
have become dishonest. When the firm of Bultiwell is compelled to file
its petition in bankruptcy, which I imagine will be a matter of only
a few weeks, I do not envy you your examination before the official
receiver." Mr. Bultiwell collapsed like a pricked bladder. He shrivelled in his
clothes. There was a whine in his tone as he substituted appeal for
argument. "There's good business to be done here still," he pleaded. "Even if
the firm lost a little money on those names, there are two of them at
least who might weather the storm, with reasonable assistance. Pratt,
they tell me you're pretty well a millionaire. I'm sorry if I was hard
on you in the old days. If you won't take a partnership, will you buy
the business?" Jacob laughed scornfully. "If I were ten times a millionaire," he said, rising to his feet, "I
would never risk a penny of my money to rid you of the millstone you
have hung around your neck. It is going to be part of my activity in
life, Mr. Bultiwell, to assist nature in dispensing justice. For many
years you have ruled the trade in which we were both brought up, and
during the whole of that time you have never accomplished a single
gracious or kindly action. You have wound up by trying to drag me
into a business which is rotten to the core. Your accountants may be
technically justified in reckoning that hundred and forty thousand
pounds owed you by those six men as good, because they never failed,
but you yourself know that they are hopelessly insolvent, and that
the moment you stop renewing their bills they will topple down like
ninepins.... I would not help you if you were starving. I shall read
of your bankruptcy with pleasure. There is, I think, nothing more to
be said." Mr. Bultiwell sat in his chair, dazed, for long after Jacob had left
him. His daughter reappeared and left at once, harshly dismissed. His
clerks went out for lunch and returned at the appointed hour. Mr.
Bultiwell was seeing ghosts....

       *       *       *       *       *

Jacob and his friend dined together that night in a well-known
grill-room. Dauncey, to whom, in those days, every man seemed to be
a brother and every place he entered a fairy palace, showed signs
of distress as he listened to his companion's story. "Dear friend," he remonstrated, "of what use in the world is revenge? I do not suggest that you should throw your money away trying to help
Bultiwell, but you might at least have left him alone." Jacob shook his head. The corners of his mouth tightened. He spoke
with grave seriousness. "Dick," he said, "you are like the man who sympathises with the evil
growth which it is the surgeon's task to remove. In the days of his
prosperity, Bultiwell was a brute and a bully. His only moments of
comparative geniality came when he was steeped in wine and glutted
with food. His own laziness and self-indulgence paved the way to his
ruin. He then became dishonest. He deliberately tried to cheat me; he
stooped even to the paltry trick of remembering that I once admired
his daughter, and dragged her in to complete his humiliation. Believe
me, the world is a better place without its Bultiwells--a better and a
healthier place--and where I find them in life, I am going to use the
knife." "You have used it this time perhaps even more effectually than you
thought," Dauncey groaned, as he took an evening paper from his pocket
and passed it across the table. "Mr. Bultiwell shot himself in his
office, late this afternoon. I did not tell you before, for fear it
might spoil your dinner." Jacob sipped his wine, unmoved. "It was really the only thing left for him," was his brief comment. Dauncey was once more the melancholy man. "I hope that all your interventions, or whatever you may call them,"
he said, "won't end in the same way." Jacob's eyes looked through the walls of the restaurant. A sudden
impulse of fancy had carried him forward into that land of adventure
to which he held the golden key. He felt the thrill of danger, the
mystery of unknown places. He passed from palace to hovel. He heard
the curse of the defeated schemer, he felt the warmth and joy of
gratitude. All these figures, save one, were imaginary, and that one
was always there, always watching, always with that look of reproach
which he seemed already to see in her cold blue eyes. He fancied
himself pleading with her, only to be scorned; hiding from the dangers
she invoked; fancied her the protectress of his enemies, the evil
genius of those whom he would have befriended. And all the time there
lingered in the background of his mind the memory of that single
evening when, angered by her father's condescension, she had chosen
to be kind to him; had shown him the secret places in that wonderful
garden, glorious with budding rhododendrons, fragrant with the roses
drooping from the long pergola,--a little scene out of fairyland,
through which he had walked under the rising moon like a man
bewildered with strange happiness. Richard leaned forward in his place. "Are you seeing ghosts?" he asked curiously. Jacob was suddenly back from that unreal world into which his magical
prosperity had pitchforked him. He drained the glass which he raised
to his lips with firm fingers. "Ghosts belong to the past," he answered. "All that we have any
concern with is the future." CHAPTER V


Jacob, in the midst of those pleasant activities necessitated by his
change of fortunes, found time to write a letter. He wrote it with
great care and after many revisions, and not until after it was
dispatched did he realise with how much anxiety he awaited the reply. The Cottage,
     Marlingden. Dear Miss Bultiwell,

     I am venturing to write these few lines to assure you of my
     very deep sympathy with you in the loss which you have
     sustained, and I beg also to express the earnest hope that
     you will not associate me in any way with those misfortunes
     of your father which I was powerless to avert or lighten. I have a further object in writing to you, which I hesitate
     to touch upon for fear I should give you offence, but I do
     beg, Miss Bultiwell, that you will accept my offer in a
     kind and generous spirit, and believe that it is entirely
     dictated by feelings of friendship for you. I gather that
     your father's affairs are so much involved that a
     considerable interval may elapse before any substantial sum
     can be collected from his estate for the benefit of
     yourself and your mother. I beg, therefore, as a person
     into whose hands great wealth has come quite unexpectedly,
     that you will, if it is the slightest convenience to you,
     permit me to offer to make any advance necessary for your
     comfort. At a word from you, it will give me the greatest
     pleasure to place a thousand pounds, or any such sum, in
     any bank you may name, for your use until the estate is
     wound up. If I have expressed myself crudely, please forgive me, Miss
     Bultiwell. I have a sincere desire to be of service to you,
     and I would like very much to be able to sign myself

                    Your friend,
                         Jacob Pratt. The reply came by return of post. It was dated from the late Mr.
Bultiwell's house, a few miles farther down the line than Marlingden. Dear Mr. Pratt,

     The offer contained in your letter, which I received this
     morning, may possibly have been kindly meant, but I wish
     you to know that I consider it an insult. My father took
     his life after an interview with you, during which I
     understand that you rejected a business proposition of his
     in terms which I cannot help suspecting, from your attitude
     while I was present, were unnecessarily brutal. Under those
     circumstances, you can scarcely wonder that I, his
     daughter, feel the greatest resentment at your offer and
     decline without the slightest hesitation your proposal of
     friendship. Yours truly,
                         Sybil Bultiwell. Jacob read the letter as he sat out amongst his roses, with the engine
of his motor-car purring in the street, waiting to take him to town. For a few moments all the joy of his new prosperity seemed to slip
away from him. The perfume of his cherished flowers lost its
sweetness; the pleasant view of spreading meadows, with their
background of dim blue hills, faded from before his eyes. He
remembered the girl's face as he had first seen and afterwards dreamed
of it, the eyes shining with kindliness, the proud lips smiling
encouragement, her tone purposely softened, leading him on to talk
about himself, his pleasant hobbies, his dawning ambitions. And then
again he thought of her as she must have looked when she sat down
to write that letter, amidst the discomfort of a dismantled home,
embittered and saddened by the sordid approach of ignominious poverty. He shivered a little and looked up as Dauncey approached. "I almost wish," he declared, "that I had bought that old swindler's
business. It wouldn't have cost me a tenth part of what I am worth." "Has the girl been unkind?" his friend asked. Jacob showed him the letter. "She's not generous," was Dauncey's comment, as he returned it. "She's loyal, at any rate," Jacob replied. Dauncey's face suddenly softened. His wife was leaning over the gate
waving her hand. His eyes watched her retreating figure until she
disappeared. "Somehow or other," he ventured a little hesitatingly, as he turned
back to Jacob, "I can't help thinking that the tone of that letter
isn't altogether womanly. She must know the truth about her father's
position. It doesn't seem fair to blame you for your perfectly
reasonable attitude." "Why, even you thought I was hard at the time," Jacob reminded him. "You were hard but you were just, and your offer to the young lady and
her mother should certainly have evoked some feeling of gratitude. I
don't like a woman to be too independent." "You've never seen her," Jacob groaned. "Not to speak to, but I've seen her once or twice on the platform with
her father. She is very good-looking, of course," Dauncey continued
hesitatingly, "although she always reminded me of one of the
conventional pictures of the birth or purse-proud young women which
adorn the illustrated papers." "You've never seen her smile," Jacob said gloomily, as he rose to his
feet. "However, she may get more reasonable after the first shock has
passed away.... Time we started for the City, eh, Dick?" They motored through the old-fashioned villages and along the quiet
country lanes, towards where the wide-flung arms of the great city
crept out like tentacles of hideous brick and mortar, to gather in her
children. This morning ride was to both of them a never-ending source
of delight. Jacob especially had the air of a schoolboy when he
remembered the punctual train, his punctual appearance at the dingy
warehouse in Bermondsey Street, his inevitable sallying forth,
half-an-hour later, with a list of names in his pocket, a few samples
of leather in his bag, and the stock phrases of the market packed into
his head by the never-satisfied Mr. Smith. "A free man, Dick," he observed, taking his cigar from his mouth and
drawing a long breath of content. "A free man at thirty-four years of
age. It's wonderful!" "If it only lasts!" Dauncey muttered, with a touch of his old
pessimism. "You can cut that out, old fellow," Jacob insisted firmly. "I gave
Pedlar a cheque for thirty-eight thousand pounds yesterday, and that
left me fifty-five thousand of the original hundred thousand. Since
then I have received bonds to the registered par value of four hundred
thousand pounds, which are being sold to-day in New York at eight
times their par value. Then there was a quarterly dividend cheque
yesterday for nine thousand pounds. You'll admit the money's there." "Can't deny facts," Dauncey agreed, with returning cheerfulness. "As regards your personal position," Jacob went on, "I made my will
yesterday and I left you five hundred a year." "Jacob!" Jacob patted his friend on the shoulder. "I've only told you this, old chap," he went on, "because I want you
to lift up your head when you walk, remember that you owe nobody
anything, and that, whatever measure of bad luck you may have, you are
outside all risk of financial trouble for the rest of your life. It's
a wonderful feeling, that, Dick. Half the men you meet in life admit
that they have their fits of depression, their dark days, their
anxieties. If you analyse these, you will find that nearly every one
of them is financial. The man who is free from all financial cares for
himself and his family should walk about with a song on his lips the
whole of the day. You and I are in that position, Dick, and don't let
us forget it." Dauncey drew in a deep breath of realisation, and his face for a
moment glowed. "Jacob," he confided, "I don't feel that I could ever be unhappy
again. I have what I always dreamed of--Nora and the kids and freedom
from anxiety. But you--where will life lead you, I wonder? I have
reached the summit of my ambitions. I'm giddy with the pleasure of it. But you--it would be horrible if you, with all your money, were to
miss happiness." Jacob smiled confidently. "My dear Dick," he said, "I am happy--not because I have twelve suits
of clothes coming home from Savile Row to-day, not because of this
Rolls-Royce car, my little flat at the Milan Court, my cottage at
Marlingden, with Harris there for gardener now, and Mrs. Harris with
not a worry in the world except how to make me comfortable. I am happy
not because of all these things, but because you and I together are
going to test life. I have the master key to the locked chambers. I am
ready for adventures." "I have about as much imagination as an owl," Dauncey sighed. Jacob's eyes were fixed upon the haze which hung over the city. "When I speak of adventures," he went on, "I do not mean the
adventures of romance. I mean rather the adventures of the pavement. Human beings interest me, Dick. I like to see them come and go, study
their purposes, analyse their motives, help them if they deserve help,
stand in their way if they seek evil. These are the day-by-day
adventures possible to the man who is free from care, and who mixes
without hindrance with his fellows." "I begin to understand," Dauncey admitted, "but I still don't quite
see by what means you are sure of coming into touch with interesting
people." Jacob knocked the ash from his cigar. "Dick," he said, with a twinkle in his eyes, "you are a very
superficial student of humanity. A story such as mine attracts the
imagination of the public. Every greedy adventurer in the world
believes that the person who has acquired wealth without individual
effort is an easy prey. I expect to derive a certain amount of
amusement from those who read of my good fortune and seek to profit
by it. That is why I had no objection to telling my story to the
reporters, why I let them take my photograph, why I gave them all the
information they wanted about the payment of my creditors in full and
my sudden wealth. All that we need now is the little West End office
which I am going to take within the next few days, and a brass plate
upon the door. The fly will then sit still and await the marauding
spiders." Dauncey smiled with all the enthusiasm of his new-found sense of
humour. "Five hundred a year," he murmured, "to be henchman to a bluebottle!" CHAPTER VI


The acquisition of West End premises presented no particular
difficulty, and in a few weeks' time behold a transformed and
glorified Jacob Pratt, seated in a cushioned swivel chair before
a roll-top desk, in an exceedingly handsomely appointed office
overlooking Waterloo Place. The summit of one of his ambitions had
been easily gained. The cut of his black morning coat and neat grey
trousers, the patent shoes and spats, his irreproachable linen, and
the modest but beautiful pearl pin which reposed in his satin tie were
indications of thoughtful and well-directed hours spent in the very
Mecca of a man's sartorial ambitions. Standing by his side, with a
packet of correspondence in his hand, Dauncey, in his sober, dark
serge suit, presented a very adequate representation of the part of
confidential assistant and secretary to a financial magnate. "Nothing but begging letters again this morning," he announced; "four
hospitals; the widow of an officer, still young, who desires a small
loan and would prefer a personal interview; and the daughter of a
rural dean down in the country, pining for London life, and only
wanting a start in any position where good looks, an excellent figure,
and a bright and loving disposition would be likely to meet with their
due reward." "Hm!" Jacob muttered. "Pitch 'em into the waste-paper basket." "There are a packet of prospectuses--"

"Send them along, too." "And a proposal from a Mr. Poppleton Watts that you should endow a
national theatre, for which he offers himself as actor manager. You
provide the cash, and he takes the whole responsibility off your
shoulders. The letter is dated from the Corn Exchange, Market
Harborough." "Scrap him with the rest," Jacob directed, leaning back in his chair. "Anything more you want for the place, Dick?" The two men looked around. There were rows of neatly arranged files,
all empty; an unused typewriter; a dictaphone and telephone. The outer
office, where Dauncey spent much of his time, was furnished with the
same quiet elegance as the inner apartment. There seemed to be nothing
lacking. "A larger waste-paper basket is the only thing I can suggest," Dauncey
observed drily. Then came the sound for which, with different degrees of interest,
both men had been waiting since the opening of the offices a fortnight
before. There was a tap at the outer door, the sound of a bell and
footsteps in the passage. Dauncey hurried out, closing the door of
the private office behind him. His chief drew a packet of papers from
a receptacle in his desk, forced a frown on to his smooth forehead,
and buried himself in purposeless calculations. Dauncey confronted the visitors. There were two of them--one whose
orientalism of speech and features was unsuccessfully camouflaged
by the splendour of his city attire, the other a rather burly,
middle-aged man, in a worn tweed suit, carrying a bowler hat, with no
gloves, and having the general appearance of a builder or tradesman
of some sort. His companion took the lead. "Is Mr. Jacob Pratt in?" he enquired. "Mr. Pratt is in but very busy," Dauncey answered doubtfully. "Have
you an appointment?" "We have not, but we are willing to await Mr. Pratt's convenience,"
was the eager reply. "Will you be so good as to take in my card? Mr.
Montague, my name is--Mr. Dane Montague." Dauncey accepted the mission after a little hesitation, knocked
reverently at the door of the inner office, and went in on tiptoe,
closing the door behind him. He presented the card to Jacob, who was
busily engaged in polishing the tip of one of his patent shoes with a
fragment of blotting paper. "A full-blown adventure," he announced. "A man who looks like a
money-lender, and another who might be his client." "Did they state the nature of their business?" Jacob demanded. "They did not, but it is written in the face of Mr. Dane Montague. He
wants as much of your million as he can induce you to part with. What
his methods may be, however, I don't know." "Show them in when I ring the bell," Jacob directed, drawing the
packet of papers once more towards him. "Extraordinarily complicated
mass of figures here," he added. Dauncey withdrew into the outer office, closing the door behind him
and still walking on tiptoe. "Mr. Pratt will see you in a few minutes," he said, with the air of
one who imparts great news. "Please be seated." The two men subsided into chairs. Dauncey thrust a sheet of paper into
a typewriter and desperately dashed off a few lines to an imaginary
correspondent. Then the bell from the inner office rang, and,
beckoning the two men to follow him, he opened the door of Jacob's
sanctum and ushered them in. Mr. Dane Montague advanced to the desk
with a winning smile. "My name is Dane Montague," he announced, ostentatiously drawing off
his glove and holding out a white, pudgy hand. "I am delighted to meet
you, Mr. Pratt. This is my friend, Mr. James Littleham. The name may
be known to you in connection with various building contracts." Jacob thrust away the papers upon which he had been engaged, with an
air of resignation. "Pray be seated, gentlemen," he invited. "My time is scarcely my own
just now. May I ask you to explain the nature of your business in as
few words as possible?" "Those are my methods exactly," Mr. Dane Montague declared, throwing
himself into the client's chair, balancing his finger tips together,
and frowning slightly. It was in this position that he had once been
photographed as the organiser of a stillborn Exhibition. "My friend Littleham," he continued, "is a builder of great
experience. I am, in my small way, a financier. We have called to
propose a business enterprise to you." "Go on," Jacob said. "You are doubtless aware that large sums of money have recently been
made by the exploitation in suitable spots of what have become known
as Garden Cities." Jacob gave a noncommittal nod and his visitor cleared his throat. "Mr. Littleham and I have a scheme which goes a little further," he
went on. "We have discovered a tract of land within easy distance of
London, where genuine country residences can be built and offered at a
ridiculously moderate cost." "Land speculation, eh?" "Not a speculation at all," was the prompt reply. "A certainty! Littleham, please oblige me with that plan." Mr. Littleham produced an architect's roll from his pocket. His
companion spread it out upon the desk before Jacob and drew an
imitation gold pencil from his pocket. "All along here," he explained, tapping upon the plan, "is a common,
sloping gently towards the south. The views all around are wonderful. The air is superb. There are five hundred acres of it. Here," he went
on, tapping a round spot, "is a small town, the name of which we will
not mention for the moment. The Great Central expresses stop here. The journey to town takes forty minutes. That five hundred acres of
land can be bought for twenty thousand pounds. It can be resold in
half-acre and acre lots for building purposes at a profit of thirty
or forty per cent." "The price of the land, if it is according to your description, is
low," Jacob remarked. "Why?" Mr. Dane Montague flashed an excellently simulated look of admiration
at his questioner. "That's a shrewd question, Mr. Pratt," he confessed. "We are going to
be honest and aboveboard with you. The price is low because the Urban
Council of this town here"--tapping on the plan--"will not enter into
any scheme for supplying lighting or water outside the three-mile
boundary." "Then what's the use of the land for building?" Jacob demanded. "I will explain," the other continued. "Situated here, two miles from
our land, are the premises, works and reservoir of the Cropstone Wood,
Water and Electric Light Company. They are in a position to supply
everything in that way which the new colony might desire." "A going concern?" Jacob enquired. "Certainly!" was the prompt reply. "But it is in connection with this
Company that we expect to make a certain additional profit." Jacob glanced at the clock. "You must hurry," he enjoined. "The Cropstone Wood Company," Mr. Dane Montague confided, "is in a
poorish way of business. The directors are sick of their job. They
know nothing about our plan for building on the estate, and, to cut a
long story short, we have secured a six months' option to purchase the
whole concern at a very low price. As soon as the building commences
on the common, we shall exercise that option. We shall make a handsome
profit on the rise in the shares of the Cropstone Wood Company, but
our proposal is to work the company ourselves. At the price we can
offer them at, it is certain that every building lot will be sold. Mr. Littleham here has prepared a specification of various forms of
domiciles suited to the neighbourhood." Mr. Littleham, in a remarkably thick voice, intervened. "I can run 'em up six-roomers at three hundred quid; eight and ten
at five; and a country villa, with half an acre of garden, for a
thousand," he announced, relapsing at the conclusion of his sentence
into his former state of sombre watching. "There's a very fair profit to be made, you see," Mr. Dane Montague
pointed out, "on the sale of the land and houses, without going more
closely into the figures, but we want to be dead straight with you,
Mr. Pratt. There should be an additional profit on the electric light
and water which we supply from the Cropstone Wood Company." "I see," Jacob remarked thoughtfully. "When they've bought their land,
and the houses are beginning to materialise, you can charge them what
you like for the water and lighting." Mr. Dane Montague beamed, with the air of one whose faith in the
shrewdness of a fellow creature has been justified. "You've hit the bull's-eye," he declared. "We've got the cost of
service all worked out, and, added to the price we'll have to pay for
the Company, it don't come to more than forty thousand pounds. Then we
shall have the whole thing in our own hands and can charge what we
damned well please." Jacob leaned back in his chair and surveyed his two visitors. There
was a gleam in his eyes which might have meant admiration--or
possibly something else. Neither of the two men noticed it. "It's quite a scheme," he remarked. "It's a gold mine," Mr. Dane Montague pronounced enthusiastically. "There'll be pickings every way," the builder murmured thickly, with a
covetous gleam in his eyes. Jacob glanced at his watch. "I'll see the property this afternoon," he promised. "If your
statement is borne out by the facts, I am willing to come in with you. How much money do you require from me?" Mr. Dane Montague coughed. Mr. Littleham looked more stolid than ever. "The fact of the matter is," the former explained, "Mr. Littleham here
is tied up with so much land that he has very little of the ready to
spare at present. Personally, I have been so fortunate lately in the
City, had so many good things brought to me by my pals, that I am
pretty well up to the neck until things begin to move." Jacob studied the speaker thoughtfully. He was an observant person,
and he noticed that Mr. Dane Montague's glossy hat showed signs of
frequent ironing, that there were traces of ink at the seams of his
black coat, and the suggestion of a patch on the patent boot which
lingered modestly under his chair. "You mean, I suppose, that you wish me to provide the whole of the
capital?" Jacob remarked. Mr. Dane Montague coughed. "You happen to be the only one of the trio who has it in fluid form,"
he pointed out. "It would suit us better to recognise you a little
more generously in the partition of the profits as the land is sold,
and for you to finance the whole thing." "I have no objection to that," Jacob decided, "provided I am satisfied
in other respects. How far is this delectable spot by road?" "Twenty-two miles," Mr. Littleham replied. "Barely that if you know
the way." "I will inspect the property this afternoon," Jacob announced. "Capital!" Mr. Dane Montague exclaimed. "You are a man after my own
heart, Mr. Pratt. You strike while the iron's hot. Now what about a
little lunch, say at the Milan, before starting?" "On condition that I am allowed to be host," Jacob stipulated, "I
shall be delighted." Mr. Dane Montague chuckled. The suggestion relieved him of a certain
disquietude regarding the contents of his pocketbook. "No objection to that, I am sure, Mr. Pratt," he declared. "Eh,
Littleham? At one o'clock at the Milan Grill, then." "You can rely upon me," Jacob promised. He entertained his two new friends to a very excellent lunch, but he
insisted upon bidding them au revoir on the threshold of the
restaurant. Jacob had views of his own about inspecting the Cropstone
Wood Estate. "I wish to form a wholly unbiased opinion as regards the value of the
property," he declared, "and I should much prefer to walk over it
alone. Besides, if we are all of us seen there together--"

"I quite understand," Mr. Dane Montague interrupted. "Not another
word, Mr. Pratt. Littleham, direct Mr. Pratt's driver," he added. "I
have never been down by road myself." Littleham entered into explanations with the chauffeur, and Mr.
Montague conversed in low but earnest tones with Jacob upon the
pavement. "Don't think, Mr. Pratt," he said, "that we are asking you to take
part in a speculation, because we are not. That land at forty pounds
an acre is a gift. You could buy it and forget all about it for ten
years, and I wouldn't mind guaranteeing that you doubled your capital. It's just one of those amazing chances which come now and then in a
man's lifetime. The only thing that rather put us in a corner was the
fact that the money has to be found within forty-eight hours. That
won't worry you, Mr. Pratt." "It will make no difference to me," Jacob admitted. "Then good luck to you and a pleasant journey," was Mr. Montague's
valediction. Jacob called for Dauncey, and after an hour's ride they had tea in a
small country town and walked along the edge of the common which Mr.
Dane Montague had described. From the top of the ridge they obtained
a fair view of the entire property. Jacob sat upon a boulder, lit a
cigarette and contemplated it thoughtfully. He confessed himself
puzzled. "They look wrong 'uns, those two," he observed, "but this land's all
right, Dauncey. It's a capital building site." Dauncey plucked at his lower lip. "I don't know anything about property," he admitted. "Never owned a
yard of land in my life. Yet it seems to me there must be a hitch
somewhere." A young man came strolling along the path, apparently on his way to
the town. Jacob accosted him politely. "Good evening, sir." "Good evening," the other replied, a little gloomily. "Fine view here," Jacob observed. "Not bad," the newcomer answered, without enthusiasm. Jacob produced his case, and the young man accepted a cigarette. "Are you a resident in these parts, may I ask?" Jacob enquired. "For my sins. I've just set up an office in Cropstone." "Are you, by any chance, a lawyer?" The young man laughed. "Do I carry my profession about with me to that extent? Yes, I'm a
lawyer. Mark Wiseman, my name is." "Not too many clients yet, eh?" Jacob asked kindly. The aspirant to legal fame made a grimace. "Too near London." Jacob looked down the ridge. "Fine building property this seems," he observed. The other assented. "It's for sale, I believe." "I happen to know that it's for sale," Jacob continued, "and at a very
low price, too. What's the drawback? The soil looks all right." "The soil's good," the young man acquiesced. "Everything's good, I
believe. The great drawback is that it's just over three miles from
Cropstone, where the lighting and water would have to come from." "And what about that?" "They won't supply it, that's all." Jacob pointed to where an ornamental chimney, a power shed and a gleam
of water appeared on the other side of a small wood. "Isn't there a private company there?" he asked. "Practically defunct. They used to supply Cropstone, but the Urban
Council there are running a show of their own." "Water good?" Jacob enquired. "I've never heard any complaints." Jacob glanced at his watch. "If you would be so good as to call at the White Hart Hotel at half
past six this evening," he said, "and ask for Mr. Jacob Pratt, there
is a small matter of business I should like you to undertake for me in
this neighbourhood." The young lawyer's alacrity was not to be mistaken. "I will be there without fail," he promised. 