



Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 The Missioner

 BY E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

 Author of "Anna, the Adventuress," "A Prince of
 Sinners," "The Master Mummer," etc. WITH ILLUSTRATIONS

 BY FRED PEGRAM

 A. L. BURT COMPANY

 PUBLISHERS         NEW YORK




 _Copyright, 1907,_
 BY THE PEARSON PUBLISHING COMPANY. _Copyright, 1907,_
 BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY. _All rights reserved._

 Published January, 1909. Fourth Printing




[ Illustration: "DO YOU MIND EXPLAINING YOURSELF?" SHE ASKED. [Page 23.] FRONTISPIECE.] CONTENTS

BOOK I


 CHAPTER                                               PAGE

     I MISTRESS AND AGENT                                1
    II THE HUNTER AND HIS QUARRY                        13
   III FIRST BLOOD                                      22
    IV BEATING HER WINGS                                32
     V EVICTED                                          41
    VI CRICKET AND PHILOSOPHY                           52
   VII AN UNDERNOTE OF MUSIC                            61
  VIII ROSES                                            70
    IX SUMMER LIGHTNING                                 78
     X THE STILL FIGURE IN THE CHAIR                    85
    XI THE BAYING OF THE HOUNDS                         93
   XII RETREAT                                         100
  XIII A CREATURE OF IMPULSE                           105
   XIV SEARCHING THE PAPERS                            114
    XV ON THE SPREE                                    121
   XVI THE NIGHT SIDE OF LONDON                        129
  XVII THE VICTIMS OF SOCIETY                          138
 XVIII LETTY'S DILEMMA                                 147
   XIX A REPORT FROM PARIS                             155
    XX LIKE A TRAPPED ANIMAL                           162


BOOK II

 CHAPTER                                               PAGE

     I RATHER A GHASTLY PART                           172
    II PLAYING WITH FIRE                               180
   III MONSIEUR S'AMUSE                                188
    IV AT THE "DEAD RAT"                               196
     V THE AWAKENING                                   204
    VI THE ECHO OF A CRIME                             210
   VII A COUNTRY WALK                                  218
  VIII THE MISSING LETTY                               227
    IX FOILED! 235
     X MYSTERIES IN MAYFAIR                            244
    XI THE WAY OF SALVATION                            253
   XII JEAN LE ROI                                     262
  XIII THE KING OF THE APACHES                         271
   XIV BEHIND THE PALM TREES                           281
    XV THE ONLY WAY                                    289
   XVI MAN TO MAN                                      296
  XVII LORD AND LADY BOUNTIFUL                         304




THE MISSIONER

BOOK I

CHAPTER I

MISTRESS AND AGENT


The lady of Thorpe was bored. These details as to leases and repairs
were wearisome. The phrases and verbiage confused her. She felt obliged
to take them in some measure for granted; to accept without question the
calmly offered advice of the man who stood so respectfully at the right
hand of her chair. "This agreement with Philip Crooks," he remarked, "is a somewhat
important document. With your permission, madam, I will read it to you." She signified her assent, and leaned wearily back in her chair. The
agent began to read. His mistress watched him through half closed eyes. His voice, notwithstanding its strong country dialect, had a sort of
sing-song intonation. He read earnestly and without removing his eyes
from the document. His listener made no attempt to arrive at the sense
of the string of words which flowed so monotonously from his lips. She
was occupied in making a study of the man. Sturdy and weather-beaten,
neatly dressed in country clothes, with a somewhat old-fashioned stock,
with trim grey side-whiskers, and a mouth which reminded her somehow of
a well-bred foxhound's, he represented to her, in his clearly cut
personality, the changeless side of life, the side of life which she
associated with the mighty oaks in her park, and the prehistoric rocks
which had become engrafted with the soil of the hills beyond. As she saw
him now, so had he seemed to her fifteen years ago. Only what a
difference! A volume to her--a paragraph to him! She had gone out into
the world--rich, intellectually inquisitive, possessing most of the
subtler gifts with which her sex is endowed; and wherever the passionate
current of life had flown the swiftest, she had been there, a leader
always, seeking ever to satisfy the unquenchable thirst for new
experiences and new joys. She had passed from girlhood to womanhood with
every nerve of her body strained to catch the emotion of the moment. Always her fingers had been tearing at the cells of life--and one by one
they had fallen away. This morning, in the bright sunshine which flooded
the great room, she felt somehow tired--tired and withered. Her maid was
a fool! The two hours spent at her toilette had been wasted! She felt
that her eyes were hollow, her cheeks pale! Fifteen years, and the man
had not changed a jot. She doubted whether he had ever passed the
confines of her estate. She doubted whether he had even had the desire. Wind and sun had tanned his cheeks, his eyes were clear, his slight
stoop was the stoop of the horseman rather than of age. He had the air
of a man satisfied with life and his place in it--an attitude which
puzzled her. No one of her world was like that! Was it some inborn gift,
she wondered, which he possessed, some antidote to the world's
restlessness which he carried with him, or was it merely lack of
intelligence? He finished reading and folded up the pages, to find her regarding him
still with that air of careful attention with which she had listened to
his monotonous flow of words. He found her interest surprising. It did
not occur to him to invest it with any personal element. "The agreement upon the whole," he remarked, "is, I believe, a fair one. You are perhaps thinking that those clauses----"

"If the agreement is satisfactory to you," she interrupted, "I will
confirm it." He bowed slightly and glanced through the pile of papers upon the table. "I do not think that there is anything else with which I need trouble
you, madam," he remarked. She nodded imperiously. "Sit down for a moment, Mr. Hurd," she said. If he felt any surprise, he did not show it. He drew one of the
high-backed chairs away from the table, and with that slight air of
deliberation which characterized all his movements, seated himself. He
was in no way disquieted to find her dark, tired eyes still studying
him. "How old are you, Mr. Hurd?" she asked. "I am sixty-three, madam," he answered. Her eyebrows were gently raised. To her it seemed incredible. She
thought of the men of sixty-three or thereabouts whom she knew, and her
lips parted in one of those faint, rare smiles of genuine amusement,
which smoothed out all the lines of her tired face. Visions of the
promenade at Marienbad and Carlsbad, the Kursaal at Homburg, floated
before her. She saw them all, the men whom she knew, with the story of
their lives written so plainly in their faces, babbling of nerves and
tonics and cures, the newest physician, the latest fad. Defaulters all
of them, unwilling to pay the great debt--seeking always a way out! Here, at least, this man scored! "You enjoy good health?" she remarked. "I never have anything the matter with me," he answered simply. "I
suppose," he added, as though by an afterthought, "the life is a healthy
one." "You find it--satisfying?" she asked. He seemed puzzled. "I have never attempted anything else," he answered. "It seems to be
what I am suited for." She attempted to abandon the _role_ of questioner--to give a more
natural turn to the conversation. "It is always," she remarked, "such a relief to get down into the
country at the end of the season. I wonder I don't spend more time here. I daresay one could amuse oneself?" she added carelessly. Mr. Hurd considered for a few moments. "There are croquet and archery and tennis in the neighbourhood," he
remarked. "The golf course on the Park hills is supposed to be
excellent. A great many people come over to play." She affected to be considering the question seriously. An intimate
friend would not have been deceived by her air of attention. Mr. Hurd
knew nothing of this. He, on his part, however, was capable of a little
gentle irony. "It might amuse you," he remarked, "to make a tour of your estate. There
are some of the outlying portions which I think that I should have the
honour of showing you for the first time." "I might find that interesting," she admitted. "By the bye, Mr. Hurd,
what sort of a landlord am I? Am I easy, or do I exact my last pound of
flesh? One likes to know these things." "It depends upon the tenant," the agent answered. "There is not one of
your farms upon which, if a man works, he cannot make a living. On the
other hand, there is not one of them on which a man can make a living
unless he works. It is upon this principle that your rents have been
adjusted. The tenants of the home lands have been most carefully chosen,
and Thorpe itself is spoken of everywhere as a model village." "It is very charming to look at," its mistress admitted. "The flowers
and thatched roofs are so picturesque. 'Quite a pastoral idyll,' my
guests tell me. The people one sees about seem contented and respectful,
too." "They should be, madam," Mr. Hurd answered drily. "The villagers have
had a good many privileges from your family for generations." The lady inclined her head thoughtfully. "You think, then," she remarked, "that if anything should happen in
England, like the French Revolution, I should not find unexpected
thoughts and discontent smouldering amongst them? You believe that they
are really contented?" Mr. Hurd knew nothing about revolutions, and he was utterly unable to
follow the trend of her thoughts. "If they were not, madam," he declared, "they would deserve to be in the
workhouse--and I should feel it my duty to assist them in getting
there." The lady of Thorpe laughed softly to herself. "You, too, then, Mr. Hurd," she said, "you are content with your life? You don't mind my being personal, do you? It is such a change down here,
such a different existence ... and I like to understand everything." Upon Mr. Hurd the almost pathetic significance of those last words was
wholly wasted. They were words of a language which he could not
comprehend. He realized only their direct application--and the woman to
him seemed like a child. "If I were not content, madam," he said, "I should deserve to lose my
place. I should deserve to lose it," he added after a moment's pause,
"notwithstanding the fact that I have done my duty faithfully for four
and forty years." She smiled upon him brilliantly. They were so far apart that she feared
lest she might have offended him. "I have always felt myself a very fortunate woman, Mr. Hurd," she said,
"in having possessed your services." He rose as though about to go. It was her whim, however, to detain him. "You lost your wife some years ago, did you not, Mr. Hurd?" she began
tentatively. As a matter of fact, she was not sure of her ground. "Seven years back, madam," he answered, with immovable face. "She was,
unfortunately, never a strong woman." "And your son?" she asked more confidently. "Is he back from South
Africa?" "A year ago, madam," he answered. "He is engaged at present in the
estate office. He knows the work well----"

"The best place for him, of course," she interrupted. "We ought to do
all we can for our young men who went out to the war. I should like to
see your son, Mr. Hurd. Will you tell him to come up some day?" "Certainly, madam," he answered. "Perhaps he would like to shoot with my guests on Thursday?" she
suggested graciously. Mr. Hurd did not seem altogether pleased. "It has never been the custom, madam," he remarked, "for either my son
or myself to be associated with the Thorpe shooting parties." "Some customs," she remarked pleasantly, "are well changed, even in
Thorpe. We shall expect him." Mr. Hurd's mouth reminded her for a moment of a steel trap. She could
see that he disapproved, but she had no intention of giving way. He
began to tie up his papers, and she watched him with some continuance of
that wave of interest which he had somehow contrived to excite in her. The signature of one of the letters which he was methodically folding,
caught her attention. "What a strange name!" she remarked. "Victor Macheson! Who is he?" Mr. Hurd unfolded the letter. The ghost of a smile flickered upon his
lips. "A preacher, apparently," he answered. "The letter is one asking
permission to give a series of what he terms religious lectures in
Harrison's large barn!" Her eyebrows were gently raised. Her tone was one of genuine surprise. "What, in Thorpe?" she demanded. "In Thorpe!" Mr. Hurd acquiesced. She took the letter and read it. Her perplexity was in no manner
diminished. "The man seems in earnest," she remarked. "He must either be a stranger
to this part of the country, or an extremely impertinent person. I
presume, Mr. Hurd, that nothing has been going on in the place with
which I am unacquainted?" "Certainly not, madam," he answered. "There has been no drunkenness?" she remarked. "The young people have, I
presume, been conducting their love-making discreetly?" The lines of Mr. Hurd's mouth were a trifle severe. One could imagine
that he found her modern directness of speech indelicate. "There have been no scandals of any sort connected with the village,
madam," he assured her. "To the best of my belief, all of our people are
industrious, sober and pious. They attend church regularly. As you know,
we have not a public-house or a dissenting place of worship in the
village." "The man must be a fool," she said deliberately. "You did not, of
course, give him permission to hold these services?" "Certainly not," the agent answered. "I refused it absolutely." The lady rose, and Mr. Hurd understood that he was dismissed. "You will tell your son about Thursday?" she reminded him. "I will deliver your message, madam," he answered. She nodded her farewell as the footman opened the door. "Everything seems to be most satisfactory, Mr. Hurd," she said. "I shall
probably be here for several weeks, so come up again if there is
anything you want me to sign." "I am much obliged, madam," the agent answered. He left the place by a side entrance, and rode slowly down the private
road, fringed by a magnificent row of elm trees, to the village. The
latch of the iron gate at the end of the avenue was stiff, and he failed
to open it with his hunting crop at the first attempt. Just as he was
preparing to try again, a tall, boyish-looking young man, dressed in
sombre black, came swiftly across the road and opened the gate. Mr. Hurd
thanked him curtly, and the young man raised his hat. "You are Mr. Hurd, I believe?" he remarked. "I was going to call upon
you this afternoon." The little man upon the pony frowned. He had no doubt as to his
questioner. "My name is Hurd, sir," he answered stiffly. "What can I do for you?" "You can let me have that barn for my services," the other answered
smiling. "I wrote you about it, you know. My name is Macheson." Mr. Hurd's answer was briefly spoken, and did not invite argument. "I have mentioned the matter to Miss Thorpe-Hatton, sir. She agrees with
me that your proposed ministrations are altogether unneeded in this
neighbourhood." "You won't let me use the barn, then?" the young man remarked
pleasantly, but with some air of disappointment. Mr. Hurd gathered up the reins in his hand. "Certainly not, sir!" He would have moved on, but his questioner stood in the way. Mr. Hurd
looked at him from underneath his shaggy eyebrows. The young man was
remarkably young. His smooth, beardless face was the face of a boy. Only
the eyes seemed somehow to speak of graver things. They were very bright
indeed, and they did not falter. "Mr. Hurd," he begged, "do let me ask you one question! Why do you
refuse me? What harm can I possibly do by talking to your villagers?" Mr. Hurd pointed with his whip up and down the country lane. "This is the village of Thorpe, sir," he answered. "There are no poor,
there is no public-house, and there, within a few hundred yards of the
farthest cottage," he added, pointing to the end of the street, "is the
church. You are not needed here. That is the plain truth." The young man looked up and down, at the flower-embosomed cottages, with
their thatched roofs and trim appearance, at the neatly cut hedges, the
well-kept road, the many signs of prosperity. He looked at the little
grey church standing in its ancient walled churchyard, where the road
divided, a very delightful addition to the picturesque beauty of the
place. He looked at all these things and he sighed. "Mr. Hurd," he said, "you are a man of experience. You know very well
that material and spiritual welfare are sometimes things very far
apart." Mr. Hurd frowned and turned his pony's head towards home. "I know nothing of the sort, sir," he snapped. "What I do know is that
we don't want any Salvation Army tricks here. You should stay in the
cities. They like that sort of thing there." "I must come where I am sent, Mr. Hurd," the young man answered. "I
cannot do your people any harm. I only want to deliver my message--and
go." Mr. Hurd wheeled his pony round. "I submitted your letter to Miss Thorpe-Hatton," he said. "She agrees
with me that your ministrations are wholly unnecessary here. I wish you
good evening!" The young man caught for a moment at the pony's rein. "One moment, sir," he begged. "You do not object to my appealing to
Miss Thorpe-Hatton herself?" A grim, mirthless smile parted the agent's lips. "By no means!" he answered, as he cantered off. Victor Macheson stood for a moment watching the retreating figure. Then
he looked across the park to where, through the great elm avenues, he
could catch a glimpse of the house. A humorous smile suddenly brightened
his face. "It's got to be done!" he said to himself. "Here goes!" CHAPTER II

THE HUNTER AND HIS QUARRY


The mistress of Thorpe stooped to pat a black Pomeranian which had
rushed out to meet her. It was when she indulged in some such movement
that one realized more thoroughly the wonderful grace of her slim,
supple figure. She who hated all manner of exercise had the ease of
carriage and flexibility of one whose life had been spent in athletic
pursuits. "How are you all?" she remarked languidly. "Shocking hostess, am I not?" A fair-haired little woman turned away from the tea-table. She held a
chocolate eclair in one hand, and a cup of Russian tea in the other. Her
eyes were very dark, and her hair very yellow--and both were perfectly
and unexpectedly natural. Her real name was Lady Margaret Penshore, but
she was known to her intimates, and to the mysterious individuals who
write under a _nom-de-guerre_ in the society papers, as "Lady Peggy." "A little casual perhaps, my dear Wilhelmina," she remarked. "Comes from
your association with Royalty, I suppose. Try one of your own caviare
sandwiches, if you want anything to eat. They're ripping." Wilhelmina--she was one of the few women of her set with whose Christian
name no one had ever attempted to take any liberties--approached the
tea-table and studied its burden. There were a dozen different sorts of
sandwiches arranged in the most tempting form, hot-water dishes with
delicately browned tea-cakes simmering gently, thick cream in silver
jugs, tea and coffee, and in the background old China dishes piled with
freshly gathered strawberries and peaches and grapes, on which the bloom
still rested. On a smaller table were flasks of liqueurs and a spirit
decanter. "Anyhow," she remarked, pouring herself out some tea, "I do feed you
people well. And as to being casual, I warned you that I never put in an
appearance before five." A man in the background, long and lantern-faced, a man whose age it
would have been as impossible to guess as his character, opened and
closed his watch with a clink. "Twenty minutes past," he remarked. "To be exact, twenty-two minutes
past." His hostess turned and regarded him contemplatively. "How painfully precise!" she remarked. "Somehow, it doesn't sound
convincing, though. Your watch is probably like your morals." "What a flattering simile!" he murmured. "Flattering?" "It presupposes, at any rate, their existence," he explained. "It is
years since I was reminded of them." Wilhelmina seated herself before an open card-table. "No doubt," she answered. "You see I knew you when you were a boy. Seriously," she continued, "I have been engaged with my agent for the
last half-hour--a most interesting person, I can assure you. There was
an agreement with one Philip Crooks concerning a farm, which he felt
compelled to read to me--every word of it! Come along and cut, all of
you!" The fourth person, slim, fair-haired, the typical army officer and
country house habitue, came over to the table, followed by the
lantern-jawed man. Lady Peggy also turned up a card. "You and I, Gilbert," Wilhelmina remarked to the elder man. "Here's luck
to us! What on earth is that you are drinking?" "Absinthe," he answered calmly. "I have been trying to persuade Austin
to join me, but it seems they don't drink absinthe in the Army." "I should think not, indeed," his hostess answered. "And you my partner,
too! Put the stuff away." Gilbert Deyes raised his glass and looked thoughtfully into its
opalescent depths. "Ah! my dear lady," he said, "you make a great mistake when you
number absinthe amongst the ordinary intoxicating beverages. I
tell you that the man who invented it was an epicure in sensations
and--er--gastronomy. If only De Quincey had realized the possibility
of absinthe, he would have given us jewelled prose indeed." Wilhelmina yawned. "Bother De Quincey!" she declared. "It's your bridge I'm thinking of." "Dear lady, you need have no anxiety," Deyes answered reassuringly. "One
does not trifle with one's livelihood. You will find me capable of the
most daring finesses, the most wonderful coups. I shall not revoke, I
shall not lead out of the wrong hand. My declarations will be touched
with genius. The rubber, in fact, is already won. Vive l'absinthe!" "The rubber will never be begun if you go on talking nonsense much
longer," Lady Peggy declared, tapping the table impatiently. "I believe
I hear the motors outside. We shall have the whole crowd here directly." "They won't find their way here," their hostess assured them calmly. "My
deal, I believe." They played the hand in silence. At its conclusion, Wilhelmina leaned
back in her chair and listened. "You were right, Peggy," she said, "they are all in the hall. I can hear
your brother's voice." Lady Peggy nodded. "Sounds healthy, doesn't it?" Gilbert Deyes leaned across to the side table and helped himself to a
cigarette. "Healthy! I call it boisterous," he declared. "Where have they all
been?" "Motoring somewhere," Wilhelmina answered. "They none of them have any
idea how to pass the time away until the first run." "Sport, my dear hostess," Deyes remarked, "is the one thing which makes
life in a country house almost unendurable." Wilhelmina shrugged her shoulders. "That's all very well, Gilbert," she said, "but what should we do if we
couldn't get rid of some of these lunatics for at least part of the
day?" "Reasonable, I admit," Deyes answered, "but think what an intolerable
nuisance they make of themselves for the other part. I double No Trumps,
Lady Peggy." Lady Peggy laid down her cards. "For goodness' sake, no more digressions," she implored. "Remember,
please, that I play this game for the peace of mind of my tradespeople! I redouble!" The hand was played almost in silence. Lady Peggy lost the odd trick and
began to add up the score with a gentle sigh. "After all," her partner remarked, returning to the subject which they
had been discussing, "I don't think that we could get on very well in
this country without sport, of some sort." "Of course not," Deyes answered. "We are all sportsmen, every one of us. We were born so. Only, while some of us are content to wreak our
instinct for destruction upon birds and animals, others choose the
nobler game--our fellow-creatures! To hunt or trap a human being is
finer sport than to shoot a rocketing pheasant, or to come in from
hunting with mud all over our clothes, smelling of ploughed fields,
steaming in front of the fire, telling lies about our exploits--all
undertaken in pursuit of a miserable little animal, which as often as
not outwits us, and which, in an ordinary way, we wouldn't touch with
gloves on! What do you say, Lady Peggy?" "You're getting beyond me," she declared. "It sounds a little savage." Deyes dealt the cards slowly, talking all the while. "Sport is savage," he declared. "No one can deny it. Whether the quarry
be human or animal, the end is death. But of all its varieties, give me
the hunting of man by man, the brain of the hunter coping with the wiles
of the hunted, both human, both of the same order. The game's even then,
for at any moment they may change places--the hunter and his quarry. It's finer work than slaughtering birds at the coverside. It gives your
sex a chance, Lady Peggy." "It sounds exciting," she admitted. "It is," he answered. His hostess looked up at him languidly. "You speak like one who knows!" "Why not?" he murmured. "I have been both quarry and hunter. Most of us
have more or less! I declare Hearts!" Again there was an interval of silence, broken only by the stock phrases
of the game, and the soft patter of the cards upon the table. Once more
the hand was played out and the cards gathered up. Captain Austin
delivered his quota to the general discussion. "After all," he said, "if it wasn't for sport, our country houses would
be useless." "Not at all!" Deyes declared. "Country houses should exist for----"

"For what, Mr. Deyes? Do tell us," Lady Peggy implored. "For bridge!" he declared. "For giving weary married people the
opportunity for divorce, and as an asylum from one's creditors." Wilhelmina shook her head as she gathered up her cards. "You are not at your best to-day, Gilbert," she said. "The allusion to
creditors is prehistoric! No one has them nowadays. Society is such a
hop-scotch affair that our coffers are never empty." "What a Utopian sentiment!" Lady Peggy murmured. "We can't agree, can we?" Deyes whispered in her ear. "You! Why they say that you are worth a million," she protested. "If I am I remain poor, for I cannot spend it," he declared. "Why not?" his hostess asked him from across the table. "Because," he answered, "I am cursed with a single vice, trailing its
way through a labyrinth of virtues. I am a miser!" Lady Peggy laughed incredulously. "Rubbish!" she exclaimed. "Dear lady, it is nothing of the sort," he answered, shaking his head
sadly. "I have felt it growing upon me for years. Besides, it is
hereditary. My mother opened a post-office savings bank account for me. At an early age I engineered a corner in marbles and sold out at a huge
profit. I am like the starving dyspeptic at the rich man's feast." Captain Austin intervened. "I declare Diamonds," he announced, and the hand proceeded. Wilhelmina leaned back in her chair as the last trick fell. Her eyes
were turned towards the window. She could just see the avenue of elms
down which her agent had ridden a short while since. Deyes, through half
closed eyes, watched her with some curiosity. "If one dared offer a trifling coin of the realm----" he murmured. "I was thinking of your theory," she interrupted. "According to you, I
suppose the whole world is made up of hunters and their quarry. Can you
tell, I wonder, by looking at people, to which order they belong?" "It is easy," he answered. "Yet you must remember we are continually
changing places. The man who cracks the whip to-day is the hunted beast
to-morrow. The woman who mocks at her lover this afternoon is often the
slave-bearer when dusk falls. Swift changes like this are like rain upon
the earth. They keep us, at any rate, out of the asylums." Wilhelmina was still looking out of the window. Up the great avenue, in
and out amongst the tree trunks, but moving always with swift buoyant
footsteps towards the house, came a slim, dark figure, soberly dressed
in ill-fitting clothes. He walked with the swing of early manhood, his
head was thrown back, and he carried his hat in his hand. She leaned
forward to watch him more closely--he seemed to have associated himself
in some mysterious manner with the mocking words of Gilbert Deyes. Half
maliciously, she drew his attention to the swiftly approaching figure. "Come, my friend of theories," she said mockingly. "There is a stranger
there, the young man who walks so swiftly. To which of your two orders
does he belong?" Deyes looked out of the window--a brief, careless glance. "To neither," he answered. "His time has not come yet. But he has the
makings of both." CHAPTER III

FIRST BLOOD


A footman entered the room a few minutes later, and obedient, without a
doubt, to some previously given command, waited behind his mistress'
chair until a hand had been played. When it was over, she spoke to him
without turning her head. "What is it, Perkins?" she asked. He bent forward respectfully. "There is a young gentleman here, madam, who wishes to see you most
particularly. He has no card, but he said that his name would not be
known to you." "Tell him that I am engaged," Wilhelmina said. "He must give you his
name, and tell you what business he has come upon." "Very good, madam!" the man answered, and withdrew. He was back again before the next hand had been played. Once more he
stood waiting in respectful silence. "Well?" his mistress asked. "His name, madam, is Mr. Victor Macheson. He said that he would wait as
long as you liked, but he preferred telling you his business himself." "I fancy that I know it," Wilhelmina answered. "You can show him in
here." "Is it the young man, I wonder," Lady Peggy remarked, "who came up the
avenue as though he were walking on air?" "Doubtless," Wilhelmina answered. "He is some sort of a missionary. I had him shown in here because I thought his coming at all an
impertinence, and I want to make him understand it. You will probably
find him amusing, Mr. Deyes." Gilbert Deyes shook his head quietly. "There was a time," he murmured, "when the very word missionary was a
finger-post to the ridiculous. The comic papers rob us, however, of our
elementary sources of humour." They all looked curiously towards the door as he entered, all except
Wilhelmina, who was the last to turn her head, and found him hesitating
in some embarrassment as to whom to address. He was somewhat above
medium height, fair, with a mass of wind-tossed hair, and had the smooth
face of a boy. His eyes were his most noticeable feature. They were
very bright and very restless. Lady Peggy called them afterwards
uncomfortable eyes, and the others, without any explanation, understood
what she meant. "I am Miss Thorpe-Hatton," Wilhelmina said calmly. "I am told that you
wished to see me." She turned only her head towards him. Her words were cold and
unwelcoming. She saw that he was nervous and she had no pity. It was
unworthy of her. She knew that. Her eyes questioned him calmly. Sitting
there in her light muslin dress, with her deep-brown hair arranged in
the Madonna-like fashion, which chanced to be the caprice of the moment,
she herself--one of London's most beautiful women--seemed little more
than a girl. "I beg your pardon," he began hurriedly. "I understood--I expected----"

"Well?" The monosyllable was like a drop of ice. A faint spot of colour burned
in his cheeks. He understood now that for some reason this woman was
inimical to him. The knowledge seemed to have a bracing effect. His eyes
flashed with a sudden fire which gave force to his face. "I expected," he continued with more assurance, "to have found Miss
Thorpe-Hatton an older lady." She said nothing. Only her eyebrows were very slightly raised. She
seemed to be asking him silently what possible concern the age of the
lady of Thorpe-Hatton could be to him. He was to understand that his
remark was almost an impertinence. "I wished," he said, "to hold a service in Thorpe on Sunday afternoon,
and also one during the week, and I wrote to your agent asking for the
loan of a barn, which is generally, I believe, used for any gathering of
the villagers. Mr. Hurd found himself unable to grant my request. I have
ventured to appeal to you." "Mr. Hurd," she said calmly, "decided, in my opinion, quite rightly. I
do not see what possible need my villagers can have of further religious
services than the Church affords them." "Madam," he answered, "I have not a word to say against your parish
church, or against your excellent vicar. Yet I believe, and the
body to which I am attached believes, that change is stimulating. We
believe that the great truths of life cannot be presented to our
fellow-creatures too often, or in too many different ways." "And what," she asked, with a faint curl of her beautiful lips, "do you
consider the great truths of life?" "Madam," he answered, with slightly reddening cheeks, "they vary for
every one of us, according to our capacity and our circumstances. What
they may mean," he added, after a moment's hesitation, "to people of
your social order, I do not know. It has not come within the orbit of my
experience. It was your villagers to whom I was proposing to talk." There was a moment's silence. Gilbert Deyes and Lady Peggy exchanged
swift glances of amused understanding. Wilhelmina bit her lip, but she
betrayed no other sign of annoyance. "To what religious body do you belong?" she asked. "My friends," he answered, "and I, are attached to none of the
recognized denominations. Our only object is to try to keep alight in
our fellow-creatures the flame of spirituality. We want to help
them--not to forget." "There is no name by which you call yourselves?" she asked. "None," he answered. "And your headquarters are where?" she asked. "In Gloucestershire," he answered--"so far as we can be said to have any
headquarters at all." "You have no churches then?" she asked. "Any building," he answered, "where the people are to whom we desire to
speak, is our church. We look upon ourselves as missioners only." "I am afraid," Wilhelmina said quietly, "that I am only wasting your
time in asking these questions. Still, I should like to know what
induced you to choose my village as an appropriate sphere for your
labours." "We each took a county," he answered. "Leicestershire fell to my lot. I
selected Thorpe to begin with, because I have heard it spoken of as a
model village." Wilhelmina's forehead was gently wrinkled. "I am afraid," she said, "that I am a somewhat dense person. Your reason
seems to me scarcely an adequate one." "Our belief is," he declared, "that where material prosperity is
assured, especially amongst this class of people, the instincts towards
spirituality are weakened." "My people all attend church; we have no public-house; there are never
any scandals," she said. "All these things," he admitted, "are excellent. But they do not help
you to see into the lives of these people. Church-going may become a
habit, a respectable and praiseworthy thing--and a thing expected of
them. Morality, too, may become a custom--until temptation comes. One
must ask oneself what is the force which prompts these people to direct
their lives in so praiseworthy a manner." "You forget," she remarked, "that these are simple folk. Their religion
with them is simply a matter of right or wrong. They need no further
instruction in this." "Madam," he said, "so long as they are living here, that may be so. Frankly, I do not consider it sufficient that their lives are seemly, so
long as they live in the shadow of your patronage. What happens to those
who pass outside its influence is another matter." "What do you know about that?" she asked coldly. "What I do know about it," he answered, "decided me to come to Thorpe." There was a moment's silence. Any of the other three, Gilbert Deyes
especially, perhaps, would have found it hard to explain, even to
realize the interest with which they listened to the conversation
between these two--the somewhat unkempt, ill-attired boy, with the
nervous, forceful manner and burning eyes, and the woman, so sure of
herself, so coldly and yet brutally ungracious. It was not so much the
words themselves that passed between them that attracted as the
undernote of hostility, more felt than apparent--the beginning of a
duel, to all appearance so ludicrously onesided, yet destined to endure. Deyes turned in his chair uneasily. He was watching this intruder--a
being outwardly so far removed from their world. The niceties of a
correct toilet had certainly never troubled him, his clothes were rough
in material and cut, he wore a flannel shirt, and a collar so low that
his neck seemed ill-shaped. He had no special gifts of features or
figure, his manner was nervous, his speech none too ready. Deyes found
himself engaged in a swift analysis of the subtleties of personality. What did this young man possess that he should convey so strong a sense
of power? There was something about him which told. They were all
conscious of it, and, more than any of them, the woman who was regarding
him with such studied ill-favour. To the others, her still beautiful
face betrayed only some languid irritation. Deyes fancied that he saw
more there--that underneath the mask which she knew so well how to wear
there were traces of some deeper disturbance. "Do you mind explaining yourself?" she asked. "That sounds rather an
extraordinary statement of yours." "A few months ago," he said, "I attended regularly one of the police
courts in London. Day by day I came into contact with the lost souls who
have drifted on to the great rubbish-heap. There was a girl, Martha
Gullimore her name was, whose record for her age was as black as sin
could make it. Her father, I believe, is the blacksmith in your model
village! I spoke to him of his daughter yesterday, and he cursed me!" "You mean Samuel Gullimore--my farrier?" she asked. "That is the man," he answered. "Have you any other--instances?" she asked. "More than one, I am sorry to say," he replied. "There were two young
men who left here only a year ago--one is the son of your gardener,
the other was brought up by his uncle at your lodge gates. I was
instrumental in saving them from prison a few months ago. One we have
shipped to Canada--the other, I am sorry to say, has relapsed. We did
what we could, but beyond a certain point we cannot go." She leaned her head for a moment upon the slim, white fingers of her
right hand, innocent of rings save for one great emerald, whose gleam
of colour was almost barbaric in its momentary splendour. Her face
had hardened a little, her tone was almost an offence. "You would have me believe, then," she said, "that my peaceful village
is a veritable den of iniquity?" "Not I," he answered brusquely. "Only I would have you realize that
roses and honeysuckle and regular wages, the appurtenances of material
prosperity, are after all things of little consequence. They hear the
song of the world, these people, in their leisure moments; their young
men and girls are no stronger than their fellows when temptation comes." Deyes leaned suddenly forward in his chair. He felt that his
intervention dissipated a dramatic interest, of which he was keenly
conscious, but he could not keep silence any longer. "To follow out your argument, sir, to its logical conclusion," he said,
"why not aim higher still? It is your contention, is it not, that the
seeds of evil things are sown in indifference, that prosperity might
even tend towards their propagation. Why not direct your energies, then,
towards the men and women of Society? There is plenty of scope here for
your labours." The young man turned towards him. The lines of his mouth had relaxed
into a smile of tolerant indifference. "I have no sympathy, sir," he answered, "with the class you name. On a
sinking ship, the cry is always, 'Save the women and children.' It is
the less fortunate in the world's possessions who represent the women
and children of shipwrecked morality. It is for their betterment that we
work." Deyes sighed gently. "It is a pity," he declared. "I am convinced that there is a magnificent
opening for mission work amongst the idle classes." "No doubt," the young man agreed quickly. "The question is whether the
game is worth the candle." Deyes made no reply. Lady Peggy was laughing softly to herself. "I have heard all that you have to say, Mr. Macheson," the mistress of
Thorpe said calmly, "and I can only repeat that I think your presence
here as a missioner most unnecessary. I consider it, in fact, an----"

She hesitated. With a sudden flash of humour in his deep-set eyes, he
supplied the word. "An impertinence, perhaps!" "The word is not mine," she answered, "but I accept it willingly. I
cannot interfere with Mr. Hurd's decision as to the barn." "I am sorry," he said slowly. "I must hold my meetings out of doors! That is all!" There was a dangerous glitter in her beautiful eyes. "There is no common land in the neighbourhood," she said, "and you will
of course understand that I will consider you a trespasser at any time
you are found upon my property." He bowed slightly. "I am here to speak to your people," he said, "and I will do so, if I
have to stop in these lanes and talk to them one by one. You will pardon
my reminding you, madam, that the days of feudalism are over." Wilhelmina carefully shuffled the pack of cards which she had just taken
up. "We will finish our rubber, Peggy," she said. "Mr. Deyes, perhaps I may
trouble you to ring the bell!" The young man was across the room before Deyes could move. "You will allow me," he said, with a delightfully humourous smile, "to
facilitate my own dismissal. I shall doubtless meet your man in the
hall. May I be allowed to wish you all good afternoon!" They all returned his farewell save Wilhelmina, who had begun to deal. She seemed determined to remember his existence no more. Yet on the
threshold, with the handle of the door between his fingers, he turned
back. He said nothing, but his eyes were fixed upon her. Deyes leaned
forward in his chair, immensely curious. Softly the cards fell into
their places, there was no sign in her face of any consciousness of his
presence. Deyes alone knew that she was fighting. He heard her breath
come quicker, saw the fingers which gathered up her cards shake. Slowly,
but with obvious unwillingness, she turned her head. She looked straight
into the eyes of the man who still lingered. "Good afternoon, Miss Thorpe-Hatton," he said pleasantly. "I am sorry to
have troubled you." Her lips moved, but she said nothing. She half inclined her head. The
door was softly closed. CHAPTER IV

BEATING HER WINGS


Never was a young man more pleased with himself than Stephen Hurd, on
the night he dined at Thorpe-Hatton. He had shot well all day, and been
accepted with the utmost cordiality by the rest of the party. At dinner
time, his hostess had placed him on her left hand, and though it was
true she had not much to say to him, it was equally obvious that her
duties were sufficient to account for her divided attention. He was
quite willing to be ignored by the lady on his other side--a little
elderly, and noted throughout the country for her husband-hunting
proclivities. He recognized the fact that, apart from the personal side
of the question, he could scarcely hope to be of any interest to her. The novelty of the situation, Wilhelmina's occasional remarks, and a
dinner such as he had never tasted before were sufficient to keep him
interested. For the rest he was content to twirl his moustache, of which
he was inordinately proud, and lean back in his chair with the
comfortable reflection that he was the first of his family to be offered
the complete hospitality of Thorpe-Hatton. Towards the close of dinner, his hostess leaned towards him. "Have you seen or heard anything of a young man named Macheson in the
village?" she asked. "I have seen him once or twice," he answered. "Here on a missionary
expedition or something of the sort, I believe." "Has he made any attempt to hold a meeting?" she asked. "Not that I have heard of," he replied. "He has been talking to some of
the people, though. I saw him with old Gullimore yesterday." "That reminds me," she remarked, "is it true that Gullimore has had
trouble with his daughter?" "I believe so," young Hurd admitted, looking downwards at his plate. "The man was to blame for letting her leave the place," Wilhelmina
declared, in cold, measured tones. "A pretty girl, I remember, but very
vain, and a fool, of course. But about this young fellow Macheson. Do
you know who he is, and where he came from?" Stephen Hurd shook his head. "I'm afraid I don't," he said doubtfully. "He belongs to some sort of
brotherhood, I believe. I can't exactly make out what he's at. Seems a
queer sort of place for him to come missioning, this!" "So I told him," she said. "By the bye, do you know where he is
staying?" "At Onetree farm," the young man answered. Wilhelmina frowned. "Will you execute a commission for me to-morrow?" she asked. "With pleasure!" he answered eagerly. "You will go to the woman at Onetree farm, I forget her name, and say
that I desire to take her rooms myself from to-morrow, or as soon as
possible. I will pay her for them, but I do not wish that young man to
be taken in by any of my tenants. You will perhaps make that known." "I will do so," he declared. "I hope he will have the good sense to
leave the neighbourhood." "I trust so," Wilhelmina replied. She turned away to speak once more to the man on her other side, and did
not address Stephen Hurd again. He watched her covertly, with tingling
pulses, as she devoted herself to her neighbour--the Lord-Lieutenant of
the county. He considered himself a judge of the sex, but he had had few
opportunities even of admiring such women as the mistress of Thorpe. He
watched the curve of her white neck with its delicate, satin-like skin,
the play of her features, the poise of her somewhat small, oval head. He
admired the slightly wearied air with which she performed her duties and
accepted the compliments of her neighbour. "A woman of mysteries" some
one had once called her, and he realized that it was the mouth and the
dark, tired eyes which puzzled those who attempted to classify her. What
a triumph--to bring her down to the world of ordinary women, to drive
the weariness away, to feel the soft touch, perhaps, of those wonderful
arms! He was a young man of many conquests, and with a sufficiently good
idea of himself. The thought was like wine in his blood. If only it
were possible! He relapsed into a day-dream, from which he was aroused only by the soft
flutter of gowns and laces as the women rose to go. There was a
momentary disarrangement of seats. Gilbert Deyes, who was on the other
side of the table, rose, and carrying his glass in his hand, came
deliberately round to the vacant seat by the young man's side. In his
evening clothes, the length and gauntness of his face and figure seemed
more noticeable than ever. His skin was dry, almost like parchment, and
his eyes by contrast appeared unnaturally bright. His new neighbour
noticed, too, that the glass which he carried so carefully contained
nothing but water. "I will come and talk to you for a few minutes, if I may," Deyes said. "I leave the Church and agriculture to hobnob. Somehow I don't fancy
that as a buffer I should be a success." Young Hurd smiled amiably. He was more than a little flattered. "The Archdeacon," he remarked, "is not an inspiring neighbour." Deyes lit one of his own cigarettes and passed his case. "I have found the Archdeacon very dull," he admitted--"a privilege of
his order, I suppose. By the bye, you are having a dose of religion from
a new source hereabouts, are you not?" "You mean this young missioner?" Hurd inquired doubtfully. Deyes nodded. "I was with our hostess when he came up to ask for the loan of a barn to
hold services in. A very queer sort of person, I should think?" "I haven't spoken to him," Hurd answered, "but I should think he's more
or less mad. I can understand mission and Salvation Army work and all
that sort of thing in the cities, but I'm hanged if I can understand any
one coming to Thorpe with such notions." "Our hostess is annoyed about it, I imagine," Deyes remarked. "She seems to have taken a dislike to the fellow," Hurd admitted. "She
was speaking to me about him just now. He is to be turned out of his
lodgings here." Gilbert Deyes smiled. The news interested him. "Our hostess is practical in her dislikes," he remarked. "Why not?" his neighbour answered. "The place belongs to her." Deyes watched for a moment the smoke from his cigarette, curling
upwards. "The young man," he said thoughtfully, "impressed me as being a person
of some determination. I wonder whether he will consent to accept defeat
so easily." The agent's son scarcely saw what else there was for him to do. "There isn't anywhere round here," he remarked, "where they would take
him in against Miss Thorpe-Hatton's wishes. Besides, he has nowhere to
preach. His coming here at all was a huge mistake. If he's a sensible
person he'll admit it." Deyes nodded as he rose to his feet and lounged towards the door with
the other men. "Play bridge?" he asked his companion, as they crossed the hall. "A little," the young man answered, "for moderate stakes." They entered the drawing-room, and Deyes made his way to a secluded
corner, where Lady Peggy sat scribbling alone in a note-book. "My dear Lady Peggy," he inquired, "whence this exceptional industry?" She closed the book and looked up at him with twinkling eyes. "Well, I didn't mean to tell a soul until it was finished," she
declared, "but you've just caught me. I've had such a brilliant idea. I'm going to write a Society Encyclopaedia!" Deyes looked at her solemnly. "A Society Encyclopaedia!" he repeated uncertainly. "'Pon my word, I'm
not quite sure that I understand." She motioned him to sit down by her side. "I'll explain," she said. "You know we're all expected to know something
about everything nowadays, and it's such a bore reading up things. I'm
going to compile a little volume of definitions. I shall sell it at a
guinea a copy, pay all my debts, and become quite respectable again." Deyes shook his head. His attitude was scarcely sympathetic. "My dear Lady Peggy, what nonsense!" he declared. "Respectable, indeed! I call it positively pandering to the middle classes!" Lady Peggy looked doubtful. "It is a horrid word, isn't it?" she admitted, "but it would be lovely
to make some money. Of course, I haven't absolutely decided how to spend
it yet. It does seem rather a waste, doesn't it, to pay one's debts, but
think of the luxury of feeling one could do it if one wanted to!" "There's something in that," Deyes admitted. "But an encyclopaedia! My
dear Lady Peggy, you don't know what you're talking about. I've got one
somewhere, I know. It came in a van, and it took two of the men to
unload it." Lady Peggy laughed softly. "Oh! I don't mean that sort, of course," she declared. "I mean just a
little gilt-edged text book, bound in morocco, you know, with just those
things in it we're likely to run up against. Radium, for instance. Now
every one's talking about radium. Do you know what radium is?" Deyes swung his eyeglass carefully by its black riband. "Well," he admitted, "I've a sort of idea, but I'm not very good at
definitions." "Of course not," Lady Peggy declared triumphantly. "When it comes to the
point, you see what a good idea mine is. You turn to my textbook," she
added, turning the pages over rapidly, "and there you are. Radium! 'A
hard, rare substance, invented by Mr. Gillette to give tone to his
bachelor parties.' What do you think of that?" "Wonderful!" Deyes declared solemnly. "Where do you get your information
from?" "Oh! I poke about in dictionaries and things, and ask every one
questions," Lady Peggy declared airily. "Would you like to hear some
more?" "Our hostess is beckoning to me," Deyes answered, rising. "I expect she
wants some bridge." "I'm on," Lady Peggy declared cheerfully. "Whom shall we get for a
fourth?" "Wilhelmina has found him already," Deyes declared. "It's the new young
man, I think." Lady Peggy shrugged her shoulders. "The agent's son?" she remarked. "I shouldn't have thought that he would
have cared about our points." "He can afford it for once in a way, I should imagine," Deyes answered. "I can't understand, though----"

He stopped short. She looked at him curiously. "Is it possible," she murmured, "that there exists anything which
Gilbert Deyes does not understand?" "Many things," he answered; "amongst them, why does Wilhelmina patronize
this young man? He is well enough, of course, but----" he shrugged his
shoulders expressively; "the thing needs an explanation, doesn't it?" "If Wilhelmina--were not Wilhelmina, it certainly would," Lady Peggy
answered. "I call her craving for new things and new people positively
morbid. All the time she beats her wings against the bars. There are no
new things. There are no new experiences. The sooner one makes up one's
mind to it the better." Gilbert Deyes laughed softly. "If my memory serves me," he said, "you are repeating a cry many
thousand years old. Wasn't there a prophet----"

"There was," she interrupted, "but they are beckoning us. I hope I don't
cut with the young man. I don't believe he has a bridge face." CHAPTER V

EVICTED


Victor Macheson smoked his after-breakfast pipe with the lazy enjoyment
of one who is thoroughly at peace with himself and his surroundings. The
tiny strip of lawn on to which he had dragged his chair was surrounded
with straggling bushes of cottage flowers, and flanked by a hedge thick
with honeysuckle. Straight to heaven, as the flight of a bird, the thin
line of blue smoke curled upwards to the summer sky; the very air seemed
full of sweet scents and soothing sounds. A few yards away, a procession
of lazy cows moved leisurely along the grass-bordered lane; from the
other side of the hedge came the cheerful sound of a reaping-machine,
driven slowly through the field of golden corn. The man, through half closed eyes, looked out upon these things, and
every line in his face spelt contentment. In repose, the artistic
temperament with which he was deeply imbued, asserted itself more
clearly--the almost fanatical light in his eyes was softened; one
saw there was something of the wistfulness of those who seek to
raise but a corner of the veil that hangs before the world of
hidden things--something, too, of the subdued joy which even the
effort brings. The lines of his forceful mouth were less firm, more
sensitive--a greater sense of humanity seemed somehow to have descended
upon him as he lounged there in the warmth of the sun, with the full joy
of his beautiful environment creeping through his blood. "If you please, Mr. Macheson," some one said in his ear. He turned his head at once. A tall, fair girl had stepped out of the
room where he had been breakfasting, and was standing by his elbow. She
was neatly dressed, pretty in a somewhat insipid fashion, and her hands
and hair showed signs of a refinement superior to her station. Just now
she was apparently nervous. Macheson smiled at her encouragingly. "Well, Letty," he said, "what is it?" "I wanted--can I say something to you, Mr. Macheson?" she began. "Why not?" he answered kindly. "Is it anything very serious? Out with
it!" "I was thinking, Mr. Macheson," she said, "that I should like to leave
home--if I could--if there was anything which I could do. I wanted to
ask your advice." He laid down his pipe and looked at her seriously. "Why, Letty," he said, "how long have you been thinking of this?" "Oh! ever so long, sir," she exclaimed, speaking with more confidence. "You see there's nothing for me to do here except when there's any one
staying, like you, sir, and that's not often. Mother won't let me help
with the rough work, and Ruth's growing up now, she's ever such a strong
girl. And I should like to go away if I could, and learn to be a little
more--more ladylike," she added, with reddening cheeks. Macheson was puzzled. The girl was not looking him in the face. He felt
there was something at the back of it all. "My dear girl," he said, "you can't learn to be ladylike. That's one of
the things that's born with you or it isn't. You can be just as much a
lady helping your mother here as practising grimaces in a London
drawing-room." "But I want to improve myself," she persisted. "Go for a long walk every day, and look about you," he said. "Read. I'll
lend you some books--the right sort. You'll do better here than away." She was frankly dissatisfied. "But I want to go away," she declared. "I want to leave Thorpe for a
time. I should like to go to London. Couldn't I get a situation as
lady's help or companion or something of that sort? I shouldn't want any
money." He was silent for a moment. "Does your mother know of this, Letty?" he asked. "She wouldn't object," the girl answered eagerly. "She lets me do what I
like." "Hadn't you better tell me--the rest?" Macheson asked quietly. The girl looked away uneasily. "There is no rest," she protested weakly. Macheson shook his head. "Letty," he said, "if you have formed any ideas of a definite future for
yourself, different from any you see before you here, tell me what they
are, and I will do my best to help you. But if you simply want to go
away because you are dissatisfied with the life here, because you fancy
yourself superior to it, well, I'm sorry, but I'd sooner prevent your
going than help you." Her eyes filled with tears. "Oh! Mr. Macheson, it isn't that," she declared, "I--I don't want to
tell any one, but I'm very--very fond of some one who's--quite
different. I think he's fond of me, too," she added softly, "but he's
always used to being with ladies, and I wanted to improve myself so
much! I thought if I went to London," she added wistfully, "I might
learn?" Macheson laughed cheerfully. He laid his hand for a moment upon her arm. "Oh! Letty, Letty," he declared, "you're a foolish little girl! Now,
listen to me. If he's a good sort, and I'm sure he is, or you wouldn't
be fond of him, he'll like you just exactly as you are. Do you know what
it means to be a lady, the supreme test of good manners? It means to be
natural. Take my advice! Go on helping your mother, enter into the
village life, make friends with the other girls, don't imagine yourself
a bit superior to anybody else. Read when you have time--I'll manage the
books for you, and spend all the time you can out of doors. It's sound
advice, Letty. Take my word for it. Hullo, who's this?" A new sound in the lane made them both turn their heads. Young Hurd had
just ridden up and was fastening his pony to the fence. He looked
across at them curiously, and Letty retreated precipitately into the
house. A moment or two later he came up the narrow path, frowning at
Macheson over the low hedge of foxgloves and cottage roses, and barely
returning his courteous greeting. For a moment he hesitated, however, as
though about to speak. Then, changing his mind, he passed on and entered
the farmhouse. He met Mrs. Foulton herself in the passage, and she welcomed him with a
smiling face. "Good morning, Mr. Hurd, sir!" she exclaimed, plucking at her apron. "Won't you come inside, sir, and sit down? The parlour's let to Mr.
Macheson there, but he's out in the garden, and he won't mind your
stepping in for a moment. And how's your father, Mr. Hurd? Wonderful
well he was looking when I saw him last." The young man followed her inside, but declined a chair. "Oh! the governor's all right, Mrs. Foulton," he answered. "Never knew
him anything else. Good weather for the harvest, eh?" "Beautiful, sir!" Mrs. Foulton answered. "Were you wanting to speak to John, Mr. Stephen? He's about the home
meadow somewhere, or in the orchard. I can send a boy for him, or
perhaps you'd step out." "It's you I came to see, Mrs. Foulton," the young man said, "and 'pon my
word, I don't like my errand much." Mrs. Foulton was visibly anxious. "There's no trouble like, I hope, sir?" she began. "Oh! it's nothing serious," he declared reassuringly. "To tell you the
truth, it's about your lodger." "About Mr. Macheson, sir!" the woman exclaimed. "Yes! Do you know how long he was proposing to stay with you?" "He's just took the rooms for another week, sir," she answered, "and a
nicer lodger, or one more quiet and regular in his habits, I never had
or wish to have. There's nothing against him, sir--surely?" "Nothing personal--that I know of," Hurd answered, tapping his boots
with his riding-whip. "The fact of it is, he has offended Miss
Thorpe-Hatton, and she wants him out of the place." "Well, I never did!" Mrs. Foulton exclaimed in amazement. "Him offend
Miss Thorpe-Hatton! So nice-spoken he is, too. I'm sure I can't imagine
his saying a wry word to anybody." "He has come to Thorpe," Hurd explained, "on an errand of which Miss
Thorpe-Hatton disapproves, and she does not wish to have him in the
place. She knows that he is staying here, and she wishes you to send him
away at once." Mrs. Foulton's face fell. "Well, I'm fair sorry to hear this, sir," she declared. "It's only this
morning that he spoke for the rooms for another week, and I was glad and
willing enough to let them to him. Well I never did! It does sound all
anyhow, don't it, sir, to be telling him to pack up and go sudden-like!" "I will speak to him myself, if you like, Mrs. Foulton," Stephen said. "Of course, Miss Thorpe-Hatton does not wish you to lose anything, and I
am to pay you the rent of the rooms for the time he engaged them. I will
do so at once, if you will let me know how much it is." He thrust his hand into his pocket, but Mrs. Foulton drew back. The
corners of her mouth were drawn tightly together. "Thank you, Mr. Stephen," she said, "I'll obey Miss Thorpe-Hatton's
wishes, of course, as in duty bound, but I'll not take any money for the
rooms. Thank you all the same." "Don't be foolish, Mrs. Foulton," the young man said pleasantly. "It
will annoy Miss Thorpe-Hatton if she knows you have refused, and you may
just as well have the money. Let me see. Shall we say a couple of
sovereigns for the week?" Mrs. Foulton shook her head. "I'll not take anything, sir, thank you all the same, and if you'd say a
word to Mr. Macheson, I'd be much obliged. I'd rather any one spoke to
him than me." Stephen Hurd pocketed the money with a shrug of the shoulders. "Just as you like, of course, Mrs. Foulton," he said. "I'll go out and
speak to the young gentleman at once." He strolled out and looked over the hedge. "Mr. Macheson, I believe?" he remarked interrogatively. Macheson nodded as he rose from his chair. "And you are Mr. Hurd's son, are you not?" he said pleasantly. "Wonderful morning, isn't it?" Young Hurd stepped over the rose bushes. The two men stood side by side,
something of a height, only that the better cut of Hurd's clothes showed
his figure to greater advantage. "I'm sorry to say that I've come on rather a disagreeable errand," the
agent's son began. "I've been talking to Mrs. Foulton about it." "Indeed?" Macheson remarked interrogatively. "The fact is you seem to have rubbed up against our great lady here,"
young Hurd continued. "She's very down on these services you were going
to hold, and she wants to see you out of the place." "I am sorry to hear this," Macheson said--and once more waited. "It isn't a pleasant task," Stephen continued, liking his errand less as
he proceeded; "but I've had to tell Mrs. Foulton that--that, in short,
Miss Thorpe-Hatton does not wish her tenants to accept you as a lodger." "Miss Thorpe-Hatton makes war on a wide scale," Macheson remarked,
smiling faintly. "Well, after all, you see," Hurd explained, "the whole place belongs to
her, and there is no particular reason, is there, why she should
tolerate any one in it of whom she disapproves?" "None whatever," Macheson assented gravely. "I promised Mrs. Foulton I would speak to you," Stephen continued,
stepping backwards. "I'm sure, for her sake, you won't make any trouble. Good morning!" Macheson bowed slightly. "Good morning!" he answered. Stephen Hurd lingered even then upon the garden path. Somehow he was
not satisfied with his interview--with his own position at the end of
it. He had an uncomfortable sense of belittlement, of having played a
small part in a not altogether worthy game. The indifference of the
other's manner nettled him. He tried a parting shaft. "Mrs. Foulton said something about your having engaged the rooms for
another week," he said, turning back. "Of course, if you insist upon
staying, it will place the woman in a very awkward position." Macheson had resumed his seat. "I should not dream," he said coolly, "of resisting--your mistress'
decree! I shall leave here in half an hour." Young Hurd walked angrily down the path and slammed the gate. The sense
of having been worsted was strong upon him. He recognized his own
limitations too accurately not to be aware that he had been in conflict
with a stronger personality. "D---- the fellow!" he muttered, as he cantered down the lane. "I wish
he were out of the place." A genuine wish, and one which betrayed at least a glimmering of a
prophetic instinct. In some dim way he seemed to understand, even before
the first move on the board, that the coming of Victor Macheson to
Thorpe was inimical to himself. He was conscious of his weakness, of a
marked inferiority, and the consciousness was galling. 