



Produced by Siobhan Hillman, D Alexander, Ernest Schaal,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)









                              THE HILLMAN




         [Illustration: What followed came like a thunder-clap. FRONTISPIECE. _See page 304._]




                              The Hillman


                        By E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM


                  Author of "The Kingdom of The Blind"
                    "Mr. Grex of Monte Carlo," Etc. [Illustration]


                           WITH FRONTISPIECE
                            By GEORGE AVISON


                           A. L. BURT COMPANY
         Publishers                                   New York
         Published by Arrangement with LITTLE, BROWN & COMPANY




                           _Copyright, 1917_,
                     BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY. _All rights reserved_

                        Published, January, 1917
                    Reprinted, January, 1917 (twice)
                         February, 1917 (twice)
                        March, 1917; April, 1917




                              THE HILLMAN

                                   I


Louise, self-engrossed, and with a pleasant sense of detachment from the
prospective inconveniences of the moment, was leaning back among the
cushions of the motionless car. Her eyes, lifted upward, traveled past
the dimly lit hillside, with its patchwork of wall-enclosed fields, up
to where the leaning clouds and the unseen heights met in a misty sea of
obscurity. The moon had not yet risen, but a faint and luminous glow, spreading
like a halo about the topmost peak of that ragged line of hills,
heralded its approach. Louise sat with clasped hands, rapt and engrossed
in the esthetic appreciation of a beauty which found its way but seldom
into her town-enslaved life. She listened to the sound of a distant
sheepbell. Her eyes swept the hillsides, vainly yet without curiosity,
for any sign of a human dwelling. The voices of her chauffeur and her
maid, who stood talking heatedly together by the bonnet of the car,
seemed to belong to another world. She had the air of one completely yet
pleasantly detached from all material surroundings. The maid, leaving her discomfited companion with a final burst of
reproaches, came to the side of the car. Her voice, when she addressed
her mistress, sank to a lower key, but her eyes still flashed with
anger. "But would _madame_ believe it?" she exclaimed. "It is incredible! The
man Charles there, who calls himself a chauffeur of experience, declares
that we are what he calls 'hung up'! Something unexpected has happened
to the magneto. There is no spark. Whose fault can that be, I ask, but
the chauffeur's? And such a desert we have reached! We have searched the
map together. We are thirty miles from any town, many miles from even a
village. What a misfortune!" Louise turned her head regretfully away from the mysterious spaces. She
listened patiently, but without any sort of emotion, to her maid's flow
of distressed words. She even smiled very faintly when the girl had
finished. "Something will happen," she remarked indifferently. "There is no need
for you to distress yourself. There must be a farmhouse or shelter of
some sort near. If the worst comes to the worst, we can spend the night
in the car. We have plenty of furs and rugs. You are not a good
traveler, Aline. You lose heart too soon." The girl's face was a study. "_Madame_ speaks of spending the night in the car!" she exclaimed. "Why,
one has not eaten since luncheon, and of all the country through which
we have passed, this is the loneliest and dreariest spot." Louise leaned forward and called to the chauffeur. "Charles," she asked, "what has happened? Are we really stranded here?" The man's head emerged from the bonnet. He came round to the side of the
car. "I am very sorry, madam," he reported, "but something has gone wrong
with the magneto. I shall have to take it to pieces before I can tell
exactly what is wrong. At present I can't get a spark of any sort." "There is no hope of any immediate repair, then?" The chauffeur shook his head dolefully. "I shall have to take the magneto down, madam," he said. "It will take
several hours, and it ought to be done by daylight." "And in the meantime, what do you suggest that we do?" she asked. The man looked a little helpless. His battle of words with Aline had
depressed him. "I heard a dog bark a little while ago," he remarked. "Perhaps I had
better go and see whether there isn't a farm somewhere near." "And leave us here alone?" Aline exclaimed indignantly. "It is a good
suggestion. It comes well from the man who has got us into such
trouble!" Her mistress smiled at her reassuringly. "What have we to fear, you foolish girl? For myself, I would like better
than anything to remain here until the moon comes over the top of that
round hill. But listen! It is just as I told you. There is no necessity
for Charles to leave us." They all turned their heads. From some distance behind on the hard,
narrow road, curling like a piece of white tape around the hillside,
there came, faintly at first, but more distinctly every moment, the
sound of horse's hoofs. "It is as I told you," Louise said composedly. "Some one approaches--on
horseback, too. He will be able to fetch assistance." The chauffeur walked back a few yards, prepared to give early warning to
the approaching horseman. The two women, standing up in the car, watched
the spot where the road, hidden for some time in the valley, came into
sight. Louder and louder came the sound of the beating of hoofs. Louise gave a
little cry as a man on horseback appeared in sight at the crest of the
hill. The narrow strip of road seemed suddenly dwarfed, an unreasonable
portion of the horizon blotted out. In the half light there was
something almost awesome in the unusual size of the horse and of the man
who rode it. "It is a world of goblins, this, Aline!" her mistress exclaimed softly. "What is it that comes?" "It is a human being, _Dieu merci_!" the maid replied, with a
matter-of-fact little sigh of content. Conscious of the obstruction in the road, the rider slackened his speed. His horse, a great, dark-colored animal, pricked up his ears when
scarcely a dozen yards away from the car, stopped short, and suddenly
bolted out on the open moor. There was the sound of a heavy whip, a
loud, masterful voice, and a very brief struggle, during which the horse
once plunged and reared so high that Louise, watching, cried out in
fear. A few moments later, however, horse and rider, the former
quivering and subdued, were beside the car. "Has anything happened?" the newcomer asked, raising his whip to his
hat. He addressed Louise, instinctively conscious, even in that dim light,
that she was the person in authority. She did not at once reply. Her eyes were fixed upon the face of her
questioner. There was little enough of him to be seen, yet she was aware
of an exceptional interest in his dimly revealed personality. He was
young, unusually tall, and his voice was cultivated. Beyond that, she
could see or divine nothing. He, for his part, with his attention still largely engaged in keeping
his horse under control, yet knew, in those first few moments, that he
was looking into the face of a woman who had no kinship with the world
in which he had been born and had lived his days. Those were fugitive
thoughts which passed between them, only half conceived, yet strong
enough to remain as first and unforgettable impressions. Then the
commonplace interests of the situation became insistent. "I have broken down," Louise said. "My chauffeur tells me that it will
take hours to effect some necessary repair to the car. And
meanwhile--here we are!" "You couldn't have chosen a worse place for a breakdown," the young man
observed. "You are miles away from anywhere." "You are indeed a comforter!" Louise murmured. "Do you think that you
could possibly get down and advise us what to do? You look so far away
up there." There was another brief struggle between the man and his still
frightened horse. Then the former swung himself down, and, with the
bridle through his arm, came and stood by the car. "If there is any way in which I can help," he ventured, "I am quite at
your service." Louise smiled at him. She remained unoppressed by any fear of
inconvenience or hardship. She had the air of one rather enjoying her
plight. "Well, you have begun very nicely by doing what I asked you," she said. "Really, you know, to an impressionable person there was something
rather terrifying about you when you appeared suddenly from out of the
shadows in such a lonely place. I was beginning to wonder whether you
were altogether real, whether one of those black hills there had not
opened to let you out. You see, I know something of the legends of your
country, although I have never been here before." The young man was less at his ease. He stood tapping his boot nervously
with his long riding-whip. "I am sorry if I frightened you," he said. "My horse is a little
restive, and the acetylene light which your chauffeur turned on him was
sufficiently alarming." "You did not exactly frighten me," she assured him, "but you looked so
abnormally large. Please tell us what you would advise us to do. Is
there a village near, or an inn, or even a barn? Or shall we have to
spend the night in the car?" "The nearest village," he replied, "is twelve miles away. Fortunately,
my own home is close by. I shall be very pleased--I and my brother--if
you will honor us. I am afraid I cannot offer you very much in the way
of entertainment--"

She rose briskly to her feet and beamed upon him. "You are indeed a good Samaritan!" she exclaimed. "A roof is more than
we had dared to hope for, although when one looks up at this wonderful
sky and breathes this air, one wonders, perhaps, whether a roof, after
all, is such a blessing." "It gets very cold toward morning," the young man said practically. "Of course," she assented. "Aline, you will bring my dressing-bag and
follow us. This gentleman is kind enough to offer us shelter for the
night. Dear me, you really are almost as tall as you appeared!" she
added, as she stood by his side. "For the first time in my life you make
me feel undersized." He looked down at her, a little more at his ease now by reason of the
friendliness of her manner, although he had still the air of one
embarked upon an adventure, the outcome of which was to be regarded with
some qualms. She was of little more than medium height, and his first
impressions of her were that she was thin, and too pale to be
good-looking; that her eyes were large and soft, with eyebrows more
clearly defined than is usual among Englishwomen; and that she moved
without seeming to walk. "I suppose I am tall," he admitted, as they started off along the road. "One doesn't notice it around here. My name is John Strangewey, and our
house is just behind that clump of trees there, on the top of the hill. We will do our best to make you comfortable," he added a little
doubtfully; "but there are only my brother and myself, and we have no
women servants in the house." "A roof of any sort will be a luxury," she assured him. "I only hope
that we shall not be a trouble to you in any way." "And your name, please?" he asked. She was a little amazed at his directness, but she answered him without
hesitation. "My name," she told him, "is Louise." He leaned down toward her, a little puzzled. "Louise? But your surname?" She laughed softly. It occurred to him that nothing like her laugh had
ever been heard on that gray-walled stretch of mountain road. "Never mind! I am traveling incognito. Who I am, or where I am
going--well, what does that matter to anybody? Perhaps I do not know
myself. You can imagine, if you like, that we came from the heart of
your hills, and that to-morrow they will open again and welcome us
back." "I don't think there are any motor-cars in fairyland," he objected. "We represent a new edition of fairy lore," she told him. "Modern
romance, you know, includes motor-cars and even French maids." "All the same," he protested, with masculine bluntness, "I really don't
see how I can introduce you to my brother as 'Louise from fairyland.'" She evaded the point. "Tell me about your brother. Is he as tall as you, and is he younger or
older?" "He is nearly twenty years older," her companion replied. "He is about
my height, but he stoops more than I do, and his hair is gray. I am
afraid that you may find him a little peculiar." Her escort paused and swung open a white gate on their left-hand side. Before them was an ascent which seemed to her, in the dim light, to be
absolutely precipitous. "Do we have to climb up that?" she asked ruefully. "It isn't so bad as it looks," he assured her, "and I am afraid it's the
only way up. The house is at the bend there, barely fifty yards away. You can see a light through the trees." "You must help me, then, please," she begged. He stooped down toward her. She linked her fingers together through his
left arm, and, leaning a little heavily upon him, began the ascent. He
was conscious of some subtle fragrance from her clothes, a perfume
strangely different from the odor of the ghostlike flowers that bordered
the steep path up which they were climbing. Her arms, slight, warm
things though they were, and great though his own strength, felt
suddenly like a yoke. At every step he seemed to feel their weight more
insistent--a weight not physical, solely due to this rush of unexpected
emotions. It was he now whose thoughts rushed away to that medley of hill legends
of which she had spoken. Was she indeed a creature of flesh and blood,
of the same world as the dull people among whom he lived? Then he
remembered the motor-car, the chauffeur, and the French maid, and he
gave a little sigh of relief. "Are we nearly there?" she asked. "Do tell me if I lean too heavily upon
you." "It is only a few steps further," he replied encouragingly. "Please lean
upon me as heavily as you like." She looked around her almost in wonder as her companion paused with his
hand upon a little iron gate. From behind that jagged stretch of hills
in the distance a corner of the moon had now appeared. By its light,
looking backward, she could see the road which they had left below, the
moorland stretching away into misty space, an uneasy panorama with its
masses of gray boulders, its clumps of gorse, its hillocks and hollows. Before her, through the little iron gate which her escort had pushed
open, was a garden, a little austere looking with its prim flower-beds,
filled with hyacinths and crocuses, bordering the flinty walks. The
trees were all bent in the same direction, fashioned after one pattern
by the winds. Before them was the house--a long, low building, part of
it covered with some kind of creeper. As they stepped across the last few yards of lawn, the black, oak door
which they were approaching suddenly opened. A tall, elderly man stood
looking inquiringly out. He shaded his eyes with his hands. "Is that you, brother?" he asked doubtfully. John Strangewey ushered his companion into the square, oak-paneled hall,
hung with many trophies of the chase, a few oil-paintings, here and
there some sporting prints. It was lighted only with a single lamp
which stood upon a round, polished table in the center of the
white-flagged floor. "This lady's motor-car has broken down, Stephen," John explained,
turning a little nervously toward his brother. "I found them in the
road, just at the bottom of the hill. She and her servants will spend
the night here. I have explained that there is no village or inn for a
good many miles." Louise turned graciously toward the elder man, who was standing grimly
apart. Even in those few seconds, her quick sensibilities warned her of
the hostility which lurked behind his tightly closed lips and steel-gray
eyes. His bow was stiff and uncordial, and he made no movement to offer
his hand. "We are not used to welcoming ladies at Peak Hall, madam," he said. "I
am afraid that you will find us somewhat unprepared for guests." "I ask for nothing more than a roof," Louise assured him. John threw his hat and whip upon the round table and stood in the center
of the stone floor. She caught a glance which flashed between the two
men--of appeal from the one, of icy resentment from the other. "We can at least add to the roof a bed and some supper--and a welcome,"
John declared. "Is that not so, Stephen?" The older man turned deliberately away. It was as if he had not heard
his brother's words. "I will go and find Jennings," he said. "He must be told about the
servants." Louise watched the disappearing figure until it was out of sight. Then
she looked up into the face of the younger man, who was standing by her
side. "I am sorry," she murmured apologetically. "I am afraid that your
brother is not pleased at this sudden intrusion. Really, we shall give
you very little trouble." He answered her with a sudden eager enthusiasm. He seemed far more
natural then than at any time since he had ridden up from out of the
shadows to take his place in her life. "I won't apologize for Stephen," he said. "He is a little crotchety. You
must please be kind and not notice. You must let me, if I can, offer you
welcome enough for us both." II


Louise, with a heavy, silver-plated candlestick in her hand, stood upon
the uneven floor of the bedroom to which she had been conducted, looking
up at the oak-framed family tree which hung above the broad
chimney-piece. She examined the coat of arms emblazoned in the corner,
and peered curiously at the last neatly printed addition, which
indicated Stephen and John Strangewey as the sole survivors of a
diminishing line. When at last she turned away, she found the name upon
her lips. "Strangewey!" she murmured. "John Strangewey! The name seems to bring
something into my memory. Have I ever known any one with such a name,
Aline?" The maid shook her head. "Never, _madame_, to the best of my belief," she declared. "Yet I, too,
seem to have heard it, and lately. It is perplexing. One has seen it
somewhere. One finds it familiar." Louise shrugged her shoulders. She stood for a moment looking around her
before she laid down the candlestick. The room was of unusual size, with two worm-eaten beams across the
ceiling; the windows were casemented, with broad seats in each recess. The dressing table, upon which her belongings were set out, was of
solid, black oak, as was also the framework of the huge sofa, the
mirror, and the chairs. The ancient four-poster, hung with chintz and
supported by carved pillars, was spread with fine linen and covered with
a quilt made of small pieces of silk, lavender-perfumed. The great
wardrobe, with its solid mahogany doors, seemed ancient enough to have
stood in its place since the building of the house itself. A log of
sweet-smelling wood burned cheerfully in the open fireplace. "Really," Louise decided, "we have been most fortunate. This is an
adventure! Aline, give me some black silk stockings and some black
slippers. I will change nothing else." The maid obeyed in somewhat ominous silence. Her mistress, however, was
living in a little world of her own. "John Strangewey!" she murmured to herself, glancing across the room at
the family tree. "It is really curious how that name brings with it a
sense of familiarity. It is so unusual, too. And what an unusual-looking
person! Do you think, Aline, that you ever saw any one so superbly
handsome?" The maid's little grimace was expressive. "Never, _madame_," she replied. "And yet to think of it--a gentleman, a
person of intelligence, who lives here always, outside the world, with
just a terrible old man servant, the only domestic in the house! Nearly
all the cooking is done at the bailiff's, a quarter of a mile away." Louise nodded thoughtfully. "It is very strange," she admitted. "I should like to understand it. Perhaps," she added, half to herself, "some day I shall." She passed across the room, and on her way paused before an old
cheval-glass, before which were suspended two silver candlesticks
containing lighted wax candles. She looked steadfastly at her own
reflection. A little smile parted her lips. In the bedroom of this
quaint farmhouse she was looking upon a face and a figure which the
illustrated papers and the enterprise of the modern photographer had
combined to make familiar to the world. A curious feeling came to her that she was looking at the face of a
stranger. She gazed earnestly into the mirror, with new eyes and a new
curiosity. She contemplated critically the lines of her slender figure
in its neat, perfectly tailored skirt--the figure of a girl, it seemed,
notwithstanding her twenty-seven years. Her soft, white blouse was open
at the neck, displaying a beautifully rounded throat. Her eyes traveled
upward, and dwelt with an almost passionate interest upon the oval face,
a little paler at that moment than usual; with its earnest, brown eyes,
its faint, silky eyebrows, its strong, yet mobile features; its lips a
little full, perhaps, but soft and sensitive; at the masses of brown
hair drawn low over her ears. This was herself, then. Did she really justify her reputation for
beauty, or was she just a cult, the passing craze of a world a little
weary of the ordinary standards? Or, again, was it only her art that had
focused the admiration of the world upon her? How would she seem to these two men down-stairs, she asked herself--the
dour, grim master of the house, and her more youthful rescuer, whose
coming had somehow touched her fancy? They saw so little of her sex. They seemed, in a sense, to be in league against it. Would they find out
that they were entertaining an angel unawares? She thought with a gratified smile of her incognito. It was a real
trial of her strength, this! When she turned away from the mirror the
smile still lingered upon her lips, a soft light of anticipation was
shining in her eyes. John met her at the foot of the stairs. She noticed with some surprise
that he was wearing the dinner-jacket and black tie of civilization. "Will you come this way, please?" he begged. "Supper is quite ready." He held open the door of one of the rooms on the other side of the hall,
and she passed into a low dining room, dimly lit with shaded lamps. The
elder brother rose from his chair as they entered, although his
salutation was even grimmer than his first welcome. He was wearing a
dress-coat of old-fashioned cut, and a black stock, and he remained
standing, without any smile or word of greeting, until she had taken her
seat. Behind his chair stood a very ancient man servant in a gray
pepper-and-salt suit, with a white tie, whose expression, at the
entrance of this unexpected guest, seemed curiously to reflect the
inhospitable instincts of his master. Although conscious of this atmosphere of antagonism, Louise looked
around her with frank admiration as she took her place in the
high-backed chair which John was holding for her. The correctness of the
setting appealed strongly to her artistic perceptions. The figures and
features of the two men--Stephen, tall, severe, stately; John, amazingly
handsome, but of the same type; the black-raftered ceiling; the Jacobean
sideboard; the huge easy chairs; the fine prints upon the walls; the
pine log which burned upon the open hearth--nowhere did there seem to be
a single alien or modern note. The table was laid with all manner of cold dishes, supplemented by
others upon the sideboard. There were pots of jam and honey, a silver
teapot and silver spoons and forks of quaint design, strangely cut
glass, and a great Dresden bowl filled with flowers. "I am afraid," John remarked, "that you are not used to dining at this
hour. My brother and I are very old-fashioned in our customs. If we had
had a little longer notice--"

"I never in my life saw anything that looked so delicious as your cold
chicken," Louise declared. "May I have some--and some ham? I believe
that you must farm some land yourselves. Everything looks as if it were
home-made or home-grown." "We are certainly farmers," John admitted, with a smile, "and I don't
think there is much here that isn't of our own production." "Of course, one must have some occupation, living so far out of the
world," Louise murmured. "I really am the most fortunate person," she
continued. "My car comes to grief in what seems to be a wilderness, and
I find myself in a very palace of plenty!" "I am not sure that your maid agrees," John laughed. "She seemed rather
horrified when she found that there was no woman servant about the
place." "Aline is spoiled, without a doubt," her mistress declared. "But is that
really the truth?" "Absolutely." "But how do you manage?" Louise went on. "Don't you need dairymaids, for
instance?" "The farm buildings are some distance away from the house," John
explained. "There is quite a little colony at the back, and the woman
who superintends the dairy lives there. It is only in the house that we
are entirely independent of your sex. We manage, somehow or other, with
Jennings here and two boys." "You are not both woman-haters, I hope?" Her younger host flashed a warning glance at Louise, but it was too
late. Stephen had laid down his knife and fork and was leaning in her
direction. "Madam," he intervened, "since you have asked the question, I will
confess that I have never known any good come to a man of our family
from the friendship or service of women. Our family history, if ever you
should come to know it, would amply justify my brother and myself for
our attitude toward your sex." "Stephen!" John remonstrated, a slight frown upon his face. "Need you
weary our guest with your peculiar views? It is scarcely polite, to say
the least of it." The older man sat, for a moment, grim and silent. "Perhaps you are right, brother," he admitted. "This lady did not seek
our company, but it may interest her to know that she is the first woman
who has crossed the threshold of Peak Hall for a matter of six years." Louise looked from one to the other, half incredulously. "Do you really mean it? Is that literally true?" she asked John. "Absolutely," the young man assured her; "but please remember that you
are none the less heartily welcome here. We have few women neighbors,
and intercourse with them seems to have slipped out of our lives. Tell
me, how far have you come to-day, and where did you hope to sleep
to-night?" Louise hesitated for a moment. For some reason or other, the question
seemed to bring with it some unexpected and disturbing thought. "I was motoring from Edinburgh. As regards to-night, I had not made up
my mind. I rather hoped to reach Kendal. My journey is not at all an
interesting matter to talk about," she went on. "Tell me about your life
here. It sounds most delightfully pastoral. Do you really mean that you
produce nearly everything yourselves? Your honey and preserves and bread
and butter, for instance--are they all home-made?" "And our hams," the young man laughed, "and everything else upon the
table. You underestimate the potentiality of male labor. Jennings is
certainly a better cook than the average woman. Everything you see was
cooked by him. We have a sort of secondary kitchen, though, down at the
bailiff's, where the preserves are made and some of the other things." "And you live here all the year round?" she asked. "My brother," John told her, "has not been further away than the nearest
market-town for nearly twenty years." Her eyes grew round with astonishment. "But you go to London sometimes?" "I was there eight years ago. Since then I have not been further away
than Carlisle or Kendal. I go into the camp near Kendal for three weeks
every year--Territorial training, you know." "But how do you pass your time? What do you do with yourself?" she
asked. "Farm," he answered. "Farming is our daily occupation. Then for
amusement we hunt, shoot, and fish. The seasons pass before we know it." She looked appraisingly at John Strangewey. Notwithstanding his
sun-tanned cheeks and the splendid vigor of his form, there was nothing
in the least agricultural about his manner or his appearance. There was
humor as well as intelligence in his clear, gray eyes. She opined that
the books which lined one side of the room were at once his property and
his hobby. "It is a very healthy life, no doubt," she said; "but somehow it seems
incomprehensible to think of a man like yourself living always in such
an out-of-the-way corner, with no desire to see what is going on in the
world, or to be able to form any estimate of the changes in men's
thoughts and habits. Human life seems to me so much more interesting
than anything else. Does this all sound a little impertinent?" she wound
up naively. "I am so sorry! My friends spoil me, I believe, and I get
into the habit of saying things just as they come into my head." John's lips were open to reply, but Stephen once more intervened. "Life means a different thing to each of us, madam," he said sternly. "There are many born with the lust for cities and the crowded places in
their hearts, born with the desire to mingle with their fellows, to
absorb the conventional vices and virtues, to become one of the
multitude. It has been different with us Strangeweys." Jennings, at a sign from his master, removed the tea equipage, evidently
produced in honor of their visitor. Three tall-stemmed glasses were
placed upon the table, and a decanter of port reverently produced. Louise had fallen for a moment or two into a fit of abstraction. Her
eyes were fixed upon the opposite wall, from which, out of their faded
frames, a row of grim-looking men and women, startlingly like her two
hosts, seemed to frown down upon her. "Is that your father?" she asked, moving her head toward one of the
portraits. "My grandfather, John Strangewey," Stephen told her. "Was he one of the wanderers?" "He left Cumberland only twice during his life. He was master of hounds,
magistrate, colonel in the yeomanry of that period, and three times he
refused to stand for Parliament." "John Strangewey!" Louise repeated softly to herself. "I was looking at
your family tree up-stairs," she went on. "It is curious how both my
maid and myself were struck with a sense of familiarity about the name,
as if we had heard or read something about it quite lately." Her words were almost carelessly spoken, but she was conscious of the
somewhat ominous silence which ensued. She glanced up wonderingly and
intercepted a rapid look passing between the two men. More puzzled than
ever, she turned toward John as if for an explanation. He had risen
somewhat abruptly to his feet, and his hand was upon the back of her
chair. "Will it be disagreeable to you if my brother smokes a pipe?" he asked. "I tried to have our little drawing-room prepared for you, but the fire
has not been lit for so long that the room, I am afraid, is quite
impossible." "Do let me stay here with you," she begged; "and I hope that both of you
will smoke. I am quite used to it." John wheeled up an easy chair for her. Stephen, stiff and upright, sat
on the other side of the hearth. He took the tobacco-jar and pipe that
his brother had brought him, and slowly filled the bowl. "With your permission, then, madam," he said, as he struck a match. Louise smiled graciously. Some instinct prompted her to stifle her own
craving for a cigarette and keep her little gold case hidden in her
pocket. All the time her eyes were wandering around the room. Suddenly
she rose and, moving round the table, stood once more facing the row of
gloomy-looking portraits. "So that is your grandfather," she remarked to John, who had followed
her. "Is your father not here?" He shook his head. "My father's portrait was never painted." "Tell the truth, John," Stephen enjoined, rising in his place and
setting down his pipe. "Our father's portrait is not here, madam,
because he was one of those of whom I have spoken--one of those who were
drawn into the vortex of the city, and who knew only the shallow ways of
life. Listen!" With a heavy silver candlestick in either hand, Stephen crossed the
room. He raised them high above his head and pointed to the pictures one
by one. "John Robert Strangewey, our great-grandfather," he began. "That picture
was a presentation from the farmers of Cumberland. He, too, was a
magistrate, and held many public offices in the county. "By his side is his brother, Stephen George Strangewey. For thirty-five
years he took the chair at the farmers' ordinary at Market Ketton on
every Saturday at one o'clock, and there was never a deserving man in
this part of the county, engaged in agricultural pursuits, who at any
time sought his aid in vain. They always knew where he was to be found,
and every Saturday, before dinner was served, there would be some one
there to seek his aid or advice. He lived his life to his own benefit
and to the benefit of his neighbors--the life which we are all sent here
to lead. "Two generations before him you see my namesake, Stephen Strangewey. It
was he who invented the first threshing-machine used in this county. He
farmed the land that my brother and I own to-day. He was churchwarden at
our little church, and he, too, was a magistrate. He did his duty in a
smaller way, but zealously and honestly, among the hillmen of this
district." "There are gaps in your family history," Louise observed. "The gaps, madam," Stephen explained, "are left by those who have
abandoned their natural heritage. We Strangeweys were hillfolk and
farmers, by descent and destiny, for more than four hundred years. Our
place is here upon the land, almost among the clouds, and those of us
who have realized it have led the lives God meant us to lead. There have
been some of our race who have been tempted into the lowlands and the
cities. Not one of them brought honor upon our name. Their pictures are
not here. They are not worthy to be here." Stephen set down the candlesticks and returned to his place. Louise,
with her hands clasped behind her back, glanced toward John, who still
stood by her side. "Tell me," she asked him, "have none of your people who went out into
the world done well for themselves?" "Scarcely one," he admitted. "My brother's words seem a little sweeping,
but they are very near the truth. The air of the great cities seems to
have poisoned every Strangewey--"

"Not one," Stephen interrupted. "Colonel John Strangewey died leading
his regiment at Waterloo, an end well enough, but reached through many
years of evil conduct and loose living." "He was a brave soldier," John put in quietly. "That is true," Stephen admitted. "His best friends have claimed no
other quality for him. Madam," he went on, turning toward Louise, "lest
my welcome to you this evening should have seemed inhospitable, let me
tell you this. Every Strangewey who has left our county, and trodden the
downward path of failure, has done so at the instance of one of your
sex. That is why those of us who inherit the family spirit look askance
upon all strange women. That is why no woman is ever welcome within this
house." Louise resumed her seat in the easy chair. "I am so sorry," she murmured, looking down at her slipper. "I could not
help breaking down here, could I?" "Nor could my brother fail to offer you the hospitality of this roof,"
Stephen admitted. "The incident was unfortunate but inevitable. It is a
matter for regret that we have so little to offer you in the way of
entertainment." He rose to his feet. The door had been opened. Jennings
was standing there with a candlestick upon a massive silver salver. Behind him was Aline. "You are doubtless fatigued by your journey,
madam," Stephen concluded. Louise made a little grimace, but she rose at once to her feet. She
understood quite well that she was being sent to bed, and she shivered a
little when she looked at the hour--barely ten o'clock. Yet it was all
in keeping. From the doorway she looked back into the room, in which
nothing seemed to have been touched for centuries. She stood upon the
threshold to bid her final good-night, fully conscious of the complete
anachronism of her presence there. Her smile for Stephen was respectful and full of dignity. As she glanced
toward John, however, something flashed in her eyes and quivered at the
corners of her lips, something which escaped her control, something
which made him grip for a moment the back of the chair against which he
stood. Then, between the old man servant, who insisted upon carrying her
candle to her room, and her maid, who walked behind, she crossed the
white stone hall and stepped slowly up the broad flight of stairs. III


Louise awoke the next morning filled with a curious sense of buoyant
expectancy. The sunshine was pouring into the room, brightening up its
most somber corners. It lay across the quilt of her bed, and seemed to
bring out the perfume of lavender from the pillow on which her head
reposed. Aline, hearing her mistress stir, hastened at once to the bedside. "Good morning, _madame_!" Louise sat up and looked around her, with her hands clasped about her
knees. "Tell me everything, Aline," she said. "Have you my breakfast there? And
what time is it?" "It is half-past nine, _madame_," Aline replied, "and your breakfast is
here. The old imbecile from the kitchen has just brought it up." Louise looked approvingly at the breakfast tray, with the home-made
bread and deep-yellow butter, the brown eggs and clear honey. The smell
of the coffee was aromatic. She breathed a little sigh of content. "How delicious everything looks!" she exclaimed. "The home-made things are well enough in their way, _madame_," Aline
agreed, "but I have never known a household so strange and disagreeable. That M. Jennings, who calls himself the butler--he is a person
unspeakable, a savage!" Louise's eyes twinkled. "I don't think they are fond of women in this household, Aline," she
remarked. "Tell me, have you seen Charles?" "Charles has gone to the nearest blacksmith's forge to get something
made for the car, _madame_," Aline replied. "He asked me to say that he
was afraid he would not be ready to start before midday." "That does not matter," Louise declared, as she settled down to her
breakfast. "I do not care how long it is before he is ready. I should
love to spend a month here!" Aline held up her hands. She was speechless. Her mistress laughed at her
consternation. "Well," she continued, "there is no fear of their asking us for a month,
or for an hour longer than they can help. The elder Mr. Strangewey, it
seems, has the strongest objection to our sex. There is not a woman
servant in the house, is there?" "Not one, _madame_," Aline replied. "I have never been in a household
conducted in such a manner. It is like the kitchen of a monastery. The
terrible Jennings is speechless. If one addresses him, he only mumbles. The sound of my skirts, or my footstep on the stone floor, makes him
shiver. He is worse, one would imagine, than his master." Louise ate and drank reflectively. "It is the queerest household one could possibly stumble upon," she
remarked. "The young Mr. Strangewey--he seems different, but he falls in
with his brother's ways." Aline glanced at herself in the mirror. She was just out of her
mistress's range of vision, and she made a little grimace at her
reflection. "I met him twice this morning in the hall," she remarked. "He wished me
good morning the first time. The second time he did not speak. He did
not seem to see me." Louise finished her breakfast and strolled presently to the window. She
gave a little sigh of pleasure as she looked out. "But, Aline," she exclaimed, "how exquisite!" The maid glanced over her shoulder and went on preparing her mistress's
clothes. "It is as _madame_ finds it," she replied. "For myself, I like the
country for fete days and holidays only, and even then I like to find
plenty of people there." Louise heard nothing. She was gazing eagerly out of the casement-window. Immediately below was a grass-grown orchard which stretched upward, at a
precipitous angle, toward a belt of freshly plowed field; beyond, a
little chain of rocky hills, sheer overhead. The trees were pink and
white with blossom; the petals lay about upon the ground like drifted
snowflakes. Here and there yellow jonquils were growing among the long
grass. A waft of perfume stole into the room through the window which
she had opened. "Fill my bath quickly, Aline," Louise ordered. "I must go out. I want to
see whether it is really as beautiful as it looks." Aline dressed her mistress in silence. It was not until she had finished
lacing her shoes that she spoke another word. Then, suddenly, she
stopped short in the act of crossing the room. Her eyes had happened to
fall upon the emblazoned genealogical record. A little exclamation
escaped her. She swung round toward her mistress, and for once there was
animation in her face. "But, _madame_," she exclaimed, "I have remembered! The name
Strangewey--you see it there--it was in our minds all the time that we
had seen or heard of it quite lately. Don't you remember--"

"Yes, yes!" Louise interrupted. "I know it reminds me of something, but
of what?" "Yesterday morning," Aline continued, "it was you _madame_, who read it
out while you took your coffee. You spoke of the good fortune of some
farmer in the north of England to whom a relative in Australia had left
a great fortune--hundreds and thousands of pounds. The name was
Strangewey, the same as that. I remember it now." She pointed once more to the family tree. Louise sat for a moment with
parted lips. "You are quite right, Aline. I remember it all perfectly now. I wonder
whether it could possibly be either of these two men!" Aline shook her head doubtfully. "It would be unbelievable, _madame_," she decided. "Could any sane human
creatures live here, with no company but the sheep and the cows, if they
had money--money to live in the cities, to buy pleasures, to be happy? Unbelievable, _madame_!" Louise remained standing before the window. She was watching the
blossom-laden boughs of one of the apple trees bending and swaying in
the fresh morning breeze--watching the restless shadows which came and
went upon the grass beneath. "That is just your point of view, Aline," she murmured; "but
happiness--well, you would not understand. They are strange men, these
two. The young one is different now, but as he grows older he will be
like his brother. He will live a very simple and honorable life. He will
be--what is it they call it?--a county magistrate, chairman of many
things, a judge at agricultural shows. When he dies, he will be buried
up in that windy little churchyard, and people will come from a long way
off to say how good he was. My hat, quickly, Aline! If I am not in that
orchard in five minutes I shall be miserable!" Louise found her way without difficulty across a cobbled yard, through a
postern gate set in a red-brick wall, into the orchard. Very slowly, and
with her head turned upward toward the trees, she made her way toward
the boundary wall. Once, with a little exclamation of pleasure, she drew
down a bough of the soft, cool blossom and pressed it against her cheek. She stopped for a moment or two to examine the contents of a row of
chicken-coops, and at every few steps she turned around to face the
breeze which came sweeping across the moorland from the other side of
the house. Arrived at the farther end of the orchard, she came to a gate, against
which she rested for a moment, leaning her arms upon the topmost bar. Before her was the little belt of plowed earth, the fresh, pungent odor
of which was a new thing to her; a little way to the right, the rolling
moorland, starred with clumps of gorse; in front, across the field on
the other side of the gray stone wall, the rock-strewn hills. The
sky--unusually blue it seemed to her, and dotted all over with little
masses of fleecy, white clouds--seemed somehow lower and nearer; or was
she, perhaps higher up? She lingered there, absolutely bewildered by the rapid growth in her
brain and senses of what surely must be some newly kindled faculty of
appreciation. There was a beauty in the world which she had not felt
before. She turned her head almost lazily at the sound of a man's voice. A team
of horses, straining at a plow, were coming round the bend of the
field, and by their side, talking to the laborer who guided them, was
John Strangewey. She watched him as he came into sight up the steep
rise. Against the empty background, he seemed to lose nothing of the
size and strength that had impressed her on the previous night. He was
bareheaded, and she noticed for the first time that his closely cropped
fair hair was inclined to curl a little near the ears. He walked in step with the plowman by his side, but without any of the
laborer's mechanical plod--with a spring in his footsteps, indeed, as if
his life and thoughts were full of joyous things. He was wearing
black-and-white tweed clothes, a little shabby but well-fitting;
breeches and gaiters; thick boots, plentifully caked now with mud. He
was pointing with his stick along the furrow, so absorbed in the
instructions he was giving that he was almost opposite the gate before
he was aware of her presence. He promptly abandoned his task and
approached her. "Good morning!" he called out. She waved her hand. "Good morning!" "You have slept well?" he asked. "Better, I think, than ever before in my life," she answered. "Differently, at any rate. And such an awakening!" He looked at her, a little puzzled. The glow upon her face and the
sunlight upon her brown hair kept him silent. He was content to look at
her and wonder. "Tell me," she demanded impetuously, "is this a little corner of
fairy-land that you have found? Does the sun always shine like this? Does the earth always smell as sweetly, and are your trees always in
blossom? Does your wind always taste as if God had breathed the elixir
of life into it?" He turned around to follow the sweep of her eyes. Something of the same
glow seemed to rest for a moment upon his face. "It is good," he said, "to find what you love so much appreciated by
some one else." They stood together in a silence almost curiously protracted. Then the
plowman passed again with his team of horses, and John called out some
instructions to him. She followed him down to earth. "Tell me, Mr. Strangewey," she inquired, "where are your
farm-buildings?" "Come and I will show you," he answered, opening the gate to let her
through. "Keep close to the hedge until we come to the end of the plow;
and then--but no, I won't anticipate. This way!" She walked by his side, conscious every now and then of his frankly
admiring eyes as he looked down at her. She herself felt all the joy of
a woman of the world imbibing a new experience. She did not even glance
toward the dismantled motor in the barn which they passed. "I am glad," he remarked presently, "that you look upon us more
charitably than your maid." "Aline is a good girl," Louise said, smiling, "but hot-water taps and
electric lights are more to her than sunshine and hills. Do you know,"
she went on, "I feel like a child being led through an undiscovered
country, a land of real adventures. Which way are we going, and what are
we going to see? Tell me, please!" "Wait," he begged. "It is just a queer little corner among the hills,
that is all." They reached the end of the plowed field, and, passing through a gate,
turned abruptly to the left and began to climb a narrow path which
bordered the boundary wall, and which became steeper every moment. As
they ascended, the orchard and the long, low house on the other side
seemed to lie almost at their feet. The road and the open moorland
beyond, stretching to the encircling hills, came more clearly into sight
with every backward glance. Louise paused at last, breathless. "I must sit down," she insisted. "It is too beautiful to hurry over." "It is only a few steps farther," he told her, holding out his hand;
"just to where the path winds its way round the hill there. But perhaps
you are tired?" "On the contrary," she assured him, "I never felt so vigorous in my
life. All the exercise I take, as a rule, is in Kensington Gardens; and
look!" She pointed downward to her absurd little shoes, and held out her
hand, "You will have to help me," she pleaded. The last few steps were, indeed, almost precipitous. Fragments of rock,
protruding through the grass and bushes, served as steps. John moved on
a little ahead and pulled her easily up. Even the slight tightening of
his fingers seemed to raise her from her feet. She looked at him
wonderingly. "How strong you are!" "A matter of weight," he answered, smiling. "You are like a feather. You
walk as lightly as the fairies who come out on midsummer night's eve and
dance in circles around the gorse-bushes there." "Is it the home of the fairies you are taking me to?" she asked. "If you
have discovered that, no wonder you find us ordinary women outside your
lives!" He laughed. "There are no fairies where we are going," he assured her. They were on a rough-made road now, which turned abruptly to the right a
few yards ahead, skirting the side of a deep gorge. They took a few
steps further, and Louise stopped short with a cry of wonder. Around the abrupt corner an entirely new perspective was revealed--a
little hamlet, built on a shoulder of the mountains; and on the right,
below a steep descent, a wide and sunny valley. It was like a tiny world
of its own, hidden in the bosom of the hills. There was a long line of
farm-buildings, built of gray stone and roofed with red tiles; there
were fifteen or twenty stacks; a quaint, white-washed house of
considerable size, almost covered on the southward side with creepers; a
row of cottages, and a gray-walled enclosure--stretching with its white
tombstones to the very brink of the descent--in the midst of which was
an ancient church, in ruins at the further end, partly rebuilt with the
stones of the hillside. Louise looked around her, silent with wonder. A couple of sheep-dogs had
rushed out from the farmhouse and were fawning around her companion. In
the background a gray-bearded shepherd, with Scottish plaid thrown over
his shoulder, raised his hat. "It isn't real, is it?" she asked, clinging for a moment to John
Strangewey's arm. He patted one of the dogs and smiled down at her. "Why not? William Elwick there is a very real shepherd, I can assure
you. He has sat on these hills for the last sixty-eight years." She looked at the old man almost with awe. "It is like the Bible!" she murmured. "Fancy the sunrises he must have
seen, and the sunsets! The coming and the fading of the stars, the
spring days, the music of the winds in these hollow places, booming to
him in the night-time! I want to talk to him. May I?" He shook his head. The old man was already shambling off. "Better not," he advised. "You would be disappointed, for William has
the family weakness--he cannot bear the sight of a woman. You see, he is
pretending now that there is something wrong with the hill flock. You
asked where the land was that we tilled. Now look down. Hold my arm if
you feel giddy." She followed the wave of his ash stick. The valley sheer below them, and
the lower hills, on both sides, were parceled out into fields, enclosed
within stone walls, reminding her, from the height at which they stood,
of nothing so much as the quilt upon her bed. "That's where all our pasture is," he told her, "and our arable land. We
grow a great deal of corn in the dip there. All the rest of the
hillside, and the moorlands, of course, are fit for nothing but grazing;
but there are eleven hundred acres down there from which we can raise
almost anything we choose." Her eyes swept this strange tract of country backward and forward. She
saw the men like specks in the fields, the cows grazing in the pasture
like toy animals. Then she turned and looked at the neat row of stacks
and the square of farm-buildings. "I am trying hard to realize that you are a farmer and that this is your
life," she said. He swung open the wooden gate of the churchyard, by which they were
standing. There was a row of graves on either side of the prim path. "Suppose," he suggested, "you tell me about yourself now--about your own
life." The hills parted suddenly as she stood there looking southward. Through
the chasm she seemed to see very clearly the things beyond. Her own
life, her own world, spread itself out--a world of easy triumphs, of
throbbing emotions always swiftly ministered to, always leaving the same
dull sensation of discontent; a world in which the pathways were broad
and smooth, but in which the end seemed always the same; a world of
receding beauties and mocking desires. The faces of her friends were
there--men and women, brilliant, her intellectual compeers, a little
tired, offering always the same gifts, the same homage. "My life, and the world in which I live, seem far away just now," she
said quietly. "I think that it is doing me good to have a rest from
them. Go on talking to me about yourself, please." He smiled. He was just a little disappointed. "We shall very soon reach the end of all that I have to tell you," he
remarked. "Still, if there is anything you would like to know--"

"Who were these men and women who have lived and died here?" she
interrupted, with a little wave of her hand toward the graves. "All our own people," he told her; "laborers, shepherds, tenant-farmers,
domestic servants. Our clergyman comes from the village on the other
side of that hill. He rides here every Sunday on a pony which we have to
provide for him." She studied the names upon the tombstones, spelling them out slowly. "The married people," he went on, "are buried on the south side; the
single ones and children are nearer the wall. Tell me," he asked, after
a moment's hesitation, "are you married or single?" She gave a little start. The abruptness of the question, the keen,
steadfast gaze of his compelling eyes, seemed for a moment to paralyze
both her nerves and her voice. Again the hills rolled open, but this
time it was her own life only that she saw, her own life, and one man's
face which she seemed to see looking at her from some immeasurable
distance, waiting, yet drawing her closer toward him, closer and closer
till their hands met. She was terrified at this unexpected tumult of emotion. It was as if
some one had suddenly drawn away one of the stones from the foundation
of her life. She found herself repeating the words on the tombstone
facing her:

    "And of Elizabeth, for sixty-one years the faithful wife and
    helpmate of Ezra Cummings, mother of his children, and his
    partner in the life everlasting." Her knees began to shake. There was a momentary darkness before her
eyes. She felt for the tombstone and sat down. IV


The churchyard gate was opened and closed noisily. They both glanced up. Stephen Strangewey was coming slowly toward them along the flinty path. Louise, suddenly herself again, rose briskly to her feet. "Here comes your brother," she said. "I wish he wouldn't glower at me
so! I really am not such a terrible person as he seems to think." John muttered a word or two of polite but unconvincing protest. They
stood together awaiting his approach. Stephen had apparently lost none
of his dourness of the previous night. He was dressed in gray homespun,
with knickerbockers and stockings of great thickness. He wore a flannel
shirt and collar and a black wisp of a tie. Underneath his battered felt
hat his weather-beaten face seemed longer and grimmer than ever, his
mouth more uncompromising. As he looked toward Louise, there was no
mistaking the slow dislike in his steely eyes. "Your chauffeur, madam, has just returned," he announced. "He sent word
that he will be ready to start at one o'clock." Louise, inspired to battle by the almost provocative hostility of her
elder host, smiled sweetly upon him. "You can't imagine how sorry I am to hear it," she said. "I don't know
when, in the whole course of my life, I have met with such a delightful
adventure or spent such a perfect morning!" Stephen looked at her with level disapproving eyes--at her slender form
in its perfectly fitting tailored gown; at her patent shoes, so
obviously unsuitable for her surroundings, and at the faint vision of
silk stockings. "If I might say so without appearing inhospitable," he remarked, with
faint sarcasm, "this would seem to be the fitting moment for your
departure. A closer examination of our rough life up here might alter
your views." She turned toward John, and caught the deprecating glance which flashed
from him to Stephen. "Your brother is making fun of me," she declared. "He looks at me and
judges me just as I believe he would judge most people--sternly and
without mercy. After all, you know, even though I am a daughter of the
cities, there is another point of view--ours. Can you not believe that
the call which prompts men and women to do the things in life which are
really worth while is heard as often amid the hubbub of the city as in
the solitude of these austere hills?" "The question is a bootless one," Stephen answered firmly. "The city
calls to its own, as the country holds its children, and both do best in
their own environment. Like to like, and each bird to his own nest. You
would be as much out of place here with us, madam, as my brother and I
on the pavements of your city." "You may be right," she admitted, "yet you dismiss one of the greatest
questions in life with a single turn of your tongue. It is given to no
one to be infallible. It is even possible that you may be wrong." "It is possible," Stephen agreed grimly. "The things in life which are worth while," she continued, looking down
into the valley, "are common to all. They do not consist of one thing
for one man, another for another. To whom comes the greater share of
them--the dweller in the city, or you in your primitive and patriarchal
life? You rest your brains, you make the seasons feed you, you work
enough to keep your muscles firm, and nature does the rest. She brings
the food to your doors, and when your harvest is over your work is done. There are possibilities of rust here, Mr. Strangewey!" Stephen's smile was almost disdainful. "Madam," he declared, "you have six or seven million people in London. How many of them live by really creative and honorable work? How many
are there of polyglot race--Hebrews, Germans, foreigners of every type,
preying upon one another, making false incomes which exist only on
paper, living in false luxury, tasting false joys? The sign-post of our
lives must be our personal inclinations. Our inclinations--my brother's
inclinations and mine--lead us, as they have led my people for hundreds
of years, to seek the cleaner things in life and the simpler forms of
happiness. If I do not have the pleasure, madam, of seeing you again,
permit me to wish you farewell." He turned and walked away. Louise watched him with very real interest. "Do you know," she said to John, "there is something which I can only
describe as biblical about your brother, something a little like the
prophets of the Old Testament, in the way he sees only one issue and
clings to it. Are you, too, of his way of thinking?" "Up to a certain point, I believe I am," he confessed. "I do not think I
could ever have lived in the city. I do not think I could ever have been
happy in any of the professions." "Certainly I could not imagine you as a stock-broker or a lawyer. I feel
it hard to realize you in any of the ordinary walks of life. Still, you
know, the greatest question of all remains unanswered. Are you content
just to live and flourish and die? Are there no compelling obligations
with which one is born? Do you never feel cramped--in your mind, I
mean?--feel that you want to push your way through the clouds into some
other life?" "I feel nearer the clouds here," he answered simply. "I suppose you are sure of content--that is to say, if you can keep free
from doubts. Still, there is the fighting instinct, you know; the
craving for action. Don't you feel that sometimes?" "Perhaps," he admitted. They were leaving the churchyard now. She paused abruptly, pointing to a
single grave in a part of the churchyard which seemed detached from the
rest. "Whose grave is that?" she inquired. He hesitated. "It is the grave of a young girl," he told her quietly. "But why is she buried so far off, and all alone?" Louise persisted. "She was the daughter of one of our shepherds," he replied. "She went
into service at Carlisle, and returned here with a child. They are both
buried there." "Because of that her grave is apart from the others?" "Yes," he answered. "It is very seldom, I am glad to say, that anything
of the sort happens among us." For the second time that morning Louise was conscious of an unexpected
upheaval of emotion. She felt that the sunshine had gone, that the whole
sweetness of the place had suddenly passed away. The charm of its
simple austerity had perished. "And I thought I had found paradise!" she cried. She moved quickly from John Strangewey's side. Before he could realize
her intention, she had stepped over the low dividing wall and was on her
knees by the side of the plain, neglected grave. She tore out the spray
of apple-blossom which she had thrust into the bosom of her gown, and
placed it reverently at the head of the little mound. For a moment her
eyes drooped and her lips moved--she herself scarcely knew whether it
was in prayer. Then she turned and came slowly back to her companion. Something had gone, too, from his charm. She saw in him now nothing but
the coming dourness of his brother. Her heart was still heavy. She
shivered a little. "Come," she said, "let us go back!" They commenced the steep descent in silence. Every now and then John
held his companion by the arm to steady her somewhat uncertain
footsteps. It was he at last who spoke. "Will you tell me, please, what is the matter with you, and why you
placed that sprig of apple-blossom where you did?" His tone woke her from her lethargy. She was a little surprised at its
poignant, almost challenging note. "Certainly," she replied. "I placed it there as a woman's protest
against the injustice of that isolation." "I deny that it is unjust." She turned around and waved her hand toward the little gray building. "The Savior to whom your church is dedicated thought otherwise," she
reminded him. "Do you play at being lords paramount here over the souls
and bodies of your serfs?" "You judge without knowledge of the facts," he assured her calmly. "The
girl could have lived here happily and been married to a respectable
young man. She chose, instead, a wandering life. She chose, further, to
make it a disreputable one. She broke her mother's heart and soured her
father's latter years. She brought into the world a nameless child." Louise's footsteps slackened. "You men," she sighed, "are all alike! You judge only by what happens. You never look inside. That is why your justice is so different from a
woman's. All that you have told me is very pitiful, but there is another
view of the case which you should consider. Let us sit down upon this
boulder for a few moments. There is something that I should like to say
to you before I go." They sat upon a ledge of rock. Below them was the house, with its walled
garden and the blossom-laden orchard. Beyond stretched the moorland,
brilliant with patches of yellow gorse, and the hills, blue and melting
in the morning sunlight. "Don't you men sometimes realize," she continued earnestly, "the many,
many guises in which temptation may come to a woman, especially to the
young girl so far from home? She may be very lonely, and she may care;
and if she cares, it is so hard to refuse the man she loves. The very
sweetness, the very generosity of a woman's nature prompts her to give,
give, give all the time. There are other women, similarly circumstanced,
who think only of themselves, of their own safety and happiness, and
they escape the danger; but are they to be praised and respected, while
she that yields is condemned and cast out? I feel that you are not going
to agree with me, and I do not wish to argue with you; but what I so
passionately object to is the sweeping judgment you make--the sheep on
one side and the goats on the other. That is how man judges; God looks
further. Every case is different. The law by which one should be judged
may be poor justice for another." She glanced at him almost appealingly, but there was no sign of yielding
in his face. "Laws," he reminded her, "are made for the benefit of the whole human
race. Sometimes an individual may suffer for the benefit of others. That
is inevitable." "And so let the subject pass," she concluded, "but it saddens me to
think that one of the great sorrows of the world should be there like a
monument to spoil the wonder of this morning. Now I am going to ask you
a question. Are you the John Strangewey who has recently had a fortune
left to him?" He nodded. "You read about it in the newspapers, I suppose," he said. "Part of the
story isn't true. It was stated that I had never seen my Australian
uncle, but as a matter of fact he has been over here three or four
times. It was he who paid for my education at Harrow and Oxford." "What did your brother say to that?" "He opposed it," John confessed, "and he hated my uncle. He detests the
thought of any one of us going out of sight of our own hills. My uncle
had the wander-fever." "And you?" she asked suddenly. "I have none of it," he asserted. A very faint smile played about her lips. "Perhaps not before," she murmured; "but now?" "Do you mean because I have inherited the money?" She leaned a little toward him. Her smile now was more evident, and
there was something in her eyes which was almost like a challenge. "Naturally!" "What difference does my money make?" he demanded. "Don't you realize the increase of your power as a human being?" she
replied. "Don't you realize the larger possibilities of the life that is
open to you? You can move, if you will, in the big world. You can take
your place in any society you choose, meet interesting people who have
done things, learn everything that is new, do everything that is worth
doing in life. You can travel to the remote countries of the globe. You
can become a politician, a philanthropist, or a sportsman. You can
follow your tastes wherever they lead you, and--perhaps this is the most
important thing of all--you can do everything upon a splendid scale." He smiled down at her. "That all sounds very nice," he admitted, "but supposing that I have no
taste in any of the directions you have mentioned? Supposing my life
here satisfies me? Supposing I find all that I expect to find in life
here on my own land, among my own hills? What then?" She looked at him with a curiosity which was almost passionate. Her lips
were parted, her senses strained. "It is not possible," she exclaimed, "that you can mean it!" "But why not?" he protested. "I have not the tortuous brain of the
modern politician. I hate cities--the smell of them, the atmosphere of
them, the life in them. The desire for travel is only half born in me. That may come--I cannot tell. I love the daily work here; I am fond of
horses and dogs. I know every yard of land we own, and I know what it
will produce. It interests me to try experiments--new crops, a new
distribution of crops, new machinery sometimes, new methods of
fertilizing. I love to watch the seasons come and reign and pass. I love
to feel the wind and the sun, and even the rain. All these things have
become a sort of appetite to me. I am afraid," he wound up a little
lamely, "that this is all very badly expressed, but the whole truth of
it is, you see, that I am a man of simple and inherited tastes. I feel
that my life is here, and I live it here and I love it. Why should I go
out like a _Don Quixote_ and search for vague adventures?" "Because you are a man!" she answered swiftly. "You have a brain and a
soul too big for your life here. You eat and drink, and physically you
flourish, but part of you sleeps because it is shut away from the world
of real things. Don't you sometimes feel it in your very heart that
life, as we were meant to live it, can only be lived among your fellow
men?" He looked upward, over his shoulder, at the little cluster of
farm-buildings and cottages, and the gray stone church. "It seems to me," he declared simply, "that the man who tries to live
more than one life fails in both. There is a little cycle of life here,
among our thirty or forty souls, which revolves around my brother and
myself. You would think it stupid and humdrum, because the people are
peasants; but I am not sure that you are right. The elementary things,
you know, are the greatest, and those we have. Our young people fall in
love and marry. The joy of birth comes to our mothers, and the tragedy
of death looms over us all. Some go out into the world, some choose to
remain here. A passer-by may glance upward from the road at our little
hamlet, and wonder what can ever happen in such an out-of-the-way
corner. I think the answer is just what I have told you. Love and
marriage, birth and death happen. These things make life." Her curiosity now had become merged in an immense interest. She laid her
fingers lightly upon his arm. "You speak for your people," she said. "That is well. I can understand
their simple lives being as absorbing to them as ours are to us. I can
imagine how, here among your hills, you can watch as a spectator a cycle
of life which contains, as you have pointed out, every element of
tragedy and happiness. But you yourself?" "I am one of them," he answered, "a necessary part of them." "How you deceive yourself! I am sure you are honest, I am sure you
believe what you say, but will you remember what I am going to tell you? The time will come, before very long, when you will feel doubts." "Doubts about what?" She smiled enigmatically. "Oh, they will assert themselves," she assured him, "and you will
recognize them when they come. Something will whisper to you in your
heart that after all you are not of the same clay as these simple
folk--that there is a different mission in the world for a man like you
than to play the part of feudal lord over a few peasants. Sooner or
later you will come out into the world; and the sooner the better, I
think, Mr. John Strangewey, or you will grow like your brother here
among your granite hills." He moved a little uneasily. All the time she was watching him. It seemed
to her that she could read the thoughts which were stirring in his
brain. "You would like to say, wouldn't you," she went on, "that your brother's
is a useful and an upright life? So it may be, but it is not wide enough
or great enough. No one should be content with the things which he can
reach. He should climb a little higher, and pluck the riper fruit. Some
day you will feel the desire to climb. Something will come to you--in
the night, perhaps, or on the bosom of that wind you love so much. It
may be a call of music, or it may be a more martial note. Promise me,
will you, that when you feel the impulse you won't use all that
obstinate will-power of yours to crush it? You will destroy the best
part of yourself, if you do. You will give it a chance? Promise!" She held out her hand with a little impulsive gesture. He took it in his
own, and held it steadfastly. "I will remember," he promised. Along the narrow streak of road, from the southward, they both watched
the rapid approach of a large motor-car. There were two servants upon
the front seat and one passenger--a man--inside. It swung into the level
stretch beneath them, a fantasy of gray and silver in the reflected
sunshine. Louise had been leaning forward, her head supported upon her hands. As
the car slackened speed, she rose very slowly to her feet. "The chariot of deliverance!" she murmured. "It is the Prince of Seyre," John remarked, gazing down with a slight
frown upon his forehead. She nodded. They had started the descent, and she was walking in very
leisurely fashion. "The prince is a great friend of mine," she said. "I had promised to
spend last night, or, at any rate, some portion of the evening, at
Raynham Castle on my way to London." He summoned up courage to ask her the question which had been on his
lips more than once. "As your stay with us is so nearly over, won't you abandon your
incognito?" "In the absence of your brother," she answered, "I will risk it. My name
is Louise Maurel." "Louise Maurel, the actress?" he repeated wonderingly. "I am she," Louise confessed. "Would your brother," she added, with a
little grimace, "feel that he had given me a night's lodging under false
pretense?" John made no immediate reply. The world had turned topsyturvy with him. Louise Maurel, and a great friend of the Prince of Seyre! He walked on
mechanically until she turned and looked at him. "Well?" "I am sorry," he declared bluntly. "Why?" she asked, a little startled at his candor. "I am sorry, first of all, that you are a friend of the Prince of
Seyre." 