



Produced by David Moynihan; Dagny; David Widger





THE HONOR OF THE NAME

By Emile Gaboriau




THE HONOR OF THE NAME



CHAPTER I

On the first Sunday in the month of August, 1815, at ten o'clock
precisely--as on every Sunday morning--the sacristan of the parish
church at Sairmeuse sounded the three strokes of the bell which warn
the faithful that the priest is ascending the steps of the altar to
celebrate high mass. The church was already more than half full, and from every side little
groups of peasants were hurrying into the church-yard. The women were
all in their bravest attire, with cunning little _fichus_ crossed upon
their breasts, broad-striped, brightly colored skirts, and large white
coifs. Being as economical as they were coquettish, they came barefooted,
bringing their shoes in their hands, but put them on reverentially
before entering the house of God. But few of the men entered the church. They remained outside to talk,
seating themselves in the porch, or standing about the yard, in the
shade of the century-old elms. For such was the custom in the hamlet of Sairmeuse. The two hours which the women consecrated to prayer the men employed
in discussing the news, the success or the failure of the crops; and,
before the service ended, they could generally be found, glass in hand,
in the bar-room of the village inn. For the farmers for a league around, the Sunday mass was only an excuse
for a reunion, a sort of weekly bourse. All the cures who had been successively stationed at Sairmeuse had
endeavored to put an end to this scandalous habit, as they termed it;
but all their efforts had made no impression upon country obstinacy. They had succeeded in gaining only one concession. At the moment of the
elevation of the Host, voices were hushed, heads uncovered, and a few
even bowed the knee and made the sign of the cross. But this was the affair of an instant only, and conversation was
immediately resumed with increased vivacity. But to-day the usual animation was wanting. No sounds came from the little knots of men gathered here and there, not
an oath, not a laugh. Between buyers and sellers, one did not overhear
a single one of those interminable discussions, punctuated with the
popular oaths, such as: "By my faith in God!" or "May the devil burn
me!" They were not talking, they were whispering together. A gloomy
sadness was visible upon each face; lips were placed cautiously at the
listener's ear; anxiety could be read in every eye. One scented misfortune in the very air. Only a month had elapsed since
Louis XVIII. had been, for the second time, installed in the Tuileries
by a triumphant coalition. The earth had not yet had time to swallow the sea of blood that flowed
at Waterloo; twelve hundred thousand foreign soldiers desecrated the
soil of France; the Prussian General Muffling was Governor of Paris. And the peasantry of Sairmeuse trembled with indignation and fear. This king, brought back by the allies, was no less to be dreaded than
the allies themselves. To them this great name of Bourbon signified only a terrible burden of
taxation and oppression. Above all, it signified ruin--for there was scarcely one among them who
had not purchased some morsel of government land; and they were assured
now that all estates were to be returned to the former proprietors, who
had emigrated after the overthrow of the Bourbons. Hence, it was with a feverish curiosity that most of them clustered
around a young man who, only two days before, had returned from the
army. With tears of rage in his eyes, he was recounting the shame and the
misery of the invasion. He told of the pillage at Versailles, the exactions at Orleans, and the
pitiless requisitions that had stripped the people of everything. "And these accursed foreigners to whom the traitors have delivered
us, will not go so long as a shilling or a bottle of wine is left in
France!" he exclaimed. As he said this he shook his clinched fist menacingly at a white flag
that floated from the tower. His generous anger won the close attention of his auditors, and they
were still listening to him with undiminished interest, when the sound
of a horse's hoofs resounded upon the stones of the only street in
Sairmeuse. A shudder traversed the crowd. The same fear stopped the beating of
every heart. Who could say that this rider was not some English or Prussian officer? He had come, perhaps, to announce the arrival of his regiment, and
imperiously demand money, clothing, and food for his soldiers. But the suspense was not of long duration. The rider proved to be a fellow-countryman, clad in a torn and dirty
blue linen blouse. He was urging forward, with repeated blows, a little,
bony, nervous mare, fevered with foam. "Ah! it is Father Chupin," murmured one of the peasants with a sigh of
relief. "The same," observed another. "He seems to be in a terrible hurry." "The old rascal has probably stolen the horse he is riding." This last remark disclosed the reputation Father Chupin enjoyed among
his neighbors. He was, indeed, one of those thieves who are the scourge and the terror
of the rural districts. He pretended to be a day-laborer, but the
truth was, that he held work in holy horror, and spent all his time in
sleeping and idling about his hovel. Hence, stealing was the only
means of support for himself, his wife, two sons--terrible youths, who,
somehow, had escaped the conscription. They consumed nothing that was not stolen. Wheat, wine, fuel,
fruits--all were the rightful property of others. Hunting and fishing
at all seasons, and with forbidden appliances, furnished them with ready
money. Everyone in the neighborhood knew this; and yet when Father Chupin was
pursued and captured, as he was occasionally, no witness could be found
to testify against him. "He is a hard case," men said; "and if he had a grudge against anyone,
he would be quite capable of lying in ambush and shooting him as he
would a squirrel." Meanwhile the rider had drawn rein at the inn of the Boeuf Couronne. He alighted from his horse, and, crossing the square, approached the
church. He was a large man, about fifty years of age, as gnarled and sinewy as
the stem of an old grape-vine. At the first glance one would not have
taken him for a scoundrel. His manner was humble, and even gentle; but
the restlessness of his eye and the expression of his thin lips betrayed
diabolical cunning and the coolest calculation. At any other time this despised and dreaded individual would have been
avoided; but curiosity and anxiety led the crowd toward him. "Ah, well, Father Chupin!" they cried, as soon as he was within the
sound of their voices; "whence do you come in such haste?" "From the city." To the inhabitants of Sairmeuse and its environs, "the city" meant
the country town of the _arrondissement_, Montaignac, a charming
sub-prefecture of eight thousand souls, about four leagues distant. "And was it at Montaignac that you bought the horse you were riding just
now?" "I did not buy it; it was loaned to me." This was such a strange assertion that his listeners could not repress a
smile. He did not seem to notice it, however. "It was loaned me," he continued, "in order that I might bring some
great news here the quicker." Fear resumed possession of the peasantry. "Is the enemy in the city?" anxiously inquired some of the more timid. "Yes; but not the enemy you refer to. This is the former lord of the
manor, the Duc de Sairmeuse." "Ah! they said he was dead." "They were mistaken." "Have you seen him?" "No, I have not seen him, but someone else has seen him for me, and has
spoken to him. And this someone is Monsieur Laugeron, the proprietor of
the Hotel de France at Montaignac. I was passing the house this morning,
when he called me. 'Here, old man,' he said, 'do you wish to do me a
favor?' Naturally I replied: 'Yes.' Whereupon he placed a coin in my
hand and said: 'Well! go and tell them to saddle a horse for you,
then gallop to Sairmeuse, and tell my friend Lacheneur that the Duc
de Sairmeuse arrived here last night in a post-chaise, with his son,
Monsieur Martial, and two servants.'" Here, in the midst of these peasants, who were listening to him with
pale cheeks and set teeth, Father Chupin preserved the subdued mien
appropriate to a messenger of misfortune. But if one had observed him carefully, one would have detected an
ironical smile upon his lips and a gleam of malicious joy in his eyes. He was, in fact, inwardly jubilant. At that moment he had his revenge
for all the slights and all the scorn he had been forced to endure. And
what a revenge! And if his words seemed to fall slowly and reluctantly from his lips, it
was only because he was trying to prolong the sufferings of his auditors
as much as possible. But a robust young fellow, with an intelligent face, who, perhaps, read
Father Chupin's secret heart, brusquely interrupted him:

"What does the presence of the Duc de Sairmeuse at Montaignac matter to
us?" he exclaimed. "Let him remain at the Hotel de France as long as he
chooses; we shall not go in search of him." "No! we shall not go in search of him," echoed the other peasants,
approvingly. The old rogue shook his head with affected commiseration. "Monsieur le Duc will not put you to that trouble," he replied; "he will
be here in less than two hours." "How do you know?" "I know it through Monsieur Laugeron, who, when I mounted his horse,
said to me: 'Above all, old man, explain to my friend Lacheneur that the
duke has ordered horses to be in readiness to convey him to Sairmeuse at
eleven o'clock.'" With a common movement, all the peasants who had watches consulted them. "And what does he want here?" demanded the same young farmer. "Pardon! he did not tell me," replied Father Chupin; "but one need not
be very cunning to guess. He comes to revisit his former estates, and
to take them from those who have purchased them, if possible. From you,
Rousselet, he will claim the meadows upon the Oiselle, which always
yield two crops; from you, Father Gauchais, the ground upon which
the Croix-Brulee stands; from you, Chanlouineau, the vineyards on the
Borderie----"

Chanlouineau was the impetuous young man who had interrupted Father
Chupin twice already. "Claim the Borderie!" he exclaimed, with even greater violence; "let
him try, and we will see. It was waste land when my father bought
it--covered with briers; even a goat could not have found pasture there. We have cleared it of stones, we have scratched up the soil with our
very nails, we have watered it with our sweat, and now they would try to
take it from us! Ah! they shall have my last drop of blood first!" "I do not say but----"

"But what? Is it any fault of ours that the nobles fled to foreign
lands? We have not stolen their lands, have we? The government offered
them for sale; we bought them, and paid for them; they are lawfully
ours." "That is true; but Monsieur de Sairmeuse is the great friend of the
king." The young soldier, whose voice had aroused the most noble sentiments
only a moment before, was forgotten. Invaded France, the threatening enemy, were alike forgotten. The
all-powerful instinct of avarice was suddenly aroused. "In my opinion," resumed Chanlouineau, "we should do well to consult the
Baron d'Escorval." "Yes, yes!" exclaimed the peasants; "let us go at once!" They were starting, when a villager who sometimes read the papers,
checked them by saying:

"Take care what you do. Do you not know that since the return of the
Bourbons Monsieur d'Escorval is of no account whatever? Fouche has him
upon the proscription list, and he is under the surveillance of the
police." This objection dampened the enthusiasm. "That is true," murmured some of the older men; "a visit to Monsieur
d'Escorval would, perhaps, do us more harm than good. And, besides, what
advice could he give us?" Chanlouineau had forgotten all prudence. "What of that?" he exclaimed. "If Monsieur d'Escorval has no counsel to
give us about this matter, he can, perhaps, teach us how to resist and
to defend ourselves." For some moments Father Chupin had been studying, with an impassive
countenance, the storm of anger he had aroused. In his secret heart
he experienced the satisfaction of the incendiary at the sight of the
flames he has kindled. Perhaps he already had a presentiment of the infamous part he would play
a few months later. Satisfied with his experiment, he assumed, for the time, the role of
moderator. "Wait a little. Do not cry before you are hurt," he exclaimed, in an
ironical tone. "Who told you that the Duc de Sairmeuse would trouble
you? How much of his former domain do you all own between you? Almost
nothing. A few fields and meadows and a hill on the Borderie. All these
together did not in former times yield him an income of five thousand
francs a year." "Yes, that is true," replied Chanlouineau; "and if the revenue you
mention is quadrupled, it is only because the land is now in the hands
of forty proprietors who cultivate it themselves." "Another reason why the duke will not say a word; he will not wish to
set the whole district in commotion. In my opinion, he will dispossess
only one of the owners of his former estates, and that is our worthy
ex-mayor--Monsieur Lacheneur, in short." Ah! he knew only too well the egotism of his compatriots. He knew with
what complacency and eagerness they would accept an expiatory victim
whose sacrifice should be their salvation. "That is a fact," remarked an old man; "Monsieur Lacheneur owns nearly
all the Sairmeuse property." "Say all, while you are about it," rejoined Father Chupin. "Where does
Monsieur Lacheneur live? In that beautiful Chateau de Sairmeuse whose
gable we can see there through the trees. He hunts in the forests which
once belonged to the Ducs de Sairmeuse; he fishes in their lakes; he
drives the horses which once belonged to them, in the carriages upon
which one could now see their coat-of-arms, if it had not been painted
out. "Twenty years ago, Lacheneur was a poor devil like myself; now, he is a
grand gentleman with fifty thousand livres a year. He wears the finest
broadcloth and top-boots like the Baron d'Escorval. He no longer works;
he makes others work; and when he passes, everyone must bow to the
earth. If you kill so much as a sparrow upon his lands, as he says, he
will cast you into prison. Ah, he has been fortunate. The emperor made
him mayor. The Bourbons deprived him of his office; but what does that
matter to him? He is still the real master here, as the Sairmeuse were
in other days. His son is pursuing his studies in Paris, intending to
become a notary. As for his daughter, Mademoiselle Marie-Anne--"

"Not a word against her!" exclaimed Chanlouineau; "if she were mistress,
there would not be a poor man in the country; and yet, how some of her
pensioners abuse her bounty. Ask your wife if this is not so, Father
Chupin." Undoubtedly the impetuous young man spoke at the peril of his life. But the wicked old Chupin swallowed this affront which he would never
forget, and humbly continued:

"I do not say that Mademoiselle Marie-Anne is not generous; but after
all her charitable work she has plenty of money left for her fine
dresses and her fallals. I think that Monsieur Lacheneur ought to
be very well content, even after he has restored to its former owner
one-half or even three-quarters of the property he has acquired--no one
can tell how. He would have enough left then to grind the poor under
foot." After his appeal to selfishness, Father Chupin appealed to envy. There
could be no doubt of his success. But he had not time to pursue his advantage. The services were over, and
the worshippers were leaving the church. Soon there appeared upon the porch the man in question, with a young
girl of dazzling beauty leaning upon his arm. Father Chupin walked straight toward him, and brusquely delivered his
message. M. Lacheneur staggered beneath the blow. He turned first so red, then so
frightfully pale, that those around him thought he was about to fall. But he quickly recovered his self-possession, and without a word to the
messenger, he walked rapidly away, leading his daughter. Some minutes later an old post-chaise, drawn by four horses, dashed
through the village at a gallop, and paused before the house of the
village cure. Then one might have witnessed a singular spectacle. Father Chupin had gathered his wife and his children together, and the
four surrounded the carriage, shouting, with all the power of their
lungs:

"Long live the Duc de Sairmeuse!" CHAPTER II

A gently ascending road, more than two miles in length, shaded by a
quadruple row of venerable elms, led from the village to the Chateau de
Sairmeuse. Nothing could be more beautiful than this avenue, a fit approach to a
palace; and the stranger who beheld it could understand the naively vain
proverb of the country: "He does not know the real beauty of France, who
has never seen Sairmeuse nor the Oiselle." The Oiselle is the little river which one crosses by means of a wooden
bridge on leaving the village, and whose clear and rapid waters give a
delicious freshness to the valley. At every step, as one ascends, the view changes. It is as if an
enchanting panorama were being slowly unrolled before one. On the right you can see the saw-mills of Fereol. On the left, like an
ocean of verdure, the forest of Dolomien trembles in the breeze. Those
imposing ruins on the other side of the river are all that remain of
the feudal manor of the house of Breulh. That red brick mansion, with
granite trimmings, half concealed by a bend in the river, belongs to the
Baron d'Escorval. And, if the day is clear, one can easily distinguish the spires of
Montaignac in the distance. This was the path traversed by M. Lacheneur after Chupin had delivered
his message. But what did he care for the beauties of the landscape! Upon the church porch he had received his death-wound; and now, with a
tottering and dragging step, he dragged himself along like one of those
poor soldiers, mortally wounded upon the field of battle, who go back,
seeking a ditch or quiet spot where they can lie down and die. He seemed to have lost all thought of his surroundings--all
consciousness of previous events. He pursued his way, lost in his
reflections, guided only by force of habit. Two or three times his daughter, Marie-Anne, who was walking by his
side, addressed him; but an "Ah! let me alone!" uttered in a harsh tone,
was the only response she could draw from him. Evidently he had received a terrible blow; and undoubtedly, as often
happens under such circumstances, the unfortunate man was reviewing all
the different phases of his life. At twenty Lacheneur was only a poor ploughboy in the service of the
Sairmeuse family. His ambition was modest then. When stretched beneath a tree at the hour
of noonday rest, his dreams were as simple as those of an infant. "If I could but amass a hundred pistoles," he thought, "I would ask
Father Barrois for the hand of his daughter Martha; and he would not
refuse me." A hundred pistoles! A thousand francs!--an enormous sum
for him who, in two years of toil and privation had only laid by eleven
louis, which he had placed carefully in a tiny box and hidden in the
depths of his straw mattress. Still he did not despair. He had read in Martha's eyes that she would
wait. And Mlle. Armande de Sairmeuse, a rich old maid, was his god-mother;
and he thought, if he attacked her adroitly, that he might, perhaps,
interest her in his love-affair. Then the terrible storm of the revolution burst over France. With the fall of the first thunder-bolts, the Duke of Sairmeuse left
France with the Count d'Artois. They took refuge in foreign lands as
a passer-by seeks shelter in a doorway from a summer shower, saying to
himself: "This will not last long." The storm did last, however; and the following year Mlle. Armande, who
had remained at Sairmeuse, died. The chateau was then closed, the president of the district took
possession of the keys in the name of the government, and the servants
were scattered. Lacheneur took up his residence in Montaignac. Young, daring, and personally attractive, blessed with an energetic
face, and an intelligence far above his station, it was not long before
he became well known in the political clubs. For three months Lacheneur was the tyrant of Montaignac. But this metier of public speaker is by no means lucrative, so the
surprise throughout the district was immense, when it was ascertained
that the former ploughboy had purchased the chateau, and almost all the
land belonging to his old master. It is true that the nation had sold this princely domain for scarcely
a twentieth part of its real value. The appraisement was sixty-nine
thousand francs. It was giving the property away. And yet, it was necessary to have this amount, and Lacheneur possessed
it, since he had poured it in a flood of beautiful louis d'or into the
hands of the receiver of the district. From that moment his popularity waned. The patriots who had applauded
the ploughboy, cursed the capitalist. He discreetly left them to recover
from their rage as best they could, and returned to Sairmeuse. There
everyone bowed low before Citoyen Lacheneur. Unlike most people, he did not forget his past hopes at the moment when
they might be realized. He married Martha Barrois, and, leaving the country to work out its
own salvation without his assistance, he gave his time and attention to
agriculture. Any close observer, in those days, would have felt certain that the man
was bewildered by the sudden change in his situation. His manner was so troubled and anxious that one, to see him, would
have supposed him a servant in constant fear of being detected in some
indiscretion. He did not open the chateau, but installed himself and his young wife in
the cottage formerly occupied by the head game-keeper, near the entrance
of the park. But, little by little, with the habit of possession, came assurance. The Consulate had succeeded the Directory, the Empire succeeded the
Consulate, Citoyen Lacheneur became M. Lacheneur. Appointed mayor two years later, he left the cottage and took possession
of the chateau. The former ploughboy slumbered in the bed of the Ducs de Sairmeuse; he
ate from the massive plate, graven with their coat-of-arms; he received
his visitors in the magnificent salon in which the Ducs de Sairmeuse had
received their friends in years gone by. To those who had known him in former days, M. Lacheneur had become
unrecognizable. He had adapted himself to his lofty station. Blushing
at his own ignorance; he had found the courage--wonderful in one of his
age--to acquire the education which he lacked. Then, all his undertakings were successful to such a degree that
his good fortune had become proverbial. That he took any part in an
enterprise, sufficed to make it turn out well. His wife had given him two lovely children, a son and a daughter. His property, managed with a shrewdness and sagacity which the former
owners had not possessed, yielded him an income of at least sixty
thousand francs. How many, under similar circumstances, would have lost their heads! But
he, M. Lacheneur, had been wise enough to retain his _sang-froid_. In spite of the princely luxury that surrounded him, his own habits were
simple and frugal. He had never had an attendant for his own person. His
large income he consecrated almost entirely to the improvement of his
estate or to the purchase of more land. And yet, he was not avaricious. In all that concerned his wife or children, he did not count the cost. His son, Jean, had been educated in Paris; he wished him to be fitted
for any position. Unwilling to consent to a separation from his
daughter, he had procured a governess to take charge of her education. Sometimes his friends accused him of an inordinate ambition for his
children; but he always shook his head sadly, as he replied:

"If _I_ can only insure them a modest and comfortable future! But what
folly it is to count upon the future. Thirty years ago, who could have
foreseen that the Sairmeuse family would be deprived of their estates?" With such opinions he should have been a good master; he was, but no one
thought the better of him on that account. His former comrades could not
forgive him for his sudden elevation. They seldom spoke of him without wishing his ruin in ambiguous words. Alas! the evil days came. Toward the close of the year 1812, he lost his
wife, the disasters of the year 1813 swept away a large portion of his
personal fortune, which had been invested in a manufacturing enterprise. Compromised by the first Restoration, he was obliged to conceal himself
for a time; and to cap the climax, the conduct of his son, who was still
in Paris, caused him serious disquietude. Only the evening before, he had thought himself the most unfortunate of
men. But here was another misfortune menacing him; a misfortune so terrible
that all the others were forgotten. From the day on which he had purchased Sairmeuse to this fatal Sunday in
August, 1815, was an interval of twenty years. Twenty years! And it seemed to him only yesterday that, blushing and
trembling, he had laid those piles of louis d'or upon the desk of the
receiver of the district. Had he dreamed it? He had not dreamed it. His entire life, with its struggles and its
miseries, its hopes and its fears, its unexpected joys and its blighted
hopes, all passed before him. Lost in these memories, he had quite forgotten the present situation,
when a commonplace incident, more powerful than the voice of his
daughter, brought him back to the terrible reality. The gate leading to
the Chateau de Sairmeuse, to _his_ chateau, was found to be locked. He shook it with a sort of rage; and, being unable to break the
fastening, he found some relief in breaking the bell. On hearing the noise, the gardener came running to the scene of action. "Why is this gate closed?" demanded M. Lacheneur, with unwonted violence
of manner. "By what right do you barricade my house when I, the master,
am without?" The gardener tried to make some excuse. "Hold your tongue!" interrupted M. Lacheneur. "I dismiss you; you are no
longer in my service." He passed on, leaving the gardener petrified with astonishment, crossed
the court-yard--a court-yard worthy of the mansion, bordered with velvet
turf, with flowers, and with dense shrubbery. In the vestibule, inlaid with marble, three of his tenants sat awaiting
him, for it was on Sunday that he always received the workmen who
desired to confer with him. They rose at his approach, and removed their hats deferentially. But he
did not give them time to utter a word. "Who permitted you to enter here?" he said, savagely, "and what do you
desire? They sent you to play the spy on me, did they? Leave, I tell
you!" The three farmers were even more bewildered and dismayed than the
gardener had been, and their remarks must have been interesting. But M. Lacheneur could not hear them. He had opened the door of the
grand salon, and dashed in, followed by his frightened daughter. Never had Marie-Anne seen her father in such a mood; and she trembled,
her heart torn by the most frightful presentiments. She had heard it said that oftentimes, under the influence of some dire
calamity, unfortunate men have suddenly lost their reason entirely; and
she was wondering if her father had become insane. It would seem, indeed, that such was the case. His eyes flashed,
convulsive shudders shook his whole body, a white foam gathered on his
lips. He made the circuit of the room as a wild beast makes the circuit of his
cage, uttering harsh imprecations and making frenzied gestures. His actions were strange, incomprehensible. Sometimes he seemed to be
trying the thickness of the carpet with the toe of his boot; sometimes
he threw himself upon a sofa or a chair, as if to test its softness. Occasionally, he paused abruptly before some one of the valuable
pictures that covered the walls, or before a bronze. One might have
supposed that he was taking an inventory, and appraising all the
magnificent and costly articles which decorated this apartment, the most
sumptuous in the chateau. "And I must renounce all this!" he exclaimed, at last. These words explained everything. "No, never!" he resumed, in a transport of rage; "never! never! I
cannot! I will not!" Now Marie-Anne understood it all. But what was passing in her father's
mind? She wished to know; and, leaving the low chair in which she had
been seated, she went to her father's side. "Are you ill, father?" she asked, in her sweet voice; "what is the
matter? What do you fear? Why do you not confide in me?--Am I not your
daughter? Do you no longer love me?" At the sound of this dear voice, M. Lacheneur trembled like a sleeper
suddenly aroused from the terrors of a nightmare, and he cast an
indescribable glance upon his daughter. "Did you not hear what Chupin said to me?" he replied, slowly. "The Duc
de Sairmeuse is at Montaignac; he will soon be here; and we are dwelling
in the chateau of his fathers, and his domain has become ours!" The vexed question regarding the national lands, which agitated France
for thirty years, Marie understood, for she had heard it discussed a
thousand times. "Ah, well, dear father," said she, "what does that matter, even if we do
hold the property? You have bought it and paid for it, have you not? So
it is rightfully and lawfully ours." M. Lacheneur hesitated a moment before replying. But his secret suffocated him. He was in one of those crises in which a
man, however strong he may be, totters and seeks some support, however
fragile. "You would be right, my daughter," he murmured, with drooping head, "if
the money that I gave in exchange for Sairmeuse had really belonged to
me." At this strange avowal the young girl turned pale and recoiled a step. "What?" she faltered; "this gold was not yours, my father? To whom did
it belong? From whence did it come?" The unhappy man had gone too far to retract. "I will tell you all, my daughter," he replied, "and you shall judge. You shall decide. When the Sairmeuse family fled from France, I had only
my hands to depend upon, and as it was almost impossible to obtain work,
I wondered if starvation were not near at hand. "Such was my condition when someone came after me one evening to tell
me that Mademoiselle Armande de Sairmeuse, my godmother, was dying, and
wished to speak with me. I ran to the chateau. "The messenger had told the truth. Mademoiselle Armande was sick unto
death. I felt this on seeing her upon her bed, whiter than wax. "Ah! if I were to live a hundred years, never should I forget her face
as it looked at that moment. It was expressive of a strength of will and
an energy that would hold death at bay until the task upon which she had
determined was performed. "When I entered the room I saw a look of relief appear upon her
countenance. "'How long you were in coming!' she murmured faintly. "I was about to make some excuse, when she motioned me to pause, and
ordered the women who surrounded her to leave the room. "As soon as we were alone:

"'You are an honest boy,', said she, 'and I am about to give you a proof
of my confidence. People believe me to be poor, but they are mistaken. While my relatives were gayly ruining themselves, I was saving the five
hundred louis which the duke, my brother, gave me each year.' "She motioned me to come nearer, and to kneel beside her bed. "I obeyed, and Mademoiselle Armande leaned toward me, almost glued her
lips to my ear, and added:

"'I possess eighty thousand francs.' "I felt a sudden giddiness, but my godmother did not notice it. "'This amount,' she continued, 'is not a quarter part of the former
income from our family estates. But now, who knows but it will, one day,
be the only resource of the Sairmeuse? I am going to place it in your
charge, Lacheneur. I confide it to your honor and to your devotion. The
estates belonging to the emigrants are to be sold, I hear. If such an
act of injustice is committed, you will probably be able to purchase
our property for seventy thousand francs. If the property is sold by the
government, purchase it; if the lands belonging to the emigrants are not
sold, take that amount to the duke, my brother, who is with the
Count d'Artois. The surplus, that is to say, the ten thousand francs
remaining, I give to you--they are yours.' "She seemed to recover her strength. She raised herself in bed, and,
holding the crucifix attached to her rosary to my lips, she said:

"'Swear by the image of our Saviour, that you will faithfully execute
the last will of your dying godmother.' "I took the required oath, and an expression of satisfaction overspread
her features. "'That is well,' she said; 'I shall die content. You will have a
protector on high. But this is not all. In times like these in which we
live, this gold will not be safe in your hands unless those about you
are ignorant that you possess it. I have been endeavoring to discover
some way by which you could remove it from my room, and from the
chateau, without the knowledge of anyone; and I have found a way. The
gold is here in this cupboard, at the head of my bed, in a stout oaken
chest. You must find strength to move the chest--you must. You can
fasten a sheet around it and let it down gently from the window into the
garden. You will then leave the house as you entered it, and as soon as
you are outside, you must take the chest and carry it to your home. The
night is very dark, and no one will see you, if you are careful. But
make haste; my strength is nearly gone.' "The chest was heavy, but I was very strong. "In less than ten minutes the task of removing the chest from the
chateau was accomplished, without a single sound that would betray us. As I closed the window, I said:

"'It is done, godmother.' "'God be praised!' she whispered; 'Sairmeuse is saved!' "I heard a deep sigh. I turned; she was dead." This scene that M. Lacheneur was relating rose vividly before him. To feign, to disguise the truth, or to conceal any portion of it was an
impossibility. He forgot himself and his daughter; he thought only of the dead woman,
of Mlle. Armande de Sairmeuse. And he shuddered on pronouncing the words: "She was dead." It seemed to
him that she was about to speak, and to insist upon the fulfilment of
his pledge. After a moment's silence, he resumed, in a hollow voice:

"I called for aid; it came. Mademoiselle Armande was adored by everyone;
there was great lamentation, and a half hour of indescribable confusion
followed her death. I was able to withdraw, unnoticed, to run into
the garden, and to carry away the oaken chest. An hour later, it was
concealed in the miserable hovel in which I dwelt. The following year I
purchased Sairmeuse." He had confessed all; and he paused, trembling, trying to read his
sentence in the eyes of his daughter. "And can you hesitate?" she demanded. "Ah! you do not know----"

"I know that Sairmeuse must be given up." This was the decree of his own conscience, that faint voice which speaks
only in a whisper, but which all the tumult on earth cannot overpower. "No one saw me take away the chest," he faltered. "If anyone suspected
it, there is not a single proof against me. But no one does suspect it." Marie-Anne rose, her eyes flashed with generous indignation. "My father!" she exclaimed; "oh! my father!" Then, in a calmer tone, she added:

"If others know nothing of this, can _you_ forget it?" M. Lacheneur appeared almost ready to succumb to the torture of the
terrible conflict raging in his soul. "Return!" he exclaimed. "What shall I return? That which I have
received? So be it. I consent. I will give the duke the eighty thousand
francs; to this amount I will add the interest on this sum since I have
had it, and--we shall be free of all obligation." The girl sadly shook her head. "Why do you resort to subterfuges which are so unworthy of you?" she
asked, gently. "You know perfectly well that it was Sairmeuse which
Mademoiselle Armande intended to intrust to the servant of her house. And it is Sairmeuse which must be returned." The word "servant" was revolting to a man, who, at least, while the
empire endured, had been a power in the land. "Ah! you are cruel, my daughter," he said, with intense bitterness; "as
cruel as a child who has never suffered--as cruel as one who, having
never himself been tempted, is without mercy for those who have yielded
to temptation. "It is one of those acts which God alone can judge, since God alone can
read the depths of one's secret soul. "I am only a depositary, you tell me. It was, indeed, in this light that
I formerly regarded myself. "If your poor sainted mother was still alive, she would tell you the
anxiety and anguish I felt on being made the master of riches which
were not mine. I trembled lest I should yield to their seductions; I was
afraid of myself. I felt as a gambler might feel who had the winnings
of others confided to his care; as a drunkard might feel who had been
placed in charge of a quantity of the most delicious wines. "Your mother would tell you that I moved heaven and earth to find the
Duc de Sairmeuse. But he had left the Count d'Artois, and no one knew
where he had gone or what had become of him. Ten years passed before
I could make up my mind to inhabit the chateau--yes, ten years--during
which I had the furniture dusted each morning as if the master was to
return that evening. "At last I ventured. I had heard Monsieur d'Escorval declare that the
duke had been killed in battle. I took up my abode here. And from day to
day, in proportion as the domain of Sairmeuse became more beautiful
and extensive beneath my care, I felt myself more and more its rightful
owner." But this despairing pleading in behalf of a bad cause produced no
impression upon Marie-Anne's loyal heart. "Restitution must be made," she repeated. M. Lacheneur wrung his hands. "Implacable!" he exclaimed; "she is implacable. Unfortunate girl! does
she not understand that it is for her sake I wish to remain where I
am? I am old, and I am familiar with toil and poverty; idleness has
not removed the callosities from my hands. What do I require to keep me
alive until the day comes for me to take my place in the graveyard? A
crust of bread and an onion in the morning, a porringer of soup in the
evening, and for the night a bundle of straw. I could easily earn that. But you, unhappy child! and your brother, what will become of you?" "We must not discuss nor haggle with duty, my father. I think, however,
that you are needlessly alarmed. I believe the duke is too noble-hearted
ever to allow you to suffer want after the immense service you have
rendered him." The old servitor of the house of Sairmeuse laughed a loud, bitter laugh. "You believe that!" said he; "then you do not know the nobles who have
been our masters for ages. 'A., you are a worthy fellow!' --very coldly
said--will be the only recompense I shall receive; and you will see us,
me, at my plough; you, out at service. And if I venture to speak of
the ten thousand francs that were given me, I shall be treated as an
impostor, as an impudent fool. By the holy name of God this shall not
be!" "Oh, my father!" "No! this shall not be. And I realize--as you cannot realize--the
disgrace of such a fall. You think you are beloved in Sairmeuse? You are
mistaken. We have been too fortunate not to be the victims of hatred and
jealousy. If I fall to-morrow, you will see all who kissed your hands
to-day fall upon you to tear you to pieces!" His eye glittered; he believed he had found a victorious argument. "And then you, yourself, will realize the horror of the disgrace. It
will cost you the deadly anguish of a separation from him whom your
heart has chosen." He had spoken truly, for Marie-Anne's beautiful eyes filled with tears. "If what you say proves true, father," she murmured, in an altered
voice, "I may, perhaps, die of sorrow; but I cannot fail to realize that
my confidence and my love has been misplaced." "And you still insist upon my returning Sairmeuse to its former owner?" "Honor speaks, my father." M. Lacheneur made the arm-chair in which he was seated tremble by a
violent blow of his fist. "And if I am just as obstinate," he exclaimed--"if I keep the
property--what will you do?" "I shall say to myself, father, that honest poverty is better than
stolen wealth. I shall leave this chateau, which belongs to the Duc
de Sairmeuse, and I shall seek a situation as a servant in the
neighborhood." M. Lacheneur sank back in his arm-chair sobbing. He knew his daughter's
nature well enough to be assured that what she said, that she would do. But he was conquered; his daughter had won the battle. He had decided to
make the heroic sacrifice. "I will relinquish Sairmeuse," he faltered, "come what may----"

He paused suddenly; a visitor was entering the room. It was a young man about twenty years of age, of distinguished
appearance, but with a rather melancholy and gentle manner. His eyes when he entered the apartment encountered those of Marie-Anne;
he blushed slightly, and the girl half turned away, crimsoning to the
roots of her hair. "Monsieur," said the young man, "my father sends me to inform you that
the Duc de Sairmeuse and his son have just arrived. They have asked the
hospitality of our cure." M. Lacheneur rose, unable to conceal his frightful agitation. "You will thank the Baron d'Escorval for his attention, my dear
Maurice," he responded. "I shall have the honor of seeing him to-day,
after a very momentous step which we are about to take, my daughter and
I." Young d'Escorval had seen, at the first glance, that his presence was
inopportune, so he remained only a few moments. But as he was taking leave, Marie-Anne found time to say, in a low
voice:

"I think I know your heart, Maurice; this evening I shall know it
certainly." CHAPTER III

Few of the inhabitants of Sairmeuse knew, except by name, the terrible
duke whose arrival had thrown the whole village into commotion. Some of the oldest residents had a faint recollection of having seen
him long ago, before '89 indeed, when he came to visit his aunt, Mlle. Armande. His duties, then, had seldom permitted him to leave the court. If he had given no sign of life during the empire, it was because he had
not been compelled to submit to the humiliations and suffering which so
many of the emigrants were obliged to endure in their exile. On the contrary, he had received, in exchange for the wealth of which he
had been deprived by the revolution, a princely fortune. Taking refuge in London after the defeat of the army of Conde, he had
been so fortunate as to please the only daughter of Lord Holland, one of
the richest peers in England, and he had married her. She possessed a fortune of two hundred and fifty thousand pounds
sterling, more than six million francs. Still the marriage was not a happy one. The chosen companion of the
dissipated and licentious Count d'Artois was not likely to prove a very
good husband. The young duchess was contemplating a separation when she died,
in giving birth to a boy, who was baptized under the names of
Anne-Marie-Martial. The loss of his wife did not render the Duc de Sairmeuse inconsolable. He was free and richer than he had ever been. As soon as _les convenances_ permitted, he confided his son to the care
of a relative of his wife, and began his roving life again. Rumor had told the truth. He had fought, and that furiously, against
France in the Austrian, and then in the Russian ranks. And he took no pains to conceal the fact; convinced that he had only
performed his duty. He considered that he had honestly and loyally
gained the rank of general which the Emperor of all the Russias had
bestowed upon him. He had not returned to France during the first Restoration; but his
absence had been involuntary. His father-in-law, Lord Holland, had just
died, and the duke was detained in London by business connected with his
son's immense inheritance. Then followed the "Hundred Days." They exasperated him. But "the good cause," as he styled it, having triumphed anew, he
hastened to France. Alas! Lacheneur judged the character of his former master correctly,
when he resisted the entreaties of his daughter. This man, who had been compelled to conceal himself during the first
Restoration, knew only too well, that the returned _emigres_ had learned
nothing and forgotten nothing. The Duc de Sairmeuse was no exception to the rule. He thought, and nothing could be more sadly absurd, that a mere act
of authority would suffice to suppress forever all the events of the
Revolution and of the empire. When he said: "I do not admit that!" he firmly believed that there was
nothing more to be said; that controversy was ended; and that what _had_
been was as if it had never been. If some, who had seen Louis XVII. at the helm in 1814, assured the duke
that France had changed in many respects since 1789, he responded with a
shrug of the shoulders:

"Nonsense! As soon as we assert ourselves, all these rascals, whose
rebellion alarms you, will quietly sink out of sight." Such was really his opinion. On the way from Montaignac to Sairmeuse, the duke, comfortably ensconced
in his berlin, unfolded his theories for the benefit of his son. "The King has been poorly advised," he said, in conclusion. "Besides,
I am disposed to believe that he inclines too much to Jacobinism. If
he would listen to my advice, he would make use of the twelve hundred
thousand soldiers which our friends have placed at his disposal, to
bring his subjects to a sense of their duty. Twelve hundred thousand
bayonets have far more eloquence than the articles of a charter." He continued his remarks on this subject until the carriage approached
Sairmeuse. Though but little given to sentiment, he was really affected by the
sight of the country in which he was born--where he had played as a
child, and of which he had heard nothing since the death of his aunt. Everything was changed: still the outlines of the landscape remained the
same; the valley of the Oiselle was as bright and laughing as in days
gone by. "I recognize it!" he exclaimed, with a delight that made him forget
politics. "I recognize it!" Soon the changes became more striking. The carriage entered Sairmeuse, and rattled over the stones of the only
street in the village. This street, in former years, had been unpaved, and had always been
rendered impassable by wet weather. "Ah, ha!" murmured the duke, "this is an improvement!" It was not long before he noticed others. The dilapidated, thatched
hovels had given place to pretty and comfortable white cottages with
green blinds, and a vine hanging gracefully over the door. As the carriage passed the public square in front of the church, Martial
observed the groups of peasants who were still talking there. "What do you think of all these peasants?" he inquired of his father. "Do they have the appearance of people who are preparing a triumphal
reception for their old masters?" M. de Sairmeuse shrugged his shoulders. He was not the man to renounce
an illusion for such a trifle. "They do not know that I am in this post-chaise," he replied. "When they
know----"

Shouts of "Vive Monsieur le Duc de Sairmeuse!" interrupted him. "Do you hear that, Marquis?" he exclaimed. And pleased by these cries that proved him in the right, he leaned from
the carriage-window, waving his hand to the honest Chupin family, who
were running after the vehicle with noisy shouts. The old rascal, his wife, and his children, all possessed powerful
voices; and it was not strange that the duke believed the whole village
was welcoming him. He was convinced of it; and when the berlin stopped
before the house of the cure, M. de Sairmeuse was persuaded that the
_prestige_ of the nobility was greater than ever. Upon the threshold of the parsonage, Bibiaine, the old housekeeper, was
standing. She knew who these guests must be, for the cure's servants
always know what is going on. "Monsieur has not yet returned from church," she said, in response to
the duke's inquiry; "but if the gentlemen wish to wait, it will not be
long before he comes, for the poor, dear man has not breakfasted yet." "Let us go in," the duke said to his son. And guided by the housekeeper,
they entered a sort of drawing-room, where the table was spread. M. de Sairmeuse took an inventory of the apartment in a single glance. The habits of a house reveal those of its master. This was clean, poor,
and bare. The walls were whitewashed; a dozen chairs composed the entire
furniture; upon the table, laid with monastic simplicity, were only tin
dishes. This was either the abode of an ambitious man or a saint. "Will these gentlemen take any refreshments?" inquired Bibiaine. "Upon my word," replied Martial, "I must confess that the drive has
whetted my appetite amazingly." "Blessed Jesus!" exclaimed the old housekeeper, in evident despair. "What am I to do? I, who have nothing! That is to say--yes--I have an
old hen left in the coop. Give me time to wring its neck, to pick it,
and clean it----"

She paused to listen, and they heard a step in the passage. "Ah!" she exclaimed, "here is Monsieur le Cure now!" The son of a poor farmer in the environs of Montaignac, he owed his
Latin and tonsure to the privations of his family. Tall, angular, and solemn, he was as cold and impassive as the stones of
his church. By what immense efforts of will, at the cost of what torture, had he
made himself what he was? One could form some idea of the terrible
restraint to which he had subjected himself by looking at his eyes,
which occasionally emitted the lightnings of an impassioned soul. Was he old or young? The most subtle observer would have hesitated to
say on seeing this pallid and emaciated face, cut in two by an immense
nose--a real eagle's beak--as thin as the edge of a razor. He wore a white cassock, which had been patched and darned in numberless
places, but which was a marvel of cleanliness, and which hung about his
tall, attenuated body like the sails of a disabled vessel. He was known as the Abbe Midon. At the sight of the two strangers seated in his drawing-room, he
manifested some slight surprise. The carriage standing before the door had announced the presence of a
visitor; but he had expected to find one of his parishioners. No one had warned him or the sacristan, and he was wondering with whom
he had to deal, and what they desired of him. Mechanically, he turned to Bibiaine, but the old servant had taken
flight. The duke understood his host's astonishment. "Upon my word, Abbe!" he said, with the impertinent ease of a _grand
seigneur_ who makes himself at home everywhere, "we have taken your
house by storm, and hold the position, as you see. I am the Duc de
Sairmeuse, and this is my son, the Marquis." The priest bowed, but he did not seem very greatly impressed by the
exalted rank of his guests. "It is a great honor for me," he replied, in a more than reserved tone,
"to receive a visit from the former master of this place." He emphasized this word "former" in such a manner that it was impossible
to doubt his sentiments and his opinions. "Unfortunately," he continued, "you will not find here the comforts to
which you are accustomed, and I fear----"

"Nonsense!" interrupted the duke. "An old soldier is not fastidious,
and what suffices for you, Monsieur Abbe, will suffice for us. And rest
assured that we shall amply repay you in one way or another for any
inconvenience we may cause you." The priest's eye flashed. This want of tact, this disagreeable
familiarity, this last insulting remark, kindled the anger of the man
concealed beneath the priest. "Besides," added Martial, gayly, "we have been vastly amused by
Bibiaine's anxieties, we already know that there is a chicken in the
coop----"

"That is to say there was one, Monsieur le Marquis." The old housekeeper, who suddenly reappeared, explained her master's
response. She seemed overwhelmed with despair. "Blessed Virgin! Monsieur, what shall I do?" she clamored. "The chicken
has disappeared. Someone has certainly stolen it, for the coop is
securely closed!" "Do not accuse your neighbor hastily," interrupted the cure; "no one has
stolen it from us. Bertrande was here this morning to ask alms in the
name of her sick daughter. I had no money, and I gave her this fowl that
she might make a good bouillon for the sick girl." This explanation changed Bibiaine's consternation to fury. Planting herself in the centre of the room, one hand upon her hip, and
gesticulating wildly with the other, she exclaimed, pointing to her
master:

"That is just the sort of man he is; he has less sense than a baby! Any
miserable peasant who meets him can make him believe anything he wishes. Any great falsehood brings tears to his eyes, and then they can do what
they like with him. In that way they take the very shoes off his feet
and the bread from his mouth. Bertrande's daughter, messieurs, is no
more ill than you or I!" "Enough," said the priest, sternly, "enough." Then, knowing by
experience that his voice had not the power to check her flood of
reproaches, he took her by the arm and led her out into the passage. M. de Sairmeuse and his son exchanged a glance of consternation. Was this a comedy that had been prepared for their benefit? Evidently
not, since their arrival had not been expected. But the priest, whose character had been so plainly revealed by this
quarrel with his domestic, was not a man to their taste. At least, he was evidently not the man they had hoped to find--not the
auxiliary whose assistance was indispensable to the success of their
plans. Yet they did not exchange a word; they listened. They heard the sound as of a discussion in the passage. The master spoke
in low tones, but with an unmistakable accent of command; the servant
uttered an astonished exclamation. But the listeners could not distinguish a word. Soon the priest re-entered the apartment. "I hope, gentlemen," he said, with a dignity that could not fail to
check any attempt at raillery, "that you will excuse this ridiculous
scene. The cure of Sairmeuse, thank God! is not so poor as she says." Neither the duke nor Martial made any response. Even their remarkable assurance was very sensibly diminished; and M. de
Sairmeuse deemed it advisable to change the subject. This he did, by relating the events which he had just witnessed in
Paris, and by insisting that His Majesty, Louis XVIII., had been
welcomed with enthusiasm and transports of affection. Fortunately, the old housekeeper interrupted this recital. She entered, loaded with china, silver, and bottles, and behind her came
a large man in a white apron, bearing three or four covered dishes in
his hands. It was the order to go and obtain this repast from the village inn which
had drawn from Bibiaine so many exclamations of wonder and dismay in the
passage. A moment later the cure and his guests took their places at the table. Had the much-lamented chicken constituted the dinner the rations would
have been "short." This the worthy woman was obliged to confess, on
seeing the terrible appetite evinced by M. de Sairmeuse and his son. "One would have sworn that they had eaten nothing for a fortnight," she
told her friends, the next day. Abbe Midon was not hungry, though it was two o'clock, and he had eaten
nothing since the previous evening. The sudden arrival of the former masters of Sairmeuse filled his
heart with gloomy forebodings. Their coming, he believed, presaged the
greatest misfortunes. So while he played with his knife and fork, pretending to eat, he was
really occupied in watching his guests, and in studying them with
all the penetration of a priest, which, by the way, is generally far
superior to that of a physician or of a magistrate. The Duc de Sairmeuse was fifty-seven, but looked considerably younger. The storms of his youth, the dissipation of his riper years, the great
excesses of every kind in which he had indulged, had not impaired his
iron constitution in the least. Of herculean build, he was extremely proud of his strength, and of his
hands, which were well-formed, but large, firmly knit and powerful, such
hands as rightly belonged to a gentleman whose ancestors had given many
a crushing blow with ponderous battle-axe in the crusades. His face revealed his character. He possessed all the graces and all the
vices of a courtier. He was, at the same time _spirituel_ and ignorant, sceptical and
violently imbued with the prejudices of his class. Though less robust than his father, Martial was a no less
distinguished-looking cavalier. It was not strange that women raved over
his blue eyes, and the beautiful blond hair which he inherited from his
mother. To his father he owed energy, courage, and, it must also be added,
perversity. But he was his superior in education and in intellect. If he
shared his father's prejudices, he had not adopted them without weighing
them carefully. What the father might do in a moment of excitement, the
son was capable of doing in cold blood. It was thus that the abbe, with rare sagacity, read the character of his
guests. So it was with great sorrow, but without surprise, that he heard the
duke advance, on the questions of the day, the impossible ideas shared
by nearly all the _emigres_. Knowing the condition of the country, and the state of public opinion,
the cure endeavored to convince the obstinate man of his mistake; but
upon this subject the duke would not permit contradiction, or even
raillery; and he was fast losing his temper, when Bibiaine appeared at
the parlor door. "Monsieur le Duc," said she, "Monsieur Lacheneur and his daughter are
without and desire to speak to you." CHAPTER IV. This name Lacheneur awakened no recollection in the mind of the duke. First, he had never lived at Sairmeuse. And even if he had, what courtier of the _ancien regime_ ever troubled
himself about the individual names of the peasants, whom he regarded
with such profound indifference. When a _grand seigneur_ addressed these people, he said: "Halloo! hi,
there! friend, my worthy fellow!" So it was with the air of a man who is making an effort of memory that
the Duc de Sairmeuse repeated:

"Lacheneur--Monsieur Lacheneur----"

But Martial, a closer observer than his father, had noticed that the
priest's glance wavered at the sound of this name. "Who is this person, Abbe?" demanded the duke, lightly. "Monsieur Lacheneur," replied the priest, with very evident hesitation,
"is the present owner of the Chateau de Sairmeuse." Martial, the precocious diplomat, could not repress a smile on hearing
this response, which he had foreseen. But the duke bounded from his
chair. "Ah!" he exclaimed, "it is the rascal who has had the impudence--Let him
come in, old woman, let him come in." Bibiaine retired, and the priest's uneasiness increased. "Permit me, Monsieur le Duc," he said, hastily, "to remark that Monsieur
Lacheneur exercises a great influence in this region--to offend him
would be impolitic----"

"I understand--you advise me to be conciliatory. Such sentiments are
purely Jacobin. If His Majesty listens to the advice of such as you,
all these sales of confiscated estates will be ratified. Zounds! our
interests are the same. If the Revolution has deprived the nobility of
their property, it has also impoverished the clergy." "The possessions of a priest are not of this world, Monsieur," said the
cure, coldly. M. de Sairmeuse was about to make some impertinent response, when M.
Lacheneur appeared, followed by his daughter. The wretched man was ghastly pale, great drops of perspiration stood out
upon his temples, his restless, haggard eyes revealed his distress of
mind. Marie-Anne was as pale as her father, but her attitude and the light
that burned in her eyes told of invincible energy and determination. "Ah, well! friend," said the duke, "so we are the owner of Sairmeuse, it
seems." This was said with such a careless insolence of manner that the cure
blushed that they should thus treat, in his own house, a man whom he
considered his equal. He rose and offered the visitors chairs. "Will you take a seat, dear Monsieur Lacheneur?" said he, with
a politeness intended as a lesson for the duke; "and you, also,
Mademoiselle, do me the honor----"

But the father and the daughter both refused the proffered civility with
a motion of the head. "Monsieur le Duc," continued Lacheneur, "I am an old servant of your
house----"

"Ah! indeed!" "Mademoiselle Armande, your aunt, accorded my poor mother the honor of
acting as my godmother----"

"Ah, yes," interrupted the duke. "I remember you now. Our family
has shown great goodness to you and yours. And it was to prove your
gratitude, probably, that you made haste to purchase our estate!" The former ploughboy was of humble origin, but his heart and his
character had developed with his fortunes; he understood his own worth. Much as he was disliked, and even detested, by his neighbors, everyone
respected him. And here was a man who treated him with undisguised scorn. Why? By what
right? Indignant at the outrage, he made a movement as if to retire. No one, save his daughter, knew the truth; he had only to keep silence
and Sairmeuse remained his. Yes, he had still the power to keep Sairmeuse, and he knew it, for
he did not share the fears of the ignorant rustics. He was too well
informed not to be able to distinguish between the hopes of the
_emigres_ and the possible. He knew that an abyss separated the dream
from the reality. A beseeching word uttered in a low tone by his daughter, made him turn
again to the duke. "If I purchased Sairmeuse," he answered, in a voice husky with emotion,
"it was in obedience to the command of your dying aunt, and with the
money which she gave me for that purpose. If you see me here, it is only
because I come to restore to you the deposit confided to my keeping." Anyone not belonging to that class of spoiled fools which surround a
throne would have been deeply touched. But the duke thought this grand act of honesty and of generosity the
most simple and natural thing in the world. "That is very well, so far as the principal is concerned," said he. "Let
us speak now of the interest. Sairmeuse, if I remember rightly, yielded
an average income of one thousand louis per year. These revenues, well
invested, should have amounted to a very considerable amount. Where is
this?" This claim, thus advanced and at such a moment, was so outrageous, that
Martial, disgusted, made a sign to his father, which the latter did not
see. But the cure hoping to recall the extortioner to something like a sense
of shame, exclaimed:

"Monsieur le Duc! Oh, Monsieur le Duc!" Lacheneur shrugged his shoulders with an air of resignation. "The income I have used for my own living expenses, and in educating
my children; but most of it has been expended in improving the estate,
which today yields an income twice as large as in former years." "That is to say, for twenty years, Monsieur Lacheneur has played the
part of lord of the manor. A delightful comedy. You are rich now, I
suppose." "I possess nothing. But I hope you will allow me to take ten thousand
francs, which your aunt gave to me." "Ah! she gave you ten thousand francs? And when?" "On the same evening that she gave me the eighty thousand francs
intended for the purchase of the estate." "Perfect! What proof can you furnish that she gave you this sum?" Lacheneur stood motionless and speechless. He tried to reply, but
he could not. If he opened his lips it would only be to pour forth a
torrent of menaces, insults, and invectives. Marie-Anne stepped quickly forward. "The proof, Monsieur," said she, in a clear, ringing voice, "is the word
of this man, who, of his own free will, comes to return to you--to give
you a fortune." As she sprang forward her beautiful dark hair escaped from its
confinement, the rich blood crimsoned her cheeks, her dark eyes flashed
brilliantly, and sorrow, anger, horror at the humiliation, imparted a
sublime expression to her face. She was so beautiful that Martial regarded her with wonder. "Lovely!" he murmured, in English; "beautiful as an angel!" These words, which she understood, abashed Marie-Anne. But she had said
enough; her father felt that he was avenged. He drew from his pocket a roll of papers, and throwing them upon the
table: "Here are your titles," he said, addressing the duke in a tone
full of implacable hatred. "Keep the legacy that your aunt gave me,
I wish nothing of yours. I shall never set foot in Sairmeuse again. Penniless I entered it, penniless I will leave it!" He quitted the room with head proudly erect, and when they were outside,
he said but one word to his daughter:

"Well!" "You have done your duty," she replied; "it is those who have not done
it, who are to be pitied!" She had no opportunity to say more. Martial came running after them,
anxious for another chance of seeing this young girl whose beauty had
made such an impression upon him. "I hastened after you," he said, addressing Marie-Anne, rather than M.
Lacheneur, "to reassure you. All this will be arranged, Mademoiselle. Eyes so beautiful as yours should never know tears. I will be your
advocate with my father--"

"Mademoiselle Lacheneur has no need of an advocate!" a harsh voice
interrupted. Martial turned, and saw the young man, who, that morning, went to warn
M. Lacheneur of the duke's arrival. "I am the Marquis de Sairmeuse," he said, insolently. "And I," said the other, quietly, "am Maurice d'Escorval." They surveyed each other for a moment; each expecting, perhaps, an
insult from the other. Instinctively, they felt that they were to
be enemies; and the bitterest animosity spoke in the glances they
exchanged. Perhaps they felt a presentiment that they were to be
champions of two different principles, as well as rivals. Martial, remembering his father, yielded. "We shall meet again, Monsieur d'Escorval," he said, as he retired. At
this threat, Maurice shrugged his shoulders, and said:

"You had better not desire it." CHAPTER V

The abode of the Baron d'Escorval, that brick structure with stone
trimmings which was visible from the superb avenue leading to Sairmeuse,
was small and unpretentious. Its chief attraction was a pretty lawn that extended to the banks of the
Oiselle, and a small but beautifully shaded park. It was known as the Chateau d'Escorval, but that appellation was gross
flattery. Any petty manufacturer who had amassed a small fortune would
have desired a larger, handsomer, and more imposing establishment. M. d'Escorval--and it will be an eternal honor to him in history--was
not rich. Although he had been intrusted with several of those missions from which
generals and diplomats often return laden with millions, M. d'Escorval's
worldly possessions consisted only of the little patrimony bequeathed
him by his father: a property which yielded an income of from twenty to
twenty-five thousand francs a year. This modest dwelling, situated about a mile from Sairmeuse, represented
the savings of ten years. He had built it in 1806, from a plan drawn by his own hand; and it was
the dearest spot on earth to him. He always hastened to this retreat when his work allowed him a few days
of rest. But this time he had not come to Escorval of his own free will. He had been compelled to leave Paris by the proscribed list of the 24th
of July--that fatal list which summoned the enthusiastic Labedoyere and
the honest and virtuous Drouot before a court-martial. And even in this solitude, M. d'Escorval's situation was not without
danger. He was one of those who, some days before the disaster of Waterloo, had
strongly urged the Emperor to order the execution of Fouche, the former
minister of police. Now, Fouche knew this counsel; and he was powerful. "Take care!" M. d'Escorval's friends wrote him from Paris. But he put his trust in Providence, and faced the future, threatening
though it was, with the unalterable serenity of a pure conscience. The baron was still young; he was not yet fifty, but anxiety, work, and
long nights passed in struggling with the most arduous difficulties of
the imperial policy, had made him old before his time. He was tall, slightly inclined to _embonpoint_, and stooped a little. His calm eyes, his serious mouth, his broad, furrowed forehead, and his
austere manners inspired respect. "He must be stern and inflexible," said those who saw him for the first
time. But they were mistaken. If, in the exercise of his official duties, this truly great man had the
strength to resist all temptations to swerve from the path of right; if,
when duty was at stake, he was as rigid as iron, in private life he
was as unassuming as a child, and kind and gentle even to the verge of
weakness. To this nobility of character he owed his domestic happiness, that rare
and precious happiness which fills one's existence with a celestial
perfume. During the bloodiest epoch of the Reign of Terror, M. d'Escorval had
wrested from the guillotine a young girl named Victoire-Laure d'Alleu, a
distant cousin of the Rhetaus of Commarin, as beautiful as an angel, and
only three years younger than himself. He loved her--and though she was an orphan, destitute of fortune, he
married her, considering the treasure of her virgin heart of far greater
value than the most magnificent dowry. She was an honest woman, as her husband was an honest man, in the most
strict and vigorous sense of the word. She was seldom seen at the Tuileries, where M. d'Escorval's worth made
him eagerly welcomed. The splendors of the Imperial Court, which at
that time surpassed all the pomp of the time of Louis XIV., had no
attractions for her. Grace, beauty, youth and accomplishments--she reserved them all for the
adornment of her home. Her husband was her God. She lived in him and through him. She had not a
thought which did not belong to him. The short time that he could spare from his arduous labors to devote to
her were her happiest hours. And when, in the evening, they sat beside the fire in their modest
drawing-room, with their son Maurice playing on the rug at their feet,
it seemed to them that they had nothing to wish for here below. The overthrow of the empire surprised them in the heydey of their
happiness. Surprised them? No. For a long time M. d'Escorval had seen the
prodigious edifice erected by the genius whom he had made his idol
totter as if about to fall. Certainly, he felt intense chagrin at this fall, but he was heart-broken
at the sight of all the treason and cowardice which followed it. He was
indignant and horrified at the rising _en masse_ of the avaricious, who
hastened to gorge themselves with the spoil. Under these circumstances, exile from Paris seemed an actual blessing. "Besides," as he remarked to the baroness, "we shall soon be forgotten
here." But even while he said this he felt many misgivings. Still, by his side,
his noble wife presented a tranquil face, even while she trembled for
the safety of her adored husband. On this first Sunday in August, M. d'Escorval and his wife had been
unusually sad. A vague presentiment of approaching misfortune weighed
heavily upon their hearts. At the same hour that Lacheneur presented himself at the house of the
Abbe Midon, they were seated upon the terrace in front of the house,
gazing anxiously at the two roads leading from Escorval to the chateau,
and to the village of Sairmeuse. Warned, that same morning, by his friends in Montaignac of the arrival
of the duke, the baron had sent his son to inform M. Lacheneur. He had requested him to be absent as short a time as possible; but
in spite of this fact, the hours were rolling by, and Maurice had not
returned. "What if something has happened to him!" both father and mother were
thinking. No; nothing had happened to him. Only a word from Mlle. Lacheneur had
sufficed to make him forget his usual deference to his father's wishes. "This evening," she had said, "I shall certainly know your heart." What could this mean? Could she doubt him? Tortured by the most cruel anxieties, the poor youth could not resolve
to go away without an explanation, and he hung around the chateau hoping
that Marie-Anne would reappear. She did reappear at last, but leaning upon the arm of her father. Young d'Escorval followed them at a distance, and soon saw them enter
the parsonage. What were they going to do there? He knew that the duke
and his son were within. The time that they remained there, and which he passed in the public
square, seemed more than a century long. They emerged at last, however, and he was about to join them when he was
prevented by the appearance of Martial, whose promises he overheard. Maurice knew nothing of life; he was as innocent as a child, but he
could not mistake the intentions that dictated this step on the part of
the Marquis de Sairmeuse. At the thought that a libertine's caprice should dare rest for an
instant upon the pure and beautiful girl whom he loved with all the
strength of his being--whom he had sworn should be his wife--all his
blood mounted madly to his brain. He felt a wild longing to chastise the insolent wretch. Fortunately--unfortunately, perhaps--his hand was arrested by the
recollection of a phrase which he had heard his father repeat a thousand
times:

"Calmness and irony are the only weapons worthy of the strong." And he possessed sufficient strength of will to appear calm, while, in
reality, he was beside himself with passion. It was Martial who lost his
self-control, and who threatened him. "Ah! yes, I will find you again, upstart!" repeated Maurice, through his
set teeth as he watched his enemy move away. For Martial had turned and discovered that Marie-Anne and her father had
left him. He saw them standing about a hundred paces from him. Although
he was surprised at their indifference, he made haste to join them, and
addressed M. Lacheneur. "We are just going to your father's house," was the response he
received, in an almost ferocious tone. A glance from Marie-Anne commanded silence. He obeyed, and walked a
few steps behind them, with his head bowed upon his breast, terribly
anxious, and seeking vainly to explain what had passed. His attitude betrayed such intense sorrow that his mother divined it as
soon as she caught sight of him. All the anguish which this courageous woman had hidden for a month,
found utterance in a single cry. "Ah! here is misfortune!" said she, "we shall not escape it." It was, indeed, misfortune. One could not doubt it when one saw M.
Lacheneur enter the drawing-room. He advanced with the heavy, uncertain step of a drunken man, his eye
void of expression, his features distorted, his lips pale and trembling. "What has happened?" asked the baron, eagerly. But the other did not seem to hear him. "Ah! I warned her," he murmured, continuing a monologue which had begun
before he entered the room. "I told my daughter so." Mme. d'Escorval, after kissing Marie-Anne, drew the girl toward her. "What has happened? For God's sake, tell me what has happened!" she
exclaimed. With a gesture expressive of the most sorrowful resignation, the girl
motioned her to look and to listen to M. Lacheneur. He had recovered from that stupor--that gift of God--which follows
cries that are too terrible for human endurance. Like a sleeper who, on
waking, finds his miseries forgotten during his slumber, lying in wait
for him, he regained with consciousness the capacity to suffer. "It is only this, Monsieur le Baron," replied the unfortunate man in a
harsh, unnatural voice: "I rose this morning the richest proprietor
in the country, and I shall lay down to-night poorer than the
poorest beggar in this commune. I had everything; I no longer have
anything--nothing but my two hands. They earned me my bread for
twenty-five years; they will earn it for me now until the day of my
death. I had a beautiful dream; it is ended." Before this outburst of despair, M. d'Escorval turned pale. "You must exaggerate your misfortune," he faltered; "explain what has
happened." Unconscious of what he was doing, M. Lacheneur threw his hat upon a
chair, and flinging back his long, gray hair, he said:

"To you I will tell all. I came here for that purpose. I know you; I
know your heart. And have you not done me the honor to call me your
friend?" Then, with the cruel exactness of the living, breathing truth, he
related the scene which had just taken place at the presbytery. The baron listened petrified with astonishment, almost doubting the
evidence of his own senses. Mme. d'Escorval's indignant and sorrowful
exclamations showed that every noble sentiment in her soul revolted
against such injustice. But there was one auditor, whom Marie-Anne alone observed, who was moved
to his very entrails by this recital. This auditor was Maurice. Leaning against the door, pale as death, he tried most energetically,
but in vain, to repress the tears of rage and of sorrow which swelled up
in his eyes. To insult Lacheneur was to insult Marie-Anne--that is to say, to injure,
to strike, to outrage him in all that he held most dear in the world. Ah! it is certain that Martial, had he been within his reach, would have
paid dearly for these insults to the father of the girl Maurice loved. But he swore that this chastisement was only deferred--that it should
surely come. And it was not mere angry boasting. This young man, though so modest
and so gentle in manner, had a heart that was inaccessible to fear. His
beautiful, dark eyes, which had the trembling timidity of the eyes of a
young girl, met the gaze of an enemy without flinching. When M. Lacheneur had repeated the last words which he had addressed to
the Duc de Sairmeuse, M. d'Escorval offered him his hand. "I have told you already that I was your friend," he said, in a voice
faltering with emotion; "but I must tell you to-day that I am proud of
having such a friend as you." The unfortunate man trembled at the touch of that loyal hand which
clasped his so warmly, and his face betrayed an ineffable satisfaction. "If my father had not returned it," murmured the obstinate Marie-Anne,
"my father would have been an unfaithful guardian--a thief. He has done
only his duty." M. d'Escorval turned to the young girl, a little surprised. "You speak the truth, Mademoiselle," he said, reproachfully; "but when
you are as old as I am, and have had my experience, you will know that
the accomplishment of a duty is, under certain circumstances, a heroism
of which few persons are capable." M. Lacheneur turned to his friend. "Ah! your words do me good, Monsieur," said he. "Now, I am content with
what I have done." The baroness rose, too much the woman to know how to resist the generous
dictates of her heart. "And I, also, Monsieur Lacheneur," she said, "desire to press your hand. I wish to tell you that I esteem you as much as I despise the ingrates
who have sought to humiliate you, when they should have fallen at your
feet. They are heartless monsters, the like of whom certainly cannot be
found upon the earth." "Alas!" sighed the baron, "the allies have brought back others who, like
these men, think the world created exclusively for their benefit." "And these people wish to be our masters," growled Lacheneur. By some strange fatality no one chanced to hear the remark made by M.
Lacheneur. Had they overheard and questioned him, he would probably have
disclosed some of the projects which were as yet in embryo in his own
mind; and in that case what disastrous consequences might have been
averted. M. d'Escorval had regained his usual coolness. "Now, my dear friend," he inquired, "what course do you propose to
pursue with these members of the Sairmeuse family?" "They will hear nothing more from me--for some time, at least." "What! Shall you not claim the ten thousand francs that they owe you?" "I shall ask them for nothing." "You will be compelled to do so. Since you have alluded to the legacy,
your own honor will demand that you insist upon its payment by all legal
methods. There are still judges in France." M. Lacheneur shook his head. "The judges will not accord me the justice I desire. I shall not apply
to them." "But----"

"No, Monsieur, no. I wish to have nothing to do with these men. I
shall not even go to the chateau to remove my clothing nor that of my
daughter. If they send it to us--very well. If it pleases them to keep
it, so much the better. The more shameful, infamous and odious their
conduct appears, the better I shall be satisfied." The baron made no reply; but his wife spoke, believing she had a sure
means of conquering this incomprehensible obstinacy. "I should understand your determination if you were alone in the world,"
said she, "but you have children." "My son is eighteen, Madame; he possesses good health and an excellent
education. He can make his own way in Paris, if he chooses to remain
there." "But your daughter?" "Marie-Anne will remain with me." M. d'Escorval thought it his duty to interfere. "Take care, my dear friend, that your grief does not overthrow your
reason," said he. "Reflect! What will become of you--your daughter and
yourself?" The wretched man smiled sadly. "Oh," he replied, "we are not as destitute as I said. I exaggerated our
misfortune. We are still landed proprietors. Last year an old cousin,
whom I could never induce to come and live at Sairmeuse, died,
bequeathing all her property to Marie-Anne. This property consisted of a
poor little cottage near the Reche, with a little garden and a few acres
of sterile land. In compliance with my daughter's entreaties, I repaired
the cottage, and sent there a few articles of furniture--a table, some
chairs, and a couple of beds. My daughter designed it as a home for old
Father Guvat and his wife. And I, surrounded by wealth and luxury, said
to myself: 'How comfortable those two old people will be there. They will live as snug as a bug in a rug!' Well, what I thought so
comfortable for others, will be good enough for me. I will raise
vegetables, and Marie-Anne shall sell them." Was he speaking seriously? Maurice must have supposed so, for he sprang forward. "This shall not be, Monsieur Lacheneur!" he exclaimed. "Oh----"

"No, this shall not be, for I love Marie-Anne, and I ask you to give her
to me for my wife." CHAPTER VI

Maurice and Marie-Anne had loved each other for many years. As children, they had played together in the magnificent grounds
surrounding the Chateau de Sairmeuse, and in the park at Escorval. Together they chased the brilliant butterflies, searched for pebbles
on the banks of the river, or rolled in the hay while their mothers
sauntered through the meadows bordering the Oiselle. For their mothers were friends. Mme. Lacheneur had been reared like other poor peasant girls; that is
to say, on the day of her marriage it was only with great difficulty she
succeeded in inscribing her name upon the register. But from the example of her husband she had learned that prosperity, as
well as _noblesse_, entails certain obligations upon one, and with rare
courage, crowned with still rarer success, she had undertaken to acquire
an education in keeping with her fortune and her new rank. And the baroness had made no effort to resist the sympathy that
attracted her to this meritorious young woman, in whom she had discerned
a really superior mind and a truly refined nature. When Mme. Lacheneur died, Mme. d'Escorval mourned for her as she would
have mourned for a favorite sister. From that moment Maurice's attachment assumed a more serious character. Educated in a Parisian lyceum, his teachers sometimes had occasion to
complain of his want of application. "If your professors are not satisfied with you," said his mother, "you
shall not accompany me to Escorval on the coming of your vacation, and
you will not see your little friend." And this simple threat was always sufficient to make the school-boy
resume his studies with redoubled diligence. So each year, as it passed, strengthened the _grande passion_ which
preserved Maurice from the restlessness and the errors of adolescence. The two children were equally timid and artless, and equally infatuated
with each other. Long walks in the twilight under the eyes of their parents, a glance
that revealed their delight at meeting each other, flowers exchanged
between them--which were religiously preserved--such were their simple
pleasures. But that magical and sublime word, love--so sweet to utter, and so sweet
to hear--had never once dropped from their lips. The audacity of Maurice had never gone beyond a furtive pressure of the
hand. The parents could not be ignorant of this mutual affection; and if they
pretended to shut their eyes, it was only because it did not displease
them nor disturb their plans. M. and Mme. d'Escorval saw no objection to their son's marriage with a
young girl whose nobility of character they appreciated, and who was as
beautiful as she was good. That she was the richest heiress in all the
country round about was naturally no objection. So far as M. Lacheneur was concerned, he was delighted at the prospect
of a marriage which would ally him, a former ploughboy, with an old
family whose head was universally respected. So, although no direct allusion to the subject had ever escaped the lips
of the baron or of M. Lacheneur, there was a tacit agreement between the
two families. Yes, the marriage was considered a foregone conclusion. And yet this impetuous and unexpected declaration by Maurice struck
everyone dumb. 