



Produced by Polly Stratton







THE TEMPTING OF TAVERNAKE


By E. Phillips Oppenheim





BOOK ONE




CHAPTER I. DESPAIR AND INTEREST

They stood upon the roof of a London boarding-house in the neighborhood
of Russell Square--one of those grim shelters, the refuge of
Transatlantic curiosity and British penury. The girl--she represented
the former race was leaning against the frail palisading, with gloomy
expression and eyes set as though in fixed contemplation of the
uninspiring panorama. The young man--unmistakably, uncompromisingly
English--stood with his back to the chimney a few feet away, watching
his companion. The silence between them was as yet unbroken, had lasted,
indeed, since she had stolen away from the shabby drawing-room below,
where a florid lady with a raucous voice had been shouting a music-hall
ditty. Close upon her heels, but without speech of any sort, he had
followed. They were almost strangers, except for the occasional word or
two of greeting which the etiquette of the establishment demanded. Yet
she had accepted his espionage without any protest of word or look. He
had followed her with a very definite object. Had she surmised it,
he wondered? She had not turned her head or vouchsafed even a single
question or remark to him since he had pushed his way through the
trap-door almost at her heels and stepped out on to the leads. Yet it
seemed to him that she must guess. Below them, what seemed to be the phantasm of a painted city, a
wilderness of housetops, of smoke-wreathed spires and chimneys,
stretched away to a murky, blood-red horizon. Even as they stood there,
a deeper color stained the sky, an angry sun began to sink into the
piled up masses of thick, vaporous clouds. The girl watched with an air
of sullen yet absorbed interest. Her companion's eyes were still fixed
wholly and critically upon her. Who was she, he wondered? Why had she
left her own country to come to a city where she seemed to have no
friends, no manner of interest? In that caravansary of the world's
stricken ones she had been an almost unnoticed figure, silent,
indisposed for conversation, not in any obvious manner attractive. Her
clothes, notwithstanding their air of having come from a first-class
dressmaker, were shabby and out of fashion, their extreme neatness
in itself pathetic. She was thin, yet not without a certain buoyant
lightness of movement always at variance with her tired eyes, her
ceaseless air of dejection. And withal she was a rebel. It was written
in her attitude, it was evident in her lowering, militant expression,
the smouldering fire in her eyes proclaimed it. Her long, rather narrow
face was gripped between her hands; her elbows rested upon the brick
parapet. She gazed at that world of blood-red mists, of unshapely,
grotesque buildings, of strange, tawdry colors; she listened to the
medley of sounds--crude, shrill, insistent, something like the groaning
of a world stripped naked--and she had all the time the air of one who
hates the thing she looks upon. Tavernake, whose curiosity concerning his companion remained unappeased,
decided that the moment for speech had arrived. He took a step forward
upon the soft, pulpy leads. Even then he hesitated before he finally
committed himself. About his appearance little was remarkable save the
general air of determination which gave character to his undistinguished
features. He was something above the medium height, broad-set, and with
rather more thick black hair than he knew how to arrange advantageously. He wore a shirt which was somewhat frayed, and an indifferent tie; his
boots were heavy and clumsy; he wore also a suit of ready-made clothes
with the air of one who knew that they were ready-made and was satisfied
with them. People of a nervous or sensitive disposition would, without
doubt, have found him irritating but for a certain nameless gift--an
almost Napoleonic concentration upon the things of the passing moment,
which was in itself impressive and which somehow disarmed criticism. "About that bracelet!" he said at last. She moved her head and looked at him. A young man of less assurance
would have turned and fled. Not so Tavernake. Once sure of his ground
he was immovable. There was murder in her eyes but he was not even
disturbed. "I saw you take it from the little table by the piano, you know,"
he continued. "It was rather a rash thing to do. Mrs. Fitzgerald was
looking for it before I reached the stairs. I expect she has called the
police in by now." Slowly her hand stole into the depths of her pocket and emerged. Something flashed for a moment high over her head. The young man caught
her wrist just in time, caught it in a veritable grip of iron. Then,
indeed, the evil fires flashed from her eyes, her teeth gleamed white,
her bosom rose and fell in a storm of angry, unuttered sobs. She was
dry-eyed and still speechless, but for all that she was a tigress. A
strangely-cut silhouette they formed there upon the housetops, with a
background of empty sky, their feet sinking in the warm leads. "I think I had better take it," he said. "Let go." Her fingers yielded the bracelet--a tawdry, ill-designed affair of
rubies and diamonds. He looked at it disapprovingly. "That's an ugly thing to go to prison for," he remarked, slipping it
into his pocket. "It was a stupid thing to do, anyhow, you know. You
couldn't have got away with it--unless," he added, looking over
the parapet as though struck with a sudden idea, "unless you had a
confederate below." He heard the rush of her skirts and he was only just in time. Nothing,
in fact, but a considerable amount of presence of mind and the full
exercise of a strength which was continually providing surprises for his
acquaintances, was sufficient to save her. Their struggles upon the
very edge of the roof dislodged a brick from the palisading, which went
hurtling down into the street. They both paused to watch it, his arms
still gripping her and one foot pressed against an iron rod. It was
immediately after they had seen it pitch harmlessly into the road that
a new sensation came to this phlegmatic young man. For the first time in
his life, he realized that it was possible to feel a certain pleasurable
emotion in the close grasp of a being of the opposite sex. Consequently,
although she had now ceased to struggle, he kept his arms locked around
her, looking into her face with an interest intense enough, but more
analytical than emotional, as though seeking to discover the meaning of
this curious throbbing of his pulses. She herself, as though exhausted,
remained quite passive, shivering a little in his grasp and breathing
like a hunted animal whose last hour has come. Their eyes met; then she
tore herself away. "You are a hateful person," she said deliberately, "a hateful,
interfering person. I detest you." "I think that we will go down now," he replied. He raised the trap-door and glanced at her significantly. She held her
skirts closely together and passed through it without looking at him. She stepped lightly down the ladder and without hesitation descended
also a flight of uncarpeted attic stairs. Here, however, upon the
landing, she awaited him with obvious reluctance. "Are you going to send for the police?" she asked without looking at
him. "No," he answered. "Why not?" "If I had meant to give you away I should have told Mrs. Fitzgerald at
once that I had seen you take her bracelet, instead of following you out
on to the roof." "Do you mind telling me what you do propose to do, then?" she continued
still without looking at him, still without the slightest note of appeal
in her tone. He withdrew the bracelet from his pocket and balanced it upon his
finger. "I am going to say that I took it for a joke," he declared. She hesitated. "Mrs. Fitzgerald's sense of humor is not elastic," she warned him. "She will be very angry, of course," he assented, "but she will not
believe that I meant to steal it." The girl moved slowly a few steps away. "I suppose that I ought to thank you," she said, still with averted
face and sullen manner. "You have really been very decent. I am much
obliged." "Are you not coming down?" he asked. "Not at present," she answered. "I am going to my room." He looked around the landing on which they stood, at the miserable,
uncarpeted floor, the ill-painted doors on which the long-forgotten
varnish stood out in blisters, the jumble of dilapidated hot-water cans,
a mop, and a medley of brooms and rags all thrown down together in a
corner. "But these are the servants' quarters, surely," he remarked. "They are good enough for me; my room is here," she told him, turning
the handle of one of the doors and disappearing. The prompt turning of
the key sounded, he thought, a little ungracious. With the bracelet in his hand, Tavernake descended three more flights
of stairs and entered the drawing-room of the private hotel conducted
by Mrs. Raithby Lawrence, whose husband, one learned from her frequent
reiteration of the fact, had once occupied a distinguished post in the
Merchant Service of his country. The disturbance following upon the
disappearance of the bracelet was evidently at its height. There were
at least a dozen people in the room, most of whom were standing up. The
central figure of them all was Mrs. Fitzgerald, large and florid, whose
yellow hair with its varied shades frankly admitted its indebtedness to
peroxide; a lady of the dashing type, who had once made her mark in the
music-halls, but was now happily married to a commercial traveler who
was seldom visible. Mrs. Fitzgerald was talking. "In respectable boarding-houses, Mrs. Lawrence," she declared with
great emphasis, "thefts may sometimes take place, I will admit, in the
servants' quarters, and with all their temptations, poor things, it's
not so much to be wondered at. But no such thing as this has ever
happened to me before--to have jewelry taken almost from my person in
the drawing-room of what should be a well-conducted establishment. Not a
servant in the room, remember, from the moment I took it off until I got
up from the piano and found it missing. It's your guests you've got to
look after, Mrs. Lawrence, sorry to say it though I am." Mrs. Lawrence managed here, through sheer loss of breath on the part of
her assailant, to interpose a tearful protest. "I am quite sure," she protested feebly, "that there is not a person
in this house who would dream of stealing anything, however valuable it
was. I am most particular always about references." "Valuable, indeed!" Mrs. Fitzgerald continued with increased volubility. "I'd have you understand that I am not one of those who wear trumpery
jewelry. Thirty-five guineas that bracelet cost me if it cost a penny,
and if my husband were only at home I could show you the receipt." Then there came an interruption of almost tragical interest. Mrs.
Fitzgerald, her mouth still open, her stream of eloquence suddenly
arrested, stood with her artificially darkened eyes riveted upon the
stolid, self-composed figure in the doorway. Every one else was gazing
in the same direction. Tavernake was holding the bracelet in the palm of
his hand. "Thirty-five guineas!" he repeated. "If I had known that it was worth as
much as that, I do not think that I should have dared to touch it." "You--you took it!" Mrs. Fitzgerald gasped. "I am afraid," he admitted, "that it was rather a clumsy joke. I
apologize, Mrs. Fitzgerald. I hope you did not really imagine that it
had been stolen." One was conscious of the little thrill of emotion which marked the
termination of the episode. Most of the people not directly concerned
were disappointed; they were being robbed of their excitement, their
hopes of a tragical denouement were frustrated. Mrs. Lawrence's worn
face plainly showed her relief. The lady with the yellow hair, on the
other hand, who had now succeeded in working herself up into a towering
rage, snatched the bracelet from the young man's fingers and with a
purple flush in her cheeks was obviously struggling with an intense
desire to box his ears. "That's not good enough for a tale!" she exclaimed harshly. "I tell you
I don't believe a word of it. Took it for a joke, indeed! I only wish my
husband were here; he'd know what to do." "Your husband couldn't do much more than get your bracelet back, ma'am,"
Mrs. Lawrence replied with acerbity. "Such a fuss and calling every one
thieves, too! I'd be ashamed to be so suspicious." Mrs. Fitzgerald glared haughtily at her hostess. "It's all very well for those that don't possess any jewelry and don't
know the value of it, to talk," she declared, with her eyes fixed upon
a black jet ornament which hung from the other woman's neck. "What I say
is this, and you may just as well hear it from me now as later. I don't
believe this cock-and-bull story of Mr. Tavernake's. Them as took my
bracelet from that table meant keeping it, only they hadn't the courage. And I'm not referring to you, Mr. Tavernake," the lady continued
vigorously, "because I don't believe you took it, for all your talk
about a joke. And whom you may be shielding it wouldn't take me two
guesses to name, and your motive must be clear to every one. The common
hussy!" "You are exciting yourself unnecessarily, Mrs. Fitzgerald," Tavernake
remarked. "Let me assure you that it was I who took your bracelet from
that table." Mrs. Fitzgerald regarded him scornfully. "Do you expect me to believe a tale like that?" she demanded. "Why not?" Tavernake replied. "It is the truth. I am sorry that you have
been so upset--"

"It is not the truth!" More sensation! Another unexpected entrance! Once more interest in the
affair was revived. After all, the lookers-on felt that they were not to
be robbed of their tragedy. An old lady with yellow cheeks and jet black
eyes leaned forward with her hand to her ear, anxious not to miss a
syllable of what was coming. Tavernake bit his lip; it was the girl from
the roof who had entered the room. "I have no doubt," she continued in a cool, clear tone, "that Mrs.
Fitzgerald's first guess would have been correct. I took the bracelet. I did not take it for a joke, I did not take it because I admire it--I
think it is hideously ugly. I took it because I had no money." She paused and looked around at them all, quietly, yet with something in
her face from which they all shrank. She stood where the light fell full
upon her shabby black gown and dejected-looking hat. The hollows in her
pale cheeks, and the faint rims under her eyes, were clearly manifest;
but notwithstanding her fragile appearance, she held herself with
composure and even dignity. Twenty--thirty seconds must have passed
whilst she stood there, slowly finishing the buttoning of her gloves. No one attempted to break the silence. She dominated them all--they felt
that she had something more to say. Even Mrs. Fitzgerald felt a weight
upon her tongue. "It was a clumsy attempt," she went on. "I should have had no idea where
to raise money upon the thing, but I apologize to you, nevertheless,
Mrs. Fitzgerald, for the anxiety which my removal of your valuable
property must have caused you," she added, turning to the owner of the
bracelet, whose cheeks were once more hot with anger at the contempt in
the girl's tone. "I suppose I ought to thank you, Mr. Tavernake, also,
for your well-meant effort to preserve my character. In future, that
shall be my sole charge. Has any one anything more to say to me before I
go?" Somehow or other, no one had. Mrs. Fitzgerald was irritated and fuming,
but she contented herself with a snort. Her speech was ready enough as
a rule, but there was a look in this girl's eyes from which she was glad
enough to turn away. Mrs. Lawrence made a weak attempt at a farewell. "I am sure," she began, "we are all sorry for what's occurred and that
you must go--not that perhaps it isn't better, under the circumstances,"
she added hastily. "As regards--"

"There is nothing owing to you," the girl interrupted calmly. "You may
congratulate yourself upon that, for if there were you would not get it. Nor have I stolen anything else." "About your luggage?" Mrs. Lawrence asked. "When I need it, I will send for it," the girl replied. She turned her back upon them and before they realized it she was gone. She had, indeed, something of the grand manner. She had come to plead
guilty to a theft and she had left them all feeling a little like
snubbed children. Mrs. Fitzgerald, as soon as the spell of the girl's
presence was removed, was one of the first to recover herself. She felt
herself beginning to grow hot with renewed indignation. "A thief!" she exclaimed looking around the room. "Just an ordinary
self-convicted thief! That's what I call her, and nothing else. And here
we all stood like a lot of ninnies. Why, if I'd done my duty I'd have
locked the door and sent for a policeman." "Too late now, anyway," Mrs. Lawrence declared. "She's gone for good,
and no mistake. Walked right out of the house. I heard her slam the
front door." "And a good job, too," Mrs. Fitzgerald armed. "We don't want any of her
sort here--not those who've got things of value about them. I bet she
didn't leave America for nothing." A little gray-haired lady, who had not as yet spoken, and who very
seldom took part in any discussion at all, looked up from her knitting. She was desperately poor but she had charitable instincts. "I wonder what made her want to steal," she remarked quietly. "A born thief," Mrs. Fitzgerald declared with conviction,--"a real bad
lot. One of your sly-looking ones, I call her." The little lady sighed. "When I was better off," she continued, "I used to help at a soup
kitchen in Poplar. I have never forgotten a certain look we used to see
occasionally in the faces of some of the men and women. I found out what
it meant--it was hunger. Once or twice lately I have passed the girl who
has just gone out, upon the stairs, and she almost frightened me. She
had just the same look in her eyes. I noticed it yesterday--it was just
before dinner, too--but she never came down." "She paid so much for her room and extra for meals," Mrs. Lawrence said
thoughtfully. "She never would have a meal unless she paid for it at the
time. To tell you the truth, I was feeling a bit uneasy about her. She
hasn't been in the dining-room for two days, and from what they tell
me there's no signs of her having eaten anything in her room. As for
getting anything out, why should she? It would be cheaper for her here
than anywhere, if she'd got any money at all." There was an uncomfortable silence. The little old lady with the
knitting looked down the street into the sultry darkness which had
swallowed up the girl. "I wonder whether Mr. Tavernake knows anything about her," some one
suggested. But Tavernake was not in the room. CHAPTER II. A TETE-A-TETE SUPPER

Tavernake caught her up in New Oxford Street and fell at once into step
with her. He wasted no time whatever upon preliminaries. "I should be glad," he said, "if you would tell me your name." Her first glance at him was fierce enough to have terrified a different
sort of man. Upon Tavernake it had absolutely no effect. "You need not unless you like, of course," he went on, "but I wish
to talk to you for a few moments and I thought that it would be more
convenient if I addressed you by name. I do not remember to have heard
it mentioned at Blenheim House, and Mrs. Lawrence, as you know, does not
introduce her guests." By this time they had walked a score or so of paces together. The girl,
after her first furious glance, had taken absolutely no notice of him
except to quicken her pace a little. Tavernake remained by her side,
however, showing not the slightest sense of embarrassment or annoyance. He seemed perfectly content to wait and he had not in the least the
appearance of a man who could be easily shaken off. From a fit of
furious anger she passed suddenly and without warning to a state of half
hysterical amusement. "You are a foolish, absurd person," she declared. "Please go away. I do
not wish you to walk with me." Tavernake remained imperturbable. She remembered suddenly his
intervention on her behalf. "If you insist upon knowing," she said, "my name at Blenheim House was
Beatrice Burnay. I am much obliged to you for what you did for me there,
but that is finished. I do not wish to have any conversation with you,
and I absolutely object to your company. Please leave me at once." "I am sorry," he answered, "but that is not possible." "Not possible?" she repeated, wonderingly. He shook his head. "You have no money, you have eaten no dinner, and I do not believe that
you have any idea where you are going," he declared, deliberately. Her face was once more dark with anger. "Even if that were the truth," she insisted, "tell me what concern it is
of yours? Your reminding me of these facts is simply an impertinence." "I am sorry that you look upon it in that light," he remarked, still
without the least sign of discomposure. "We will, if you do not mind,
waive the discussion for the moment. Do you prefer a small restaurant or
a corner in a big one? There is music at Frascati's but there are not so
many people in the smaller ones." She turned half around upon the pavement and looked at him steadfastly. His personality was at last beginning to interest her. His square jaw
and measured speech were indices of a character at least unusual. She
recognized certain invincible qualities under an exterior absolutely
commonplace. "Are you as persistent about everything in life?" she asked him. "Why not?" he replied. "I try always to be consistent." "What is your name?" "Leonard Tavernake," he answered, promptly. "Are you well off--I mean moderately well off?" "I have a quite sufficient income." "Have you any one dependent upon you?" "Not a soul," he declared. "I am my own master in every sense of the
word." She laughed in an odd sort of way. "Then you shall pay for your persistence," she said,--"I mean that I may
as well rob you of a sovereign as the restaurant people." "You must tell me now where you would like to go to," he insisted. "It
is getting late." "I do not like these foreign places," she replied. "I should prefer to
go to the grill-room of a good restaurant." "We will take a taxicab," he announced. "You have no objection?" She shrugged her shoulders. "If you have the money and don't mind spending it," she said, "I will
admit that I have had all the walking I want. Besides, the toe of my
boot is worn through and I find it painful. Yesterday I tramped ten
miles trying to find a man who was getting up a concert party for the
provinces." "And did you find him?" he asked, hailing a cab. "Yes, I found him," she answered, indifferently. "We went through the
usual programme. He heard me sing, tried to kiss me and promised to let
me know. Nobody ever refuses anything in my profession, you see. They
promise to let you know." "Are you a singer, then, or an actress?" "I am neither," she told him. "I said 'my profession' because it is the
only one to which I have ever tried to belong. I have never succeeded in
obtaining an engagement in this country. I do not suppose that even if I
had persevered I should ever have had one." "You have given up the idea, then," he remarked. "I have given it up," she admitted, a little curtly. "Please do not
think, because I am allowing you to be my companion for a short time,
that you may ask me questions. How fast these taxies go!" They drew up at their destination--a well-known restaurant in Regent
Street. He paid the cabman and they descended a flight of stairs into
the grill-room. "I hope that this place will suit you," he said. "I have not much
experience of restaurants." She looked around and nodded. "Yes," she replied, "I think that it will do." She was very shabbily dressed, and he, although his appearance was by no
means ordinary, was certainly not of the type which inspires
immediate respect in even the grill-room of a fashionable restaurant. Nevertheless, they received prompt and almost officious service. Tavernake, as he watched his companion's air, her manner of seating
herself and accepting the attentions of the head waiter, felt that
nameless impulse which was responsible for his having followed her
from Blenheim House and which he could only call curiosity, becoming
stronger. An exceedingly matter-of-fact person, he was also by instinct
and habit observant. He never doubted but that she belonged to a class
of society from which the guests at the boarding-house where they had
both lived were seldom recruited, and of which he himself knew little. He was not in the least a snob, this young man, but he found the fact
interesting. Life with him was already very much the same as a ledger
account--a matter of debits and credits, and he had never failed to
include among the latter that curious gift of breeding for which he
himself, denied it by heritage, had somehow substituted a complete and
exceedingly rare naturalness. "I should like," she announced, laying down the carte, "a fried sole,
some cutlets, an ice, and black coffee." The waiter bowed. "And for Monsieur?" Tavernake glanced at his watch; it was already ten o'clock. "I will take the same," he declared. "And to drink?" She seemed indifferent. "Any light wine," she answered, carelessly, "white or red." Tavernake took up the wine list and ordered sauterne. They were left
alone in their corner for a few minutes, almost the only occupants of
the place. "You are sure that you can afford this?" she asked, looking at him
critically. "It may cost you a sovereign or thirty shillings." He studied the prices on the menu. "I can afford it quite well and I have plenty of money with me," he
assured her, "but I do not think that it will cost more than eighteen
shillings. While we are waiting for the sole, shall we talk? I can tell
you, if you choose to hear, why I followed you from the boardinghouse." "I don't mind listening to you," she told him, "or I will talk with
you about anything you like. There is only one subject which I cannot
discuss; that subject is myself and my own doings." Tavernake was silent for a moment. "That makes conversation a bit difficult," he remarked. She leaned back
in her chair. "After this evening," she said, "I go out of your life as completely and
finally as though I had never existed. I have a fancy to take my poor
secrets with me. If you wish to talk, tell me about yourself. You have
gone out of your way to be kind to me. I wonder why. It doesn't seem to
be your role." He smiled slowly. His face was fashioned upon broad lines and the
relaxing of his lips lightened it wonderfully. He had good teeth,
clear gray eyes, and coarse black hair which he wore a trifle long; his
forehead was too massive for good looks. "No," he admitted, "I do not think that benevolence is one of my
characteristics." Her dark eyes were turned full upon him; her red lips, redder than ever
they seemed against the pallor of her cheeks and her deep brown hair,
curled slightly. There was something almost insolent in her tone. "You understand, I hope," she continued, "that you have nothing whatever
to look for from me in return for this sum which you propose to expend
for my entertainment?" "I understand that," he replied. "Not even gratitude," she persisted. "I really do not feel grateful to
you. You are probably doing this to gratify some selfish interest or
curiosity. I warn you that I am quite incapable of any of the proper
sentiments of life." "Your gratitude would be of no value to me whatever," he assured her. She was still not wholly satisfied. His complete stolidity frustrated
every effort she made to penetrate beneath the surface. "If I believed," she went on, "that you were one of those men--the
world is full of them, you know--who will help a woman with a reasonable
appearance so long as it does not seriously interfere with their own
comfort--"

"Your sex has nothing whatever to do with it," he interrupted. "As to
your appearance, I have not even considered it. I could not tell you
whether you are beautiful or ugly--I am no judge of these matters. What
I have done, I have done because it pleased me to do it." "Do you always do what pleases you?" she asked. "Nearly always." She looked him over again attentively, with an interest obviously
impersonal, a trifle supercilious. "I suppose," she remarked, "you consider yourself one of the strong
people of the world?" "I do not know about that," he answered. "I do not often think about
myself." "I mean," she explained, "that you are one of those people who struggle
hard to get just what they want in life." His jaw suddenly tightened and she saw the likeness to Napoleon. "I do more than struggle," he affirmed, "I succeed. If I make up my mind
to do a thing, I do it; if I make up my mind to get a thing, I get it. It means hard work sometimes, but that is all." For the first time, a really natural interest shone out of her eyes. The half sulky contempt with which she had received his advances passed
away. She became at that moment a human being, self-forgetting, the
heritage of her charms--for she really had a curious but very poignant
attractiveness--suddenly evident. It was only a momentary lapse and it
was entirely wasted. Not even one of the waiters happened to be looking
that way, and Tavernake was thinking wholly of himself. "It is a good deal to say--that," she remarked, reflectively. "It is a good deal but it is not too much," he declared. "Every man who
takes life seriously should say it." Then she laughed--actually laughed--and he had a vision of flashing
white teeth, of a mouth breaking into pleasant curves, of dark mirth-lit
eyes, lustreless no longer, provocative, inspiring. A vague impression
as of something pleasant warmed his blood. It was a rare thing for him
to be so stirred, but even then it was not sufficient to disturb the
focus of his thoughts. "Tell me," she demanded, "what do you do? What is your profession or
work?" "I am with a firm of auctioneers and estate agents," he answered
readily,--"Messrs. Dowling, Spence & Company the name is. Our offices
are in Waterloo Place." "You find it interesting?" "Of course," he answered. "Interesting? Why not? I work at it." "Are you a partner?" "No," he admitted. "Six years ago I was a carpenter; then I became an
errand boy in Mr. Dowling's office I had to learn the business, you see. To-day I am a sort of manager. In eighteen months' time--perhaps before
that if they do not offer me a partnership--I shall start for myself." Once more the subtlest of smiles flickered at the corners of her lips. "Do they know yet?" she asked, with faint irony. "Not yet," he replied, with absolute seriousness. "They might tell me
to go, and I have a few things to learn yet. I would rather make
experiments for some one else than for myself. I can use the results
later; they will help me to make money." She laughed softly and wiped the tears out of her eyes. They were really
very beautiful eyes notwithstanding the dark rims encircling them. "If only I had met you before!" she murmured. "Why?" he asked. She shook her head. "Don't ask me," she begged. "It would not be good for your conceit, if
you have any, to tell you." "I have no conceit and I am not inquisitive," he said, "but I do not see
why you laughed." Their period of waiting came to an end at this point. The fish was
brought and their conversation became disjointed. In the silence which
followed, the old shadow crept over her face. Once only it lifted. It
was while they were waiting for the cutlets. She leaned towards him, her
elbows upon the tablecloth, her face supported by her fingers. "I think that it is time we left these generalities," she insisted, "and
you told me something rather more personal, something which I am very
anxious to know. Tell me exactly why so self-centered a person as
yourself should interest himself in a fellow-creature at all. It seems
odd to me." "It is odd," he admitted, frankly. "I will try to explain it to you but
it will sound very bald, and I do not think that you will understand. I
watched you a few nights ago out on the roof at Blenheim House. You were
looking across the house-tops and you didn't seem to be seeing anything
at all really, and yet all the time I knew that you were seeing things I
couldn't, you were understanding and appreciating something which I knew
nothing of, and it worried me. I tried to talk to you that evening, but
you were rude." "You really are a curious person," she remarked. "Are you always
worried, then, if you find that some one else is seeing things or
understanding things which are outside your comprehension?" "Always," he replied promptly. "You are too far-reaching," she affirmed. "You want to gather everything
into your life. You cannot. You will only be unhappy if you try. No man
can do it. You must learn your limitations or suffer all your days." "Limitations!" He repeated the words with measureless scorn. "If I learn
them at all," he declared, with unexpected force, "it will be with scars
and bruises, for nothing else will content me." "We are, I should say, almost the same age," she remarked slowly. "I am twenty-five," he told her. "I am twenty-two," she said. "It seems strange that two people whose
ideas of life are as far apart as the Poles should have come together
like this even for a moment. I do not understand it at all. Did you
expect that I should tell you just what I saw in the clouds that night?" "No," he answered, "not exactly. I have spoken of my first interest in
you only. There are other things. I told a lie about the bracelet and I
followed you out of the boarding-house and I brought you here, for some
other for quite a different reason." "Tell me what it was," she demanded. "I do not know it myself," he declared solemnly. "I really and honestly
do not know it. It is because I hoped that it might come to me while
we were together, that I am here with you at this moment. I do not like
impulses which I do not understand." She laughed at him a little scornfully. "After all," she said, "although it may not have dawned upon you yet,
it is probably the same wretched reason. You are a man and you have the
poison somewhere in your blood. I am really not bad-looking, you know." He looked at her critically. She was a little over-slim, perhaps, but
she was certainly wonderfully graceful. Even the poise of her head, the
manner in which she leaned back in her chair, had its individuality. Her
features, too, were good, though her mouth had grown a trifle hard. For
the first time the dead pallor of her cheeks was relieved by a touch of
color. Even Tavernake realized that there were great possibilities about
her. Nevertheless, he shook his head. "I do not agree with you in the least," he asserted firmly. "Your looks
have nothing to do with it. I am sure that it is not that." "Let me cross-examine you," she suggested. "Think carefully now. Does it
give you no pleasure at all to be sitting here alone with me?" He answered her deliberately; it was obvious that he was speaking the
truth. "I am not conscious that it does," he declared. "The only feeling I am
aware of at the present moment in connection with you, is the curiosity
of which I have already spoken." She leaned a little towards him, extending her very shapely fingers. Once more the smile at her lips transformed her face. "Look at my hand," she said. "Tell me--wouldn't you like to hold it just
for a minute, if I gave it you?" Her eyes challenged his, softly and yet imperiously. His whole
attention, however, seemed to be absorbed by her finger-nails. It seemed
strange to him that a girl in her straits should have devoted so much
care to her hands. "No," he answered deliberately, "I have no wish to hold your hand. Why
should I?" "Look at me," she insisted. He did so without embarrassment or hesitation,--it was more than ever
apparent that he was entirely truthful. She leaned back in her chair,
laughing softly to herself. "Oh, my friend Mr. Leonard Tavernake," she exclaimed, "if you were not
so crudely, so adorably, so miraculously truthful, what a prig,
prig, prig, you would be! The cutlets at last, thank goodness! Your
cross-examination is over. I pronounce you 'Not Guilty!"' During the progress of the rest of the meal, they talked very little. At
its conclusion, Tavernake discharged the bill, having carefully checked
each item and tipped the waiter the exact amount which the man had the
right to expect. They ascended the stairs together to the street, the
girl lingering a few steps behind. On the pavement her fingers touched
his arm. "I wonder, would you mind driving me down to the Embankment?" she asked
almost humbly. "It was so close down there and I want some air." This was an extravagance which he had scarcely contemplated, but he did
not hesitate. He called a taxicab and seated himself by her side. Her
manner seemed to have grown quieter and more subdued, her tone was no
longer semi-belligerent. "I will not keep you much longer," she promised. "I suppose I am not so
strong as I used to be. I have had scarcely anything to eat for two
days and conversation has become an unknown luxury. I think--it seems
absurd--but I think that I am feeling a little faint." "The air will soon revive you," he said. "As to our conversation, I
am disappointed. I think that you are very foolish not to tell me more
about yourself." She closed her eyes, ignoring his remark. They turned presently into a
narrower thoroughfare. She leaned towards him. "You have been very good to me," she admitted almost timidly, "and I am
afraid that I have not been very gracious. We shall not see one another
again after this evening. I wonder--would you care to kiss me?" He opened his lips and closed them again. He sat quite still, his eyes
fixed upon the road ahead, until he had strangled something absolutely
absurd, something unrecognizable. "I would rather not," he decided quietly. "I know you mean to be kind
but that sort of thing--well, I don't think I understand it. Besides,"
he added with a sudden naive relief, as he clutched at a fugitive but
plausible thought, "if I did you would not believe the things which I
have been telling you." He had a curious idea that she was disappointed as she turned her head
away, but she said nothing. Arrived at the Embankment, the cab came
slowly to a standstill. The girl descended. There was something new in
her manner; she looked away from him when she spoke. "You had better leave me here," she said. "I am going to sit upon that
seat." Then came those few seconds' hesitation which were to count for a
great deal in his life. The impulse which bade him stay with her was
unaccountable but it conquered. "If you do not object," he remarked with some stiffness, "I should like
to sit here with you for a little time. There is certainly a breeze." She made no comment but walked on. He paid the man and followed her to
the empty seat. Opposite, some illuminated advertisements blazed their
unsightly message across the murky sky. Between the two curving rows
of yellow lights the river flowed--black, turgid, hopeless. Even here,
though they had escaped from its absolute thrall, the far-away roar of
the city beat upon their ears. She listened to it for a moment and then
pressed her hands to the side of her head. "Oh, how I hate it!" she moaned. "The voices, always the voices,
calling, threatening, beating you away! Take my hands, Leonard
Tavernake,--hold me." He did as she bade him, clumsily, as yet without comprehension. "You are not well," he muttered. Her eyes opened and a flash of her old manner returned. She smiled at
him, feebly but derisively. "You foolish boy!" she cried. "Can't you see that I am dying? Hold my
hands tightly and watch--watch! Here is one more thing you can see--that
you cannot understand." He saw the empty phial slip from her sleeve and fall on to the pavement. With a cry he sprang up and, carrying her in his arms, rushed out into
the road. CHAPTER III. AN UNPLEASANT MEETING

It was a quarter past eleven and the theatres were disgorging their
usual nightly crowds. The most human thoroughfare in any of the world's
great cities was at its best and brightest. Everywhere commissionaires
were blowing their whistles, the streets were thronged with
slowly-moving vehicles, the pavements were stirring with life. The
little crowd which had gathered in front of the chemist's shop was swept
away. After all, none of them knew exactly what they had been waiting
for. There was a rumor that a woman had fainted or had met with an
accident. Certainly she had been carried into the shop and into the
inner room, the door of which was still closed. A few passers-by had
gathered together and stared and waited for a few minutes, but had
finally lost interest and melted away. A human thoroughfare, this,
indeed, one of the pulses of the great city beating time night and
day to the tragedies of life. The chemist's assistant, with impassive
features, was serving a couple of casual customers from behind the
counter. Only a few yards away, beyond the closed door, the chemist
himself and a hastily summoned doctor fought with Death for the body of
the girl who lay upon the floor, faint moans coming every now and then
from her blue lips. Tavernake, whose forced inaction during that terrible struggle had
become a burden to him, slipped softly from the room as soon as the
doctor had whispered that the acute crisis was over, and passed
through the shop out into the street, a solemn, dazed figure among the
light-hearted crowd. Even in those grim moments, the man's individualism
spoke up to him. He was puzzled at his own action, He asked himself
a question--not, indeed, with regret, but with something more than
curiosity and actual selfprobing--as though, by concentrating his mind
upon his recent course of action, he would be able to understand the
motives which had influenced him. Why had he chosen to burden himself
with the care of this desperate young woman? Supposing she lived, what
was to become of her? He had acquired a certain definite responsibility
with regard to her future, for whatever the doctor and his assistant
might do, it was his own promptitude and presence of mind which had
given her the first chance of life. Without a doubt, he had behaved
foolishly. Why not vanish into the crowd and have done with it? What was
it to him, after all, whether this girl lived or died? He had done his
duty--more than his duty. Why not disappear now and let her take her
chance? His common sense spoke to him loudly; such thoughts as these
beat upon his brain. Just for once in his life, however, his common sense exercised an
altogether subordinate position. He knew very well, even while he
listened to these voices, that he was only counting the minutes until he
could return. Having absolutely decided that the only reasonable course
left for him to pursue was to return home and leave the girl to her
fate, he found himself back inside the shop within a quarter of an hour. The chemist had just come out from the inner room, and looked up at his
entrance. "She'll do now," he announced. Tavernake nodded. He was amazed at his own sense of relief. "I am glad," he declared. The doctor joined them, his black bag in his hand, prepared for
departure. He addressed himself to Tavernake as the responsible person. "The young lady will be all right now," he said, "but she may be rather
queer for a day or two. Fortunately, she made the usual mistake of
people who are ignorant of medicine and its effects--she took enough
poison to kill a whole household. You had better take care of her, young
man," he added dryly. "She'll be getting into trouble if she tries this
sort of thing again." "Will she need any special attention during the next few days?" Tavernake asked. "The circumstances under which I brought her here are a
little unusual, and I am not quite sure--"

"Take her home to bed," the doctor interrupted, "and you'll find she'll
sleep it off. She seems to have a splendid constitution, although she
has let herself run down. If you need any further advice and your own
medical man is not available, I will come and see her if you send for
me. Camden, my name is; telephone number 734 Gerrard." "I should be glad to know the amount of your fee, if you please,"
Tavernake said. "My fee is two guineas," the doctor answered. Tavernake paid him and he went away. Already the shadow of the
tragedy was passing. The chemist had joined his assistant and was busy
dispensing drugs behind his counter. "You can go in to the young lady, if you like," he remarked to
Tavernake. "I dare say she'll feel better to have some one with her." Tavernake passed slowly into the inner room, closing the door behind
him. He was scarcely prepared for so piteous a sight. The girl's face
was white and drawn as she lay upon the couch to which they had lifted
her. The fighting spirit was dead; she was in a state of absolute and
complete collapse. She opened her eyes at his coning, but closed them
again almost immediately--less, it seemed, from any consciousness of his
presence than from sheer exhaustion. "I am glad that you are better," he whispered crossing the room to her
side. "Thank you," she murmured almost inaudibly. Tavernake stood looking down upon her, and his sense of perplexity
increased. Stretched on the hard horsehair couch she seemed, indeed,
pitifully thin and younger than her years. The scowl, which had passed
from her face, had served in some measure as a disguise. "We shall have to leave here in a few minutes," he said, softly. "They
will want to close the shop." "I am so sorry," she faltered, "to have given you all this trouble. You
must send me to a hospital or the workhouse--anywhere." "You are sure that there are no friends to whom I can send?" he asked. "There is no one!" She closed her eyes and Tavernake sat quite still on the end of
her couch, his elbow upon his knee, his head resting upon his hand. Presently, the rush of customers having ceased, the chemist came in. "I think, if I were you, I should take her home now," he remarked. "She'll probably drop off to sleep very soon and wake up much stronger. I have made up a prescription here in case of exhaustion." Tavernake stared at the man. Take her home! His sense of humor was faint
enough but he found himself trying to imagine the faces of Mrs. Lawrence
or Mrs. Fitzgerald if he should return with her to the boardinghouse at
such an hour. "I suppose you know where she lives?" the chemist inquired curiously. "Of course," Tavernake assented. "You are quite right. I dare say she is
strong enough now to walk as far as the pavement." He paid the bill for the medicines, and they lifted her from the couch. Between them she walked slowly into the outer shop. Then she began to
drag on their arms and she looked up at the chemist a little piteously. "May I sit down for a moment?" she begged. "I feel faint." They placed her in one of the cane chairs facing the door. The chemist
mixed her some sal volatile. "I am sorry," she murmured, "so sorry. In a few minutes--I shall be
better." Outside, the throng of pedestrians had grown less, but from the great
restaurant opposite a constant stream of motor-cars and carriages was
slowly bringing away the supper guests. Tavernake stood at the door,
watching them idly. The traffic was momentarily blocked and almost
opposite to him a motor-car, the simple magnificence of which filled him
with wonder, had come to a standstill. The chauffeur and footman both
wore livery which was almost white. Inside a swinging vase of flowers
was suspended from the roof. A man and a woman leaned back in luxurious
easy-chairs. The man was dark and had the look of a foreigner. The woman
was very fair. She wore a long ermine cloak and a tiara of pearls. Tavernake, whose interest in the passing throngs was entirely
superficial, found himself for some reason curiously attracted by this
glimpse into a world of luxury of which he knew nothing; attracted, too,
by the woman's delicate face with its uncommon type of beauty. Their
eyes met as he stood there, stolid and motionless, framed in the
doorway. Tavernake continued to stare, unmindful, perhaps unconscious,
of the rudeness of his action. The woman, after a moment, glanced away
at the shopwindow. A sudden thought seemed to strike her. She spoke
through the tube at her side and turned to her companion. Meanwhile, the
footman, leaning from his place, held out his arm in warning and the
car was slowly backed to the side of the pavement. The lady felt for a
moment in a bag of white satin which lay upon the round table in front
of her, and handed a slip of paper through the open window to the
servant who had already descended and was standing waiting. He came at
once towards the shop, passing Tavernake, who remained in the door-way. "Will you make this up at once, please?" he directed, handing the paper
across to the chemist. The chemist took it in his hand and turned away mechanically toward the
dispensing room. Suddenly he paused, and, looking back, shook his head. "For whom is this prescription required?" he asked. "For my mistress," the man answered. "Her name is there." "Where is she?" "Outside; she is waiting for it." "If she really wants this made up to-night," the chemist declared, "she
must come in and sign the book." The footman looked across the counter, for a moment, a little blankly. "Am I to tell her that?" he inquired. "It's only a sleeping draught. Her
regular chemist makes it up all right." "That may be," the man behind the counter replied, "but, you see, I am
not her regular chemist. You had better go and tell her so." The footman departed upon his errand without a glance at the girl who
was sitting within a few feet of him. "I am very sorry, madam," he announced to his mistress, "that the
chemist declines to make up the prescription unless you sign the book." "Very well, then, I will come," she declared. The woman, handed from the automobile by her servant, lifted her white
satin skirts in both hands and stepped lightly across the pavement. Tavernake stood on one side to let her pass. She seemed to him to be,
indeed, a creature of that other world of which he knew nothing. Her
slow, graceful movements, the shimmer of her skirt, her silk stockings,
the flashing of the diamond buckles upon her shoes, the faint perfume
from her clothes, the soft touch of her ermine as she swept by--all
these things were indeed strange to him. His eyes followed her with rapt
interest as she approached the counter. "You wish me to sign for my prescription?" she asked the chemist. "I
will do so, with pleasure, if it is necessary, only you must not keep me
waiting long." Her voice was very low and very musical; the slight smile which had
parted her tired lips, was almost pathetic. Even the chemist felt
himself to be a human being. He turned at once to his shelves and began
to prepare the drug. "I am sorry, madam, that it should have been necessary to fetch you in,"
he said, apologetically. "My assistant will give you the book if you
will kindly sign it." The assistant dived beneath the counter, reappearing almost immediately
with a black volume and a pen and ink. The chemist was engrossed upon
his task; Tavernake's eyes were still riveted upon this woman, who
seemed to him the most beautiful thing he had ever seen in life. No one
was watching the girl. The chemist was the first to see her face, and
that only in a looking glass. He stopped in the act of mixing his drug
and turned slowly round. His expression was such that they all followed
his eyes. The girl was sitting up in her chair, with a sudden spot of
color burning in her cheeks, her fingers gripping the counter as though
for support, her eyes dilated, unnatural, burning in their white setting
with an unholy fire. The lady was the last to turn her head, and the
bottle of eau-de-cologne which she had taken up from the counter,
slipped with a crash to the floor. All expression seemed to pass from
her face; the very life seemed drawn from it. Those who were watching
her saw suddenly an old woman looking at something of which she was
afraid. The girl seemed to find an unnatural strength. She dragged herself up
and turned wildly to Tavernake. "Take me away," she cried, in a low voice. "Take me away at once." The woman at the counter did not speak. Tavernake stepped quickly
forward and then hesitated. The girl was on her feet now and she
clutched at his arms. Her eyes besought him. "You must take me away, please," she begged, hoarsely. "I am well
now--quite well. I can walk." Tavernake's lack of imagination stood him in good stead then. He simply
did what he was told, did it in perfectly mechanical fashion, without
asking any questions. With the girl leaning heavily upon his arm, he
stepped into the street and almost immediately into a passing taxicab
which he had hailed from the threshold of the shop. As he closed the
door, he glanced behind him. The woman was standing there, half turned
towards him, still with that strange, stony look upon her lifeless
face. The chemist was bending across the counter towards her, wondering,
perhaps, if another incident were to be drawn into his night's work. The
eau-de-cologne was running in a little stream across the floor. "Where to, sir?" the taxicab driver asked Tavernake. "Where to?" Tavernake repeated. The girl was clinging to his arm. "Tell him to drive away from here," she whispered, "to drive anywhere,
but away from here." "Drive straight on," Tavernake directed, "along Fleet Street and up
Holborn. I will give you the address later on." The man changed his speed and their pace increased. Tavernake sat quite
still, dumfounded by these amazing happenings. The girl by his side was
clutching his arm, sobbing a little hysterically, holding him all the
time as though in terror. CHAPTER IV. BREAKFAST WITH BEATRICE


The girl, awakened, perhaps, by the passing of some heavy cart along
the street below, or by the touch of the sunbeam which lay across
her pillow, first opened her eyes and then, after a preliminary stare
around, sat up in bed. The events of the previous night slowly shaped
themselves in her mind. She remembered everything up to the commencement
of that drive in the taxicab. Sometime after that she must have fainted. And now--what had become of her? Where was she? She looked around her in ever-increasing surprise. Certainly it was the
strangest room she had ever been in. The floor was dusty and innocent
of any carpet; the window was bare and uncurtained. The walls were
unpapered but covered here and there with strange-looking plans, one of
them taking up nearly the whole side of the room--a very rough piece
of work with little dabs of blue paint here and there, and shadings and
diagrams which were absolutely unintelligible. She herself was lying
upon a battered iron bedstead, and she was wearing a very coarse
nightdress. Her own clothes were folded up and lay upon a piece of brown
paper on the floor by the side of the bed. To all appearance, the room
was entirely unfurnished, except that in the middle of it was a hideous
papier mache screen. After her first bewildered inspection of her surroundings, it was upon
this screen that her attention was naturally directed. Obviously it
must be there to conceal something. Very carefully she leaned out of bed
until she was able to see around the corner of it. Then her heart gave a
little jump and she was only just able to stifle an exclamation of fear. Some one was sitting there--a man--sitting on a battered cane chair,
bending over a roll of papers which were stretched upon a rude deal
table. She felt her cheeks grow hot. It must be Tavernake! Where had he
brought her? What did his presence in the room mean? The bed creaked heavily as she regained her former position. A voice
came to her from behind the screen. She knew it at once. It was
Tavernake's. "Are you awake?" he asked. "Yes," she answered,--"yes, I am awake. Is that Mr. Tavernake? Where am
I, please?" "First of all, are you better?" he inquired. "I am better," she assured him, sitting up in bed and pulling the
clothes to her chin. "I am quite well now. Tell me at once where I am
and what you are doing over there." "There is nothing to be terrified about," Tavernake answered. "To all
effects and purposes, I am in another room. When I move to the door,
as I shall do directly, I shall drag the screen with me. I can promise
you--"

"Please explain everything," she begged, "quickly. I am
most--uncomfortable." "At half-past twelve this morning," Tavernake said, "I found myself
alone in a taxicab with you, without any luggage or any idea where to
go to. To make matters worse, you fainted. I tried two hotels but they
refused to take you in; they were probably afraid that you were going
to be ill. Then I thought of this room. I am employed, as you know, by
a firm of estate agents. I do a great deal of work on my own account,
however, which I prefer to do in secret, and unknown to any one. For
that reason, I hired this room a year ago and I come here most evenings
to work. Sometimes I stay late, so last month I bought a small bedstead
and had it fixed up here. There is a woman who comes in to clean the
room. I went to her house last night and persuaded her to come here. She undressed you and put you to bed. I am sorry that my presence
here distresses you, but it is a large building and quite empty at
night-time. I thought you might wake up and be frightened, so I borrowed
this screen from the woman and have been sitting here." "What, all night?" she gasped. "Certainly," he answered. "The woman could not stop herself and this
is not a residential building at all. All the lower floors are let for
offices and warehouses, and there is no one else in the place until
eight o'clock." She put her hands to her head and sat quite still for a moment or two. It was really hard to take everything in. "Aren't you very sleepy?" she asked, irrelevantly. "Not very," he replied. "I dozed for an hour, a little time ago. Since
then I have been looking through some plans which interest me very
much." "Can I get up?" she inquired, timidly. "If you feel strong enough, please do," he answered, with manifest
relief. "I shall move towards the door, dragging the screen in front of
me. You will find a brush and comb and some hairpins on your clothes. I
could not think of anything else to get for you, but, if you will dress,
we will walk to London Bridge Station, which is just across the way,
and while I order some breakfast you can go into the ladies' room and do
your hair properly. I did my best to get hold of a looking-glass, but it
was quite impossible." The girl's sense of humor was suddenly awake. She had hard work not to
scream. He had evidently thought out all these details in painstaking
fashion, one by one. "Thank you," she said. "I will get up immediately, if you will do as you
say." He clutched the screen from the inside and dragged it towards the door. On the threshold, he spoke to her once more. "I shall sit upon the stairs just outside," he announced. "I sha'n't be more than five minutes," she assured him. She sprang out of bed and dressed quickly. There was nothing beyond
where the screen had been except a table covered with plans, and a
particularly hard cane chair which she dragged over for her own use. As she dressed, she began to realize how much this matter-of-fact,
unimpressionable young man had done for her during the last few hours. The reflection affected her in a curious manner. She became afflicted
with a shyness which she had not felt when he was in the room. When at
last she had finished her toilette and opened the door, she was almost
tongue-tied. He was sitting on the top step, with his back against the
landing, and his eyes were closed. He opened them with a little start,
however, as soon as he heard her approach. "I am glad you have not been long," he remarked. "I want to be at my
office at nine o'clock and I must go and have a bath somewhere. These
stairs are rather steep. Please walk carefully." She followed him in silence down three flights of stone steps. On each
landing there were names upon the doors--two firms of hop merchants,
a solicitor, and a commission agent. The ground floor was some sort of
warehouse, from which came a strong smell of leather. Tavernake opened the outside door with a small key and they passed into
the street. "London Bridge Station is just across the way," he said. "The
refreshment room will be open and we can get some breakfast at once." "What time is it?" she asked. "About half-past seven." She walked by his side quite meekly, and although there were many things
which she was longing to say, she remained absolutely without the power
of speech. Except that he was looking a little crumpled, there was
nothing whatever in his appearance to indicate that he had been up all
night. He looked exactly as he had done on the previous day, he
seemed even quite unconscious that there was anything unusual in their
relations. As soon as they arrived at the station, he pointed to the
ladies' waiting-room. "If you will go in and arrange your hair there," he said, "I will go and
order breakfast and have a shave. I will be back here in about twenty
minutes. You had better take this." He offered her a shilling and she accepted it without hesitation. As
soon as he had gone, however, she looked at the coin in her hand in
blank wonder. She had accepted it from him with perfect naturalness and
without even saying "Thank you!" With a queer little laugh, she pushed
open the swinging doors and made her way into the waiting-room. In hardly more than a quarter of an hour she emerged, to find Tavernake
waiting for her. He had retied his tie, bought a fresh collar, had been
shaved. She, too, had improved her appearance. "Breakfast is waiting this way," he announced. She followed him obediently and they sat down at a small table in the
station refreshment-room. "Mr. Tavernake," she asked, suddenly, "I must ask you something. Has
anything like this ever happened to you before?" "Nothing," he assured her, with some emphasis. "You seem to take everything so much as a matter of course," she
protested. "Why not?" "Oh, I don't know," she replied, a little feebly. "Only--"

She found relief in a sudden and perfectly natural laugh. "Come," he said, "that is better. I am glad that you feel like
laughing." "As a matter of fact," she declared, "I feel much more like crying. Don't you know that you were very foolish last night? You ought to have
left me alone. Why didn't you? You would have saved yourself a great
deal of trouble." He nodded, as though that point of view did, in some degree, commend
itself to him. "Yes," he admitted, "I suppose I should. I do not, even now, understand
why I interfered. I can only remember that it didn't seem possible not
to at the time. I suppose one must have impulses," he added, with a
little frown. "The reflection," she remarked, helping herself to another roll, "seems
to annoy you." "It does," he confessed. "I do not like to feel impelled to do anything
the reason for which is not apparent. I like to do just the things which
seem likely to work out best for myself." "How you must hate me!" she murmured. "No, I do not hate you," he replied, "but, on the other hand, you have
certainly been a trouble to me. First of all, I told a falsehood at the
boarding-house, and I prefer always to tell the truth when I can. Then
I followed you out of the house, which I disliked doing very much, and
I seem to have spent a considerable portion of the time since, in your
company, under somewhat extraordinary circumstances. I do not understand
why I have done this." "I suppose it is because you are a very good-hearted person," she
remarked. "But I am not," he assured her, calmly. "I am nothing of the sort. I
have very little sympathy with good-hearted people. I think the world
goes very much better when every one looks after himself, and the people
who are not competent to do so go to the wall." "It sounds a trifle selfish," she murmured. "Perhaps it is. I have an idea that if I could phrase it differently it
would become philosophy." "Perhaps," she suggested, smiling across the table at him, "you have
really done all this because you like me." "I am quite sure that it is not that," he declared. "I feel an interest
in you for which I cannot account, but it does not seem to me to be
a personal one. Last night," he continued, "when I was sitting there
waiting, I tried to puzzle it all out. I came to the conclusion that it
was because you represent something which I do not understand. I am very
curious and it always interests me to learn. I believe that must be the
secret of my interest in you." "You are very complimentary," she told him, mockingly. "I wonder what
there is in the world which I could teach so superior a person as Mr. Tavernake?" He took her question quite seriously. "I wonder what there is myself," he answered. "And yet, in a way, I
think I know." "Your imagination should come to the rescue," she remarked. "I have no imagination," he declared, gloomily. They were silent for several minutes; she was still studying him. "I wonder you don't ask me any questions about myself," she said,
abruptly. "There is only one thing," he answered, "concerning which I am in the
least curious. Last night in the chemist's shop--"

"Don't!" she begged him, with suddenly whitening face. "Don't speak of
that!" "Very well," he replied, indifferently. "I thought that you were rather
inviting my questions. You need not be afraid of any more. I really am
not curious about personal matters; I find that my own life absorbs all
my interests." They had finished breakfast and he paid the bill. She began to put on
her gloves. "Whatever happens to me," she said, "I shall never forget that you have
been very kind." She hesitated for a moment and then she seemed to realize more
completely how really kind he had been. There had been a certain crude
delicacy about his actions which she had under-appreciated. She leaned
towards him. There was nothing left this morning of that disfiguring
sullenness. Her mouth was soft; her eyes were bright, almost appealing. If Tavernake had been a judge of woman's looks, he must certainly have
found her attractive. "I am very, very grateful to you," she continued, holding out her hand. "I shall always remember how kind you were. Good-bye!" "You are not going?" he asked. She laughed. "Why, you didn't imagine that you had taken the care of me upon your
shoulders for the rest of your life?" she demanded. "No, I didn't imagine that," he answered. "At the same time, what plans
have you made? Where are you going?" "Oh! I shall think of something," she declared, indifferently. He caught the gleam in her eyes, the sudden hopelessness which fell like
a cloud upon her face. He spoke promptly and with decision. "As a matter of fact," he remarked, "you do not know yourself. You are
just going to drift out of this place and very likely find your way to a
seat on the Embankment again." Her lips quivered. She had tried to be brave but it was hard. "Not necessarily," she replied. "Something may turn up." He leaned a little across the table towards her. "Listen," he said, deliberately, "I will make a proposition to you. It has come to me during the last few minutes. I am tired of the
boarding-house and I wish to leave it. The work which I do at night
is becoming more and more important. I should like to take two rooms
somewhere. If I take a third, would you care to call yourself what I
called you to the charwoman last night--my sister? I should expect you
to look after the meals and my clothes, and help me in certain other
ways. I cannot give you much of a salary," he continued, "but you would
have an opportunity during the daytime of looking out for some work, if
that is what you want, and you would at least have a roof and plenty to
eat and drink." She looked at him in blank amazement. It was obvious that his
proposition was entirely honest. "But, Mr. Tavernake," she protested, "you forget that I am not really
your sister." "Does that matter?" he asked, without flinching. "I think you understand
the sort of person I am. You would have nothing to fear from any
admiration on my part--or anything of that sort," he added, with some
show of clumsiness. "Those things do not come in my life. I am ambitious
to get on, to succeed and become wealthy. Other things I do not even
think about." She was speechless. After a short pause, he went on. "I am proposing this arrangement as much for my own sake as for yours. I am very well read and I know most of what there is to be known in my
profession. But there are other things concerning which I am ignorant. Some of these things I believe you could teach me." Still speechless, she sat and looked at him for several moments. Outside, the station now was filled with a hurrying throng on their way
to the day's work. Engines were shrieking, bells ringing, the press of
footsteps was unceasing. In the dark, ill-ventilated room itself there
was the rattle of crockery, the yawning of discontented-looking young
women behind the bar, young women with their hair still in curl-papers,
as yet unprepared for their weak little assaults upon the good-nature or
susceptibility of their customers. A queer corner of life it seemed. She
looked at her companion and realized how fragmentary was her knowledge
of him. There was nothing to be gathered from his face. He seemed
to have no expression. He was simply waiting for her reply, with his
thoughts already half engrossed upon the business of the day. "Really," she began, "I--"

He came back from his momentary wandering and looked at her. She
suddenly altered the manner of her speech. It was a strange proposition,
perhaps, but this was one of the strangest of men. "I am quite willing to try it," she decided. "Will you tell me where I
can meet you later on?" "I have an hour and a half for luncheon at one o'clock," he said. "Meet
me exactly at the southeast corner of Trafalgar Square. Would you like a
little money?" he added, rising. "I have plenty, thank you," she answered. He laid half-a-crown upon the table and made an entry in a small
memorandum book which he drew from his pocket. "You had better keep this," he said, "in case you want it. I am going to
leave you alone here. You can find your way anywhere, I am sure, and
I am in a hurry. At one o'clock, remember. I hope you will still be
feeling better." He put on his hat and went away without a backward glance. Beatrice sat
in her chair and watched him out of sight. CHAPTER V. INTRODUCING Mrs. WENHAM GARDNER


A very distinguished client was engaging the attention of Mr. Dowling,
Senior, of Messrs. Dowling, Spence & Company, auctioneers and estate
agents, whose offices were situated in Waterloo Place, Pall Mall. 