



Produced by Jo Churcher. HTML version by Al Haines. GREENMANTLE


by

JOHN BUCHAN




To

Caroline Grosvenor




During the past year, in the intervals of an active life, I have amused
myself with constructing this tale. It has been scribbled in every
kind of odd place and moment--in England and abroad, during long
journeys, in half-hours between graver tasks; and it bears, I fear, the
mark of its gipsy begetting. But it has amused me to write, and I
shall be well repaid if it amuses you--and a few others--to read. Let no man or woman call its events improbable. The war has driven
that word from our vocabulary, and melodrama has become the prosiest
realism. Things unimagined before happen daily to our friends by sea
and land. The one chance in a thousand is habitually taken, and as
often as not succeeds. Coincidence, like some new Briareus, stretches
a hundred long arms hourly across the earth. Some day, when the full
history is written--sober history with ample documents--the poor
romancer will give up business and fall to reading Miss Austen in a
hermitage. The characters of the tale, if you think hard, you will recall. Sandy
you know well. That great spirit was last heard of at Basra, where he
occupies the post that once was Harry Bullivant's. Richard Hannay is
where he longed to be, commanding his battalion on the ugliest bit of
front in the West. Mr John S.  Blenkiron, full of honour and wholly
cured of dyspepsia, has returned to the States, after vainly
endeavouring to take Peter with him. As for Peter, he has attained the
height of his ambition. He has shaved his beard and joined the Flying
Corps. CONTENTS


   1. A Mission is Proposed
   2. The Gathering of the Missionaries
   3. Peter Pienaar
   4. Adventures of Two Dutchmen on the Loose
   5. Further Adventures of the Same
   6. The Indiscretions of the Same
   7. Christmas Eve
   8. The Essen Barges
   9. The Return of the Straggler
  10. The Garden-House of Suliman the Red
  11. The Companions of the Rosy Hours
  12. Four Missionaries See Light in Their Mission
  13. I Move in Good Society
  14. The Lady of the Mantilla
  15. An Embarrassed Toilet
  16. The Battered Caravanserai
  17. Trouble By the Waters of Babylon
  18. Sparrows on the Housetops
  19. Greenmantle
  20. Peter Pienaar Goes to the Wars
  21. The Little Hill
  22. The Guns of the North



CHAPTER ONE

A Mission is Proposed

I had just finished breakfast and was filling my pipe when I got
Bullivant's telegram. It was at Furling, the big country house in
Hampshire where I had come to convalesce after Loos, and Sandy, who was
in the same case, was hunting for the marmalade. I flung him the
flimsy with the blue strip pasted down on it, and he whistled. 'Hullo, Dick, you've got the battalion. Or maybe it's a staff billet. You'll be a blighted brass-hat, coming it heavy over the hard-working
regimental officer. And to think of the language you've wasted on
brass-hats in your time!' I sat and thought for a bit, for the name 'Bullivant' carried me back
eighteen months to the hot summer before the war. I had not seen the
man since, though I had read about him in the papers. For more than a
year I had been a busy battalion officer, with no other thought than to
hammer a lot of raw stuff into good soldiers. I had succeeded pretty
well, and there was no prouder man on earth than Richard Hannay when he
took his Lennox Highlanders over the parapets on that glorious and
bloody 25th day of September. Loos was no picnic, and we had had some
ugly bits of scrapping before that, but the worst bit of the campaign I
had seen was a tea-party to the show I had been in with Bullivant
before the war started. [Major Hannay's narrative of this affair has
been published under the title of _The Thirty-nine Steps_.] The sight of his name on a telegram form seemed to change all my
outlook on life. I had been hoping for the command of the battalion,
and looking forward to being in at the finish with Brother Boche. But
this message jerked my thoughts on to a new road. There might be other
things in the war than straightforward fighting. Why on earth should
the Foreign Office want to see an obscure Major of the New Army, and
want to see him in double-quick time? 'I'm going up to town by the ten train,' I announced; 'I'll be back in
time for dinner.' 'Try my tailor,' said Sandy. 'He's got a very nice taste in red tabs. You can use my name.' An idea struck me. 'You're pretty well all right now. If I wire for
you, will you pack your own kit and mine and join me?' 'Right-o! I'll accept a job on your staff if they give you a corps. If
so be as you come down tonight, be a good chap and bring a barrel of
oysters from Sweeting's.' I travelled up to London in a regular November drizzle, which cleared
up about Wimbledon to watery sunshine. I never could stand London
during the war. It seemed to have lost its bearings and broken out
into all manner of badges and uniforms which did not fit in with my
notion of it. One felt the war more in its streets than in the field,
or rather one felt the confusion of war without feeling the purpose. I
dare say it was all right; but since August 1914 I never spent a day in
town without coming home depressed to my boots. I took a taxi and drove straight to the Foreign Office. Sir Walter did
not keep me waiting long. But when his secretary took me to his room I
would not have recognized the man I had known eighteen months before. His big frame seemed to have dropped flesh and there was a stoop in the
square shoulders. His face had lost its rosiness and was red in
patches, like that of a man who gets too little fresh air. His hair
was much greyer and very thin about the temples, and there were lines
of overwork below the eyes. But the eyes were the same as before, keen
and kindly and shrewd, and there was no change in the firm set of the
jaw. 'We must on no account be disturbed for the next hour,' he told his
secretary. When the young man had gone he went across to both doors
and turned the keys in them. 'Well, Major Hannay,' he said, flinging himself into a chair beside the
fire. 'How do you like soldiering?' 'Right enough,' I said, 'though this isn't just the kind of war I would
have picked myself. It's a comfortless, bloody business. But we've
got the measure of the old Boche now, and it's dogged as does it. I
count on getting back to the front in a week or two.' 'Will you get the battalion?' he asked. He seemed to have followed my
doings pretty closely. 'I believe I've a good chance. I'm not in this show for honour and
glory, though. I want to do the best I can, but I wish to heaven it
was over. All I think of is coming out of it with a whole skin.' He laughed. 'You do yourself an injustice. What about the forward
observation post at the Lone Tree? You forgot about the whole skin
then.' I felt myself getting red. 'That was all rot,' I said, 'and I can't
think who told you about it. I hated the job, but I had to do it to
prevent my subalterns going to glory. They were a lot of fire-eating
young lunatics. If I had sent one of them he'd have gone on his knees
to Providence and asked for trouble.' Sir Walter was still grinning. 'I'm not questioning your caution. You have the rudiments of it, or
our friends of the Black Stone would have gathered you in at our last
merry meeting. I would question it as little as your courage. What
exercises my mind is whether it is best employed in the trenches.' 'Is the War Office dissatisfied with me?' I asked sharply. 'They are profoundly satisfied. They propose to give you command of
your battalion. Presently, if you escape a stray bullet, you will no
doubt be a Brigadier. It is a wonderful war for youth and brains. But
... I take it you are in this business to serve your country, Hannay?' 'I reckon I am,' I said. 'I am certainly not in it for my health.' He looked at my leg, where the doctors had dug out the shrapnel
fragments, and smiled quizzically. 'Pretty fit again?' he asked. 'Tough as a sjambok. I thrive on the racket and eat and sleep like a
schoolboy.' He got up and stood with his back to the fire, his eyes staring
abstractedly out of the window at the wintry park. 'It is a great game, and you are the man for it, no doubt. But there
are others who can play it, for soldiering today asks for the average
rather than the exception in human nature. It is like a big machine
where the parts are standardized. You are fighting, not because you
are short of a job, but because you want to help England. How if you
could help her better than by commanding a battalion--or a brigade--or,
if it comes to that, a division? How if there is a thing which you
alone can do? Not some _embusque_ business in an office, but a thing
compared to which your fight at Loos was a Sunday-school picnic. You
are not afraid of danger? Well, in this job you would not be fighting
with an army around you, but alone. You are fond of tackling
difficulties? Well, I can give you a task which will try all your
powers. Have you anything to say?' My heart was beginning to thump uncomfortably. Sir Walter was not the
man to pitch a case too high. 'I am a soldier,' I said, 'and under orders.' 'True; but what I am about to propose does not come by any conceivable
stretch within the scope of a soldier's duties. I shall perfectly
understand if you decline. You will be acting as I should act
myself--as any sane man would. I would not press you for worlds. If
you wish it, I will not even make the proposal, but let you go here and
now, and wish you good luck with your battalion. I do not wish to
perplex a good soldier with impossible decisions.' This piqued me and put me on my mettle. 'I am not going to run away before the guns fire. Let me hear what you
propose.' Sir Walter crossed to a cabinet, unlocked it with a key from his chain,
and took a piece of paper from a drawer. It looked like an ordinary
half-sheet of note-paper. 'I take it,' he said, 'that your travels have not extended to the East.' 'No,' I said, 'barring a shooting trip in East Africa.' 'Have you by any chance been following the present campaign there?' 'I've read the newspapers pretty regularly since I went to hospital. I've got some pals in the Mesopotamia show, and of course I'm keen to
know what is going to happen at Gallipoli and Salonika. I gather that
Egypt is pretty safe.' 'If you will give me your attention for ten minutes I will supplement
your newspaper reading.' Sir Walter lay back in an arm-chair and spoke to the ceiling. It was
the best story, the clearest and the fullest, I had ever got of any bit
of the war. He told me just how and why and when Turkey had left the
rails. I heard about her grievances over our seizure of her ironclads,
of the mischief the coming of the _Goeben_ had wrought, of Enver and
his precious Committee and the way they had got a cinch on the old
Turk. When he had spoken for a bit, he began to question me. 'You are an intelligent fellow, and you will ask how a Polish
adventurer, meaning Enver, and a collection of Jews and gipsies should
have got control of a proud race. The ordinary man will tell you that
it was German organization backed up with German money and German arms. You will inquire again how, since Turkey is primarily a religious
power, Islam has played so small a part in it all. The Sheikh-ul-Islam
is neglected, and though the Kaiser proclaims a Holy War and calls
himself Hadji Mohammed Guilliamo, and says the Hohenzollerns are
descended from the Prophet, that seems to have fallen pretty flat. The
ordinary man again will answer that Islam in Turkey is becoming a back
number, and that Krupp guns are the new gods. Yet--I don't know. I do
not quite believe in Islam becoming a back number.' 'Look at it in another way,' he went on. 'If it were Enver and Germany
alone dragging Turkey into a European war for purposes that no Turk
cared a rush about, we might expect to find the regular army obedient,
and Constantinople. But in the provinces, where Islam is strong, there
would be trouble. Many of us counted on that. But we have been
disappointed. The Syrian army is as fanatical as the hordes of the
Mahdi. The Senussi have taken a hand in the game. The Persian Moslems
are threatening trouble. There is a dry wind blowing through the East,
and the parched grasses wait the spark. And that wind is blowing
towards the Indian border. Whence comes that wind, think you?' Sir Walter had lowered his voice and was speaking very slow and
distinct. I could hear the rain dripping from the eaves of the window,
and far off the hoot of taxis in Whitehall. 'Have you an explanation, Hannay?' he asked again. 'It looks as if Islam had a bigger hand in the thing than we thought,'
I said. 'I fancy religion is the only thing to knit up such a
scattered empire.' 'You are right,' he said. 'You must be right. We have laughed at the
Holy War, the jehad that old Von der Goltz prophesied. But I believe
that stupid old man with the big spectacles was right. There is a
jehad preparing. The question is, How?' 'I'm hanged if I know,' I said; 'but I'll bet it won't be done by a
pack of stout German officers in _pickelhaubes_. I fancy you can't
manufacture Holy Wars out of Krupp guns alone and a few staff officers
and a battle cruiser with her boilers burst.' 'Agreed. They are not fools, however much we try to persuade ourselves
of the contrary. But supposing they had got some tremendous sacred
sanction--some holy thing, some book or gospel or some new prophet from
the desert, something which would cast over the whole ugly mechanism of
German war the glamour of the old torrential raids which crumpled the
Byzantine Empire and shook the walls of Vienna? Islam is a fighting
creed, and the mullah still stands in the pulpit with the Koran in one
hand and a drawn sword in the other. Supposing there is some Ark of
the Covenant which will madden the remotest Moslem peasant with dreams
of Paradise? What then, my friend?' 'Then there will be hell let loose in those parts pretty soon.' 'Hell which may spread. Beyond Persia, remember, lies India.' 'You keep to suppositions. How much do you know?' I asked. 'Very little, except the fact. But the fact is beyond dispute. I have
reports from agents everywhere--pedlars in South Russia, Afghan
horse-dealers, Turcoman merchants, pilgrims on the road to Mecca,
sheikhs in North Africa, sailors on the Black Sea coasters,
sheep-skinned Mongols, Hindu fakirs, Greek traders in the Gulf, as well
as respectable Consuls who use cyphers. They tell the same story. The
East is waiting for a revelation. It has been promised one. Some
star--man, prophecy, or trinket--is coming out of the West. The Germans
know, and that is the card with which they are going to astonish the
world.' 'And the mission you spoke of for me is to go and find out?' He nodded gravely. 'That is the crazy and impossible mission.' 'Tell me one thing, Sir Walter,' I said. 'I know it is the fashion in
this country if a man has a special knowledge to set him to some job
exactly the opposite. I know all about Damaraland, but instead of
being put on Botha's staff, as I applied to be, I was kept in Hampshire
mud till the campaign in German South West Africa was over. I know a
man who could pass as an Arab, but do you think they would send him to
the East? They left him in my battalion--a lucky thing for me, for he
saved my life at Loos. I know the fashion, but isn't this just
carrying it a bit too far? There must be thousands of men who have
spent years in the East and talk any language. They're the fellows for
this job. I never saw a Turk in my life except a chap who did
wrestling turns in a show at Kimberley. You've picked about the most
useless man on earth.' 'You've been a mining engineer, Hannay,' Sir Walter said. 'If you
wanted a man to prospect for gold in Barotseland you would of course
like to get one who knew the country and the people and the language. But the first thing you would require in him would be that he had a
nose for finding gold and knew his business. That is the position now. I believe that you have a nose for finding out what our enemies try to
hide. I know that you are brave and cool and resourceful. That is why
I tell you the story. Besides ...'

He unrolled a big map of Europe on the wall. 'I can't tell you where you'll get on the track of the secret, but I
can put a limit to the quest. You won't find it east of the
Bosporus--not yet. It is still in Europe. It may be in
Constantinople, or in Thrace. It may be farther west. But it is
moving eastwards. If you are in time you may cut into its march to
Constantinople. That much I can tell you. The secret is known in
Germany, too, to those whom it concerns. It is in Europe that the
seeker must search--at present.' 'Tell me more,' I said. 'You can give me no details and no
instructions. Obviously you can give me no help if I come to grief.' He nodded. 'You would be beyond the pale.' 'You give me a free hand.' 'Absolutely. You can have what money you like, and you can get what
help you like. You can follow any plan you fancy, and go anywhere you
think fruitful. We can give no directions.' 'One last question. You say it is important. Tell me just how
important.' 'It is life and death,' he said solemnly. 'I can put it no higher and
no lower. Once we know what is the menace we can meet it. As long as
we are in the dark it works unchecked and we may be too late. The war
must be won or lost in Europe. Yes; but if the East blazes up, our
effort will be distracted from Europe and the great _coup_ may fail. The stakes are no less than victory and defeat, Hannay.' I got out of my chair and walked to the window. It was a difficult
moment in my life. I was happy in my soldiering; above all, happy in
the company of my brother officers. I was asked to go off into the
enemy's lands on a quest for which I believed I was manifestly
unfitted--a business of lonely days and nights, of nerve-racking
strain, of deadly peril shrouding me like a garment. Looking out on
the bleak weather I shivered. It was too grim a business, too inhuman
for flesh and blood. But Sir Walter had called it a matter of life and
death, and I had told him that I was out to serve my country. He could
not give me orders, but was I not under orders--higher orders than my
Brigadier's? I thought myself incompetent, but cleverer men than me
thought me competent, or at least competent enough for a sporting
chance. I knew in my soul that if I declined I should never be quite
at peace in the world again. And yet Sir Walter had called the scheme
madness, and said that he himself would never have accepted. How does one make a great decision? I swear that when I turned round
to speak I meant to refuse. But my answer was Yes, and I had crossed
the Rubicon. My voice sounded cracked and far away. Sir Walter shook hands with me and his eyes blinked a little. 'I may be sending you to your death, Hannay--Good God, what a damned
task-mistress duty is!--If so, I shall be haunted with regrets, but you
will never repent. Have no fear of that. You have chosen the roughest
road, but it goes straight to the hill-tops.' He handed me the half-sheet of note-paper. On it were written three
words--'_Kasredin_', '_cancer_', and '_v. I._'

'That is the only clue we possess,' he said. 'I cannot construe it,
but I can tell you the story. We have had our agents working in Persia
and Mesopotamia for years--mostly young officers of the Indian Army. They carry their lives in their hands, and now and then one disappears,
and the sewers of Baghdad might tell a tale. But they find out many
things, and they count the game worth the candle. They have told us of
the star rising in the West, but they could give us no details. All
but one--the best of them. He had been working between Mosul and the
Persian frontier as a muleteer, and had been south into the Bakhtiari
hills. He found out something, but his enemies knew that he knew and
he was pursued. Three months ago, just before Kut, he staggered into
Delamain's camp with ten bullet holes in him and a knife slash on his
forehead. He mumbled his name, but beyond that and the fact that there
was a Something coming from the West he told them nothing. He died in
ten minutes. They found this paper on him, and since he cried out the
word "Kasredin" in his last moments, it must have had something to do
with his quest. It is for you to find out if it has any meaning.' I folded it up and placed it in my pocket-book. 'What a great fellow! What was his name?' I asked. Sir Walter did not answer at once. He was looking out of the window. 'His name,' he said at last, 'was Harry Bullivant. He was my son. God
rest his brave soul!' CHAPTER TWO

The Gathering of the Missionaries

I wrote out a wire to Sandy, asking him to come up by the two-fifteen
train and meet me at my flat. 'I have chosen my colleague,' I said. 'Billy Arbuthnot's boy? His father was at Harrow with me. I know the
fellow--Harry used to bring him down to fish--tallish, with a lean,
high-boned face and a pair of brown eyes like a pretty girl's. I know
his record, too. There's a good deal about him in this office. He
rode through Yemen, which no white man ever did before. The Arabs let
him pass, for they thought him stark mad and argued that the hand of
Allah was heavy enough on him without their efforts. He's
blood-brother to every kind of Albanian bandit. Also he used to take a
hand in Turkish politics, and got a huge reputation. Some Englishman
was once complaining to old Mahmoud Shevkat about the scarcity of
statesmen in Western Europe, and Mahmoud broke in with, "Have you not
the Honourable Arbuthnot?" You say he's in your battalion. I was
wondering what had become of him, for we tried to get hold of him here,
but he had left no address. Ludovick Arbuthnot--yes, that's the man. Buried deep in the commissioned ranks of the New Army? Well, we'll get
him out pretty quick!' 'I knew he had knocked about the East, but I didn't know he was that
kind of swell. Sandy's not the chap to buck about himself.' 'He wouldn't,' said Sir Walter. 'He had always a more than Oriental
reticence. I've got another colleague for you, if you like him.' He looked at his watch. 'You can get to the Savoy Grill Room in five
minutes in a taxi-cab. Go in from the Strand, turn to your left, and
you will see in the alcove on the right-hand side a table with one
large American gentleman sitting at it. They know him there, so he
will have the table to himself. I want you to go and sit down beside
him. Say you come from me. His name is Mr John Scantlebury Blenkiron,
now a citizen of Boston, Mass., but born and raised in Indiana. Put
this envelope in your pocket, but don't read its contents till you have
talked to him. I want you to form your own opinion about Mr Blenkiron.' I went out of the Foreign Office in as muddled a frame of mind as any
diplomatist who ever left its portals. I was most desperately
depressed. To begin with, I was in a complete funk. I had always
thought I was about as brave as the average man, but there's courage
and courage, and mine was certainly not the impassive kind. Stick me
down in a trench and I could stand being shot at as well as most
people, and my blood could get hot if it were given a chance. But I
think I had too much imagination. I couldn't shake off the beastly
forecasts that kept crowding my mind. In about a fortnight, I calculated, I would be dead. Shot as a spy--a
rotten sort of ending! At the moment I was quite safe, looking for a
taxi in the middle of Whitehall, but the sweat broke on my forehead. I
felt as I had felt in my adventure before the war. But this was far
worse, for it was more cold-blooded and premeditated, and I didn't seem
to have even a sporting chance. I watched the figures in khaki passing
on the pavement, and thought what a nice safe prospect they had
compared to mine. Yes, even if next week they were in the
Hohenzollern, or the Hairpin trench at the Quarries, or that ugly angle
at Hooge. I wondered why I had not been happier that morning before I
got that infernal wire. Suddenly all the trivialities of English life
seemed to me inexpressibly dear and terribly far away. I was very
angry with Bullivant, till I remembered how fair he had been. My fate
was my own choosing. When I was hunting the Black Stone the interest of the problem had
helped to keep me going. But now I could see no problem. My mind had
nothing to work on but three words of gibberish on a sheet of paper and
a mystery of which Sir Walter had been convinced, but to which he
couldn't give a name. It was like the story I had read of Saint Teresa
setting off at the age of ten with her small brother to convert the
Moors. I sat huddled in the taxi with my chin on my breast, wishing
that I had lost a leg at Loos and been comfortably tucked away for the
rest of the war. Sure enough I found my man in the Grill Room. There he was, feeding
solemnly, with a napkin tucked under his chin. He was a big fellow
with a fat, sallow, clean-shaven face. I disregarded the hovering
waiter and pulled up a chair beside the American at the little table. He turned on me a pair of full sleepy eyes, like a ruminating ox. 'Mr Blenkiron?' I asked. 'You have my name, Sir,' he said. 'Mr John Scantlebury Blenkiron. I
would wish you good morning if I saw anything good in this darned
British weather.' 'I come from Sir Walter Bullivant,' I said, speaking low. 'So?' said he. 'Sir Walter is a very good friend of mine. Pleased to
meet you, Mr--or I guess it's Colonel--'

'Hannay,' I said; 'Major Hannay.' I was wondering what this sleepy
Yankee could do to help me. 'Allow me to offer you luncheon, Major. Here, waiter, bring the carte. I regret that I cannot join you in sampling the efforts of the
management of this hotel. I suffer, Sir, from dyspepsia--duodenal
dyspepsia. It gets me two hours after a meal and gives me hell just
below the breast-bone. So I am obliged to adopt a diet. My
nourishment is fish, Sir, and boiled milk and a little dry toast. It's
a melancholy descent from the days when I could do justice to a lunch
at Sherry's and sup off oyster-crabs and devilled bones.' He sighed
from the depths of his capacious frame. I ordered an omelette and a chop, and took another look at him. The
large eyes seemed to be gazing steadily at me without seeing me. They
were as vacant as an abstracted child's; but I had an uncomfortable
feeling that they saw more than mine. 'You have been fighting, Major? The Battle of Loos? Well, I guess
that must have been some battle. We in America respect the fighting of
the British soldier, but we don't quite catch on to the de-vices of the
British Generals. We opine that there is more bellicosity than science
among your highbrows. That is so? My father fought at Chattanooga,
but these eyes have seen nothing gorier than a Presidential election. Say, is there any way I could be let into a scene of real bloodshed?' His serious tone made me laugh. 'There are plenty of your countrymen
in the present show,' I said. 'The French Foreign Legion is full of
young Americans, and so is our Army Service Corps. Half the chauffeurs
you strike in France seem to come from the States.' He sighed. 'I did think of some belligerent stunt a year back. But I
reflected that the good God had not given John S.  Blenkiron the kind
of martial figure that would do credit to the tented field. Also I
recollected that we Americans were nootrals--benevolent nootrals--and
that it did not become me to be butting into the struggles of the
effete monarchies of Europe. So I stopped at home. It was a big
renunciation, Major, for I was lying sick during the Philippines
business, and I have never seen the lawless passions of men let loose
on a battlefield. And, as a stoodent of humanity, I hankered for the
experience.' 'What have you been doing?' I asked. The calm gentleman had begun to
interest me. 'Waal,' he said, 'I just waited. The Lord has blessed me with money to
burn, so I didn't need to go scrambling like a wild cat for war
contracts. But I reckoned I would get let into the game somehow, and I
was. Being a nootral, I was in an advantageous position to take a
hand. I had a pretty hectic time for a while, and then I reckoned I
would leave God's country and see what was doing in Europe. I have
counted myself out of the bloodshed business, but, as your poet sings,
peace has its victories not less renowned than war, and I reckon that
means that a nootral can have a share in a scrap as well as a
belligerent.' 'That's the best kind of neutrality I've ever heard of,' I said. 'It's the right kind,' he replied solemnly. 'Say, Major, what are your
lot fighting for? For your own skins and your Empire and the peace of
Europe. Waal, those ideals don't concern us one cent. We're not
Europeans, and there aren't any German trenches on Long Island yet. You've made the ring in Europe, and if we came butting in it wouldn't
be the rules of the game. You wouldn't welcome us, and I guess you'd
be right. We're that delicate-minded we can't interfere and that was
what my friend, President Wilson, meant when he opined that America was
too proud to fight. So we're nootrals. But likewise we're benevolent
nootrals. As I follow events, there's a skunk been let loose in the
world, and the odour of it is going to make life none too sweet till it
is cleared away. It wasn't us that stirred up that skunk, but we've
got to take a hand in disinfecting the planet. See? We can't fight,
but, by God! some of us are going to sweat blood to sweep the mess up. Officially we do nothing except give off Notes like a leaky boiler
gives off steam. But as individooal citizens we're in it up to the
neck. So, in the spirit of Jefferson Davis and Woodrow Wilson, I'm
going to be the nootralist kind of nootral till Kaiser will be sorry he
didn't declare war on America at the beginning.' I was completely recovering my temper. This fellow was a perfect
jewel, and his spirit put purpose into me. 'I guess you British were the same kind of nootral when your Admiral
warned off the German fleet from interfering with Dewey in Manila Bay
in '98.' Mr Blenkiron drank up the last drop of his boiled milk and
lit a thin black cigar. I leaned forward. 'Have you talked to Sir Walter?' I asked. 'I have talked to him, and he has given me to understand that there's a
deal ahead which you're going to boss. There are no flies on that big
man, and if he says it's good business then you can count me in.' 'You know that it's uncommonly dangerous?' 'I judged so. But it don't do to begin counting risks. I believe in
an all-wise and beneficent Providence, but you have got to trust Him
and give Him a chance. What's life anyhow? For me, it's living on a
strict diet and having frequent pains in my stomach. It isn't such an
almighty lot to give up, provided you get a good price in the deal. Besides, how big is the risk? About one o'clock in the morning, when
you can't sleep, it will be the size of Mount Everest, but if you run
out to meet it, it will be a hillock you can jump over. The grizzly
looks very fierce when you're taking your ticket for the Rockies and
wondering if you'll come back, but he's just an ordinary bear when
you've got the sight of your rifle on him. I won't think about risks
till I'm up to my neck in them and don't see the road out.' I scribbled my address on a piece of paper and handed it to the stout
philosopher. 'Come to dinner tonight at eight,' I said. 'I thank you, Major. A little fish, please, plain-boiled, and some hot
milk. You will forgive me if I borrow your couch after the meal and
spend the evening on my back. That is the advice of my noo doctor.' I got a taxi and drove to my club. On the way I opened the envelope
Sir Walter had given me. It contained a number of jottings, the
dossier of Mr Blenkiron. He had done wonders for the Allies in the
States. He had nosed out the Dumba plot, and had been instrumental in
getting the portfolio of Dr Albert. Von Papen's spies had tried to
murder him, after he had defeated an attempt to blow up one of the big
gun factories. Sir Walter had written at the end: 'The best man we
ever had. Better than Scudder. He would go through hell with a box of
bismuth tablets and a pack of Patience cards.' I went into the little back smoking-room, borrowed an atlas from the
library, poked up the fire, and sat down to think. Mr Blenkiron had
given me the fillip I needed. My mind was beginning to work now, and
was running wide over the whole business. Not that I hoped to find
anything by my cogitations. It wasn't thinking in an arm-chair that
would solve the mystery. But I was getting a sort of grip on a plan of
operations. And to my relief I had stopped thinking about the risks. Blenkiron had shamed me out of that. If a sedentary dyspeptic could
show that kind of nerve, I wasn't going to be behind him. I went back to my flat about five o'clock. My man Paddock had gone to
the wars long ago, so I had shifted to one of the new blocks in Park
Lane where they provide food and service. I kept the place on to have
a home to go to when I got leave. It's a miserable business holidaying
in an hotel. Sandy was devouring tea-cakes with the serious resolution of a
convalescent. 'Well, Dick, what's the news? Is it a brass hat or the boot?' 'Neither,' I said. 'But you and I are going to disappear from His
Majesty's forces. Seconded for special service.' 'O my sainted aunt!' said Sandy. 'What is it? For Heaven's sake put
me out of pain. Have we to tout deputations of suspicious neutrals
over munition works or take the shivering journalist in a motor-car
where he can imagine he sees a Boche?' 'The news will keep. But I can tell you this much. It's about as safe
and easy as to go through the German lines with a walking-stick.' 'Come, that's not so dusty,' said Sandy, and began cheerfully on the
muffins. I must spare a moment to introduce Sandy to the reader, for he cannot
be allowed to slip into this tale by a side-door. If you will consult
the Peerage you will find that to Edward Cospatrick, fifteenth Baron
Clanroyden, there was born in the year 1882, as his second son,
Ludovick Gustavus Arbuthnot, commonly called the Honourable, etc. The
said son was educated at Eton and New College, Oxford, was a captain in
the Tweeddale Yeomanry, and served for some years as honorary attache
at various embassies. The Peerage will stop short at this point, but
that is by no means the end of the story. For the rest you must
consult very different authorities. Lean brown men from the ends of
the earth may be seen on the London pavements now and then in creased
clothes, walking with the light outland step, slinking into clubs as if
they could not remember whether or not they belonged to them. From
them you may get news of Sandy. Better still, you will hear of him at
little forgotten fishing ports where the Albanian mountains dip to the
Adriatic. If you struck a Mecca pilgrimage the odds are you would meet
a dozen of Sandy's friends in it. In shepherds' huts in the Caucasus
you will find bits of his cast-off clothing, for he has a knack of
shedding garments as he goes. In the caravanserais of Bokhara and
Samarkand he is known, and there are shikaris in the Pamirs who still
speak of him round their fires. If you were going to visit Petrograd
or Rome or Cairo it would be no use asking him for introductions; if he
gave them, they would lead you into strange haunts. But if Fate
compelled you to go to Llasa or Yarkand or Seistan he could map out
your road for you and pass the word to potent friends. We call
ourselves insular, but the truth is that we are the only race on earth
that can produce men capable of getting inside the skin of remote
peoples. Perhaps the Scots are better than the English, but we're all
a thousand per cent better than anybody else. Sandy was the wandering
Scot carried to the pitch of genius. In old days he would have led a
crusade or discovered a new road to the Indies. Today he merely roamed
as the spirit moved him, till the war swept him up and dumped him down
in my battalion. I got out Sir Walter's half-sheet of note-paper. It was not the
original--naturally he wanted to keep that--but it was a careful
tracing. I took it that Harry Bullivant had not written down the words
as a memo for his own use. People who follow his career have good
memories. He must have written them in order that, if he perished and
his body was found, his friends might get a clue. Wherefore, I argued,
the words must be intelligible to somebody or other of our persuasion,
and likewise they must be pretty well gibberish to any Turk or German
that found them. The first, '_Kasredin_', I could make nothing of. I asked Sandy. 'You mean Nasr-ed-din,' he said, still munching crumpets. 'What's that?' I asked sharply. 'He's the General believed to be commanding against us in Mesopotamia. I remember him years ago in Aleppo. He talked bad French and drank the
sweetest of sweet champagne.' I looked closely at the paper. The 'K' was unmistakable. 'Kasredin is nothing. It means in Arabic the House of Faith, and might
cover anything from Hagia Sofia to a suburban villa. What's your next
puzzle, Dick? Have you entered for a prize competition in a weekly
paper?' '_Cancer,_' I read out. 'It is the Latin for a crab. Likewise it is the name of a painful
disease. It is also a sign of the Zodiac.' '_V. I_,' I read. 'There you have me. It sounds like the number of a motor-car. The
police would find out for you. I call this rather a difficult
competition. What's the prize?' I passed him the paper. 'Who wrote it? It looks as if he had been in
a hurry.' 'Harry Bullivant,' I said. Sandy's face grew solemn. 'Old Harry. He was at my tutor's. The best
fellow God ever made. I saw his name in the casualty list before Kut. ...  Harry didn't do things without a purpose. What's the story of
this paper?' 'Wait till after dinner,' I said. 'I'm going to change and have a
bath. There's an American coming to dine, and he's part of the
business.' Mr Blenkiron arrived punctual to the minute in a fur coat like a
Russian prince's. Now that I saw him on his feet I could judge him
better. He had a fat face, but was not too plump in figure, and very
muscular wrists showed below his shirt-cuffs. I fancied that, if the
occasion called, he might be a good man with his hands. Sandy and I ate a hearty meal, but the American picked at his boiled
fish and sipped his milk a drop at a time. When the servant had
cleared away, he was as good as his word and laid himself out on my
sofa. I offered him a good cigar, but he preferred one of his own lean
black abominations. Sandy stretched his length in an easy chair and
lit his pipe. 'Now for your story, Dick,' he said. I began, as Sir Walter had begun with me, by telling them about the
puzzle in the Near East. I pitched a pretty good yarn, for I had been
thinking a lot about it, and the mystery of the business had caught my
fancy. Sandy got very keen. 'It is possible enough. Indeed, I've been expecting it, though I'm
hanged if I can imagine what card the Germans have got up their sleeve. It might be any one of twenty things. Thirty years ago there was a
bogus prophecy that played the devil in Yemen. Or it might be a flag
such as Ali Wad Helu had, or a jewel like Solomon's necklace in
Abyssinia. You never know what will start off a jehad! But I rather
think it's a man.' 'Where could he get his purchase?' I asked. 'It's hard to say. If it were merely wild tribesmen like the Bedouin
he might have got a reputation as a saint and miracle-worker. Or he
might be a fellow that preached a pure religion, like the chap that
founded the Senussi. But I'm inclined to think he must be something
extra special if he can put a spell on the whole Moslem world. The
Turk and the Persian wouldn't follow the ordinary new theology game. He must be of the Blood. Your Mahdis and Mullahs and Imams were
nobodies, but they had only a local prestige. To capture all
Islam--and I gather that is what we fear--the man must be of the
Koreish, the tribe of the Prophet himself.' 'But how could any impostor prove that? For I suppose he's an
impostor.' 'He would have to combine a lot of claims. His descent must be pretty
good to begin with, and there are families, remember, that claim the
Koreish blood. Then he'd have to be rather a wonder on his own
account--saintly, eloquent, and that sort of thing. And I expect he'd
have to show a sign, though what that could be I haven't a notion.' 'You know the East about as well as any living man. Do you think that
kind of thing is possible?' I asked. 'Perfectly,' said Sandy, with a grave face. 'Well, there's the ground cleared to begin with. Then there's the
evidence of pretty well every secret agent we possess. That all seems
to prove the fact. But we have no details and no clues except that bit
of paper.' I told them the story of it. Sandy studied it with wrinkled brows. 'It beats me. But it may be the
key for all that. A clue may be dumb in London and shout aloud at
Baghdad.' 'That's just the point I was coming to. Sir Walter says this thing is
about as important for our cause as big guns. He can't give me orders,
but he offers the job of going out to find what the mischief is. Once
he knows that, he says he can checkmate it. But it's got to be found
out soon, for the mine may be sprung at any moment. I've taken on the
job. Will you help?' Sandy was studying the ceiling. 'I should add that it's about as safe as playing chuck-farthing at the
Loos Cross-roads, the day you and I went in. And if we fail nobody can
help us.' 'Oh, of course, of course,' said Sandy in an abstracted voice. Mr Blenkiron, having finished his after-dinner recumbency, had sat up
and pulled a small table towards him. From his pocket he had taken a
pack of Patience cards and had begun to play the game called the Double
Napoleon. He seemed to be oblivious of the conversation. Suddenly I had a feeling that the whole affair was stark lunacy. Here
were we three simpletons sitting in a London flat and projecting a
mission into the enemy's citadel without an idea what we were to do or
how we were to do it. And one of the three was looking at the ceiling,
and whistling softly through his teeth, and another was playing
Patience. The farce of the thing struck me so keenly that I laughed. Sandy looked at me sharply. 'You feel like that? Same with me. It's idiocy, but all war is
idiotic, and the most whole-hearted idiot is apt to win. We're to go
on this mad trail wherever we think we can hit it. Well, I'm with you. But I don't mind admitting that I'm in a blue funk. I had got myself
adjusted to this trench business and was quite happy. And now you have
hoicked me out, and my feet are cold.' 'I don't believe you know what fear is,' I said. 'There you're wrong, Dick,' he said earnestly. 'Every man who isn't a
maniac knows fear. I have done some daft things, but I never started
on them without wishing they were over. Once I'm in the show I get
easier, and by the time I'm coming out I'm sorry to leave it. But at
the start my feet are icy.' 'Then I take it you're coming?' 'Rather,' he said. 'You didn't imagine I would go back on you?' 'And you, sir?' I addressed Blenkiron. His game of Patience seemed to be coming out. He was completing eight
little heaps of cards with a contented grunt. As I spoke, he raised
his sleepy eyes and nodded. 'Why, yes,' he said. 'You gentlemen mustn't think that I haven't been
following your most engrossing conversation. I guess I haven't missed
a syllable. I find that a game of Patience stimulates the digestion
after meals and conduces to quiet reflection. John S. Blenkiron is
with you all the time.' He shuffled the cards and dealt for a new game. I don't think I ever expected a refusal, but this ready assent cheered
me wonderfully. I couldn't have faced the thing alone. 'Well, that's settled. Now for ways and means. We three have got to
put ourselves in the way of finding out Germany's secret, and we have
to go where it is known. Somehow or other we have to reach
Constantinople, and to beat the biggest area of country we must go by
different roads. Sandy, my lad, you've got to get into Turkey. You're
the only one of us that knows that engaging people. You can't get in by
Europe very easily, so you must try Asia. What about the coast of Asia
Minor?' 'It could be done,' he said. 'You'd better leave that entirely to me. I'll find out the best way. I suppose the Foreign Office will help me
to get to the jumping-off place?' 'Remember,' I said, 'it's no good getting too far east. The secret, so
far as concerns us, is still west of Constantinople.' 'I see that. I'll blow in on the Bosporus by a short tack.' 'For you, Mr Blenkiron, I would suggest a straight journey. You're an
American, and can travel through Germany direct. But I wonder how far
your activities in New York will allow you to pass as a neutral?' 'I have considered that, Sir,' he said. 'I have given some thought to
the pecooliar psychology of the great German nation. As I read them
they're as cunning as cats, and if you play the feline game they will
outwit you every time. Yes, Sir, they are no slouches at sleuth-work. If I were to buy a pair of false whiskers and dye my hair and dress
like a Baptist parson and go into Germany on the peace racket, I guess
they'd be on my trail like a knife, and I should be shot as a spy
inside of a week or doing solitary in the Moabite prison. But they
lack the larger vision. They can be bluffed, Sir. With your approval I
shall visit the Fatherland as John S.  Blenkiron, once a thorn in the
side of their brightest boys on the other side. But it will be a
different John S.  I reckon he will have experienced a change of heart. He will have come to appreciate the great, pure, noble soul of Germany,
and he will be sorrowing for his past like a converted gun-man at a
camp meeting. He will be a victim of the meanness and perfidy of the
British Government. I am going to have a first-class row with your
Foreign Office about my passport, and I am going to speak harsh words
about them up and down this metropolis. I am going to be shadowed by
your sleuths at my port of embarkation, and I guess I shall run up hard
against the British Legations in Scandinavia. By that time our
Teutonic friends will have begun to wonder what has happened to John
S., and to think that maybe they have been mistaken in that child. So,
when I get to Germany they will be waiting for me with an open mind. Then I judge my conduct will surprise and encourage them. I will
confide to them valuable secret information about British preparations,
and I will show up the British lion as the meanest kind of cur. You
may trust me to make a good impression. After that I'll move
eastwards, to see the demolition of the British Empire in those parts. By the way, where is the rendezvous?' 'This is the 17th day of November. If we can't find out what we want
in two months we may chuck the job. On the 17th of January we should
forgather in Constantinople. Whoever gets there first waits for the
others. If by that date we're not all present, it will be considered
that the missing man has got into trouble and must be given up. If
ever we get there we'll be coming from different points and in
different characters, so we want a rendezvous where all kinds of odd
folk assemble. Sandy, you know Constantinople. You fix the
meeting-place.' 'I've already thought of that,' he said, and going to the writing-table
he drew a little plan on a sheet of paper. 'That lane runs down from
the Kurdish Bazaar in Galata to the ferry of Ratchik. Half-way down on
the left-hand side is a cafe kept by a Greek called Kuprasso. Behind
the cafe is a garden, surrounded by high walls which were parts of the
old Byzantine Theatre. At the end of the garden is a shanty called the
Garden-house of Suliman the Red. It has been in its time a
dancing-hall and a gambling hell and God knows what else. It's not a
place for respectable people, but the ends of the earth converge there
and no questions are asked. That's the best spot I can think of for a
meeting-place.' The kettle was simmering by the fire, the night was raw, and it seemed
the hour for whisky-punch. I made a brew for Sandy and myself and
boiled some milk for Blenkiron. 'What about language?' I asked. 'You're all right, Sandy?' 'I know German fairly well; and I can pass anywhere as a Turk. The
first will do for eavesdropping and the second for ordinary business.' 'And you?' I asked Blenkiron. 'I was left out at Pentecost,' he said. 'I regret to confess I have no
gift of tongues. But the part I have chosen for myself don't require
the polyglot. Never forget I'm plain John S.  Blenkiron, a citizen of
the great American Republic.' 'You haven't told us your own line, Dick,' Sandy said. 'I am going to the Bosporus through Germany, and, not being a neutral,
it won't be a very cushioned journey.' Sandy looked grave. 'That sounds pretty desperate. Is your German good enough?' 'Pretty fair; quite good enough to pass as a native. But officially I
shall not understand one word. I shall be a Boer from Western Cape
Colony: one of Maritz's old lot who after a bit of trouble has got
through Angola and reached Europe. I shall talk Dutch and nothing
else. And, my hat! I shall be pretty bitter about the British. There's
a powerful lot of good swear-words in the taal. I shall know all about
Africa, and be panting to get another whack at the _verdommt rooinek_. With luck they may send me to the Uganda show or to Egypt, and I shall
take care to go by Constantinople. If I'm to deal with the Mohammedan
natives they're bound to show me what hand they hold. At least, that's
the way I look at it.' We filled our glasses--two of punch and one of milk--and drank to our
next merry meeting. Then Sandy began to laugh, and I joined in. The
sense of hopeless folly again descended on me. The best plans we could
make were like a few buckets of water to ease the drought of the Sahara
or the old lady who would have stopped the Atlantic with a broom. I
thought with sympathy of little Saint Teresa. CHAPTER THREE

Peter Pienaar

Our various departures were unassuming, all but the American's. Sandy
spent a busy fortnight in his subterranean fashion, now in the British
Museum, now running about the country to see old exploring companions,
now at the War Office, now at the Foreign Office, but mostly in my
flat, sunk in an arm-chair and meditating. He left finally on December
1st as a King's Messenger for Cairo. Once there I knew the King's
Messenger would disappear, and some queer Oriental ruffian take his
place. It would have been impertinence in me to inquire into his
plans. He was the real professional, and I was only the dabbler. Blenkiron was a different matter. Sir Walter told me to look out for
squalls, and the twinkle in his eye gave me a notion of what was
coming. The first thing the sportsman did was to write a letter to the
papers signed with his name. There had been a debate in the House of
Commons on foreign policy, and the speech of some idiot there gave him
his cue. He declared that he had been heart and soul with the British
at the start, but that he was reluctantly compelled to change his
views. He said our blockade of Germany had broken all the laws of God
and humanity, and he reckoned that Britain was now the worst exponent
of Prussianism going. That letter made a fine racket, and the paper
that printed it had a row with the Censor. But that was only the
beginning of Mr Blenkiron's campaign. He got mixed up with some
mountebanks called the League of Democrats against Aggression,
gentlemen who thought that Germany was all right if we could only keep
from hurting her feelings. He addressed a meeting under their
auspices, which was broken up by the crowd, but not before John S.  had
got off his chest a lot of amazing stuff. I wasn't there, but a man
who was told me that he never heard such clotted nonsense. He said
that Germany was right in wanting the freedom of the seas, and that
America would back her up, and that the British Navy was a bigger
menace to the peace of the world than the Kaiser's army. He admitted
that he had once thought differently, but he was an honest man and not
afraid to face facts. The oration closed suddenly, when he got a
brussels-sprout in the eye, at which my friend said he swore in a very
unpacifist style. After that he wrote other letters to the Press, saying that there was
no more liberty of speech in England, and a lot of scallywags backed
him up. Some Americans wanted to tar and feather him, and he got
kicked out of the Savoy. There was an agitation to get him deported,
and questions were asked in Parliament, and the Under-Secretary for
Foreign Affairs said his department had the matter in hand. I was
beginning to think that Blenkiron was carrying his tomfoolery too far,
so I went to see Sir Walter, but he told me to keep my mind easy. 'Our friend's motto is "Thorough",' he said, 'and he knows very well
what he is about. We have officially requested him to leave, and he
sails from Newcastle on Monday. He will be shadowed wherever he goes,
and we hope to provoke more outbreaks. He is a very capable fellow.' The last I saw of him was on the Saturday afternoon when I met him in
St james's Street and offered to shake hands. He told me that my
uniform was a pollution, and made a speech to a small crowd about it. They hissed him and he had to get into a taxi. As he departed there
was just the suspicion of a wink in his left eye. On Monday I read that
he had gone off, and the papers observed that our shores were well quit
of him. I sailed on December 3rd from Liverpool in a boat bound for the
Argentine that was due to put in at Lisbon. I had of course to get a
Foreign Office passport to leave England, but after that my connection
with the Government ceased. All the details of my journey were
carefully thought out. Lisbon would be a good jumping-off place, for
it was the rendezvous of scallywags from most parts of Africa. My kit
was an old Gladstone bag, and my clothes were the relics of my South
African wardrobe. I let my beard grow for some days before I sailed,
and, since it grows fast, I went on board with the kind of hairy chin
you will see on the young Boer. My name was now Brandt, Cornelis
Brandt--at least so my passport said, and passports never lie. There were just two other passengers on that beastly boat, and they
never appeared till we were out of the Bay. I was pretty bad myself,
but managed to move about all the time, for the frowst in my cabin
would have sickened a hippo. The old tub took two days and a night to
waddle from Ushant to Finisterre. Then the weather changed and we came
out of snow-squalls into something very like summer. The hills of
Portugal were all blue and yellow like the Kalahari, and before we made
the Tagus I was beginning to forget I had ever left Rhodesia. There
was a Dutchman among the sailors with whom I used to patter the taal,
and but for 'Good morning' and 'Good evening' in broken English to the
captain, that was about all the talking I did on the cruise. We dropped anchor off the quays of Lisbon on a shiny blue morning,
pretty near warm enough to wear flannels. I had now got to be very
wary. I did not leave the ship with the shore-going boat, but made a
leisurely breakfast. Then I strolled on deck, and there, just casting
anchor in the middle of the stream, was another ship with a blue and
white funnel I knew so well. I calculated that a month before she had
been smelling the mangrove swamps of Angola. Nothing could better
answer my purpose. I proposed to board her, pretending I was looking
for a friend, and come on shore from her, so that anyone in Lisbon who
chose to be curious would think I had landed straight from Portuguese
Africa. I hailed one of the adjacent ruffians, and got into his rowboat, with
my kit. We reached the vessel--they called her the _Henry the
Navigator_--just as the first shore-boat was leaving. The crowd in it
were all Portuguese, which suited my book. But when I went up the ladder the first man I met was old Peter Pienaar. Here was a piece of sheer monumental luck. Peter had opened his eyes
and his mouth, and had got as far as '_Allemachtig_', when I shut him
up. 'Brandt,' I said, 'Cornelis Brandt. That's my name now, and don't you
forget it. Who is the captain here? Is it still old Sloggett?' '_Ja,_' said Peter, pulling himself together. 'He was speaking about
you yesterday.' This was better and better. I sent Peter below to get hold of
Sloggett, and presently I had a few words with that gentleman in his
cabin with the door shut. 'You've got to enter my name in the ship's books. I came aboard at
Mossamedes. And my name's Cornelis Brandt.' At first Sloggett was for objecting. He said it was a felony. I told
him that I dared say it was, but he had got to do it, for reasons which
I couldn't give, but which were highly creditable to all parties. In
the end he agreed, and I saw it done. I had a pull on old Sloggett,
for I had known him ever since he owned a dissolute tug-boat at Delagoa
Bay. Then Peter and I went ashore and swaggered into Lisbon as if we owned
De Beers. We put up at the big hotel opposite the railway station, and
looked and behaved like a pair of lowbred South Africans home for a
spree. It was a fine bright day, so I hired a motor-car and said I
would drive it myself. We asked the name of some beauty-spot to visit,
and were told Cintra and shown the road to it. I wanted a quiet place
to talk, for I had a good deal to say to Peter Pienaar. I christened that car the Lusitanian Terror, and it was a marvel that
we did not smash ourselves up. There was something immortally wrong
with its steering gear. Half a dozen times we slewed across the road,
inviting destruction. But we got there in the end, and had luncheon in
an hotel opposite the Moorish palace. There we left the car and
wandered up the slopes of a hill, where, sitting among scrub very like
the veld, I told Peter the situation of affairs. But first a word must be said about Peter. He was the man that taught
me all I ever knew of veld-craft, and a good deal about human nature
besides. He was out of the Old Colony--Burgersdorp, I think--but he
had come to the Transvaal when the Lydenburg goldfields started. He
was prospector, transport-rider, and hunter in turns, but principally
hunter. In those early days he was none too good a citizen. He was in
Swaziland with Bob Macnab, and you know what that means. Then he took
to working off bogus gold propositions on Kimberley and Johannesburg
magnates, and what he didn't know about salting a mine wasn't
knowledge. After that he was in the Kalahari, where he and Scotty
Smith were familiar names. An era of comparative respectability dawned
for him with the Matabele War, when he did uncommon good scouting and
transport work. Cecil Rhodes wanted to establish him on a stock farm
down Salisbury way, but Peter was an independent devil and would call
no man master. He took to big-game hunting, which was what God
intended him for, for he could track a tsessebe in thick bush, and was
far the finest shot I have seen in my life. He took parties to the
Pungwe flats, and Barotseland, and up to Tanganyika. Then he made a
speciality of the Ngami region, where I once hunted with him, and he
was with me when I went prospecting in Damaraland. When the Boer War started, Peter, like many of the very great hunters,
took the British side and did most of our intelligence work in the
North Transvaal. Beyers would have hanged him if he could have caught
him, and there was no love lost between Peter and his own people for
many a day. When it was all over and things had calmed down a bit, he
settled in Bulawayo and used to go with me when I went on trek. At the
time when I left Africa two years before, I had lost sight of him for
months, and heard that he was somewhere on the Congo poaching
elephants. He had always a great idea of making things hum so loud in
Angola that the Union  Government would have to step in and annex it. After Rhodes Peter had the biggest notions south of the Line. He was a man of about five foot ten, very thin and active, and as
strong as a buffalo. He had pale blue eyes, a face as gentle as a
girl's, and a soft sleepy voice. From his present appearance it looked
as if he had been living hard lately. His clothes were of the cut you
might expect to get at Lobito Bay, he was as lean as a rake, deeply
browned with the sun, and there was a lot of grey in his beard. He was
fifty-six years old, and used to be taken for forty. Now he looked
about his age. I first asked him what he had been up to since the war began. He spat,
in the Kaffir way he had, and said he had been having hell's time. 'I got hung up on the Kafue,' he said. 'When I heard from old
Letsitela that the white men were fighting I had a bright idea that I
might get into German South West from the north. You see I knew that
Botha couldn't long keep out of the war. Well, I got into German
territory all right, and then a _skellum_ of an officer came along, and
commandeered all my mules, and wanted to commandeer me with them for
his fool army. He was a very ugly man with a yellow face.' Peter
filled a deep pipe from a kudu-skin pouch. 'Were you commandeered?' I asked. 'No. I shot him--not so as to kill, but to wound badly. It was all
right, for he fired first on me. Got me too in the left shoulder. But
that was the beginning of bad trouble. I trekked east pretty fast, and
got over the border among the Ovamba. I have made many journeys, but
that was the worst. Four days I went without water, and six without
food. Then by bad luck I fell in with 'Nkitla--you remember, the
half-caste chief. He said I owed him money for cattle which I bought
when I came there with Carowab. It was a lie, but he held to it, and
would give me no transport. So I crossed the Kalahari on my feet. Ugh, it was as slow as a vrouw coming from _nachtmaal_. It took weeks
and weeks, and when I came to Lechwe's kraal, I heard that the fighting
was over and that Botha had conquered the Germans. That, too, was a
lie, but it deceived me, and I went north into Rhodesia, where I
learned the truth. But by then I judged the war had gone too far for
me to make any profit out of it, so I went into Angola to look for
German refugees. By that time I was hating Germans worse than hell.' 'But what did you propose to do with them?' I asked. 'I had a notion they would make trouble with the Government in those
parts. I don't specially love the Portugoose, but I'm for him against
the Germans every day. Well, there was trouble, and I had a merry time
for a month or two. But by and by it petered out, and I thought I had
better clear for Europe, for South Africa was settling down just as the
big show was getting really interesting. So here I am, Cornelis, my
old friend. If I shave my beard will they let me join the Flying
Corps?' I looked at Peter sitting there smoking, as imperturbable as if he had
been growing mealies in Natal all his life and had run home for a
month's holiday with his people in Peckham. 'You're coming with me, my lad,' I said. 'We're going into Germany.' Peter showed no surprise. 'Keep in mind that I don't like the
Germans,' was all he said. 'I'm a quiet Christian man, but I've the
devil of a temper.' Then I told him the story of our mission. 'You and I have got to be
Maritz's men. We went into Angola, and now we're trekking for the
Fatherland to get a bit of our own back from the infernal English. Neither of us knows any German--publicly. We'd better plan out the
fighting we were in--Kakamas will do for one, and Schuit Drift. You
were a Ngamiland hunter before the war. They won't have your
_dossier_, so you can tell any lie you like. I'd better be an educated
Afrikander, one of Beyers's bright lads, and a pal of old Hertzog. We
can let our imagination loose about that part, but we must stick to the
same yarn about the fighting.' '_Ja_, Cornelis,' said Peter. (He had called me Cornelis ever since I
had told him my new name. He was a wonderful chap for catching on to
any game.) 'But after we get into Germany, what then? There can't be
much difficulty about the beginning. But once we're among the
beer-swillers I don't quite see our line. We're to find out about
something that's going on in Turkey? When I was a boy the predikant
used to preach about Turkey. I wish I was better educated and
remembered whereabouts in the map it was.' 'You leave that to me,' I said; 'I'll explain it all to you before we
get there. We haven't got much of a spoor, but we'll cast about, and
with luck will pick it up. I've seen you do it often enough when we
hunted kudu on the Kafue.' Peter nodded. 'Do we sit still in a German town?' he asked anxiously. 'I shouldn't like that, Cornelis.' 'We move gently eastward to Constantinople,' I said. Peter grinned. 'We should cover a lot of new country. You can reckon
on me, friend Cornelis. I've always had a hankering to see Europe.' He rose to his feet and stretched his long arms. 'We'd better begin at once. God, I wonder what's happened to old Solly
Maritz, with his bottle face? Yon was a fine battle at the drift when
I was sitting up to my neck in the Orange praying that Brits' lads
would take my head for a stone.' Peter was as thorough a mountebank, when he got started, as Blenkiron
himself. All the way back to Lisbon he yarned about Maritz and his
adventures in German South West till I half believed they were true. He made a very good story of our doings, and by his constant harping on
it I pretty soon got it into my memory. That was always Peter's way. He said if you were going to play a part, you must think yourself into
it, convince yourself that you were it, till you really were it and
didn't act but behaved naturally. The two men who had started that
morning from the hotel door had been bogus enough, but the two men that
returned were genuine desperadoes itching to get a shot at England. We spent the evening piling up evidence in our favour. Some kind of
republic had been started in Portugal, and ordinarily the cafes would
have been full of politicians, but the war had quieted all these local
squabbles, and the talk was of nothing but what was doing in France and
Russia. The place we went to was a big, well-lighted show on a main
street, and there were a lot of sharp-eyed fellows wandering about that
I guessed were spies and police agents. I knew that Britain was the one
country that doesn't bother about this kind of game, and that it would
be safe enough to let ourselves go. I talked Portuguese fairly well, and Peter spoke it like a Lourenco
Marques bar-keeper, with a lot of Shangaan words to fill up. He
started on curacao, which I reckoned was a new drink to him, and
presently his tongue ran freely. Several neighbours pricked up their
ears, and soon we had a small crowd round our table. We talked to each other of Maritz and our doings. It didn't seem to be
a popular subject in that cafe. One big blue-black fellow said that
Maritz was a dirty swine who would soon be hanged. Peter quickly
caught his knife-wrist with one hand and his throat with the other, and
demanded an apology. He got it. The Lisbon _boulevardiers_ have not
lost any lions. After that there was a bit of a squash in our corner. Those near to us
were very quiet and polite, but the outer fringe made remarks. When
Peter said that if Portugal, which he admitted he loved, was going to
stick to England she was backing the wrong horse, there was a murmur of
disapproval. One decent-looking old fellow, who had the air of a
ship's captain, flushed all over his honest face, and stood up looking
straight at Peter. I saw that we had struck an Englishman, and
mentioned it to Peter in Dutch. Peter played his part perfectly. He suddenly shut up, and, with
furtive looks around him, began to jabber to me in a low voice. He was
the very picture of the old stage conspirator. The old fellow stood staring at us. 'I don't very well understand this
damned lingo,' he said; 'but if so be you dirty Dutchmen are sayin'
anything against England, I'll ask you to repeat it. And if so be as
you repeats it I'll take either of you on and knock the face off him.' He was a chap after my own heart, but I had to keep the game up. I
said in Dutch to Peter that we mustn't get brawling in a public house. 'Remember the big thing,' I said darkly. Peter nodded, and the old
fellow, after staring at us for a bit, spat scornfully, and walked out. 'The time is coming when the Englander will sing small,' I observed to
the crowd. We stood drinks to one or two, and then swaggered into the
street. At the door a hand touched my arm, and, looking down, I saw a
little scrap of a man in a fur coat. 'Will the gentlemen walk a step with me and drink a glass of beer?' he
said in very stiff Dutch. 'Who the devil are you?' I asked. '_Gott strafe England!_' was his answer, and, turning back the lapel of
his coat, he showed some kind of ribbon in his buttonhole. 'Amen,' said Peter. 'Lead on, friend. We don't mind if we do.' He led us to a back street and then up two pairs of stairs to a very
snug little flat. The place was filled with fine red lacquer, and I
guessed that art-dealing was his nominal business. Portugal, since the
republic broke up the convents and sold up the big royalist grandees,
was full of bargains in the lacquer and curio line. He filled us two long tankards of very good Munich beer. '_Prosit_,' he said, raising his glass. 'You are from South Africa. What make you in Europe?' We both looked sullen and secretive. 'That's our own business,' I answered. 'You don't expect to buy our
confidence with a glass of beer.' 'So?' he said. 'Then I will put it differently. From your speech in
the cafe I judge you do not love the English.' Peter said something about stamping on their grandmothers, a Kaffir
phrase which sounded gruesome in Dutch. The man laughed. 'That is all I want to know. You are on the German
side?' 'That remains to be seen,' I said. 