



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer









THE EVIL SHEPHERD


By E. Philips Oppenheim





CHAPTER I


Francis Ledsam, alert, well-satisfied with himself and the world, the
echo of a little buzz of congratulations still in his ears, paused on
the steps of the modern Temple of Justice to light a cigarette before
calling for a taxi to take him to his club. Visions of a whisky and
soda--his throat was a little parched--and a rubber of easy-going bridge
at his favourite table, were already before his eyes. A woman who had
followed him from the Court touched him on the shoulder. "Can I speak to you for a moment, Mr. Ledsam?" The barrister frowned slightly as he swung around to confront his
questioner. It was such a familiar form of address. "What do you want?" he asked, a little curtly. "A few minutes' conversation with you," was the calm reply. "The matter
is important." The woman's tone and manner, notwithstanding her plain, inconspicuous
clothes, commanded attention. Francis Ledsam was a little puzzled. Small
things meant much to him in life, and he had been looking forward almost
with the zest of a schoolboy to that hour of relaxation at his club. He was impatient of even a brief delay, a sentiment which he tried to
express in his response. "What do you want to speak to me about?" he repeated bluntly. "I shall
be in my rooms in the Temple to-morrow morning, any time after eleven." "It is necessary for me to speak to you now," she insisted. "There is a
tea-shop across the way. Please accompany me there." Ledsam, a little surprised at the coolness of her request, subjected his
accoster to a closer scrutiny. As he did so, his irritation diminished. He shrugged his shoulders slightly. "If you really have business with me," he said, "I will give you a few
minutes." They crossed the street together, the woman self-possessed, negative,
wholly without the embarrassment of one performing an unusual action. Her companion felt the awakening of curiosity. Zealously though she had,
to all appearance, endeavoured to conceal the fact, she was without a
doubt personable. Her voice and manner lacked nothing of refinement. Yet
her attraction to Francis Ledsam, who, although a perfectly normal human
being, was no seeker after promiscuous adventures, did not lie in these
externals. As a barrister whose success at the criminal bar had been
phenomenal, he had attained to a certain knowledge of human nature. He
was able, at any rate, to realise that this woman was no imposter. He
knew that she had vital things to say. They passed into the tea-shop and found an empty corner. Ledsam hung up
his hat and gave an order. The woman slowly began to remove her gloves. When she pushed back her veil, her vis-a-vis received almost a shock. She was quite as good-looking as he had imagined, but she was far
younger--she was indeed little more than a girl. Her eyes were of a deep
shade of hazel brown, her eyebrows were delicately marked, her features
and poise admirable. Yet her skin was entirely colourless. She was as
pale as one whose eyes have been closed in death. Her lips, although
in no way highly coloured, were like streaks of scarlet blossom upon
a marble image. The contrast between her appearance and that of her
companion was curiously marked. Francis Ledsam conformed in no way to
the accepted physical type of his profession. He was over six feet in
height, broad-shouldered and powerfully made. His features were cast in
a large mould, he was of fair, almost sandy complexion, even his mouth
was more humourous than incisive. His eyes alone, grey and exceedingly
magnetic, suggested the gifts which without a doubt lay behind his
massive forehead. "I am anxious to avoid any possible mistake," she began. "Your name is
Francis Ledsam?" "It is," he admitted. "You are the very successful criminal barrister," she continued, "who
has just been paid an extravagant fee to defend Oliver Hilditch." "I might take exception to the term 'extravagant'," Ledsam observed
drily. "Otherwise, your information appears to be singularly correct. I do not know whether you have heard the verdict. If not, you may be
interested to know that I succeeded in obtaining the man's acquittal." "I know that you did," the woman replied. "I was in the Court when the
verdict was brought in. It has since occurred to me that I should like
you to understand exactly what you have done, the responsibility you
have incurred." Ledsam raised his eyebrows. "Responsibility?" he repeated. "What I have done is simple enough. I
have earned a very large fee and won my case." "You have secured the acquittal of Oliver Hilditch," she persisted. "He is by this time a free man. Now I am going to speak to you of that
responsibility. I am going to tell you a little about the man who owes
his freedom to your eloquence." It was exactly twenty minutes after their entrance into the teashop when
the woman finished her monologue. She began to draw on her gloves again. Before them were two untasted cups of tea and an untouched plate of
bread and butter. From a corner of the room the waitress was watching
them curiously. "Good God!" Francis Ledsam exclaimed at last, suddenly realising his
whereabouts. "Do you mean to affirm solemnly that what you have been
telling me is the truth?" The woman continued to button her gloves. "It is the truth," she said. Ledsam sat up and looked around him. He was a little dazed. He had
almost the feeling of a man recovering from the influence of some
anaesthetic. Before his eyes were still passing visions of terrible
deeds, of naked, ugly passion, of man's unscrupulous savagery. During
those few minutes he had been transported to New York and Paris, London
and Rome. Crimes had been spoken of which made the murder for which
Oliver Hilditch had just been tried seem like a trifling indiscretion. Hard though his mentality, sternly matter-of-fact as was his outlook,
he was still unable to fully believe in himself, his surroundings, or
in this woman who had just dropped a veil over her ashen cheeks. Reason
persisted in asserting itself. "But if you knew all this," he demanded, "why on earth didn't you come
forward and give evidence?" "Because," she answered calmly, as she rose to her feet, "my evidence
would not have been admissible. I am Oliver Hilditch's wife." CHAPTER II


Francis Ledsam arrived at his club, the Sheridan, an hour later than he
had anticipated. He nodded to the veteran hall-porter, hung up his hat
and stick, and climbed the great staircase to the card-room without any
distinct recollection of performing any of these simple and reasonable
actions. In the cardroom he exchanged a few greetings with friends,
accepted without comment or without the slightest tinge of gratification
a little chorus of chafing congratulations upon his latest triumph,
and left the room without any inclination to play, although there was
a vacant place at his favourite table. From sheer purposelessness he
wandered back again into the hall, and here came his first gleam of
returning sensation. He came face to face with his most intimate friend,
Andrew Wilmore. The latter, who had just hung up his coat and hat,
greeted him with a growl of welcome. "So you've brought it off again, Francis!" "Touch and go," the barrister remarked. "I managed to squeak home." Wilmore laid his hand upon his friend's shoulder and led the way towards
two easy-chairs in the lounge. "I tell you what it is, old chap," he confided, "you'll be making
yourself unpopular before long. Another criminal at large, thanks to
that glib tongue and subtle brain of yours. The crooks of London will
present you with a testimonial when you're made a judge." "So you think that Oliver Hilditch was guilty, then?" Francis asked
curiously. "My dear fellow, how do I know or care?" was the indifferent reply. "I shouldn't have thought that there had been any doubt about it. You
probably know, anyway." "That's just what I didn't when I got up to make my speech," Francis
assured his friend emphatically. "The fellow was given an opportunity of
making a clean breast of it, of course--Wensley, his lawyer, advised him
to, in fact--but the story he told me was precisely the story he told at
the inquest." They were established now in their easy-chairs, and Wilmore summoned a
waiter. "Two large whiskies and sodas," he ordered. "Francis," he went on,
studying his companion intently, "what's the matter with you? You don't
look as though your few days in the country last week had done you any
good." Francis glanced around as though to be sure that they were alone. "I was all right when I came up, Andrew," he muttered. "This case has
upset me." "Upset you? But why the dickens should it?" the other demanded, in a
puzzled tone. "It was quite an ordinary case, in its way, and you won
it." "I won it," Francis admitted. "Your defence was the most ingenious thing I ever heard." "Mostly suggested, now I come to think of it," the barrister remarked
grimly, "by the prisoner himself." "But why are you upset about it, anyway?" Wilmore persisted. Francis rose to his feet, shook himself, and with his elbow resting upon
the mantelpiece leaned down towards his friend. He could not rid himself
altogether of this sense of unreality. He had the feeling that he had
passed through one of the great crises of his life. "I'll tell you, Andrew. You're about the only man in the world I could
tell. I've gone crazy." "I thought you looked as though you'd been seeing spooks," Wilmore
murmured sympathetically. "I have seen a spook," Francis rejoined, with almost passionate
seriousness, "a spook who lifted an invisible curtain with invisible
fingers, and pointed to such a drama of horrors as De Quincey, Poe and
Sue combined could never have imagined. Oliver Hilditch was guilty,
Andrew. He murdered the man Jordan--murdered him in cold blood." "I'm not surprised to hear that," was the somewhat puzzled reply. "He was guilty, Andrew, not only of the murder of this man, his partner,
but of innumerable other crimes and brutalities," Francis went on. "He
is a fiend in human form, if ever there was one, and I have set him
loose once more to prey upon Society. I am morally responsible for his
next robbery, his next murder, the continued purgatory of those forced
to associate with him." "You're dotty, Francis," his friend declared shortly. "I told you I was crazy," was the desperate reply. "So would you be if
you'd sat opposite that woman for half-an-hour, and heard her story." "What woman?" Wilmore demanded, leaning forward in his chair and gazing
at his friend with increasing uneasiness. "A woman who met me outside the Court and told me the story of Oliver
Hilditch's life." "A stranger?" "A complete stranger to me. It transpired that she was his wife." Wilmore lit a cigarette. "Believe her?" "There are times when one doesn't believe or disbelieve," Francis
answered. "One knows." Wilmore nodded. "All the same, you're crazy," he declared. "Even if you did save the
fellow from the gallows, you were only doing your job, doing your duty
to the best of poor ability. You had no reason to believe him guilty." "That's just as it happened," Francis pointed out. "I really didn't care
at the time whether he was or not. I had to proceed on the assumption
that he was not, of course, but on the other hand I should have fought
just as hard for him if I had known him to be guilty." "And you wouldn't now--to-morrow, say?" "Never again." "Because of that woman's story?" "Because of the woman." There was a short silence. Then Wilmore asked a very obvious question. "What sort of a person was she?" Francis Ledsam was several moments before he replied. The question was
one which he had been expecting, one which he had already asked himself
many times, yet he was unprepared with any definite reply. "I wish I could answer you, Andrew," his friend confessed. "As a matter
of fact, I can't. I can only speak of the impression she left upon me,
and you are about the only person breathing to whom I could speak of
that." Wilmore nodded sympathetically. He knew that, man of the world though
Francis Ledsam appeared, he was nevertheless a highly imaginative
person, something of an idealist as regards women, unwilling as a rule
to discuss them, keeping them, in a general way, outside his daily life. "Go ahead, old fellow," he invited. "You know I understand." "She left the impression upon me," Francis continued quietly, "of a
woman who had ceased to live. She was young, she was beautiful, she had
all the gifts--culture, poise and breeding--but she had ceased to live. We sat with a marble table between us, and a few feet of oil-covered
floor. Those few feet, Andrew, were like an impassable gulf. She spoke
from the shores of another world. I listened and answered, spoke and
listened again. And when she told her story, she went. I can't shake off
the effect she had upon me, Andrew. I feel as though I had taken a step
to the right or to the left over the edge of the world." Andrew Wilmore studied his friend thoughtfully. He was full of sympathy and understanding. His one desire at that moment
was not to make a mistake. He decided to leave unasked the obvious
question. "I know," he said simply. "Are you dining anywhere?" "I thought of staying on here," was the indifferent reply. "We won't do anything of the sort," Wilmore insisted. "There's scarcely
a soul in to-night, and the place is too humpy for a man who's been
seeing spooks. Get back to your rooms and change. I'll wait here." "What about you?" "I have some clothes in my locker. Don't be long. And, by-the-bye, which
shall it be--Bohemia or Mayfair? I'll telephone for a table. London's so
infernally full, these days." Francis hesitated. "I really don't care," he confessed. "Now I think of it, I shall be glad
to get away from here, though. I don't want any more congratulations
on saving Oliver Hilditch's life. Let's go where we are least likely to
meet any one we know." "Respectability and a starched shirt-front, then," Wilmore decided. "We'll go to Claridge's." CHAPTER III


The two men occupied a table set against the wall, not far from the
entrance to the restaurant, and throughout the progress of the earlier
part of their meal were able to watch the constant incoming stream of
their fellow-guests. They were, in their way, an interesting contrast
physically, neither of them good-looking according to ordinary
standards, but both with many pleasant characteristics. Andrew Wilmore,
slight and dark, with sallow cheeks and brown eyes, looked very much
what he was--a moderately successful journalist and writer of stories,
a keen golfer, a bachelor who preferred a pipe to cigars, and lived
at Richmond because he could not find a flat in London which he could
afford, large enough for his somewhat expansive habits. Francis Ledsam
was of a sturdier type, with features perhaps better known to the world
owing to the constant activities of the cartoonist. His reputation
during the last few years had carried him, notwithstanding his
comparative youth--he was only thirty-five years of age--into the very
front ranks of his profession, and his income was one of which men spoke
with bated breath. He came of a family of landed proprietors, whose
younger sons for generations had drifted always either to the Bar or the
Law, and his name was well known in the purlieus of Lincoln's Inn
before he himself had made it famous. He was a persistent refuser
of invitations, and his acquaintances in the fashionable world were
comparatively few. Yet every now and then he felt a mild interest in the
people whom his companion assiduously pointed out to him. "A fashionable restaurant, Francis, is rather like your Law Courts--it
levels people up," the latter remarked. "Louis, the head-waiter, is the
judge, and the position allotted in the room is the sentence. I wonder
who is going to have the little table next but one to us. Some favoured
person, evidently." Francis glanced in the direction indicated without curiosity. The
table in question was laid for two and was distinguished by a wonderful
cluster of red roses. "Why is it," the novelist continued speculatively, "that, whenever we
take another man's wife out, we think it necessary to order red roses?" "And why is it," Francis queried, a little grimly, "that a dear fellow
like you, Andrew, believes it his duty to talk of trifles for his pal's
sake, when all the time he is thinking of something else? I know you're
dying to talk about the Hilditch case, aren't you? Well, go ahead." "I'm only interested in this last development," Wilmore confessed. "Of course, I read the newspaper reports. To tell you the truth, for a
murder trial it seemed to me to rather lack colour." "It was a very simple and straightforward case," Francis said slowly. "Oliver Hilditch is the principal partner in an American financial
company which has recently opened offices in the West End. He seems to
have arrived in England about two years ago, to have taken a house in
Hill Street, and to have spent a great deal of money. A month or so ago,
his partner from New York arrived in London, a man named Jordan of whom
nothing was known. It has since transpired, however, that his journey
to Europe was undertaken because he was unable to obtain certain figures
relating to the business, from Hilditch. Oliver Hilditch met him at
Southampton, travelled with him to London and found him a room at the
Savoy. The next day, the whole of the time seems to have been spent in
the office, and it is certain, from the evidence of the clerk, that
some disagreement took place between the two men. They dined together,
however, apparently on good terms, at the Cafe Royal, and parted in
Regent Street soon after ten. At twelve o'clock, Jordan's body was
picked up on the pavement in Hill Street, within a few paces of
Heidrich's door. He had been stabbed through the heart with some
needle-like weapon, and was quite dead." "Was there any vital cause of quarrel between them?" Wilmore enquired. "Impossible to say," Francis replied. "The financial position of
the company depends entirely upon the value of a large quantity of
speculative bonds, but as there was only one clerk employed, it was
impossible to get at any figures. Hilditch declared that Jordan had only
a small share in the business, from which he had drawn a considerable
income for years, and that he had not the slightest cause for
complaint." "What were Hilditch's movements that evening?" Wilmore asked. "Not a soul seems to have seen him after he left Regent Street," was the
somewhat puzzled answer. "His own story was quite straightforward
and has never been contradicted. He let himself into his house with a
latch-key after his return from the Cafe Royal, drank a whisky and
soda in the library, and went to bed before half-past eleven. The whole
affair--"

Francis broke off abruptly in the middle of his sentence. He sat with
his eyes fixed upon the door, silent and speechless. "What in Heaven's name is the matter, old fellow?" Wilmore demanded,
gazing at his companion in blank amazement. The latter pulled himself together with an effort. The sight of the two
new arrivals talking to Louis on the threshold of the restaurant, seemed
for the moment to have drawn every scrap of colour from his cheeks. Nevertheless, his recovery was almost instantaneous. "If you want to know any more," he said calmly, "you had better go and
ask him to tell you the whole story himself. There he is." "And the woman with him?" Wilmore exclaimed under his breath. "His wife!" CHAPTER IV


To reach their table, the one concerning which Francis and his friend
had been speculating, the new arrivals, piloted by Louis, had to pass
within a few feet of the two men. The woman, serene, coldly beautiful,
dressed like a Frenchwoman in unrelieved black, with extraordinary
attention to details, passed them by with a careless glance and subsided
into the chair which Louis was holding. Her companion, however, as he
recognised Francis hesitated. His expression of somewhat austere gloom
was lightened. A pleasant but tentative smile parted his lips. He
ventured upon a salutation, half a nod, half a more formal bow, a
salutation which Francis instinctively returned. Andrew Wilmore looked
on with curiosity. "So that is Oliver Hilditch," he murmured. "That is the man," Francis observed, "of whom last evening half the
people in this restaurant were probably asking themselves whether or
not he was guilty of murder. To-night they will be wondering what he is
going to order for dinner. It is a strange world." "Strange indeed," Wilmore assented. "This afternoon he was in the dock,
with his fate in the balance--the condemned cell or a favoured table at
Claridge's. And your meeting! One can imagine him gripping your hands,
with tears in his eyes, his voice broken with emotion, sobbing out his
thanks. And instead you exchange polite bows. I would not have missed
this situation for anything." "Tradesman!" Francis scoffed. "One can guess already at the plot of your
next novel." "He has courage," Wilmore declared. "He has also a very beautiful
companion. Were you serious, Francis, when you told me that that was his
wife?" "She herself was my informant," was the quiet reply. Wilmore was puzzled. "But she passed you just now without even a glance of recognition, and
I thought you told me at the club this afternoon that all your knowledge
of his evil ways came from her. Besides, she looks at least twenty years
younger than he does." Francis, who had been watching his glass filled with champagne, raised
it to his lips and drank its contents steadily to the last drop. "I can only tell you what I know, Andrew," he said, as he set down the
empty glass. "The woman who is with him now is the woman who spoke to me
outside the Old Bailey this afternoon. We went to a tea-shop together. She told me the story of his career. I have never listened to so
horrible a recital in my life." "And yet they are here together, dining tete-a-tete, on a night when it
must have needed more than ordinary courage for either of them to have
been seen in public at all," Wilmore pointed out. "It is as astounding to me as it is to you," Francis confessed. "From
the way she spoke, I should never have dreamed that they were living
together." "And from his appearance," Wilmore remarked, as he called the waiter
to bring some cigarettes, "I should never have imagined that he was
anything else save a high-principled, well-born, straightforward sort of
chap. I never saw a less criminal type of face." They each in turn glanced at the subject of their discussion. Oliver
Hilditch's good-looks had been the subject of many press comments during
the last few days. They were certainly undeniable. His face was a little
lined but his hair was thick and brown. His features were regular, his
forehead high and thoughtful, his mouth a trifle thin but straight and
shapely. Francis gazed at him like a man entranced. The hours seemed to
have slipped away. He was back in the tea-shop, listening to the woman
who spoke of terrible things. He felt again his shivering abhorrence of
her cold, clearly narrated story. Again he shrank from the horrors from
which with merciless fingers she had stripped the coverings. He seemed
to see once more the agony in her white face, to hear the eternal pain
aching and throbbing in her monotonous tone. He rose suddenly to his
feet. "Andrew," he begged, "tell the fellow to bring the bill outside. We'll
have our coffee and liqueurs there." Wilmore acquiesced willingly enough, but even as they turned towards
the door Francis realised what was in store for him. Oliver Hilditch had
risen to his feet. With a courteous little gesture he intercepted the
passer-by. Francis found himself standing side by side with the man for
whose life he had pleaded that afternoon, within a few feet of the woman
whose terrible story seemed to have poisoned the very atmosphere he
breathed, to have shown him a new horror in life, to have temporarily,
at any rate, undermined every joy and ambition he possessed. "Mr. Ledsam," Hilditch said, speaking with quiet dignity, "I hope that
you will forgive the liberty I take in speaking to you here. I looked
for you the moment I was free this afternoon, but found that you had
left the Court. I owe you my good name, probably my life. Thanks are
poor things but they must be spoken." "You owe me nothing at all," Francis replied, in a tone which even he
found harsh. "I had a brief before me and a cause to plead. It was a
chapter out of my daily work." "That work can be well done or ill," the other reminded him gently. "In your case, my presence here proves how well it was done. I wish to
present you to my wife, who shares my gratitude." Francis bowed to the woman, who now, at her husband's words, raised her
eyes. For the first time he saw her smile. It seemed to him that the
effort made her less beautiful. "Your pleading was very wonderful, Mr. Ledsam," she said, a very subtle
note of mockery faintly apparent in her tone. "We poor mortals find
it difficult to understand that with you all that show of passionate
earnestness is merely--what did you call it?--a chapter in your day's
work? It is a great gift to be able to argue from the brain and plead as
though from the heart." "We will not detain Mr. Ledsam," Oliver Hilditch interposed, a little
hastily. "He perhaps does not care to be addressed in public by a client
who still carries with him the atmosphere of the prison. My wife and I
wondered, Mr. Ledsam, whether you would be good enough to dine with us
one night. I think I could interest you by telling you more about
my case than you know at present, and it would give us a further
opportunity, and a more seemly one, for expressing our gratitude." Francis had recovered himself by this time. He was after all a man of
parts, and though he still had the feeling that he had been through one
of the most momentous days of his life, his savoir faire was making its
inevitable reappearance. He knew very well that the idea of that dinner
would be horrible to him. He also knew that he would willingly cancel
every engagement he had rather than miss it. "You are very kind," he murmured. "Are we fortunate enough to find you disengaged," Hilditch suggested,
"to-morrow evening?" "I am quite free," was the ready response. "That suits you, Margaret?" Hilditch asked, turning courteously to his
wife. For a single moment her eyes were fixed upon those of her prospective
guest. He read their message which pleaded for his refusal, and he
denied it. "To-morrow evening will suit me as well as any other," she acquiesced,
after a brief pause. "At eight o'clock, then--number 10 b, Hill Street," Hilditch concluded. Francis bowed and turned away with a murmured word of polite assent. Outside, he found Wilmore deep in the discussion of the merits of
various old brandies with an interested maitre d'hotel. "Any choice, Francis?" his host enquired. "None whatever," was the prompt reply, "only, for God's sake, give me a
double one quickly!" The two men were on the point of departure when Oliver Hilditch and his
wife left the restaurant. As though conscious that they had become
the subject of discussion, as indeed was the case, thanks to the busy
whispering of the various waiters, they passed without lingering through
the lounge into the entrance hall, where Francis and Andrew Wilmore were
already waiting for a taxicab. Almost as they appeared, a new arrival
was ushered through the main entrance, followed by porters carrying
luggage. He brushed past Francis so closely that the latter looked into
his face, half attracted and half repelled by the waxen-like complexion,
the piercing eyes, and the dignified carriage of the man whose arrival
seemed to be creating some stir in the hotel. A reception clerk and a
deputy manager had already hastened forward. The newcomer waved them
back for a moment. Bareheaded, he had taken Margaret Hilditch's hands in
his and raised them to his lips. "I came as quickly as I could," he said. "There was the usual delay, of
course, at Marseilles, and the trains on were terrible. So all has ended
well." Oliver Hilditch, standing by, remained speechless. It seemed for a
moment as though his self-control were subjected to a severe strain. "I had the good fortune," he interposed, in a low tone, "to be
wonderfully defended. Mr. Ledsam here--"

He glanced around. Francis, with some idea of what was coming, obeyed an
imaginary summons from the head-porter, touched Andrew Wilmore upon
the shoulder, and hastened without a backward glance through the
swing-doors. Wilmore turned up his coat-collar and looked doubtfully up
at the rain. "I say, old chap," he protested, "you don't really mean to walk?" Francis thrust his hand through his friend's arm and wheeled him round
into Davies Street. "I don't care what the mischief we do, Andrew," he confided, "but
couldn't you see what was going to happen? Oliver Hilditch was going to
introduce me as his preserver to the man who had just arrived!" "Are you afflicted with modesty, all of a sudden?" Wilmore grumbled. "No, remorse," was the terse reply. CHAPTER V


Indecision had never been one of Francis Ledsam's faults, but four times
during the following day he wrote out a carefully worded telegraphic
message to Mrs. Oliver Hilditch, 10 b, Hill Street, regretting his
inability to dine that night, and each time he destroyed it. He carried
the first message around Richmond golf course with him, intending to
dispatch his caddy with it immediately on the conclusion of the round. The fresh air, however, and the concentration required by the game,
seemed to dispel the nervous apprehensions with which he had anticipated
his visit, and over an aperitif in the club bar he tore the telegram
into small pieces and found himself even able to derive a certain
half-fearful pleasure from the thought of meeting again the woman who,
together with her terrible story, had never for one moment been out of
his thoughts. Andrew Wilmore, who had observed his action, spoke of it
as they settled down to lunch. "So you are going to keep your engagement tonight, Francis?" he
observed. The latter nodded. "After all, why not?" he asked, a little defiantly. "It ought to be
interesting." "Well, there's nothing of the sordid criminal, at any rate, about Oliver
Hilditch," Wilmore declared. "Neither, if one comes to think of it, does
his wife appear to be the prototype of suffering virtue. I wonder if you
are wise to go, Francis?" "Why not?" the man who had asked himself that question a dozen times
already, demanded. "Because," Wilmore replied coolly, "underneath that steely hardness
of manner for which your profession is responsible, you have a vein
of sentiment, of chivalrous sentiment, I should say, which some day or
other is bound to get you into trouble. The woman is beautiful enough
to turn any one's head. As a matter of fact, I believe that you are more
than half in love with her already." Francis Ledsam sat where the sunlight fell upon his strong, forceful
face, shone, too, upon the table with its simple but pleasant
appointments, upon the tankard of beer by his side, upon the plate of
roast beef to which he was already doing ample justice. He laughed with
the easy confidence of a man awakened from some haunting nightmare,
relieved to find his feet once more firm upon the ground. "I have been a fool to take the whole matter so seriously, Andrew,"
he declared. "I expect to walk back to Clarges Street to-night,
disillusioned. The man will probably present me with a gold pencil-case,
and the woman--"

"Well, what about the woman?" Wilmore asked, after a brief pause. "Oh, I don't know!" Francis declared, a little impatiently. "The woman
is the mystery, of course. Probably my brain was a little over-excited
when I came out of Court, and what I imagined to be an epic was nothing
more than a tissue of exaggerations from a disappointed wife. I'm sure
I'm doing the right thing to go there.... What about a four-ball this
afternoon, Andrew?" The four-ball match was played and won in normal fashion. The two men
returned to town together afterwards, Wilmore to the club and Francis to
his rooms in Clarges Street to prepare for dinner. At a few minutes to
eight he rang the bell of number 10 b, Hill Street, and found his host
and hostess awaiting him in the small drawing-room into which he was
ushered. It seemed to him that the woman, still colourless, again
marvellously gowned, greeted him coldly. His host, however, was almost
too effusive. There was no other guest, but the prompt announcement of
dinner dispelled what might have been a few moments of embarrassment
after Oliver Hilditch's almost too cordial greeting. The woman laid her
fingers upon her guest's coat-sleeve. The trio crossed the little hall
almost in silence. Dinner was served in a small white Georgian dining-room, with every
appurtenance of almost Sybaritic luxury. The only light in the room
was thrown upon the table by two purple-shaded electric lamps, and the
servants who waited seemed to pass backwards and forwards like shadows
in some mysterious twilight--even the faces of the three diners
themselves were out of the little pool of light until they leaned
forward. The dinner was chosen with taste and restraint, the wines were
not only costly but rare. A watchful butler, attended now and then by
a trim parlour-maid, superintended the service. Only once, when she
ordered a bowl of flowers removed from the table, did their mistress
address either of them. Conversation after the first few amenities
speedily became almost a monologue. One man talked whilst the others
listened, and the man who talked was Oliver Hilditch. He possessed the
rare gift of imparting colour and actuality in a few phrases to the
strange places of which he spoke, of bringing the very thrill of strange
happenings into the shadowy room. It seemed that there was scarcely a
country of the world which he had not visited, a country, that is to
say, where men congregate, for he admitted from the first that he was a
city worshipper, that the empty places possessed no charm for him. "I am not even a sportsman," he confessed once, half apologetically, in
reply to a question from his guest. "I have passed down the great rivers
of the world without a thought of salmon, and I have driven through the
forest lands and across the mountains behind a giant locomotive, without
a thought of the beasts which might be lurking there, waiting to be
killed. My only desire has been to reach the next place where men and
women were." "Irrespective of nationality?" Francis queried. "Absolutely. I have never minded much of what race--I have the trick
of tongues rather strangely developed--but I like the feeling of human
beings around me. I like the smell and sound and atmosphere of a great
city. Then all my senses are awake, but life becomes almost turgid in my
veins during the dreary hours of passing from one place to another." "Do you rule out scenery as well as sport from amongst the joys of
travel?" Francis enquired. "I am ashamed to make such a confession," his host answered, "but I
have never lingered for a single unnecessary moment to look at the most
wonderful landscape in the world. On the other hand, I have lounged for
hours in the narrowest streets of Pekin, in the markets of Shanghai,
along Broadway in New York, on the boulevards in Paris, outside the
Auditorium in Chicago. These are the obvious places where humanity
presses the thickest, but I know of others. Some day we will talk of
them." Francis, too, although that evening, through sheer lack of sympathy,
he refused to admit it, shared to some extent Hilditch's passionate
interest in his fellow-creatures, and notwithstanding the strange
confusion of thought into which he had been thrown during the last
twenty-four hours, he felt something of the pungency of life, the thrill
of new and appealing surroundings, as he sat in his high-backed chair,
sipping his wonderful wine, eating almost mechanically what was set
before him, fascinated through all his being by his strange company. For three days he had cast occasional glances at this man, seated in
the criminal dock with a gaoler on either side of him, his fine,
nervous features gaining an added distinction from the sordidness of his
surroundings. Now, in the garb of civilisation, seated amidst luxury to
which he was obviously accustomed, with a becoming light upon his face
and this strange, fascinating flow of words proceeding always from his
lips, the man, from every external point of view, seemed amongst the
chosen ones of the world. The contrast was in itself amazing. And then
the woman! Francis looked at her but seldom, and when he did it was with
a curious sense of mental disturbance; poignant but unanalysable. It was amazing to see her here, opposite the man of whom she had told
him that ghastly story, mistress of his house, to all appearance his
consort, apparently engrossed in his polished conversation, yet with
that subtle withholding of her real self which Francis rather imagined
than felt, and which somehow seemed to imply her fierce resentment of
her husband's re-entry into the arena of life. It was a situation so
strange that Francis, becoming more and more subject to its influence,
was inclined to wonder whether he had not met with some accident on
his way from the Court, and whether this was not one of the heated
nightmares following unconsciousness. "Tell me," he asked his host, during one of the brief pauses in the
conversation, "have you ever tried to analyse this interest of yours
in human beings and crowded cities, this hatred of solitude and empty
spaces?" Oliver Hilditch smiled thoughtfully, and gazed at a salted almond which
he was just balancing between the tips of his fingers. "I think," he said simply, "it is because I have no soul." CHAPTER VI


The three diners lingered for only a short time over their dessert. Afterwards, they passed together into a very delightful library on the
other side of the round, stone-paved hall. Hilditch excused himself for
a moment. "I have some cigars which I keep in my dressing-room," he explained,
"and which I am anxious for you to try. There is an electric stove there
and I can regulate the temperature." He departed, closing the door behind him. Francis came a little further
into the room. His hostess, who had subsided into an easy-chair and was
holding a screen between her face and the fire, motioned him to,
seat himself opposite. He did so without words. He felt curiously and
ridiculously tongue-tied. He fell to studying the woman instead of
attempting the banality of pointless speech. From the smooth gloss of
her burnished hair, to the daintiness of her low, black brocaded shoes,
she represented, so far as her physical and outward self were concerned,
absolute perfection. No ornament was amiss, no line or curve of her
figure other than perfectly graceful. Yet even the fire's glow which
she had seemed to dread brought no flush of colour to her cheeks. Her
appearance of complete lifelessness remained. It was as though some sort
of crust had formed about her being, a condition which her very physical
perfection seemed to render the more incomprehensible. "You are surprised to see me here living with my husband, after what
I told you yesterday afternoon?" she said calmly, breaking at last the
silence which had reigned between them. "I am," he admitted. "It seems unnatural to you, I suppose?" "Entirely." "You still believe all that I told you?" "I must." She looked at the door and raised her head a little, as though either
listening or adjudging the time before her husband would return. Then
she glanced across at him once more. "Hatred," she said, "does not always drive away. Sometimes it attracts. Sometimes the person who hates can scarcely bear the other out of his
sight. That is where hate and love are somewhat alike." The room was warm but Francis was conscious of shivering. She raised
her finger warningly. It seemed typical of the woman, somehow, that the
message could not be conveyed by any glance or gesture. "He is coming," she whispered. Oliver Hilditch reappeared, carrying cigars wrapped in gold foil which
he had brought with him from Cuba, the tobacco of which was a revelation
to his guest. The two men smoked and sipped their coffee and brandy. The
woman sat with half-closed eyes. It was obvious that Hilditch was still
in the mood for speech. "I will tell you, Mr. Ledsam," he said, "why I am so happy to have you
here this evening. In the first place, I desire to tender you once more
my thanks for your very brilliant efforts on my behalf. The very fact
that I am able to offer you hospitality at all is without a doubt due to
these." "I only did what I was paid to do," Francis insisted, a little harshly. "You must remember that these things come in the day's work with us." His host nodded. "Naturally," he murmured. "There was another reason, too, why I was
anxious to meet you, Mr. Ledsam," he continued. "You have gathered
already that I am something of a crank. I have a profound detestation
of all sentimentality and affected morals. It is a relief to me to
come into contact with a man who is free from that bourgeois incubus to
modern enterprise--a conscience." "Is that your estimate of me?" Francis asked. "Why not? You practise your profession in the criminal courts, do you
not?" "That is well-known," was the brief reply. "What measure of conscience can a man have," Oliver Hilditch argued
blandly, "who pleads for the innocent and guilty alike with the same
simulated fervour? Confess, now, Mr. Ledsam--there is no object in being
hypocritical in this matter--have you not often pleaded for the guilty
as though you believed them innocent?" "That has sometimes been my duty," Francis acknowledged. Hilditch laughed scornfully. "It is all part of the great hypocrisy of society," he proclaimed. "You have an extra glass of champagne for dinner at night and are
congratulated by your friends because you have helped some poor devil
to cheat the law, while all the time you know perfectly well, and so
do your high-minded friends, that your whole attitude during those two
hours of eloquence has been a lie. That is what first attracted me to
you, Mr. Ledsam." "I am sorry to hear it," Francis commented coldly. "The ethics of my
profession--"

His host stopped him with a little wave of the hand. "Spare me that," he begged. "While we are on the subject, though, I have
a question to ask you. My lawyer told me, directly after he had briefed
you, that, although it would make no real difference to your pleading,
it would be just as well for me to keep up my bluff of being innocent,
even in private conversation with you. Why was that?" "For the very obvious reason," Francis told him, "that we are not
all such rogues and vagabonds as you seem to think. There is more
satisfaction to me, at any rate, in saving an innocent man's life than a
guilty one's." Hilditch laughed as though amused. "Come," he threatened, "I am going to be ill-natured. You have shown
signs of smugness, a quality which I detest. I am going to rob you of
some part of your self-satisfaction. Of course I killed Jordan. I killed
him in the very chair in which you are now sitting." There was a moment's intense silence. The woman was still fanning
herself lazily. Francis leaned forward in his place. "I do not wish to hear this!" he exclaimed harshly. "Don't be foolish," his host replied, rising to his feet and strolling
across the room. "You know the whole trouble of the prosecution. They
couldn't discover the weapon, or anything like it, with which the deed
was done. Now I'll show you something ingenious." Francis followed the other's movements with fascinated eyes. The woman
scarcely turned her head. Hilditch paused at the further end of the
room, where there were a couple of gun cases, some fishing rods and a
bag, of golf clubs. From the latter he extracted a very ordinary-looking
putter, and with it in his hands strolled back to them. "Do you play golf, Ledsam?" he asked. "What do you think of that?" Francis took the putter into his hand. It was a very ordinary club,
which had apparently seen a good deal of service, so much, indeed, that
the leather wrapping at the top was commencing to unroll. The maker's
name was on the back of the blade, also the name of the professional
from whom it had been purchased. Francis swung the implement
mechanically with his wrists. "There seems to be nothing extraordinary about the club," he pronounced. "It is very much like a cleek I putt with myself." "Yet it contains a secret which would most certainly have hanged me,"
Oliver Hilditch declared pleasantly. "See!" He held the shaft firmly in one hand and bent the blade away from it. In a moment or two it yielded and he commenced to unscrew it. A little
exclamation escaped from Francis' lips. The woman looked on with tired
eyes. "The join in the steel," Hilditch pointed out, "is so fine as to be
undistinguishable by the naked eye. Yet when the blade comes off, like
this, you see that although the weight is absolutely adjusted, the
inside is hollow. The dagger itself is encased in this cotton wool to
avoid any rattling. I put it away in rather a hurry the last time I used
it, and as you see I forgot to clean it." Francis staggered back and gripped at the mantelpiece. His eyes were
filled with horror. Very slowly, and with the air of one engaged upon
some interesting task, Oliver Hilditch had removed the blood-stained
sheath of cotton wool from around the thin blade of a marvellous-looking
stiletto, on which was also a long stain of encrusted blood. "There is a handle," he went on, "which is perhaps the most ingenious
thing of all. You touch a spring here, and behold!" He pressed down two tiny supports which opened upon hinges about four
inches from the top of the handle. There was now a complete hilt. "With this little weapon," he explained, "the point is so sharpened
and the steel so wonderful that it is not necessary to stab. It has the
perfection of a surgical instrument. You have only to lean it against
a certain point in a man's anatomy, lunge ever so little and the whole
thing is done. Come here, Mr. Ledsam, and I will show you the exact
spot." Francis made no movement. His eyes were fixed upon the weapon. "If I had only known!" he muttered. "My dear fellow, if you had," the other protested soothingly, "you know
perfectly well that it would not have made the slightest difference. Perhaps that little break in your voice would not have come quite so
naturally, the little sweep of your arm towards me, the man whom a
moment's thoughtlessness might sweep into Eternity, would have been a
little stiffer, but what matter? You would still have done your best and
you would probably still have succeeded. You don't care about trifling
with Eternity, eh? Very well, I will find the place for you." Hilditch's fingers strayed along his shirt-front until he found a
certain spot. Then he leaned the dagger against it, his forefinger and
second finger pressed against the hilt. His eyes were fixed upon his
guest's. He seemed genuinely interested. Francis, glancing away for a
moment, was suddenly conscious of a new horror. The woman had leaned
a little forward in her easy-chair until she had attained almost a
crouching position. Her eyes seemed to be measuring the distance from
where she sat to that quivering thread of steel. "You see, Ledsam," his host went on, "that point driven now at that
angle would go clean through the vital part of my heart. And it needs no
force, either--just the slow pressure of these two fingers. What did you
say, Margaret?" he enquired, breaking off abruptly. The woman was seated upon the very edge of her chair, her eyes rivetted
upon the dagger. There was no change in her face, not a tremor in her
tone. "I said nothing," she replied. "I did not speak at all. I was just
watching." Hilditch turned back to his guest. "These two fingers," he repeated, "and a flick of the wrist--very little
more than would be necessary for a thirty yard putt right across the
green." Francis had recovered himself, had found his bearings to a certain
extent. "I am sorry that you have told me this, Mr. Hilditch," he said, a little
stiffly. "Why?" was the puzzled reply. "I thought you would be interested." "I am interested to this extent," Francis declared, "I shall accept no
more cases such as yours unless I am convinced of my client's innocence. I look upon your confession to me as being in the worst possible taste,
and I regret very much my efforts on your behalf." The woman was listening intently. Hilditch's expression was one of
cynical wonder. Francis rose to his feet and moved across to his
hostess. "Mrs. Hilditch," he said, "will you allow me to make my apologies? Your
husband and I have arrived at an understanding--or perhaps I should
say a misunderstanding--which renders the acceptance of any further
hospitality on my part impossible." She held out the tips of her fingers. "I had no idea," she observed, with gentle sarcasm, "that you barristers
were such purists morally. I thought you were rather proud of being the
last hope of the criminal classes." "Madam," Francis replied, "I am not proud of having saved the life of a
self-confessed murderer, even though that man may be your husband." Hilditch was laughing softly to himself as he escorted his departing
guest to the door. "You have a quaint sense of humour," Francis remarked. "Forgive me," Oliver Hilditch begged, "but your last few words rather
appealed to me. You must be a person of very scanty perceptions if you
could spend the evening here and not understand that my death is the one
thing in the world which would make my wife happy." Francis walked home with these last words ringing in his ears. They
seemed with him even in that brief period of troubled sleep which came
to him when he had regained his rooms and turned in. They were there in
the middle of the night when he was awakened, shivering, by the shrill
summons of his telephone bell. He stood quaking before the instrument
in his pajamas. It was the voice which, by reason of some ghastly
premonition, he had dreaded to hear--level, composed, emotionless. "Mr. Ledsam?" she enquired. "I am Francis Ledsam," he assented. "Who wants me?" "It is Margaret Hilditch speaking," she announced. "I felt that I must
ring up and tell you of a very strange thing which happened after you
left this evening." "Go on," he begged hoarsely. "After you left," she went on, "my husband persisted in playing with
that curious dagger. He laid it against his heart, and seated himself
in the chair which Mr. Jordan had occupied, in the same attitude. It was
what he called a reconstruction. While he was holding it there, I think
that he must have had a fit, or it may have been remorse, we shall never
know. He called out and I hurried across the room to him. I tried to
snatch the dagger away--I did so, in fact--but I must have been too
late. He had already applied that slight movement of the fingers which
was necessary. The doctor has just left. He says that death must have
been instantaneous." "But this is horrible!" Francis cried out into the well of darkness. "A person is on the way from Scotland Yard," the voice continued,
without change or tremor. "When he has satisfied himself, I am going to
bed. He is here now. Good-night!" Francis tried to speak again but his words beat against a wall of
silence. He sat upon the edge of the bed, shivering. In that moment
of agony he seemed to hear again the echo of Oliver Hilditch's mocking
words:

"My death is the one thing in the world which would make my wife happy!" CHAPTER VII


There was a good deal of speculation at the Sheridan Club, of which he
was a popular and much envied member, as to the cause for the complete
disappearance from their midst of Francis Ledsam since the culmination
of the Hilditch tragedy. "Sent back four topping briefs, to my knowledge, last week," one of the
legal luminaries of the place announced to a little group of friends and
fellow-members over a before-dinner cocktail. "Griggs offered him the defence of William Bull, the Chippenham
murderer, and he refused it," another remarked. "Griggs wrote him
personally, and the reply came from the Brancaster Golf Club! It isn't
like Ledsam to be taking golfing holidays in the middle of the session." "There's nothing wrong with Ledsam," declared a gruff voice from the
corner. "And don't gossip, you fellows, at the top of your voices like a
lot of old women. He'll be calling here for me in a moment or two." They all looked around. Andrew Wilmore rose slowly to his feet and
emerged from behind the sheets of an evening paper. He laid his hand
upon the shoulder of a friend, and glanced towards the door. "Ledsam's had a touch of nerves," he confided. "There's been nothing
else the matter with him. We've been down at the Dormy House at
Brancaster and he's as right as a trivet now. That Hilditch affair did
him in completely." "I don't see why," one of the bystanders observed. "He got Hilditch off
all right. One of the finest addresses to a jury I ever heard." "That's just the point," Wilmore explained "You see, Ledsam had no idea
that Hilditch was really guilty, and for two hours that afternoon he
literally fought for his life, and in the end wrested a verdict from the
jury, against the judge's summing up, by sheer magnetism or eloquence
or whatever you fellows like to call it. The very night after, Hilditch
confesses his guilt and commits suicide." "I still don't see where Ledsam's worry comes in," the legal luminary
remarked. "The fact that the man was guilty is rather a feather in the
cap of his counsel. Shows how jolly good his pleading must have been." "Just so," Wilmore agreed, "but Ledsam, as you know, is a very
conscientious sort of fellow, and very sensitive, too. The whole thing
was a shock to him." "It must have been a queer experience," a novelist remarked from the
outskirts of the group, "to dine with a man whose life you have juggled
away from the law, and then have him explain his crime to you, and
the exact manner of its accomplishment. Seems to bring one amongst the
goats, somehow." "Bit of a shock, no doubt," the lawyer assented, "but I still don't
understand Ledsam's sending back all his briefs. He's not going to chuck
the profession, is he?" "Not by any means," Wilmore declared. "I think he has an idea, though,
that he doesn't want to accept any briefs unless he is convinced that
the person whom he has to represent is innocent, and lawyers don't like
that sort of thing, you know. You can't pick and choose, even when you
have Leadsam's gifts." "The fact of it is," the novelist commented, "Francis Ledsam isn't
callous enough to be associated with you money-grubbing dispensers of
the law. He'd be all right as Public Prosecutor, a sort of Sir Galahad
waving the banner of virtue, but he hates to stuff his pockets at the
expense of the criminal classes." "Who the mischief are the criminal classes?" a police court magistrate
demanded. "Personally, I call war profiteering criminal, I call a good
many Stock Exchange deals criminal, and," he added, turning to a member
of the committee who was hovering in the background, "I call it criminal
to expect us to drink French vermouth like this." "There is another point of view," the latter retorted. "I call it
a crime to expect a body of intelligent men to administer without
emolument to the greed of such a crowd of rotters. You'll get the right
stuff next week." The hall-porter approached and addressed Wilmore. "Mr. Ledsam is outside in a taxi, sir," he announced. "Outside in a taxi?" the lawyer repeated. "Why on earth can't he come
in?" "I never heard such rot," another declared. "Let's go and rope him in." "Mr. Ledsam desired me to say, sir," the hall porter continued, "to
any of his friends who might be here, that he will be in to lunch
to-morrow." "Leave him to me till then," Wilmore begged. "He'll be all right
directly. He's simply altering his bearings and taking his time about
it. If he's promised to lunch here to-morrow, he will. He's as near as
possible through the wood. Coming up in the train, he suggested a little
conversation to-night and afterwards the normal life. He means it, too. There's nothing neurotic about Ledsam." The magistrate nodded. "Run along, then, my merry Andrew," he said, "but see that Ledsam keeps
his word about to-morrow." Andrew Wilmore plunged boldly into the forbidden subject later on that
evening, as the two men sat side by side at one of the wall tables in
Soto's famous club restaurant. They had consumed an excellent dinner. An empty champagne bottle had just been removed, double liqueur brandies
had taken its place. Francis, with an air of complete and even exuberant
humanity, had lit a huge cigar. The moment seemed propitious. "Francis," his friend began, "they say at the club that you refused to
be briefed in the Chippenham affair." "Quite true," was the calm reply. "I told Griggs that I wouldn't have
anything to do with it." Wilmore knew then that all was well. Francis' old air of strength and
decision had returned. His voice was firm, his eyes were clear and
bright. His manner seemed even to invite questioning. "I think I know why," Wilmore said, "but I should like you to tell me in
your own words." Francis glanced around as though to be sure that they were not
overheard. "Because," he replied, dropping his voice a little but still speaking
with great distinctness, "William Bull is a cunning and dangerous
criminal whom I should prefer to see hanged." "You know that?" "I know that." "It would be a great achievement to get him off," Wilmore persisted. "The evidence is very weak in places." "I believe that I could get him off," was the confident reply. "That
is why I will not touch the brief. I think," Francis continued, "that
I have already conveyed it to you indirectly, but here you are in plain
words, Andrew. I have made up my mind that I will defend no man in
future unless I am convinced of his innocence." "That means--"

"It means practically the end of my career at the bar," Francis
admitted. "I realise that absolutely: Fortunately, as you know, I am not
dependent upon my earnings, and I have had a wonderful ten years." "This is all because of the Hilditch affair, I suppose?" "Entirely." Wilmore was still a little puzzled. "You seem to imagine that you have something on your conscience as
regards that business," he said boldly. "I have," was the calm reply. "Come," Wilmore protested, "I don't quite follow your line of thought. Granted that Hilditch was a desperate criminal whom by the exercise
of your special gifts you saved from the law, surely his tragic death
balanced the account between you and Society?" "It might have done," Francis admitted, "if he had really committed
suicide." Wilmore was genuinely startled. He looked at his companion curiously. "What the devil do you mean, old chap?" he demanded. "Your own evidence
at the inquest was practically conclusive as to that." Francis glanced around him with apparent indifference but in reality
with keen and stealthy care. On their right was a glass division,
through which the sound of their voices could not possibly penetrate. On their left was an empty space, and a table beyond was occupied by a
well-known cinema magnate engaged in testing the attractions in daily
life of a would-be film star. Nevertheless, Francis' voice was scarcely
raised above a whisper. "My evidence at the coroner's inquest," he confided, "was a subtly
concocted tissue of lies. I committed perjury freely. That is the real
reason why I've been a little on the nervy side lately, and why I took
these few months out of harness." "Good God!" Wilmore exclaimed, setting down untasted the glass of brandy
which he had just raised to his lips. "I want to finish this matter up," Francis continued calmly, "by making
a clean breast of it to you, because from to-night I am starting afresh,
with new interests in my life, what will practically amount to a new
career. That is why I preferred not to dine at the club to-night,
although I am looking forward to seeing them all again. I wanted instead
to have this conversation with you. I lied at the inquest when I said
that the relations between Oliver Hilditch and his wife that night
seemed perfectly normal. I lied when I said that I knew of no cause for
ill-will between them. I lied when I said that I left them on friendly
terms. I lied when I said that Oliver Hilditch seemed depressed and
nervous. I lied when I said that he expressed the deepest remorse for
what he had done. There was every indication that night, of the hate
which I happen to know existed between the woman and the man. I have not
the faintest doubt in my mind but that she murdered him. In my judgment,
she was perfectly justified in doing so." There followed a brief but enforced silence as some late arrivals
passed their table. The room was well-ventilated but Andrew Wilmore felt
suddenly hot and choking. A woman, one of the little group of newcomers,
glanced towards Francis curiously. "Francis Ledsam, the criminal barrister," her companion whispered,--"the
man who got Oliver Hilditch off. The man with him is Andrew Wilmore, the
novelist. Discussing a case, I expect." CHAPTER VIII


The little party of late diners passed on their way to the further end
of the room, leaving a wave of artificiality behind, or was it, Andrew
Wilmore wondered, in a moment of half-dazed speculation, that it was
they and the rest of the gay company who represented the real things,
and he and his companion who were playing a sombre part in some unreal
and gloomier world. Francis' voice, however, when he recommenced his
diatribe, was calm and matter-of-fact enough. "You see," he continued, argumentatively, "I was morally and actually
responsible for the man's being brought back into Society. And far worse
than that, I was responsible for his being thrust back again upon his
wife. Ergo, I was also responsible for what she did that night. The
matter seems as plain as a pikestaff to me. I did what I could to atone,
rightly or wrongly it doesn't matter, because it is over and done with. There you are, old fellow, now you know what's been making me nervy. I've committed wholesale perjury, but I acted according to my conscience
and I think according to justice. The thing has worried me, I admit, but
it has passed, and I'm glad it's off my chest. One more liqueur, Andrew,
and if you want to we'll talk about my plans for the future." The brandy was brought. Wilmore studied his friend curiously, not
without some relief. Francis had lost the harassed and nervous
appearance upon which his club friends had commented, which had been
noticeable, even, to a diminishing extent, upon the golf course at
Brancaster. He was alert and eager. He had the air of a man upon the
threshold of some enterprise dear to his heart. "I have been through a queer experience," Francis continued presently,
as he sipped his second liqueur. "Not only had I rather less than twelve
hours to make up my mind whether I should commit a serious offence
against the law, but a sensation which I always hoped that I might
experience, has come to me in what I suppose I must call most
unfortunate fashion." "The woman?" Wilmore ventured. Francis assented gloomily. There was a moment's silence. Wilmore, the
metaphysician, saw then a strange thing. He saw a light steal across his
friend's stern face. He saw his eyes for a moment soften, the hard mouth
relax, something incredible, transforming, shine, as it were, out of
the man's soul in that moment of self-revelation. It was gone like the
momentary passing of a strange gleam of sunshine across a leaden sea,
but those few seconds were sufficient. Wilmore knew well enough what had
happened. "Oliver Hilditch's wife," Francis went on, after a few minutes' pause,
"presents an enigma which at present I cannot hope to solve. The fact
that she received her husband back again, knowing what he was and
what he was capable of, is inexplicable to me. The woman herself is a
mystery. I do not know what lies behind her extraordinary immobility. Feeling she must have, and courage, or she would never have dared to
have ridded herself of the scourge of her life. But beyond that my
judgment tells me nothing. I only know that sooner or later I shall seek
her out. I shall discover all that I want to know, one way or the other. It may be for happiness--it may be the end of the things that count." "I guessed this," Wilmore admitted, with a little shiver which he was
wholly unable to repress. Francis nodded. "Then keep it to yourself, my dear fellow," he begged, "like everything
else I am telling you tonight. I have come out of my experience changed
in many ways," he continued, "but, leaving out that one secret chapter,
this is the dominant factor which looms up before me. I bring into life
a new aversion, almost a passion, Andrew, born in a tea-shop in the
city, and ministered to by all that has happened since. I have lost that
sort of indifference which my profession engenders towards crime. I am
at war with the criminal, sometimes, I hope, in the Courts of Justice,
but forever out of them. I am no longer indifferent as to whether men do
good or evil so long as they do not cross my path. I am a hunter of
sin. I am out to destroy. There's a touch of melodrama in this for
you, Andrew," he concluded, with a little laugh, "but, my God, I'm in
earnest!" "What does this mean so far as regards the routine of your daily life?" Wilmore asked curiously. "Well, it brings us to the point we discussed down at Brancaster,"
Francis replied. "It will affect my work to this extent. I shall not
accept any brief unless, after reading the evidence, I feel convinced
that the accused is innocent." "That's all very well," Wilmore observed, "but you know what it will
mean, don't you? Lawyers aren't likely to single you out for a brief
without ever feeling sure whether you will accept it or not." "That doesn't worry me," Francis declared. "I don't need the fees,
fortunately, and I can always pick up enough work to keep me going by
attending Sessions. One thing I can promise you--I certainly shall not
sit in my rooms and wait for things to happen. Mine is a militant spirit
and it needs the outlet of action." "Action, yes, but how?" Wilmore queried. "You can't be always hanging
about the courts, waiting for the chance of defending some poor devil
who's been wrongfully accused--there aren't enough of them, for one
thing. On the other hand, you can't walk down Regent Street, brandishing
a two-edged sword and hunting for pickpockets." Francis smiled. "Nothing so flamboyant, I can assure you, Andrew," he replied; "nor
shall I play the amateur detective with his mouth open for mysteries. But listen," he went on earnestly. "I've had some experience, as you
know, and, notwithstanding the Oliver Hilditch's of the world, I can
generally tell a criminal when I meet him face to face. There are plenty
of them about, too, Andrew--as many in this place as any other. I am not
going to be content with a negative position as regards evildoers. I am
going to set my heel on as many of the human vermin of this city as I
can find." "A laudable, a most exhilarating and delightful pursuit! `human vermin,'
too, is excellent. It opens up a new and fascinating vista for the
modern sportsman. My congratulations!" It was an interruption of peculiar and wonderful significance, but
Francis did not for the moment appreciate the fact. Turning his head, he
simply saw a complete stranger seated unaccountably at the next table,
who had butted into a private conversation and whose tone of gentle
sarcasm, therefore, was the more offensive. "Who the devil are you, sir," he demanded, "and where did you come
from?" The newcomer showed no resentment at Francis' little outburst. He simply
smiled with deprecating amiability--a tall, spare man, with lean, hard
face, complexion almost unnaturally white; black hair, plentifully
besprinkled with grey; a thin, cynical mouth, notwithstanding its
distinctly humourous curve, and keen, almost brilliant dark eyes. He was
dressed in ordinary dinner garb; his linen and jewellery was indeed in
the best possible taste. Francis, at his second glance, was troubled
with a vague sense of familiarity. "Let me answer your last question first, sir," the intruder begged. "I
was seated alone, several tables away, when the couple next to you went
out, and having had pointed out to me the other evening at Claridge's
Hotel, and knowing well by repute, the great barrister, Mr. Francis
Ledsam, and his friend the world-famed novelist, Mr. Andrew Wilmore,
I--er--unobtrusively made my way, half a yard at a time, in your
direction--and here I am. I came stealthily, you may object? Without
a doubt. If I had come in any other fashion, I should have disturbed a
conversation in which I was much interested." "Could you find it convenient," Francis asked, with icy politeness, "to
return to your own table, stealthily or not, as you choose?" The newcomer showed no signs of moving. "In after years," he declared, "you would be the first to regret
the fact if I did so. This is a momentous meeting. It gives me an
opportunity of expressing my deep gratitude to you, Mr. Ledsam, for
the wonderful evidence you tendered at the inquest upon the body of my
son-in-law, Oliver Hilditch." Francis turned in his place and looked steadily at this unsought-for
companion, learning nothing, however, from the half-mocking smile and
imperturbable expression. "Your son-in-law?" he repeated. "Do you mean to say that you are the
father of--of Oliver Hilditch's wife?" "Widow," the other corrected gently. "I have that honour. You
will understand, therefore, that I feel myself on this, the first
opportunity, compelled to tender my sincere thanks for evidence so
chivalrously offered, so flawlessly truthful." Francis was a man accustomed to self-control, but he clenched his hands
so that his finger nails dug into his flesh. He was filled with an
insane and unreasoning resentment against this man whose words were
biting into his conscience. Nevertheless, he kept his tone level. "I do not desire your gratitude," he said, "nor, if you will permit me
to say so, your further acquaintance." The stranger shook his head regretfully. "You are wrong," he protested. "We were bound, in any case, to know one
another. Shall I tell you why? You have just declared yourself anxious
to set your heel upon the criminals of the world. I have the distinction
of being perhaps the most famous patron of that maligned class now
living--and my neck is at your service." "You appear to me," Francis said suavely, "to be a buffoon." It might have been fancy, but Francis could have sworn that he saw the
glitter of a sovereign malevolence in the other's dark eyes. If so, it
was but a passing weakness, for a moment later the half good-natured,
half cynical smile was back again upon the man's lips. "If so, I am at least a buffoon of parts," was the prompt rejoinder. "I
will, if you choose, prove myself." There was a moment's silence. Wilmore was leaning forward in his place,
studying the newcomer earnestly. An impatient invective was somehow
stifled upon Francis' lips. "Within a few yards of this place, sometime before the closing hour
to-night," the intruder continued, earnestly yet with a curious absence
of any human quality in his hard tone, "there will be a disturbance,
and probably what you would call a crime will be committed. Will you use
your vaunted gifts to hunt down the desperate criminal, and, in your own
picturesque phraseology, set your heel upon his neck? Success may bring
you fame, and the trail may lead--well, who knows where?" Afterwards, both Francis and Andrew Wilmore marvelled at themselves,
unable at any time to find any reasonable explanation of their conduct,
for they answered this man neither with ridicule, rudeness nor civility. They simply stared at him, impressed with the convincing arrogance
of his challenge and unable to find words of reply. They received
his mocking farewell without any form of reciprocation or sign of
resentment. They watched him leave the room, a dignified, distinguished
figure, sped on his way with marks of the deepest respect by waiters,
maitres d'hotels and even the manager himself. They behaved, indeed, as
they both admitted afterwards, like a couple of moonstruck idiots. When
he had finally disappeared, however, they looked at one another and the
spell was broken. "Well, I'm damned!" Francis exclaimed. "Soto, come here at once." The manager hastened smilingly to their table. "Soto," Francis invoked, "tell us quickly--tell us the name of the
gentleman who has just gone out, and who he is?" Soto was amazed. "You don't know Sir Timothy Brast, sir?" he exclaimed. "Why, he is
supposed to be one of the richest men in the world! He spends money like
water. They say that when he is in England, his place down the river
alone costs a thousand pounds a week. When he gives a party here, we can
find nothing good enough. He is our most generous client." "Sir Timothy Brast," Wilmore repeated. "Yes, I have heard of him." "Why, everybody knows Sir Timothy," Soto went on eloquently. "He is
the greatest living patron of boxing. He found the money for the last
international fight." "Does he often come in alone like this?" Francis asked curiously. "Either alone," Soto replied, "or with a very large party. He entertains
magnificently." "I've seen his name in the paper in connection with something or other,
during the last few weeks," Wilmore remarked reflectively. "Probably about two months ago, sir," Soto suggested. "He gave a
donation of ten thousand pounds to the Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals, and they made him a Vice President.... In one
moment, sir." The manager hurried away to receive a newly-arrived guest. Francis and
his friend exchanged a wondering glance. "Father of Oliver Hilditch's wife," Wilmore observed, "the most
munificent patron of boxing in the world, Vice President of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and self-confessed
arch-criminal! He pulled our legs pretty well!" "I suppose so," Francis assented absently. Wilmore glanced at his watch. "What about moving on somewhere?" he suggested. "We might go into the
Alhambra for half-an-hour, if you like. The last act of the show is the
best." Francis shook his head. "We've got to see this thing out," he replied. "Have you forgotten that
our friend promised us a sensation before we left?" Wilmore began to laugh a little derisively. Then, suddenly aware of
some lack of sympathy between himself and his friend, he broke off and
glanced curiously at the latter. "You're not taking him seriously, are you?" he enquired. Francis nodded. "Certainly I am," he confessed. "You don't believe that he was getting at us?" "Not for a moment." "You believe that something is going to happen here in this place, or
quite close?" "I am convinced of it," was the calm reply. Wilmore was silent. For a moment he was troubled with his old fears as
to his friend's condition. A glance, however, at Francis' set face and
equable, watchful air, reassured him. "We must see the thing through, of course, then," he assented. "Let us
see if we can spot the actors in the coming drama." CHAPTER IX


It happened that the two men, waiting in the vestibule of the restaurant
for Francis' car to crawl up to the entrance through the fog which
had unexpectedly rolled up, heard the slight altercation which was
afterwards referred to as preceding the tragedy. The two young people
concerned were standing only a few feet away, the girl pretty, a little
peevish, an ordinary type; her companion, whose boyish features were
marred with dissipation, a very passable example of the young man about
town going a little beyond his tether. "It's no good standing here, Victor!" the girl exclaimed, frowning. "The
commissionaire's been gone ages already, and there are two others before
us for taxis." "We can't walk," her escort replied gloomily. "It's a foul night. Nothing to do but wait, what? Let's go back and have another drink." The girl stamped her satin-shod foot impatiently. "Don't be silly," she expostulated. "You know I promised Clara we'd be
there early." "All very well," the young man grumbled, "but what can we do? We shall
have to wait our turn." "Why can't you slip out and look for a taxi yourself?" she suggested. "Do, Victor," she added, squeezing his arm. "You're so clever at picking
them up." He made a little grimace, but lit a cigarette and turned up his coat
collar. "I'll do my best," he promised. "Don't go on without me." "Try up towards Charing Cross Road, not the other way," she advised
earnestly. "Right-oh!" he replied, which illuminative form of assent, a word spoken
as he plunged unwillingly into the thick obscurity on the other side of
the revolving doors, was probably the last he ever uttered on earth. Left alone, the girl began to shiver, as though suddenly cold. She
turned around and glanced hurriedly back into the restaurant. At that
moment she met the steady, questioning scrutiny of Francis' eyes. She
stood as though transfixed. Then came the sound which every one talked
of for months afterwards, the sound which no one who heard it ever
forgot--the death cry of Victor Bidlake, followed a second afterwards by
a muffled report. A strain of frenzied surprise seemed mingled with the
horror. Afterwards, silence. There was the sound of some commotion outside, the sound of hurried
footsteps and agitated voices. Then a terrible little procession
appeared. Something--it seemed to be a shapeless heap of clothes--was
carried in and laid upon the floor, in the little space between the
revolving doors and the inner entrance. Two blue-liveried attendants
kept back the horrified but curious crowd. Francis, vaguely recognised
as being somehow or other connected with the law, was one of the
few people allowed to remain whilst a doctor, fetched out from the
dancing-room, kneeled over the prostrate form. He felt that he knew
beforehand the horrible verdict which the latter whispered in his ear
after his brief examination. "Quite dead! A ghastly business!" Francis gazed at the hole in the shirt-front, disfigured also by a
scorching stain. "A bullet?" he asked. The doctor nodded. "Fired within a foot of the poor fellow's heart," he whispered. "The
murderer wasn't taking any chances, whoever he was." "Have the police been sent for?" The head-porter stepped forward. "There was a policeman within a few yards of the spot, sir," he replied. "He's gone down to keep every one away from the place where we found the
body. We've telephoned to Scotland Yard for an inspector." The doctor rose to his feet. "Nothing more can be done," he pronounced. "Keep the people out of here
whilst I go and fetch my hat and coat. Afterwards, I'll take the body to
the mortuary when the ambulance arrives." An attendant pushed his way through the crowd of people on the inner
side of the door. 