



Produced by Dagny; John Bickers





THE GREAT IMPERSONATION

By E. Phillips Oppenheim



First published 1920. THE GREAT IMPERSONATION



CHAPTER I

The trouble from which great events were to come began when Everard
Dominey, who had been fighting his way through the scrub for the last
three quarters of an hour towards those thin, spiral wisps of smoke,
urged his pony to a last despairing effort and came crashing through
the great oleander shrub to pitch forward on his head in the little
clearing. It developed the next morning, when he found himself for the
first time for many months on the truckle bed, between linen sheets,
with a cool, bamboo-twisted roof between him and the relentless sun. He
raised himself a little in the bed. "Where the mischief am I?" he demanded. A black boy, seated cross-legged in the entrance of the banda, rose to
his feet, mumbled something and disappeared. In a few moments the tall,
slim figure of a European, in spotless white riding clothes, stooped
down and came over to Dominey's side. "You are better?" he enquired politely. "Yes, I am," was the somewhat brusque rejoinder. "Where the mischief am
I, and who are you?" The newcomer's manner stiffened. He was a person of dignified carriage,
and his tone conveyed some measure of rebuke. "You are within half a mile of the Iriwarri River, if you know where
that is," he replied,--"about seventy-two miles southeast of the
Darawaga Settlement." "The devil! Then I am in German East Africa?" "Without a doubt." "And you are German?" "I have that honour." Dominey whistled softly. "Awfully sorry to have intruded," he said. "I left Marlinstein two and a
half months ago, with twenty boys and plenty of stores. We were doing
a big trek after lions. I took some new Askaris in and they made
trouble,--looted the stores one night and there was the devil to pay. I was obliged to shoot one or two, and the rest deserted. They took my
compass, damn them, and I'm nearly a hundred miles out of my bearings. You couldn't give me a drink, could you?" "With pleasure, if the doctor approves," was the courteous answer. "Here, Jan!" The boy sprang up, listened to a word or two of brief command in his
own language, and disappeared through the hanging grass which led into
another hut. The two men exchanged glances of rather more than ordinary
interest. Then Dominey laughed. "I know what you're thinking," he said. "It gave me quite a start when
you came in. We're devilishly alike, aren't we?" "There is a very strong likeness between us," the other admitted. Dominey leaned his head upon his hand and studied his host. The likeness
was clear enough, although the advantage was all in favour of the man
who stood by the side of the camp bedstead with folded arms. Everard
Dominey, for the first twenty-six years of his life, had lived as an
ordinary young Englishman of his position,--Eton, Oxford, a few years
in the Army, a few years about town, during which he had succeeded in
making a still more hopeless muddle of his already encumbered estates: a
few months of tragedy, and then a blank. Afterwards ten years--at first
in the cities, then in the dark places of Africa--years of which no man
knew anything. The Everard Dominey of ten years ago had been, without a
doubt, good-looking. The finely shaped features remained, but the
eyes had lost their lustre, his figure its elasticity, his mouth its
firmness. He had the look of a man run prematurely to seed, wasted by
fevers and dissipation. Not so his present companion. His features were
as finely shaped, cast in an even stronger though similar mould. His
eyes were bright and full of fire, his mouth and chin firm, bespeaking a
man of deeds, his tall figure lithe and supple. He had the air of being
in perfect health, in perfect mental and physical condition, a man who
lived with dignity and some measure of content, notwithstanding the
slight gravity of his expression. "Yes," the Englishman muttered, "there's no doubt about the likeness,
though I suppose I should look more like you than I do if I'd taken care
of myself. But I haven't. That's the devil of it. I've gone the other
way; tried to chuck my life away and pretty nearly succeeded, too." The dried grasses were thrust on one side, and the doctor entered,--a
little round man, also clad in immaculate white, with yellow-gold hair
and thick spectacles. His countryman pointed towards the bed. "Will you examine our patient, Herr Doctor, and prescribe for him what
is necessary? He has asked for drink. Let him have wine, or whatever
is good for him. If he is well enough, he will join our evening meal. I
present my excuses. I have a despatch to write." The man on the couch turned his head and watched the departing figure
with a shade of envy in his eyes. "What is my preserver's name?" he asked the doctor. The latter looked as though the questions were irreverent. "It is His Excellency the Major-General Baron Leopold Von Ragastein." "All that!" Dominey muttered. "Is he the Governor, or something of that
sort?" "He is Military Commandant of the Colony," the doctor replied. "He has
also a special mission here." "Damned fine-looking fellow for a German," Dominey remarked, with
unthinking insolence. The doctor was unmoved. He was feeling his patient's pulse. He concluded
his examination a few minutes later. "You have drunk much whisky lately, so?" he asked. "I don't know what the devil it's got to do with you," was the curt
reply, "but I drink whisky whenever I can get it. Who wouldn't in this
pestilential climate!" The doctor shook his head. "The climate is good as he is treated," he declared. "His Excellency
drinks nothing but light wine and seltzer water. He has been here for
five years, not only here but in the swamps, and he has not been ill one
day." "Well, I have been at death's door a dozen times," the Englishman
rejoined a little recklessly, "and I don't much mind when I hand in my
checks, but until that time comes I shall drink whisky whenever I can
get it." "The cook is preparing you some luncheon," the doctor announced, "and
it will do you good to eat. I cannot give you whisky at this moment, but
you can have some hock and seltzer with bay leaves." "Send it along," was the enthusiastic reply. "What a constitution I must
have, doctor! The smell of that cooking outside is making me ravenous." "Your constitution is still sound if you would only respect it," was the
comforting assurance. "Anything been heard of the rest of my party?" Dominey enquired. "Some bodies of Askaris have been washed up from the river," the doctor
informed him, "and two of your ponies have been eaten by lions. You
will excuse. I have the wounds of a native to dress, who was bitten last
night by a jaguar." The traveller, left alone, lay still in the hut, and his thoughts
wandered backwards. He looked out over the bare, scrubby stretch of
land which had been cleared for this encampment to the mass of bush and
flowering shrubs beyond, mysterious and impenetrable save for that rough
elephant track along which he had travelled; to the broad-bosomed river,
blue as the sky above, and to the mountains fading into mist beyond. The face of his host had carried him back into the past. Puzzled
reminiscence tugged at the strings of memory. It came to him later on
at dinner time, when they three, the Commandant, the doctor and himself,
sat at a little table arranged just outside the hut, that they might
catch the faint breeze from the mountains, herald of the swift-falling
darkness. Native servants beat the air around them with bamboo fans to
keep off the insects, and the air was faint almost to noxiousness with
the perfume of some sickly, exotic shrub. "Why, you're Devinter!" he exclaimed suddenly,--"Sigismund Devinter! You
were at Eton with me--Horrock's House--semi-final in the racquets." "And Magdalen afterwards, number five in the boat." "And why the devil did the doctor here tell me that your name was Von
Ragastein?" "Because it happens to be the truth," was the somewhat measured reply. "Devinter is my family name, and the one by which I was known when in
England. When I succeeded to the barony and estates at my uncle's death,
however, I was compelled to also take the title." "Well, it's a small world!" Dominey exclaimed. "What brought you out
here really--lions or elephants?" "Neither." "You mean to say that you've taken up this sort of political business
just for its own sake, not for sport?" "Entirely so. I do not use a sporting rifle once a month, except for
necessity. I came to Africa for different reasons." Dominey drank deep of his hock and seltzer and leaned back, watching the
fireflies rise above the tall-bladed grass, above the stumpy clumps of
shrub, and hang like miniature stars in the clear, violet air. "What a world!" he soliloquised. "Siggy Devinter, Baron Von Ragastein,
out here, slaving for God knows what, drilling niggers to fight God
knows whom, a political machine, I suppose, future Governor-General of
German Africa, eh? You were always proud of your country, Devinter." "My country is a country to be proud of," was the solemn reply. "Well, you're in earnest, anyhow," Dominey continued, "in earnest
about something. And I--well, it's finished with me. It would have been
finished last night if I hadn't seen the smoke from your fires, and I
don't much care--that's the trouble. I go blundering on. I suppose
the end will come somehow, sometime--Can I have some rum or whisky,
Devinter--I mean Von Ragastein--Your Excellency--or whatever I ought
to say? You see those wreaths of mist down by the river? They'll mean
malaria for me unless I have spirits." "I have something better than either," Von Ragastein replied. "You shall
give me your opinion of this." The orderly who stood behind his master's chair, received a whispered
order, disappeared into the commissariat hut and came back presently
with a bottle at the sight of which the Englishman gasped. "Napoleon!" he exclaimed. "Just a few bottles I had sent to me," his host explained. "I am
delighted to offer it to some one who will appreciate it." "By Jove, there's no mistake about that!" Dominey declared, rolling it
around in his glass. "What a world! I hadn't eaten for thirty hours
when I rolled up here last night, and drunk nothing but filthy water
for days. To-night, fricassee of chicken, white bread, cabinet hock and
Napoleon brandy. And to-morrow again--well, who knows? When do you move
on, Von Ragastein?" "Not for several days." "What the mischief do you find to do so far from headquarters, if you
don't shoot lions or elephants?" his guest asked curiously. "If you really wish to know," Von Ragastein replied, "I am annoying your
political agents immensely by moving from place to place, collecting
natives for drill." "But what do you want to drill them for?" Dominey persisted. "I heard
some time ago that you have four times as many natives under arms as we
have. You don't want an army here. You're not likely to quarrel with us
or the Portuguese." "It is our custom," Von Ragastein declared a little didactically, "in
Germany and wherever we Germans go, to be prepared not only for what is
likely to happen but for what might possibly happen." "A war in my younger days, when I was in the Army," Dominey mused,
"might have made a man of me." "Surely you had your chance out here?" Dominey shook his head. "My battalion never left the country," he said. "We were shut up in
Ireland all the time. That was the reason I chucked the army when I was
really only a boy." Later on they dragged their chairs a little farther out into the
darkness, smoking cigars and drinking some rather wonderful coffee. The
doctor had gone off to see a patient, and Von Ragastein was thoughtful. Their guest, on the other hand, continued to be reminiscently
discursive. "Our meeting," he observed, lazily stretching out his hand for his
glass, "should be full of interest to the psychologist. Here we are,
brought together by some miraculous chance to spend one night of our
lives in an African jungle, two human beings of the same age, brought
up together thousands of miles away, jogging on towards the eternal
blackness along lines as far apart as the mind can conceive." "Your eyes are fixed," Von Ragastein murmured, "upon that very blackness
behind which the sun will rise at dawn. You will see it come up from
behind the mountains in that precise spot, like a new and blazing
world." "Don't put me off with allegories," his companion objected petulantly. "The eternal blackness exists surely enough, even if my metaphor is
faulty. I am disposed to be philosophical. Let me ramble on. Here am I,
an idler in my boyhood, a harmless pleasure-seeker in my youth till
I ran up against tragedy, and since then a drifter, a drifter with a
slowly growing vice, lolling through life with no definite purpose, with
no definite hope or wish, except," he went on a little drowsily, "that I
think I'd like to be buried somewhere near the base of those mountains,
on the other side of the river, from behind which you say the sun comes
up every morning like a world on fire." "You talk foolishly," Von Ragastein protested. "If there has been
tragedy in your life, you have time to get over it. You are not yet
forty years old." "Then I turn and consider you," Dominey continued, ignoring altogether
his friend's remark. "You are only my age, and you look ten years
younger. Your muscles are hard, your eyes are as bright as they were in
your school days. You carry yourself like a man with a purpose. You rise
at five every morning, the doctor tells me, and you return here, worn
out, at dusk. You spend every moment of your time drilling those filthy
blacks. When you are not doing that, you are prospecting, supervising
reports home, trying to make the best of your few millions of acres of
fever swamps. The doctor worships you but who else knows? What do you do
it for, my friend?" "Because it is my duty," was the calm reply. "Duty! But why can't you do your duty in your own country, and live a
man's life, and hold the hands of white men, and look into the eyes of
white women?" "I go where I am needed most," Von Ragastein answered. "I do not enjoy
drilling natives, I do not enjoy passing the years as an outcast from
the ordinary joys of human life. But I follow my star." "And I my will-o'-the-wisp," Dominey laughed mockingly. "The whole
thing's as plain as a pikestaff. You may be a dull dog--you always were
on the serious side--but you're a man of principle. I'm a slacker." "The difference between us," Von Ragastein pronounced, "is something
which is inculcated into the youth of our country and which is not
inculcated into yours. In England, with a little money, a little birth,
your young men expect to find the world a playground for sport, a garden
for loves. The mightiest German noble who ever lived has his work to do. It is work which makes fibre, which gives balance to life." Dominey sighed. His cigar, dearly prized though it had been, was cold
between his fingers. In that perfumed darkness, illuminated only by the
faint gleam of the shaded lamp behind, his face seemed suddenly white
and old. His host leaned towards him and spoke for the first time in the
kindlier tones of their youth. "You hinted at tragedy, my friend. You are not alone. Tragedy also has
entered my life. Perhaps if things had been otherwise, I should have
found work in more joyous places, but sorrow came to me, and I am here." A quick flash of sympathy lit up Dominey's face. "We met trouble in a different fashion," he groaned. CHAPTER II

Dominey slept till late the following morning, and when he woke at last
from a long, dreamless slumber, he was conscious of a curious
quietness in the camp. The doctor, who came in to see him, explained it
immediately after his morning greeting. "His Excellency," he announced, "has received important despatches from
home. He has gone to meet an envoy from Dar-es-Salaam. He will be away
for three days. He desired that you would remain his guest until his
return." "Very good of him," Dominey murmured. "Is there any European news?" "I do not know," was the stolid reply. "His Excellency desired me to
inform you that if you cared for a short trip along the banks of the
river, southward, there are a dozen boys left and some ponies. There are
plenty of lion, and rhino may be met with at one or two places which the
natives know of." Dominey bathed and dressed, sipped his excellent coffee, and lounged
about the place in uncertain mood. He unburdened himself to the doctor
as they drank tea together late in the afternoon. "I am not in the least keen on hunting," he confessed, "and I feel like
a horrible sponge, but all the same I have a queer sort of feeling that
I'd like to see Von Ragastein again. Your silent chief rather fascinates
me, Herr Doctor. He is a man. He has something which I have lost." "He is a great man," the doctor declared enthusiastically. "What he sets
his mind to do, he does." "I suppose I might have been like that," Dominey sighed, "if I had had
an incentive. Have you noticed the likeness between us, Herr Doctor?" The latter nodded. "I noticed it from the first moment of your arrival," he assented. "You
are very much alike yet very different. The resemblance must have been
still more remarkable in your youth. Time has dealt with your features
according to your deserts." "Well, you needn't rub it in," Dominey protested irritably. "I am rubbing nothing in," the doctor replied with unruffled calm. "I
speak the truth. If you had been possessed of the same moral stamina as
His Excellency, you might have preserved your health and the things that
count. You might have been as useful to your country as he is to his." "I suppose I am pretty rocky?" "Your constitution has been abused. You still, however, have much
vitality. If you cared to exercise self-control for a few months, you
would be a different man.--You must excuse. I have work." Dominey spent three restless days. Even the sight of a herd of elephants
in the river and that strange, fierce chorus of night sounds, as beasts
of prey crept noiselessly around the camp, failed to move him. For the
moment his love of sport, his last hold upon the world of real things,
seemed dead. What did it matter, the killing of an animal more or
less? His mind was fixed uneasily upon the past, searching always for
something which he failed to discover. At dawn he watched for that
strangely wonderful, transforming birth of the day, and at night he sat
outside the banda, waiting till the mountains on the other side of
the river had lost shape and faded into the violet darkness. His
conversation with Von Ragastein had unsettled him. Without knowing
definitely why, he wanted him back again. Memories that had long since
ceased to torture were finding their way once more into his brain. On the first day he had striven to rid himself of them in the usual
fashion. "Doctor, you've got some whisky, haven't you?" he asked. The doctor nodded. "There is a case somewhere to be found," he admitted. "His Excellency
told me that I was to refuse you nothing, but he advises you to drink
only the white wine until his return." "He really left that message?" "Precisely as I have delivered it." The desire for whisky passed, came again but was beaten back, returned
in the night so that he sat up with the sweat pouring down his face and
his tongue parched. He drank lithia water instead. Late in the afternoon
of the third day, Von Ragastein rode into the camp. His clothes were
torn and drenched with the black mud of the swamps, dust and dirt were
thick upon his face. His pony almost collapsed as he swung himself off. Nevertheless, he paused to greet his guest with punctilious courtesy,
and there was a gleam of real satisfaction in his eyes as the two men
shook hands. "I am glad that you are still here," he said heartily. "Excuse me while
I bathe and change. We will dine a little earlier. So far I have not
eaten to-day." "A long trek?" Dominey asked curiously. "I have trekked far," was the quiet reply. At dinner time, Von Ragastein was once more himself, immaculate in white
duck, with clean linen, shaved, and with little left of his fatigue. There was something different in his manner, however, some change which
puzzled Dominey. He was at once more attentive to his guest, yet further
removed from him in spirit and sympathy. He kept the conversation with
curious insistence upon incidents of their school and college days, upon
the subject of Dominey's friends and relations, and the later episodes
of his life. Dominey felt himself all the time encouraged to talk about
his earlier life, and all the time he was conscious that for some reason
or other his host's closest and most minute attention was being given
to his slightest word. Champagne had been served and served freely, and
Dominey, up to the very gates of that one secret chamber, talked volubly
and without reserve. After the meal was over, their chairs were dragged
as before into the open. The silent orderly produced even larger cigars,
and Dominey found his glass filled once more with the wonderful brandy. The doctor had left them to visit the native camp nearly a quarter of a
mile away, and the orderly was busy inside, clearing the table. Only the
black shapes of the servants were dimly visible as they twirled their
fans,--and overhead the gleaming stars. They were alone. "I've been talking an awful lot of rot about myself," Dominey said. "Tell me a little about your career now and your life in Germany before
you came out here?" Von Ragastein made no immediate reply, and a curious silence ebbed and
flowed between the two men. Every now and then a star shot across
the sky. The red rim of the moon rose a little higher from behind the
mountains. The bush stillness, always the most mysterious of silences,
seemed gradually to become charged with unvoiced passion. Soon the
animals began to call around them, creeping nearer and nearer to the
fire which burned at the end of the open space. "My friend," Von Ragastein said at last, speaking with the air of a man
who has spent much time in deliberation, "you speak to me of Germany,
of my homeland. Perhaps you have guessed that it is not duty alone
which has brought me here to these wild places. I, too, left behind me a
tragedy." Dominey's quick impulse of sympathy was smothered by the stern, almost
harsh repression of the other's manner. The words seemed to have been
torn from his throat. There was no spark of tenderness or regret in his
set face. "Since the day of my banishment," he went on, "no word of this matter
has passed my lips. To-night it is not weakness which assails me, but
a desire to yield to the strange arm of coincidence. You and I,
schoolmates and college friends, though sons of a different country,
meet here in the wilderness, each with the iron in our souls. I shall
tell you the thing which happened to me, and you shall speak to me of
your own curse." "I cannot!" Dominey groaned. "But you will," was the stern reply. "Listen." An hour passed, and the voices of the two men had ceased. The howling
of the animals had lessened with the paling of the fires, and a slow,
melancholy ripple of breeze was passing through the bush and lapping the
surface of the river. It was Von Ragastein who broke through what might
almost have seemed a trance. He rose to his feet, vanished inside the
banda, and reappeared a moment or two later with two tumblers. One he
set down in the space provided for it in the arm of his guest's chair. "To-night I break what has become a rule with me," he announced. "I
shall drink a whisky and soda. I shall drink to the new things that may
yet come to both of us." "You are giving up your work here?" Dominey asked curiously. "I am part of a great machine," was the somewhat evasive reply. "I have
nothing to do but obey." A flicker of passion distorted Dominey's face, flamed for a moment in
his tone. "Are you content to live and die like this?" he demanded. "Don't you
want to get back to where a different sort of sun will warm your heart
and fill your pulses? This primitive world is in its way colossal,
but it isn't human, it isn't a life for humans. We want streets, Von
Ragastein, you and I. We want the tide of people flowing around us, the
roar of wheels and the hum of human voices. Curse these animals! If I
live in this country much longer, I shall go on all fours." "You yield too much to environment," his companion observed. "In the
life of the cities you would be a sentimentalist." "No city nor any civilised country will ever claim me again," Dominey
sighed. "I should never have the courage to face what might come." Von Ragastein rose to his feet. The dim outline of his erect form was in
a way majestic. He seemed to tower over the man who lounged in the chair
before him. "Finish your whisky and soda to our next meeting, friend of my school
days," he begged. "To-morrow, before you awake, I shall be gone." "So soon?" "By to-morrow night," Von Ragastein replied, "I must be on the other
side of those mountains. This must be our farewell." Dominey was querulous, almost pathetic. He had a sudden hatred of
solitude. "I must trek westward myself directly," he protested, "or eastward, or
northward--it doesn't so much matter. Can't we travel together?" Von Ragastein shook his head. "I travel officially, and I must travel alone," he replied. "As for
yourself, they will be breaking up here to-morrow, but they will lend
you an escort and put you in the direction you wish to take. This, alas,
is as much as I can do for you. For us it must be farewell." "Well, I can't force myself upon you," Dominey said a little wistfully. "It seems strange, though, to meet right out here, far away even from
the by-ways of life, just to shake hands and pass on. I am sick to death
of niggers and animals." "It is Fate," Von Ragastein decided. "Where I go, I must go alone. Farewell, dear friend! We will drink the toast we drank our last night
in your rooms at Magdalen. That Sanscrit man translated it for us: 'May
each find what he seeks!' We must follow our star." Dominey laughed a little bitterly. He pointed to a light glowing
fitfully in the bush. "My will-o'-the-wisp," he muttered recklessly, "leading where I shall
follow--into the swamps!" A few minutes later Dominey threw himself upon his couch, curiously and
unaccountably drowsy. Von Ragastein, who had come in to wish him good
night, stood looking down at him for several moments with significant
intentness. Then, satisfied that his guest really slept, he turned and
passed through the hanging curtain of dried grasses into the next banda,
where the doctor, still fully dressed, was awaiting him. They spoke
together in German and with lowered voices. Von Ragastein had lost
something of his imperturbability. "Everything progresses according to my orders?" he demanded. "Everything, Excellency! The boys are being loaded, and a runner has
gone on to Wadihuan for ponies to be prepared." "They know that I wish to start at dawn?" "All will be prepared, Excellency." Von Ragastein laid his hand upon the doctor's shoulder. "Come outside, Schmidt," he said. "I have something to tell you of my
plans." The two men seated themselves in the long, wicker chairs, the doctor
in an attitude of strict attention. Von Ragastein turned his head and
listened. From Dominey's quarters came the sound of deep and regular
breathing. "I have formed a great plan, Schmidt," Von Ragastein proceeded. "You
know what news has come to me from Berlin?" "Your Excellency has told me a little," the doctor reminded him. "The Day arrives," Von Ragastein pronounced, his voice shaking with deep
emotion. He paused a moment in thought and continued, "the time, even
the month, is fixed. I am recalled from here to take the place for which
I was destined. You know what that place is? You know why I was sent to
an English public school and college?" "I can guess." "I am to take up my residence in England. I am to have a special
mission. I am to find a place for myself there as an Englishman. The
means are left to my ingenuity. Listen, Schmidt. A great idea has come
to me." The doctor lit a cigar. "I listen, Excellency." Von Ragastein rose to his feet. Not content with the sound of that
regular breathing, he made his way to the opening of the banda and gazed
in at Dominey's slumbering form. Then he returned. "It is something which you do not wish the Englishman to hear?" the
doctor asked. "It is." "We speak in German." "Languages," was the cautious reply, "happen to be that man's only
accomplishment. He can speak German as fluently as you or I. That,
however, is of no consequence. He sleeps and he will continue to sleep. I mixed him a sleeping draught with his whisky and soda." "Ah!" the doctor grunted. "My principal need in England is an identity," Von Ragastein pointed
out. "I have made up my mind. I shall take this Englishman's. I shall
return to England as Sir Everard Dominey." "So!" "There is a remarkable likeness between us, and Dominey has not seen an
Englishman who knows him for eight or ten years. Any school or college
friends whom I may encounter I shall be able to satisfy. I have stayed
at Dominey. I know Dominey's relatives. To-night he has babbled for
hours, telling me many things that it is well for me to know." "What about his near relatives?" "He has none nearer than cousins." "No wife?" Von Ragastein paused and turned his head. The deep breathing inside the
banda had certainly ceased. He rose to his feet and, stealing uneasily
to the opening, gazed down upon his guest's outstretched form. To all
appearance, Dominey still slept deeply. After a moment or two's watch,
Von Ragastein returned to his place. "Therein lies his tragedy," he confided, dropping his voice a little
lower. "She is insane--insane, it seems, through a shock for which he
was responsible. She might have been the only stumbling block, and she
is as though she did not exist." "It is a great scheme," the doctor murmured enthusiastically. "It is a wonderful one! That great and unrevealed Power, Schmidt, which
watches over our country and which will make her mistress of the world,
must have guided this man to us. My position in England will be unique. As Sir Everard Dominey I shall be able to penetrate into the inner
circles of Society--perhaps, even, of political life. I shall be able,
if necessary, to remain in England even after the storm bursts." "Supposing," the doctor suggested, "this man Dominey should return to
England?" Von Ragastein turned his head and looked towards his questioner. "He must not," he pronounced. "So!" the doctor murmured. Late in the afternoon of the following day, Dominey, with a couple of
boys for escort and his rifle slung across his shoulder, rode into the
bush along the way he had come. The little fat doctor stood and watched
him, waving his hat until he was out of sight. Then he called to the
orderly. "Heinrich," he said, "you are sure that the Herr Englishman has the
whisky?" "The water bottles are filled with nothing else, Herr Doctor," the man
replied. "There is no water or soda water in the pack?" "Not one drop, Herr Doctor." "How much food?" "One day's rations." "The beef is salt?" "It is very salt, Herr Doctor." "And the compass?" "It is ten degrees wrong." "The boys have their orders?" "They understand perfectly, Herr Doctor. If the Englishman does not
drink, they will take him at midnight to where His Excellency will be
encamped at the bend of the Blue River." The doctor sighed. He was not at heart an unkindly man. "I think," he murmured, "it will be better for the Englishman that he
drinks." CHAPTER III

Mr. John Lambert Mangan of Lincoln's Inn gazed at the card which a
junior clerk had just presented in blank astonishment, an astonishment
which became speedily blended with dismay. "Good God, do you see this, Harrison?" he exclaimed, passing it over
to his manager, with whom he had been in consultation. "Dominey--Sir
Everard Dominey--back here in England!" The head clerk glanced at the narrow piece of pasteboard and sighed. "I'm afraid you will find him rather a troublesome client, sir," he
remarked. His employer frowned. "Of course I shall," he answered testily. "There
isn't an extra penny to be had out of the estates--you know that,
Harrison. The last two quarters' allowance which we sent to Africa came
out of the timber. Why the mischief didn't he stay where he was!" "What shall I tell the gentleman, sir?" the boy enquired. "Oh, show him in!" Mr. Mangan directed ill-temperedly. "I suppose I
shall have to see him sooner or later. I'll finish these affidavits
after lunch, Harrison." The solicitor composed his features to welcome a client who, however
troublesome his affairs had become, still represented a family who had
been valued patrons of the firm for several generations. He was prepared
to greet a seedy-looking and degenerate individual, looking older than
his years. Instead, he found himself extending his hand to one of the
best turned out and handsomest men who had ever crossed the threshold
of his not very inviting office. For a moment he stared at his visitor,
speechless. Then certain points of familiarity--the well-shaped nose,
the rather deep-set grey eyes--presented themselves. This surprise
enabled him to infuse a little real heartiness into his welcome. "My dear Sir Everard!" he exclaimed. "This is a most unexpected
pleasure--most unexpected! Such a pity, too, that we only posted a draft
for your allowance a few days ago. Dear me--you'll forgive my saying
so--how well you look!" Dominey smiled as he accepted an easy chair. "Africa's a wonderful country, Mangan," he remarked, with just that
faint note of patronage in his tone which took his listener back to the
days of his present client's father. "It--pardon my remarking it--has done wonderful things for you, Sir
Everard. Let me see, it must be eleven years since we met." Sir Everard tapped the toes of his carefully polished brown shoes with
the end of his walking stick. "I left London," he murmured reminiscently, "in April, nineteen hundred
and two. Yes, eleven years, Mr. Mangan. It seems queer to find myself in
London again, as I dare say you can understand." "Precisely," the lawyer murmured. "I was just wondering--I think that
last remittance we sent to you could be stopped. I have no doubt you
will be glad of a little ready money," he added, with a confident smile. "Thanks, I don't think I need any just at present," was the amazing
answer. "We'll talk about financial affairs a little later on." Mr. Mangan metaphorically pinched himself. He had known his present
client even during his school days, had received a great many visits
from him at different times, and could not remember one in which the
question of finance had been dismissed in so casual a manner. "I trust," he observed chiefly for the sake of saying something, "that
you are thinking of settling down here for a time now?" "I have finished with Africa, if that is what you mean," was the
somewhat grave reply. "As to settling down here, well, that depends a
little upon what you have to tell me." The lawyer nodded. "I think," he said, "that you may make yourself quite easy as regards
the matter of Roger Unthank. Nothing has ever been heard of him since
the day you left England." "His--body has not been found?" "Nor any trace of it." There was a brief silence. The lawyer looked hard at Dominey, and
Dominey searchingly back again at the lawyer. "And Lady Dominey?" the former asked at length. "Her ladyship's condition is, I believe, unchanged," was the somewhat
guarded reply. "If the circumstances are favourable," Dominey continued, after another
moment's pause, "I think it very likely that I may decide to settle down
at Dominey Hall." The lawyer appeared doubtful. "I am afraid," he said, "you will be very disappointed in the condition
of the estate, Sir Everard. As I have repeatedly told you in our
correspondence, the rent roll, after deducting your settlement upon Lady
Dominey, has at no time reached the interest on the mortgages, and we
have had to make up the difference and send you your allowance out of
the proceeds of the outlying timber." "That is a pity," Dominey replied, with a frown. "I ought, perhaps,
to have taken you more into my confidence. By the by," he added,
"when--er--about when did you receive my last letter?" "Your last letter?" Mr. Mangan repeated. "We have not had the privilege
of hearing from you, Sir Everard, for over four years. The only
intimation we had that our payments had reached you was the exceedingly
prompt debit of the South African bank." "I have certainly been to blame," this unexpected visitor confessed. "On
the other hand, I have been very much absorbed. If you haven't happened
to hear any South African gossip lately, Mangan, I suppose it will be a
surprise to you to hear that I have been making a good deal of money." "Making money?" the lawyer gasped. "You making money, Sir Everard?" "I thought you'd be surprised," Dominey observed coolly. "However,
that's neither here nor there. The business object of my visit to you
this morning is to ask you to make arrangements as quickly as possible
for paying off the mortgages on the Dominey estates." Mr. Mangan was a lawyer of the new-fashioned school,--Harrow and
Cambridge, the Bath Club, racquets and fives, rather than gold and
lawn tennis. Instead of saying "God bless my soul!" he exclaimed "Great
Scott!" dropped a very modern-looking eyeglass from his left eye, and
leaned back in his chair with his hands in his pockets. "I have had three or four years of good luck," his client continued. "I
have made money in gold mines, in diamond mines and in land. I am
afraid that if I had stayed out another year, I should have descended
altogether to the commonplace and come back a millionaire." "My heartiest congratulations!" Mr. Mangan found breath to murmur. "You'll forgive my being so astonished, but you are the first Dominey
I ever knew who has ever made a penny of money in any sort of way, and
from what I remember of you in England--I'm sure you'll forgive my being
so frank--I should never have expected you to have even attempted such a
thing." Dominey smiled good-humouredly. "Well," he said, "if you inquire at the United Bank of Africa, you will
find that I have a credit balance there of something over a hundred
thousand pounds. Then I have also--well, let us say a trifle more,
invested in first-class mines. Do me the favour of lunching with me,
Mr. Mangan, and although Africa will never be a favourite topic of
conversation with me, I will tell you about some of my speculations." The solicitor groped around for his hat. "I will send the boy for a taxi," he faltered. "I have a car outside," this astonishing client told him. "Before we
leave, could you instruct your clerk to have a list of the Dominey
mortgages made out, with the terminable dates and redemption values?" "I will leave instructions," Mr. Mangan promised. "I think that the
total amount is under eighty thousand pounds." Dominey sauntered through the office, an object of much interest to the
little staff of clerks. The lawyer joined him on the pavement in a few
minutes. "Where shall we lunch?" Dominey asked. "I'm afraid my clubs are a little
out of date. I am staying at the Carlton." "The Carlton grill room is quite excellent," Mr. Mangan suggested. "They are keeping me a table until half-past one," Dominey replied. "We
will lunch there, by all means." They drove off together, the returned traveller gazing all the time out
of the window into the crowded streets, the lawyer a little thoughtful. "While I think of it, Sir Everard," the latter said, as they drew near
their destination. "I should be glad of a short conversation with you
before you go down to Dominey." "With regard to anything in particular?" "With regard to Lady Dominey," the lawyer told him a little gravely. A shadow rested on his companion's face. "Is her ladyship very much changed?" "Physically, she is in excellent health, I believe. Mentally I believe
that there is no change. She has unfortunately the same rather violent
prejudice which I am afraid influenced your departure from England." "In plain words," Dominey said bitterly, "she has sworn to take my life
if ever I sleep under the same roof." "She will need, I am afraid, to be strictly watched," the lawyer
answered evasively. "Still, I think you ought to be told that time does
not seem to have lessened her tragical antipathy." "She regards me still as the murderer of Roger Unthank?" Dominey asked,
in a measured tone. "I am afraid she does." "And I suppose that every one else has the same idea?" "The mystery," Mr. Mangan admitted, "has never been cleared up. It is
well known, you see, that you fought in the park and that you staggered
home almost senseless. Roger Unthank has never been seen from that day
to this." "If I had killed him," Dominey pointed out, "why was his body not
found?" The lawyer shook his head. "There are all sorts of theories, of course," he said, "but for one
superstition you may as well be prepared. There is scarcely a man or
a woman for miles around Dominey who doesn't believe that the ghost of
Roger Unthank still haunts the Black Wood near where you fought." "Let us be quite clear about this," Dominey insisted. "If the body
should ever be found, am I liable, after all these years, to be indicted
for manslaughter?" "I think you may make your mind quite at ease," the lawyer assured him. "In the first place, I don't think you would ever be indicted." "And in the second?" "There isn't a human being in that part of Norfolk would ever believe
that the body of man or beast, left within the shadow of the Black Wood,
would ever be seen or heard of again!" CHAPTER IV

Mr. Mangan, on their way into the grill room, loitered for a few minutes
in the small reception room, chatting with some acquaintances, whilst
his host, having spoken to the _maitre d'hotel_ and ordered a cocktail
from a passing waiter, stood with his hands behind his back, watching
the inflow of men and women with all that interest which one might be
supposed to feel in one's fellows after a prolonged absence. He had
moved a little to one side to allow a party of young people to make
their way through the crowded chamber, when he was conscious of a woman
standing alone on the topmost of the three thickly carpeted stairs. Their eyes met, and hers, which had been wandering around the room as
though in search of some acquaintance, seemed instantly and fervently
held. To the few loungers about the room, ignorant of any special
significance in that studied contemplation of the man on the part of
the woman, their two personalities presented an agreeable, almost a
fascinating study. Dominey was six feet two in height and had to its
fullest extent the natural distinction of his class, together with
the half military, half athletic bearing which seemed to have been so
marvellously restored to him. His complexion was no more than becomingly
tanned; his slight moustache, trimmed very close to the upper lip, was
of the same ruddy brown shade as his sleekly brushed hair. The woman,
who had commenced now to move slowly towards him, save that her cheeks,
at that moment, at any rate, were almost unnaturally pale, was of the
same colouring. Her red-gold hair gleamed beneath her black hat. She
was tall, a Grecian type of figure, large without being coarse, majestic
though still young. She carried a little dog under one arm and a plain
black silk bag, on which was a coronet in platinum and diamonds, in
the other hand. The major-domo who presided over the room, watching her
approach, bowed with more than his usual urbanity. Her eyes, however,
were still fixed upon the person who had engaged so large a share of her
attention. She came towards him, her lips a little parted. "Leopold!" she faltered. "The Holy Saints, why did you not let me know!" Dominey bowed very slightly. His words seemed to have a cut and dried
flavour. "I am so sorry," he replied, "but I fear that you make a mistake. My
name is not Leopold." She stood quite still, looking at him with the air of not having heard a
word of his polite disclaimer. "In London, of all places," she murmured. "Tell me, what does it mean?" "I can only repeat, madam," he said, "that to my very great regret I
have not the honour of your acquaintance." She was puzzled, but absolutely unconvinced. "You mean to deny that you are Leopold Von Ragastein?" she asked
incredulously. "You do not know me?" "Madam," he answered, "it is not my great pleasure. My name is
Dominey--Everard Dominey." She seemed for a moment to be struggling with some embarrassment which
approached emotion. Then she laid her fingers upon his sleeve and drew
him to a more retired corner of the little apartment. "Leopold," she whispered, "nothing can make it wrong or indiscreet for
you to visit me. My address is 17, Belgrave Square. I desire to see you
to-night at seven o'clock." "But, my dear lady," Dominey began--

Her eyes suddenly glowed with a new light. "I will not be trifled with," she insisted. "If you wish to succeed in
whatever scheme you have on hand, you must not make an enemy of me. I
shall expect you at seven o'clock." She passed away from him into the restaurant. Mr. Mangan, now freed from
his friends, rejoined his host, and the two men took their places at the
side table to which they were ushered with many signs of attention. "Wasn't that the Princess Eiderstrom with whom you were talking?" the
solicitor asked curiously. "A lady addressed me by mistake," Dominey explained. "She mistook me,
curiously enough, for a man who used to be called my double at Oxford. Sigismund Devinter he was then, although I think he came into a title
later on." "The Princess is quite a famous personage," Mr. Mangan remarked, "one of
the richest widows in Europe. Her husband was killed in a duel some six
or seven years ago." Dominey ordered the luncheon with care, slipping into a word or two of
German once to assist the waiter, who spoke English with difficulty. His
companion smiled. "I see that you have not forgotten your languages out there in the
wilds." "I had no chance to," Dominey answered. "I spent five years on the
borders of German East Africa, and I traded with some of the fellows
there regularly." "By the by," Mr. Mangan enquired, "what sort of terms are we on with the
Germans out there?" "Excellent, I should think," was the careless reply. "I never had any
trouble." "Of course," the lawyer continued, "this will all be new to you, but
during the last few years Englishmen have become divided into two
classes--the people who believe that the Germans wish to go to war and
crush us, and those who don't." "Then since my return the number of the 'don'ts' has been increased by
one." "I am amongst the doubtfuls myself," Mr. Mangan remarked. "All the same,
I can't quite see what Germany wants with such an immense army, and why
she is continually adding to her fleet." Dominey paused for a moment to discuss the matter of a sauce with the
head waiter. He returned to the subject a few minutes later on, however. "Of course," he pointed out, "my opinions can only come from a study of
the newspapers and from conversations with such Germans as I have met
out in Africa, but so far as her army is concerned, I should have said
that Russia and France were responsible for that, and the more powerful
it is, the less chance of any European conflagration. Russia might at
any time come to the conclusion that a war is her only salvation against
a revolution, and you know the feeling in France about Alsace-Lorraine
as well as I do. The Germans themselves say that there is more interest
in military matters and more progress being made in Russia to-day than
ever before." "I have no doubt that you are right," agreed Mr. Mangan. "It is a matter
which is being a great deal discussed just now, however. Let us speak
of your personal plans. What do you intend to do for the next few weeks,
say? Have you been to see any of your relatives yet?" "Not one," Dominey replied. "I am afraid that I am not altogether keen
about making advances." Mr. Mangan coughed. "You must remember that during the period of your
last residence in London," he said, "you were in a state of chronic
impecuniosity. No doubt that rather affected the attitude of some of
those who would otherwise have been more friendly." "I should be perfectly content never to see one of them again," declared
Dominey, with perfect truth. "That, of course, is impossible," the lawyer protested. "You must go and
see the Duchess, at any rate. She was always your champion." "The Duchess was always very kind to me," Dominey admitted doubtfully,
"but I am afraid she was rather fed up before I left England." Mr. Mangan smiled. He was enjoying a very excellent lunch, which it
seemed hard to believe was ordered by a man just home from the wilds of
Africa, and he thoroughly enjoyed talking about duchesses. "Her Grace," he began--

"Well?" The lawyer had paused, with his eyes glued upon the couple at a
neighbouring table. He leaned across towards his companion. "The Duchess herself, Sir Everard, just behind you, with Lord St. Omar." "This place must certainly be the rendezvous of all the world," Dominey
declared, as he held out his hand to a man who had approached their
table. "Seaman, my friend, welcome! Let me introduce you to my friend
and legal adviser, Mr. Mangan--Mr. Seaman." Mr. Seaman was a short, fat man, immaculately dressed in most
conventional morning attire. He was almost bald, except for a little
tuft on either side, and a few long, fair hairs carefully brushed back
over a shining scalp. His face was extraordinarily round except towards
his chin, where it came to a point; his eyes bright and keen, his mouth
the mouth of a professional humourist. He shook hands with the lawyer
with an _empressement_ which was scarcely English. "Within the space of half an hour," Dominey continued, "I find a
princess who desires to claim my acquaintance; a cousin," he dropped his
voice a little, "who lunches only a few tables away, and the man of whom
I have seen the most during the last ten years amidst scenes a little
different from these, eh, Seaman?" Seaman accepted the chair which the waiter had brought and sat down. The
lawyer was immediately interested. "Do I understand, then," he asked, addressing the newcomer, "that you
knew Sir Everard in Africa?" Seaman beamed. "Knew him?" he repeated, and with the first words of his
speech the fact of his foreign nationality was established. "There was
no one of whom I knew so much. We did business together--a great deal of
business--and when we were not partners, Sir Everard generally got the
best of it." Dominey laughed. "Luck generally comes to a man either early or late
in life. My luck came late. I think, Seaman, that you must have been my
mascot. Nothing went wrong with me during the years that we did business
together." Seaman was a little excited. He brushed upright with the palm of his
hand one of those little tufts of hair left on the side of his head, and
he laid his plump fingers upon the lawyer's shoulder. "Mr. Mangan," he said, "you listen to me. I sell this man the
controlling interests in a mine, shares which I have held for four and
a half years and never drew a penny dividend. I sell them to him, I say,
at par. Well, I need the money and it seems to me that I had given the
shares a fair chance. Within five weeks--five weeks, sir," he repeated,
struggling to attune his voice to his civilised surroundings, "those
shares had gone from par to fourteen and a half. To-day they stand at
twenty. He gave me five thousand pounds for those shares. To-day
he could walk into your stock market and sell them for one hundred
thousand. That is the way money is made in Africa, Mr. Mangan, where
innocents like me are to be found every day." Dominey poured out a glass of wine and passed it to their visitor. "Come," he said, "we all have our ups and downs. Africa owes you
nothing, Seaman." "I have done well in my small way," Seaman admitted, fingering the stem
of his wineglass, "but where I have had to plod, Sir Everard here has
stood and commanded fate to pour her treasures into his lap." The lawyer was listening with a curious interest and pleasure to this
half bantering conversation. He found an opportunity now to intervene. "So you two were really friends in Africa?" he remarked, with a queer
and almost inexplicable sense of relief. "If Sir Everard permits our association to be so called," Seaman
replied. "We have done business together in the great cities--in
Johannesburg and Pretoria, in Kimberley and Cape Town--and we have
prospected together in the wild places. We have trekked the veldt and
been lost to the world for many months at a time. We have seen the real
wonders of Africa together, as well as her tawdry civilisation." "And you, too," Mr. Mangan asked, "have you retired?" Seaman's smile was almost beatific. "The same deal," he said, "which brought Sir Everard's fortune to
wonderful figures brought me that modest sum which I had sworn to
reach before I returned to England. It is true. I have retired from
money-making. It is now that I take up again my real life's work." "If you are going to talk about your hobby," Dominey observed, "you had
better order them to serve your lunch here." "I had finished my lunch before you came in," his friend replied. "I
drink another glass of wine with you, perhaps. Afterwards a liqueur--who
can say? In this climate one is favoured, one can drink freely. Sir
Everard and I, Mr. Mangan, have been in places where thirst is a thing
to be struggled against, where for months a little weak brandy and water
was our chief dissipation." "Tell me about this hobby?" the lawyer enquired. Dominey intervened promptly. "I protest. If he begins to talk of that,
he'll be here all the afternoon." Seaman held out his hands and rolled his head from side to side. "But I am not so unreasonable," he objected. "Just one word--so? Very well, then," he proceeded quickly, with the air of one fearing
interruption. "This must be clear to you, Mr. Mangan. I am a German
by birth, naturalised in England for the sake of my business, loving
Germany, grateful to England. One third of my life I have lived in
Berlin, one third at Forest Hill here in London, and in the city, one
third in Africa. I have watched the growth of commercial rivalries and
jealousies between the two nations. There is no need for them. They
might lead to worse things. I would brush them all away. My aim is to
encourage a league for the promotion of more cordial social and business
relations between the people of Great Britain and the people of the
German Empire. There! Have I wasted much of your time? Can I not speak
of my hobby without a flood of words?" "Conciseness itself," Mangan admitted, "and I compliment you most
heartily upon your scheme. If you can get the right people into it, it
should prove a most valuable society." "In Germany I have the right people. All Germans who live for their
country and feel for their country loathe the thought of war. We want
peace, we want friends, and, to speak as man to man," he concluded,
tapping the lawyer upon the coat sleeve, "England is our best customer." "I wish one could believe," the latter remarked, "that yours was the
popular voice in your country." Seaman rose reluctantly to his feet. "At half-past two," he announced, glancing at his watch, "I have an
appointment with a woollen manufacturer from Bradford. I hope to get him
to join my council." He bowed ceremoniously to the lawyer, nodded to Dominey with the
familiarity of an old friend, and made his bustling, good-humoured way
out of the room. "A sound business man, I should think," was the former's comment. "I
wish him luck with his League. You yourself, Sir Everard, will need to
develop some new interests. Why not politics?" "I really expect to find life a little difficult at first," admitted
Dominey, with a shrug of his shoulders. "I have lost many of the tastes
of my youth, and I am very much afraid that my friends over here will
call me colonial. I can't fancy myself doing nothing down in Norfolk all
the rest of my days. Perhaps I shall go into Parliament." "You must forgive my saying," his companion declared impulsively, "that
I never knew ten years make such a difference in a man in my life." "The colonies," Dominey pronounced, "are a kill or cure sort of
business. You either take your drubbing and come out a stronger man, or
you go under. I had the very narrowest escape from going under myself,
but I just pulled together in time. To-day I wouldn't have been without
my hard times for anything in the world." "If you will permit me," Mr. Mangan said, with an inherited pomposity,
"on our first meeting under the new conditions, I should like to offer
you my hearty congratulations, not only upon what you have accomplished
but upon what you have become." "And also, I hope," Dominey rejoined, smiling a little seriously and
with a curious glint in his eyes, "upon what I may yet accomplish." The Duchess and her companion had risen to their feet, and the former,
on her way out, recognising her solicitor, paused graciously. "How do you do, Mr. Mangan?" she said. "I hope you are looking after
those troublesome tenants of mine in Leicestershire?" "We shall make our report in due course, Duchess," Mangan assured her. "Will you permit me," he added, "to bring back to your memory a relative
who has just returned from abroad--Sir Everard Dominey?" Dominey had risen to his feet a moment previously and now extended his
hand. The Duchess, who was a tall, graceful woman, with masses of fair
hair only faintly interspersed with gray, very fine brown eyes, the
complexion of a girl, and, to quite her own confession, the manners of a
kitchen maid, stared at him for a moment without any response. "Sir Everard Dominey?" she repeated. "Everard? Ridiculous!" Dominey's extended hand was at once withdrawn, and the tentative smile
faded from his lips. The lawyer plunged into the breach. "I can assure your Grace," he insisted earnestly, "that there is no
doubt whatever about Sir Everard's identity. He only returned from
Africa during the last few days." The Duchess's incredulity remained, wholly good-natured but ministered
to by her natural obstinacy. "I simply cannot bring myself to believe it," she declared. "Come, I'll
challenge you. When did we meet last?" "At Worcester House," was the prompt reply. "I came to say good-bye to
you." The Duchess was a little staggered. Her eyes softened, a faint smile
played at the corners of her lips. She was suddenly a very attractive
looking woman. "You came to say good-bye," she repeated, "and?" "I am to take that as a challenge?" Dominey asked, standing very upright
and looking her in the eyes. "As you will." "You were a little kinder to me," he continued, "than you are to-day. You gave me--this," he added, drawing a small picture from his
pocketbook, "and you permitted--"

"For heaven's sake, put that thing away," she cried, "and don't say
another word! There's my grown-up nephew, St. Omar, paying his
bill almost within earshot. Come and see me at half-past three this
afternoon, and don't be a minute late. And, St. Omar," she went
on, turning to the young man who stood now by her side, "this is a
connection of yours--Sir Everard Dominey. He is a terrible person, but
do shake hands with him and come along. I am half an hour late for my
dressmaker already." Lord St. Omar chuckled vaguely, then shook hands with his new-found
relative, nodded affably to the lawyer and followed his aunt out of the
room. Mangan's expression was beatific. "Sir Everard," he exclaimed, "God bless you! If ever a woman got what
she deserved! I've seen a duchess blush--first time in my life!" CHAPTER V

Worcester House was one of those semi-palatial residences set down
apparently for no reason whatever in the middle of Regent's Park. It had
been acquired by a former duke at the instigation of the Regent, who was
his intimate friend, and retained by later generations in mute protest
against the disfiguring edifices which had made a millionaire's highway
of Park Lane. Dominey, who was first scrutinised by an individual in
buff waistcoat and silk hat at the porter's lodge, was interviewed by a
major-domo in the great stone hall, conducted through an extraordinarily
Victorian drawing-room by another myrmidon in a buff waistcoat, and
finally ushered into a tiny little boudoir leading out of a larger
apartment and terminating in a conservatory filled with sweet-smelling
exotics. The Duchess, who was reclining in an easy-chair, held out her
hand, which her visitor raised to his lips. She motioned him to a seat
by her side and once more scrutinised him with unabashed intentness. "There's something wrong about you, you know," she declared. "That seems very unfortunate," he rejoined, "when I return to find you
wholly unchanged." "Not bad," she remarked critically. "All the same, I have changed. I am
not in the least in love with you any longer." "It was the fear of that change in you," he sighed, "which kept me for
so long in the furthest corners of the world." She looked at him with a severity which was obviously assumed. "Look here," she said, "it is better for us to have a perfectly clear
understanding upon one point. I know the exact position of your affairs,
and I know, too, that the two hundred a year which your lawyer has been
sending out to you came partly out of a few old trees and partly out of
his own pocket. How you are going to live over here I cannot imagine,
but it isn't the least use expecting Henry to do a thing for you. The
poor man has scarcely enough pocket money to pay his travelling expenses
when he goes lecturing." "Lecturing?" Dominey repeated. "What's happened to poor Henry?" "My husband is an exceedingly conscientious man," was the dignified
reply. "He goes from town to town with Lord Roberts and a secretary,
lecturing on national defence." "Dear Henry was always a little cranky, wasn't he?" Dominey observed. "Let me put your mind at rest on that other matter, though, Caroline. I
can assure you that I have come back to England not to borrow money but
to spend it." His cousin shook her head mournfully. "And a few minutes ago I was
nearly observing that you had lost your sense of humour!" "I am in earnest," he persisted. "Africa has turned out to be my
Eldorado. Quite unexpectedly, I must admit, I came in for a considerable
sum of money towards the end of my stay there. I am paying off the
mortgages at Dominey at once, and I want Henry to jot down on paper at
once those few amounts he was good enough to lend me in the old days." Caroline, Duchess of Worcester, sat perfectly still for a moment with
her mouth open, a condition which was entirely natural but unbecoming. "And you mean to tell me that you really are Everard Dominey?" she
exclaimed. "The weight of evidence is rather that way," he murmured. He moved his chair deliberately a little nearer, took her hand and
raised it to his lips. Her face was perilously near to his. She drew a
little back--and too abruptly. "My dear Everard," she whispered, "Henry is in the house! Besides--Yes,
I suppose you must be Everard. Just now there was something in your eyes
exactly like his. But you are so stiff. Have you been drilling out there
or anything?" He shook his head. "One spends half one's time in the saddle." "And you are really well off?" she asked again wonderingly. "If I had stayed there another year," he replied, "and been able to
marry a Dutch Jewess, I should have qualified for Park Lane." She sighed. "It's too wonderful. Henry will love having his money back." "And you?" She looked positively distressed. "You've lost all your manners," she complained. "You make love like a
garden rake. You should have leaned towards me with a quiver in your
voice when you said those last two words, and instead of that you look
as though you were sitting at attention, with a positive glint of steel
in your eyes." "One sees a woman once in a blue moon out there," he pleaded. She shook her head. "You've changed. It was a sixth sense with you to
make love in exactly the right tone, to say exactly the right thing in
the right manner." "I shall pick it up," he declared hopefully, "with a little assistance." She made a little grimace. "You won't want an old woman like me to assist you, Everard. You'll have
the town at your feet. You'll be able to frivol with musical comedy,
flirt with our married beauties, or--I'm sorry, Everard, I forgot." "You forgot what?" he asked steadfastly. "I forgot the tragedy which finally drove you abroad. I forgot your
marriage. Is there any change in your wife?" "Not much, I am afraid." "And Mr. Mangan--he thinks that you are safe over here?" "Perfectly." She looked at him earnestly. Perhaps she had never admitted, even to
herself, how fond she had been of this scapegrace cousin. "You'll find that no one will have a word to say against you," she told
him, "now that you are wealthy and regenerate. They'll forget everything
you want them to. When will you come and dine here and meet all your
relatives?" "Whenever you are kind enough to ask me," he answered. "I thought of
going down to Dominey to-morrow." She looked at him with a new thing in her eyes--something of fear,
something, too, of admiration. "But--your wife?" "She is there, I believe," he said. "I cannot help it. I have been an
exile from my home long enough." "Don't go," she begged suddenly. "Why not be brave and have her removed. I know how tender-hearted you are, but you have your future and your
career to consider. For her sake, too, you ought not to give her the
opportunity--"

Dominey could never make up his mind whether the interruption which came
at that moment was welcome or otherwise. Caroline suddenly broke off
in her speech and glanced warningly towards the larger room. A tall,
grey-haired man, dressed in old-fashioned clothes and wearing a
pince-nez, had lifted the curtains. He addressed the Duchess in a thin,
reedy voice. "My dear Caroline," he began,--"ah, you must forgive me. I did not know
that you were engaged. We will not stay, but I should like to present to
you a young friend of mine who is going to help me at the meeting this
evening." "Do bring him in," his wife replied, her voice once more attuned to its
natural drawl. "And I have a surprise for you too, Henry--a very great
surprise, I think you will find it!" Dominey rose to his feet--a tall, commanding figure--and stood waiting
the approach of the newcomer. The Duke advanced, looking at him
enquiringly. A young man, very obviously a soldier in mufti, was
hovering in the background. "I must plead guilty to the surprise," the Duke confessed courteously. "There is something exceedingly familiar about your face, sir, but I
cannot remember having had the privilege of meeting you." "You see," Caroline observed, "I am not the only one, Everard, who did
not accept you upon a glance. This is Everard Dominey, Henry, returned
from foreign exile and regenerated in every sense of the word." "How do you do?" Dominey said, holding out his hand. "I seem to be
rather a surprise to every one, but I hope you haven't quite forgotten
me." "God bless my soul!" the Duke exclaimed. "You don't mean to say that
you're really Everard Dominey?" "I am he, beyond a doubt," was the calm assurance. "Most amazing!" the Duke declared, as he shook hands. "Most amazing! I
never saw such a change in my life. Yes, yes, I see--same complexion,
of course--nose and eyes--yes, yes! But you seem taller, and you carry
yourself like a soldier. Dear, dear me! Africa has done wonderfully by
you. Delighted, my dear Everard! Delighted!" "You'll be more delighted still when you hear the rest of the news," his
wife remarked drily. "In the meantime, do present your friend." "Precisely so," the Duke acquiesced, turning to the young man in the
background. "Most sorry, my dear Captain Bartram. The unexpected return
of a connection of my wife must be my apology for this lapse of manners. Let me present you to the Duchess. Captain Bartram is just back from
Germany, my dear, and is an enthusiastic supporter of our cause.--Sir
Everard Dominey." Caroline shook hands kindly with her husband's protege, and Dominey
exchanged a solemn handshake with him. "You, too, are one of those, then, Captain Bartram, who are convinced
that Germany has evil designs upon us?" the former said, smiling. "I have just returned from Germany after twelve months' stay there,"
the young soldier replied. "I went with an open mind. I have come
back convinced that we shall be at war with Germany within a couple of
years." The Duke nodded vigorously. "Our young friend is right," he declared. "Three times a week for many
months I have been drumming the fact into the handful of wooden-headed
Englishmen who have deigned to come to our meetings. I have made myself
a nuisance to the House of Lords and the Press. It is a terrible thing
to realise how hard it is to make an Englishman reflect, so long as he
is making money and having a good time.--You are just back from Africa,
Everard?" "Within a week, sir." "Did you see anything of the Germans out there? Were you anywhere near
their Colony?" "I have been in touch with them for some years," Dominey replied. "Most interesting!" his questioner exclaimed. "You may be of service to
us, Everard. You may, indeed! Now tell me, isn't it true that they have
secret agents out there, trying to provoke unsettlement and disquiet
amongst the Boers? Isn't it true that they apprehend a war with England
before very long and are determined to stir up the Colony against us?" "I am very sorry," Dominey replied, "but I am not a politician in any
shape or form. All the Germans whom I have met out there seem a most
peaceful race of men, and there doesn't seem to be the slightest
discontent amongst the Boers or any one else." The Duke's face fell. "This is very surprising." "The only people who seem to have any cause for discontent," Dominey
continued, "are the English settlers. I didn't commence to do any good
myself there till a few years ago, but I have heard some queer stories
about the way our own people were treated after the war." "What you say about South Africa, Sir Everard," the young soldier
remarked, "is naturally interesting, but I am bound to say that it is in
direct opposition to all I have heard." "And I," the Duke echoed fervently. "I have lived there for the last eleven years," Dominey continued, "and
although I spent the earlier part of that time trekking after big game,
lately I am bound to confess that every thought and energy I possess
have been centered upon money-making. For that reason, perhaps, my
observations may have been at fault. I shall claim the privilege of
coming to one of your first meetings, Duke, and of trying to understand
this question." His august connection blinked at him a little curiously for a moment
behind his glasses. "My dear Everard," he said, "forgive my remarking it, but I find you
more changed than I could have believed possible." "Everard is changed in more ways than one," his wife observed, with
faint irony. Dominey, who had risen to leave, bent over her hand. "What about my dinner party, sir?" she added. "As soon as I return from Norfolk," he replied. "Dominey Hall will really find you?" she asked a little curiously. "Most certainly!" There was again that little flutter of fear in her eyes, followed by a
momentary flash of admiration. Dominey shook hands gravely with his host
and nodded to Bertram. The servant whom the Duchess had summoned stood
holding the curtains on one side. "I shall hope to see you again shortly, Duke," Dominey said, as he
completed his leave-taking. "There is a little matter of business to be
adjusted between us. 