



Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Keith M. Eckrich and PG
Distributed Proofreaders










AN AMIABLE CHARLATAN

BY

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

(AUTHOR OF "MR. GREX OF MONTE CARLO," "THE DOUBLE TRAITOR", ETC.) WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY WILL GREF


[Illustration:
"No one can be more glad than Mrs. Delaporte and myself
that this little affair has been concluded so amicably."] CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    I THE MAN AT STEPHANO'S

   II THE COUP IN THE GAMBLING DEN

  III CULLEN GIVES ADVICE

   IV THE WOOING OF EVE

    V MR. SAMUELSON

   VI THE PARTY AT THE MILAN

  VII "ONE OF US"

 VIII AT THE ALHAMBRA

   IX THE EXPOSURE

    X A BROKEN PARTNERSHIP

   XI MR. BUNDERCOMBE'S WINK

  XII THE EMANCIPATION OF LOUIS

 XIII "THE SHORN LAMB"

  XIV MR. BUNDERCOMBE'S LOVE AFFAIR

   XV LORD PORTHONING'S LESSON


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"No one can be more glad than Mrs. Delaporte and myself that this little
affair has been concluded so amicably"

"Ladies and gentlemen, if you please! Nothing has happened"

"I haven't interrupted anything, have I--any little celebration, or
anything of that sort?" "Eve was one of the first to congratulate me"




AN AMIABLE CHARLATAN



CHAPTER I--THE MAN AT STEPHANO's

The thing happened so suddenly that I really had very little time to make
up my mind what course to adopt under somewhat singular circumstances. I
was seated at my favorite table against the wall on the right-hand side in
Stephano's restaurant, with a newspaper propped up before me, a glass of
hock by my side, and a portion of the _plat du jour_, which happened to be
chicken _en casserole_, on the plate in front of me. I was, in fact, halfway through dinner when, without a word of warning, a
man who seemed to enter with a lightfooted speed that, considering his
size, was almost incredible, drew a chair toward him and took the vacant
place at my table. My glass of wine and my plate were moved with smooth
and marvelous haste to his vicinity. Under cover of the tablecloth a
packet--I could not tell what it contained--was thrust into my hand. "Sir," he said, raising my glass of wine to his lips, "I am forced to take
somewhat of a liberty. You can render me the service of a lifetime! Kindly
accept the situation." I stared at him for a moment quite blankly. Then I recognized him; and,
transferring at once the packet to my trousers pocket, I drew another
glass toward me and poured out the remainder of my half-bottle of hock. So
much, at any rate, I felt I had saved! "I shall offer you presently," my self-invited guest continued, with his
mouth full of my chicken, "the fullest explanation. I shall also ask you
to do me the honor of dining with me. I think I am right in saying that we
are not altogether strangers?" "I know you very well by sight," I told him. "I have seen you here several
times before with a young lady." "Exactly," he agreed. "My daughter, sir." "Then for the sake of your daughter," I said, with an enthusiasm that was
not in the least assumed, "I can assure you that, whether as host or
guest, you are very welcome to sit at my table. As for this packet--"

"Keep it for a few moments, my young friend," the newcomer interrupted,
"just while I recover my breath, that is all. Have confidence in me. Things may happen here very shortly. Sit tight and you will never regret
it. My name, so far as you are concerned, is Joseph H. Parker. Tell me,
you are facing the door, some one has just entered. Who is it?" "A stranger," I replied; "a stranger to this place, I am sure. He is tall
and dark; he is a little lantern-jawed--a hatchet-shaped face, I should
call it." "My man, right enough," Mr. Joseph H. Parker muttered. "Don't seem to
notice him particularly," he added, "but tell me what he is doing." "He seems to have entered in a hurry," I announced, "and is now taking off
his overcoat. He is wearing, I perceive, a bowler hat, a dinner jacket,
the wrong-shaped collar; and he appears to have forgotten to change his
boots." "That's Cullen, all right," Mr. Joseph H. Parker groaned. "You're a person
of observation, sir. Well, I've been in tighter corners than this--thanks
to you!" "Who is Mr. Cullen and what does he want?" I asked. "Mr. Cullen," my guest declared, sampling the fresh bottle of wine which
had just been brought to him, "is one of those misguided individuals whose
lack of faith in his fellows will bring him some time or other to a bad
end. My young friend, sip that wine thoughtfully--don't hurry over it--and
tell me whether my choice is not better than yours?" "Possibly," I remarked, with a glance at the yellow seal, "your pocket is
longer. By the by, your friend is coming toward us." "It is not a question of pocket," Mr. Parker continued, disregarding my
remark, "it is a question of taste and judgment; discrimination is perhaps
the word I should use. Now in my younger days--Eh? What's that?" The person named Cullen had paused at my table. His hand was resting
gently upon the shoulder of my self-invited guest. Mr. Parker looked up
and appeared to recognize him with much surprise. "You, my dear fellow!" he exclaimed. "Say, I'm delighted to see you--I am
sure! But would you mind--just a little lower with your fingers! Too
professional a touch altogether!" Mr. Cullen smiled, and from that moment I took a dislike to him--a dislike
that did much toward determining the point of view from which I was
inclined to consider various succeeding incidents. He was by no means a
person of prepossessing appearance. His cheeks were colorless save for a
sort of yellowish tinge. His mouth reminded me of the mouth of a horse;
his teeth were irregular and poor. Yet there was about the man a certain sense of power. His eyes were clear
and bright. His manner was imbued with the reserve strength of a man who
knows his own mind and does not fear to speak it. "I am sorry to interrupt you at your dinner, Mr. Parker," he said, his
eyes traveling all over the table as though taking in its appointments and
condition. "Of no consequence at all," Mr. Parker assured him; "in fact I have nearly
finished. If you are thinking of dining here let me recommend this chicken
_en casserole_. I have tasted nothing so good for days!" Mr. Cullen thanked him mechanically. His mind, however, was obviously
filled with other things. He was puzzled. "You must have a double about this evening, I fancy," he remarked. "I
could have sworn I saw you coming out of a certain little house in Adam
Street not a couple of minutes ago. You know the little house I mean?" Mr. Parker smiled. "Seems as though that double were all right," he said. "I am halfway
through my dinner, as you can see, and I'm a slow eater--especially in
pleasant company. Shake hands with my friend--Mr. Paul Walmsley, Mr. Cullen." My surprise at hearing my own name correctly given was only equaled by the
admiration I also felt for my companion's complete and absolute assurance. Mr. Cullen and I exchanged a perfunctory handshake, which left me without
any change in my feelings toward him. "Another of my mistakes, I suppose," Mr. Cullen said quietly. "I am afraid
on this occasion, however, that I must trouble you, Mr. Parker. An affair
of a few moments only. I won't even suggest Bow Street--at present. If you
could take a stroll with me--even into Luigi's office would do." Mr. Parker put down his knife and fork with a little gesture of
irritation. His broad, good-natured face was for the moment clouded. "Say,
Cullen," he remonstrated, "don't you think you're carrying this a bit too
far, you know? There isn't a man I enjoy a half-hour's chat with more than
you; but in the middle of dinner--dinner with a friend too--"

"I try to do my duty," Mr. Cullen interrupted, "and I am afraid that I am
not at liberty to study your comfort." Mr. Parker sighed heavily. "Do you mind, Walmsley, having my plate kept warm and reminding the man
that I ordered asparagus to follow?" my new friend remarked, as he rose to
his feet. "Mr. Cullen wants a word or two with me in private, and Mr.
Cullen is a man who will have his own way." I nodded as indifferently as possible and the two men walked off together
toward the entrance. Then I summoned my waiter. "Bring me," I ordered, "a fresh portion of chicken and order some
asparagus to follow. Keep my friend's chicken warm and order him some
asparagus also." Leaning back in my chair I tried to puzzle out the probable meaning of
this somewhat extraordinary happening. My acquiescence in the attitude
that had been so suddenly forced upon me was owing entirely to one
circumstance. Mr. Joseph H. Parker I had recognized at his first entrance
as a regular _habitue_ of the restaurant. He was usually accompanied by a
young lady who, from the first moment I had seen her, had produced an
effect upon my not too susceptible disposition for which I was wholly
unable to account, but which was the sole reason why I had given up my
club and all other restaurants and occupied that particular place for the
last fortnight. I had put the two down as an American and his daughter traveling in
England for pleasure; and my continual presence at the restaurant was
wholly inspired by the hope that some opportunity might arise by means of
which I could make their acquaintance. Adventures, in the ordinary sense
of the word, had never appealed to me. I was privileged to possess many
charming acquaintances among the other sex, but not one of them had ever
inspired me with anything save the most ordinary feelings of friendship
and admiration. The opportunity I desired had now apparently come. I had made the
acquaintance of Mr. Joseph H. Parker--made it in an unceremonious manner,
perhaps, but still under circumstances that would probably result in his
being willing to acknowledge himself my debtor. I had a packet of
something belonging to him in my pocket, which was presumably valuable. His friend, Mr. Cullen, I detested, and the reference to Bow Street
puzzled me. However, I had no doubt that in a few minutes everything would
be explained. Meantime I permitted myself to indulge in certain very
pleasurable anticipations. In the course of about a quarter of an hour Mr. Joseph H. Parker
reappeared. He came down the room humming a tune and apparently quite
pleased with himself. I took the opportunity of studying his personal
appearance a little more closely. He was not tall, but he was distinctly
fat. He had a large double chin, but a certain freshness of complexion and
massiveness about his forehead relieved his face from any suspicion of
grossness. He had a large and humorous mouth, delightful eyes and
plentiful eyebrows. His iron-gray hair was brushed carefully back from his
forehead. He gave one the idea of strength, notwithstanding the
disabilities of his figure. He smiled contentedly as he seated himself
once more at my table. "Really," he began, "I scarcely know how to excuse myself, Mr. Walmsley. However, thanks to you, we can now dine in comfort. Until now I fear I
have taken your good offices very much for granted; but I assure you it
will give me the greatest pleasure to make your closer acquaintance and to
impress upon you my extreme sense of obligation." "You are very kind," I replied. "By the by, might I ask how you know my
name?" "My young friend," Mr. Parker said, eying with approval the fresh portion
of chicken that had been brought him, "it is my business to know many
things. I go about the world with my eyes and ears open. Things that
escape other people interest me. Your name is Mr. Paul Walmsley. You are
one of a class of men that practically doesn't exist in America. You have
no particular occupation that I know of, save that you have a small estate
in the country, which no doubt takes up some of your time. You have rooms
in London, which you occupy occasionally. You probably write a little--I
have noticed that you are fond of watching people." "You really seem to know a good deal about me," I confessed, a little
taken aback. "I am not far from the mark, am I?" "You are not," I admitted. "As regards your lack of occupation," Mr. Parker went on, "I am not the
man to blame you for it. There are very few things in life a man can
settle down to nowadays. To a person of imagination the ordinary routine
of the professions and the ordinary curriculum of business life is a
species of slavery. We live in overcivilized times. There seems to be very
little room anywhere for a man to gratify his natural instincts for change
and adventure." I murmured my acquiescence with his sentiments and my companion paused for
a few minutes, his whole attention devoted to his dinner. "Might one inquire," I asked, after a brief pause, "as to your own
profession? You are an American, are you not?" "I am most certainly an American," Mr. Parker assented. "In business?" I asked. Mr. Parker looked round. Our table was comparatively isolated. "I am an adventurer," he replied mysteriously. I stared at him and repeated the word. He beamed pleasantly upon me. "An adventurer! My daughter, whom you have seen here with me, is an
adventuress. We live by our wits and we do pretty well at it. Sometimes we
live in luxury. Sometimes we are up against it good and hard. The Ritz one
day, you know, and Bloomsbury the next; but lots of fun all the time." I looked at him a little blankly. "To a certain extent I suppose you are joking?" I asked. "To no extent at all," he assured me. "By the by, as regards that packet;
would you mind just slipping it under this newspaper?" I withdrew it from my pocket and obeyed him at once. Mr. Parker's fingers
seemed to play with it for a moment and I noticed at that moment what a
strong and capable hand he seemed to have, with fingers of unusual length
and suppleness. A dark faced _maitre d'hotel_, who presided over our portion of the room,
came up smiling, with an inquiry as to our coffee. He exchanged a casual
sentence or two with Mr. Parker, bowed and passed on. Mr. Parker, a moment
later, with a little smile lifted the newspaper. The packet had
disappeared. He noticed my look of surprise and seemed gratified. "A mere trifle, that!" he declared. "I can assure you that I could have
taken it out of your pocket, if I had desired, without your feeling a
thing." "Wonderful!" I murmured, feeling distinctly uncomfortable. "Just a gift!" he continued modestly. "We all have our talents, you know. I have ordered some special coffee." I was beginning to think rapidly now. "By the by," I asked, "what is Mr. Cullen's profession?" "He is a detective," Mr. Parker answered, without hesitation; "and, to my
mind, a singularly bad one. For two months he has had what they call his
eye on me. Between ourselves I think he will have his eye on me still in
another two months' time. I am sure I hope so, for I frankly admit that
half the savor of life would be gone if my friend, Mr. Cullen, were to
finally give me up as a bad job and leave me alone." I suppose that something of what I was feeling was reflected in my face. I
had always considered myself a man of the world and I was interested
enough in my fellows to enjoy mixing with all classes. But there was the girl! "You are thinking--!" my companion began softly. "Your friend," I interrupted, "has just entered the restaurant. He is
coming toward this table." Mr. Parker's expression never changed. Not a muscle twitched. His tone was
even careless. "Just as well, perhaps," he remarked, "that we worked that little
conjuring trick." The detective stood once more at our table. My instinctive dislike of him
was now an accomplished thing. I hated his smile of subdued triumph, and
all my fundamental ideas as to law and order were seriously affected by
it. I was distinctly on the side of my new acquaintance. "I am sorry to interrupt this little feast," Mr. Cullen said, "but I shall
have to trouble you both to come with me for a short time." Mr. Parker carefully clipped the end of his cigar and leaned back in his
chair while he lit it. "My friend Cullen," he remonstrated, "I have no objection to offering
myself up as a victim to your super-abundant energy and trotting about
with you wherever you choose; but when it comes to dragging my friends
into it, I just want to say right here that I think you are carrying
things a little too far--just a little too far, sir." "If either of you seriously object to my request," Mr. Cullen replied
doggedly, "I can put the matter on a different basis." "Who is this friend of yours and why should we go anywhere with him?" I
asked. Mr. Parker shook his head mournfully. "You may well ask," he sighed. "You may not think it, to look at his
ingenuous and honest expression, but the fact, nevertheless, remains that
Mr. Cullen is a misguided but zealous member of the Sherlock Holmes
fraternity: in short, a detective." I rose to my feet with some alacrity. "Anything in the shape of an adventure--" I began. "Not much adventure about this," Mr. Parker interrupted gloomily, brushing
the ashes from his waistcoat and also rising. "We are probably going to be
searched for spoons. However if it must be--"

For the first time in my life I walked side by side with a detective. He
led us to the far end of the restaurant, into an apartment usually used by
the manager as a wine-tasting office, and carefully closed the door behind
us. Outside I caught the glimmer of a policeman's helmet. "Every precaution taken, you perceive," Mr. Parker remarked. "In case we
should turn out to be desperate characters and, appalled by the fear of
discovery, should be driven to make a personal attack upon Mr. Cullen, a
myrmidon of the law is lurking near. Under those circumstances I shall
eschew violence. I shall submit myself peaceably to a second examination." I found the affair, on the whole, interesting. I divested myself only of
my coat and waistcoat and Mr. Cullen's fingers did the rest. Only a single
and momentary frown betrayed his disappointment as, ten minutes later, he
unlocked the door. "Gentlemen," he said, "I owe you my most profound apologies." "That's all right, Cullen," Mr. Parker observed, patting him on the
shoulder; "but let's have this thing straight now. Are we to be allowed to
finish our dinner in peace or will you be turning up again with a new
idea? And if I take a box for the Tivoli presently, shall we have the
pleasure of seeing you bob in upon us?" "So far as my present intentions are concerned," Mr. Cullen remarked
grimly, "you may rely upon remaining undisturbed. I am sorry, Mr.
Walmsley," he added, turning to me, "to have been the cause of any
annoyance to you this evening. My advice to you is, if you wish to escape
these inconveniences through life, to avoid the society of people whose
character is known to the police." "I shall get you for libel yet, Cullen!" Mr. Parker declared, pulling down
his waistcoat. "What I've done to annoy that man I can't imagine," he went on
impersonally. "Mind, he practises on me--I'm convinced of it." Mr. Cullen left us abruptly and quitted the restaurant. I returned to our
table with my new friend. "Really," he said, "I scarcely know how to apologize to you, Mr. Walmsley. This sort of thing amuses me, as a rule; but I must admit that Mr. Cullen
is apt to get on one's nerves. A well-meaning man, mind, but unduly
persistent!" I resumed my seat at the table. I was feeling a little dazed. Opposite,
talking to two ladies, was the smooth-faced _maitre d'hotel_ into whose
keeping I felt sure that packet had gone. Seated by my side was the
gentleman who had assured me with the utmost self-possession that he was
an adventurer. And standing in the doorway, looking at us, was the girl
who for the last few weeks had monopolized all my thoughts; who had played
havoc to such a complete extent with the principles of my life that, for
her sake, I was at that moment perfectly willing to range myself even
among the outcasts of the world. CHAPTER II--THE COUP IN THE GAMBLING DEN

On seeing us the girl advanced into the room. I called Mr. Parker's
attention to her and he rose at once to his feet. It was a cold evening in
April and she was wearing a long coat trimmed with some dark-colored fur,
and a hat also trimmed with fur, but with something blue in it. She was
rather tall; she had masses of dark brown hair, a suspicion of a fringe,
and deep blue eyes. She came toward us very deliberately, with the same
grace of movement I had watched and admired night after night. She gave me
a glance of the slightest possible curiosity as she approached. Then her
father introduced us. "This is Mr. Paul Walmsley, my dear," he said--"my daughter. Have you
dined, Eve?" She shook hands with me and smiled very charmingly. "Hours ago," she replied. "I didn't mean to come out this evening, but I
was so bored that I thought I would try and find you." She accepted the chair I was holding and unbuttoned her cloak. "You will have some coffee?" I begged. "Why, that would be delightful," she agreed. "I am so glad to find you
with my father, Mr. Walmsley," she continued. "I know he hates dining
alone; but this evening I had an appointment with a dressmaker quite late
--and I didn't feel a bit like dinner anyhow." "You come here often, don't you?" I ventured. "Very often indeed," she replied. "You see it is not in the least
entertaining where we are staying and the cooking is abominable. Then
father adores restaurants. Do tell me what you have been talking about--
you two men--all the evening?" "The truth!" Mr. Parker remarked, lighting another cigar. "My daughter
knows that I speak nothing else. It is a weakness of mine. Mr. Walmsley
and I were exchanging notes as to our relative professions. I told him
frankly that I was an adventurer and you an adventuress. I think by now he
is beginning to believe it." She laughed very softly--almost under her breath; yet I fancied there was
a note of mockery in her mirth. "Confess that you were very much shocked, Mr. Walmsley!" she said. "Not in the least," I assured her. She raised her eyebrows ever so slightly. "Confess, then," she went on, "confess, Mr. Walmsley, that in all your
well-ordered life you have never heard such an admission made by two
apparently respectable people before." "How do you know," I asked, "that my life has been well-ordered?" "Look at yourself in the glass," she begged. Scarcely knowing what I did, I turned round in my seat and obeyed her. There is, perhaps, a certain preciseness about my appearance as well as my
attire. I am tall enough--well over six feet--but my complexion still
retains traces of my years in Africa and of my fondness for outdoor
sports. My hair is straight and I have never grown beard or mustache. I
felt, somehow, that I represented the things which in an Englishman are a
little derided by young ladies on the other side of the water. "I can't help my appearance," I said, a little crossly. "I can assure you
that I am not a prig." "Our young friend," Mr. Parker intervened, "has certainly earned his
immunity from any such title. To tell you the truth, Eve, he has already
been my accomplice this evening in a certain little matter. But for his
help, who knows that I might not have found myself up against it? Between
us we have even had a little fun out of Cullen." Her expression changed. She seemed, for some reason, none too well
pleased. "What have you been doing?" she asked me. "I, personally, have been doing very little indeed," I told her. "Your
father entered the restaurant in a hurry about an hour ago and found it
convenient to seat himself at my table and help himself to my dinner. He
intrusted me, also, with a packet, which I subsequently returned to him." "It is now," Mr. Parker declared, replying to his daughter's anxious
glance, "in perfectly safe hands." She sighed and shook her head at him. "Daddy," she murmured plaintively, "why will you run such risks? Even Mr.
Cullen isn't an absolute idiot, you know, and there might have been some
one else watching." Mr. Parker nodded. "You are quite right, my dear," he admitted. "To tell you the truth,
Cullen was really a little smarter than usual this evening. However,
there's always the luck, you know--our luck! If Mr. Walmsley had turned
out a different sort of man--but, then, I knew he wouldn't." She turned her head and looked at me. She had a trick of contracting the
corners of her eyes just a little, which was absolutely bewitching. "Will you tell me why you helped my father in this way, Mr. Walmsley?" I returned her regard steadfastly. "It never occurred to me," I said, "to do anything else--after I had
recognized him." She smiled a little. My speech was obviously sincere. I think from that
moment she began to realize why I had occupied the little table, opposite
to the one where she so often sat, with such unfailing regularity. "What about a music hall?" Mr. Parker suggested. "I hear there's a good
show on right across the street here. Have you any engagement for this
evening, Mr. Walmsley?" "None at all," I hastened to assure him. We left the place together a few minutes later and found a vacant box at
the Tivoli. Arrived there, however, Mr. Parker soon became restless. He
kept on seeing friends in the auditorium. We watched him, with his hat a
little on the back of his head, going about shaking hands in various
directions. "How long have you been in England?" I asked my companion. "Barely two months," she replied. "Do look at father! Wherever he goes
it's the same. The one recreation of his life is making friends. The
people he is speaking to to-night he has probably come across in a
railroad train or an American bar. He makes lifelong friendships every
time he drinks a cocktail, and he never forgets a face." "Isn't that a little trying for you?" I asked. She laughed outright. "If you could only see some of the people he brings up and introduces to
me!" We talked for some time upon quite ordinary subjects. As the time passed
on, however, and her father did not return, it seemed to me she became
more silent. She told me very little about herself and the few personal
things she said were always restrained. I was beginning to feel almost
discouraged; she sat so long with a slight frown upon her forehead and her
head turned away from me. "Miss Parker," I ventured at last, "something seems to have displeased
you." "It has," she admitted. "Will you please tell me what it is?" I asked humbly. "If I have said or
done anything clumsy give me a chance, at any rate, to let you see how
sorry I am." She turned and faced me then. "It is not your fault," she assured me; "only I am a little annoyed with
my father." "Why?" "I think," she went on, "it is perfectly delightful that he should have
made your acquaintance. It isn't that at all. But I do not think he should
have made use of you in the way he did. He is utterly reckless sometimes
and forgets what he is doing. It is all very well for himself, but he has
no right to expose you to--to--"

"To what risk did he expose me?" I demanded. "Tell me, Miss Parker--was he
absolutely honest when he told me he was an adventurer?" "Absolutely!" "Was I, then, an accomplice in anything illegal to-night?" "Worse than illegal--criminal!" she told me. Now my father had been a judge and I had a brother who was a barrister;
but the madness was upon me and I spoke quickly and convincingly. "Then all I have to say about it is that I am glad!" I declared. "Why?" she murmured, looking at me wonderingly. "Because he is your father and I have helped him," I answered under my
breath. For a few moments she was silent. She looked at me however; and as I
watched her eyes grow softer I suddenly held out my hand, and for a moment
she suffered hers to rest in it. Then she drew away a little. She was still looking at me steadfastly; but something that had seemed to
me inimical had gone from her expression. "Mr. Walmsley," she said slowly, "I want to tell you I think you are
making a mistake. Please listen to me carefully. You do not belong to the
order of people from whom the adventurers of the world are drawn. What you
are is written in your face. I am perfectly certain you possess the
ordinary conventional ideas as to right and wrong--the ideas in which you
have been brought up and which have been instilled into you all your life. My father and I belong to a different class of society. There is nothing
to be gained for you by mixing with us, and a great deal to be lost." "May I not judge for myself?" I asked. "I fear," she answered, looking me full in the face and smiling at me
delightfully, "you are just a little prejudiced." "Supposing," I whispered, "I have discovered something that seems to me
better worth living for than anything else I have yet found in the world I
know of--if that something belongs to a world in which I have not yet
lived--do you blame me if for the sake of it I would be willing to climb
down even into----"

She held out her finger warningly. I heard heavy footsteps outside and the
rattle of the doorhandle. "You are very foolish!" she murmured. "Please let my father in." Mr. Parker returned in high good humor. He had met a host of acquaintances
and declared that he had not had a dull moment. As for the performance he
seemed to have forgotten there was one going on at all. "I am for supper," he suggested. "I owe our friend here a supper in return
for his interrupted dinner." "Supper, by all means!" I agreed. "Remember that I am wearing a hat," Eve said. "We must go to one of the
smaller places." In the end we went back to Stephano's. We sat at the table at which I had
so often watched Eve and her father sitting alone, and by her side I
listened to the music I had so often heard while I had watched her from
what had seemed to me to be an impossible distance. Mr. Parker talked wonderfully. He spoke of gigantic financial deals in
Wall Street; of operations which had altered the policy of nations; of
great robberies in New York, the details of which he discussed with
amazing technical knowledge. He played tricks with the knives and forks, balanced the glasses in
extraordinary fashion, and reduced our waiters to a state of numbed and
amazed incapacity. Every person who entered he seemed to have some slight
acquaintance with. All the time he was acknowledging and returning
greetings, and all the time he talked. We spoke finally of gambling; and he laughed heartily when I made mild fun
of the gambling scare that was just then being written up in all the
papers and magazines. "So you don't believe in baccarat tables in London!" he said. "Very good! We shall see. After we have supped we shall see!" We stayed until long past closing time. Mr. Parker continued in the
highest good humor, but Eve was subject at times to moods of either
indifference or depression. The more intimate note which had once or twice
crept into our conversation she seemed now inclined to deprecate. She
avoided meeting my eyes. More than once she glanced toward the clock. "Haven't you an appointment to-night, father?" she asked, almost in an
undertone. "Sure!" Mr. Parker answered readily. "I have an appointment, and I am
going to take you and Mr. Walmsley along." "I am delighted to hear it!" I exclaimed quickly. "I'll teach you to make fun of the newspapers," Mr. Parker went on. "No
gambling hells in London, eh? Well, we shall see!" To my great relief Eve made no spoken objection to my inclusion in the
party. When at last we left a large and handsome motor car was drawn up
outside waiting for us. "A taxicab," Mr. Parker explained, "is of no use to me--of no more use
than a hansom cab. I have to keep a car in order to slip about quietly. Now in what part of London shall we look for a gambling hell, Mr.
Walmsley? I know of eleven. Name your own street--somewhere in the West
End." I named one at random. "The very place!" Mr. Parker declared; "the very place where I have
already an appointment. Get in. Say, you Londoners have no idea what goes
on in your own city!" We drove to a quiet street not very far from the Ritz Hotel. Mr. Parker
led us across the pavement and we entered a block of flats. The entrance
hall was dimly lit and there seemed to be no one about. Mr. Parker,
however, rang for a lift, which came promptly down. "You two will stay here," he directed, "for two or three minutes. Then the
lift will come down for you." He ascended and left us there. I turned at once to Eve, who had scarcely
spoken a word during the drive from the restaurant. "I do wish you would tell me what is troubling you, Miss Parker," I
begged. "If I am really in the way of course you have only to say the word
and I'll be off at once." She held my arm for a moment. The touch of her fingers gave me
unreasonable pleasure. "Please don't think me rude or unkind," she pleaded. "Don't even think
that I don't like your coming along with us--because I do. It isn't that. Only, as I told my father before supper, you don't belong! You ought not
to be seen at these places, and with us. For some absurd reason father
seems to have taken a fancy to you. It isn't a very good thing for you. It
very likely won't be a good thing for us." "Do please change your opinion of me a little," I implored her. "I can't
help my appearance; but let me assure you I am willing to play the
Bohemian to any extent so long as I can be with you. There isn't a thing
in your life I wouldn't be content to share," I ventured to add. She sighed a little petulantly. She was half-convinced, but against her
will. "You are very obstinate," she declared; "but, of course, you're rather
nice." After that I was ready for anything that might happen. The lift had
descended and the porter bade us enter. We stopped at the third floor. In
the open doorway of one of the flats Mr. Parker was standing, solid and
imposing. He beckoned us, with a broad smile, to follow him. To my surprise there were no locked doors or burly doorkeepers. We hung up
our things in the hall and passed into a long room, in which were some
fifteen or twenty people. Most of them were sitting round a _chemin de
fer_ table; a few were standing at the sideboard eating sandwiches. A
dark-haired, dark-eyed, sallow-faced man, a trifle corpulent, undeniably
Semitic, who seemed to be in charge of the place, came up and shook hands
with Mr. Parker. "Glad to see you, sir--and your daughter," he said, glancing keenly at
them both and then at me. "This gentleman is a friend of yours?" "Certainly," Mr. Parker replied. "I won't introduce you, but I'll answer
for him." "You would like to play?" "I will play, certainly," Mr. Parker answered cheerfully. "My friend will
watch--for the present, at any rate." He waved us away, himself taking a seat at the table. I led Eve to a divan
at the farther corner of the room. We sat there and watched the people. There were many whose faces I knew--a sprinkling of stock-brokers, one or
two actresses, and half a dozen or so men about town of a dubious type. On
the whole the company was scarcely reputable. I looked at Eve and sighed. "Well, what is it?" she asked. "This is no sort of place for you, you know," I ventured. "Here it comes," she laughed; "the real, hidebound, respectable
Englishman! I tell you I like it. I like the life; I like the light and
shade of it all. I should hate your stiff English country houses, your
highly moral amusements, and your dull day-by-day life. Look at those
people's faces as they bend over the table!" "Well, I am looking at them," I told her. "I see nothing but greed. I see
no face that has not already lost a great part of its attractiveness." "Perhaps!" she replied indifferently. "I will grant you that greed is the
keynote of this place; yet even that has its interesting side. Where else
do you see it so developed? Where else could you see the same emotion
actuating a number of very different people in an altogether different
manner?" "For an adventuress," I remarked, "you seem to notice things." "No one in the world, except those who live by adventures, ever has any
inducement to notice things," she retorted. "That is why amateurs are such
failures. One never does anything so well as when one does it for one's
living." "The question is arguable," I submitted. She shrugged her shoulders. "Every question is arguable if it is worth while," she agreed carelessly. "Look at all those people coming in!" "I don't understand it," I confessed. "These places are against the law,
yet there seems to be no concealment at all! Why aren't we raided?" "Raids in this part of London only take place by arrangement," she assured
me. "This place will reach its due date sometime, but every one will know
all about it beforehand. They are making a clear profit here of about four
hundred pounds a night and it has been running for two months now. When
the raid comes Mr. Rubenstein--I think that is his name--can pay his five-
hundred-pound fine and move on somewhere else. It's wicked--the money they
make here some nights!" "You seem to know a good deal about it," I remarked. "The place interests father," she told me. "He comes here often." "And you?" "Sometimes. I am not always in the humor." I looked at her long and thoughtfully. Her beauty was entirely the beauty
of a young girl. There were no signs of late hours or anxiety in her face. She puzzled me more than ever. "I wish I knew," I said, "exactly what you mean when you call yourself an
adventuress." She laughed. "It means this," she explained: "To-night I have money in my purse, jewels
on my fingers, a motor car to ride home in. In a week's time, if things
went badly with us, I might have nothing. Then father or I, or both of us,
would go out into the world to replenish, and from whomever had most of
what we desired we should take as opportunity presented itself." "Irrespective of the law?" "Absolutely!" "Irrespective of your sense of right and wrong?" "My sense of right and wrong, according to your standards, does not
exist." I gave it up. She seemed thoroughly in earnest, and yet every word she
spoke seemed contrary to my instinctive judgment of her. She pointed to
the table. "Look!" she whispered. "These people don't seem as though they had all
that money to gamble with, do they? Look! There must be at least a
thousand or fifteen hundred pounds upon the table." It was just as she said these words that the thing happened. From
somewhere among the little crowd of people gathered round the table there
came the sound of heavy stamping on the floor, and in less than a moment
every light in the room went out. The place was in somber darkness. Then,
breaking the momentary silence, there came from outside a shrill whistle. Again there was a silence--and then pandemonium! In a dozen different keys
one heard the same shout:

"The police!" Eve gripped my arm. My matchbox was out in a moment and I struck a match,
holding it high over my head. As it burned a queer little halo of light
seemed thrown over the table. The door was wide open and blocked with
people rushing out. The banker was still sitting in his place. At first I
seemed to have the idea that Mr. Parker was by his side. Then, to my
astonishment, I saw him at the opposite end of the table, standing as
though he had appeared from nowhere. A stentorian voice was heard from
outside:

"Ladies and gentlemen, if you please! Nothing has happened. The lights
will be on again immediately." Almost as he spoke the place was flooded with light. The faces of the people were ghastly. A babel of voices arose. "Where are the police?" "Where are they?" "Who said the police?" The little dark gentleman whose name was Rubenstein stood upon a chair. "Ladies and gentlemen," he called out, "nothing whatever has happened--
nothing! The electric lights went out owing to an accident, which I will
investigate. It seems to have been a practical joke on the part of the
lift man, who has disappeared. There are no police here. Please take your
places. The game will proceed." They came back a little reluctantly, as though still afraid. Then suddenly
the banker's hoarse voice rang out through the room. All the time he had
been sitting like an automaton. Now he was on his feet, swaying backward
and forward, his eyes almost starting from his head. "Lock the doors! The bank has been robbed! The notes have gone! Mr.
Rubenstein, don't let any one go out! I tell you there was two thousand
pounds upon the table. Some one has the notes!" There was a little murmur of voices and a shriek from one of the women as
she clutched her handbag. Mr. Parker, bland and benign, rose to his feet. "My own stake has disappeared," he declared; "and the pile of notes I
distinctly saw in front of the banker has gone. I fear, Mr. Rubenstein,
there is a thief among us." Mr. Rubenstein, white as a sheet, was standing at the door. He locked it
and put the key in his pocket. "Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "play is over for to-night. We are,
without a doubt, the victims of an attempted robbery. The lights were
turned out from the controlling switch by the lift man, who has
disappeared. I will ask you to leave the room one by one; and, for all our
sakes, I beg that any unknown to us will submit themselves to be
searched." There was a little angry murmur. Mr. Rubenstein looked pleadingly round. "Ladies and gentlemen," he begged, "you will not object, I am sure. I am a
poor man. Two thousand pounds of my money has gone from that table--all
the money I kept in reserve to make a bank for you. If any one will return
it now nothing shall be said. But to lose it all--I tell you it would ruin
me!" The perspiration stood out on his forehead. He looked anxiously round, as
though seeking for sympathy. Mr. Parker came over to his side. "Say, Mr. Rubenstein," he declared, "there isn't any one here who wants
you to lose a five-pound note--that's a sure thing! But there is just one
difficulty about this searching business: How can you identify your notes? If I, for instance, were to insist that I had brought with me two thousand
pounds in banknotes in my pocket--which, let me hasten to assure you, I
didn't--how could you deny it?" "My notes," Mr. Rubenstein replied feverishly, "all bear the stamp of
Lloyd's Bank and to-day's date. They can all be recognized." "In that case," Mr. Parker continued, "I recommend you, Mr. Rubenstein, to
insist upon searching every person here not thoroughly known to you; and I
recommend you, ladies and gentlemen," he added, looking round, "to submit
to be searched. It will not be a very strenuous affair, because no one can
have had time to conceal the notes very effectively. I think you will all
agree with me that we cannot allow our friend, who has provided us with
amusement for so many nights, to run the risk of a loss like this. Begin
with me, Mr. Rubenstein. No--I insist upon it. You know me better than
most of your clients, I think; but I submit myself voluntarily to be
searched." "I thank you very much indeed, sir," Mr. Rubenstein declared quickly. "It
is very good of you to set the example," he continued, thrusting his hand
into Mr. Parker's pockets. "Ah! I see nothing here--nothing! Notes in this
pocket--ten, twenty, thirty. Not mine, I see--no Lloyd's stamp. Gold! A
pleasant little handful of gold, that. Mr. Parker, I thank you, sir. If
you will be so good as to pass into the next room." I brought Eve up. We were recognized as having been sitting upon the divan
and Mr. Rubenstein, with a bow and extended hand, motioned to us to pass
on. "You will visit us again, I trust," he said, "when we are not so
disturbed." "Most certainly!" Mr. Parker promised in our names. "Most certainly, Mr.
Rubenstein. We will all come again. Good night!" We walked out to the landing and, descending the stairs, reached the
street and stepped into the motor car that was waiting for us. It rolled
off and turned into Piccadilly. "How much was it, father?" Eve asked suddenly, from her place in the
corner. "I am not sure," Mr. Parker answered. "There is a matter of eight hundred
pounds in my right shoe, and a little more than that, I think, in my left. The note down my back was, I believe, a hundred-pound one. Quite a
pleasant little evening and fairly remunerative! The lift man will cost me
a hundred--but he was worth it." I sat quite still. I felt that Eve's eyes were watching me. I set my teeth
for a moment; and I turned toward her, my cigarette case in my hand. "You don't mind?" I murmured as I lit a cigarette. She shook her head. Her eyes were still fixed upon me. "Where can we drop you?" Mr. Parker inquired. "If the evening is really over and there are no more excitements to come,
you might put me down at the Milan Court," I told him, "if that is
anywhere on your way." Mr. Parker lifted the speaking tube to his lips and gave an order. We
glided up to the Milan a few minutes later. "I have enjoyed my evening immensely," I assured Eve impressively, "every
moment of it; and I do hope, Mr. Parker," I added as I shook hands, "that
you and your daughter will give me the great pleasure of dining with me
any night this week. If there are any other little adventures about here
in which I could take a hand I can assure you I should be delighted. I
might even be of some assistance." They both of them looked at me steadfastly. Then Eve at last glanced away,
with a little shrug of the shoulders, and Mr. Joseph H. Parker gripped my
hand. "Say, you're all right!" he pronounced. "You just ring up 3771A Gerrard
to-morrow morning between ten and eleven." CHAPTER III--CULLEN GIVES ADVICE

At ten o'clock the following morning my telephone bell rang and a visitor
was announced. I did not catch the name given me, and it was only when I
opened the door to him in response to his ring that I recognized Mr.
Cullen. In morning clothes, which consisted in his case of a blue serge
suit that needed brushing and a bowler hat of extinct shape, he seemed to
me, if possible, a little more objectionable than I had found him the
previous night. He presented himself, however, in a wholly non-aggressive
spirit. "Mr. Walmsley," he said, as he took the chair to which I motioned him, "I
have called to see you very largely in your own interests." I murmured something to the effect that I was extremely obliged. "I have made inquiries concerning you," he went on, "and I find that you
not only have a blameless record but that you are possessed of
considerable means, and that you belong to a highly esteemed county
family." "And what of it, Mr. Cullen?" I asked. "This," he answered, "that I feel it my duty to warn you against the
companions with whom you spent a portion of last evening." "You mean Mr. and Miss Parker?" "I mean Mr. and Miss Parker." "Are you making any definite charges against this young lady and
gentleman?" I inquired after a moment's pause. "Very definite charges indeed!" he replied. "I warn you, Mr. Walmsley,
that this man and his daughter are in bad repute with us, and to be seen
associated with them is to bring yourself under police surveillance. We
had a special warning when they sailed from New York, and since their
arrival in London they have already been concerned in two or three very
shady transactions." "If they break the law," I inquired, "why do you not arrest them?" "Because I have had bad luck--rotten bad luck!" Mr. Cullen declared
firmly. "I am perfectly convinced that this Mr. Parker, as he calls
himself, has been financing one of the greatest artists in banknote
counterfeits ever known to the police. I am perfectly convinced that Mr.
Parker left this young man in Adam Street last night, with a packet of
notes upon his person for which he had just paid two hundred pounds, and
if I could have arrested him then the game would have been up. He dodged
me by going into the Cecil, leaving by the back way and coming through the
Savoy; but I picked him up again within two minutes of his reaching
Stephano's. "Obviously with your collusion--you'll pardon me, sir, but there the facts
are--he was seated at your table as though in the middle of a dinner. I
had him searched, but there wasn't a thing on him. I am not going to ask
you what he did with the notes he had--whether he palmed them off on you
or not--but I will simply say that between the time of his entering
Stephano's and the time of my searching him he got rid of a thousand
pounds' worth of counterfeit notes." "Sounds very clever of him!" I remarked. "How do you know that he didn't
get rid of them to some one in either the Cecil or the Savoy?" "Because," Mr. Cullen explained, "he was followed by one of my men through
both places and not lost sight of for a single second. You see, I made
sure he would come to Stephano's and I was on the other side of the
Strand, but I had left a man in case he went the other way. I tell you he
was under the strictest surveillance the whole time, except during the few
minutes--I might almost say seconds--when he disappeared in the
restaurant." "Anything else against him?" I asked. "I am not inclined," Mr. Cullen continued slowly, "to mention specifically
the various cases that have come under my notice and in which I believe
him to be concerned; but, among other things, he is a frequenter of half
the gambling houses in London and a tout for their owners. Trouble follows
wherever he goes. But, Mr. Walmsley, mark my words! I am not a man given
to idle speech and I assure you that within a few weeks--perhaps within a
few days--I shall have him; aye, and the young lady, too! You don't want
to be mixed up in this sort of business, sir. I am here to give you the
advice to sheer off! They'll only rob you and bring you, too, under
suspicion." I lit a cigarette and stood on the hearthrug with my hands behind me. "Mr. Cullen," I said, "it is, of course, very kind of you to come to me in
this disinterested manner. You don't seem to have anything to gain by it,
so I will accept your attitude as being a bona fide one. I will, if I may,
be equally frank with you. I met both Mr. Parker and his daughter last
night for the first time----"

"Then that dinner was a plant!" Mr. Cullen interrupted swiftly. "I knew
it!" I ignored the interruption. "For the first time," I repeated; "and I find them both most delightful
companions. As to how far our acquaintance may progress, that is entirely
a matter for chance to decide. You have doubtless come here with very good
motives, but I see no reason why I should accept your statements
concerning Mr. Parker and his daughter. You understand? My suggestion is
that you are mistaken. Until I have proved them to be other than they
represent themselves to be," I added with infinite subtlety, "I shall
continue to derive pleasure from their society." Mr. Cullen rose at once to his feet. "My warning has been given, sir," he said. "It only remains for me now to
wish you good morning, and to assure you most regretfully that your name
will be added to those whom Scotland Yard thinks it well to watch and that
your movements from place to place will be noted." "I trust that Scotland Yard will benefit," I replied politely, and showed
him out. At half past ten I rang up 3771A Gerrard. The telephone was answered
almost immediately by a man, apparently a servant. I inquired for Mr.
Parker and in a moment or two I heard his voice at the telephone. "This is Joseph H. Parker speaking. Who are you?" "I am Paul Walmsley. You told me I might ring up between ten and eleven." "Sure!" was the prompt reply. "My dear fellow, I am delighted to hear from
you. None the worse for our little adventure last night, I hope?" "Not in the least," I assured him. "On the contrary I am looking forward
to another." "You shall have one," was the delighted answer. "What about--What is it, Eve? Excuse me for one moment, Mr. Walmsley." Mr. Parker was apparently dragged away from the telephone. I waited
impatiently. He returned in a moment or two. His voice sounded as though
he were a little irritated. "Sorry," he said. "I was going to make a little suggestion to you for this
evening, but my daughter here doesn't fall in with it. They will have
their own way--these girls." "It's very disappointing!" I said. "Don't you think you could prevail on
her?" "Look here!" Mr. Parker continued. "I'll tell you what: Let's meet
accidentally at dinner tonight. I'll talk Eve round before then. You drop
into Stephano's for dinner at about seven-thirty. Then, when you see us
there, you can come over and join us." "Thank you very much," I replied heartily. "By the by, I suppose you
couldn't tell me your address? I should like to send Miss Parker some
flowers." Mr. Parker obviously hesitated. "Better not," he decided regretfully--"not this morning, at any rate. Eve
is a bit peculiar; and if you come into our little scheme and it goes
wrong the less you know of us the better. See you later!" I did see Mr. Parker later, but not quite so late as the time appointed. He was in the American bar at the Milan when I looked in there just before
luncheon and was talking to two of the most ferocious and objectionable-
looking ruffians I had ever seen in my life. He glanced at me blandly, but
without any sign of recognition, save that I fancied I caught the
slightest twitch of his left eyebrow. I took the hint and did not join
him. My reward came presently; for, after leaving the room with his two
acquaintances, Mr. Parker strolled back again, and coming straight over to
me clapped me on the shoulder. "This is capital!" he exclaimed. "We meet tonight?" "Without a doubt," I assured him. He drew me a little on one side. "Say," he inquired, scratching the side of his chin, "have you any
objection to a bit of a scrap?" "Not the slightest," I replied, "so long as Miss Parker is out of it!" "Good boy!" Mr. Parker pronounced. "Yes; we'll keep her out of it, all
right. I shall count on you then. Just keep yourself in reserve. We'll
talk it over at dinner time. You just stroll in casually and I'll call you
over. By the by," he added, lowering his voice, "did you see those two
fellows I was with?" "I saw them!" I confessed. "They were just a trifle noticeable." Mr. Parker came a little nearer to me. He accentuated his words by beating
on the palm of his left hand with two fingers of his right. "Absolutely, my dear Walmsley, two of the most unmitigated and desperate
ruffians on either continent!" "They looked it," I agreed heartily. "Their record," Mr. Parker continued--"their police record, I mean--is one
of the most wonderful things ever put on paper. The marvelous thing is
how, even for a few minutes, they should be out of prison! Did you notice
the one with the cast in his eye?" "I did," I admitted. "They used to call him Angel Jake," Mr. Parker proceeded confidentially. "He was sentenced to death once for shooting a policeman, but there was
some technicality--he was tried in the wrong court--so he got off." "A very interesting acquaintance," I remarked with utterly wasted sarcasm. "They're fairly up to their necks in trouble, both of them, on the other
side," Mr. Parker declared with relish; "and they're kind o' looking for
it here." I took him by the arm and led him out of the bar into a retired corner of
the smoking room. We sat upon a divan and had the room almost to
ourselves. "How is Miss Parker this morning?" I asked. "Fine!" her father replied. "I told her about the flowers and it made her
quite homesick. Girls miss that sort of thing, you know; and over here,
living under a sort of cloud, as it were, one can't risk making many
friends." It was a very good opening for me and I took advantage of it. "Why do you choose to live under a cloud, Mr. Parker?" I asked. "My dear fellow," he replied earnestly, "I don't altogether choose. I have
been frank with you. It's my life." "If it were only a question of money----" I began tentatively. "A question of money!" Mr. Parker interrupted. "Isn't everything a
question of money? Say, what do you mean exactly?" "I mean that I admire your daughter, sir--I admire her immensely," I told
him. "If she'd have me I'd marry her to-morrow, I am not what you would
call a wealthy man, but I have enough money for all reasonable purposes." Mr. Parker was clearly staggered. He stroked his waistcoat for a moment in
an absent sort of way. "This takes my breath away!" he exclaimed. "Let us understand exactly what
it means." "It means," I told him bluntly, "that I'll make a settlement upon your
daughter and give you enough to live on." He looked first at me and then at the carpet. He began to whistle softly. "And they always told me," he murmured under his breath, "that you
Britishers were so cautious! Why, you know nothing about us at all except
what I've told you, and goodness knows that isn't much of a
recommendation! Besides, I may not have told you half!" "I am willing to take my risk," I declared. "I simply don't care. Once in
a lifetime a man has that feeling for a woman. If he is wise he goes nap
on it. I have never had it before and I am not going to let go. I feel
that if I do I may regret it all my life. I don't want any other woman in
this world except your daughter, and what I possess in life worth having I
am willing to give to make sure of her." Mr. Parker sat for several moments in profound silence. I could not make
out what his mood was, He seemed neither unduly depressed nor elated. He
was obviously puzzled, however--puzzled to know precisely what to do or
what to say. He sat in the middle of the divan with one thumb in his
waistcoat pocket and the other hand flat upon the table. His round face
was innocent of smile or frown. Yet I knew he was taking what I had said
seriously, though for some reason or other it did not seem to give him
unqualified pleasure. "Well, well!" he said at last. "You've spoken up like a man, anyway--and
like a man who knows what he wants. I can't tell how to answer you. I have
never lived on any one yet. Sponging's never been in my line. I have
enjoyed living on my wits. And Eve--she's a little that way, too. Makes me
kind of sorry I've let her go about with me so much. It's a wonderful
cloak of respectability you'd throw over us; but I'm wondering whether
it's large enough!" "As my wife--" I began. "Oh, yes! you'd gather her in all right to start with," he interrupted;
"but there are other things," he added, turning a little toward me and
looking me in the face. "Suppose she didn't turn out just as you thought! She's a wild, high-spirited sort of creature--is Eve. She loves the music
and the rattle of life. I can't fancy her in one of those out-of-the-way,
God-forsaken little mudholes you call an English village, sitting in an
early-Victorian drawing-room all the afternoon, waiting for the vicar's
wife to come to tea, and taking a walk before dinner for entertainment,
with an umbrella and mackintosh." "You've been reading Jane Austen," I told him. "Never heard of her," he replied promptly. "I once--but never mind. Just
keep this to yourself for a bit, my boy. If we come to any arrangement
there are one or two things we've got on that we might have to drop. We'll
think this over. So long until this evening." He bustled away then, evidently anxious to escape any further
conversation. I went about my business, which consisted of a visit to my
lawyer's and a couple of rubbers of bridge at my club before dinner. At half past seven precisely I strolled into Stephano's. I had scarcely
taken my table before Mr. Parker and Eve entered. Contrary to his usual
custom, Mr. Parker was wearing a dress coat, white waistcoat and white
tie; and Eve looked exquisite in a low-necked gown of white silk. Mr.
Parker, according to his promise, at once beckoned me over. "My dear boy," he said, "I insist upon it that you sit down and dine with
us. Last night I dined with you. To be literal, I ate off your plate. Tonight I return the compliment." I had no idea of refusing, but I was watching Eve with some anxiety. Her
attitude seemed a little negative. However, she welcomed me pleasantly. "Well," she asked, "is your conscience beginning to prick yet?" "My conscience," I replied, "is about as imaginary a thing as my early-
Victorian drawing-room. I can assure you I have the most profound
admiration for your father. I think he is one of the cleverest men I ever
met." She seemed a little taken aback. My tone, I felt quite sure, was
convincing. "Of course," she remarked, "it is possible I have formed a wrong idea of
Englishmen. I have met only one or two." "I should say it is highly probable," I agreed. "What scheme of villainy
is before us to-night? I claim a share in it at any rate." She shook her head. "Not to-night, I am afraid." Mr. Parker, with the menu in front of him, was busy with the waiter and a
_maitre d'hotel_. I dropped my voice a little. "Why not? Are you going to the theater?" "To the opera." "You love music?" I asked. She leaned a little toward me. Her hair almost brushed my cheek as she
whispered:

"We love jewelry!" I flatter myself that not a muscle of my face moved. "No place like the opera!" I remarked. "You should do well there with a
little luck." This time I certainly scored. She looked at me fixedly for a moment. Then
she laughed softly. "I want a pearl necklace," she said. "What about the one you have on?" She held it out toward me. "Imitations, unfortunately," she sighed. "They may look very nice, but
they don't feel like the real thing." "Why can't I go to the opera with you?" I suggested. "Because there are no vacant seats anywhere near ours," she replied. "You
see we happen to know whom we are going to sit near." "Anyhow, I think I shall go," I decided, "I may be able to come and talk
to you between the acts at any rate." Mr. Parker, having finished giving his orders, joined in the conversation,
and we dined together quite cheerily. For educated Americans they seemed
very ignorant of English life, and I was not surprised to hear that it was
their first visit to Europe. They listened with interest to a great deal
that I told them. It was only as we were preparing to leave the place that
I asked Mr. Parker a definite question. "Tell me," I whispered, "have you really any plans for to-night?" He nodded. "Sure! We are in luck just now. There's nothing like backing
it." "Are those fellows I saw you with this morning at the Milan in it? If so I
am going to take Miss Parker away. There are limits--"

He patted me on the back. "That little affair is off for to-night at any rate. A lady we are very
anxious to meet is going to the opera. The little girl wants a pearl
necklace. Well, we shall see!" "You've thought over what I said? Have you mentioned it to her?" "Only kind of hinted at it. It's no good putting it too straight to her. She's got the bit between her teeth and she'll need to be humored." Eve had gone to fetch her cloak and we were alone outside the door. I
looked at him steadfastly--he was so very pink and white, so very
cheerful, so utterly optimistic! "You've never seen the inside of an English prison, have you, Mr. Parker?" I asked. He stared at me blankly. "I am not thinking about you or myself," I went on. "She's so dainty and
sweet! She looks like a child who has never known an hour of rough usage
in her life. They wouldn't leave her much of that, you know." I had certainly succeeded in making an impression this time. Mr. Parker's
smooth forehead was wrinkled; his face was clouded. "You are right, Mr. Walmsley," he admitted. "I wish--I wish she would
listen to reason. We'll have a talk together--the three of us--soon. You've no idea how difficult it is! She doesn't know fear--can't realize
danger. Hush! Here she comes. It will only set her against you if she
thinks you are trying to influence me behind her back." Mr. Parker's car was waiting and we drove together to Covent Garden. I
left them in the vestibule and went to call on some of my friends. My
sister had a box in the second tier and I was fortunate enough to find her
there and alone with her husband. Almost directly underneath us in the
stalls Mr. Parker and Eve were sitting; and next Mr. Parker was a woman
wearing a pearl necklace. I asked my sister her name. She raised her
lorgnette and looked over the side of the box. "Lady Orstline," she told me. "Her husband is a South African
millionaire." "Are those real pearls she is wearing?" I inquired. "My dear Paul," she laughed, "why not? Her husband is enormously wealthy
and they say that her jewels are wonderful. Unlike so many of those
people, she really does select very fine stones, independent of size. Those pearls she is wearing now, for instance, are quite small, but their
luster is exquisite. What an extraordinary fat man is sitting next her--
and what a pretty girl!" "Americans," I remarked. "They look it," she agreed. "Quite the Gibson type of girl, isn't she?" The curtain went up and we turned our attention to the stage. As a rule I
find music soothing; but that night proved an exception--perhaps because
my moderately well-ordered life had crumbled into pieces; because I was
conscious of a new and overmastering passion--the music appealed to me in
an altogether different way. My enjoyment was no longer impersonal--a
matter of the brain and the judgment. I felt the excitement of it
throbbing in my pulses. The gloomy, half-lit auditorium seemed full of
strange suggestions. I felt in real and actual touch with the great things
that throbbed beneath. I was no longer an auditor--a looker-on. I had
become a participator. The hours passed as though in a dream. I talked to my sister and her
husband, and exchanged the usual gossip with their callers. I even paid a
call or two on my own account; but I have no recollection of whom I went
to see or what we talked about. I had no chance to visit either Mr. Parker
or Eve, for neither of them left their places and they were in the middle
of a row; but I took good care that we were close together in the
vestibule toward the end. With a little shiver I saw that Lady Orstline
was there too--next Mr. Parker. I was a few feet behind them both, with my
sister. I found myself watching almost feverishly. As usual there was a block outside, and the few yards between us and the
door seemed interminable. I had none of the optimism of those others. I
was filled with vague fears of some impending disaster. Suddenly, with a
shiver, I recognized Cullen, scarcely a couple of yards away, also
watching, wedged in among the throng. His lips were drawn closely
together; his opera hat was well over his forehead; his eyes never left
Mr. Parker. He looked to me there like a lean-faced rat preparing for its
spring. 