



Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Anuradha Valsa Raj and PG
Distributed Proofreaders











THE PAWNS COUNT

BY

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM


1918


FOREWORD

"I am for England and England only," John Lutchester, the Englishman,
asserted. "I am for Japan and Japan only," Nikasti, the Jap, insisted. "I am for Germany first and America afterwards," Oscar Fischer, the
German-American pronounced. "I am for America first, America only, America always," Pamela Van
Teyl, the American girl, declared. They were all right except the German-American. CHAPTER I


Mefiez-Vous! Taisez-Vous! Les Oreilles Ennemies Vous Ecoutent! The usual little crowd was waiting in the lobby of a fashionable London
restaurant a few minutes before the popular luncheon hour. Pamela Van
Teyl, a very beautiful American girl, dressed in the extreme of
fashion, which she seemed somehow to justify, directed the attention of
her companions to the notice affixed to the wall facing them. "Except," she declared, "for you poor dears who have been hurt, that is
the first thing I have seen in England which makes me realise that you
are at war." The younger of her two escorts, Captain Richard Holderness, who wore
the uniform of a well-known cavalry regiment, glanced at the notice a
little impatiently. "What rot it seems!" he exclaimed. "We get fed up with that sort of
thing in France. It's always the same at every little railway station
and every little inn. 'Mefiez-vous! Taisez-vous!' They might spare us
over here." John Lutchester, a tall, clean-shaven man, dressed in civilian clothes,
raised his eyeglass and read out the notice languidly. "Well, I don't know," he observed. "Some of you Service fellows--not
the Regulars, of course--do gas a good deal when you come back. I don't
suppose you any of you know anything, so it doesn't really matter," he
added, glancing at his watch. "Army's full of Johnnies, who come from God knows where nowadays,"
Holderness assented gloomily. "No wonder they can't keep their mouths
shut." "Seems to me you need them all," Miss Pamela Van Teyl remarked with a
smile. "Of course we do," Holderness assented, "and Heaven forbid that any of
us Regulars should say a word against them. Jolly good stuff in them,
too, as the Germans found out last month." "All the same," Lutchester continued, still studying the notice, "news
does run over London like quicksilver. If you step down to the American
bar here, for instance, you'll find that Charles is one of the
best-informed men about the war in London. He has patrons in the Army,
in the Navy, and in the Flying Corps, and it's astonishing how
communicative they seem to become after the second or third cocktail." "Cocktail, mark you, Miss Van Teyl," Holderness pointed out. "We poor
Englishmen could keep our tongues from wagging before we acquired some
of your American habits." "The habits are all right," Pamela retorted. "It's your heads that are
wrong." "The most valued product of your country," Lutchester murmured, "is
more dangerous to our hearts than to our heads." She made a little grimace and turned away, holding out her hand to a
new arrival--a tall, broad-shouldered man, with a strong, cold face and
keen, grey eyes, aggressive even behind his gold-rimmed spectacles. There was a queer change in his face as his eyes met Pamela's. He
seemed suddenly to become more human. His pleasure at seeing her was
certainly more than the usual transatlantic politeness. "Mr. Fischer," she exclaimed, "they are saying hard things about our
country! Please protect me." He bowed over her fingers. Then he looked up. His tone was impressive. "If I thought that you needed protection, Miss Van Teyl--"

"Well, I can assure you that I do," she interrupted, laughing. "You
know my friends, don't you?" "I think I have that pleasure," the American replied, shaking hands
with Lutchester and Holderness. "Now we'll get an independent opinion," the former observed, pointing
to the wall. "We were discussing that notice, Mr. Fischer. You're
almost as much a Londoner as a New Yorker. What do you think?--is it
superfluous or not?" Fischer read it out and smiled. "Well," he admitted, "in America we don't lay much store by that sort
of thing, but I don't know as we're very good judges about what goes on
over here. I shouldn't call this place, anyway, a hotbed of intrigue. Excuse me!" He moved off to greet some incoming guests--a well-known stockbroker
and his partner. Lutchester looked after him curiously. "Is Mr. Fischer one of your typical millionaires, Miss Van Teyl?" he
asked. She shrugged her shoulders. "We have no typical millionaires," she assured him. "They come from all
classes and all States." "Fischer is a Westerner, isn't he?" Pamela nodded, but did not pursue the conversation. Her eyes were fixed
upon a girl who had just entered, and who was looking a little
doubtfully around, a girl plainly but smartly dressed, with fluffy
light hair, dark eyes, and a very pleasant expression. Pamela, who was
critical of her own sex, found the newcomer attractive. "Is that, by any chance, one of our missing guests, Captain
Holderness?" she inquired, turning towards him. "I don't know why, but
I have an idea that it is your sister." "By Jove, yes!" the young man assented, stepping forward. "Here we are,
Molly, and at last you are going to meet Miss Van Teyl. I've bored
Molly stiff, talking about you," he explained, as Pamela held out her
hand. The girls, who stood talking together for a moment, presented rather a
striking contrast. Molly Holderness was pretty but usual. Pamela was
beautiful and unusual. She had the long, slim body of a New York girl,
the complexion and eyes of a Southerner, the savoir faire of a
Frenchwoman. She was extraordinarily cosmopolitan, and yet
extraordinarily American. She impressed every one, as she did Molly
Holderness at that moment, with a sense of charm. One could almost
accept as truth her own statement--that she valued her looks chiefly
because they helped people to forget that she had brains. "I won't admit that I have ever been bored, Miss Van Teyl," Molly
Holderness assured her, "but Dick has certainly told me all sorts of
wonderful things about you--how kind you were in New York, and what a
delightful surprise it was to see you down at the hospital at Nice. I
am afraid he must have been a terrible crock then." "Got well in no time as soon as Miss Van Teyl came along," Holderness
declared. "It was a bit dreary down there at first. None of my lot were
sent south, and a familiar face means a good deal when you've got your
lungs full of that rotten gas and are feeling like nothing on earth. I
wonder where that idiot Sandy is. I told him to be here a quarter of an
hour before you others--thought we might have had a quiet chat first. Will you stand by the girls for a moment, Lutchester, while I have a
look round?" he added. He hobbled away, one of the thousands who were thronging the streets
and public places of London--brave, simple-minded young men, all of
them, with tangled recollections in their brains of blood and fire and
hell, and a game leg or a lost arm to remind them that the whole thing
was not a nightmare. He looked a little disconsolately around, and was
on the point of rejoining the others when the friend for whom he was
searching came hurriedly through the turnstile doors. "Sandy, old chap," Holderness exclaimed, with an air of relief, "here
you are at last!" "Cheero, Dick!" was the light-hearted reply. "Fearfully sorry I'm late,
but listen--just listen for one moment." The newcomer threw his hat and coat to the attendant. He was a rather
short, freckled young man, with a broad, high forehead and
light-coloured hair. His eyes just now were filled with the enthusiasm
which trembled in his tone. "Dick," he continued, gripping his friend's arm tightly, "I'm late, I
know, but I've great news. I've motored straight up from Salisbury
Plain. I've done it! I swear to you, Dick, I've done it!" "Done what?" Holderness demanded, a little bewildered. "I've perfected my explosive--the thing I was telling you about last
week," was the triumphant reply. "The whole world's struggling for it,
Dick. The German chemists have been working night and day for three
years, just for one little formula, and I've got it! One of my shells,
which fell in a wood at daylight this morning, killed every living
thing within a mile of it. The bark fell off the trees, and the
labourers in a field beyond threw down their implements and ran for
their lives. It's the principle of intensification. The poison feeds on
its own vapours. The formula--I've got it in my pocket-book--"

"Look here, old fellow," Holderness interrupted, "it's all splendid, of
course, and I'm dying to hear you talk about it, but come along now and
be introduced to Miss Van Teyl. Molly's over there, waiting, and we're
all half starved." "So am I," was the cheerful answer. "Hullo, Lutchester, how are you? Just one moment. I must get a wash, I motored straight through, and I'm
choked with dust. Where do I go?" "I'll show you," Lutchester volunteered. "Hurry up." The two men sprang up the stairs towards the dressing-room, and
Holderness strolled back to where his sister and Pamela were talking to
a small, dark young man, with rather high cheek-bones and olive
complexion. Pamela turned around with a smile. "I have found an old friend," she told him. "Baron Sunyea--Captain
Holderness. Baron Sunyea used to be in the Japanese Embassy at
Washington." The two men shook hands. "I was interested," the Japanese said slowly, "in your conversation
just now about that notice. Your young friend was telling you news very
loudly indeed, it seemed to me, which you would not like known across
the North Sea. Am I not right?" "In a sense you are, of course," Holderness admitted, "but here at
Henry's--why, the place is like a club. Where are the enemies' ears to
come from, I should like to know?" "Where we least expect to find them, as a rule," was the grave reply. "Quite right," Lutchester, who had just rejoined them, agreed. "They
still say, you know, that our home Secret Service is just as bad as our
foreign Secret Service is good." Holderness smiled in somewhat superior fashion. "Can't say that I have much faith in that spy talk," he declared. "No
doubt there was any quantity of espionage before the war, but it's
pretty well weeded out now. I say, how good civilisation is!" he went
on, his eyes dwelling lovingly on the interior of the restaurant. "Tophole, isn't it, Lutchester--these smart girls, with their furs and
violets and perfumes, the little note of music in the distance, the
cheerful clatter of plates, the smiling faces of the waiters, and the
undercurrent of pleasant voices. Don't laugh at me, please, Miss Van
Teyl. I've three weeks more of it, by George--perhaps more. I don't go
up before my Board till Thursday fortnight. Dash it, I wish Sandy would
hurry up!" "You never told me how you got your wound," Pamela observed, as the
conversation flagged for a moment. "Can't even remember," was the careless reply. "We were all scrapping
away as hard as we could one afternoon, and nearly a dozen of us got
the knock, all at the same time. It's quite all right now, though,
except for the stiffness. It was the gas did me in.... What a fellow
Sandy is! You people must be starving." They waited for another five minutes. Then Holderness limped towards
the stairs with a little imprecation. Lutchester stopped him. "Don't you go, Holderness," he begged. "I'll find him and bring him
down by the scruff of the neck." He strode up the stairs on a mission which ended in unexpected failure. Presently he returned, a slight frown upon his forehead. "I am awfully sorry," he announced, "but I can't find him anywhere. I
left him washing his hands, and he said he'd be down in a moment. Are
you quite sure that we haven't missed him?" "There hasn't been a sign of him," Molly declared promptly. "I am so
hungry that my eyes have been glued upon the staircase all the time." Pamela, who had slipped away a few moments before, rejoined them with a
little expression of surprise. "Isn't Captain Graham here yet?" she asked incredulously. "Not a sign of him," Holderness replied. "Queer set out, isn't it? We
won't wait a moment longer. Take my sister and Miss Van Teyl in, will
you?" he went on, laying his hand on Lutchester's shoulder. "Ferrani
will look after you. I'll follow directly." The chief maitre d'hotel advanced to meet them with a gesture of
invitation, and led them to a table arranged for five. The restaurant
was crowded, and the coloured band, from the space against the wall on
their left, was playing a lively one-step. Ferrani was buttonholed by
an important client as they crossed the threshold, and they lingered
for a moment, waiting for his guidance. Whilst they stood there, a
curious thing happened. The leader of the orchestra seemed to draw his
fingers recklessly across the strings of his instrument and to produce
a discord which was almost appalling. A half-pained, half-amused
exclamation rippled down the room. For a moment the music ceased. The
conductor, who was responsible for the disturbance, was sitting
motionless, his hand hanging down by his side. His features remained
imperturbable, but the gleam of his white teeth, and a livid little
streak under his eyes gave to his usually good-humoured face an utterly
altered, almost a malignant expression. Ferrani stepped across and
spoke to him for a moment angrily. The man took up his instrument,
waved his hand, and the music re-commenced in a subdued note. Pamela
turned to the chief maitre d'hotel, who had now re-joined them. "What an extraordinary breakdown!" she exclaimed. "Is your leader a man
of nerves?" "Never have I heard such a thing in all my days," Ferrani assured them
fervently. "Joseph is one of the most wonderful performers in the
world. His control over his instrument is marvellous.... Captain
Holderness asked particularly for this table." They seated themselves at the table reserved for them against the wall. Their cicerone was withdrawing with a low bow, but Pamela leaned over
to speak to him. "Your music," she told him, "is quite wonderful. The orchestra consists
entirely of Americans, I suppose?" "Entirely, madam," Ferrani assented. "They are real Southern darkies,
from Joseph, the leader, down to little Peter, who blows the
motor-horn." Pamela's interest in the matter remained unabated. "I tell you it makes one feel almost homesick to hear them play," she
went on, with a little sigh. "Did they come direct from the States?" Ferrani shook his head. "From Paris, madam. Before that, for a little time, they were at the
Winter Garden in Berlin. They made quite a European tour of it before
they arrived here." "And he is the leader--the man whom you call Joseph," Pamela observed. "A broad, good-humoured face--not much intelligence, I should imagine." Ferrani's protest was vigorous and gesticulatory. He evidently had
ideas of his own concerning Joseph. "More, perhaps, than you would think, madam," he declared. "He knows
how to make a bargain, believe me. It cost us more than I would like to
tell you to get these fellows here." Pamela looked him in the eyes. "Be careful, Monsieur Ferrani," she advised, "that it does not cost you
more to get rid of them." She leaned back in her place, apparently tired of the subject, and
Ferrani, a little puzzled, made his bow and withdrew. The music was
once more in full swing. Their luncheon was served, and Lutchester did
his best to entertain his companions. Their eyes, however, every few
seconds strayed towards the door. There was no sign of the missing
guest. CHAPTER II


Molly Holderness, for whom Graham's absence possessed, perhaps, more
significance than the others, relapsed very soon into a strained and
anxious silence. Pamela and Lutchester, on the other hand, divided
their attention between a very excellent luncheon and an even flow of
personal, almost inquisitorial conversation. "You will find," Pamela warned her companion almost as they took their
places, "that I am a very curious person. I am more interested in
people than in events. Tell me something about your work at the War
Office?" "I am not at the War Office," he replied. "Well, what is it that you do, then?" she asked. "Captain Holderness
told me that you had been out in France, fighting, but that you had
some sort of official position at home now." "I am at the Ministry of Munitions," he explained. "Well, tell me about that, then?" she suggested. "Is it as exciting as
fighting?" He shook his head. "It has advantages," he admitted, "but I should scarcely say that
excitement figured amongst them." She looked at him thoughtfully. Lutchester was a little over
thirty-five years of age, tall and of sinewy build. His colouring was
neutral, his complexion inclined to be pale, his mouth straight and
firm, his grey eyes rather deep-set. Without possessing any of the
stereotyped qualifications, he was sufficiently good-looking. "I wonder you didn't prefer soldiering," she observed. He smiled for a moment, and Pamela felt unreasonably annoyed at the
twinkle in his eyes. "I am not a soldier by profession," he said, "but I went out with the
Expeditionary Force and had a year of it. They kept me here, after a
slight wound, to take up my old work again." "Your old work," she repeated. "I didn't know there was such a thing as
a Ministry of Munitions before the war." He deliberately changed the conversation, directing Pamela's attention
to the crowded condition of the room. "Gay scene, isn't it?" he remarked. "Very!" she assented drily. "Do you come here to dance?" he inquired. She shook her head. "You must remember that I have been living in Paris for some months,"
she told him. "You won't be annoyed if I tell you that the way you
English people are taking the war simply maddens me. Your young
soldiers talk about it as though it were a sort of picnic, your
middle-aged clubmen seem to think that it was invented to give them a
fresh interest in their newspapers, and the rest of you seem to think
of nothing but the money you are making. And Paris.... No, I don't
think I should care to dance here!" Lutchester nodded, but Pamela fancied somehow or other that his
attitude was not wholly sympathetic. His tone, with its slight note of
admonition, irritated her. "You must be careful," he said, "not to be too much misled by
externals." Pamela opened her lips for a quick reply, but checked herself. Captain Holderness and Ferrani had entered the room and were
approaching their table, talking earnestly. The latter especially was
looking perplexed and anxious. "It's the queerest thing I ever knew," Holderness pronounced. "We've
searched every hole and corner upstairs, and there isn't a sign of
Sandy." "Have you tried the bar?" Lutchester inquired. "Both the bar and the grillroom," Ferrani assured him. "If he had been suddenly taken ill--" Molly murmured. "But there is no place in which he could have been taken ill which we
have not searched," Ferrani reminded her. "And besides," Holderness intervened, "Sandy was in the very pink of
health, and bubbling over with high-spirits." "One noticed that," Lutchester remarked, a little drily. "He might almost have been called garrulous," Pamela agreed. Ferrani took grave leave of them, and Holderness seated himself at the
table. "Well, let's get on with luncheon, anyway," he advised. "It's no good
bothering. The best thing we can do is to conclude that the impossible
has happened--that Sandy has met with some pals and will be here
presently." "Or possibly," Lutchester suggested, "that he has done what certainly
seems the most reasonable thing--gone straight off to the War Office
with his formula and forgotten all about us. Let us return the
compliment and forget all about him." They finished their luncheon a little more cheerfully. As the
cigarettes were handed round, Pamela's eyes looked longingly at a tray
of Turkish coffee which was passing. "I'm a rotten host," Holderness declared, "but, to tell you the truth,
this queer prank of Sandy's has driven everything else out of my mind. Here, Hassan!" The coloured man in gorgeous oriental livery turned at once with a
smile. He approached the table, bowing to each of them in turn. Pamela
watched him intently, and, as his eyes met hers, Hassan's hands began
to shake. "The waiter is bringing us ordinary coffee," Holderness explained. "Please countermand it and bring us Turkish coffee for four." The man had lost his savoir faire. His wonderful smile had turned into
something sickly, his bland speech of thanks into a mumble. He turned
away almost sheepishly. "Hassan doesn't seem to like us to-day," Molly remarked. "I should have said that he was drunk," her brother observed, looking
after him curiously. There was certainly something the matter with Hassan, for it was at
least a quarter of an hour before he reappeared and served his
specially prepared concoction with the usual ceremony but with more
restraint. Molly and the two men, after Hassan had sprinkled the
contents of his mysterious little flask into their coffee, gave him
their hands for the customary salute. When he came to Pamela he
hesitated. She shook her head and he fell back, bowing respectfully,
his hand tracing cabalistic signs across his heart. For a moment before
he departed, he raised his eyes and glanced at her. It was like the
mute appeal of some hurt or frightened animal. "You don't approve of Hassan's little ceremony?" Lutchester asked her. She shrugged her shoulders. "In America," she observed, "I think we look upon coloured people of
any sort a little differently. Well, we've certainly given your friend
a chance," she went on, glancing at the little jewelled watch upon her
wrist, "We've outstayed almost every one here." Their host paid the bill, and they strolled reluctantly towards the
door, Holderness and Pamela a few steps behind. "Now what are your sister and Mr. Lutchester studying again?" the
latter inquired, as they reached the lobby. Molly had paused once more before the notice on the wall, which seemed
somehow to have fascinated her. She read it out, lingering on every
word:

MEFIEZ-VOUS! TAISEZ-VOUS! LES OREILLES ENNEMIES VOUS
ECOUTENT! Holderness listened with a frown. Then he turned suddenly to
Lutchester, who was standing by his side. "It would be too ridiculous, wouldn't it--you couldn't in any way
connect the idea behind that notice with Sandy's disappearance?" "I was wondering about that myself," Lutchester confessed. "To tell you
the truth, I have been wondering all luncheon-time. If ever a man broke
the letter and the spirit of that simple warning I should say your
excitable young friend, Captain Graham, did." "But here at Henry's," Holderness protested, "with friends on every
side! Isn't it a little too ridiculous! We'll wait until the last
person is out of the place, anyway," he added. The crowd soon began to thin. Ferrani, seeing them still waiting,
approached with a little bow. "Your friend," he asked, "he has not arrived, eh?" "No sign of him," Holderness replied gloomily. "What about his hat and coat?" Ferrani inquired, with a sudden
inspiration. "Great idea," Holderness assented, turning towards the cloakroom
attendant. "Don't you remember my friend, James?" he went on. "He
arrived about half-past one, and threw his coat and hat over to you." The attendant nodded and glanced towards an empty peg. "I remember him quite well, sir," he acknowledged. "Number sixty-seven
was his number." "Where are his things, then?" "Gone, sir," the man replied. "Do you remember his asking for them?" The attendant shook his head. "Can't say that I do, sir," he acknowledged, "but they've gone right
enough." A party of outgoing guests claimed the man's attention. Holderness
turned away. "This thing is getting on my nerves," he declared. "Does it seem likely
that Sandy should chuck his luncheon without a word of explanation,
come out and get his coat and hat and walk off? And, besides, where was
he all the time we were looking for him?" It was unanswerable, inexplicable. They all looked at one another
almost helplessly. Pamela held out her hand. "Well," she announced, "I am sorry, but I'm afraid that I must go. I
have a great many things to attend to this afternoon." "You are going away soon?" Lutchester inquired. She hesitated, and at that moment Mr. Fischer, who had been saying
farewell to his guests, turned towards her. "You are not thinking of the trip home yet, Miss Van Teyl?" he asked. "Oh, I don't know," she answered a little evasively. "I'm out of humour
with London just now." "Perhaps we shall be fellow-passengers on Thursday?" he ventured. "I am
going over on the _New York_." "I never make plans," she told him. "In any case," Mr. Fischer continued, "I shall anticipate our early
meeting in New York. I heard from your brother only yesterday." She looked at him with a slight frown. "From James?" Mr. Fischer nodded. "Why, I didn't know," she observed, "that you and he were acquainted." "I have had large transactions with his firm, and naturally I have seen
a good deal of Mr. Van Teyl," the other explained. "He looks after the
interests of us Western clients." Pamela turned a little abruptly away, and Lutchester walked with her to
the door. "You will let me see that they bring your car round?" he asked. She shook her head. "Thank you, no," she replied, holding out her hand. "I have not yet
said good-by to Captain Holderness and his sister. Good-by, Mr. Lutchester!" Her farewell was purposely chilly. It seemed as though the slight
sparring in which they had indulged throughout luncheon-time, had found
its culmination in an antipathy which she had no desire to conceal. Lutchester, however, only smiled. "Nowadays," he observed, "that is a word which it is never necessary to
use." She withdrew her hand from his somewhat too tenacious clasp. Something
in his manner puzzled as well as irritated her. "Do you mean that you, too, are thinking of taking a holiday from your
strenuous labours?" she asked. "Perhaps America is the safest country
in the world just now for an Englishman who--"

She stopped short, realising the lengths towards which her causeless
pique was carrying her. "Prefers departmental work to fighting, were you going to add?" he said
quietly. "Well, perhaps you are right. At any rate, I will content
myself by saying au revoir." He passed through the turnstile door and disappeared. Pamela made her
adieux to Holderness and his sister, and then, recognising some
acquaintances, turned back into the restaurant to speak to them. Fischer, who had just received his hat and cane from the cloakroom
attendant, stood watching her. CHAPTER III


Pamela, after a brief conversation with her friends, once more left the
restaurant. In the lobby she called Ferrani to her. "Has Mr. Fischer gone, Ferrani?" she asked. "Not two minutes ago," the man replied. "You wish to speak to him? I
can stop him even now." She shook her head. "On the contrary," she said drily, "Mr. Fischer represents a type of my
countrymen of whom I am not very fond. He is a great patron of yours,
is he not?" "He is a large shareholder in the company," Ferrani confessed. "Then your restaurant will prosper," she told him. "Mr. Fischer has the
name of being very fortunate.... That was a wonderful luncheon you gave
us to-day." "Madame is very kind." "Will you do me a favour?" Ferrani's gesture was all-expressive. Words were entirely superfluous. "I want two addresses, please. First, the address of Joseph, your head
musician, and, secondly, the address of Hassan, your coffee-maker." Ferrani effectually concealed any surprise he might have felt. He tore
a page from his pocket-book. "Both I know," he declared. "Hassan lodges at a shop eighty yards away. The name is Haines, and there are newspaper placards outside the door." "That is quite enough," Pamela murmured. "As for Monsieur Joseph," Ferrani continued, "that is a different
matter. He has, I understand, a small flat in Tower Mansions, Tower
Street, leading off the Edgware Road. The number is 18C. So!" He wrote it down and passed it to her. Pamela thanked him and stood up. "Now that I have done as you asked me," Ferrani concluded, "let me add
a word. Both these men are already off duty and have left the
restaurant. If you wish to communicate with either of them, I advise
you to do so by letter." "You are a very courteous gentleman, Mr. Ferrani," Pamela declared,
dropping him a little mock curtsey, "and good morning!" She made her way into the street outside, shook her head to the
commissionaire's upraised whistle, and strolled along until she came to
a cross street down which several motor-cars were waiting. She
approached one--a very handsome limousine--and checked the driver who
would have sprung from his seat. "George," she said, "I am going to pay a call at a disreputable-looking
news-shop, just where I am pointing. You can't bring the car there, as
the street is too narrow. You might follow me on foot and be about." The young man touched his hat and obeyed. A few yards down the street
Pamela found her destination, and entered a gloomy little shop. A
slatternly woman looked at her curiously from behind the counter. "I am told that Hassan lodges here, the coffee-maker from Henry's,"
Pamela began. The woman looked at her in a peculiar fashion. "Well?" "I wish to see him." "You can't, then," was the curt answer. "He's at his prayers." "At what?" Pamela exclaimed. "At his prayers," the woman repeated brusquely. "There," she added,
throwing open the door which led into the premises behind, "can't you
hear him, poor soul? He's been pinching some more charms from ladies'
bracelets, or something of the sort, I reckon. He's always in trouble. He goes on like this for an hour or so and then he forgives himself." Pamela stood by the open door and listened--listened to a strange,
wailing chant, which rose and fell with almost weird monotony. "Very interesting," she observed. "I have heard that sort of thing
before. Now will you kindly tell Hassan that I wish to speak to him, or
shall I go and find him for myself?" "Well, you've got some brass!" the woman declared, with a sneer. "And some gold," Pamela assented, passing a pound note over to the
woman. "Do you want to see him alone?" the latter asked, almost snatching at
the note, but still regarding Pamela with distrustful curiosity. "Of course," was the calm reply. The woman opened her lips and closed them again, sniffed, and led the
way down a short passage, at the end of which was a door. "There you are," she muttered, throwing it open. "You've arst for it,
mind. 'Tain't my business." She slouched her way back again into the shop. At first Pamela could
scarcely see anything except a dark figure on his knees before a closed
and shrouded window. Then she saw Hassan rise to his feet, saw the
glitter of his eyes. "Pull up the blind, Hassan," she directed. He came a step nearer to her. The gloom in the apartment was
extraordinary. Only his shape and his eyes were visible. "Do as I tell you," she ordered. "Pull up the blind. It will be
better." He hesitated. Then he obeyed. Even then the interior of the room seemed
shadowy and obscure. Pamela could only see, in contrast with the rest
of the house, that it was wonderfully and spotlessly clean. In one
corner, barely concealed by a low screen, his bed stood upon the floor. Hassan muttered something in an Oriental tongue. Pamela interrupted
him. She spoke in the soothing tone one uses towards a child. "That's all right, Hassan," she said. "Sorry to have interrupted you at
your prayers, but it had to be done. You know me?" "Yes, mistress," he answered unwillingly. "I your dragoman one year in
Cairo. What you want here, mistress?" "You know that I know," she went on, "that you are a Turk and a
Mohammedan, and not an Egyptian at all." "Yes, mistress, you know that," he muttered. "And you also know," she continued, "that if I give you away to the
authorities you will be sent at once to a very uncomfortable internment
camp, where you won't even have an opportunity to wash more than once a
day, where you will have to herd with all sorts of people, who will
make fun of your colour and your religion--"

"Don't, mistress!" he shouted suddenly. "You will not tell. I think you
will not tell!" He was sidling a little towards her. Again one of those curious changes
seemed to have transformed him from a dumb, passive creature into a
savage. There was menace in his eyes. She waved him back without
moving. "I have come to make a bargain with you, Hassan," she said, "just a few
words, that is all. Not quite so near, please." He paused. There was a moment's silence. His face was within a foot of
hers, lowering, black, bestial. Her eyes met his without a tremor. Her
full, sweet lips only curved into a faintly contemptuous line. "You cannot frighten me, Hassan," she declared. "No man has ever done
that. And outside I have a chauffeur with muscles of iron, who waits
for me. Be reasonable. Listen. There are secrets connected with your
restaurant." "I know nothing," he began at once; "nothing, mistress--nothing!" "Quite naturally," she continued. "I only need one piece of
information. A man disappeared there this morning. I just have to find
him. That's all there is about it. At half-past one he was inveigled
into the musicians' room and by some means or other rendered
unconscious. At three o'clock he had been removed. I want to know what
became of him. You help me and the whole world can believe you to be an
Egyptian for the rest of their lives. If you can't help me it is rather
unfortunate for you, because I shall tell the police at once who and
what you are. Don't waste time, Hassan." He stood thinking, rubbing his hands and bowing before her, yet, as she
knew very well, with murder in his heart. Once she saw his long fingers
raised a little. "Quite useless, Hassan," she warned him. "They hang you in England, you
know, for any little trifle such as you are thinking of. Be sensible,
and I may even leave a few pound notes behind me." "Mistress should ask Joseph," he muttered. "I know nothing." "Oh, mistress is going to ask Joseph all right," she assured him, "but
I want a little information from you, too. You've got to earn your
freedom, you know, Hassan. Come, what do they do with the people who
disappear from the restaurant?" "Not understand," was the almost piteous reply. Pamela sighed. She had again the air of one being patient with a child. "See here, Hassan," she went on, "a few days ago I went over that
restaurant from top to bottom with the manager. There is the musicians'
room, isn't there, just over the entrance hall? I suppose those little
glass places in the floor are movable, and then one can hear every word
that is spoken below. I am right so far, am I not?" Hassan answered nothing. His breathing, however, had become a little
deeper. "An unsuspecting person, passing from the toilet rooms upstairs, could
easily be induced to enter. I think that there must be another exit
from that room. Yes?" "Yes!" Hassan faltered. "To where?" "The wine-cellars." "And from there?" Hassan was suddenly voluble. Truth unlocked his tongue. "Not know, mistress--not know another thing. No one enters wine-cellar
but three men. One of those not know. If I guess--I, Hassan--I look at
little chapel left standing in waste place. Perhaps I wonder sometimes,
but I not know." Pamela drew three notes from her gold purse, smoothed them out and
handed them over. "Three pounds, Hassan, silence, and good day! You'll live longer if you
open your windows now and then, and get a little fresh air, instead of
praying yourself hoarse." Again the black figure swayed perilously towards her. She affected not
to notice, not to notice the hand which seemed for a moment as though
it would snatch the door handle from her grasp. She passed out
pleasantly and without haste. The last sound she heard was a groan. "Done your bit o' business, eh?" the landlady asked curiously. Pamela nodded assent. "Rather an odd sort of lodger for you, isn't he?" "Not so odd as his visitors," the woman retorted, with an evil sneer. Pamela passed into the narrow street and drew a long sigh of relief. Then she entered her car and gave the chauffeur an address from the
slip of paper which she carried in her hand. When they stopped outside
the little block of flats he prepared to follow her. "Tough neighbourhood this, madam," he said. "Maybe, George," she replied, waving him back, "but you've got to stay
down here. If the man I am going to see thought I was frightened of him
I wouldn't have a chance. If I am not down in half an hour you can try
number 18C." The chauffeur resumed his place on the driving-seat of the car. Pamela,
heartily disliking her surroundings, was escorted by a shabby porter to
a shabbier lift. "You'll find Mr. Joseph in," the lift boy assured her with a grin. Pamela found the number at the end of an unswept stone passage. At her
third summons the door was cautiously opened by a large,
repulsive-looking woman, with a mass of peroxidised hair. She stared at
her visitor first in amazement, then in rapidly gathering resentment. "Mr. Joseph is at home," she admitted truculently, in response to
Pamela's inquiry. "What might you be wanting with him?" "If you will be so good as to let me in I will explain to Mr. Joseph,"
Pamela replied. The woman seemed on the point of slamming the door. Suddenly there was
a voice from behind her shoulder. Joseph appeared--not the smiling,
joyous Joseph of Henry's but a sullen-looking negro, dressed in shirt
and trousers only, with a heavy under-lip and frowning forehead. "Let the lady pass and get into the kitchen, Nora," he ordered, "Come
this way, mam." Pamela followed her guide into a parlour, redolent of stale cigar
smoke, with oilcloth on the floor and varnished walls, an abode even
more horrible than Hassan's lair. Joseph closed the door carefully
behind him, and made no apology for his dishabille. He simply faced
Pamela. "Say, what is it you want with me?" he demanded truculently. "A trifle," she answered. "The key of the chapel in the little plot of
waste ground next Henry's." She meant him to be staggered, and he was. He reeled back for a moment. "What the hell are you talking about?" he gasped. "Facts," Pamela replied. "Do you want to save yourself, Joseph? You can
do it if you choose." He folded his arms and stood in front of the closed door. Without a
collar, his neck bulged unpleasantly behind. There was nothing whatever
left of the suave and genial chef d'orchestra. "Save myself from what, eh? Just let me get wise about it." Pamela's eyebrows were daintily elevated. "Dear me!" she murmured. "I thought you were more intelligent. Listen. You know where we met last? Let me remind you. You were playing in the
Winter Garden at Berlin, and the gentleman whom I was with, an attache
at the American Embassy, spoke to you. He told me a good deal about
your past life, Joseph, and your present one. You are in the pay of the
Secret Service of Germany. Am I to go to Scotland Yard and tell them
so?" He looked at her wickedly. "You'd have to get out of here first." "Don't be silly," she advised him contemptuously. "Remember you're
talking to an American woman and don't waste your breath. You can be in
the Secret Service of any country you like, without interference from
me. On the other hand, there's just one thing I want from you." "What is it? I haven't got any key." "I want to discover exactly what has become of Captain Graham," she
declared. "What, the guy that missed his lunch to-day?" he growled. "I see you know all about it," she continued equably. "So he's your spark, is he?" Joseph observed slowly, his eyes blinking
as he leaned a little forward. "On the contrary," Pamela replied, "I have never met him. However,
that's beside the point. Do I have the key of that chapel?" "You do not." "Have you got it?" "Right here," Joseph assented, dangling it before her eyes. "I think it's a fair bargain I'm offering you," she reminded him. "You
lose the key and keep your place. You only have to keep your mouth shut
and nothing happens." "Nothing doing," the negro declared shortly. "Keys as important as this
ain't lost. If I part with it, I get the chuck, and I probably get into
the same mess as the others. If I keep it--"

"If you keep it," Pamela interrupted, "you will probably stand with
your back to the light in the Tower within the next few days. They've
left off being lenient with spies over here." He looked at her, and there were things in his eyes which few women in
the world could have seen without terror. Pamela's lips only came a
little closer together. She pressed the inside of the ring upon her
third finger, and a ray of green fire seemed to shoot forward. "I guess I'm up against it," he growled, taking a step forward. "I'll
have something of what's coming to me, if I swing for it." His arm was suddenly around her, his face hideously close. He gave a
little snarl as he felt the pinprick through his shirt sleeve. Then he
went spinning round and round with his hand to his head. "What in God's name!" he spluttered. "What in hell--!" He reeled against the horsehair easy-chair and slipped on to the floor. Pamela calmly closed her ring, stooped over him, withdrew the key from
his pocket, crossed the room and the dingy little hall with swift
footsteps, and, without waiting for the lift, fled down the stone
steps. Before she reached the bottom, she heard the shrill ringing of
the lift bell, the angry shouting of the woman. Pamela, however,
strolled quietly out and took her place in the car. "Back to the hotel, George," she directed the chauffeur. "Don't stop if
they call to you from the flats." The young man sprang up to his seat and the car glided off. Pamela
leaned forward and looked at herself in the mirror. There was a shade
more colour in her face, perhaps, than usual, but her low waves of
chestnut hair were unruffled. She used her powder puff with attentive
skill and leaned back. "That's the disagreeable part of it over, anyway," she sighed to
herself contentedly. CHAPTER IV


The last of the supper-guests had left Henry's Restaurant, the
commissionaire's whistle was silent. The light laughter and frivolous
adieux of the departing guests seemed to have melted away into a world
somewhere beyond the pale of the unseasonable fog. The little strip of
waste ground adjoining was wrapped in gloom and silence. The exterior
of the bare and deserted chapel, long since unconsecrate, was dull and
lifeless. Inside, however, began the march of strange things. First of
all, the pinprick of light of a tiny electric torch seemed as though it
had risen from the floor, and Hassan, pushing back a trap-door, stepped
into the bare, dusty conventicle. He listened for a moment, then made a
tour of the windows, touched a spring in the wall, and drew down long,
thick blinds. Afterwards he passed between the row of dilapidated
benches and paused at the entrance door. He stooped down, examined the
keyless lock, shook it gently, gazed upwards and downwards as though in
vain search of bolts that were never there. His white teeth gleamed for
a moment in the darkness. He turned away with a little shiver. "Not my fault," he muttered to himself. "Not my fault." He listened for a moment intently, as though for footsteps outside. The
disturbance, however, came from the other end of the building. There
was a sharp knocking from the trap-door by which he had ascended. He
touched an electric knob. The place was dimly yet sufficiently
illuminated. He hastened towards the further end of the place and
pulled up the trap-door. A melancholy-looking little procession slowly
emerged. First of all came Joseph, stepping backwards, supporting the
head and shoulders of Graham, still bound and gagged. After him came a
dark, swarthy-faced wine waiter, who supported Graham's feet. Behind
followed Fischer, carrying his silk hat and cane in his hand. He paused
for a moment as he stepped on the floor of the chapel, and brushed the
dust from his trousers. "You can take out the gag now," he ordered the two men. "There isn't
much shout in him." They laid him upon a couch, and Joseph obeyed the order. Graham's head
swung helplessly on one side. His eyes opened, however, and he
struggled for consciousness. His lips twitched for a moment. In these
long hours he had almost forgotten the habit of speech. The words, when
they came, sounded strange to him. "What--where am I? What do you want with me?" Fischer laid his hat and stick upon a table, on which also stood a
telephone instrument. "The formula, my young friend," he replied, "for that wonderful
explosive of which you spoke in the lobby." A sudden accession of nervous strength brought something almost like
passion into the young man's reply, although to himself there still
seemed some unreality in the words which might have come from the walls
or the roof--surely not from his lips. "I'll see you damned first!" Fischer smiled. The man was good-looking, in his way, but this was a
pale and ugly smile. "My request was merely a matter of courtesy," he remarked. "The
difficulty of searching you is not formidable. It would have been
undertaken long ago but for the fact that the restaurant has been
crowded and gags sometimes slip. Besides, there was no hurry. Observe!" He leaned over Graham, who for the first time struggled furiously but
ineffectually with his bonds. His fingers all the time were straining
towards the inside pocket of his coat. Fischer nodded understandingly. "Allow me to anticipate you," he said. With a quick thrust he drew a little handful of papers from the pocket
of his captive. One by one he glanced them through and flung them on to
the floor. As he came towards the end of his search, however, his
expression of confident complacency vanished. His lips shrivelled up a
little, his eyes narrowed. The last folded sheet of paper--a little
perfumed note from Peggy, thanking Sandy for his beautiful roses--he
crumpled fiercely into a little ball. He opened his lips to speak, then
he paused. A new light broke in upon him. The fury had passed from
Sandy Graham's face. In its stead there was an expression of blank
astonishment. "Where is the formula?" Fischer asked fiercely. There was no reply. Sandy Graham was still staring at the little pile
of papers upon the floor. Fischer made a brief examination of the other
pockets. Then he stepped back. His voice shook, his face was dark and
malevolent. "Joseph, Hassan, Jules--listen to me!" he ordered. "Did any one else
enter the musicians' room whilst he was lying in the alcove?" "Impossible!" Jules declared. "The door was locked," Hassan murmured. "Stop!" Joseph exclaimed. Fischer wheeled round upon him. "Well?" he exclaimed. "Get on, then. Who?" Joseph moistened his lips. He was still feeling sore and dizzy, but he
began to see his way. "You noticed, perhaps," he said, "the American girl--the beautiful
young lady with this guy's friends? She was waiting with the others for
Captain Graham to come down. I saw her go up the stairs. I saw her come
down again, three minutes later." "Miss Van Teyl?" Fischer exclaimed, with a frown. "You're mad, Joseph!" The negro laughed grimly. "Am I!" he retorted. "I tell you this, Master Fischer. She was in
Berlin where I was, and she was at the Embassy every day. She was asked
to leave there. They put her over the frontier into Holland. I knew her
when she came into the restaurant. She's no society young lady, she
ain't! Bet you she was on to the goods." Fischer hesitated for a moment. The thoughts were chasing one another
through his brain. Then he took up the receiver from the telephone
instrument which stood upon the table. "1560 Mayfair," he asked in a low tone. They all stood listening, grouped around Graham's writhing figure. "Hullo! Is that Claridge's Hotel?" Fischer went on. "I am speaking from
Giro's. Put me through, if you please, to Miss Van Teyl's apartments...
What? Repeat that, will you?... Thank you." Fischer laid down the receiver. He turned towards the others. He was
breathing a little quickly, and his eyes glittered behind his
gold-rimmed spectacles. "Miss Van Teyl," he announced, "has left for Tilbury. She is going out
on the _Lapland_ this morning. My God, she's got the formula!" There was a moment's silence. Joseph was standing by with a wicked look
on his face. "I saw her slip away," he muttered, "and I watched her come down again. There was just time." Fischer turned suddenly to where Graham was lying. He drew a sheet of
writing paper from the rack upon the table, and a pencil from his
pocket. There was an evil and concentrated significance in his tone. "That formula," he said, "can be written again. I think you had better
write it." "I'll see you damned first!" was the weak but prompt reply. Fischer bent a little lower over the prostrate figure, "Look here," he
went on, "we don't run risks like this for nothing. You're better dead
than alive, so far as we are concerned, anyway. We'd planned to take
the formula from you, and you can guess the rest. There are cellars
underneath here into which no one ever goes who matters. Now here's a
chance of life for you. Write down that formula--truthfully, mind--and
we'll discuss the matter of taking your parole." "See you damned first!" Graham repeated, his voice a little more
tremulous but still convincing. Fischer stood upright and turned to Jules. "Get a bottle of brandy and a glass," he ordered. The man pushed open the trap-door and disappeared. He came back again
in a few moments, with a bottle in one hand and a glass in the other. Fischer poured out some of the cordial and drew a small table up to
Graham's side. "There," he said, loosening the cord around his left wrist, "drink
that, and think it over. We shall be gone for about ten minutes. If you
change your mind before, ring that little hand-bell. If you have not
changed your mind when we return, it will be the cellars." "Beasts!" Graham muttered. Fischer shrugged his shoulders. For a moment he had straightened
himself. His face had softened, but it was in tune with his thoughts. "I would twist the necks of a million fools like you," he said, "for
the sake of--"

He paused, leaving his sentence uncompleted, and beckoned to the other
men. They followed him through the trap-door and down into the cellars
below. The place was once more silent. Graham rolled from side to side,
drew a long breath, and tugged vainly at his bonds. The effort
overtaxed his strength. He seemed to feel the darkness closing in upon
him, the rushing of the sea in his ears....




CHAPTER V


So far as Sandy Graham was concerned, his unconsciousness might have
lasted an hour or a day. As a matter of fact, it was scarcely a minute
after the disappearance of Fischer and his confederates when he was
conscious of a rush of cold air in the place, and beheld the vision of
a tiny flash of light at the lower end of the gloomy building. Immediately afterwards he heard the soft closing of a door and beheld a
tall, shadowy figure slowly approaching. He lay quite still and looked
at it, and his heart began to beat with hope. One of the lights had
been left burning, and there was something in the bearing and attitude
of the man who finally came to a standstill by his side, which was
entirely reassuring. "Lutchester!" he faltered. "My God, how did you get here?" "Offices of a young lady," Lutchester observed, producing a knife from
his pocket. "Allow me!" He cut the cords which still secured Graham's limbs. Then he looked
around him. "How did they bring you here?" he whispered. "I suppose there is a
passage from the restaurant?" "Up through a trapdoor there," Graham explained, pointing. Lutchester stood over it and listened intently. Then he turned around, lifted the glass of brandy from the table, smelt
it approvingly, and tasted it. "Excellent!" he pronounced. "The 1840. Allow me!" He refilled the glass and handed it to Sandy, who gulped down the
contents. The effect was almost instantaneous. In less than a minute he
had staggered to his feet. "Feel strong enough to walk about fifty yards?" Lutchester inquired. "I'd walk to hell to get out of this place!" was the prompt reply. Lutchester took his arm, and they passed down the dusty aisle between
the worm-eaten and decaying benches and through the outside door, which
Lutchester closed and locked behind them. The rush of cold air was like
new life to Graham. "I can walk all right now," he muttered. "My God, we'll give these
fellows hell for this!" They made their very difficult way across a plot of ground from which a
row of dilapidated cottages had been razed to the ground. The fog still
hung around them and seemed to bring with it a curious silence,
although the dying traffic from one of the main thoroughfares reached
them in muffled notes. Lutchester climbed to the top of a pile of
rubbish and then, turning around, held out his hand. "Up here," he directed. Graham struggled up until he stood by his companion's side. The latter
stood quite still, listening for a moment. Then he climbed a little
higher and swung around, holding out his hand once more. "I'm on top of the wall," he said. "Come
on." Graham's knees were shaking, but with Lutchester's help he staggered up
and reached his side. On the pavement below a man in chauffeur's livery
was standing, holding out his hands, and by the side of the curbstone a
closed car was waiting. Somehow or other the two reached the pavement. Lutchester almost pushed his companion into the limousine and stepped
in after him. The chauffeur sprang to his seat and the car glided off. Graham just realised that there was a woman by his side whose face was
vaguely familiar. Then the waves broke in upon his ears once more. "I was right, then, it seems," Pamela observed approvingly. "You were
just the man for this little affair." Lutchester sighed. "Unfortunately," he confessed, "a messenger boy would have been as
effective. I stumbled over to the chapel--rubber shoes, you observe,"
he remarked, pointing downwards--"and soon discovered that blinds had
been let down all round and that there were people inside. There was
just a faint chink in one, and I caught a glimpse of several men, your
friend Oscar amongst them. Having," he went on, "an immense regard for
my personal safety, I was hesitating what means to adopt when the
lights were lowered, and it seemed to me that the men were
disappearing." "Do go on," Pamela murmured. "This is most exciting." "In a sense it was disappointing," Lutchester complained. "I had
pictured for myself a dramatic entrance ... a quiet turning of the key,
a soft approach--owing to my shoes," he reminded her--"a cough,
perhaps, or a breath ... discovery, me with a revolver in my hand
pointed to the arch-villain--'If you stir you're a dead man!' ...
Natural collapse of the villain. With my left hand I slash the bonds
which hold Graham, with my right I cover the miscreants. One of them,
perhaps, might creep behind me, and I hesitate. If I move my revolver
the other two will get the drop on me--I think that is the correct
expression? A wonderful moment, that, Miss Van Teyl!" "But it didn't happen," she protested. "Ah! I forgot that," he acknowledged. "Still, I was prepared, I had the
revolver all right. But as you say, it didn't happen. I made my way to
the chapel door, let myself in, found our friend lying in a
half-comatose state upon one of the blue plush Henry sofas, in the
shadow of a horrible deal pulpit. I gathered that he had been left
there to reflect upon his sins. There was a bottle of remarkably fine
brandy within reach, which I tested, and with which I dosed our friend
here. I then cut away his bonds, arm in arm we walked down the aisle, I
locked up the place, threw the key away, kicked my shins half-a-dozen
times crossing that disgusting little plot of land, climbed boldly to
the top of the wall, and behold!" Pamela smiled upon him in congratulatory fashion. "On the whole," she said, "I am quite glad that I telephoned to you." "You showed a sound discretion," he admitted. "If he had not been lame," she confessed, "I should have sent to
Captain Holderness." "That would have been a great mistake," Lutchester assured her. "Holderness is a good fellow but devoid of imagination. He is great on
constituted authority. He would have probably marched up with a squad
of heavy-footed policemen--and found nothing." "Yet I must confess," Pamela persisted, with a frankness unaccountable
even to herself, "that if I could have thought of any one else I should
never have telephoned to you." "And why not?" "Because I should not have classified you as being of the adventurous
type," she declared. Lutchester looked injured. "After all," he protested, "that is not my fault. That is due to your
singular lack of perception. However, I am able to return the
compliment. I, for my part, should have thought that you were more
interested in the fashions than in paying exceedingly rash visits to
degenerate orientals and negroes." "Perhaps some day," she remarked, "we may understand one another
better." He met her gaze with a certain seriousness. "I hope that we may," he said. For some reason they were both silent for a moment. Her tone had
changed a little when she spoke again. "You are sure," she asked, "that you do not mind my leaving the rest of
this affair in your hands? There are reasons, which I cannot tell you
of just now, which make me anxious not to appear in it at all." "I accept the charge as a privilege," he assented. "We are within a few
yards of my rooms now. I promise you that I will look after Captain
Graham and advise him as to the proper course for him to pursue." The car came to a standstill. "This then," she said, holding out her hand, "will be good-by for the
present." He held her fingers for a moment without reply. Quite suddenly she
decided that she liked him. Then he lifted Graham, who was half asleep,
half unconscious, to his feet, and assisted him from the car. "Where shall I tell the man to go to?" he inquired. "He knows," she answered with sudden taciturnity. "Wherever it may be, then," he replied, "bon voyage!" CHAPTER VI


It was about half-an-hour later when Sandy Graham opened his eyes and
began to feel the life once more warm in his veins. He was seated in
the most comfortable easy-chair of John Lutchester's bachelor
sitting-room. By his side was a coffee equipage and a decanter of
brandy. His head still throbbed, and his bones ached, but his mind was
beginning to grow clearer. Lutchester, who had been seated at the
writing table, swung round in his chair at the sound of his guest's
movement. "Feeling better, eh?" he asked. "I am all right now," was the somewhat shaky reply. "Got a head like a
turnip and a tongue like a lime-kiln, but I'm beginning--to feel
myself." "How's your memory?" "Hazy. Let me see.... My God, I've been robbed, haven't I!" "So I imagine," Lutchester replied. "You rather asked for it, didn't
you?" Graham moved uneasily in his place. He had suddenly the feeling of
being back at school--and in the presence of the headmaster. "I suppose I did in a way," he admitted, "but at Henry's--why, I've
always looked upon the place as a club more than anything else." "I am afraid that I can't agree with you there," Lutchester observed. "I should consider Henry's a remarkably cosmopolitan restaurant, where
a man in your position should exercise more than even ordinary
restraint." "I suppose I was wrong," Graham muttered, "but I had been working for
about ten hours on end, and then rushed up to London in the car to try
and keep my appointment with Holderness." "Stop anywhere on the way?" "We had a few drinks," Graham confessed. "I was so done up. Perhaps I
had more than I meant to. However, it's no use bothering about that
now. I've been robbed, and that's all there is about it. Could we get
on to Scotland Yard from here?" "We could, but I don't think we will," Lutchester replied. Graham was puzzled. "Why not?" he demanded. "That formula was the most wonderful thing that
has ever been put together, and the whole thing's so simple. I've been
afraid every second that some one else might stumble upon it." "It is without doubt a great loss," Lutchester admitted. "All the same,
I don't fancy that it's a Scotland Yard business exactly. Have you any
idea who robbed you?" Graham paused to think. His eyes were still troubled and uncertain. "It's coming back to me," he muttered. "I remember that beastly barn of
a chapel. There were Jules, and that musician fellow, and the big
American. He emptied my pockets ... Why, of course, I remember how
angry he was ... My pocketbook was gone! They left me alone to write
out the formula again, and then you came.... How on earth did you
tumble on to my being there, Lutchester?" "It was Miss Pamela Van Teyl whom you must thank," Lutchester told him,
"not me. It seems she knew more about Henry's than any of us. She'd
come up against some of the crew in Berlin, and she guessed they were
holding you for that formula. She got the key out of one of those men
and then telephoned to me for my help." "And I never even thanked her," Graham murmured weakly. There was a moment's silence. The recovering man's consciousness of his
position and of events was evidently as yet incomplete. He sat up
suddenly in his chair, gripping the sides of it. His eyes were large
with reminiscent trouble. "My pocketbook had gone when they searched me," he muttered. "Are you sure that you had it with you when you came into Henry's?" Lutchester inquired. "Absolutely certain." "Do you think you can remember now what happened when you went
upstairs?" "I reached the lavatory all right--you were with me then, weren't you?" Graham said reflectively. "I hung up my coat while I washed, but there
was no one else in the room. Then you went downstairs and I brushed my
hair and just stopped to light a cigarette. You know that on the
right-hand side of the landing there is a room where the musicians
change. Joseph, that black devil, was standing in the doorway. He
grinned as I came into sight. 'Lady wants to speak to you for a moment,
Captain Graham,' he said. Well, you know how harmless the fellow
looks--just a good-natured, smiling nigger. I never dreamed of anything
wrong. As a matter of fact, I thought that Peggy Vincent--that's a
young lady I often go to Henry's with--wanted to have a word with me
before I joined our party. I stepped inside the room, and that's just
about all I can remember. It must have been jolly quick. His arm shot
round my neck, the door was closed, and that other brute--Hassan, I
think it was--held something over my face." "But that room was searched," Lutchester reminded him. "Well I came to just a little," Graham explained, "I found that I was
in a sort of cupboard place, behind the lockers these fellows have for
their clothes. It opens with a spring lock, and you'd never notice it,
searching the room." 