



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger





THE SEA-GULL


by Anton Checkov



A Play In Four Acts




CHARACTERS

IRINA ABKADINA, an actress

CONSTANTINE TREPLIEFF, her son

PETER SORIN, her brother

NINA ZARIETCHNAYA, a young girl, the daughter of a rich landowner

ILIA SHAMRAEFF, the manager of SORIN'S estate

PAULINA, his wife

MASHA, their daughter

BORIS TRIGORIN, an author

EUGENE DORN, a doctor

SIMON MEDVIEDENKO, a schoolmaster

JACOB, a workman

A COOK

A MAIDSERVANT


_The scene is laid on SORIN'S estate. Two years elapse between the third
and fourth acts_. THE SEA-GULL




ACT I

_The scene is laid in the park on SORIN'S estate. A broad avenue of
trees leads away from the audience toward a lake which lies lost in
the depths of the park. The avenue is obstructed by a rough stage,
temporarily erected for the performance of amateur theatricals, and
which screens the lake from view. There is a dense growth of bushes to
the left and right of the stage. A few chairs and a little table are
placed in front of the stage. The sun has just set. JACOB and some other
workmen are heard hammering and coughing on the stage behind the lowered
curtain_. MASHA and MEDVIEDENKO come in from the left, returning from a walk. MEDVIEDENKO. Why do you always wear mourning? MASHA. I dress in black to match my life. I am unhappy. MEDVIEDENKO. Why should you be unhappy? [Thinking it over] I don't
understand it. You are healthy, and though your father is not rich, he
has a good competency. My life is far harder than yours. I only have
twenty-three roubles a month to live on, but I don't wear mourning. [They sit down]. MASHA. Happiness does not depend on riches; poor men are often happy. MEDVIEDENKO. In theory, yes, but not in reality. Take my case, for
instance; my mother, my two sisters, my little brother and I must all
live somehow on my salary of twenty-three roubles a month. We have to
eat and drink, I take it. You wouldn't have us go without tea and sugar,
would you? Or tobacco? Answer me that, if you can. MASHA. [Looking in the direction of the stage] The play will soon begin. MEDVIEDENKO. Yes, Nina Zarietchnaya is going to act in Treplieff's play. They love one another, and their two souls will unite to-night in the
effort to interpret the same idea by different means. There is no ground
on which your soul and mine can meet. I love you. Too restless and sad
to stay at home, I tramp here every day, six miles and back, to be met
only by your indifference. I am poor, my family is large, you can have
no inducement to marry a man who cannot even find sufficient food for
his own mouth. MASHA. It is not that. [She takes snuff] I am touched by your affection,
but I cannot return it, that is all. [She offers him the snuff-box] Will
you take some? MEDVIEDENKO. No, thank you. [A pause.] MASHA. The air is sultry; a storm is brewing for to-night. You do
nothing but moralise or else talk about money. To you, poverty is the
greatest misfortune that can befall a man, but I think it is a thousand
times easier to go begging in rags than to--You wouldn't understand
that, though. SORIN leaning on a cane, and TREPLIEFF come in. SORIN. For some reason, my boy, country life doesn't suit me, and I am
sure I shall never get used to it. Last night I went to bed at ten and
woke at nine this morning, feeling as if, from oversleep, my brain had
stuck to my skull. [Laughing] And yet I accidentally dropped off to
sleep again after dinner, and feel utterly done up at this moment. It is
like a nightmare. TREPLIEFF. There is no doubt that you should live in town. [He catches
sight of MASHA and MEDVIEDENKO] You shall be called when the play
begins, my friends, but you must not stay here now. Go away, please. SORIN. Miss Masha, will you kindly ask your father to leave the dog
unchained? It howled so last night that my sister was unable to sleep. MASHA. You must speak to my father yourself. Please excuse me; I can't
do so. [To MEDVIEDENKO] Come, let us go. MEDVIEDENKO. You will let us know when the play begins? MASHA and MEDVIEDENKO go out. SORIN. I foresee that that dog is going to howl all night again. It is
always this way in the country; I have never been able to live as I like
here. I come down for a month's holiday, to rest and all, and am
plagued so by their nonsense that I long to escape after the first day. [Laughing] I have always been glad to get away from this place, but I
have been retired now, and this was the only place I had to come to. Willy-nilly, one must live somewhere. JACOB. [To TREPLIEFF] We are going to take a swim, Mr. Constantine. TREPLIEFF. Very well, but you must be back in ten minutes. JACOB. We will, sir. TREPLIEFF. [Looking at the stage] Just like a real theatre! See,
there we have the curtain, the foreground, the background, and all. No
artificial scenery is needed. The eye travels direct to the lake, and
rests on the horizon. The curtain will be raised as the moon rises at
half-past eight. SORIN. Splendid! TREPLIEFF. Of course the whole effect will be ruined if Nina is late. She should be here by now, but her father and stepmother watch her so
closely that it is like stealing her from a prison to get her away from
home. [He straightens SORIN'S collar] Your hair and beard are all on
end. Oughtn't you to have them trimmed? SORIN. [Smoothing his beard] They are the tragedy of my existence. Even
when I was young I always looked as if I were drunk, and all. Women have
never liked me. [Sitting down] Why is my sister out of temper? TREPLIEFF. Why? Because she is jealous and bored. [Sitting down beside
SORIN] She is not acting this evening, but Nina is, and so she has set
herself against me, and against the performance of the play, and against
the play itself, which she hates without ever having read it. SORIN. [Laughing] Does she, really? TREPLIEFF. Yes, she is furious because Nina is going to have a
success on this little stage. [Looking at his watch] My mother is a
psychological curiosity. Without doubt brilliant and talented, capable
of sobbing over a novel, of reciting all Nekrasoff's poetry by heart,
and of nursing the sick like an angel of heaven, you should see what
happens if any one begins praising Duse to her! She alone must be
praised and written about, raved over, her marvellous acting in "La Dame
aux Camelias" extolled to the skies. As she cannot get all that rubbish
in the country, she grows peevish and cross, and thinks we are all
against her, and to blame for it all. She is superstitious, too. She
dreads burning three candles, and fears the thirteenth day of the month. Then she is stingy. I know for a fact that she has seventy thousand
roubles in a bank at Odessa, but she is ready to burst into tears if you
ask her to lend you a penny. SORIN. You have taken it into your head that your mother dislikes your
play, and the thought of it has excited you, and all. Keep calm; your
mother adores you. TREPLIEFF. [Pulling a flower to pieces] She loves me, loves me not;
loves--loves me not; loves--loves me not! [Laughing] You see, she
doesn't love me, and why should she? She likes life and love and gay
clothes, and I am already twenty-five years old; a sufficient reminder
to her that she is no longer young. When I am away she is only
thirty-two, in my presence she is forty-three, and she hates me for
it. She knows, too, that I despise the modern stage. She adores it, and
imagines that she is working on it for the benefit of humanity and her
sacred art, but to me the theatre is merely the vehicle of convention
and prejudice. When the curtain rises on that little three-walled room,
when those mighty geniuses, those high-priests of art, show us people in
the act of eating, drinking, loving, walking, and wearing their coats,
and attempt to extract a moral from their insipid talk; when playwrights
give us under a thousand different guises the same, same, same old
stuff, then I must needs run from it, as Maupassant ran from the Eiffel
Tower that was about to crush him by its vulgarity. SORIN. But we can't do without a theatre. TREPLIEFF. No, but we must have it under a new form. If we can't do
that, let us rather not have it at all. [Looking at his watch] I love my
mother, I love her devotedly, but I think she leads a stupid life. She
always has this man of letters of hers on her mind, and the newspapers
are always frightening her to death, and I am tired of it. Plain, human
egoism sometimes speaks in my heart, and I regret that my mother is
a famous actress. If she were an ordinary woman I think I should be
a happier man. What could be more intolerable and foolish than my
position, Uncle, when I find myself the only nonentity among a crowd of
her guests, all celebrated authors and artists? I feel that they only
endure me because I am her son. Personally I am nothing, nobody. I
pulled through my third year at college by the skin of my teeth, as they
say. I have neither money nor brains, and on my passport you may read
that I am simply a citizen of Kiev. So was my father, but he was
a well-known actor. When the celebrities that frequent my mother's
drawing-room deign to notice me at all, I know they only look at me
to measure my insignificance; I read their thoughts, and suffer from
humiliation. SORIN. Tell me, by the way, what is Trigorin like? I can't understand
him, he is always so silent. TREPLIEFF. Trigorin is clever, simple, well-mannered, and a little, I
might say, melancholic in disposition. Though still under forty, he is
surfeited with praise. As for his stories, they are--how shall I put
it?--pleasing, full of talent, but if you have read Tolstoi or Zola you
somehow don't enjoy Trigorin. SORIN. Do you know, my boy, I like literary men. I once passionately
desired two things: to marry, and to become an author. I have succeeded
in neither. It must be pleasant to be even an insignificant author. TREPLIEFF. [Listening] I hear footsteps! [He embraces his uncle] I
cannot live without her; even the sound of her footsteps is music to me. I am madly happy. [He goes quickly to meet NINA, who comes in at that
moment] My enchantress! My girl of dreams! NINA. [Excitedly] It can't be that I am late? No, I am not late. TREPLIEFF. [Kissing her hands] No, no, no! NINA. I have been in a fever all day, I was so afraid my father would
prevent my coming, but he and my stepmother have just gone driving. The
sky is clear, the moon is rising. How I hurried to get here! How I urged
my horse to go faster and faster! [Laughing] I am _so_ glad to see you! [She shakes hands with SORIN.] SORIN. Oho! Your eyes look as if you had been crying. You mustn't do
that. NINA. It is nothing, nothing. Do let us hurry. I must go in half an
hour. No, no, for heaven's sake do not urge me to stay. My father
doesn't know I am here. TREPLIEFF. As a matter of fact, it is time to begin now. I must call the
audience. SORIN. Let me call them--and all--I am going this minute. [He goes
toward the right, begins to sing "The Two Grenadiers," then stops.] I was singing that once when a fellow-lawyer said to me: "You have a
powerful voice, sir." Then he thought a moment and added, "But it is a
disagreeable one!" [He goes out laughing.] NINA. My father and his wife never will let me come here; they call this
place Bohemia and are afraid I shall become an actress. But this lake
attracts me as it does the gulls. My heart is full of you. [She glances
about her.] TREPLIEFF. We are alone. NINA. Isn't that some one over there? TREPLIEFF. No. [They kiss one another.] NINA. What is that tree? TREPLIEFF. An elm. NINA. Why does it look so dark? TREPLIEFF. It is evening; everything looks dark now. Don't go away
early, I implore you. NINA. I must. TREPLIEFF. What if I were to follow you, Nina? I shall stand in your
garden all night with my eyes on your window. NINA. That would be impossible; the watchman would see you, and Treasure
is not used to you yet, and would bark. TREPLIEFF. I love you. NINA. Hush! TREPLIEFF. [Listening to approaching footsteps] Who is that? Is it you,
Jacob? JACOB. [On the stage] Yes, sir. TREPLIEFF. To your places then. The moon is rising; the play must
commence. NINA. Yes, sir. TREPLIEFF. Is the alcohol ready? Is the sulphur ready? There must be
fumes of sulphur in the air when the red eyes shine out. [To NINA] Go,
now, everything is ready. Are you nervous? NINA. Yes, very. I am not so much afraid of your mother as I am of
Trigorin. I am terrified and ashamed to act before him; he is so famous. Is he young? TREPLIEFF. Yes. NINA. What beautiful stories he writes! TREPLIEFF. [Coldly] I have never read any of them, so I can't say. NINA. Your play is very hard to act; there are no living characters in
it. TREPLIEFF. Living characters! Life must be represented not as it is, but
as it ought to be; as it appears in dreams. NINA. There is so little action; it seems more like a recitation. I
think love should always come into every play. NINA and TREPLIEFF go up onto the little stage; PAULINA and DORN come
in. PAULINA. It is getting damp. Go back and put on your goloshes. DORN. I am quite warm. PAULINA. You never will take care of yourself; you are quite obstinate
about it, and yet you are a doctor, and know quite well that damp air is
bad for you. You like to see me suffer, that's what it is. You sat out
on the terrace all yesterday evening on purpose. DORN. [Sings]

"Oh, tell me not that youth is wasted." PAULINA. You were so enchanted by the conversation of Madame Arkadina
that you did not even notice the cold. Confess that you admire her. DORN. I am fifty-five years old. PAULINA. A trifle. That is not old for a man. You have kept your looks
magnificently, and women still like you. DORN. What are you trying to tell me? PAULINA. You men are all ready to go down on your knees to an actress,
all of you. DORN. [Sings]

"Once more I stand before thee." It is only right that artists should be made much of by society and
treated differently from, let us say, merchants. It is a kind of
idealism. PAULINA. When women have loved you and thrown themselves at your head,
has that been idealism? DORN. [Shrugging his shoulders] I can't say. There has been a great deal
that was admirable in my relations with women. In me they liked, above
all, the superior doctor. Ten years ago, you remember, I was the only
decent doctor they had in this part of the country--and then, I have
always acted like a man of honour. PAULINA. [Seizes his hand] Dearest! DORN. Be quiet! Here they come. ARKADINA comes in on SORIN'S arm; also TRIGORIN, SHAMRAEFF, MEDVIEDENKO,
and MASHA. SHAMRAEFF. She acted most beautifully at the Poltava Fair in 1873; she
was really magnificent. But tell me, too, where Tchadin the comedian is
now? He was inimitable as Rasplueff, better than Sadofski. Where is he
now? ARKADINA. Don't ask me where all those antediluvians are! I know nothing
about them. [She sits down.] SHAMRAEFF. [Sighing] Pashka Tchadin! There are none left like him. The
stage is not what it was in his time. There were sturdy oaks growing on
it then, where now but stumps remain. DORN. It is true that we have few dazzling geniuses these days, but, on
the other hand, the average of acting is much higher. SHAMRAEFF. I cannot agree with you; however, that is a matter of taste,
_de gustibus._

Enter TREPLIEFF from behind the stage. ARKADINA. When will the play begin, my dear boy? TREPLIEFF. In a moment. I must ask you to have patience. ARKADINA. [Quoting from Hamlet] My son,

     "Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul;
     And there I see such black grained spots
     As will not leave their tinct." [A horn is blown behind the stage.] TREPLIEFF. Attention, ladies and gentlemen! The play is about to begin. [A pause] I shall commence. [He taps the door with a stick, and speaks
in a loud voice] O, ye time-honoured, ancient mists that drive at night
across the surface of this lake, blind you our eyes with sleep, and show
us in our dreams that which will be in twice ten thousand years! SORIN. There won't be anything in twice ten thousand years. TREPLIEFF. Then let them now show us that nothingness. ARKADINA. Yes, let them--we are asleep. The curtain rises. A vista opens across the lake. The moon hangs low
above the horizon and is reflected in the water. NINA, dressed in white,
is seen seated on a great rock. NINA. All men and beasts, lions, eagles, and quails, horned stags,
geese, spiders, silent fish that inhabit the waves, starfish from the
sea, and creatures invisible to the eye--in one word, life--all, all
life, completing the dreary round imposed upon it, has died out at last. A thousand years have passed since the earth last bore a living creature
on her breast, and the unhappy moon now lights her lamp in vain. No
longer are the cries of storks heard in the meadows, or the drone of
beetles in the groves of limes. All is cold, cold. All is void, void,
void. All is terrible, terrible--[A pause] The bodies of all living
creatures have dropped to dust, and eternal matter has transformed them
into stones and water and clouds; but their spirits have flowed together
into one, and that great world-soul am I! In me is the spirit of the
great Alexander, the spirit of Napoleon, of Caesar, of Shakespeare,
and of the tiniest leech that swims. In me the consciousness of man has
joined hands with the instinct of the animal; I understand all, all,
all, and each life lives again in me. [The will-o-the-wisps flicker out along the lake shore.] ARKADINA. [Whispers] What decadent rubbish is this? TREPLIEFF. [Imploringly] Mother! NINA. I am alone. Once in a hundred years my lips are opened, my voice
echoes mournfully across the desert earth, and no one hears. And you,
poor lights of the marsh, you do not hear me. You are engendered at
sunset in the putrid mud, and flit wavering about the lake till dawn,
unconscious, unreasoning, unwarmed by the breath of life. Satan, father
of eternal matter, trembling lest the spark of life should glow in you,
has ordered an unceasing movement of the atoms that compose you, and so
you shift and change for ever. I, the spirit of the universe, I alone
am immutable and eternal. [A pause] Like a captive in a dungeon deep and
void, I know not where I am, nor what awaits me. One thing only is not
hidden from me: in my fierce and obstinate battle with Satan, the source
of the forces of matter, I am destined to be victorious in the end. Matter and spirit will then be one at last in glorious harmony, and the
reign of freedom will begin on earth. But this can only come to pass by
slow degrees, when after countless eons the moon and earth and shining
Sirius himself shall fall to dust. Until that hour, oh, horror! horror! horror! [A pause. Two glowing red points are seen shining across the
lake] Satan, my mighty foe, advances; I see his dread and lurid eyes. ARKADINA. I smell sulphur. Is that done on purpose? TREPLIEFF. Yes. ARKADINA. Oh, I see; that is part of the effect. TREPLIEFF. Mother! NINA. He longs for man--

PAULINA. [To DORN] You have taken off your hat again! Put it on, you
will catch cold. ARKADINA. The doctor has taken off his hat to Satan father of eternal
matter--

TREPLIEFF. [Loudly and angrily] Enough of this! There's an end to the
performance. Down with the curtain! ARKADINA. Why, what are you so angry about? TREPLIEFF. [Stamping his foot] The curtain; down with it! [The curtain
falls] Excuse me, I forgot that only a chosen few might write plays or
act them. I have infringed the monopoly. I--I---

He would like to say more, but waves his hand instead, and goes out to
the left. ARKADINA. What is the matter with him? SORIN. You should not handle youthful egoism so roughly, sister. ARKADINA. What did I say to him? SORIN. You hurt his feelings. ARKADINA. But he told me himself that this was all in fun, so I treated
his play as if it were a comedy. SORIN. Nevertheless---

ARKADINA. Now it appears that he has produced a masterpiece, if you
please! I suppose it was not meant to amuse us at all, but that he
arranged the performance and fumigated us with sulphur to demonstrate to
us how plays should be written, and what is worth acting. I am tired
of him. No one could stand his constant thrusts and sallies. He is a
wilful, egotistic boy. SORIN. He had hoped to give you pleasure. ARKADINA. Is that so? I notice, though, that he did not choose an
ordinary play, but forced his decadent trash on us. I am willing to
listen to any raving, so long as it is not meant seriously, but in
showing us this, he pretended to be introducing us to a new form of art,
and inaugurating a new era. In my opinion, there was nothing new about
it, it was simply an exhibition of bad temper. TRIGORIN. Everybody must write as he feels, and as best he may. ARKADINA. Let him write as he feels and can, but let him spare me his
nonsense. DORN. Thou art angry, O Jove! ARKADINA. I am a woman, not Jove. [She lights a cigarette] And I am not
angry, I am only sorry to see a young man foolishly wasting his time. I
did not mean to hurt him. MEDVIEDENKO. No one has any ground for separating life from matter, as
the spirit may well consist of the union of material atoms. [Excitedly,
to TRIGORIN] Some day you should write a play, and put on the stage the
life of a schoolmaster. It is a hard, hard life. ARKADINA. I agree with you, but do not let us talk about plays or atoms
now. This is such a lovely evening. Listen to the singing, friends, how
sweet it sounds. PAULINA. Yes, they are singing across the water. [A pause.] ARKADINA. [To TRIGORIN] Sit down beside me here. Ten or fifteen years
ago we had music and singing on this lake almost all night. There are
six houses on its shores. All was noise and laughter and romance then,
such romance! The young star and idol of them all in those days was this
man here, [Nods toward DORN] Doctor Eugene Dorn. He is fascinating now,
but he was irresistible then. But my conscience is beginning to
prick me. Why did I hurt my poor boy? I am uneasy about him. [Loudly]
Constantine! Constantine! MASHA. Shall I go and find him? ARKADINA. If you please, my dear. MASHA. [Goes off to the left, calling] Mr. Constantine! Oh, Mr.
Constantine! NINA. [Comes in from behind the stage] I see that the play will never be
finished, so now I can go home. Good evening. [She kisses ARKADINA and
PAULINA.] SORIN. Bravo! Bravo! ARKADINA. Bravo! Bravo! We were quite charmed by your acting. With your
looks and such a lovely voice it is a crime for you to hide yourself
in the country. You must be very talented. It is your duty to go on the
stage, do you hear me? NINA. It is the dream of my life, which will never come true. ARKADINA. Who knows? Perhaps it will. But let me present Monsieur Boris
Trigorin. NINA. I am delighted to meet you. [Embarrassed] I have read all your
books. ARKADINA. [Drawing NINA down beside her] Don't be afraid of him, dear. He is a simple, good-natured soul, even if he is a celebrity. See, he is
embarrassed himself. DORN. Couldn't the curtain be raised now? It is depressing to have it
down. SHAMRAEFF. [Loudly] Jacob, my man! Raise the curtain! NINA. [To TRIGORIN] It was a curious play, wasn't it? TRIGORIN. Very. I couldn't understand it at all, but I watched it with
the greatest pleasure because you acted with such sincerity, and the
setting was beautiful. [A pause] There must be a lot of fish in this
lake. NINA. Yes, there are. TRIGORIN. I love fishing. I know of nothing pleasanter than to sit on a
lake shore in the evening with one's eyes on a floating cork. NINA. Why, I should think that for one who has tasted the joys of
creation, no other pleasure could exist. ARKADINA. Don't talk like that. He always begins to flounder when people
say nice things to him. SHAMRAEFF. I remember when the famous Silva was singing once in the
Opera House at Moscow, how delighted we all were when he took the low C.
Well, you can imagine our astonishment when one of the church cantors,
who happened to be sitting in the gallery, suddenly boomed out: "Bravo,
Silva!" a whole octave lower. Like this: [In a deep bass voice] "Bravo,
Silva!" The audience was left breathless. [A pause.] DORN. An angel of silence is flying over our heads. NINA. I must go. Good-bye. ARKADINA. Where to? Where must you go so early? We shan't allow it. NINA. My father is waiting for me. ARKADINA. How cruel he is, really. [They kiss each other] Then I suppose
we can't keep you, but it is very hard indeed to let you go. NINA. If you only knew how hard it is for me to leave you all. ARKADINA. Somebody must see you home, my pet. NINA. [Startled] No, no! SORIN. [Imploringly] Don't go! NINA. I must. SORIN. Stay just one hour more, and all. Come now, really, you know. NINA. [Struggling against her desire to stay; through her tears] No, no,
I can't. [She shakes hands with him and quickly goes out.] ARKADINA. An unlucky girl! They say that her mother left the whole of an
immense fortune to her husband, and now the child is penniless because
the father has already willed everything away to his second wife. It is
pitiful. DORN. Yes, her papa is a perfect beast, and I don't mind saying so--it
is what he deserves. SORIN. [Rubbing his chilled hands] Come, let us go in; the night is
damp, and my legs are aching. ARKADINA. Yes, you act as if they were turned to stone; you can hardly
move them. Come, you unfortunate old man. [She takes his arm.] SHAMRAEFF. [Offering his arm to his wife] Permit me, madame. SORIN. I hear that dog howling again. Won't you please have it
unchained, Shamraeff? SHAMRAEFF. No, I really can't, sir. The granary is full of millet, and
I am afraid thieves might break in if the dog were not there. [Walking
beside MEDVIEDENKO] Yes, a whole octave lower: "Bravo, Silva!" and he
wasn't a singer either, just a simple church cantor. MEDVIEDENKO. What salary does the church pay its singers? [All go out
except DORN.] DORN. I may have lost my judgment and my wits, but I must confess I
liked that play. There was something in it. When the girl spoke of her
solitude and the Devil's eyes gleamed across the lake, I felt my hands
shaking with excitement. It was so fresh and naive. But here he comes;
let me say something pleasant to him. TREPLIEFF comes in. TREPLIEFF. All gone already? DORN. I am here. TREPLIEFF. Masha has been yelling for me all over the park. An
insufferable creature. DORN. Constantine, your play delighted me. It was strange, of course,
and I did not hear the end, but it made a deep impression on me. You
have a great deal of talent, and must persevere in your work. TREPLIEFF seizes his hand and squeezes it hard, then kisses him
impetuously. DORN. Tut, tut! how excited you are. Your eyes are full of tears. Listen
to me. You chose your subject in the realm of abstract thought, and you
did quite right. A work of art should invariably embody some lofty idea. Only that which is seriously meant can ever be beautiful. How pale you
are! TREPLIEFF. So you advise me to persevere? DORN. Yes, but use your talent to express only deep and eternal truths. I have led a quiet life, as you know, and am a contented man, but if I
should ever experience the exaltation that an artist feels during his
moments of creation, I think I should spurn this material envelope of my
soul and everything connected with it, and should soar away into heights
above this earth. TREPLIEFF. I beg your pardon, but where is Nina? DORN. And yet another thing: every work of art should have a definite
object in view. You should know why you are writing, for if you follow
the road of art without a goal before your eyes, you will lose yourself,
and your genius will be your ruin. TREPLIEFF. [Impetuously] Where is Nina? DORN. She has gone home. TREPLIEFF. [In despair] Gone home? What shall I do? I want to see her; I
must see her! I shall follow her. DORN. My dear boy, keep quiet. TREPLIEFF. I am going. I must go. MASHA comes in. MASHA. Your mother wants you to come in, Mr. Constantine. She is waiting
for you, and is very uneasy. TREPLIEFF. Tell her I have gone away. And for heaven's sake, all of you,
leave me alone! Go away! Don't follow me about! DORN. Come, come, old chap, don't act like this; it isn't kind at all. TREPLIEFF. [Through his tears] Good-bye, doctor, and thank you. TREPLIEFF goes out. DORN. [Sighing] Ah, youth, youth! MASHA. It is always "Youth, youth," when there is nothing else to be
said. She takes snuff. DORN takes the snuff-box out of her hands and flings it
into the bushes. DORN. Don't do that, it is horrid. [A pause] I hear music in the house. I must go in. MASHA. Wait a moment. DORN. What do you want? MASHA. Let me tell you again. I feel like talking. [She grows more and
more excited] I do not love my father, but my heart turns to you. For
some reason, I feel with all my soul that you are near to me. Help me! Help me, or I shall do something foolish and mock at my life, and ruin
it. I am at the end of my strength. DORN. What is the matter? How can I help you? MASHA. I am in agony. No one, no one can imagine how I suffer. [She lays
her head on his shoulder and speaks softly] I love Constantine. DORN. Oh, how excitable you all are! And how much love there is about
this lake of spells! [Tenderly] But what can I do for you, my child? What? What? The curtain falls. ACT II

_The lawn in front of SORIN'S house. The house stands in the background,
on a broad terrace. The lake, brightly reflecting the rays of the sun,
lies to the left. There are flower-beds here and there. It is noon;
the day is hot. ARKADINA, DORN, and MASHA are sitting on a bench on the
lawn, in the shade of an old linden. An open book is lying on DORN'S
knees_. ARKADINA. [To MASHA] Come, get up. [They both get up] Stand beside me. You are twenty-two and I am almost twice your age. Tell me, Doctor,
which of us is the younger looking? DORN. You are, of course. ARKADINA. You see! Now why is it? Because I work; my heart and mind are
always busy, whereas you never move off the same spot. You don't live. It is a maxim of mine never to look into the future. I never admit the
thought of old age or death, and just accept what comes to me. MASHA. I feel as if I had been in the world a thousand years, and I
trail my life behind me like an endless scarf. Often I have no desire
to live at all. Of course that is foolish. One ought to pull oneself
together and shake off such nonsense. DORN. [Sings softly]

"Tell her, oh flowers--"

ARKADINA. And then I keep myself as correct-looking as an Englishman. I
am always well-groomed, as the saying is, and carefully dressed, with my
hair neatly arranged. Do you think I should ever permit myself to leave
the house half-dressed, with untidy hair? Certainly not! I have kept my
looks by never letting myself slump as some women do. [She puts her arms
akimbo, and walks up and down on the lawn] See me, tripping on tiptoe
like a fifteen-year-old girl. DORN. I see. Nevertheless, I shall continue my reading. [He takes up his
book] Let me see, we had come to the grain-dealer and the rats. ARKADINA. And the rats. Go on. [She sits down] No, give me the book, it
is my turn to read. [She takes the book and looks for the place] And
the rats. Ah, here it is. [She reads] "It is as dangerous for society to
attract and indulge authors as it is for grain-dealers to raise rats
in their granaries. Yet society loves authors. And so, when a woman
has found one whom she wishes to make her own, she lays siege to him
by indulging and flattering him." That may be so in France, but it
certainly is not so in Russia. We do not carry out a programme like
that. With us, a woman is usually head over ears in love with an author
before she attempts to lay siege to him. You have an example before your
eyes, in me and Trigorin. SORIN comes in leaning on a cane, with NINA beside him. MEDVIEDENKO
follows, pushing an arm-chair. SORIN. [In a caressing voice, as if speaking to a child] So we are happy
now, eh? We are enjoying ourselves to-day, are we? Father and stepmother
have gone away to Tver, and we are free for three whole days! NINA. [Sits down beside ARKADINA, and embraces her] I am so happy. I
belong to you now. SORIN. [Sits down in his arm-chair] She looks lovely to-day. ARKADINA. Yes, she has put on her prettiest dress, and looks sweet. That
was nice of you. [She kisses NINA] But we mustn't praise her too much;
we shall spoil her. Where is Trigorin? NINA. He is fishing off the wharf. ARKADINA. I wonder he isn't bored. [She begins to read again.] NINA. What are you reading? ARKADINA. "On the Water," by Maupassant. [She reads a few lines to
herself] But the rest is neither true nor interesting. [She lays down
the book] I am uneasy about my son. Tell me, what is the matter with
him? Why is he so dull and depressed lately? He spends all his days on
the lake, and I scarcely ever see him any more. MASHA. His heart is heavy. [Timidly, to NINA] Please recite something
from his play. NINA. [Shrugging her shoulders] Shall I? Is it so interesting? MASHA. [With suppressed rapture] When he recites, his eyes shine and his
face grows pale. His voice is beautiful and sad, and he has the ways of
a poet. SORIN begins to snore. DORN. Pleasant dreams! ARKADINA. Peter! SORIN. Eh? ARKADINA. Are you asleep? SORIN. Not a bit of it. [A pause.] ARKADINA. You don't do a thing for your health, brother, but you really
ought to. DORN. The idea of doing anything for one's health at sixty-five! SORIN. One still wants to live at sixty-five. DORN. [Crossly] Ho! Take some camomile tea. ARKADINA. I think a journey to some watering-place would be good for
him. DORN. Why, yes; he might go as well as not. ARKADINA. You don't understand. DORN. There is nothing to understand in this case; it is quite clear. MEDVIEDENKO. He ought to give up smoking. SORIN. What nonsense! [A pause.] DORN. No, that is not nonsense. Wine and tobacco destroy the
individuality. After a cigar or a glass of vodka you are no longer Peter
Sorin, but Peter Sorin plus somebody else. Your ego breaks in two: you
begin to think of yourself in the third person. SORIN. It is easy for you to condemn smoking and drinking; you have
known what life is, but what about me? I have served in the Department
of Justice for twenty-eight years, but I have never lived, I have never
had any experiences. You are satiated with life, and that is why you
have an inclination for philosophy, but I want to live, and that is why
I drink my wine for dinner and smoke cigars, and all. DORN. One must take life seriously, and to take a cure at sixty-five
and regret that one did not have more pleasure in youth is, forgive my
saying so, trifling. MASHA. It must be lunch-time. [She walks away languidly, with a dragging
step] My foot has gone to sleep. DORN. She is going to have a couple of drinks before lunch. SORIN. The poor soul is unhappy. DORN. That is a trifle, your honour. SORIN. You judge her like a man who has obtained all he wants in life. ARKADINA. Oh, what could be duller than this dear tedium of the country? The air is hot and still, nobody does anything but sit and philosophise
about life. It is pleasant, my friends, to sit and listen to you here,
but I had rather a thousand times sit alone in the room of a hotel
learning a role by heart. NINA. [With enthusiasm] You are quite right. I understand how you feel. SORIN. Of course it is pleasanter to live in town. One can sit in one's
library with a telephone at one's elbow, no one comes in without being
first announced by the footman, the streets are full of cabs, and all---

DORN. [Sings]

"Tell her, oh flowers---"

SHAMRAEFF comes in, followed by PAULINA. SHAMRAEFF. Here they are. How do you do? [He kisses ARKADINA'S hand and
then NINA'S] I am delighted to see you looking so well. [To ARKADINA] My
wife tells me that you mean to go to town with her to-day. Is that so? ARKADINA. Yes, that is what I had planned to do. SHAMRAEFF. Hm--that is splendid, but how do you intend to get there,
madam? We are hauling rye to-day, and all the men are busy. What horses
would you take? ARKADINA. What horses? How do I know what horses we shall have? SORIN. Why, we have the carriage horses. SHAMRAEFF. The carriage horses! And where am I to find the harness for
them? This is astonishing! My dear madam, I have the greatest respect
for your talents, and would gladly sacrifice ten years of my life for
you, but I cannot let you have any horses to-day. ARKADINA. But if I must go to town? What an extraordinary state of
affairs! SHAMRAEFF. You do not know, madam, what it is to run a farm. ARKADINA. [In a burst of anger] That is an old story! Under these
circumstances I shall go back to Moscow this very day. Order a carriage
for me from the village, or I shall go to the station on foot. SHAMRAEFF. [losing his temper] Under these circumstances I resign my
position. You must find yourself another manager. [He goes out.] ARKADINA. It is like this every summer: every summer I am insulted here. I shall never set foot here again. She goes out to the left, in the direction of the wharf. In a few
minutes she is seen entering the house, followed by TRIGORIN, who
carries a bucket and fishing-rod. SORIN. [Losing his temper] What the deuce did he mean by his impudence? I want all the horses brought here at once! NINA. [To PAULINA] How could he refuse anything to Madame Arkadina, the
famous actress? Is not every wish, every caprice even, of hers, more
important than any farm work? This is incredible. PAULINA. [In despair] What can I do about it? Put yourself in my place
and tell me what I can do. SORIN. [To NINA] Let us go and find my sister, and all beg her not to
go. [He looks in the direction in which SHAMRAEFF went out] That man is
insufferable; a regular tyrant. NINA. [Preventing him from getting up] Sit still, sit still, and let
us wheel you. [She and MEDVIEDENKO push the chair before them] This is
terrible! SORIN. Yes, yes, it is terrible; but he won't leave. I shall have a talk
with him in a moment. [They go out. Only DORN and PAULINA are left.] DORN. How tiresome people are! Your husband deserves to be thrown out of
here neck and crop, but it will all end by this old granny Sorin and his
sister asking the man's pardon. See if it doesn't. PAULINA. He has sent the carriage horses into the fields too. These
misunderstandings occur every day. If you only knew how they excite me! I am ill; see! I am trembling all over! I cannot endure his rough ways. [Imploringly] Eugene, my darling, my beloved, take me to you. Our time
is short; we are no longer young; let us end deception and concealment,
even though it is only at the end of our lives. [A pause.] DORN. I am fifty-five years old. It is too late now for me to change my
ways of living. PAULINA. I know that you refuse me because there are other women who are
near to you, and you cannot take everybody. I understand. Excuse me--I
see I am only bothering you. NINA is seen near the house picking a bunch of flowers. DORN. No, it is all right. PAULINA. I am tortured by jealousy. Of course you are a doctor and
cannot escape from women. I understand. DORN. [TO NINA, who comes toward him] How are things in there? NINA. Madame Arkadina is crying, and Sorin is having an attack of
asthma. DORN. Let us go and give them both some camomile tea. NINA. [Hands him the bunch of flowers] Here are some flowers for you. DORN. Thank you. [He goes into the house.] PAULINA. [Following him] What pretty flowers! [As they reach the house
she says in a low voice] Give me those flowers! Give them to me! DORN hands her the flowers; she tears them to pieces and flings them
away. They both go into the house. NINA. [Alone] How strange to see a famous actress weeping, and for
such a trifle! Is it not strange, too, that a famous author should sit
fishing all day? He is the idol of the public, the papers are full
of him, his photograph is for sale everywhere, his works have been
translated into many foreign languages, and yet he is overjoyed if he
catches a couple of minnows. I always thought famous people were distant
and proud; I thought they despised the common crowd which exalts
riches and birth, and avenged themselves on it by dazzling it with the
inextinguishable honour and glory of their fame. But here I see them
weeping and playing cards and flying into passions like everybody else. TREPLIEFF comes in without a hat on, carrying a gun and a dead seagull. TREPLIEFF. Are you alone here? NINA. Yes. TREPLIEFF lays the sea-gull at her feet. NINA. What do you mean by this? TREPLIEFF. I was base enough to-day to kill this gull. I lay it at your
feet. NINA. What is happening to you? [She picks up the gull and stands
looking at it.] TREPLIEFF. [After a pause] So shall I soon end my own life. NINA. You have changed so that I fail to recognise you. TREPLIEFF. Yes, I have changed since the time when I ceased to recognise
you. You have failed me; your look is cold; you do not like to have me
near you. NINA. You have grown so irritable lately, and you talk so darkly and
symbolically that you must forgive me if I fail to follow you. I am too
simple to understand you. TREPLIEFF. All this began when my play failed so dismally. A woman never
can forgive failure. I have burnt the manuscript to the last page. Oh,
if you could only fathom my unhappiness! Your estrangement is to me
terrible, incredible; it is as if I had suddenly waked to find this
lake dried up and sunk into the earth. You say you are too simple to
understand me; but, oh, what is there to understand? You disliked
my play, you have no faith in my powers, you already think of me as
commonplace and worthless, as many are. [Stamping his foot] How well
I can understand your feelings! And that understanding is to me like
a dagger in the brain. May it be accursed, together with my stupidity,
which sucks my life-blood like a snake! [He sees TRIGORIN, who
approaches reading a book] There comes real genius, striding along like
another Hamlet, and with a book, too. [Mockingly] "Words, words, words." You feel the warmth of that sun already, you smile, your eyes melt and
glow liquid in its rays. I shall not disturb you. [He goes out.] TRIGORIN. [Making notes in his book] Takes snuff and drinks vodka;
always wears black dresses; is loved by a schoolteacher--

NINA. How do you do? TRIGORIN. How are you, Miss Nina? Owing to an unforeseen development of
circumstances, it seems that we are leaving here today. You and I shall
probably never see each other again, and I am sorry for it. I seldom
meet a young and pretty girl now; I can hardly remember how it feels
to be nineteen, and the young girls in my books are seldom living
characters. I should like to change places with you, if but for an hour,
to look out at the world through your eyes, and so find out what sort of
a little person you are. NINA. And I should like to change places with you. TRIGORIN. Why? NINA. To find out how a famous genius feels. What is it like to be
famous? What sensations does it give you? 