



Produced by K Nordquist and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.) THE UNICORN FROM THE STARS

AND OTHER PLAYS


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
NEW YORK . BOSTON . CHICAGO
ATLANTA . SAN FRANCISCO

MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED
LONDON . BOMBAY . CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.
TORONTO




THE UNICORN FROM THE STARS

AND OTHER PLAYS



BY

WILLIAM B. YEATS

AND

LADY GREGORY



New York
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
1908

_All rights reserved_


COPYRIGHT, 1904, 1908,
BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. New edition. Set up and electrotyped. Published April, 1908. Norwood Press
J. S. Cushing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A. PREFACE


About seven years ago I began to dictate the first of these Plays to
Lady Gregory. My eyesight had become so bad that I feared I could
henceforth write nothing with my own hands but verses, which, as
Theophile Gautier has said, can be written with a burnt match. Our
Irish Dramatic movement was just passing out of the hands of English
Actors, hired because we knew of no Irish ones, and our little troop of
Irish amateurs--as they were at the time--could not have too many
Plays, for they would come to nothing without continued playing. Besides, it was exciting to discover, after the unpopularity of blank
verse, what one could do with three Plays written in prose and founded
on three public interests deliberately chosen,--religion, humour,
patriotism. I planned in those days to establish a dramatic movement
upon the popular passions, as the ritual of religion is established in
the emotions that surround birth and death and marriage, and it was
only the coming of the unclassifiable, uncontrollable, capricious,
uncompromising genius of J. M. Synge that altered the direction of the
movement and made it individual, critical, and combative. If his had
not, some other stone would have blocked up the old way, for the public
mind of Ireland, stupefied by prolonged intolerant organisation, can
take but brief pleasure in the caprice that is in all art, whatever its
subject, and, more commonly, can but hate unaccustomed personal
reverie. I had dreamed the subject of "Cathleen ni Houlihan," but found when I
looked for words that I could not create peasant dialogue that would go
nearer to peasant life than the dialogue in "The Land of Heart's
Desire" or "The Countess Cathleen." Every artistic form has its own
ancestry, and the more elaborate it is, the more is the writer
constrained to symbolise rather than to represent life, until perhaps
his ladies of fashion are shepherds and shepherdesses, as when Colin
Clout came home again. I could not get away, no matter how closely I
watched the country life, from images and dreams which had all too
royal blood, for they were descended like the thought of every poet
from all the conquering dreams of Europe, and I wished to make that
high life mix into some rough contemporary life without ceasing to be
itself, as so many old books and Plays have mixed it and so few modern,
and to do this I added another knowledge to my own. Lady Gregory had
written no Plays, but had, I discovered, a greater knowledge of the
country mind and country speech than anybody I had ever met with, and
nothing but a burden of knowledge could keep "Cathleen ni Houlihan"
from the clouds. I needed less help for the "Hour-Glass," for the
speech there is far from reality, and so the Play is almost wholly
mine. When, however, I brought to her the general scheme for the "Pot
of Broth," a little farce which seems rather imitative to-day, though
it plays well enough, and of the first version of "The Unicorn," "Where
there is Nothing," a five-act Play written in a fortnight to save it
from a plagiarist, and tried to dictate them, her share grew more and
more considerable. She would not allow me to put her name to these
Plays, though I have always tried to explain her share in them, but has
signed "The Unicorn from the Stars," which but for a good deal of the
general plan and a single character and bits of another is wholly hers. I feel indeed that my best share in it is that idea, which I have been
capable of expressing completely in criticism alone, of bringing
together the rough life of the road and the frenzy that the poets have
found in their ancient cellar,--a prophecy, as it were, of the time
when it will be once again possible for a Dickens and a Shelley to be
born in the one body. The chief person of the earlier Play was very dominating, and I have
grown to look upon this as a fault, though it increases the dramatic
effect in a superficial way. We cannot sympathise with the man who sets
his anger at once lightly and confidently to overthrow the order of the
world, for such a man will seem to us alike insane and arrogant. But
our hearts can go with him, as I think, if he speak with some humility,
so far as his daily self carry him, out of a cloudy light of vision;
for whether he understand or not, it may be that voices of angels and
archangels have spoken in the cloud, and whatever wildness come upon
his life, feet of theirs may well have trod the clusters. But a man so
plunged in trance is of necessity somewhat still and silent, though it
be perhaps the silence and the stillness of a lamp; and the movement of
the Play as a whole, if we are to have time to hear him, must be
without hurry or violence. NOTES


I cannot give the full cast of "Cathleen ni Houlihan," which was first
played at St. Teresa's Hall, Dublin, on April 3, 1902, for I have been
searching the cupboard of the Abbey Theatre, where we keep old
Play-bills, and can find no record of it, nor did the newspapers of the
time mention more than the principals. Mr. W. G. Fay played the old
countryman, and Miss Quinn his wife, while Miss Maude Gonne was
Cathleen ni Houlihan, and very magnificently she played. The Play has
been constantly revived, and has, I imagine, been played more often
than any other, except perhaps Lady Gregory's "Spreading the News," at
the Abbey Theatre, Dublin. The "Hour-Glass" was first played at the Molesworth Hall, Dublin, on
March 14, 1903, with the following cast:--

The Wise Man                             J. W. Digges
Bridget, his wife                      Maire T. Quinn
Her children       Eithne and Padragan ni Shiubhlaigh
                                  { P. I. Kelly
Her pupils                        { Seumas O'Sullivan
                                  { P. Colum
                                  { P. MacShiubhlaigh
The Angel                        Maire ni Shiubhlaigh
The Fool                                    F. J. Fay

The Play has been revived many times since then as a part of the
repertoire at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin. "The Unicorn from the Stars" was first played at the Abbey Theatre on
November 23, 1907, with the following cast:--

Father John                            Ernest Vaughan
Thomas Hearne                         Arthur Sinclair
Andrew Hearne                          J. A. O'Rourke
Martin Hearne                               F. J. Fay
Johnny Bacach                               W. G. Fay
Paudeen                                J. M. Kerrigan
Biddy Lally                             Maire O'Neill
Nanny                               Bridget O'Dempsey




CONTENTS


                                                       PAGE

THE UNICORN FROM THE STARS                                1
    By Lady Gregory and W. B. Yeats. CATHLEEN NI HOULIHAN                                    135
    By W. B. Yeats. THE HOUR-GLASS                                          169
    By W. B. Yeats. THE UNICORN FROM THE STARS




CHARACTERS


FATHER JOHN

THOMAS HEARNE                    _a coach builder._

ANDREW HEARNE                        _his brother._

MARTIN. HEARNE                        _his nephew._

JOHNNY BACACH }
PAUDEEN       }
BIDDY LALLY   }                          _beggars._
NANNY         }




ACT I

SCENE: _Interior of a coach builder's workshop. Parts of a gilded
coach, among them an ornament representing the lion and the unicorn._
THOMAS _working at a wheel._ FATHER JOHN _coming from door of inner
room._


FATHER JOHN. I have prayed over Martin. I have prayed a long time, but
there is no move in him yet. THOMAS. You are giving yourself too much trouble, Father. It's as good
for you to leave him alone till the doctor's bottle will come. If there
is any cure at all for what is on him, it is likely the doctor will
have it. FATHER JOHN. I think it is not doctor's medicine will help him in this
case. THOMAS. It will, it will. The doctor has his business learned well. If
Andrew had gone to him the time I bade him, and had not turned again to
bring yourself to the house, it is likely Martin would be walking at
this time. I am loth to trouble you, Father, when the business is not
of your own sort. Any doctor at all should be able, and well able, to
cure the falling sickness. FATHER JOHN. It is not any common sickness that is on him now. THOMAS. I thought at the first it was gone asleep he was. But when
shaking him and roaring at him failed to rouse him, I knew well it was
the falling sickness. Believe me, the doctor will reach it with his
drugs. FATHER JOHN. Nothing but prayer can reach a soul that is so far beyond
the world as his soul is at this moment. THOMAS. You are not saying that the life is gone out of him! FATHER JOHN. No, no, his life is in no danger. But where he himself,
the spirit, the soul, is gone, I cannot say. It has gone beyond our
imaginings. He is fallen into a trance. THOMAS. He used to be queer as a child, going asleep in the fields and
coming back with talk of white horses he saw, and bright people like
angels or whatever they were. But I mended that. I taught him to
recognise stones beyond angels with a few strokes of a rod. I would
never give in to visions or to trances. FATHER JOHN. We who hold the faith have no right to speak against
trance or vision. St. Teresa had them, St. Benedict, St. Anthony, St.
Columcille. St. Catherine of Sienna often lay a long time as if dead. THOMAS. That might be so in the olden time, but those things are gone
out of the world now. Those that do their work fair and honest have no
occasion to let the mind go rambling. What would send my nephew, Martin
Hearne, into a trance, supposing trances to be in it, and he rubbing
the gold on the lion and unicorn that he had taken in hand to make a
good job of for the top of the coach? FATHER JOHN [_taking it up_]. It is likely it was that sent him off. The flashing of light upon it would be enough to throw one that had a
disposition to it into a trance. There was a very saintly man, though
he was not of our church, he wrote a great book called "Mysterium
Magnum," was seven days in a trance. Truth, or whatever truth he found,
fell upon him like a bursting shower, and he a poor tradesman at his
work. It was a ray of sunlight on a pewter vessel that was the
beginning of all. [_Goes to the door of inner room._] There is no stir
in him yet. It is either the best thing or the worst thing can happen
to anyone that is happening to him now. THOMAS. And what in the living world can happen to a man that is asleep
on his bed? FATHER JOHN. There are some would answer you that it is to those who
are awake that nothing happens, and it is they that know nothing. He is
gone where all have gone for supreme truth. THOMAS [_sitting down again and taking up tools_]. Well, maybe so. But
work must go on and coach building must go on, and they will not go on
the time there is too much attention given to dreams. A dream is a sort
of a shadow, no profit in it to anyone at all. A coach now is a real
thing and a thing that will last for generations and be made use of the
last, and maybe turn to be a hen-roost at its latter end. FATHER JOHN. I think Andrew told me it was a dream of Martin's that led
to the making of that coach. THOMAS. Well, I believe he saw gold in some dream, and it led him to
want to make some golden thing, and coaches being the handiest, nothing
would do him till he put the most of his fortune into the making of
this golden coach. It turned out better than I thought, for some of the
lawyers came looking at it at assize time, and through them it was
heard of at Dublin Castle ... and who now has it ordered but the Lord
Lieutenant! [FATHER JOHN _nods._] Ready it must be and sent off it must
be by the end of the month. It is likely King George will be visiting
Dublin, and it is he himself will be sitting in it yet. FATHER JOHN. Martin has been working hard at it, I know. THOMAS. You never saw a man work the way he did, day and night, near
ever since the time, six months ago, he first came home from France. FATHER JOHN. I never thought he would be so good at a trade. I thought
his mind was only set on books. THOMAS. He should be thankful to myself for that. Any person I will
take in hand I make a clean job of them the same as I would make of any
other thing in my yard, coach, half coach, hackney-coach, ass car,
common car, post-chaise, calash, chariot on two wheels, on four wheels. Each one has the shape Thomas Hearne put on it, and it in his hands;
and what I can do with wood and iron, why would I not be able to do it
with flesh and blood, and it in a way my own? FATHER JOHN. Indeed I know you did your best for Martin. THOMAS. Every best. Checked him, taught him the trade, sent him to the
monastery in France for to learn the language and to see the wide
world; but who should know that if you did not know it, Father John,
and I doing it according to your own advice? FATHER JOHN. I thought his nature needed spiritual guidance and
teaching, the best that could be found. THOMAS. I thought myself it was best for him to be away for a while. There are too many wild lads about this place. He to have stopped here,
he might have taken some fancies and got into some trouble, going
against the Government, maybe, the same as Johnny Gibbons that is at
this time an outlaw having a price upon his head. FATHER JOHN. That is so. That imagination of his might have taken fire
here at home. It was better putting him with the Brothers, to turn it
to imaginings of heaven. THOMAS. Well, I will soon have a good hardy tradesman made of him now
that will live quiet and rear a family, and maybe be appointed coach
builder to the royal family at the last. FATHER JOHN [_at window_]. I see your brother Andrew coming back from
the doctor; he is stopping to talk with a troop of beggars that are
sitting by the side of the road. THOMAS. There now is another that I have shaped. Andrew used to be a
bit wild in his talk and in his ways, wanting to go rambling, not
content to settle in the place where he was reared. But I kept a guard
over him; I watched the time poverty gave him a nip, and then I settled
him into the business. He never was so good a worker as Martin; he is
too fond of wasting his time talking vanities. But he is middling
handy, and he is always steady and civil to customers. I have no
complaint worth while to be making this last twenty years against
Andrew. [ANDREW _comes in._]

ANDREW. Beggars there are outside going the road to the Kinvara fair. They were saying there is news that Johnny Gibbons is coming back from
France on the quiet. The king's soldiers are watching the ports for
him. THOMAS. Let you keep now, Andrew, to the business you have in hand. Will the doctor be coming himself, or did he send a bottle that will
cure Martin? ANDREW. The doctor can't come, for he is down with lumbago in the back. He questioned me as to what ailed Martin, and he got a book to go
looking for a cure, and he began telling me things out of it, but I
said I could not be carrying things of that sort in my head. He gave me
the book then, and he has marks put in it for the places where the
cures are ... wait now ... [_Reads._] "Compound medicines are usually
taken inwardly, or outwardly applied. Inwardly taken they should be
either liquid or solid; outwardly they should be fomentations or
sponges wet in some decoctions." THOMAS. He had a right to have written it out himself upon a paper. Where is the use of all that? ANDREW. I think I moved the mark maybe ... here now is the part he was
reading to me himself ... "the remedies for diseases belonging to the
skins next the brain: headache, vertigo, cramp, convulsions, palsy,
incubus, apoplexy, falling sickness." THOMAS. It is what I bid you to tell him--that it was the falling
sickness. ANDREW [_dropping book_]. O my dear, look at all the marks gone out of
it. Wait now, I partly remember what he said ... a blister he spoke of
... or to be smelling hartshorn ... or the sneezing powder ... or if
all fails, to try letting the blood. FATHER JOHN. All this has nothing to do with the real case. It is all
waste of time. ANDREW. That is what I was thinking myself, Father. Sure it was I was
the first to call out to you when I saw you coming down from the
hillside and to bring you in to see what could you do. I would have
more trust in your means than in any doctor's learning. And in case you
might fail to cure him, I have a cure myself I heard from my
grandmother ... God rest her soul ... and she told me she never knew it
to fail. A person to have the falling sickness, to cut the top of his
nails and a small share of the hair of his head, and to put it down on
the floor and to take a harry-pin and drive it down with that into the
floor and to leave it there. "That is the cure will never fail," she
said, "to rise up any person at all having the falling sickness." FATHER JOHN [_hands on ears_]. I will go back to the hillside, I will
go back to the hillside, but no, no, I must do what I can, I will go
again, I will wrestle, I will strive my best to call him back with
prayer. [_Goes into room and shuts door._]

ANDREW. It is queer Father John is sometimes, and very queer. There are
times when you would say that he believes in nothing at all. THOMAS. If you wanted a priest, why did you not get our own parish
priest that is a sensible man, and a man that you would know what his
thoughts are? You know well the Bishop should have something against
Father John to have left him through the years in that poor mountainy
place, minding the few unfortunate people that were left out of the
last famine. A man of his learning to be going in rags the way he is,
there must be some good cause for that. ANDREW. I had all that in mind and I bringing him. But I thought he
would have done more for Martin than what he is doing. To read a Mass
over him I thought he would, and to be convulsed in the reading it, and
some strange thing to have gone out with a great noise through the
doorway. THOMAS. It would give no good name to the place such a thing to be
happening in it. It is well enough for labouring men and for half-acre
men. It would be no credit at all such a thing to be heard of in this
house, that is for coach building the capital of the county. ANDREW. If it is from the devil this sickness comes, it would be best
to put it out whatever way it would be put out. But there might no bad
thing be on the lad at all. It is likely he was with wild companions
abroad, and that knocking about might have shaken his health. I was
that way myself one time....

THOMAS. Father John said that it was some sort of a vision or a trance,
but I would give no heed to what he would say. It is his trade to see
more than other people would see, the same as I myself might be seeing
a split in a leather car hood that no other person would find out at
all. ANDREW. If it is the falling sickness is on him, I have no objection to
that ... a plain, straight sickness that was cast as a punishment on
the unbelieving Jews. It is a thing that might attack one of a family
and one of another family and not to come upon their kindred at all. A
person to have it, all you have to do is not to go between him and the
wind or fire or water. But I am in dread trance is a thing might run
through the house, the same as the cholera morbus. THOMAS. In my belief there is no such thing as a trance. Letting on
people do be to make the world wonder the time they think well to rise
up. To keep them to their work is best, and not to pay much attention
to them at all. ANDREW. I would not like trances to be coming on myself. I leave it in
my will if I die without cause, a holly stake to be run through my
heart the way I will lie easy after burial, and not turn my face
downwards in my coffin. I tell you I leave it on you in my will. THOMAS. Leave thinking of your own comforts, Andrew, and give your mind
to the business. Did the smith put the irons yet on to the shafts of
this coach? ANDREW. I'll go see did he. THOMAS. Do so, and see did he make a good job of it. Let the shafts be
sound and solid if they _are_ to be studded with gold. ANDREW. They are, and the steps along with them ... glass sides for the
people to be looking in at the grandeur of the satin within ... the
lion and the unicorn crowning all ... it was a great thought Martin had
the time he thought of making this coach! THOMAS. It is best for me go see the smith myself ... and leave it to
no other one. You can be attending to that ass car out in the yard
wants a new tyre in the wheel ... out in the rear of the yard it is. [_They go to door._] To pay attention to every small thing, and to fill
up every minute of time, shaping whatever you have to do, that is the
way to build up a business. [_They go out._]

FATHER JOHN [_bringing in_ MARTIN]. They are gone out now ... the air
is fresher here in the workshop ... you can sit here for a while. You
are now fully awake; you have been in some sort of a trance or a sleep. MARTIN. Who was it that pulled at me? Who brought me back? FATHER JOHN. It is I, Father John, did it. I prayed a long time over
you and brought you back. MARTIN. You, Father John, to be so unkind! O leave me, leave me alone! FATHER JOHN. You are in your dream still. MARTIN. It was no dream, it was real ... do you not smell the broken
fruit ... the grapes ... the room is full of the smell. FATHER JOHN. Tell me what you have seen where you have been. MARTIN. There were horses ... white horses rushing by, with white,
shining riders ... there was a horse without a rider, and someone
caught me up and put me upon him, and we rode away, with the wind, like
the wind....

FATHER JOHN. That is a common imagining. I know many poor persons have
seen that. MARTIN. We went on, on, on ... we came to a sweet-smelling garden with
a gate to it ... and there were wheat-fields in full ear around ... and
there were vineyards like I saw in France, and the grapes in bunches
... I thought it to be one of the town-lands of heaven. Then I saw the
horses we were on had changed to unicorns, and they began trampling the
grapes and breaking them ... I tried to stop them, but I could not. FATHER JOHN. That is strange, that is strange. What is it that brings
to mind ... I heard it in some place, _Monocoros di Astris_, the
Unicorn from the Stars. MARTIN. They tore down the wheat and trampled it on stones, and then
they tore down what were left of the grapes and crushed and bruised and
trampled them ... I smelt the wine, it was flowing on every side ...
then everything grew vague ... I cannot remember clearly ... everything
was silent ... the trampling now stopped ... we were all waiting for
some command. Oh! was it given! I was trying to hear it ... there was
some one dragging, dragging me away from that ... I am sure there was a
command given ... and there was a great burst of laughter. What was it? What was the command? Everything seemed to tremble around me. FATHER JOHN. Did you awake then? MARTIN. I do not think I did ... it all changed ... it was terrible,
wonderful. I saw the unicorns trampling, trampling ... but not in the
wine troughs.... Oh, I forget! Why did you waken me? FATHER JOHN. I did not touch you. Who knows what hands pulled you away? I prayed; that was all I did. I prayed very hard that you might awake. If I had not, you might have died. I wonder what it all meant. The
unicorns ... what did the French monk tell me ... strength they meant
... virginal strength, a rushing, lasting, tireless strength. MARTIN. They were strong.... Oh, they made a great noise with their
trampling! FATHER JOHN. And the grapes ... what did they mean?... It puts me in
mind of the psalm ... _Ex calix meus inebrians quam praeclarus est._ It
was a strange vision, a very strange vision, a very strange vision. MARTIN. How can I get back to that place? FATHER JOHN. You must not go back, you must not think of doing that;
that life of vision, of contemplation, is a terrible life, for it has
far more of temptation in it than the common life. Perhaps it would
have been best for you to stay under rules in the monastery. MARTIN. I could not see anything so clearly there. It is back here in
my own place the visions come, in the place where shining people used
to laugh around me and I a little lad in a bib. FATHER JOHN. You cannot know but it was from the Prince of this world
the vision came. How can one ever know unless one follows the
discipline of the church? Some spiritual director, some wise, learned
man, that is what you want. I do not know enough. What am I but a poor
banished priest with my learning forgotten, my books never handled, and
spotted with the damp? MARTIN. I will go out into the fields where you cannot come to me to
awake me ... I will see that townland again ... I will hear that
command. I cannot wait, I must know what happened, I must bring that
command to mind again. FATHER JOHN [_putting himself between_ MARTIN _and the door_]. You
must have patience as the saints had it. You are taking your own way. If there is a command from God for you, you must wait His good time to
receive it. MARTIN. Must I live here forty years, fifty years ... to grow as old as
my uncles, seeing nothing but common things, doing work ... some
foolish work? FATHER JOHN. Here they are coming. It is time for me to go. I must
think and I must pray. My mind is troubled about you. [_To_ THOMAS _as
he and_ ANDREW _come in._] Here he is; be very kind to him, for he has
still the weakness of a little child. [_Goes out._]

THOMAS. Are you well of the fit, lad? MARTIN. It was no fit. I was away ... for a while ... no, you will not
believe me if I tell you. ANDREW. I would believe it, Martin. I used to have very long sleeps
myself and very queer dreams. THOMAS. You had, till I cured you, taking you in hand and binding you
to the hours of the clock. The cure that will cure yourself, Martin,
and will waken you, is to put the whole of your mind on to your golden
coach, to take it in hand, and to finish it out of face. MARTIN. Not just now. I want to think ... to try and remember what I
saw, something that I heard, that I was told to do. THOMAS. No, but put it out of your mind. There is no man doing business
that can keep two things in his head. A Sunday or a Holyday now you
might go see a good hurling or a thing of the kind, but to be spreading
out your mind on anything outside of the workshop on common days, all
coach building would come to an end. MARTIN. I don't think it is building I want to do. I don't think that
is what was in the command. THOMAS. It is too late to be saying that the time you have put the most
of your fortune in the business. Set yourself now to finish your job,
and when it is ended, maybe I won't begrudge you going with the coach
as far as Dublin. ANDREW. That is it; that will satisfy him. I had a great desire myself,
and I young, to go travelling the roads as far as Dublin. The roads are
the great things; they never come to an end. They are the same as the
serpent having his tail swallowed in his own mouth. MARTIN. It was not wandering I was called to. What was it? What was it? THOMAS. What you are called to, and what everyone having no great
estate is called to, is to work. Sure the world itself could not go on
without work. MARTIN. I wonder if that is the great thing, to make the world go on. No, I don't think that is the great thing ... what does the Munster
poet call it ... "this crowded slippery coach-loving world." I don't
think I was told to work for that. ANDREW. I often thought that myself. It is a pity the stock of the
Hearnes to be asked to do any work at all. THOMAS. Rouse yourself, Martin, and don't be talking the way a fool
talks. You started making that golden coach, and you were set upon it,
and you had me tormented about it. You have yourself wore out working
at it and planning it and thinking of it, and at the end of the race,
when you have the winning post in sight, and horses hired for to bring
it to Dublin Castle, you go falling into sleeps and blathering about
dreams, and we run to a great danger of letting the profit and the sale
go by. Sit down on the bench now, and lay your hands to the work. MARTIN [_sitting down_]. I will try. I wonder why I ever wanted to
make it; it was no good dream set me doing that. [_He takes up wheel._]
What is there in a wooden wheel to take pleasure in it? Gilding it
outside makes it no different. THOMAS. That is right now. You had some good plan for making the axle
run smooth. MARTIN [_letting wheel fall and putting his hands to his head_]. It is
no use. [_Angrily._] Why did you send the priest to awake me? My soul
is my own and my mind is my own. I will send them to where I like. You
have no authority over my thoughts. THOMAS. That is no way to be speaking to me. I am head of this
business. Nephew or no nephew, I will have no one come cold or
unwilling to the work. MARTIN. I had better go. I am of no use to you. I am going.... I must
be alone.... I will forget if I am not alone. Give me what is left of
my money, and I will go out of this. THOMAS [_opening a press and taking out a bag and throwing it to
him_]. There is what is left of your money! The rest of it you have
spent on the coach. If you want to go, go, and I will not have to be
annoyed with you from this out. ANDREW. Come now with me, Thomas. The boy is foolish, but it will soon
pass over. He has not my sense to be giving attention to what you will
say. Come along now; leave him for a while; leave him to me, I say; it
is I will get inside his mind. [_He leads_ THOMAS _out._ MARTIN, _when they have gone, sits
          down, taking up lion and unicorn._]

MARTIN. I think it was some shining thing I saw.... What was it? ANDREW [_opening door and putting in his head_]. Listen to me, Martin. MARTIN. Go away--no more talking--leave me alone. ANDREW [_coming in_]. Oh, but wait. I understand you. Thomas doesn't
understand your thoughts, but I understand them. Wasn't I telling you I
was just like you once? MARTIN. Like me? Did you ever see the other things, the things beyond? ANDREW. I did. It is not the four walls of the house keep me content. Thomas doesn't know, oh, no, he doesn't know. MARTIN. No, he has no vision. ANDREW. He has not, nor any sort of a heart for frolic. MARTIN. He has never heard the laughter and the music beyond. ANDREW. He has not, nor the music of my own little flute. I have it
hidden in the thatch outside. MARTIN. Does the body slip from you as it does from me? They have not
shut your window into eternity? ANDREW. Thomas never shut a window I could not get through. I knew you
were one of my own sort. When I am sluggish in the morning Thomas says,
"Poor Andrew is getting old." That is all he knows. The way to keep
young is to do the things youngsters do. Twenty years I have been
slipping away, and he never found me out yet! MARTIN. That is what they call ecstasy, but there is no word that can
tell out very plain what it means. That freeing of the mind from its
thoughts. Those wonders we know; when we put them into words, the words
seem as little like them as blackberries are like the moon and sun. ANDREW. I found that myself the time they knew me to be wild, and used
to be asking me to say what pleasure did I find in cards, and women,
and drink. MARTIN. You might help me to remember that vision I had this morning,
to understand it. The memory of it has slipped from me. Wait; it is
coming back, little by little. I know that I saw the unicorns
trampling, and then a figure, a many-changing figure, holding some
bright thing. I knew something was going to happen or to be said, ...
something that would make my whole life strong and beautiful like the
rushing of the unicorns, and then, and then....

JOHNNY BACACH'S VOICE [_at window_]. A poor person I am, without food,
without a way, without portion, without costs, without a person or a
stranger, without means, without hope, without health, without
warmth....

ANDREW [_looking towards window_]. It is that troop of beggars;
bringing their tricks and their thieveries they are to the Kinvara
fair. MARTIN [_impatiently_]. There is no quiet ... come to the other room. I am trying to remember....

          [_They go to door of inner room, but_ ANDREW _stops him._]

ANDREW. They are a bad-looking fleet. I have a mind to drive them away,
giving them a charity. MARTIN. Drive them away or come away from their voices. ANOTHER VOICE. I put under the power of my prayer,

    All that will give me help,
    Rafael keep him Wednesday;
    Sachiel feed him Thursday;
    Hamiel provide him Friday;
    Cassiel increase him Saturday. Sure giving to us is giving to the Lord and laying up a store in the
treasury of heaven. ANDREW. Whisht! He is coming in by the window! [JOHNNY B. _climbs in._]

JOHNNY B. That I may never sin, but the place is empty! PAUDEEN. Go in and see what can you make a grab at. JOHNNY B. [_getting in_]. That every blessing I gave may be turned to a
curse on them that left the place so bare! [_He turns things over._] I
might chance something in this chest if it was open.... [ANDREW _begins
creeping towards him._]

NANNY [_outside_]. Hurry on now, you limping crabfish, you! We can't
be stopping here while you'll boil stirabout! JOHNNY B. [_seizing bag of money and holding it up in both hands_]. Look at this now, look! [ANDREW _comes behind and seizes his arm._]

JOHNNY B. [_letting bag fall with a crash_]. Destruction on us all! MARTIN [running forward, seizes him. Heads disappear]. That is it! Oh,
I remember! That is what happened! That is the command! Who was it sent
you here with that command? JOHNNY B. It was misery sent me in and starvation and the hard ways of
the world. NANNY [_outside_]. It was that, my poor child, and my one son only. Show mercy to him now, and he after leaving gaol this morning. MARTIN [_to_ ANDREW.]. I was trying to remember it ... when he spoke
that word it all came back to me. I saw a bright, many-changing figure
... it was holding up a shining vessel ... [_holds up arms_] then the
vessel fell and was broken with a great crash ... then I saw the
unicorns trampling it. They were breaking the world to pieces ... when
I saw the cracks coming, I shouted for joy! And I heard the command,
"Destroy, destroy; destruction is the life-giver; destroy." ANDREW. What will we do with him? He was thinking to rob you of your
gold. MARTIN. How could I forget it or mistake it? It has all come upon me
now ... the reasons of it all, like a flood, like a flooded river. JOHNNY B. [_weeping_]. It was the hunger brought me in and the drouth. MARTIN. Were you given any other message? Did you see the unicorns? JOHNNY B. I saw nothing and heard nothing; near dead I am with the
fright I got and with the hardship of the gaol. MARTIN. To destroy ... to overthrow all that comes between us and God,
between us and that shining country. To break the wall, Andrew, the
thing, whatever it is that comes between, but where to begin?... ANDREW. What is it you are talking about? MARTIN. It may be that this man is the beginning. He has been sent ...
the poor, they have nothing, and so they can see heaven as we cannot. He and his comrades will understand me. But now to give all men high
hearts that they may all understand. JOHNNY B. It's the juice of the grey barley will do that. ANDREW. To rise everybody's heart, is it? Is it that was your
meaning?... If you will take the blame of it all, I'll do what you
want. Give me the bag of money, then. [_He takes it up._] Oh, I've a
heart like your own! I'll lift the world too! The people will be
running from all parts. Oh, it will be a great day in this district. JOHNNY B. Will I go with you? MARTIN. No, you must stay here; we have things to do and to plan. JOHNNY B. Destroyed we all are with the hunger and the drouth. MARTIN. Go then, get food and drink, whatever is wanted to give you
strength and courage; gather your people together here; bring them all
in. We have a great thing to do. I have to begin ... I want to tell it
to the whole world. Bring them in, bring them in, I will make the house
ready. ACT II

SCENE: The same workshop a few minutes later. MARTIN. seen arranging
mugs and bread, etc., on a table. FATHER JOHN comes in, knocking at
open door as he comes. MARTIN. Come in, come in, I have got the house ready. Here is bread and
meat ... everybody is welcome. [Hearing no answer, turns round.] FATHER JOHN. Martin, I have come back.... There is something I want to
say to you. MARTIN. You are welcome; there are others coming.... They are not of
your sort, but all are welcome. FATHER JOHN. I have remembered suddenly something that I read when I
was in the seminary. MARTIN. You seem very tired. FATHER JOHN [_sitting down_]. I had almost got back to my own place
when I thought of it. I have run part of the way. It is very important. It is about the trance that you have been in. When one is inspired from
above, either in trance or in contemplation, one remembers afterwards
all that one has seen and read. I think there must be something about
it in St. Thomas. I know that I have read a long passage about it years
ago. But, Martin, there is another kind of inspiration, or rather an
obsession or possession. A diabolical power comes into one's body or
overshadows it. Those whose bodies are taken hold of in this way,
jugglers and witches and the like, can often tell what is happening in
distant places, or what is going to happen, but when they come out of
that state, they remember nothing. I think you said----

MARTIN. That I could not remember. FATHER JOHN. You remembered something, but not all. Nature is a great
sleep; there are dangerous and evil spirits in her dreams, but God is
above Nature. She is a darkness, but He makes everything clear--He is
light. MARTIN. All is clear now. I remember all, or all that matters to me. A
poor man brought me a word, and I know what I have to do. FATHER JOHN. Ah, I understand; words were put into his mouth. I have
read of such things. God sometimes uses some common man as His
messenger. MARTIN. You may have passed the man who brought it on the road. He left
me but now. FATHER JOHN. Very likely, very likely, that is the way it happened. Some plain, unnoticed man has sometimes been sent with a command. MARTIN. I saw the unicorns trampling in my dream. They were breaking
the world. I am to destroy, that is the word the messenger spoke. FATHER JOHN. To destroy? MARTIN. To bring again the old disturbed exalted life, the old
splendour. FATHER JOHN. You are not the first that dream has come to. [_Gets up
and walks up and down._] It has been wandering here and there, calling
now to this man, now to that other. It is a terrible dream. MARTIN. Father John, you have had the same thought. FATHER JOHN. Men were holy then; there were saints everywhere, there
was reverence, but now it is all work, business, how to live a long
time. Ah, if one could change it all in a minute, even by war and
violence.... There is a cell where St. Ciaran used to pray, if one
could bring that time again. MARTIN. Do not deceive me. You have had the command. FATHER JOHN. Why are you questioning me? You are asking me things that
I have told to no one but my confessor. MARTIN. We must gather the crowds together, you and I. FATHER JOHN. I have dreamed your dream; it was long ago. I had your
vision. MARTIN. And what happened? FATHER JOHN [_harshly_]. It was stopped. That was an end. I was sent
to the lonely parish where I am, where there was no one I could lead
astray. They have left me there. We must have patience; the world was
destroyed by water, it has yet to be consumed by fire. MARTIN. Why should we be patient? To live seventy years, and others to
come after us and live seventy years it may be, and so from age to age,
and all the while the old splendour dying more and more. [A noise of shouting. ANDREW, who has been standing at the
          door for a moment, comes in.] ANDREW. Martin says truth, and he says it well. Planing the side of a
cart or a shaft, is that life? It is not. Sitting at a desk writing
letters to the man that wants a coach or to the man that won't pay for
the one he has got, is that life, I ask you? Thomas arguing at you and
putting you down, "Andrew, dear Andrew, did you put the tyre on that
wheel yet?" Is that life? No, it is not. I ask you all what do you
remember when you are dead? It's the sweet cup in the corner of the
widow's drinking house that you remember. Ha, ha, listen to that
shouting! That is what the lads in the village will remember to the
last day they live! MARTIN. Why are they shouting? What have you told them? ANDREW. Never you mind. You left that to me. You bade me to lift their
hearts, and I did lift them. There is not one among them but will have
his head like a blazing tar barrel before morning. What did your
friend, the beggar, say? The juice of the grey barley, he said. FATHER JOHN. You accursed villain! You have made them drunk! ANDREW. Not at all, but lifting them to the stars. That is what Martin
bade me to do, and there is no one can say I did not do it. [_A shout at door and beggars push in a barrel. They all cry,
          "Hi! for the noble master!" and point at_ ANDREW.] JOHNNY B. It's not him, it's that one! [_Points at_ MARTIN.] FATHER JOHN. Are you bringing this devil's work in at the very door? Go
out of this, I say! Get out! Take these others with you! MARTIN. No, no, I asked them in; they must not be turned out. They are
my guests. FATHER JOHN. Drive them out of your uncle's house! MARTIN. Come, Father, it is better for you to go. Go back to your own
place. I have taken the command. It is better, perhaps, for you that
you did not take it. [MARTIN _and_ FATHER JOHN _go out._]

BIDDY. It is well for that old lad he didn't come between ourselves and
our luck. It would be right to have flayed him and to have made bags of
his skin. NANNY. What a hurry you are in to get your enough! Look at the grease
on your frock yet with the dint of the dabs you put in your pocket! Doing cures and foretellings, is it? You starved pot picker, you! BIDDY. That you may be put up to-morrow to take the place of that
decent son of yours that had the yard of the gaol wore with walking it
till this morning! NANNY. If he had, he had a mother to come to, and he would know her
when he did see her, and that is what no son of your own could do, and
he to meet you at the foot of the gallows! JOHNNY B. If I did know you, I knew too much of you since the first
beginning of my life! What reward did I ever get travelling with you? What store did you give me of cattle or of goods? What provision did I
get from you by day or by night but your own bad character to be joined
on to my own, and I following at your heels, and your bags tied round
about me? NANNY. Disgrace and torment on you! Whatever you got from me, it was
more than any reward or any bit I ever got from the father you had, or
any honourable thing at all, but only the hurt and the harm of the
world and its shame! JOHNNY B. What would he give you, and you going with him without leave? Crooked and foolish you were always, and you begging by the side of the
ditch. NANNY. Begging or sharing, the curse of my heart upon you! It's better
off I was before ever I met with you, to my cost! What was on me at all
that I did not cut a scourge in the wood to put manners and decency on
you the time you were not hardened as you are! JOHNNY B. Leave talking to me of your rods and your scourges! All you
taught me was robbery, and it is on yourself and not on myself the
scourges will be laid at the day of the recognition of tricks. PAUDEEN. Faith, the pair of you together is better than Hector fighting
before Troy! NANNY. Ah, let you be quiet. It is not fighting we are craving, but the
easing of the hunger that is on us and of the passion of sleep. Lend me
a graineen of tobacco till I'll kindle my pipe--a blast of it will take
the weight of the road off my heart. [ANDREW _gives her some_. NANNY. _grabs at it._]

BIDDY. No, but it's to myself you should give it. I that never smoked a
pipe this forty year without saying the tobacco prayer. Let that one
say, did ever she do that much? NANNY. That the pain of your front tooth may be in your back tooth, you
to be grabbing my share! [_They snap at tobacco._]

ANDREW. Pup, pup, pup. Don't be snapping and quarrelling now, and you
so well treated in this house. It is strollers like yourselves should
be for frolic and for fun. Have you ne'er a good song to sing, a song
that will rise all our hearts? PAUDEEN. Johnny Bacach is a good singer; it is what he used to be doing
in the fairs, if the oakum of the gaol did not give him a hoarseness in
the throat. ANDREW. Give it out so, a good song; a song will put courage and spirit
into any man at all. JOHNNY B. [_singing_]. Come, all ye airy bachelors,
    A warning take by me:
    A sergeant caught me fowling,
    And fired his gun so free. His comrades came to his relief,
    And I was soon trepanned;
    And, bound up like a woodcock,
    Had fallen into their hands. The judge said transportation;
    The ship was on the strand;
    They have yoked me to the traces
    For to plough Van Dieman's land! ANDREW. That's no good of a song, but a melancholy sort of a song. I'd
as lief be listening to a saw going through timber. Wait, now, till you
will hear myself giving out a tune on the flute. [_Goes out for it._]

JOHNNY B. It is what I am thinking there must be a great dearth and a
great scarcity of good comrades in this place, a man like that
youngster having means in his hand to be bringing ourselves and our
rags into the house. PAUDEEN. You think yourself very wise, Johnny Bacach. Can you tell me
now who that man is? JOHNNY B. Some decent lad, I suppose, with a good way of living and a
mind to send up his name upon the roads. PAUDEEN. You that have been gaoled this eight months know little of
this countryside.... It isn't a limping stroller like yourself the boys
would let come among them. But I know. I went to the drill a few
nights, and I skinning kids for the mountainy men. In a quarry beyond
the drill is ... they have their plans made.... It's the square house
of the Browns is to be made an attack on and plundered. Do you know now
who is the leader they are waiting for? JOHNNY B. How would I know that? PAUDEEN [_singing_]. Oh, Johnny Gibbons, my five hundred healths to you. It is long you are away from us over the sea! JOHNNY B. [_standing up excitedly_]. Sure that man could not be John
Gibbons that is outlawed. PAUDEEN. I asked news of him from the old lad [_points after_ ANDREW],
and I bringing in the drink along with him. "Don't be asking
questions," says he; "take the treat he gives you," says he. "If a lad
that had a high heart has a mind to rouse the neighbours," says he,
"and to stretch out his hand to all that pass the road, it is in France
he learned it," says he, "the place he is but lately come from, and
where the wine does be standing open in tubs. Take your treat when you
get it," says he, "and make no delay, or all might be discovered and
put an end to." JOHNNY B. He came over the sea from France! It is Johnny Gibbons
surely, but it seems to me they were calling him by some other name. PAUDEEN. A man on his keeping might go by a hundred names. Would he be
telling it out to us that he never saw before, and we with that clutch
of chattering women along with us? Here he is coming now. Wait till you
see is he the lad I think him to be. MARTIN [_coming in_]. I will make my banner; I will paint the Unicorn
on it. Give me that bit of canvas; there is paint over here. We will
get no help from the settled men--we will call to the lawbreakers, the
tinkers--the sievemakers--the sheep-stealers. [_He begins to make
banner._]

BIDDY. That sounds to be a queer name of an army. Ribbons I can
understand, Whiteboys, Rightboys, Threshers, and Peep-o'-day, but
Unicorns I never heard of before. JOHNNY B. It is not a queer name, but a very good name. [_Takes up Lion
and Unicorn._] It is often you saw that before you in the dock. There
is the Unicorn with the one horn, and what is it he is going against? The Lion of course. When he has the Lion destroyed, the Crown must fall
and be shivered. Can't you see? It is the League of the Unicorns is the
league that will fight and destroy the power of England and King
George. PAUDEEN. It is with that banner we will march and the lads in the
quarry with us; it is they will have the welcome before him! It won't
be long till we'll be attacking the Square House! Arms there are in it;
riches that would smother the world; rooms full of guineas--we will put
wax on our shoes walking them; the horses themselves shod with no less
than silver! MARTIN [_holding up the banner_]. There it is ready! We are very few
now, but the army of the Unicorns will be a great army! [_To_ JOHNNY
B.] Why have you brought me the message? Can you remember any more? Has
anything more come to you? Who told you to come to me? Who gave you the
message?... Can you see anything or hear anything that is beyond the
world? JOHNNY B. I cannot. I don't know what do you want me to tell you at
all. MARTIN. I want to begin the destruction, but I don't know where to
begin ... you do not hear any other voice? JOHNNY B. I do not. I have nothing at all to do with freemasons or
witchcraft. PAUDEEN. It is Biddy Lally has to do with witchcraft. It is often she
threw the cups and gave out prophecies the same as Columcille. MARTIN. You are one of the knowledgeable women. You can tell me where
it is best to begin, and what will happen in the end. BIDDY. I will foretell nothing at all. I rose out of it this good
while, with the stiffness and the swelling it brought upon my joints. MARTIN. If you have foreknowledge, you have no right to keep silent. If
you do not help me, I may go to work in the wrong way. I know I have to
destroy, but when I ask myself what I am to begin with, I am full of
uncertainty. PAUDEEN. Here now are the cups handy and the leavings in them. BIDDY [_taking cups and pouring one from another_]. Throw a bit of
white money into the four corners of the house. MARTIN. There! [_Throwing it._]

BIDDY. There can be nothing told without silver. It is not myself will
have the profit of it. Along with that I will be forced to throw out
gold. MARTIN. There is a guinea for you. Tell me what comes before your eyes. BIDDY. What is it you are wanting to have news of? MARTIN. Of what I have to go out against at the beginning ... there is
so much ... the whole world, it may be. BIDDY [_throwing from one cup to another and looking_]. You have no
care for yourself. You have been across the sea; you are not long back. You are coming within the best day of your life. MARTIN. What is it? What is it I have to do? BIDDY. I see a great smoke, I see burning ... there is a great smoke
overhead. MARTIN. That means we have to burn away a great deal that men have
piled up upon the earth. We must bring men once more to the wildness of
the clean green earth. BIDDY. Herbs for my healing, the big herb and the little herb; it is
true enough they get their great strength out of the earth. JOHNNY B. Who was it the green sod of Ireland belonged to in the olden
times? Wasn't it to the ancient race it belonged? And who has
possession of it now but the race that came robbing over the sea? The
meaning of that is to destroy the big houses and the towns, and the
fields to be given back to the ancient race. MARTIN. That is it. You don't put it as I do, but what matter? Battle
is all. PAUDEEN. Columcille said the four corners to be burned, and then the
middle of the field to be burned. I tell you it was Columcille's
prophecy said that. BIDDY. Iron handcuffs I see and a rope and a gallows, and it maybe is
not for yourself I see it, but for some I have acquaintance with a good
way back. MARTIN. That means the law. We must destroy the law. That was the first
sin, the first mouthful of the apple. JOHNNY B. So it was, so it was. The law is the worst loss. The ancient
law was for the benefit of all. It is the law of the English is the
only sin. MARTIN. When there were no laws men warred on one another and man to
man, not with one machine against another as they do now, and they grew
hard and strong in body. They were altogether alive like Him that made
them in His image, like people in that unfallen country. But presently
they thought it better to be safe, as if safety mattered, or anything
but the exaltation of the heart and to have eyes that danger had made
grave and piercing. We must overthrow the laws and banish them! JOHNNY B. It is what I say, to put out the laws is to put out the whole
nation of the English. Laws for themselves they made for their own
profit and left us nothing at all, no more than a dog or a sow. BIDDY. An old priest I see, and I would not say is he the one was here
or another. Vexed and troubled he is, kneeling fretting, and ever
fretting, in some lonesome, ruined place. MARTIN. I thought it would come to that. Yes, the church too ... that
is to be destroyed. Once men fought with their desires and their fears,
with all that they call their sins, unhelped, and their souls became
hard and strong. When we have brought back the clean earth and
destroyed the law and the church, all life will become like a flame of
fire, like a burning eye.... Oh, how to find words for it all ... all
that is not life will pass away! JOHNNY B. It is Luther's church he means, and the humpbacked discourse
of Seaghan Calvin's Bible. So we will break it and make an end of it. MARTIN [_rising_]. We will go out against the world and break it and
unmake it. We are the army of the Unicorn from the Stars! We will
trample it to pieces. We will consume the world, we will burn it away. Father John said the world has yet to be consumed by fire. Bring me
fire. ANDREW. Here is Thomas coming! [_All except_ MARTIN _hurry into next
room._ THOMAS _comes in._]

THOMAS. Come with me, Martin. There is terrible work going on in the
town! There is mischief gone abroad! Very strange things are happening! MARTIN. What are you talking of? What has happened? THOMAS. Come along, I say; it must be put a stop to! We must call to
every decent man!... It is as if the devil himself had gone through the
town on a blast and set every drinking house open! MARTIN. I wonder how that has happened. Can it have anything to do with
Andrew's plan? THOMAS. Are you giving no heed to what I'm saying? There is not a man,
I tell you, in the parish, and beyond the parish, but has left the work
he was doing, whether in the field or in the mill. MARTIN. Then all work has come to an end? Perhaps that was a good
thought of Andrew's. THOMAS. There is not a man has come to sensible years that is not drunk
or drinking! My own labourers and my own serving-man are sitting on
counters and on barrels! I give you my word the smell of the spirits
and the porter and the shouting and the cheering within made the hair
to rise up on my scalp. MARTIN. And there is not one of them that does not feel that he could
bridle the four winds. THOMAS [_sitting down in despair_]. You are drunk, too. I never
thought you had a fancy for it. MARTIN. It is hard for you to understand. You have worked all your
life. You have said to yourself every morning, "What is to be done
to-day?" and when you are tired out you have thought of the next day's
work. If you gave yourself an hour's idleness, it was but that you
might work the better. Yet it is only when one has put work away that
one begins to live. THOMAS. It is those French wines that did it. MARTIN. I have been beyond the earth, in paradise, in that happy
townland. I have seen the shining people. They were all doing one thing
or another, but not one of them was at work. All that they did was but
the overflowing of their idleness, and their days were a dance bred of
the secret frenzy of their hearts, or a battle where the sword made a
sound that was like laughter. THOMAS. You went away sober from out of my hands; they had a right to
have minded you better. MARTIN. No man can be alive, and what is paradise but fulness of life,
if whatever he sets his hand to in the daylight cannot carry him from
exaltation to exaltation, and if he does not rise into the frenzy of
contemplation in the night silence. Events that are not begotten in joy
are misbegotten and darken the world, and nothing is begotten in joy if
the joy of a thousand years has not been crushed into a moment. THOMAS. And I offered to let you go to Dublin in the coach! [ANDREW
_and the beggars have returned cautiously._]

MARTIN [_giving banner to_ PAUDEEN]. Give me the lamp. The lamp has
not yet been lighted, and the world is to be consumed! [_Goes into
inner room._]

THOMAS [_seeing_ ANDREW]. Is it here you are, Andrew? What are the
beggars doing? Was this door thrown open, too?... Why did you not keep
order? I will go for the constables to help us! ANDREW. You will not find them to help you. They were scattering
themselves through the drinking houses of the town; and why wouldn't
they? THOMAS. Are you drunk, too? You are worse than Martin. You are a
disgrace. ANDREW. Disgrace yourself! Coming here to be making an attack on me and
badgering me and disparaging me. And what about yourself that turned me
to be a hypocrite? THOMAS. What are you saying? ANDREW. You did, I tell you. Weren't you always at me to be regular and
to be working and to be going through the day and the night without
company and to be thinking of nothing but the trade? What did I want
with a trade? I got a sight of the fairy gold one time in the
mountains. I would have found it again and brought riches from it but
for you keeping me so close to the work. THOMAS. Oh, of all the ungrateful creatures! You know well that I
cherished you, leading you to live a decent, respectable life. ANDREW. You never had respect for the ancient ways. It is after the
mother you take it, that was too soft and too lumpish, having too much
of the English in her blood. Martin is a Hearne like myself. 