



Produced by Suzanne Shell, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [ Transcriber's Notes:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation. Possible typesetting errors, spelling mistakes and inconsistencies
    in spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been preserved as
    they appear in the printed edition, including paragraphs with no
    or non-sentence-ending punctuation at the end. Passages with
    questionable text are listed at the end of this document. This text version does not attempt to reproduce the layout of the
    printed book; please consult the HTML version if you are interested
    in the original layout.
  ] GEOGRAPHY AND PLAYS




  By GERTRUDE STEIN


  Three Lives

  Matisse and Picasso

  Mabel Dodge of the Villa Curonia

  Tender Buttons

  Have They Attacked Mary. He Giggled. (_A Political Satire._)




                          GEOGRAPHY AND PLAYS

                                   BY
                             GERTRUDE STEIN


                                 BOSTON
                         THE FOUR SEAS COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                          Copyright, 1922, by
                         The Four Seas Company


                          The Four Seas Press
                        Boston, Mass., U. S. A. THE WORK OF GERTRUDE STEIN

By SHERWOOD ANDERSON


One evening in the winter, some years ago, my brother came to my rooms
in the city of Chicago bringing with him a book by Gertrude Stein. The
book was called _Tender Buttons_ and, just at that time, there was a
good deal of fuss and fun being made over it in American newspapers. I
had already read a book of Miss Stein's called _Three Lives_ and had
thought it contained some of the best writing ever done by an American. I was curious about this new book. My brother had been at some sort of a gathering of literary people on
the evening before and someone had read aloud from Miss Stein's new
book. The party had been a success. After a few lines the reader stopped
and was greeted by loud shouts of laughter. It was generally agreed that
the author had done a thing we Americans call "putting something
across"--the meaning being that she had, by a strange freakish
performance, managed to attract attention to herself, get herself
discussed in the newspapers, become for a time a figure in our hurried,
harried lives. My brother, as it turned out, had not been satisfied with the
explanation of Miss Stein's work then current in America, and so he
bought _Tender Buttons_ and brought it to me, and we sat for a time
reading the strange sentences. "It gives words an oddly new intimate
flavor and at the same time makes familiar words seem almost like
strangers, doesn't it," he said. What my brother did, you see, was to
set my mind going on the book, and then, leaving it on the table, he
went away. And now, after these years, and having sat with Miss Stein by her own
fire in the rue de Fleurus in Paris I am asked to write something by way
of an introduction to a new book she is about to issue. As there is in America an impression of Miss Stein's personality, not at
all true and rather foolishly romantic, I would like first of all to
brush that aside. I had myself heard stories of a long dark room with a
languid woman lying on a couch, smoking cigarettes, sipping absinthes
perhaps and looking out upon the world with tired, disdainful eyes. Now
and then she rolled her head slowly to one side and uttered a few words,
taken down by a secretary who approached the couch with trembling
eagerness to catch the falling pearls. You will perhaps understand something of my own surprise and delight
when, after having been fed up on such tales and rather Tom Sawyerishly
hoping they might be true, I was taken to her to find instead of this
languid impossibility a woman of striking vigor, a subtle and powerful
mind, a discrimination in the arts such as I have found in no other
American born man or woman, and a charmingly brilliant conversationalist. "Surprise and delight" did I say? Well, you see, my feeling is something
like this. Since Miss Stein's work was first brought to my attention I
have been thinking of it as the most important pioneer work done in the
field of letters in my time. The loud guffaws of the general that must
inevitably follow the bringing forward of more of her work do not
irritate me but I would like it if writers, and particularly young
writers, would come to understand a little what she is trying to do and
what she is in my opinion doing. My thought in the matter is something like this--that every artist
working with words as his medium, must at times be profoundly irritated
by what seems the limitations of his medium. What things does he not
wish to create with words! There is the mind of the reader before him
and he would like to create in that reader's mind a whole new world of
sensations, or rather one might better say he would like to call back
into life all of the dead and sleeping senses. There is a thing one might call "the extension of the province of his
art" one wants to achieve. One works with words and one would like words
that have a taste on the lips, that have a perfume to the nostrils,
rattling words one can throw into a box and shake, making a sharp,
jingling sound, words that, when seen on the printed page, have a
distinct arresting effect upon the eye, words that when they jump out
from under the pen one may feel with the fingers as one might caress the
cheeks of his beloved. And what I think is that these books of Gertrude Stein's do in a very
real sense recreate life in words. We writers are, you see, all in such a hurry. There are such grand
things we must do. For one thing the Great American Novel must be
written and there is the American or English Stage that must be uplifted
by our very important contributions, to say nothing of the epic poems,
sonnets to my lady's eyes, and what not. We are all busy getting these
grand and important thoughts and emotions into the pages of printed
books. And in the meantime the little words, that are the soldiers with which
we great generals must make our conquests, are neglected. There is a city of English and American words and it has been a
neglected city. Strong broad shouldered words, that should be marching
across open fields under the blue sky, are clerking in little dusty dry
goods stores, young virgin words are being allowed to consort with
whores, learned words have been put to the ditch digger's trade. Only
yesterday I saw a word that once called a whole nation to arms serving
in the mean capacity of advertising laundry soap. For me the work of Gertrude Stein consists in a rebuilding, an entire
new recasting of life, in the city of words. Here is one artist who has
been able to accept ridicule, who has even forgone the privilege of
writing the great American novel, uplifting our English speaking stage,
and wearing the bays of the great poets, to go live among the little
housekeeping words, the swaggering bullying street-corner words, the
honest working, money saving words, and all the other forgotten and
neglected citizens of the sacred and half forgotten city. Would it not be a lovely and charmingly ironic gesture of the gods if,
in the end, the work of this artist were to prove the most lasting and
important of all the word slingers of our generation! TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                               Page

SUSIE ASADO                                                      13

ADA                                                              14

MISS FURR AND MISS SKEENE                                        17

A COLLECTION                                                     23

FRANCE                                                           27

AMERICANS                                                        39

ITALIANS                                                         46

A SWEET TAIL (GYPSIES)                                           65

THE HISTORY OF BELMONTE                                          70

IN THE GRASS (ON SPAIN)                                          75

ENGLAND                                                          82

MALLORCAN STORIES                                                96

SCENES. ACTIONS AND DISPOSITIONS OF RELATIONS AND POSITIONS      97

THE KING OR SOMETHING (THE PUBLIC IS INVITED TO DANCE)          122

PUBLISHERS, THE PORTRAIT GALLERY, AND THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE
BRITISH MUSEUM                                                  134

ROCHE                                                           141

BRAQUE                                                          144

PORTRAIT OF PRINCE B. D.                                        150

MRS. WHITEHEAD                                                  154

PORTRAIT OF CONSTANCE FLETCHER                                  157

A POEM ABOUT WALBERG                                            166

JOHNNY GREY                                                     167

A PORTRAIT OF F. B. 176

SACRED EMILY                                                    178

IIIIIIIIII                                                      189

ONE (VAN VECHTEN)                                               199

ONE. HARRY PHELAN GIBB                                          201

A CURTAIN RAISER                                                202

LADIES VOICES (CURTAIN RAISER)                                  203

WHAT HAPPENED. _A Play in Five Acts_                            205

WHITE WINES. _Three Acts_                                       210

DO LET US GO AWAY. _A Play_                                     215

FOR THE COUNTRY ENTIRELY. _A Play in Letters_                   227

TURKEY BONES AND EATING AND WE LIKED IT. _A Play_               239

EVERY AFTERNOON. _A Dialogue_                                   254

CAPTAIN WALTER ARNOLD. _A Play_                                 260

PLEASE DO NOT SUFFER. _A Play_                                  262

HE SAID IT. _Monologue_                                         267

COUNTING HER DRESSES. _A Play_                                  275

I LIKE IT TO BE A PLAY. _A Play_                                286

NOT SIGHTLY. _A Play_                                           290

BONNE ANNEE. _A Play_                                           302

MEXICO. _A Play_                                                304

A FAMILY OF PERHAPS THREE                                       331

ADVERTISEMENTS                                                  341

PINK MELON JOY                                                  347

IF YOU HAD THREE HUSBANDS                                       377

WORK AGAIN                                                      392

TOURTY OR TOURTEBATTRE. A STORY OF THE GREAT WAR                401

NEXT. (LIFE AND LETTERS OF MARCEL DUCHAMP)                      405

LAND OF NATIONS. (SUB TITLE: AND ASK ASIA)                      407

ACCENTS IN ALSACE. A REASONABLE TRAGEDY                         409

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF NATIONS OR WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING AT            416




GEOGRAPHY AND PLAYS




SUSIE ASADO


Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea. Susie Asado. Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea. Susie Asado. Susie Asado which is a told tray sure. A lean on the shoe this means slips slips hers. When the ancient light grey is clean it is yellow, it is a silver
seller. This is a please this is a please there are the saids to jelly. These
are the wets these say the sets to leave a crown to Incy. Incy is short for incubus. A pot. A pot is a beginning of a rare bit of trees. Trees tremble, the
old vats are in bobbles, bobbles which shade and shove and render clean,
render clean must. Drink pups. Drink pups drink pups lease a sash hold, see it shine and a bobolink has
pins. It shows a nail. What is a nail. A nail is unison. Sweet sweet sweet sweet sweet tea. ADA


Barnes Colhard did not say he would not do it but he did not do it. He
did it and then he did not do it, he did not ever think about it. He
just thought some time he might do something. His father Mr. Abram Colhard spoke about it to every one and very many
of them spoke to Barnes Colhard about it and he always listened to them. Then Barnes fell in love with a very nice girl and she would not marry
him. He cried then, his father Mr. Abram Colhard comforted him and they
took a trip and Barnes promised he would do what his father wanted him
to be doing. He did not do the thing, he thought he would do another
thing, he did not do the other thing, his father Mr. Colhard did not
want him to do the other thing. He really did not do anything then. When
he was a good deal older he married a very rich girl. He had thought
perhaps he would not propose to her but his sister wrote to him that it
would be a good thing. He married the rich girl and she thought he was
the most wonderful man and one who knew everything. Barnes never spent
more than the income of the fortune he and his wife had then, that is to
say they did not spend more than the income and this was a surprise to
very many who knew about him and about his marrying the girl who had
such a large fortune. He had a happy life while he was living and after
he was dead his wife and children remembered him. He had a sister who also was successful enough in being one being
living. His sister was one who came to be happier than most people come
to be in living. She came to be a completely happy one. She was twice
as old as her brother. She had been a very good daughter to her mother. She and her mother had always told very pretty stories to each other. Many old men loved to hear her tell these stories to her mother. Every
one who ever knew her mother liked her mother. Many were sorry later
that not every one liked the daughter. Many did like the daughter but
not every one as every one had liked the mother. The daughter was
charming inside in her, it did not show outside in her to every one, it
certainly did to some. She did sometimes think her mother would be
pleased with a story that did not please her mother, when her mother
later was sicker the daughter knew that there were some stories she
could tell her that would not please her mother. Her mother died and
really mostly altogether the mother and the daughter had told each other
stories very happily together. The daughter then kept house for her father and took care of her
brother. There were many relations who lived with them. The daughter did
not like them to live with them and she did not like them to die with
them. The daughter, Ada they had called her after her grandmother who
had delightful ways of smelling flowers and eating dates and sugar, did
not like it at all then as she did not like so much dying and she did
not like any of the living she was doing then. Every now and then some
old gentlemen told delightful stories to her. Mostly then there were not
nice stories told by any one then in her living. She told her father Mr.
Abram Colhard that she did not like it at all being one being living
then. He never said anything. She was afraid then, she was one needing
charming stories and happy telling of them and not having that thing she
was always trembling. Then every one who could live with them were dead
and there were then the father and the son a young man then and the
daughter coming to be that one then. Her grandfather had left some money
to them each one of them. Ada said she was going to use it to go away
from them. The father said nothing then, then he said something and she
said nothing then, then they both said nothing and then it was that she
went away from them. The father was quite tender then, she was his
daughter then. He wrote her tender letters then, she wrote him tender
letters then, she never went back to live with him. He wanted her to
come and she wrote him tender letters then. He liked the tender letters
she wrote to him. He wanted her to live with him. She answered him by
writing tender letters to him and telling very nice stories indeed in
them. He wrote nothing and then he wrote again and there was some
waiting and then he wrote tender letters again and again. She came to be happier than anybody else who was living then. It is easy
to believe this thing. She was telling some one, who was loving every
story that was charming. Some one who was living was almost always
listening. Some one who was loving was almost always listening. That one
who was loving was almost always listening. That one who was loving was
telling about being one then listening. That one being loving was then
telling stories having a beginning and a middle and an ending. That one
was then one always completely listening. Ada was then one and all her
living then one completely telling stories that were charming,
completely listening to stories having a beginning and a middle and an
ending. Trembling was all living, living was all loving, some one was
then the other one. Certainly this one was loving this Ada then. And
certainly Ada all her living then was happier in living than any one
else who ever could, who was, who is, who ever will be living. MISS FURR AND MISS SKEENE


Helen Furr had quite a pleasant home. Mrs. Furr was quite a pleasant
woman. Mr. Furr was quite a pleasant man. Helen Furr had quite a
pleasant voice a voice quite worth cultivating. She did not mind
working. She worked to cultivate her voice. She did not find it gay
living in the same place where she had always been living. She went to a
place where some were cultivating something, voices and other things
needing cultivating. She met Georgine Skeene there who was cultivating
her voice which some thought was quite a pleasant one. Helen Furr and
Georgine Skeene lived together then. Georgine Skeene liked travelling. Helen Furr did not care about travelling, she liked to stay in one place
and be gay there. They were together then and travelled to another place
and stayed there and were gay there. They stayed there and were gay there, not very gay there, just gay
there. They were both gay there, they were regularly working there both
of them cultivating their voices there, they were both gay there. Georgine Skeene was gay there and she was regular, regular in being gay,
regular in not being gay, regular in being a gay one who was one not
being gay longer than was needed to be one being quite a gay one. They
were both gay then there and both working there then. They were in a way both gay there where there were many cultivating
something. They were both regular in being gay there. Helen Furr was gay
there, she was gayer and gayer there and really she was just gay there,
she was gayer and gayer there, that is to say she found ways of being
gay there that she was using in being gay there. She was gay there, not
gayer and gayer, just gay there, that is to say she was not gayer by
using the things she found there that were gay things, she was gay
there, always she was gay there. They were quite regularly gay there, Helen Furr and Georgine Skeene,
they were regularly gay there where they were gay. They were very
regularly gay. To be regularly gay was to do every day the gay thing that they did
every day. To be regularly gay was to end every day at the same time
after they had been regularly gay. They were regularly gay. They were
gay every day. They ended every day in the same way, at the same time,
and they had been every day regularly gay. The voice Helen Furr was cultivating was quite a pleasant one. The voice
Georgine Skeene was cultivating was, some said, a better one. The voice
Helen Furr was cultivating she cultivated and it was quite completely a
pleasant enough one then, a cultivated enough one then. The voice
Georgine Skeene was cultivating she did not cultivate too much. She
cultivated it quite some. She cultivated and she would sometime go on
cultivating it and it was not then an unpleasant one, it would not be
then an unpleasant one, it would be a quite richly enough cultivated
one, it would be quite richly enough to be a pleasant enough one. They were gay where there were many cultivating something. The two were
gay there, were regularly gay there. Georgine Skeene would have liked to
do more travelling. They did some travelling, not very much travelling,
Georgine Skeene would have liked to do more travelling, Helen Furr did
not care about doing travelling, she liked to stay in a place and be gay
there. They stayed in a place and were gay there, both of them stayed there,
they stayed together there, they were gay there, they were regularly gay
there. They went quite often, not very often, but they did go back to where
Helen Furr had a pleasant enough home and then Georgine Skeene went to a
place where her brother had quite some distinction. They both went,
every few years, went visiting to where Helen Furr had quite a pleasant
home. Certainly Helen Furr would not find it gay to stay, she did not
find it gay, she said she would not stay, she said she did not find it
gay, she said she would not stay where she did not find it gay, she said
she found it gay where she did stay and she did stay there where very
many were cultivating something. She did stay there. She always did find
it gay there. She went to see them where she had always been living and where she did
not find it gay. She had a pleasant home there, Mrs. Furr was a pleasant
enough woman, Mr. Furr was a pleasant enough man, Helen told them and
they were not worrying, that she did not find it gay living where she
had always been living. Georgine Skeene and Helen Furr were living where they were both
cultivating their voices and they were gay there. They visited where
Helen Furr had come from and then they went to where they were living
where they were then regularly living. There were some dark and heavy men there then. There were some who were
not so heavy and some who were not so dark. Helen Furr and Georgine
Skeene sat regularly with them. They sat regularly with the ones who
were dark and heavy. They sat regularly with the ones who were not so
dark. They sat regularly with the ones that were not so heavy. They sat
with them regularly, sat with some of them. They went with them
regularly went with them. They were regular then, they were gay then,
they were where they wanted to be then where it was gay to be then, they
were regularly gay then. There were men there then who were dark and
heavy and they sat with them with Helen Furr and Georgine Skeene and
they went with them with Miss Furr and Miss Skeene, and they went with
the heavy and dark men Miss Furr and Miss Skeene went with them, and
they sat with them, Miss Furr and Miss Skeene sat with them, and there
were other men, some were not heavy men and they sat with Miss Furr and
Miss Skeene and Miss Furr and Miss Skeene sat with them, and there were
other men who were not dark men and they sat with Miss Furr and Miss
Skeene and Miss Furr and Miss Skeene sat with them. Miss Furr and Miss
Skeene went with them and they went with Miss Furr and Miss Skeene, some
who were not heavy men, some who were not dark men. Miss Furr and Miss
Skeene sat regularly, they sat with some men. Miss Furr and Miss Skeene
went and there were some men with them. There were men and Miss Furr and
Miss Skeene went with them, went somewhere with them, went with some of
them. Helen Furr and Georgine Skeene were regularly living where very many
were living and cultivating in themselves something. Helen Furr and
Georgine Skeene were living very regularly then, being very regular then
in being gay then. They did then learn many ways to be gay and they were
then being gay being quite regular in being gay, being gay and they were
learning little things, little things in ways of being gay, they were
very regular then, they were learning very many little things in ways of
being gay, they were being gay and using these little things they were
learning to have to be gay with regularly gay with then and they were
gay the same amount they had been gay. They were quite gay, they were
quite regular, they were learning little things, gay little things, they
were gay inside them the same amount they had been gay, they were gay
the same length of time they had been gay every day. They were regular in being gay, they learned little things that are
things in being gay, they learned many little things that are things in
being gay, they were gay every day, they were regular, they were gay,
they were gay the same length of time every day, they were gay, they
were quite regularly gay. Georgine Skeene went away to stay two months with her brother. Helen
Furr did not go then to stay with her father and her mother. Helen Furr
stayed there where they had been regularly living the two of them and
she would then certainly not be lonesome, she would go on being gay. She
did go on being gay. She was not any more gay but she was gay longer
every day than they had been being gay when they were together being
gay. She was gay then quite exactly the same way. She learned a few more
little ways of being in being gay. She was quite gay and in the same
way, the same way she had been gay and she was gay a little longer in
the day, more of each day she was gay. She was gay longer every day than
when the two of them had been being gay. She was gay quite in the way
they had been gay, quite in the same way. She was not lonesome then, she was not at all feeling any need of having
Georgine Skeene. She was not astonished at this thing. She would have
been a little astonished by this thing but she knew she was not
astonished at anything and so she was not astonished at this thing not
astonished at not feeling any need of having Georgine Skeene. Helen Furr had quite a completely pleasant voice and it was quite well
enough cultivated and she could use it and she did use it but then there
was not any way of working at cultivating a completely pleasant voice
when it has become a quite completely well enough cultivated one, and
there was not much use in using it when one was not wanting it to be
helping to make one a gay one. Helen Furr was not needing using her
voice to be a gay one. She was gay then and sometimes she used her voice
and she was not using it very often. It was quite completely enough
cultivated and it was quite completely a pleasant one and she did not
use it very often. She was then, she was quite exactly as gay as she had
been, she was gay a little longer in the day than she had been. She was gay exactly the same way. She was never tired of being gay that
way. She had learned very many little ways to use in being gay. Very
many were telling about using other ways in being gay. She was gay
enough, she was always gay exactly the same way, she was always learning
little things to use in being gay, she was telling about using other
ways in being gay, she was telling about learning other ways in being
gay, she was learning other ways in being gay, she would be using other
ways in being gay, she would always be gay in the same way, when
Georgine Skeene was there not so long each day as when Georgine Skeene
was away. She came to using many ways in being gay, she came to use every way in
being gay. She went on living where many were cultivating something and
she was gay, she had used every way to be gay. They did not live together then Helen Furr and Georgine Skeene. Helen
Furr lived there the longer where they had been living regularly
together. Then neither of them were living there any longer. Helen Furr
was living somewhere else then and telling some about being gay and she
was gay then and she was living quite regularly then. She was regularly
gay then. She was quite regular in being gay then. She remembered all
the little ways of being gay. She used all the little ways of being gay. She was quite regularly gay. She told many then the way of being gay,
she taught very many then little ways they could use in being gay. She
was living very well, she was gay then, she went on living then, she was
regular in being gay, she always was living very well and was gay very
well and was telling about little ways one could be learning to use in
being gay, and later was telling them quite often, telling them again
and again. A COLLECTION


MY DEAR MISS CAREY: A STORY

There were little places to see Fernville, the town, the hospital, the
lying in hospital, the sea-shore and the city. Once we met my brother he was ringing a bell. He needed an umbrella but
he would not buy it. I sent him one not prepaid. Oh yes the people are
kind they all drink together. Even now. No not now. We are late. Did you see the pear tree. It resembles the figs. They are often ripe. They grow in great abundance. We like milk. My father likes milk and coffee. Whenever there are flowers my mother is angry. She is even angry with
me. That is to say she is generous enough and wishes everything back. We
are all that way. My brother takes coal away in a little bag for use. All dark days are necessary. No permission is asked and it is given. For
all day. For all day. Whenever it is needed. Not whenever it is needed. We do as we say it is best to do. Even religious people do so. Come together in Fernville. Not I I thank you. My brother finds
handkerchiefs there. For men. For men and for women. So does his wife. Many. Not very many. She brings them with her. Is that so. Many
handkerchiefs are not necessary in Fernville. No indeed. We dismiss the
church. We separate it. We have it to-day. A great many people call. On
one another. Not altogether that. The post-office. The post-office of my
brother. Now. Not now. Yes he is there now. Since the war. Yes since the
war. I remember when I was a b of c. I did not speak to old men then not when
I was busy. I waited until I was tired and then we all sat down and had
a cup of coffee. Coffee is very nourishing. I am very sensitive to the
influence of coffee. So are we all. Do you think that we are married. That we are all married. Mr. Weeks is
married. He is going to be able to follow my advice. I advise him to go
to my country. There he will do very well. The only advice I have to
give him is never to live in the city. His wife does not like the city
nor does she like a sunny climate. She is not able to go about with him. We are all of us leaving the end of the month. Do not be angry. I was very much surprised that water was the same color. As what. As the sun. I feel that I must go at once. Did you entirely forget about the other. Drowning in water. This is a question that I have never asked about because in the summer
one does not think about it. Now it is winter but it is as warm as in
summer. Dear friends have a way of relating themselves to a town. We find in
some districts that there are better ways of investing money. Some find
that at the end of the war they are not able to continue paying on their
houses. Does this affect you. Oh no because even if the father of my child is killed his sister will
continue to give the money. She is obliged to by law. This makes the whole matter very simple. Not to me I have always been accustomed to it and have had some
difficulty. Yes we know we know that it is suddenly cold. You are not pleased to see the sun setting. Indeed I cannot blame you. POLYBE IN PORT: A CURTAIN RAISER

Polybe in Port. A hunter. He was not a hunter. He had a gun. I do not know whether they
have permission to shoot. Of course he must have if he has a gun. In this country they have a
great many dogs who hunt rabbits. They run quicker. We are surprised to see him. Polybe is an ornament. He is not thinner. He likes the water now. This I do not believe. Neither do I believe there was any intention to go that way. Which way
do you mean. Polybe does not remember. Me. Yes. The house. Yes. The
servant. Yes. You are not mistaken. We are not mistaken. A great many shrubs every one of which are labelled. SCENE II. A credit to me. The cares and duties of a mother had been denied to Carrie Russell. Polybe silent. He said earnestly that it didn't matter. SPANISH CHATTINGS

Do you keep books. All weddings are back. Pigeons. Pigeons recognise persons. Do they. We saw them. They flew around. Shooting pigeons is necessary. For what. For the sea. I see old peppers that are dried. We do not complain. We say winds are
violent and I do not wish them. Wish for them. I do not wish to see the
stars. Call it out of here. You mean that pole. No indeed I don't mean
Inca. Oh yes certainly. THEY CAME TOGETHER

I can tell a little story. I cannot describe the character nor the color
in the street nor the kind of a stone. A great many people have silver
purses. WILD FLOWERS

We collected wild flowers. We enjoyed it very much. In a window we saw
exhibited the things that can be found in the country. There was a satisfaction that we had the temporary installation which
made it possible for us to ask another servant not to visit our servant. We did not do so. We were not neglectful of our best interests. WILL THEY CRUSH GERMANY

They will crush Germany. There is no doubt about it. FRANCE


Likely and more than evenly, unevenly and not unlikely, very much that
and anyway more, this is the left over method. There is nothing left
because if it were left it would be left over. This does not make music. The time to state that is in reading. There is a beginning in a lesson
in smiling. What is up is not down and what is down is not reversing and what is
refused is not a section and what is silenced is not speaking. This does
not make the rude ones murmur, this does not make a penny smaller, this
does not make religion. All the time there is a melodrama there is monopoly and all the time
there is more there is no excuse. A luck in breaths is more to be denied than music, much more. The only
long string is that which is not twisted. All the same there is no
excuse. A sight is not a shadow and a whole rise in a cry is not more piercing
than danger of being mixed into an affair where there are witnesses. If
writing is in little pieces and little places and a little door is open,
many little doors are not open and writing is not surreptitious, it is
not even obliging. To show the difference between an occasion and merit and a button it is
necessary to recognise that an honor is not forced so that there is no
question of taste. To exchange a single statue for a coat of silk and a
coat of wool is not necessary as there are appliances. A somber day is
one when there is no pleading. Made in haste, not made in haste, made in darkness, not made in
darkness, made in a place, made in a place. The whole stretched out is
not part of the whole block, the whole stretched out is so arranged
that there is not stumbling but what is just as remarkable, pushing. An
easy expression of being willing, of being hunting, of being so stupid
that there is no question of not selling, all these things cause more
discussion than a resolution and this is so astonishing when there is
nothing to do and an excellent reason for an exchange, and yet the
practice of it makes such an example that any day is a season. To be sure that the trees have winter and the plants have summer and the
houses painting, to be sure of this engages some attention. The time to
place this in the way is not what is expected from a diner. The whole
thing that shows the result is the little way that the balls and the
pieces that are with them which are not birds as they are older do not
measure the distance between a cover and a calendar. This which is not a
question is not reverse and the question which is a question is at noon. To question a special date is not mercenary. To answer a single servant
is not obligatory. To be afraid is not nearsighted. An exclamation does
not connect more grass than there is with any more trees than have
branches. The special scenery which makes the blameless see and the
solitary resemble a conversation is not that which resembles that
memory. There is no necessity for furthering the regulation of the
understanding. One special absence does not make any place empty. The
dampness which is not covered by a cloth is not mingled with color. And
it comes. There is no astonishment nor width. Education, education, apprenticeship, and all the meeting of nephews and
trains and changing papers and remaining when there is no chance to go
there, all this occupied a whole sentence. It is a shame that there is
not such an only use for that, it is a shame and there is no indignation
more indignant. Everything is an indication of the simple remedy that is
applied when there is no refusal and no application. Every thing which
shows that is not tied with a string or any little string. All the same
there is not much of a remedy. Alarm over the action of the one who when he sees the light rise and the
sun set and the stars shine and the water flow alarm is the same alarm
as any alarm. In all the same ways that pieces are separated in all these ways there
are those placed things which are not pieces. They are not pieces and
there is reason, there is reason in it because the whole thing shows
such dissociation that all doing it for that purpose and together there
can be no question but that they succeed. A tobacco habit is one that a leaf does not enlighten and yet
carelessness is so extraordinary. Supposing that the arrangement had
been made and that it was agreed that no separation between any one
being one and being another one could be established, supposing this
were agreed and there was no conversation, would this enlighten any one,
if it would why is the result so ambiguous. It is not ambiguous because
the authority which does not authorise washing does supply soap. This
does not make any change. It is sensible to be around it is very sensible, it is so sensible that
there is every way of stopping a selection, and then there is selection,
there is a respect for resignation, there is no disturbance in a
disappointment. The question is is there more urging than satisfaction,
is there more distribution than renewal. This is not a question, it is a
relaxing. And then the time comes for more noise. Is there then more
noise. There is then reestablishment. Does that mean return of a price
which is plentiful. Nobody knows. All this shows something it shows that
there can be suspicion. There is no separation in majesty. Terms, lines, sections, extra
packing, nothing shows that confidence. All the same there is news. The
time to stay away is in vacation. Why is there no place chosen. The
answer is simple it consists in explaining that there has been given
the use of all that will be used. This does not show feeling. A curtain is not crazy, it has no way of being crazy, it has hardly a
way of enraging a resemblance, it has no resurrection. Indeed the
chances are that when there is seen more astonishment than anything that
is placed it is very likely that the whole system will be not so much
estranged as devastated and yet supposing they do not mean that,
supposing they do say that it will be a success, supposing they do say
does that mean that oration is contradiction, it does not. Just a word to show a kite that clouds are higher than a thing that is
smaller, just that word and no single silence is closer. Suggest that the passage is filled with feathers, suggest that there are
all together, suggest that using boxes is heavy, suggest that there is
no feather, suggest all these things and what is result the result is
that everything gets put away. All the silence is adequate to a rumble and all the silliness is
adequate to a procession and all the recitation is equal to the hammer
and all the paving is equal to summer. All the same the detaining most
is the reason that there is a pillar and mostly what is shocking is a
rooster. This is not so easily said. There is no occasion for a red
result. Laugh, to laugh, all the same the tittle is inclinable. What a change
from any yesterday. A period of singular results and no gloom such a period shows such a
rapid approach that there is no search in silence and yet not a sound,
not any sound is searching, no sound is an occasion. A fine fan and a fine closet and a very fine handkerchief and quite a
fine article all these together shows where there has been plenty of
rebuke and plenty of expectation and plenty, plentifully reduction of
suspension, and so the season is the same and there is every corner. No chance shows the rapidity of exchange, no chance and this which means
one is the same as any two halves and this is not outrageous, not a bit
outrageous it is simply the sign of splendor. All the tempting and the chewing and the cloth all of it shows no sign
and no symbol it does not and that is no disgrace. If standing is an illusion is it necessary to be pressed to bend in that
direction is it necessary and if it is necessary is it polite and if it
is polite is it urgent and if it is not urgent is it an impulse. No question has so much disturbance as the principal reunion. This is
not so distinguished when there are no ties in the window. This is
completely changed, once there were none and now there are none. There
are no rebukes. A privilege is not painful. A recurrence is not
artificial. It is not separating that which satisfies no finger, it is not fading. What was it that was not wished. The reason is that the section is there
and no reflection makes abundance. The only tangle is when there is
abundance and there is abundance when there is pulling and piling. Does
this seem to scream, it does not there is not even clustering and yet
not hampering not singling everything does not make sorrow, it makes no
plant grander, it does make a plant slender, it does not make it so
slender that there is every size. All privilege and all practice, all
suspicion and grandeur, all the timber and a little wood all this makes
silver, paper is chosen and gold is cheap, does this make a little salt,
it does not, it makes copper. Little frame if it is cheaper than a big one is a different size. There
is no use disputing as memory is a reminder. Not to pay for a conversation, not to pay anything for any conversation,
not to throw away paying, not to pass paying, not to pay anything this
is not being a victim. What is victory, victory is that which eschewing
liberation and a girdle and gratitude and resignation and a choice
display and more flavor shows a strange reluctance to have a maritime
connection. This is victory. A license, what is a license, what is a license. An angry coat, a very angry coat shines. Butter is not frozen, this does not mean that there is no bravery and no
mistake. This does show a conclusion. Difference is no excuse, grain is no excuse, even the remains of a pear
is an excuse and yet is there graciousness, there is if there is
generosity. There is so much fruit. This is kindly a mistake. No
misunderstanding is insurmountable. Cage no lion, not to cage a lion is not dirty, it is not even merciless,
it is not malodorous, it is not virtue. To surround a giraffe, what does that mean. To surround a mixture, that
means something. Solid, what is solid, is more solid than everything, it is not doubtful
because there is no necessity. Haughtiness, there is haughtiness when there is no tape and no billiard
rooms and no need to be secured from wet. There is certainly some
selected obstacles. The certainty of a change in the parts that speak, this uncertainty does
not show as it does not fashion speech. All union is in the widow and
all menace is in the band. Any way to bend the hat is the way to encourage vice. Virtue all virtue
is resolved and some and any hat, every hat is identical. A shadow a
white shadow is a mountain. Kindness what is kindness, kindness is the necessity of preserving of
really preserving all the parts of speech and teaching, not music so
much as trimming and a costume, and sincerely most sincerely shoving
regions together. Notice a room, in noticing a room what is there to notice, the first
thing to notice is the room and the windows and the door and the table
and the place where there are divisions and the center of the room and
the rest of the people. All this is necessary and then there is finance. Heavy where heaviness is and no mistake plentifully, heavy where the
breeze is and no darkness plentifully, heavy where there is a voice and
a noise and singling out a company, heavy where there is a sale of
accents and raisins and possibly more ways of not being heavy. Certainly
there is no peril and yet think, think often, is daintiness and a collar
heavy is it and what is the disturbance, is there not more registration. So there is not coming anything. There certainly is no single space
useful and betrothed and vulgar and not pretty. There is a sign in
placing nothing. This changes from day to day any day. Surely no change
is a blessing. All the search is in violation and yet a single search is
a single search willing. It is cautious. There is riot. The likelihood of dipping and drawing and digesting and drinking and
dirtying not dirtying smoking, the likelihood of all this makes such an
order that every discussion is simultaneous. A large increase in beer,
any large increase is here, some large increase is clear, no large
increase is dear. A lily a very lily lily is accurate and described and
surrounded and so venturesome that there is risk and writing, there is
even inlaying. Darkness, there is no darkness in extremity and in mixing and in
originating scattering religion. There is no darkness in designing. A group a single group proceeding show the necessity of the distribution
of the same organization as there is if there is, assuming that there
is, if there is reorganization. Flower, flower and water and even more even a gram of grain and a single
little blister, very likely the chance is not perfect and the exquisite
arrangement has lace, very likely there are no stains and more likely
there are ruffles. In all of this there is no use in practicing
medicine. Quinine any quinine is useful and more there is more, there
can be more, there is an apartment. A sign of saving consists in spending the late morning in the morning
and in urging in certainly not urging a calculation. A sign of saving is
so simple if there is enough handed about, and surely no pains in piling
are more shown than when everything is in dishes. This does not happen
in an asylum, it does not even happen in the hay and in the double
shapes that shelter cooking. A top a tiny little top that sits and spits and shows the courage
calmly, this this is so soon an exasperation and a piece of lightning,
it is so ordinarily just that occasion, it is so kindly dispiriting, it
is so haughty if there is pushing. There is pushing, this is what makes
it repetition. A long, what is a log to do when it floats, it is to do nothing as it
floats but certainly it would be best that it should adjust that to
itself certainly. This alone does not make an explanation. A degree of resorts and a shining wave all this together does not make a
regulation and it does not make that irregular, it sustains mischief and
an order and it even enforces the likelihood of the season and some
color. So sustained is a paragraph that a sentence shows no staring and
some noise. This is so simple in the size that is medium and is medium
sized sentinel. There is no kilometer. That does not make a sample. Keep the place that is not open, close the place that has one door, shut
the place that has a cellar, suffer where all suffer more, argue, and
shelter the understanding orphan, and silence that is silence is not
sufficient there must even be sleep. Puzzle is more than a speck and a soiled collar. A pound is more than
oat meal and a new institution. A silence is no more than occasional. It respects understanding and salt and even a rope. It respects a
news-stand and it also it very also respects desert. All the ice can
descend together. Was there freedom, was there enchaining, was there even a height rising
from higher. If there was what is a coat worth and by whom was it made
when. A lining any lining is a trimming. More trimming is extra. A sort of arranging, a kindling of paying a shilling, does that mean
another extravagance and more candles, no more candles. It does not
show. A famous single candle has a chance to shine so that glaring meant that
no more would be reversed by lightning. The safe lamp and the bright
lamp and the dirty lamp and the long lamp were all not the lamps that
were attending baptism. Why is the baptism patient, baptism is patient
in the first place because there is no coarse cloth, in the second place
because when there is nothing taken enough is left to give every reason. A practice which engaged more attention than the rest was that which
shaved a tame stopper and did not even end that. Supposing crossing a
street is necessary, supposing it is, does that show more of such
occasion. It does and it does. A lime is in labor, a lemon is cooler, a citron is larger, a currant is
redder, a strawberry is more vexed, a banana is straighter. A little thing is a little thing, a single point is bigger, a bigger
thing is a bigger thing, an older thing is older, an older thing is an
older thing, a station is a station, a station is a station and a
station is a thing and stationary only that is a stationary thing. A blind being blind and deaf and deaf being deaf and blind and blind and
deaf and a coat with a cape and more use in all than in any shape all
this makes a reason for criticising the use of machinery and paper and
even a pen and even a stamp and even more flags than ever. In the pin in the picking of a pin, in sewing a little feather and
avoiding deserting a pin, in retaining the feather and arranging to rank
the pin as a pin and to hold it there where if it is seen it is found
and if it is found it is seen, to not mark a pin and select a pin all
this is a reason for using that way of waiting. A standard blessed is a standard that is blue if it is blue and blue and
white when it is blue and white. Supposing there is no money, supposing
there is no dress and no skirt, supposing there is no window and no bed,
supposing there is no more distribution and not any more violence,
supposing there is not even arithmetic and intelligence, supposing there
is a light and a round hole, does that mean that there is no success
suggested. It does not. A little bit of choice makes a color regular. A
little bit of black makes dinner necessary. If there is a shape a real shape prettily, if there is and there is no
wonder does it happen all the time, if it does not is there a certainty
that there is collusion. These interesting questions crowd the house,
they crowd, they do not crowd everywhere. They crowd separately. All there is of more chances is in a book, all there is of any more
chances is in a list, all there is of chances is in an address, all
there is is what is the best place not to remain sitting and suggesting
that there is no title for relieving rising. An excursion, what is an excursion, an excursion is a picnic if it is
recurrent, it is a picnic if there is no absence, it is a picnic and not
necessarily, it is a picnic. Black horses, very black horses are not peculiar, very large horses are
not peculiar, very splendid horses are not peculiar, horses are peculiar
regularly and with an awake resemblance to the best the very best
description and regret. The kindness of this is mentioned and very often
quite often the same rebuke is outrageous. Not allowed, not only allowed to eat, to ache, to resemble, to project,
to make a motion, to study preaching, to stumble on anything, to stretch
audibly. Not allowed a prize or a couch or even what is not necessary a
searching, not allowed more formerly, not allowed more entirely, not
allowed a dispensary. It is a custom, it is a custom when it is not undue, when it is not
undue, when it is not. It is a custom. It is a custom when it is more
due, when it is, when it is an angle, it is not a custom, it is a custom
altogether. In cross and across, in that show and wide there is the sensory
statement that there is night rule and a winter rule and even the
chamber is empty and watches why are watches lighted. What a day to pay to stay, what a day. When the work is done too soon
and there is a crossing of hands and even of heads entirely when there
is and when the rest is so awake, is there any slept out sleeping, there
is not gradually, there is more chance than there would be in a colored
collection. There is more chance certainly. What is the resolution between a cutlet and an ingredient. It is
mentioned and made in paper and floating. What is the example of a miner. A single example is in the best of cups
and also in the rest of the places and also in the show that is there. After a mixed cloud is there any use in a trimming, there is, there is. There is a trimming behind in. There in no use. There is the case. Calm, a calm, that calm, along the calm. This which is in the ell is so
much are so. When and when and when is there. When the rail is the
passage to. Through and so and much orderly. Beginning to twining and sudden girls what is mended in a street, what
is a rut in finnish. What is it in a market. A considerable engagement, a considerable engagement. Excuse the point that makes a division between the right and left that
which is in the middle in between. Surprise an engagement, surprise it
so that an agreement is all the time. This is a way, this is a trout, this is the succession. To linger in the pale way and not to show spots to be greener to do
this means that all the references are what they are. A pedal a pedal is that which when examined is made and this is no
mistake in regularity it is a splendid thing. Covering in and covering, covering with inside covering. Covering a lion
with the same shape as the bear and yet what is the best measure for a
tiger, what is the measure steadily. A half safe wife and a whole safe wife and a half safe wife and a half
safe wife. A bet and sugar and a bet and within, a bet and within and a bet in
within. Cut a slice to show a pear, cut a slice to show a row, cut a slice and
there is visiting. An angel is in the exchange. Suppose that there is a cost, suppose that there is a beggar, suppose
that there is a powder and a powder suppose there is a real gold mine. A curly fate and a household fact and a gloom too soon, and a couple of
necessary pockets. Explain, explain why there is a shell fish and an oyster. A pleasant little spot to have gold. The same spot is used for silver. The gold is the best way to keep it. The silver is the way to keep
silver. A cloud of white and a chorus of all bright birds and a sweet a very
sweet cherry and a thick miss, a thick and a dark and a clean clerk, a
whole succession of mantle pieces. Conceal a nose and climb, counsel a name and shudder, believe a glass
and relate, cool a pound and put in that. Wednesday is a day and a closed begging is reasonable, reasonable, is
reasonable, reasonable is reasonable. Piston and clothes, consider the wet sack, coal hack, hack a piece of
gum. AMERICANS


Eating and paper. A laugh in a loop is not dinner. There is so much to pray. A slight price is a potatoe. A slimness is in length and even in
strength. A capable extravagance that is that which shows no provision is that
which when necessity is mild shows a certain distribution of anger. This
is no sign of sin. Five, five are more wonderful than a million. Five million, five
million, five million, five are more wonderful than two together. Two
together, two together. A song, if a sad song is in unison and is sung, a sad song is singing. A
sign of singing. A gap what is a gap when there is not any meaning in a slice with a hole
in it. What is the exchange between the whole and no more witnesses. Press juice from a button, press it carelessly, press it with care,
press it in a storm. A storm is so waiting and awful and moreover so
much the worse for being where there is a storm that the use the whole
use of more realization comes out of a narrow bridge and water faucets. This is no plain evidence of disaster. The point of it is that there is
a strange straw being in any strange ice-cream. A legal pencil a really legal pencil is incredible, it fastens the whole
strong iron wire calender. An inherent investigation, does that mean murder or does it only mean a
railroad track with plenty of cinders. Words that cumber nothing and call exceptionally tall people from very
far away are those that have the same center as those used by them
frequently. Bale, bale is a thing that surrounding largely means hay, no hay has
any more food than it needs to weigh that way henceforward and not more
that most likely. A soap, a whole soap, any piece of a whole soap, more whole soap and not
mistily, all this is no outrage and no blessing. A precious thing is an
oily thing. In that there is no sugar and silence. A reason is that a curly house an ordinary curly house is exactly that,
it is exactly more than that, it is so exactly no more than more than
that. Waiter, when is a waiter passive and expressed, a waiter is so when
there is no more selection and really no more buckets altogether. This
is what remains. It does. It is kindly exacted, it is pleased, it is
anxious, it is even worthy when a material is like it. It is. What is a hinge. A hinge is a location. What is a hinge necessarily. When the butter cup is limited and there are radishes, when radishes are
clean and a whole school, a real school is outrageous and more incensed,
really more incensed and inclined, when the single satisfaction is so
perfect and the pearl is so demure when all this is changed then there
is no rattle there is hardly any rattle. A and B and also nothing of the same direction is the best personal
division there is between any laughing. The climate, the whole thing is
surrounded, it is not pressed, it is not a vessel, it is not all there
is of joining, it is a real anxious needful and it is so seldom
circular, so more so than any article in the wire. The cluster is just
the same ordinarily. Supposing a movement is segregated and there is a piece of staging,
suppose there is and the present is melted does that mean that any salt
is bitter, would it change an investigation suddenly, when it would
would it mean a long wide and not particular eddy. Would it and if it
did would there be a change. A kind of exercise is hardest and the best
excellence is sweet. Finding a best hat with a hearty hat pin in midsummer is a reason for
being blindly. A smell is not in earth. A wonder to chew and to eat and to mind and to set into the very tiny
glass that is tall. This is that when there is a tenement. All weights
are scales. No put in a closet, no skirt in a closet, no lily, no lily not a lime
lily. A solving and learned, awake and highing and a throat and a throat
and a short set color, a short set color and a collar and a color. A
last degree in the kink in a glove the rest. A letter to press, a letter to press is not rowdy, it is not sliding, it
is not a measure of the increasing swindling of elastic and breaking. The thread, the thread, the thread is the language of yesterday, it is
the resolution of today, it is no pain. What is pain, pain is so changing the climate and the best ever that it
is a time, it is really only a time, it is so winding. It is even. A warm banana is warm naturally and this makes an ingredient in a
mixture which has banana in it. Cooling in the chasing void, cooling more than milder. Hold that ho, that is hold the hold. Pow word, a pow word is organic and sectional and an old man's company. Win, win, a little bit chickeny, wet, wet, a long last hollow chucking
jam, gather, a last butter in a cheese, a lasting surrounding action. White green, a white green. A looking like that is a most connected
piece of example of what it is where there is no choking, no choking in
any sign. Pin in and pin in and point clear and point where. Breakfast, breakfast is the arrangement that beggars corn, that shows
the habit of fishes, that powders aches and stumblings, and any useful
thing. The way to say it is to say it. No counting, no counting in not cousins, no counting for that example
and that number of thirty and thirteen and thirty six and thirty. A blind hobble which makes distress. A place not to put in a foot, a
place so called and in close color, a place best and more shape and
really a thought. Cousin why is there no cousin, because it is an article to be
preparatory. Was it green told, was it a pill, was it chased awake, will it sale per,
peas are fish, chicken, cold ups, nail poppers, nail pack in hers extra. Look pase per. Look past per. Look past per. Look past fer. Look past
fer. Look past fer. No end in yours, knock puzzler palers, no beast in papers, no bird. Icer cream, ice her steam, ice her icer ice sea excellent, excel gone in
front excel sent. Leaves of wet perfect sharpen setters, leaves of wet purr feet shape for
seal weight for shirters. Leaves of wet for ear pole ache sold hers, ears for sake heat purse
change to meeters, change to be a sunk leave to see wet hers, but to why
in that peace so not. Knot lot. Please bell room please bell room fasten a character fasten a care in
apter buttons fasten a care in such, in such. Fasten a care in, in in a
in. A lovely life in the center makes a mine in found a lovely pond in the
water makes it just a space. A lovely seat in a day lump makes a set to
collapse, a lovely light in a grass field makes it see just the early
day in when there is a sight of please please please. Due tie due to die due show the never less more way less. Do, weigh the
more do way less. Let us call a boat, let us call a boat. Leave little grace to be. Leave little grace to bea, live little grace
to bee. Leave little grace. Leave little. Leave little grace to be. Near red reserve leave lavender acre bat. Shout us, shout horse curve less. Least bee, least bay alter, alter the sat pan and left all, rest in,
resafe in article so fur. A cannon ball a cigar and a dress in suits, a cannon ball a cigar and a
dress suit case, a cannon ball a cigar and a dress suit case, a head a
hand a little above, a shake in my and mines. Let us leaves, moor itch. Bars touch. Nap old in town inch chair, nap on in term on chain, do deal sack file
in for, do bale send on and for, reset the pan old in for same and chew
get that all baste for, nice nor call churches, meet by and boot send
for in, last when with and by that which for with all do sign call, meet
with like shall what shirs not by bought lest, not by bought lest in own
see certain, in own so same excellent, excellent hairy, hairy, excellent
not excellent not knot excellent, excellent knot. B r, brute says. A hole, a hole is a true, a true, a true. Little paper and dolls, little paper and row why, little paper and a
thin opera extra. No use to age mother, no whole wide able recent mouth parcel, no relief
farther, no relief in loosens no relief abler, no relief, no relief pie
pepper nights, no relief poor no relief or, no relief, or no relief. America a merica, a merica the go leading s the go leading s cans, cans
be forgot and nigh nigh is a niecer a niecer to bit, a niecer to bit. It was a peach, it was a long suit, it was heavy harsh singes. Leave crack his leave crack his eats, all guest all guest a stove. Like
bit. Nuts, when and if the bloom is on next and really really really, it is a
team, it is a left and all it cut, it is a so like that between and a
shun a shun with a believer, a believer in the extra, extra not, extra
a rechange for it more. No sir. No it sir. It was a tame in, it was a tame in and a a little vent made a whole
simmer simmer a wish. What is it not to say reach house. Coal mill. Coal mill well. It to
lease house. Coal mill tell. Coal in meal tell. A pill shape with a round center. Color Cook color him with ready bbs and neat show pole glass and nearly
be seen every day more see what all a pearly little not shut, no rail
see her. No peter no rot. Poles poles are seeds and near the change the change pets are swimming
swimming and a plate all a plate is reed pour for the grammar grammar of
lake. Lake in a sad old chimney last and needs needs needs needs needs needs
needs, in the mutton and the meat there is a change to pork walk, with a
walk mean clean and butter and does it show the feather bench does it
mean the actual and not or does it light the cylinder. It is in choice
and chosen, it is in choice and knee and knee and knee and just the same
two bay. To irregulate to irregulate gums. America key america key. It is too nestle by the pin grove shirr, all agree to the counting ate
ate pall. Paul is better. Vest in restraint in repute. Shown land in constate. I am sorry I am awfully sorry, I am so sorry, I am so sorry. No fry shall it see c bough it. Nibbling bit, nibbling bit, may the land in awe for. It is not a particular lamp lights which absolutely so far pull sizes
and near by in the change with it not in the behoof. It was a singe, it was a scene in the in, it was a singe in. Never sink, never sink sinker, never sink sinker sunk, sink sink sinker
sink. A cattle sheep. By the white white white white, by the white white white white white
white, by the white white white white by the white by the white white
white white. Needless in pins. In the fence in the for instance, in the fence or how, hold chirp, hold
chirp her, hold your paper, hope hop in hit it. Extra successive. Little beats of long saturday tileing. No neck leg ticking. Peel more such wake next stir day. Peel heaps pork seldom. Coiled or red bench. A soled in a light is not waver. There is for much ash so. In the second, in the second second second. Pour were whose has. Pole sack sirs. A neat not necklace neglect. A neat not neglect. A neat. A neat not neglect. Put a sun in sunday. Sunday. ITALIANS


Some of them were where some others of them were. Some of them were
where no others of them were. One of them was where not any other of
them, of that kind of them, had been, and it was a thing that was
important to any one to have seen that one, to have heard that one. It
would have been discouraging to see more of them. It was disillusioning
to go to the place where there were many of them. If there were many of
them then there were more than one. If there were more than one then
there were many of them and if there were many of them one could know
any one of them and if one knew any one of them one knew all of them. And if one knew all of them then one would be beginning again, one would
be beginning knowing them. One would be beginning knowing that kind of
them. There are enough of them and most of them are where the others of them
are. There are enough of them but certainly not too many of them,
certainly not, too many of them. There are many of them and most of them
are where the others of them are. They have a way of doing what they are
doing, they have a way of not doing what they are not doing. They have a
way of having some feeling about them that they are ones doing what they
are doing in the way that is a thing satisfying the desire of having
anybody do anything. They are ones that give to some feeling them a
feeling of knowing that they will not do in a way that is satisfying
anything they are doing. They are ones talking, they are ones doing
something, they are ones waiting quickly waiting very quickly waiting
for anything to be happening and easily going on with waiting, with
waiting for anything to happen, to not happen again. They are ones
talking and talking and they are ones quick in talking and waiting for
something to happen and they are ones who are not so quick, not quick
enough not to be slow ones, quite slow ones. They are ones very many are
seeing. There are very many of them. There are quite enough of them. There are not too many of them. Certainly very many are pleased at their
being completely existing, certainly very many are completely pleased by
their being completely existing. There are not too many of them. They have something growing on them,
some of them, a good many of them, and certainly very many others would
not be wanting such things to be growing out of them that is to say
growing on them. It makes them, those having such things, makes them
elegant and charming, makes them ugly and disgusting, makes them clean
looking and sleek and rich and dark, makes them dirty looking and fierce
and annoying. They are not peculiar ones these, they are very many of them, they are a
kind of them, they are natural ones for any one to be knowing, there are
many kinds of this kind of them. They are talking, often talking and
they are doing things with pieces of them while they are talking and
they are then sounding like something, they are then certainly sounding
in a way that is a way that is a natural way for them to be sounding,
they are having noise come out of them in a natural way for them to have
noise come out of them. There are very many of them, not at all too many
of them. Very many hear them, quite enough hear them. There are not too
many of them not at all too many of them, they are talking, they are
moving their fingers and their arms and their hands then and they have
noises coming out of them and some are hearing them, quite a number hear
them and some like them, very many like them, very many tell about
liking them, some do not like them, some tell about not liking them. Some are smaller than others, some are darker than others, some are
harsher than others, some are sweeter than others, some are queerer than
other, some are older than others, some have more hair on them than
others, some are softer than others, some are quicker than others, some
have longer nails than others, some have one longer nail than others,
some look longer at some than others, some wear more things on them than
others, some wear more kinds of colors than others, some are stronger
than others, some are noisier than others, some are more respectful than
others, some are braver than others, some are quieter than others, some
are not lovelier than others. There are very many of one kind of them and they are not all the same,
certainly not all the same. They are in a way the same and yet not so
much so that some of them are not altogether like some who are not at
all of that kind of them. When there are very many of them together they
are more like each other, they are and they seem to be and that is
natural. They are, that is natural because they are together. They seem
to be, and that is natural because what is in one is carried over to the
other one by it being in the feeling of the one looking at the one and
then at the other one. There are a good many of that kind of them and it is a good thing,
certainly it is not a bad thing. Certainly not any one is really
objecting to their being ones being existing. They are ones who are
being living and then they go on being living and some of them are not
then being living, and they like it being living and they can bear it to
be not being living. It is not a sad thing that they are not being
living those who are not being living. It is not a sad thing that they
are being living those who are being living. It is a gentle thing. It is
a lively enough thing. It is a pleasant enough thing. It is an important
enough thing. There are very many of them who are not any longer being
living. It is an accepted thing. It is a quiet thing. It is a pleasant
thing. It is a certain thing. It is a thing not remembered, not
forgotten. It is a thing existing. It is a thing persisting. It is a
thing contenting any one. It is a thing disturbing some. It is a thing
any one can have had happen in knowing any place where some of this kind
of them have been living. It is a kind of them who are existing who are ones very many are
visiting. Very many always have been visiting them. Very many are going
on visiting them and that is a natural thing. They will do something and they do do things and they will offer to do
something and they will then not be surprised if they are not
succeeding. They will expect something and they are surprised if they
are not succeeding and some of them are surprised and are quick then and
some of them are surprised and are slow then and they are surprised and
really then being surprised is not existing in them, really not, they
are not surprised that they have not been succeeding. Certainly some of
them are surprised if they are not succeeding but certainly being alike
all of them is in not being surprised that they are not succeeding. There are very many of them. And they are alike, all of them. Certainly
they are not alike all of them. Certainly not. They are certainly not
alike all of them. They are alike all of them. They are expecting
something, they are doing some things, they are offering some things. They are not surprised that they are not succeeding. It is not a melancholy thing being one of them. It is not an interesting
thing being one of them. It is not an exciting thing being one of them,
it is not an important thing being all of them. It is an important
enough thing being all of them. It is a pleasant thing being with them. It is not a pleasant thing expecting anything from them. It is not a
disconcerting thing expecting anything from them. It is an agreeable
thing knowing about them. It is an exciting thing first hearing about
them. It is a delightful thing coming among them although it is a
frightening thing the first seeing of them. It is a very pleasant thing
living where they are living. It is a completely pleasant thing living
where they are living. It is a troublesome thing waiting for any one of
them. It is a troublesome thing waiting for them to go on finishing
anything. It is not an exasperating, not a disconcerting thing waiting
for any one of them. They are certainly ones deciding something. They are certainly ones
expecting anything. They are certainly ones not despairing in being ones
being living. They are certainly ones not certain that they will be
expecting anything. They are certainly ones deciding something. They are
not ones deciding that they will be ones expecting something. They are
not ones despairing. They are ones expecting something. They are ones
deciding something. They are ones not deciding that they will be
expecting something. They are ones not certain that they will be
expecting something. It is a pleasant thing to be living among them. They are not interested
in this thing. They are not at all interested in this thing. They are
smiling. They are not interested in this thing. They are expecting
something. They are interested in this thing. They are not certain they
will be expecting something. They are feeling this thing. They are then
deciding something. They like being living. They are not interested in this thing. They are
quickly being existing. They are interested in this thing. They have
been existing. They are not interested in this thing. They are going on
being living. They are not interested in this thing. They are deciding
something. They are not interested in that thing. They are doing
something, they are going to be doing something. They are interested in
that thing. They are going to be doing some other thing. They are
interested in that thing. They are quicker than others who are slower. They are not interested in that thing. They are slower than others who
are quicker. They are not interested in that thing. They are quicker
than others who are slower. That is astonishing but not to them. They
are slower than others who are quicker. That is not astonishing and not
to them. They are quicker and they are slower and certainly this is in
all of them and certainly this is astonishing to some coming to
understand this thing. They certainly are deciding something. They are
not interested in this thing. They are interested in everything. They
are expecting something. They are not certain that they will be
expecting something. They are deciding something then. They are not
interested in this thing in deciding something, in having been deciding
something. There are a good many of them. They are certainly different one from the
other of them, quite different one from the other one of them and this
is quite a troublesome thing and quite not an interesting thing to some. There are quite enough of them. They are certainly each one of them
quite different from the others of them. There are some of them like
others of them. This is a pleasant thing to some. There are some who are
like others of them and some of such of them are ones who are completely
being that thing being a kind of one which is a kind of one that is one
giving to some a feeling of being an arranged one that is in the whole
of them a thing not exciting, not disconcerting, that is a thing that is
a thing that is growing in a certain arrangement that is a solid,
unexciting, definite, beautiful enough thing, that is a thing that is
something that each one being that one is in some way knowing, that is a
thing that some are admiring, that is a thing that is not intensely
interesting any one, that is a thing that is a beautiful thing in being
a beautiful kind of existing thing, that is a thing that is a very
agreeable thing and one is liking and one is noticing that thing. There are very many being existing who are ones who are talking quite
often and they are sounding as they are looking, as they are acting, as
they are being. They are certainly sounding very pleasant when they are
not sounding harsh and terrifying and unpleasant. They are certainly
sounding pleasantly and that is sometimes a surprising thing and it is
sometimes a surprising thing that they are not always pleasantly
sounding. It is quite a serious thing deciding if they are pleasing to
one or not pleasing to one. It is quite a serious thing coming to a
decision. If they are pleasing to one that is an important thing. If
they are not pleasing to one that is an important thing. If some of them were different, not so very different, they would not be
so willing to go on being living. If some of them were different and not
so very different they would be certain to be expecting something. If
some of them were different, quite a little different they would be
winning something. If some of them were different, not really different,
they would be quite certain not to go on being living. If some of them
were different, just a little different they would be doing something
that would be making some other one decide something. If some of them were certain that they would go on being living, they
would decide something. And really they are certain, in a way completely
certain, all of them, that they are going on living, that not any one is
going on living. They are all of them quite certain that every one who
is not coming to be a dead one is going on being living. They are all of
them quite certain of this thing. They are all of them in a way always
saying such a thing. They are all of them in a way patient with this
thing. They are all of them certain that not any one is going on being
living. They are all of them quite patient with this thing. They are,
very many of them, very lively in this thing. They are, very many of
them quite quick in remembering, quite quick in not living in this
thing. They are then ones, all of them certain that any one not coming
to be a dead one is going on being living. They are all of them quite
certain that not any one is going on being living. They are all of them
quite patient with these things. They are all of them quite quick and
they are not forgetting anything of these things. They are living and
they are quite quick and they are not remembering and they are not
forgetting anything of these things. When they are young they are quicker than when they are old. When they
are quite young they are very much quicker than when they are old. When
they are young they are quicker than when they are old but not really
quicker, they are not slow when they are old. When they are very young
they are very much quicker than when they are older. They are quicker
when they are young, when they are very young, when they are old than it
is ever natural for them, for any one to think them. And certainly this
is a very natural thing, a very natural thing. They are quick and
certainly they have very much time to be quick in, and they are using
very much time for this thing. And certainly any one can know this thing
that they are using very much time, a great deal of time. They certainly
have been, they certainly are using very much time, any one can know
this thing, any of them can know this thing. Every one knows this thing,
knows they are using very much time, that they are all of them using up
very much time. Every one is naturally certain of this thing, that any
of them, that all of them are using very much time. They are then quick
ones, quicker when they are very young than when they are older, a
little quicker when they are young than when they are old. There are quite enough of them. They are different enough each one of
them from the others of them. They are different enough each one of them
from the others of them and it is easy enough to know this thing to know
that each of them are different enough from the others of them. It is
certainly easy enough to know this thing to know that each of them are
different enough from the others of them. They are different enough each
one of them from the others of them. In a way it is completely easy to
know this thing to know that each of them are different enough from the
others of them. They certainly can show this thing, any of them can show
this thing that they are different enough from the others of them. There are enough of them. There are not too many of them. There are
quite enough of them. Each of them is quite different enough from the
others of them. They do each one of them easily enough show this thing,
quite easily show this thing that they are different enough each one of
them from the others of them. In a way they are completely simply showing this thing that each one of
them is different from the others of them, from any of the others of
them. They can very simply be showing this thing and certainly then it
is a thing to be pleasing to any one to be knowing that each one of them
is different enough from any of the others of them and is simply enough
showing this thing. Certainly any one can be completely showing this thing, any one of them,
that they are different enough from any others of them and they are, any
one of them, completely simply showing this thing. So then it is a
pleasing thing, this thing, and again and again and again it is a
pleasing thing, and certainly each one of them is showing such a thing,
showing they are different enough from any other one of them, simply
enough showing this thing. So then it is a simple enough thing, being
different enough from any other of them, this then is a simple enough
thing. In a way then it is a pleasing thing, certainly this thing is a
pleasing thing, it is a simple enough thing, it is a pleasing enough
thing. This thing, completely this thing, this thing a completely simple
thing, a completely pleasing thing is a thing existing and certainly
every one is knowing it in all of these of them knowing it so as to be
quite certain. Being different enough from any other one is a simple enough thing in
all of these of them and certainly very many are being completely
content with this thing, with these being completely expressing this
thing, with these having been completely expressing this thing. Some
then are knowing that certainly this is completely pleasing, this thing,
this being different enough from any other of them, this being simply
enough in all of them and certainly then every one has been certain that
such a thing has been completely pleasing. Certainly all of them and
there certainly are enough of them and not too many of them and very
many of them are each one different enough from any other one of them,
and are simply enough such a thing are simply enough different enough
and certainly such a thing is pleasing and certainly it is completely
enough existing to make them being ones being, having been completely
pleasing, and certainly having been completely expressing such a thing,
being different enough each one of them, being simply enough such a
thing, having been completely enough expressing such a thing, being so
simply that thing different enough each one of them, has made then ones
certainly having been completely pleasing, having been completely
expressing a thing being completely pleasing. Certainly it is not a
complicated thing, being different enough from any other one, being
simply enough different enough and certainly these then are expressing
this thing, and certainly this has been completely expressed by them,
and they are expressing this thing. Some are needing that not any one is one some are not wondering about
and then again and again finding that they are knowing everything that
that one is ever doing. Very many are needing this thing and these then
are ones being living and these then being ones being living are ones
sometimes singing and sometimes making noises in being ones just then
not wondering and not knowing anything about any one doing anything. So
then all of them all of each of them that are being existing and being
ones being such ones are being ones who are ones being ones of this kind
of them. This kind then are all of them for all of them are of this kind
of them. Many of them, any of them are ones that are completely not needing going
on being living when they are ones any one is hearing. Many of them, any
of them are almost not at all needing going on being living if any one
has been listening. And certainly very many are listening, mostly all of
them are listening, any of them are listening and so not any of them are
needing to be going on being living. Certainly any one of them, all of them are different from any other one
of them. Certainly all of them, any one of them, if any one has been
listening to them are not needing then to be ones going on being living. Very many of them, almost all of them are listening. Very many of them,
all of them are having again and again some hearing them, and so many of
them, all of them are not needing to be ones going on being living, they
are then not at all needing this thing needing being one going on being
living. There are very many of them, certainly enough of them, certainly not too
many of them. They certainly are not completely needing going on being
living. Certainly they are not needing this thing if any one has been
listening to them and certainly they are, all of them, listening and
certainly then all of them have been having some listening to them and
so then not any of them are needing are ever needing being one going on
being living. There are certainly very many of them. Any of them are ones having some
listening. Any of them are ones listening. There are very many of them. 