



Produced by Barbara Watson, James Wright and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net









                           THE TROJAN WOMEN





                          THE ATHENIAN DRAMA
                         FOR ENGLISH READERS


              A Series of Verse Translations of the Greek
                 Dramatic Poets, with Commentaries and
                          Explanatory Notes. =Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt top, 7s. 6d. each net. Each Volume Illustrated from ancient
                     Sculptures and Vase-Painting.=

AESCHYLUS: _The Orestean Trilogy._ By Prof. G. C. WARR. With an
    Introduction on _The Rise of Greek Tragedy_, and 13 Illustrations. SOPHOCLES: _Oedipus Tyrannus_ and _Coloneus_, and _Antigone_. By Prof.
    J. S. PHILLIMORE. With an Introduction on _Sophocles and his Treatment
    of Tragedy_, and 16 Illustrations. EURIPIDES: _Hippolytus_; _Bacchae_; _Aristophanes' 'Frogs. '_ By Prof.
    GILBERT MURRAY. With an Appendix on _The Lost Tragedies of Euripides_,
    and an Introduction on _The Significance of the Bacchae in Athenian
    History_, and 12 Illustrations. [_Second Edition._


                   ALSO UNIFORM WITH THE ABOVE

THE HOMERIC HYMNS. A New Prose Rendering by ANDREW LANG, with Essays
    Critical and Explanatory, and 14 Illustrations. THE PLAYS OF EURIPIDES

Translated into English Rhyming Verse, with Explanatory Notes, by Prof.
    GILBERT MURRAY. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. each net. _The Trojan Women._
                  _Electra._      [_In the Press._


_Hippolytus._ Third Edition. } Paper Covers, Impl. _Bacchae._                   } 16mo, 1s. each net. THE

                           TROJAN WOMEN

                                OF

                            EURIPIDES


              TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH RHYMING VERSE
                   WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES BY

                 GILBERT MURRAY, M.A., LL.D. EMERITUS PROFESSOR OF GREEK IN THE UNIVERSITY
                 OF GLASGOW; SOMETIME FELLOW OF
                      NEW COLLEGE, OXFORD


                              LONDON
               GEORGE ALLEN, 156, CHARING CROSS ROAD
                               1905

                      [All rights reserved]





                Printed by BALLANTYNE HANSON & CO.
                     At the Ballantyne Press





                         INTRODUCTORY NOTE



Judged by common standards, the _Troaedes_ is far from a perfect play; it
is scarcely even a good play. It is an intense study of one great
situation, with little plot, little construction, little or no relief or
variety. The only movement of the drama is a gradual extinguishing of
all the familiar lights of human life, with, perhaps, at the end, a
suggestion that in the utterness of night, when all fears of a possible
worse thing are passed, there is in some sense peace and even glory. But
the situation itself has at least this dramatic value, that it is
different from what it seems. The consummation of a great conquest, a thing celebrated in paeans and
thanksgivings, the very height of the day-dreams of unregenerate man--it
seems to be a great joy, and it is in truth a great misery. It is
conquest seen when the thrill of battle is over, and nothing remains but
to wait and think. We feel in the background the presence of the
conquerors, sinister and disappointed phantoms; of the conquered men,
after long torment, now resting in death. But the living drama for
Euripides lay in the conquered women. It is from them that he has named
his play and built up his scheme of parts: four figures clearly lit and
heroic, the others in varying grades of characterisation, nameless and
barely articulate, mere half-heard voices of an eternal sorrow. Indeed, the most usual condemnation of the play is not that it is dull,
but that it is too harrowing; that scene after scene passes beyond the
due limits of tragic art. There are points to be pleaded against this
criticism. The very beauty of the most fearful scenes, in spite of their
fearfulness, is one; the quick comfort of the lyrics is another, falling
like a spell of peace when the strain is too hard to bear (cf. p. 89). But the main defence is that, like many of the greatest works of art,
the _Troaedes_ is something more than art. It is also a prophecy, a
bearing of witness. And the prophet, bound to deliver his message, walks
outside the regular ways of the artist. For some time before the _Troaedes_ was produced, Athens, now entirely in
the hands of the War Party, had been engaged in an enterprise which,
though on military grounds defensible, was bitterly resented by the more
humane minority, and has been selected by Thucydides as the great
crucial crime of the war. She had succeeded in compelling the neutral
Dorian island of Melos to take up arms against her, and after a long
siege had conquered the quiet and immemorially ancient town, massacred
the men and sold the women and children into slavery. Melos fell in the
autumn of 416 B.C. The _Troaedes_ was produced in the following spring. And while the gods of the prologue were prophesying destruction at sea
for the sackers of Troy, the fleet of the sackers of Melos, flushed with
conquest and marked by a slight but unforgettable taint of sacrilege,
was actually preparing to set sail for its fatal enterprise against
Sicily. Not, of course, that we have in the _Troaedes_ a case of political
allusion. Far from it. Euripides does not mean Melos when he says Troy,
nor mean Alcibiades' fleet when he speaks of Agamemnon's. But he writes
under the influence of a year which to him, as to Thucydides, had been
filled full of indignant pity and of dire foreboding. This tragedy is
perhaps, in European literature, the first great expression of the
spirit of pity for mankind exalted into a moving principle; a principle
which has made the most precious, and possibly the most destructive,
elements of innumerable rebellions, revolutions, and martyrdoms, and of
at least two great religions. Pity is a rebel passion. Its hand is against the strong, against the
organised force of society, against conventional sanctions and accepted
Gods. It is the Kingdom of Heaven within us fighting against the brute
powers of the world; and it is apt to have those qualities of unreason,
of contempt for the counting of costs and the balancing of sacrifices,
of recklessness, and even, in the last resort, of ruthlessness, which so
often mark the paths of heavenly things and the doings of the children
of light. It brings not peace, but a sword. So it was with Euripides. The _Troaedes_ itself has indeed almost no
fierceness and singularly little thought of revenge. It is only the
crying of one of the great wrongs of the world wrought into music, as it
were, and made beautiful by "the most tragic of the poets." But its
author lived ever after in a deepening atmosphere of strife and even of
hatred, down to the day when, "because almost all in Athens rejoiced at
his suffering," he took his way to the remote valleys of Macedon to
write the _Bacchae_ and to die. G. M.




                           THE TROJAN WOMEN




                        CHARACTERS IN THE PLAY


GOD POSEIDON. THE GODDESS PALLAS ATHENA. HECUBA, _Queen of Troy, wife of Priam, mother of Hector and Paris_. CASSANDRA, _daughter of Hecuba, a prophetess_. ANDROMACHE, _wife of Hector, Prince of Troy_. HELEN, _wife of Menelaues, King of Sparta; carried off by Paris, Prince of
    Troy_. TALTHYBIUS, _Herald of the Greeks_. MENELAUS, _King of Sparta, and, together with his brother Agamemnon,
    General of the Greeks_. SOLDIERS ATTENDANT ON TALTHYBIUS AND MENELAUS. CHORUS OF CAPTIVE TROJAN WOMEN, YOUNG AND OLD, MAIDEN AND MARRIED. _The Troaedes was first acted in the year_ 415 B.C. "_The first prize was
won by Xenocles, whoever he may have been, with the four plays Oedipus,
Lycaoen, Bacchae and Athamas, a Satyr-play. The second by Euripides with
the Alexander, Palamedes, Troaedes and Sisyphus, a Satyr-play._"--AELIAN,
_Varia Historia_, ii. 8. THE TROJAN WOMEN




_The scene represents a battlefield, a few days after the battle. At the back are the walls of Troy, partially ruined. In front of
     them, to right and left, are some huts, containing those of the
     Captive Women who have been specially set apart for the chief Greek
     leaders. At one side some dead bodies of armed men are visible. In
     front a tall woman with white hair is lying on the ground asleep._

_It is the dusk of early dawn, before sunrise. The figure of the
     god_ POSEIDON _is dimly seen before the walls_. POSEIDON. Up from Aegean caverns, pool by pool
Of blue salt sea, where feet most beautiful
Of Nereid maidens weave beneath the foam
Their long sea-dances, I, their lord, am come,
Poseidon of the Sea. 'Twas I whose power,
With great Apollo, builded tower by tower
These walls of Troy; and still my care doth stand
True to the ancient People of my hand;
Which now as smoke is perished, in the shock
Of Argive spears. Down from Parnassus' rock
The Greek Epeios came, of Phocian seed,
And wrought by Pallas' mysteries a Steed
Marvellous, big with arms; and through my wall
It passed, a death-fraught image magical. The groves are empty and the sanctuaries
Run red with blood. Unburied Priam lies
By his own hearth, on God's high altar-stair,
And Phrygian gold goes forth and raiment rare
To the Argive ships; and weary soldiers roam
Waiting the wind that blows at last for home,
For wives and children, left long years away,
Beyond the seed's tenth fullness and decay,
To work this land's undoing. And for me,
Since Argive Hera conquereth, and she
Who wrought with Hera to the Phrygians' woe,
Pallas, behold, I bow mine head and go
Forth from great Ilion and mine altars old. When a still city lieth in the hold
Of Desolation, all God's spirit there
Is sick and turns from worship.--Hearken where
The ancient River waileth with a voice
Of many women, portioned by the choice
Of war amid new lords, as the lots leap
For Thessaly, or Argos, or the steep
Of Theseus' Rock. And others yet there are,
High women, chosen from the waste of war
For the great kings, behind these portals hid;
And with them that Laconian Tyndarid,
Helen, like them a prisoner and a prize. And this unhappy one--would any eyes
Gaze now on Hecuba? Here at the Gates
She lies 'mid many tears for many fates
Of wrong. One child beside Achilles' grave
In secret slain, Polyxena the brave,
Lies bleeding. Priam and his sons are gone;
And, lo, Cassandra, she the Chosen One,
Whom Lord Apollo spared to walk her way
A swift and virgin spirit, on this day
Lust hath her, and she goeth garlanded
A bride of wrath to Agamemnon's bed. [_He turns to go; and another divine Presence becomes visible in the
    dusk. It is the goddess_ PALLAS ATHENA. O happy long ago, farewell, farewell,
Ye shining towers and mine own citadel;
Broken by Pallas, Child of God, or still
Thy roots had held thee true. PALLAS. Is it the will
Of God's high Brother, to whose hand is given
Great power of old, and worship of all Heaven,
To suffer speech from one whose enmities
This day are cast aside? POSEIDON. His will it is:
Kindred and long companionship withal,
Most high Athena, are things magical. PALLAS. Blest be thy gentle mood!--Methinks I see
A road of comfort here, for thee and me. POSEIDON. Thou hast some counsel of the Gods, or word
Spoken of Zeus? Or is it tidings heard
From some far Spirit? PALLAS. For this Ilion's sake,
Whereon we tread, I seek thee, and would make
My hand as thine. POSEIDON. Hath that old hate and deep
Failed, where she lieth in her ashen sleep? Thou pitiest her? PALLAS. Speak first; wilt thou be one
In heart with me and hand till all be done? POSEIDON. Yea; but lay bare thy heart. For this land's sake
Thou comest, not for Hellas? PALLAS. I would make
Mine ancient enemies laugh for joy, and bring
On these Greek ships a bitter homecoming. POSEIDON. Swift is thy spirit's path, and strange withal,
And hot thy love and hate, where'er they fall. PALLAS. A deadly wrong they did me, yea within
Mine holy place: thou knowest? POSEIDON. I know the sin
Of Ajax, when he cast Cassandra down . . . PALLAS. And no man rose and smote him; not a frown
Nor word from all the Greeks! POSEIDON. And 'twas thine hand
That gave them Troy! PALLAS. Therefore with thee I stand
To smite them. POSEIDON. All thou cravest, even now
Is ready in mine heart. What seekest thou? PALLAS. An homecoming that striveth ever more
And cometh to no home. POSEIDON. Here on the shore
Wouldst hold them or amid mine own salt foam? PALLAS. When the last ship hath bared her sail for home! Zeus shall send rain, long rain and flaw of driven
Hail, and a whirling darkness blown from heaven;
To me his levin-light he promiseth
O'er ships and men, for scourging and hot death:
Do thou make wild the roads of the sea, and steep
With war of waves and yawning of the deep,
Till dead men choke Euboea's curling bay. So Greece shall dread even in an after day
My house, nor scorn the Watchers of strange lands! POSEIDON. I give thy boon unbartered. These mine hands
Shall stir the waste Aegean; reefs that cross
The Delian pathways, jag-torn Myconos,
Scyros and Lemnos, yea, and storm-driven
Caphereus with the bones of drowned men
Shall glut him.--Go thy ways, and bid the Sire
Yield to thine hand the arrows of his fire. Then wait thine hour, when the last ship shall wind
Her cable coil for home! [_Exit_ PALLAS. How are ye blind,
Ye treaders down of cities, ye that cast
Temples to desolation, and lay waste
Tombs, the untrodden sanctuaries where lie
The ancient dead; yourselves so soon to die! [_Exit_ POSEIDON. *       *       *       *       *

_The day slowly dawns_: HECUBA _wakes_. HECUBA. Up from the earth, O weary head! This is not Troy, about, above--
      Not Troy, nor we the lords thereof. Thou breaking neck, be strengthened! Endure and chafe not. The winds rave
      And falter. Down the world's wide road,
      Float, float where streams the breath of God;
    Nor turn thy prow to breast the wave. Ah woe! . . . For what woe lacketh here? My children lost, my land, my lord. O thou great wealth of glory, stored
    Of old in Ilion, year by year

    We watched . . . and wert thou nothingness? What is there that I fear to say? And yet, what help? . . . Ah, well-a-day,
    This ache of lying, comfortless

    And haunted! Ah, my side, my brow
      And temples! All with changeful pain
      My body rocketh, and would fain
    Move to the tune of tears that flow:
    For tears are music too, and keep
    A song unheard in hearts that weep. [_She rises and gazes towards the Greek ships far off on the shore._

        O ships, O crowding faces
          Of ships, O hurrying beat
          Of oars as of crawling feet,
        How found ye our holy places? Threading the narrows through,
          Out from the gulfs of the Greek,
        Out to the clear dark blue,
          With hate ye came and with joy,
        And the noise of your music flew,
          Clarion and pipe did shriek,
        As the coiled cords ye threw,
          Held in the heart of Troy! What sought ye then that ye came? A woman, a thing abhorred:
          A King's wife that her lord
        Hateth: and Castor's shame
          Is hot for her sake, and the reeds
        Of old Eurotas stir
        With the noise of the name of her. She slew mine ancient King,
          The Sower of fifty Seeds,
            And cast forth mine and me,
          As shipwrecked men, that cling
            To a reef in an empty sea. Who am I that I sit
          Here at a Greek king's door,
        Yea, in the dust of it? A slave that men drive before,
        A woman that hath no home,
          Weeping alone for her dead;
          A low and bruised head,
        And the glory struck therefrom. [_She starts up from her solitary brooding, and calls to the other
    Trojan Women in the huts._

        O Mothers of the Brazen Spear,
          And maidens, maidens, brides of shame,
          Troy is a smoke, a dying flame;
        Together we will weep for her:
        I call ye as a wide-wing'd bird
          Calleth the children of her fold,
        To cry, ah, not the cry men heard
          In Ilion, not the songs of old,
        That echoed when my hand was true
            On Priam's sceptre, and my feet
            Touched on the stone one signal beat,
          And out the Dardan music rolled;
        And Troy's great Gods gave ear thereto. [_The door of one of the huts on the right opens, and the Women steal
    out severally, startled and afraid._

                   FIRST WOMAN. [_Strophe_ 1. How say'st thou? Whither moves thy cry,
      Thy bitter cry? Behind our door
      We heard thy heavy heart outpour
    Its sorrow: and there shivered by
        Fear and a quick sob shaken
  From prisoned hearts that shall be free no more! HECUBA. Child, 'tis the ships that stir upon the shore . . . SECOND WOMAN. The ships, the ships awaken! THIRD WOMAN. Dear God, what would they? Overseas
    Bear me afar to strange cities? HECUBA. Nay, child, I know not. Dreams are these,
          Fears of the hope-forsaken. FIRST WOMAN. Awake, O daughters of affliction, wake
  And learn your lots! Even now the Argives break
              Their camp for sailing! HECUBA. Ah, not Cassandra! Wake not her
      Whom God hath maddened, lest the foe
    Mock at her dreaming. Leave me clear
      From that one edge of woe. O Troy, my Troy, thou diest here
      Most lonely; and most lonely we
      The living wander forth from thee,
          And the dead leave thee wailing! [_One of the huts on the left is now open, and the rest of the_ CHORUS
    _come out severally_. _Their number eventually amounts to fifteen._

                   FOURTH WOMAN. [_Antistrophe_ 1. Out of the tent of the Greek king
      I steal, my Queen, with trembling breath:
      What means thy call? Not death; not death! They would not slay so low a thing! FIFTH WOMAN
            O, 'tis the ship-folk crying
  To deck the galleys: and we part, we part! HECUBA. Nay, daughter: take the morning to thine heart. FIFTH WOMAN. My heart with dread is dying! SIXTH WOMAN. An herald from the Greek hath come! FIFTH WOMAN. How have they cast me, and to whom
    A bondmaid? HECUBA. Peace, child: wait thy doom. Our lots are near the trying. FOURTH WOMAN. Argos, belike, or Phthia shall it be,
    Or some lone island of the tossing sea,
            Far, far from Troy? HECUBA. And I the aged, where go I,
        A winter-frozen bee, a slave
      Death-shapen, as the stones that lie
        Hewn on a dead man's grave:
      The children of mine enemy
        To foster, or keep watch before
        The threshold of a master's door,
          I that was Queen in Troy! A WOMAN TO ANOTHER. [_Strophe_ 2. And thou, what tears can tell thy doom? THE OTHER. The shuttle still shall flit and change
    Beneath my fingers, but the loom,
            Sister, be strange. ANOTHER (_wildly_). Look, my dead child! My child, my love,
    The last look. . . . ANOTHER. Oh, there cometh worse. A Greek's bed in the dark. . . . ANOTHER. God curse
    That night and all the powers thereof! ANOTHER. Or pitchers to and fro to bear
      To some Pirene on the hill,
      Where the proud water craveth still
    Its broken-hearted minister. ANOTHER. God guide me yet to Theseus' land,
      The gentle land, the famed afar . . . ANOTHER. But not the hungry foam--Ah, never!--
    Of fierce Eurotas, Helen's river,
    To bow to Menelaus' hand,
      That wasted Troy with war! A WOMAN. [_Antistrophe_ 2. They told us of a land high-born,
      Where glimmers round Olympus' roots
    A lordly river, red with corn
              And burdened fruits. ANOTHER. Aye, that were next in my desire
      To Athens, where good spirits dwell . . . ANOTHER. Or Aetna's breast, the deeps of fire
      That front the Tyrian's Citadel:
    First mother, she, of Sicily
      And mighty mountains: fame hath told
      Their crowns of goodness manifold. . . . ANOTHER. And, close beyond the narrowing sea,
    A sister land, where float enchanted
      Ionian summits, wave on wave,
    And Crathis of the burning tresses
    Makes red the happy vale, and blesses
    With gold of fountains spirit-haunted
        Homes of true men and brave! LEADER. But lo, who cometh: and his lips
      Grave with the weight of dooms unknown:
    A Herald from the Grecian ships. Swift comes he, hot-foot to be done
    And finished. Ah, what bringeth he
    Of news or judgment? Slaves are we,
      Spoils that the Greek hath won! [TALTHYBIUS, _followed by some Soldiers, enters from the left_. TALTHYBIUS. Thou know'st me, Hecuba. Often have I crossed
Thy plain with tidings from the Hellene host. 'Tis I, Talthybius. . . . Nay, of ancient use
Thou know'st me. And I come to bear thee news. HECUBA. Ah me, 'tis here, 'tis here,
Women of Troy, our long embosomed fear! TALTHYBIUS. The lots are cast, if that it was ye feared. HECUBA. What lord, what land. . . . Ah me,
Phthia or Thebes, or sea-worn Thessaly? TALTHYBIUS. Each hath her own. Ye go not in one herd. HECUBA. Say then what lot hath any? What of joy
Falls, or can fall on any child of Troy? TALTHYBIUS. I know: but make thy questions severally. HECUBA. My stricken one must be
Still first. Say how Cassandra's portion lies. TALTHYBIUS. Chosen from all for Agamemnon's prize! HECUBA. How, for his Spartan bride
A tirewoman? For Helen's sister's pride? TALTHYBIUS. Nay, nay: a bride herself, for the King's bed. HECUBA. The sainted of Apollo? And her own
        Prize that God promised
Out of the golden clouds, her virgin crown? . . . TALTHYBIUS. He loved her for that same strange holiness. HECUBA. Daughter, away, away,
        Cast all away,
The haunted Keys, the lonely stole's array
That kept thy body like a sacred place! TALTHYBIUS. Is't not rare fortune that the King hath smiled
On such a maid? HECUBA. What of that other child
Ye reft from me but now? TALTHYBIUS (_speaking with some constraint_). Polyxena? Or what child meanest thou? HECUBA. The same. What man now hath her, or what doom? TALTHYBIUS. She rests apart, to watch Achilles' tomb. HECUBA. To watch a tomb? My daughter? What is this? . . . Speak, Friend? What fashion of the laws of Greece? TALTHYBIUS. Count thy maid happy! She hath naught of ill
To fear . . . HECUBA. What meanest thou? She liveth still? TALTHYBIUS. I mean, she hath one toil that holds her free
From all toil else. HECUBA. What of Andromache,
Wife of mine iron-hearted Hector, where
        Journeyeth she? TALTHYBIUS. Pyrrhus, Achilles' son, hath taken her. HECUBA. And I, whose slave am I,
The shaken head, the arm that creepeth by,
        Staff-crutched, like to fall? TALTHYBIUS. Odysseus, Ithaca's king, hath thee for thrall. HECUBA. Beat, beat the crownless head:
  Rend the cheek till the tears run red! A lying man and a pitiless
  Shall be lord of me, a heart full-flown
        With scorn of righteousness:
  O heart of a beast where law is none,
  Where all things change so that lust be fed,
  The oath and the deed, the right and the wrong,
  Even the hate of the forked tongue:
  Even the hate turns and is cold,
  False as the love that was false of old! O Women of Troy, weep for me! Yea, I am gone: I am gone my ways. Mine is the crown of misery,
  The bitterest day of all our days. LEADER. Thy fate thou knowest, Queen: but I know not
What lord of South or North has won my lot. TALTHYBIUS. Go, seek Cassandra, men! Make your best speed,
That I may leave her with the King, and lead
These others to their divers lords. . . . Ha, there! What means that sudden light? Is it the flare
Of torches? [_Light is seen shining through the crevices of the second hut on the
    right. He moves towards it._

              Would they fire their prison rooms,
Or how, these dames of Troy?--'Fore God, the dooms
Are known, and now they burn themselves and die
Rather than sail with us! How savagely
In days like these a free neck chafes beneath
Its burden! . . . Open! Open quick! Such death
Were bliss to them, it may be: but 'twill bring
Much wrath, and leave me shamed before the King! HECUBA. There is no fire, no peril: 'tis my child,
Cassandra, by the breath of God made wild. [_The door opens from within and_ CASSANDRA _enters, white-robed and
    wreathed like a Priestess, a great torch in her hand_. _She is singing
    softly to herself and does not see the Herald or the scene before her._

                   CASSANDRA. [_Strophe._
          Lift, lift it high:
            Give it to mine hand! Lo, I bear a flame
              Unto God! I praise his name. I light with a burning brand
          This sanctuary. Blessed is he that shall wed,
            And blessed, blessed am I
            In Argos: a bride to lie
          With a king in a king's bed. Hail, O Hymen red,
            O Torch that makest one! Weepest thou, Mother mine own? Surely thy cheek is pale
          With tears, tears that wail
            For a land and a father dead. But I go garlanded:
          I am the Bride of Desire:
            Therefore my torch is borne--
            Lo, the lifting of morn,
          Lo, the leaping of fire!--

          For thee, O Hymen bright,
            For thee, O Moon of the Deep,
          So Law hath charged, for the light
            Of a maid's last sleep. [_Antistrophe._
          Awake, O my feet, awake:
            Our father's hope is won! Dance as the dancing skies
              Over him, where he lies
            Happy beneath the sun! . . . Lo, the Ring that I make . . . [_She makes a circle round her with the torch, and visions appear to her._

          Apollo! . . . Ah, is it thou? O shrine in the laurels cold,
            I bear thee still, as of old,
          Mine incense! Be near to me now. [_She waves the torch as though bearing incense._

          O Hymen, Hymen fleet:
            Quick torch that makest one! . . . How? Am I still alone? Laugh as I laugh, and twine
          In the dance, O Mother mine:
            Dear feet, be near my feet! Come, greet ye Hymen, greet
            Hymen with songs of pride:
          Sing to him loud and long,
          Cry, cry, when the song
            Faileth, for joy of the bride! O Damsels girt in the gold
            Of Ilion, cry, cry ye,
          For him that is doomed of old
            To be lord of me! LEADER. O hold the damsel, lest her tranced feet
Lift her afar, Queen, toward the Hellene fleet! HECUBA. O Fire, Fire, where men make marriages
Surely thou hast thy lot; but what are these
Thou bringest flashing? Torches savage-wild
And far from mine old dreams.--Alas, my child,
How little dreamed I then of wars or red
Spears of the Greek to lay thy bridal bed! Give me thy brand; it hath no holy blaze
Thus in thy frenzy flung. Nor all thy days
Nor all thy griefs have changed them yet, nor learned
Wisdom.--Ye women, bear the pine half burned
To the chamber back; and let your drowned eyes
Answer the music of these bridal cries! [_She takes the torch and gives it to one of the women._

                   CASSANDRA. O Mother, fill mine hair with happy flowers,
And speed me forth. Yea, if my spirit cowers,
Drive me with wrath! So liveth Loxias,
A bloodier bride than ever Helen was
Go I to Agamemnon, Lord most high
Of Hellas! . . . I shall kill him, mother; I
Shall kill him, and lay waste his house with fire
As he laid ours. My brethren and my sire
Shall win again . . . (_Checking herself_) But part I must let be,
And speak not. Not the axe that craveth me,
And more than me; not the dark wanderings
Of mother-murder that my bridal brings,
And all the House of Atreus down, down, down . . Nay, I will show thee. Even now this town
Is happier than the Greeks. I know the power
Of God is on me: but this little hour,
Wilt thou but listen, I will hold him back! One love, one woman's beauty, o'er the track
Of hunted Helen, made their myriads fall. And this their King so wise, who ruleth all,
What wrought he? Cast out Love that Hate might feed:
Gave to his brother his own child, his seed
Of gladness, that a woman fled, and fain
To fly for ever, should be turned again! So the days waned, and armies on the shore
Of Simois stood and strove and died. Wherefore? No man had moved their landmarks; none had shook
Their walled towns.--And they whom Ares took,
Had never seen their children: no wife came
With gentle arms to shroud the limbs of them
For burial, in a strange and angry earth
Laid dead. And there at home, the same long dearth:
Women that lonely died, and aged men
Waiting for sons that ne'er should turn again,
Nor know their graves, nor pour drink-offerings,
To still the unslaked dust. These be the things
The conquering Greek hath won! But we--what pride,
What praise of men were sweeter?--fighting died
To save our people. And when war was red
Around us, friends upbore the gentle dead
Home, and dear women's hands about them wound
White shrouds, and here they sleep in the old ground
Beloved. And the rest long days fought on,
Dwelling with wives and children, not alone
And joyless, like these Greeks. And Hector's woe,
What is it? He is gone, and all men know
His glory, and how true a heart he bore. It is the gift the Greek hath brought! Of yore
Men saw him not, nor knew him. Yea, and even
Paris hath loved withal a child of heaven:
Else had his love but been as others are. Would ye be wise, ye Cities, fly from war! Yet if war come, there is a crown in death
For her that striveth well and perisheth
Unstained: to die in evil were the stain! Therefore, O Mother, pity not thy slain,
Nor Troy, nor me, the bride. Thy direst foe
And mine by this my wooing is brought low. TALTHYBIUS (_at last breaking through the spell that has held him_). I swear, had not Apollo made thee mad,
Not lightly hadst thou flung this shower of bad
Bodings, to speed my General o'er the seas! 'Fore God, the wisdoms and the greatnesses
Of seeming, are they hollow all, as things
Of naught? This son of Atreus, of all kings
Most mighty, hath so bowed him to the love
Of this mad maid, and chooseth her above
All women! By the Gods, rude though I be,
I would not touch her hand! Look thou; I see
Thy lips are blind, and whatso words they speak,
Praises of Troy or shamings of the Greek,
I cast to the four winds! Walk at my side
In peace! . . . And heaven content him of his bride! [_He moves as though to go, but turns to_ HECUBA, _and speaks more gently_. And thou shalt follow to Odysseus' host
When the word comes. 'Tis a wise queen thou go'st
To serve, and gentle: so the Ithacans say. CASSANDRA (_seeing for the first time the Herald and all the scene_). How fierce a slave! . . . O Heralds, Heralds! Yea,
Voices of Death; and mists are over them
Of dead men's anguish, like a diadem,
These weak abhorred things that serve the hate
Of kings and peoples! . . . To Odysseus' gate
My mother goeth, say'st thou? Is God's word
As naught, to me in silence ministered,
That in this place she dies? . . . (_To herself_) No more; no more! Why should I speak the shame of them, before
They come? . . . Little he knows, that hard-beset
Spirit, what deeps of woe await him yet;
Till all these tears of ours and harrowings
Of Troy, by his, shall be as golden things. Ten years behind ten years athwart his way
Waiting: and home, lost and unfriended . . . Nay:
Why should Odysseus' labours vex my breath? On; hasten; guide me to the house of Death,
To lie beside my bridegroom! . . . Thou Greek King,
Who deem'st thy fortune now so high a thing,
Thou dust of the earth, a lowlier bed I see,
In darkness, not in light, awaiting thee:
And with thee, with thee . . . there, where yawneth plain
A rift of the hills, raging with winter rain,
Dead . . . and out-cast . . . and naked . . . It is I
Beside my bridegroom: and the wild beasts cry,
And ravin on God's chosen! [_She clasps her hands to her brow and feels the wreaths._

                              O, ye wreaths! Ye garlands of my God, whose love yet breathes
About me; shapes of joyance mystical;
Begone! I have forgot the festival,
Forgot the joy. Begone! I tear ye, so,
From off me! . . . Out on the swift winds they go. With flesh still clean I give them back to thee,
Still white, O God, O light that leadest me! [_Turning upon the Herald._
Where lies the galley? Whither shall I tread? See that your watch be set, your sail be spread. The wind comes quick! . . . Three Powers--mark me, thou!--
There be in Hell, and one walks with thee now! Mother, farewell, and weep not! O my sweet
City, my earth-clad brethren, and thou great
Sire that begat us; but a space, ye Dead,
And I am with you: yea, with crowned head
I come, and shining from the fires that feed
On these that slay us now, and all their seed! [_She goes out, followed by_ TALTHYBIUS _and the Soldiers_: HECUBA,
    _after waiting for an instant motionless, falls to the ground_. LEADER OF CHORUS. The Queen, ye Watchers! See, she falls, she falls,
Rigid without a word! O sorry thralls,
Too late! And will ye leave her downstricken,
A woman, and so old? Raise her again! [_Some women go to_ HECUBA, _but she refuses their aid and speaks
    without rising_. HECUBA. Let lie . . . the love we seek not is no love . . . This ruined body! Is the fall thereof
Too deep for all that now is over me
Of anguish, and hath been, and yet shall be? Ye Gods . . . Alas! Why call on things so weak
For aid? Yet there is something that doth seek,
Crying, for God, when one of us hath woe. O, I will think of things gone long ago
And weave them to a song, like one more tear
In the heart of misery. . . . All kings we were;
And I must wed a king. And sons I brought
My lord King, many sons . . . nay, that were naught;
But high strong princes, of all Troy the best. Hellas nor Troaes nor the garnered East
Held such a mother! And all these things beneath
The Argive spear I saw cast down in death,
And shore these tresses at the dead men's feet. Yea, and the gardener of my garden great,
It was not any noise of him nor tale
I wept for; these eyes saw him, when the pale
Was broke, and there at the altar Priam fell
Murdered, and round him all his citadel
Sacked. And my daughters, virgins of the fold,
Meet to be brides of mighty kings, behold,
'Twas for the Greek I bred them! All are gone;
And no hope left, that I shall look upon
Their faces any more, nor they on mine. And now my feet tread on the utmost line:
An old, old slave-woman, I pass below
Mine enemies' gates; and whatso task they know
For this age basest, shall be mine; the door,
Bowing, to shut and open. . . . I that bore
Hector! . . . and meal to grind, and this racked head
Bend to the stones after a royal bed;
Torn rags about me, aye, and under them
Torn flesh; 'twill make a woman sick for shame! Woe's me; and all that one man's arms might hold
One woman, what long seas have o'er me rolled
And roll for ever! . . . O my child, whose white
Soul laughed amid the laughter of God's light,
Cassandra, what hands and how strange a day
Have loosed thy zone! And thou, Polyxena,
Where art thou? And my sons? Not any seed
Of man nor woman now shall help my need. Why raise me any more? What hope have I
To hold me? Take this slave that once trod high
In Ilion; cast her on her bed of clay
Rock-pillowed, to lie down, and pass away
Wasted with tears. And whatso man they call
Happy, believe not ere the last day fall! *       *       *       *       *

                     CHORUS. [_Strophe._
  O Muse, be near me now, and make
  A strange song for Ilion's sake,
Till a tone of tears be about mine ears
  And out of my lips a music break
  For Troy, Troy, and the end of the years:
    When the wheels of the Greek above me pressed,
    And the mighty horse-hoofs beat my breast;
  And all around were the Argive spears. A towering Steed of golden rein--
    O gold without, dark steel within!--
  Ramped in our gates; and all the plain
    Lay silent where the Greeks had been. And a cry broke from all the folk
  Gathered above on Ilion's rock:
  "Up, up, O fear is over now! To Pallas, who hath saved us living,
  To Pallas bear this victory-vow!" Then rose the old man from his room,
  The merry damsel left her loom,
  And each bound death about his brow
    With minstrelsy and high thanksgiving! [_Antistrophe._
  O, swift were all in Troy that day,
  And girt them to the portal-way,
Marvelling at that mountain Thing
  Smooth-carven, where the Argives lay,
  And wrath, and Ilion's vanquishing:
    Meet gift for her that spareth not,
    Heaven's yokeless Rider. Up they brought
  Through the steep gates her offering:
  Like some dark ship that climbs the shore
    On straining cables, up, where stood
  Her marble throne, her hallowed floor,
    Who lusted for her people's blood. A very weariness of joy
  Fell with the evening over Troy:
  And lutes of Afric mingled there
    With Phrygian songs: and many a maiden,
  With white feet glancing light as air,
  Made happy music through the gloom:
  And fires on many an inward room
  All night broad-flashing, flung their glare
    On laughing eyes and slumber-laden. A MAIDEN. I was among the dancers there
    To Artemis, and glorying sang
  Her of the Hills, the Maid most fair,
    Daughter of Zeus: and, lo, there rang
  A shout out of the dark, and fell
    Deathlike from street to street, and made
  A silence in the citadel:
    And a child cried, as if afraid,
  And hid him in his mother's veil. Then stalked the Slayer from his den,
  The hand of Pallas served her well! O blood, blood of Troy was deep
    About the streets and altars then:
  And in the wedded rooms of sleep,
    Lo, the desolate dark alone,
    And headless things, men stumbled on. And forth, lo, the women go,
  The crown of War, the crown of Woe,
  To bear the children of the foe
    And weep, weep, for Ilion! *       *       *       *       *

[_As the song ceases a chariot is seen approaching from the town, laden
    with spoils. On it sits a mourning Woman with a child in her arms._

                     LEADER. Lo, yonder on the heaped crest
      Of a Greek wain, Andromache,
      As one that o'er an unknown sea
    Tosseth; and on her wave-borne breast
    Her loved one clingeth, Hector's child,
      Astyanax . . . O most forlorn
      Of women, whither go'st thou, borne
    'Mid Hector's bronzen arms, and piled
    Spoils of the dead, and pageantry
      Of them that hunted Ilion down? Aye, richly thy new lord shall crown
    The mountain shrines of Thessaly! ANDROMACHE. [_Strophe_ 1. Forth to the Greek I go,
        Driven as a beast is driven. HEC. Woe, woe! AND. Nay, mine is woe:
        Woe to none other given,
      And the song and the crown therefor! HEC. O Zeus! AND. He hates thee sore! HEC. Children! AND. No more, no more
        To aid thee: their strife is striven! HECUBA. [_Antistrophe_ 1. Troy, Troy is gone! AND. Yea, and her treasure parted. HEC. Gone, gone, mine own
        Children, the noble-hearted! AND. Sing sorrow. . . . HEC. For me, for me! AND. Sing for the Great City,
        That falleth, falleth to be
          A shadow, a fire departed. ANDROMACHE. [_Strophe_ 2. Come to me, O my lover! HEC. The dark shroudeth him over,
      My flesh, woman, not thine, not thine! AND. Make of thine arms my cover! HECUBA. [_Antistrophe_ 2. O thou whose wound was deepest,
        Thou that my children keepest,
    Priam, Priam, O age-worn King,
        Gather me where thou sleepest. ANDROMACHE (_her hands upon her heart_). [_Strophe_ 3. O here is the deep of desire,
HEC. (How? And is this not woe?) AND. For a city burned with fire;
HEC. (It beateth, blow on blow.) AND. God's wrath for Paris, thy son, that he died not long ago:

        Who sold for his evil love
        Troy and the towers thereof:
        Therefore the dead men lie
        Naked, beneath the eye
        Of Pallas, and vultures croak
          And flap for joy:
        So Love hath laid his yoke
          On the neck of Troy! HECUBA. [_Antistrophe_ 3. O mine own land, my home,
AND. (I weep for thee, left forlorn,)
HEC. See'st thou what end is come? AND. (And the house where my babes were born.) HEC. A desolate Mother we leave, O children, a City of scorn:

        Even as the sound of a song
        Left by the way, but long
        Remembered, a tune of tears
        Falling where no man hears,
        In the old house, as rain,
          For things loved of yore:
        But the dead hath lost his pain
          And weeps no more. LEADER. How sweet are tears to them in bitter stress,
And sorrow, and all the songs of heaviness. ANDROMACHE. Mother of him of old, whose mighty spear
Smote Greeks like chaff, see'st thou what things are here? HECUBA. I see God's hand, that buildeth a great crown
For littleness, and hath cast the mighty down. ANDROMACHE. I and my babe are driven among the droves
Of plundered cattle. O, when fortune moves
So swift, the high heart like a slave beats low. HECUBA. 'Tis fearful to be helpless. Men but now
Have taken Cassandra, and I strove in vain. ANDROMACHE. Ah, woe is me; hath Ajax come again? But other evil yet is at thy gate. HECUBA. Nay, Daughter, beyond number, beyond weight
My evils are! Doom raceth against doom. ANDROMACHE. Polyxena across Achilles' tomb
Lies slain, a gift flung to the dreamless dead. HECUBA. My sorrow! . . . 'Tis but what Talthybius said:
So plain a riddle, and I read it not. ANDROMACHE. I saw her lie, and stayed this chariot;
And raiment wrapt on her dead limbs, and beat
My breast for her. HECUBA (_to herself_). O the foul sin of it! The wickedness! My child. My child! Again
I cry to thee. How cruelly art thou slain! ANDROMACHE. She hath died her death, and howso dark it be,
Her death is sweeter than my misery. HECUBA. Death cannot be what Life is, Child; the cup
Of Death is empty, and Life hath always hope. ANDROMACHE. O Mother, having ears, hear thou this word
Fear-conquering, till thy heart as mine be stirred
With joy. To die is only not to be;
And better to be dead than grievously
Living. They have no pain, they ponder not
Their own wrong. But the living that is brought
From joy to heaviness, his soul doth roam,
As in a desert, lost, from its old home. Thy daughter lieth now as one unborn,
Dead, and naught knowing of the lust and scorn
That slew her. And I . . . long since I drew my bow
Straight at the heart of good fame; and I know
My shaft hit; and for that am I the more
Fallen from peace. All that men praise us for,
I loved for Hector's sake, and sought to win. I knew that alway, be there hurt therein
Or utter innocence, to roam abroad
Hath ill report for women; so I trod
Down the desire thereof, and walked my way
In mine own garden. And light words and gay
Parley of women never passed my door. The thoughts of mine own heart . . . I craved no more . . . Spoke with me, and I was happy. Constantly
I brought fair silence and a tranquil eye
For Hector's greeting, and watched well the way
Of living, where to guide and where obey. And, lo! some rumour of this peace, being gone
Forth to the Greek, hath cursed me. Achilles' son,
So soon as I was taken, for his thrall
Chose me. I shall do service in the hall
Of them that slew . . . How? Shall I thrust aside
Hector's beloved face, and open wide
My heart to this new lord? Oh, I should stand
A traitor to the dead! And if my hand
And flesh shrink from him . . . lo, wrath and despite
O'er all the house, and I a slave! One night,
One night . . . aye, men have said it . . . maketh tame
A woman in a man's arms. . . . O shame, shame! What woman's lips can so forswear her dead,
And give strange kisses in another's bed? Why, not a dumb beast, not a colt will run
In the yoke untroubled, when her mate is gone--
A thing not in God's image, dull, unmoved
Of reason. O my Hector! best beloved,
That, being mine, wast all in all to me,
My prince, my wise one, O my majesty
Of valiance! No man's touch had ever come
Near me, when thou from out my father's home
Didst lead me and make me thine. . . . And thou art dead,
And I war-flung to slavery and the bread
Of shame in Hellas, over bitter seas! What knoweth she of evils like to these,
That dead Polyxena, thou weepest for? There liveth not in my life any more
The hope that others have. Nor will I tell
The lie to mine own heart, that aught is well
Or shall be well. . . . Yet, O, to dream were sweet! LEADER. Thy feet have trod the pathway of my feet,
And thy clear sorrow teacheth me mine own. HECUBA. Lo, yonder ships: I ne'er set foot on one,
But tales and pictures tell, when over them
Breaketh a storm not all too strong to stem,
Each man strives hard, the tiller gripped, the mast
Manned, the hull baled, to face it: till at last
Too strong breaks the o'erwhelming sea: lo, then
They cease, and yield them up as broken men
To fate and the wild waters. Even so
I in my many sorrows bear me low,
Nor curse, nor strive that other things may be. The great wave rolled from God hath conquered me. But, O, let Hector and the fates that fell
On Hector, sleep. Weep for him ne'er so well,
Thy weeping shall not wake him. Honour thou
The new lord that is set above thee now,
And make of thine own gentle piety
A prize to lure his heart. So shalt thou be
A strength to them that love us, and--God knows,
It may be--rear this babe among his foes,
My Hector's child, to manhood and great aid
For Ilion. So her stones may yet be laid
One on another, if God will, and wrought
Again to a city! Ah, how thought to thought
Still beckons! . . . But what minion of the Greek
Is this that cometh, with new words to speak? [_Enter_ TALTHYBIUS _with a band of Soldiers_. _He comes forward slowly
    and with evident disquiet._

                   TALTHYBIUS. Spouse of the noblest heart that beat in Troy,
Andromache, hate me not! 'Tis not in joy
I tell thee. But the people and the Kings
Have with one voice . . . ANDROMACHE. What is it? Evil things
Are on thy lips! TALTHYBIUS. 'Tis ordered, this child . . . Oh,
How can I tell her of it? ANDROMACHE. Doth he not go
With me, to the same master? TALTHYBIUS. There is none
In Greece, shall e'er be master of thy son. ANDROMACHE. How? Will they leave him here to build again
The wreck? . . . TALTHYBIUS. I know not how to tell thee plain! ANDROMACHE. Thou hast a gentle heart . . . if it be ill,
And not good, news thou hidest! TALTHYBIUS. 'Tis their will
Thy son shall die. . . . The whole vile thing is said
Now! ANDROMACHE. Oh, I could have borne mine enemy's bed! TALTHYBIUS. And speaking in the council of the host
Odysseus hath prevailed--

                   ANDROMACHE. O lost! lost! lost! . . . Forgive me! It is not easy . . . TALTHYBIUS. . . . That the son
Of one so perilous be not fostered on
To manhood--

                   ANDROMACHE. God; may his own counsel fall
On his own sons! TALTHYBIUS. . . . But from this crested wall
Of Troy be dashed, and die. . . . Nay, let the thing
Be done. Thou shalt be wiser so. Nor cling
So fiercely to him. Suffer as a brave
Woman in bitter pain; nor think to have
Strength which thou hast not. Look about thee here! Canst thou see help, or refuge anywhere? Thy land is fallen and thy lord, and thou
A prisoner and alone, one woman; how
Canst battle against us? For thine own good
I would not have thee strive, nor make ill blood
And shame about thee. . . . Ah, nor move thy lips
In silence there, to cast upon the ships
Thy curse! One word of evil to the host,
This babe shall have no burial, but be tossed
Naked. . . . Ah, peace! And bear as best thou may,
War's fortune. So thou shalt not go thy way
Leaving this child unburied; nor the Greek
Be stern against thee, if thy heart be meek! ANDROMACHE (_to the child_). Go, die, my best-beloved, my cherished one,
In fierce men's hands, leaving me here alone. Thy father was too valiant; that is why
They slay thee! Other children, like to die,
Might have been spared for that. But on thy head
His good is turned to evil. O thou bed
And bridal; O the joining of the hand,
That led me long ago to Hector's land
To bear, O not a lamb for Grecian swords
To slaughter, but a Prince o'er all the hordes
Enthroned of wide-flung Asia. . . . Weepest thou? Nay, why, my little one? Thou canst not know. And Father will not come; he will not come;
Not once, the great spear flashing, and the tomb
Riven to set thee free! Not one of all
His brethren, nor the might of Ilion's wall. How shall it be? One horrible spring . . . deep, deep
Down. And thy neck . . . Ah God, so cometh sleep! . . . And none to pity thee! . . . Thou little thing
That curlest in my arms, what sweet scents cling
All round thy neck! Beloved; can it be
All nothing, that this bosom cradled thee
And fostered; all the weary nights, wherethrough
I watched upon thy sickness, till I grew
Wasted with watching? Kiss me. This one time;
Not ever again. Put up thine arms, and climb
About my neck: now, kiss me, lips to lips. . . . O, ye have found an anguish that outstrips
All tortures of the East, ye gentle Greeks! Why will ye slay this innocent, that seeks
No wrong? . . . O Helen, Helen, thou ill tree
That Tyndareus planted, who shall deem of thee
As child of Zeus? O, thou hast drawn thy breath
From many fathers, Madness, Hate, red Death,
And every rotting poison of the sky! Zeus knows thee not, thou vampire, draining dry
Greece and the world! God hate thee and destroy,
That with those beautiful eyes hast blasted Troy,
And made the far-famed plains a waste withal. Quick! take him: drag him: cast him from the wall,
If cast ye will! Tear him, ye beasts, be swift! God hath undone me, and I cannot lift
One hand, one hand, to save my child from death . . . O, hide my head for shame: fling me beneath
Your galleys' benches! . . . [_She swoons: then half-rising._
                      Quick: I must begone
To the bridal. . . . I have lost my child, my own! [_The soldiers close round her._

                     LEADER. O Troy ill-starred; for one strange woman, one
Abhorred kiss, how are thine hosts undone! TALTHYBIUS (_bending over_ ANDROMACHE _and gradually taking the Child
             from her_). Come, Child: let be that clasp of love
    Outwearied! Walk thy ways with me,
  Up to the crested tower, above
    Thy father's wall . . . where they decree
  Thy soul shall perish.--Hold him: hold!--
    Would God some other man might ply
  These charges, one of duller mould,
    And nearer to the iron than I! HECUBA. O Child, they rob us of our own,
    Child of my Mighty One outworn:
  Ours, ours thou art!--Can aught be done
    Of deeds, can aught of pain be borne,
  To aid thee?--Lo, this beaten head,
  This bleeding bosom! These I spread
  As gifts to thee. I can thus much. Woe, woe for Troy, and woe for thee! What fall yet lacketh, ere we touch
    The last dead deep of misery? [_The Child, who has started back from_ TALTHYBIUS, _is taken up by one
    of the Soldiers and borne back towards the city, while_ ANDROMACHE _is
    set again on the Chariot and driven off towards the ships_. TALTHYBIUS
    _goes with the Child_. *       *       *       *       *

                     CHORUS. [_Strophe_ 1. In Salamis, filled with the foaming
    Of billows and murmur of bees,
  Old Telamon stayed from his roaming,
    Long ago, on a throne of the seas;
  Looking out on the hills olive-laden,
    Enchanted, where first from the earth
  The grey-gleaming fruit of the Maiden
      Athena had birth;
  A soft grey crown for a city
    Beloved, a City of Light:
  Yet he rested not there, nor had pity,
      But went forth in his might,
  Where Heracles wandered, the lonely
    Bow-bearer, and lent him his hands
  For the wrecking of one land only,
  Of Ilion, Ilion only,
      Most hated of lands! [_Antistrophe_ 1. Of the bravest of Hellas he made him
    A ship-folk, in wrath for the Steeds,
  And sailed the wide waters, and stayed him
    At last amid Simois' reeds;
  And the oars beat slow in the river,
    And the long ropes held in the strand,
  And he felt for his bow and his quiver,
      The wrath of his hand. And the old king died; and the towers
    That Phoebus had builded did fall,
  And his wrath, as a flame that devours,
      Ran red over all;
  And the fields and the woodlands lay blasted,
    Long ago. Yea, twice hath the Sire
  Uplifted his hand and downcast it
  On the wall of the Dardan, downcast it
      As a sword and as fire. [_Strophe_ 2. In vain, all in vain,
    O thou 'mid the wine-jars golden
      That movest in delicate joy,
      Ganymedes, child of Troy,
  The lips of the Highest drain
    The cup in thine hand upholden:
  And thy mother, thy mother that bore thee,
    Is wasted with fire and torn;
      And the voice of her shores is heard,
      Wild, as the voice of a bird,
  For lovers and children before thee
    Crying, and mothers outworn. And the pools of thy bathing are perished,
    And the wind-strewn ways of thy feet:
  Yet thy face as aforetime is cherished
    Of Zeus, and the breath of it sweet;
  Yea, the beauty of Calm is upon it
    In houses at rest and afar. But thy land, He hath wrecked and o'erthrown it
      In the wailing of war. [_Antistrophe_ 2. O Love, ancient Love,
      Of old to the Dardan given;
        Love of the Lords of the Sky;
        How didst thou lift us high
    In Ilion, yea, and above
      All cities, as wed with heaven! For Zeus--O leave it unspoken:
      But alas for the love of the Morn;
        Morn of the milk-white wing,
       The gentle, the earth-loving,
    That shineth on battlements broken
      In Troy, and a people forlorn! And, lo, in her bowers Tithonus,
      Our brother, yet sleeps as of old:
    O, she too hath loved us and known us,
      And the Steeds of her star, flashing gold,
    Stooped hither and bore him above us;
      Then blessed we the Gods in our joy. But all that made them to love us
        Hath perished from Troy. *       *       *       *       *

[_As the song ceases, the King_ MENELAUS _enters, richly armed and
    followed by a bodyguard of Soldiers_. _He is a prey to violent and
    conflicting emotions._

                    MENELAUS. How bright the face of heaven, and how sweet
The air this day, that layeth at my feet
The woman that I . . . Nay: 'twas not for her
I came. 'Twas for the man, the cozener
And thief, that ate with me and stole away
My bride. But Paris lieth, this long day,
By God's grace, under the horse-hoofs of the Greek,
And round him all his land. And now I seek . . . Curse her! I scarce can speak the name she bears,
That was my wife. Here with the prisoners
They keep her, in these huts, among the hordes
Of numbered slaves.--The host whose labouring swords
Won her, have given her up to me, to fill
My pleasure; perchance kill her, or not kill,
But lead her home.--Methinks I have foregone
The slaying of Helen here in Ilion . . . Over the long seas I will bear her back,
And there, there, cast her out to whatso wrack
Of angry death they may devise, who know
Their dearest dead for her in Ilion.--Ho! Ye soldiers! Up into the chambers where
She croucheth! Grip the long blood-reeking hair,
And drag her to mine eyes . . . [_Controlling himself._
                                And when there come
Fair breezes, my long ships shall bear her home. [_The Soldiers go to force open the door of the second hut on the left._

                     HECUBA. 