



Produced by Eve Sobol. HTML version by Al Haines. THE DEVIL'S DISCIPLE


Bernard Shaw




ACT I

At the most wretched hour between a black night and a wintry morning in
the year 1777, Mrs. Dudgeon, of New Hampshire, is sitting up in the
kitchen and general dwelling room of her farm house on the outskirts of
the town of Websterbridge. She is not a prepossessing woman. No woman
looks her best after sitting up all night; and Mrs. Dudgeon's face,
even at its best, is grimly trenched by the channels into which the
barren forms and observances of a dead Puritanism can pen a bitter
temper and a fierce pride. She is an elderly matron who has worked hard
and got nothing by it except dominion and detestation in her sordid
home, and an unquestioned reputation for piety and respectability among
her neighbors, to whom drink and debauchery are still so much more
tempting than religion and rectitude, that they conceive goodness
simply as self-denial. This conception is easily extended to
others--denial, and finally generalized as covering anything
disagreeable. So Mrs. Dudgeon, being exceedingly disagreeable, is held
to be exceedingly good. Short of flat felony, she enjoys complete
license except for amiable weaknesses of any sort, and is consequently,
without knowing it, the most licentious woman in the parish on the
strength of never having broken the seventh commandment or missed a
Sunday at the Presbyterian church. The year 1777 is the one in which the passions roused of the breaking
off of the American colonies from England, more by their own weight
than their own will, boiled up to shooting point, the shooting being
idealized to the English mind as suppression of rebellion and
maintenance of British dominion, and to the American as defence of
liberty, resistance to tyranny, and selfsacrifice on the altar of the
Rights of Man. Into the merits of these idealizations it is not here
necessary to inquire: suffice it to say, without prejudice, that they
have convinced both Americans and English that the most high minded
course for them to pursue is to kill as many of one another as
possible, and that military operations to that end are in full swing,
morally supported by confident requests from the clergy of both sides
for the blessing of God on their arms. Under such circumstances many other women besides this disagreeable
Mrs. Dudgeon find themselves sitting up all night waiting for news. Like her, too, they fall asleep towards morning at the risk of nodding
themselves into the kitchen fire. Mrs. Dudgeon sleeps with a shawl over
her head, and her feet on a broad fender of iron laths, the step of the
domestic altar of the fireplace, with its huge hobs and boiler, and its
hinged arm above the smoky mantel-shelf for roasting. The plain kitchen
table is opposite the fire, at her elbow, with a candle on it in a tin
sconce. Her chair, like all the others in the room, is uncushioned and
unpainted; but as it has a round railed back and a seat conventionally
moulded to the sitter's curves, it is comparatively a chair of state. The room has three doors, one on the same side as the fireplace, near
the corner, leading to the best bedroom; one, at the opposite end of
the opposite wall, leading to the scullery and washhouse; and the house
door, with its latch, heavy lock, and clumsy wooden bar, in the front
wall, between the window in its middle and the corner next the bedroom
door. Between the door and the window a rack of pegs suggests to the
deductive observer that the men of the house are all away, as there are
no hats or coats on them. On the other side of the window the clock
hangs on a nail, with its white wooden dial, black iron weights, and
brass pendulum. Between the clock and the corner, a big cupboard,
locked, stands on a dwarf dresser full of common crockery. On the side opposite the fireplace, between the door and the corner, a
shamelessly ugly black horsehair sofa stands against the wall. An
inspection of its stridulous surface shows that Mrs. Dudgeon is not
alone. A girl of sixteen or seventeen has fallen asleep on it. She is a
wild, timid looking creature with black hair and tanned skin. Her
frock, a scanty garment, is rent, weatherstained, berrystained, and by
no means scrupulously clean. It hangs on her with a freedom which,
taken with her brown legs and bare feet, suggests no great stock of
underclothing. Suddenly there comes a tapping at the door, not loud enough to wake the
sleepers. Then knocking, which disturbs Mrs. Dudgeon a little. Finally
the latch is tried, whereupon she springs up at once. MRS. DUDGEON (threateningly). Well, why don't you open the door? (She
sees that the girl is asleep and immediately raises a clamor of
heartfelt vexation.) Well, dear, dear me! Now this is-- (shaking her)
wake up, wake up: do you hear? THE GIRL (sitting up). What is it? MRS. DUDGEON. Wake up; and be ashamed of yourself, you unfeeling sinful
girl, falling asleep like that, and your father hardly cold in his
grave. THE GIRL (half asleep still). I didn't mean to. I dropped off--

MRS. DUDGEON (cutting her short). Oh yes, you've plenty of excuses, I
daresay. Dropped off! (Fiercely, as the knocking recommences.) Why
don't you get up and let your uncle in? after me waiting up all night
for him! (She pushes her rudely off the sofa.) There: I'll open the
door: much good you are to wait up. Go and mend that fire a bit. The girl, cowed and wretched, goes to the fire and puts a log on. Mrs.
Dudgeon unbars the door and opens it, letting into the stuffy kitchen a
little of the freshness and a great deal of the chill of the dawn, also
her second son Christy, a fattish, stupid, fair-haired, round-faced man
of about 22, muffled in a plaid shawl and grey overcoat. He hurries,
shivering, to the fire, leaving Mrs. Dudgeon to shut the door. CHRISTY (at the fire). F--f--f! but it is cold. (Seeing the girl, and
staring lumpishly at her.) Why, who are you? THE GIRL (shyly). Essie. MRS. DUDGEON. Oh you may well ask. (To Essie.) Go to your room, child,
and lie down since you haven't feeling enough to keep you awake. Your
history isn't fit for your own ears to hear. ESSIE. I--

MRS. DUDGEON (peremptorily). Don't answer me, Miss; but show your
obedience by doing what I tell you. (Essie, almost in tears, crosses
the room to the door near the sofa.) And don't forget your prayers. (Essie goes out.) She'd have gone to bed last night just as if nothing
had happened if I'd let her. CHRISTY (phlegmatically). Well, she can't be expected to feel Uncle
Peter's death like one of the family. MRS. DUDGEON. What are you talking about, child? Isn't she his
daughter--the punishment of his wickedness and shame? (She assaults her
chair by sitting down.) CHRISTY (staring). Uncle Peter's daughter! MRS. DUDGEON. Why else should she be here? D'ye think I've not had
enough trouble and care put upon me bringing up my own girls, let alone
you and your good-for-nothing brother, without having your uncle's
bastards--

CHRISTY (interrupting her with an apprehensive glance at the door by
which Essie went out). Sh! She may hear you. MRS. DUDGEON (raising her voice). Let her hear me. People who fear God
don't fear to give the devil's work its right name. (Christy,
soullessly indifferent to the strife of Good and Evil, stares at the
fire, warming himself.) Well, how long are you going to stare there
like a stuck pig? What news have you for me? CHRISTY (taking off his hat and shawl and going to the rack to hang
them up). The minister is to break the news to you. He'll be here
presently. MRS. DUDGEON. Break what news? CHRISTY (standing on tiptoe, from boyish habit, to hang his hat up,
though he is quite tall enough to reach the peg, and speaking with
callous placidity, considering the nature of the announcement). Father's dead too. MRS. DUDGEON (stupent). Your father! CHRISTY (sulkily, coming back to the fire and warming himself again,
attending much more to the fire than to his mother). Well, it's not my
fault. When we got to Nevinstown we found him ill in bed. He didn't
know us at first. The minister sat up with him and sent me away. He
died in the night. MRS. DUDGEON (bursting into dry angry tears). Well, I do think this is
hard on me--very hard on me. His brother, that was a disgrace to us all
his life, gets hanged on the public gallows as a rebel; and your
father, instead of staying at home where his duty was, with his own
family, goes after him and dies, leaving everything on my shoulders. After sending this girl to me to take care of, too! (She plucks her
shawl vexedly over her ears.) It's sinful, so it is; downright sinful. CHRISTY (with a slow, bovine cheerfulness, after a pause). I think it's
going to be a fine morning, after all. MRS. DUDGEON (railing at him). A fine morning! And your father newly
dead! Where's your feelings, child? CHRISTY (obstinately). Well, I didn't mean any harm. I suppose a man
may make a remark about the weather even if his father's dead. MRS. DUDGEON (bitterly). A nice comfort my children are to me! One son
a fool, and the other a lost sinner that's left his home to live with
smugglers and gypsies and villains, the scum of the earth! Someone knocks. CHRISTY (without moving). That's the minister. MRS. DUDGEON (sharply). Well, aren't you going to let Mr. Anderson in? Christy goes sheepishly to the door. Mrs. Dudgeon buries her face in
her hands, as it is her duty as a widow to be overcome with grief. Christy opens the door, and admits the minister, Anthony Anderson, a
shrewd, genial, ready Presbyterian divine of about 50, with something
of the authority of his profession in his bearing. But it is an
altogether secular authority, sweetened by a conciliatory, sensible
manner not at all suggestive of a quite thoroughgoing
other-worldliness. He is a strong, healthy man, too, with a thick,
sanguine neck; and his keen, cheerful mouth cuts into somewhat fleshy
corners. No doubt an excellent parson, but still a man capable of
making the most of this world, and perhaps a little apologetically
conscious of getting on better with it than a sound Presbyterian ought. ANDERSON (to Christy, at the door, looking at Mrs. Dudgeon whilst he
takes off his cloak). Have you told her? CHRISTY. She made me. (He shuts the door; yawns; and loafs across to
the sofa where he sits down and presently drops off to sleep.) Anderson looks compassionately at Mrs. Dudgeon. Then he hangs his cloak
and hat on the rack. Mrs. Dudgeon dries her eyes and looks up at him. ANDERSON. Sister: the Lord has laid his hand very heavily upon you. MRS. DUDGEON (with intensely recalcitrant resignation). It's His will,
I suppose; and I must bow to it. But I do think it hard. What call had
Timothy to go to Springtown, and remind everybody that he belonged to a
man that was being hanged?--and (spitefully) that deserved it, if ever
a man did. ANDERSON (gently). They were brothers, Mrs. Dudgeon. MRS. DUDGEON. Timothy never acknowledged him as his brother after we
were married: he had too much respect for me to insult me with such a
brother. Would such a selfish wretch as Peter have come thirty miles to
see Timothy hanged, do you think? Not thirty yards, not he. However, I
must bear my cross as best I may: least said is soonest mended. ANDERSON (very grave, coming down to the fire to stand with his back to
it). Your eldest son was present at the execution, Mrs. Dudgeon. MRS. DUDGEON (disagreeably surprised). Richard? ANDERSON (nodding). Yes. MRS. DUDGEON (vindictively). Let it be a warning to him. He may end
that way himself, the wicked, dissolute, godless-- (she suddenly stops;
her voice fails; and she asks, with evident dread) Did Timothy see him? ANDERSON. Yes. MRS. DUDGEON (holding her breath). Well? ANDERSON. He only saw him in the crowd: they did not speak. (Mrs.
Dudgeon, greatly relieved, exhales the pent up breath and sits at her
ease again.) Your husband was greatly touched and impressed by his
brother's awful death. (Mrs. Dudgeon sneers. Anderson breaks off to
demand with some indignation) Well, wasn't it only natural, Mrs.
Dudgeon? He softened towards his prodigal son in that moment. He sent
for him to come to see him. MRS. DUDGEON (her alarm renewed). Sent for Richard! ANDERSON. Yes; but Richard would not come. He sent his father a
message; but I'm sorry to say it was a wicked message--an awful message. MRS. DUDGEON. What was it? ANDERSON. That he would stand by his wicked uncle, and stand against
his good parents, in this world and the next. MRS. DUDGEON (implacably). He will be punished for it. He will be
punished for it--in both worlds. ANDERSON. That is not in our hands, Mrs. Dudgeon. MRS. DUDGEON. Did I say it was, Mr. Anderson. We are told that the
wicked shall be punished. Why should we do our duty and keep God's law
if there is to be no difference made between us and those who follow
their own likings and dislikings, and make a jest of us and of their
Maker's word? ANDERSON. Well, Richard's earthly father has been merciful and his
heavenly judge is the father of us all. MRS. DUDGEON (forgetting herself). Richard's earthly father was a
softheaded--

ANDERSON (shocked). Oh! MRS. DUDGEON (with a touch of shame). Well, I am Richard's mother. If
I am against him who has any right to be for him? (Trying to conciliate
him.) Won't you sit down, Mr. Anderson? I should have asked you before;
but I'm so troubled. ANDERSON. Thank you-- (He takes a chair from beside the fireplace, and
turns it so that he can sit comfortably at the fire. When he is seated
he adds, in the tone of a man who knows that he is opening a difficult
subject.) Has Christy told you about the new will? MRS. DUDGEON (all her fears returning). The new will! Did Timothy--? (She breaks off, gasping, unable to complete the question.) ANDERSON. Yes. In his last hours he changed his mind. MRS. DUDGEON (white with intense rage). And you let him rob me? ANDERSON. I had no power to prevent him giving what was his to his own
son. MRS. DUDGEON. He had nothing of his own. His money was the money I
brought him as my marriage portion. It was for me to deal with my own
money and my own son. He dare not have done it if I had been with him;
and well he knew it. That was why he stole away like a thief to take
advantage of the law to rob me by making a new will behind my back. The
more shame on you, Mr. Anderson,--you, a minister of the gospel--to act
as his accomplice in such a crime. ANDERSON (rising). I will take no offence at what you say in the first
bitterness of your grief. MRS. DUDGEON (contemptuously). Grief! ANDERSON. Well, of your disappointment, if you can find it in your
heart to think that the better word. MRS. DUDGEON. My heart! My heart! And since when, pray, have you begun
to hold up our hearts as trustworthy guides for us? ANDERSON (rather guiltily). I--er--

MRS. DUDGEON (vehemently). Don't lie, Mr. Anderson. We are told that
the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. My heart belonged, not to Timothy, but to that poor wretched brother of
his that has just ended his days with a rope round his neck--aye, to
Peter Dudgeon. You know it: old Eli Hawkins, the man to whose pulpit
you succeeded, though you are not worthy to loose his shoe latchet,
told it you when he gave over our souls into your charge. He warned me
and strengthened me against my heart, and made me marry a Godfearing
man--as he thought. What else but that discipline has made me the woman
I am? And you, you who followed your heart in your marriage, you talk
to me of what I find in my heart. Go home to your pretty wife, man; and
leave me to my prayers. (She turns from him and leans with her elbows
on the table, brooding over her wrongs and taking no further notice of
him.) ANDERSON (willing enough to escape). The Lord forbid that I should come
between you and the source of all comfort! (He goes to the rack for his
coat and hat.) MRS. DUDGEON (without looking at him). The Lord will know what to
forbid and what to allow without your help. ANDERSON. And whom to forgive, I hope--Eli Hawkins and myself, if we
have ever set up our preaching against His law. (He fastens his cloak,
and is now ready to go.) Just one word--on necessary business, Mrs.
Dudgeon. There is the reading of the will to be gone through; and
Richard has a right to be present. He is in the town; but he has the
grace to say that he does not want to force himself in here. MRS. DUDGEON. He shall come here. Does he expect us to leave his
father's house for his convenience? Let them all come, and come
quickly, and go quickly. They shall not make the will an excuse to
shirk half their day's work. I shall be ready, never fear. ANDERSON (coming back a step or two). Mrs. Dudgeon: I used to have some
little influence with you. When did I lose it? MRS. DUDGEON (still without turning to him). When you married for love. Now you're answered. ANDERSON. Yes: I am answered. (He goes out, musing.) MRS. DUDGEON (to herself, thinking of her husband). Thief! Thief!! (She
shakes herself angrily out of the chair; throws back the shawl from her
head; and sets to work to prepare the room for the reading of the will,
beginning by replacing Anderson's chair against the wall, and pushing
back her own to the window. Then she calls, in her hard, driving,
wrathful way) Christy. (No answer: he is fast asleep.) Christy. (She
shakes him roughly.) Get up out of that; and be ashamed of
yourself--sleeping, and your father dead! (She returns to the table;
puts the candle on the mantelshelf; and takes from the table drawer a
red table cloth which she spreads.) CHRISTY (rising reluctantly). Well, do you suppose we are never going
to sleep until we are out of mourning? MRS. DUDGEON. I want none of your sulks. Here: help me to set this
table. (They place the table in the middle of the room, with Christy's
end towards the fireplace and Mrs. Dudgeon's towards the sofa. Christy
drops the table as soon as possible, and goes to the fire, leaving his
mother to make the final adjustments of its position.) We shall have
the minister back here with the lawyer and all the family to read the
will before you have done toasting yourself. Go and wake that girl; and
then light the stove in the shed: you can't have your breakfast here. And mind you wash yourself, and make yourself fit to receive the
company. (She punctuates these orders by going to the cupboard;
unlocking it; and producing a decanter of wine, which has no doubt
stood there untouched since the last state occasion in the family, and
some glasses, which she sets on the table. Also two green ware plates,
on one of which she puts a barmbrack with a knife beside it. On the
other she shakes some biscuits out of a tin, putting back one or two,
and counting the rest.) Now mind: there are ten biscuits there: let
there be ten there when I come back after dressing myself. And keep
your fingers off the raisins in that cake. And tell Essie the same. I
suppose I can trust you to bring in the case of stuffed birds without
breaking the glass? (She replaces the tin in the cupboard, which she
locks, pocketing the key carefully.) CHRISTY (lingering at the fire). You'd better put the inkstand instead,
for the lawyer. MRS. DUDGEON. That's no answer to make to me, sir. Go and do as you're
told. (Christy turns sullenly to obey.) Stop: take down that shutter
before you go, and let the daylight in: you can't expect me to do all
the heavy work of the house with a great heavy lout like you idling
about. Christy takes the window bar out of its damps, and puts it aside; then
opens the shutter, showing the grey morning. Mrs. Dudgeon takes the
sconce from the mantelshelf; blows out the candle; extinguishes the
snuff by pinching it with her fingers, first licking them for the
purpose; and replaces the sconce on the shelf. CHRISTY (looking through the window). Here's the minister's wife. MRS. DUDGEON (displeased). What! Is she coming here? CHRISTY. Yes. MRS. DUDGEON. What does she want troubling me at this hour, before I'm
properly dressed to receive people? CHRISTY. You'd better ask her. MRS. DUDGEON (threateningly). You'd better keep a civil tongue in your
head. (He goes sulkily towards the door. She comes after him, plying
him with instructions.) Tell that girl to come to me as soon as she's
had her breakfast. And  tell her to make herself fit to be seen before
the people. (Christy goes out and slams the door in her face.) Nice
manners, that! (Someone knocks at the house door: she turns and cries
inhospitably.) Come in. (Judith Anderson, the  minister's wife, comes
in. Judith is more than twenty years  younger than her husband, though
she will never be as young as he in vitality. She is pretty and proper
and ladylike, and has been admired and petted into an opinion of
herself sufficiently favorable to give her a self-assurance which
serves her instead of strength. She has a pretty taste in dress, and in
her face the pretty lines of a sentimental character formed by dreams. Even her little self-complacency is pretty, like a child's vanity. Rather a pathetic creature to any sympathetic observer who knows how
rough a place the world is. One feels, on the whole, that Anderson
might have chosen worse, and that she, needing protection, could not
have chosen better.) Oh, it's you, is it, Mrs. Anderson? JUDITH (very politely--almost patronizingly). Yes. Can I do anything
for you, Mrs. Dudgeon? Can I help to get the place ready before they
come to read the will? MRS. DUDGEON (stiffly). Thank you, Mrs. Anderson, my house is always
ready for anyone to come into. MRS. ANDERSON (with complacent amiability). Yes, indeed it is. Perhaps
you had rather I did not intrude on you just now. MRS. DUDGEON. Oh, one more or less will make no difference this
morning, Mrs. Anderson. Now that you're here, you'd better stay. If you
wouldn't mind shutting the door! (Judith smiles, implying "How stupid
of me" and shuts it with an exasperating air of doing something pretty
and becoming.) That's better. I must go and tidy myself a bit. I
suppose you don't mind stopping here to receive anyone that comes until
I'm ready. JUDITH (graciously giving her leave). Oh yes, certainly. Leave them to
me, Mrs. Dudgeon; and take your time. (She hangs her cloak and bonnet
on the rack.) MRS. DUDGEON (half sneering). I thought that would be more in your way
than getting the house ready. (Essie comes back.) Oh, here you are! (Severely) Come here: let me see you. (Essie timidly goes to her. Mrs.
Dudgeon takes her roughly by the arm and pulls her round to inspect the
results of her attempt to clean and tidy herself--results which show
little practice and less conviction.) Mm! That's what you call doing
your hair properly, I suppose. It's easy to see what you are, and how
you were brought up. (She throws her arms away, and goes on,
peremptorily.) Now you listen to me and do as you're told. You sit down
there in the corner by the fire; and when the company comes don't dare
to speak until you're spoken to. (Essie creeps away to the fireplace.) Your father's people had better see you and know you're there: they're
as much bound to keep you from starvation as I am. At any rate they
might help. But let me have no chattering and making free with them, as
if you were their equal. Do you hear? ESSIE. Yes. MRS. DUDGEON. Well, then go and do as you're told. (Essie sits down miserably on the corner of the fender furthest from
the door.) Never mind her, Mrs. Anderson: you know who she is and what
she is. If she gives you any trouble, just tell me; and I'll settle
accounts with her. (Mrs. Dudgeon goes into the bedroom, shutting the
door sharply behind her as if even it had to be made to do its duty
with a ruthless hand.) JUDITH (patronizing Essie, and arranging the cake and wine on the table
more becomingly). You must not mind if your aunt is strict with you. She is a very good woman, and desires your good too. ESSIE (in listless misery). Yes. JUDITH (annoyed with Essie for her failure to be consoled and edified,
and to appreciate the kindly condescension of the remark). You are not
going to be sullen, I hope, Essie. ESSIE. No. JUDITH. That's a good girl! (She places a couple of chairs at the table
with their backs to the window, with a pleasant sense of being a more
thoughtful housekeeper than Mrs. Dudgeon.) Do you know any of your
father's relatives? ESSIE. No. They wouldn't have anything to do with him: they were too
religious. Father used to talk about Dick Dudgeon; but I never saw him. JUDITH (ostentatiously shocked). Dick Dudgeon! Essie: do you wish to be
a really respectable and grateful girl, and to make a place for
yourself here by steady good conduct? ESSIE (very half-heartedly). Yes. JUDITH. Then you must never mention the name of Richard Dudgeon--never
even think about him. He is a bad man. ESSIE. What has he done? JUDITH. You must not ask questions about him, Essie. You are too young
to know what it is to be a bad man. But he is a smuggler; and he lives
with gypsies; and he has no love for his mother and his family; and he
wrestles and plays games on Sunday instead of going to church. Never
let him into your presence, if you can help it, Essie; and try to keep
yourself and all womanhood unspotted by contact with such men. ESSIE. Yes. JUDITH (again displeased). I am afraid you say Yes and No without
thinking very deeply. ESSIE. Yes. At least I mean--

JUDITH (severely). What do you mean? ESSIE (almost crying). Only--my father was a smuggler; and-- (Someone
knocks.) JUDITH. They are beginning to come. Now remember your aunt's
directions, Essie; and be a good girl. (Christy comes back with the
stand of stuffed birds under a glass case, and an inkstand, which he
places on the table.) Good morning, Mr. Dudgeon. Will you open the
door, please: the people have come. CHRISTY. Good morning. (He opens the house door.) The morning is now fairly bright and warm; and Anderson, who is the
first to enter, has left his cloak at home. He is accompanied by Lawyer
Hawkins, a brisk, middleaged man in brown riding gaiters and yellow
breeches, looking as much squire as solicitor. He and Anderson are
allowed precedence as representing the learned professions. After them
comes the family, headed by the senior uncle, William Dudgeon, a large,
shapeless man, bottle-nosed and evidently no ascetic at table. His
clothes are not the clothes, nor his anxious wife the wife, of a
prosperous man. The junior uncle, Titus Dudgeon, is a wiry little
terrier of a man, with an immense and visibly purse-proud wife, both
free from the cares of the William household. Hawkins at once goes briskly to the table and takes the chair nearest
the sofa, Christy having left the inkstand there. He puts his hat on
the floor beside him, and produces the will. Uncle William comes to the
fire and stands on the hearth warming his coat tails, leaving Mrs.
William derelict near the door. Uncle Titus, who is the lady's man of
the family, rescues her by giving her his disengaged arm and bringing
her to the sofa, where he sits down warmly between his own lady and his
brother's. Anderson hangs up his hat and waits for a word with Judith. JUDITH. She will be here in a moment. Ask them to wait. (She taps at
the bedroom door. Receiving an answer from within, she opens it and
passes through.) ANDERSON (taking his place at the table at the opposite end to
Hawkins). Our poor afflicted sister will be with us in a moment. Are we
all here? CHRISTY (at the house door, which he has just shut). All except Dick. The callousness with which Christy names the reprobate jars on the
moral sense of the family. Uncle William shakes his head slowly and
repeatedly. Mrs. Titus catches her breath convulsively through her
nose. Her husband speaks. UNCLE TITUS. Well, I hope he will have the grace not to come. I hope so. The Dudgeons all murmur assent, except Christy, who goes to the window
and posts himself there, looking out. Hawkins smiles secretively as if
he knew something that would change their tune if they knew it. Anderson is uneasy: the love of solemn family councils, especially
funereal ones, is not in his nature. Judith appears at the bedroom door. JUDITH (with gentle impressiveness). Friends, Mrs. Dudgeon. (She takes
the chair from beside the fireplace; and places it for Mrs. Dudgeon,
who comes from the bedroom in black, with a clean handkerchief to her
eyes. All rise, except Essie. Mrs. Titus and Mrs. William produce
equally clean handkerchiefs and weep. It is an affecting moment.) UNCLE WILLIAM. Would it comfort you, sister, if we were to offer up a
prayer? UNCLE TITUS. Or sing a hymn? ANDERSON (rather hastily). I have been with our sister this morning
already, friends. In our hearts we ask a blessing. ALL (except Essie). Amen. They all sit down, except Judith, who stands behind Mrs. Dudgeon's
chair. JUDITH (to Essie). Essie: did you say Amen? ESSIE (scaredly). No. JUDITH. Then say it, like a good girl. ESSIE. Amen. UNCLE WILLIAM (encouragingly). That's right: that's right. We know who
you are; but we are willing to be kind to you if you are a good girl
and deserve it. We are all equal before the Throne. This republican sentiment does not please the women, who are convinced
that the Throne is precisely the place where their superiority, often
questioned in this world, will be recognized and rewarded. CHRISTY (at the window). Here's Dick. Anderson and Hawkins look round sociably. Essie, with a gleam of
interest breaking through her misery, looks up. Christy grins and gapes
expectantly at the door. The rest are petrified with the intensity of
their sense of Virtue menaced with outrage by the approach of flaunting
Vice. The reprobate appears in the doorway, graced beyond his alleged
merits by the morning sunlight. He is certainly the best looking member
of the family; but his expression is reckless and sardonic, his manner
defiant and satirical, his dress picturesquely careless. Only his
forehead and mouth betray an extraordinary steadfastness, and his eyes
are the eyes of a fanatic. RICHARD (on the threshold, taking off his hat). Ladies and gentlemen:
your servant, your very humble servant. (With this comprehensive
insult, he throws his hat to Christy with a suddenness that makes him
jump like a negligent wicket keeper, and comes into the middle of the
room, where he turns and deliberately surveys the company.) How happy
you all look! how glad to see me! (He turns towards Mrs. Dudgeon's
chair; and his lip rolls up horribly from his dog tooth as he meets her
look of undisguised hatred.) Well, mother: keeping up appearances as
usual? that's right, that's right. (Judith pointedly moves away from
his neighborhood to the other side of the kitchen, holding her skirt
instinctively as if to save it from contamination. Uncle Titus promptly
marks his approval of her action by rising from the sofa, and placing a
chair for her to sit down upon.) What! Uncle William! I haven't seen
you since you gave up drinking. (Poor Uncle William, shamed, would
protest; but Richard claps him heartily on his shoulder, adding) you
have given it up, haven't you? (releasing him with a playful push) of
course you have: quite right too; you overdid it. (He turns away from
Uncle William and makes for the sofa.) And now, where is that upright
horsedealer Uncle Titus? Uncle Titus: come forth. (He comes upon him
holding the chair as Judith sits down.) As usual, looking after the
ladies. UNCLE TITUS (indignantly). Be ashamed of yourself, sir--

RICHARD (interrupting him and shaking his hand in spite of him). I am:
I am; but I am proud of my uncle--proud of all my relatives (again
surveying them) who could look at them and not be proud and joyful? (Uncle Titus, overborne, resumes his seat on the sofa. Richard turns to
the table.) Ah, Mr. Anderson, still at the good work, still shepherding
them. Keep them up to the mark, minister, keep them up to the mark. Come! (with a spring he seats himself on the table and takes up the
decanter) clink a glass with me, Pastor, for the sake of old times. ANDERSON. You know, I think, Mr. Dudgeon, that I do not drink before
dinner. RICHARD. You will, some day, Pastor: Uncle William used to drink before
breakfast. Come: it will give your sermons unction. (He smells the wine
and makes a wry face.) But do not begin on my mother's company sherry. I stole some when I was six years old; and I have been a temperate man
ever since. (He puts the decanter down and changes the subject.) So I
hear you are married, Pastor, and that your wife has a most ungodly
allowance of good looks. ANDERSON (quietly indicating Judith). Sir: you are in the presence of
my wife. (Judith rises and stands with stony propriety.) RICHARD (quickly slipping down from the table with instinctive good
manners). Your servant, madam: no offence. (He looks at her earnestly.) You deserve your reputation; but I'm sorry to see by your expression
that you're a good woman. (She looks shocked, and sits down amid a murmur of indignant sympathy
from his relatives. Anderson, sensible enough to know that these
demonstrations can only gratify and encourage a man who is deliberately
trying to provoke them, remains perfectly goodhumored.) All the same,
Pastor, I respect you more than I did before. By the way, did I hear,
or did I not, that our late lamented Uncle Peter, though unmarried, was
a father? UNCLE TITUS. He had only one irregular child, sir. RICHARD. Only one! He thinks one a mere trifle! I blush for you, Uncle
Titus. ANDERSON. Mr. Dudgeon you are in the presence of your mother and her
grief. RICHARD. It touches me profoundly, Pastor. By the way, what has become
of the irregular child? ANDERSON (pointing to Essie). There, sir, listening to you. RICHARD (shocked into sincerity). What! Why the devil didn't you tell
me that before? Children suffer enough in this house without-- (He
hurries remorsefully to Essie.) Come, little cousin! never mind me: it
was not meant to hurt you. (She looks up gratefully at him. Her
tearstained face affects him violently, and he bursts out, in a
transport of wrath) Who has been making her cry? Who has been
ill-treating her? By God--

MRS. DUDGEON (rising and confronting him). Silence your blasphemous
tongue. I will hear no more of this. Leave my house. RICHARD. How do you know it's your house until the will is read? (They
look at one another for a moment with intense hatred; and then she
sinks, checkmated, into her chair. Richard goes boldly up past Anderson
to the window, where he takes the railed chair in his hand.) Ladies and
gentlemen: as the eldest son of my late father, and the unworthy head
of this household, I bid you welcome. By your leave, Minister Anderson:
by your leave, Lawyer Hawkins. The head of the table for the head of
the family. (He places the chair at the table between the minister and
the attorney; sits down between them; and addresses the assembly with a
presidential air.) We meet on a melancholy occasion: a father dead! an
uncle actually hanged, and probably damned. (He shakes his head
deploringly. The relatives freeze with horror.) That's right: pull your
longest faces (his voice suddenly sweetens gravely as his glance lights
on Essie) provided only there is hope in the eyes of the child. (Briskly.) Now then, Lawyer Hawkins: business, business. Get on with
the will, man. TITUS. Do not let yourself be ordered or hurried, Mr. Hawkins. HAWKINS (very politely and willingly). Mr. Dudgeon means no offence, I
feel sure. I will not keep you one second, Mr. Dudgeon. Just while I
get my glasses-- (he fumbles for them. The Dudgeons look at one another
with misgiving). RICHARD. Aha! They notice your civility, Mr. Hawkins. They are prepared
for the worst. A glass of wine to clear your voice before you begin. (He pours out one for him and hands it; then pours one for himself.) HAWKINS. Thank you, Mr. Dudgeon. Your good health, sir. RICHARD. Yours, sir. (With the glass half way to his lips, he checks
himself, giving a dubious glance at the wine, and adds, with quaint
intensity.) Will anyone oblige me with a glass of water? Essie, who has been hanging on his every word and movement, rises
stealthily and slips out behind Mrs. Dudgeon through the bedroom door,
returning presently with a jug and going out of the house as quietly as
possible. HAWKINS. The will is not exactly in proper legal phraseology. RICHARD. No: my father died without the consolations of the law. HAWKINS. Good again, Mr. Dudgeon, good again. (Preparing to read) Are
you ready, sir? RICHARD. Ready, aye ready. For what we are about to receive, may the
Lord make us truly thankful. Go ahead. HAWKINS (reading). "This is the last will and testament of me Timothy
Dudgeon on my deathbed at Nevinstown on the road from Springtown to
Websterbridge on this twenty-fourth day of September, one thousand
seven hundred and seventy seven. I hereby revoke all former wills made
by me and declare that I am of sound mind and know well what I am doing
and that this is my real will according to my own wish and affections." RICHARD (glancing at his mother). Aha! HAWKINS (shaking his head). Bad phraseology, sir, wrong phraseology. "I
give and bequeath a hundred pounds to my younger son Christopher
Dudgeon, fifty pounds to be paid to him on the day of his marriage to
Sarah Wilkins if she will have him, and ten pounds on the birth of each
of his children up to the number of five." RICHARD. How if she won't have him? CHRISTY. She will if I have fifty pounds. RICHARD. Good, my brother. Proceed. HAWKINS. "I give and bequeath to my wife Annie Dudgeon, born Annie
Primrose"--you see he did not know the law, Mr. Dudgeon: your mother
was not born Annie: she was christened so--"an annuity of fifty-two
pounds a year for life (Mrs. Dudgeon, with all eyes on her, holds
herself convulsively rigid) to be paid out of the interest on her own
money"--there's a way to put it, Mr. Dudgeon! Her own money! MRS. DUDGEON. A very good way to put God's truth. It was every penny my
own. Fifty-two pounds a year! HAWKINS. "And I recommend her for her goodness and piety to the
forgiving care of her children, having stood between them and her as
far as I could to the best of my ability." MRS. DUDGEON. And this is my reward! (raging inwardly) You know what I
think, Mr. Anderson you know the word I gave to it. ANDERSON. It cannot be helped, Mrs. Dudgeon. We must take what comes to
us. (To Hawkins.) Go on, sir. HAWKINS. "I give and bequeath my house at Websterbridge with the land
belonging to it and all the rest of my property soever to my eldest son
and heir, Richard Dudgeon." RICHARD. Oho! The fatted calf, Minister, the fatted calf. HAWKINS. "On these conditions--"

RICHARD. The devil! Are there conditions? HAWKINS. "To wit: first, that he shall not let my brother Peter's
natural child starve or be driven by want to an evil life." RICHARD (emphatically, striking his fist on the table). Agreed. Mrs. Dudgeon, turning to look malignantly at Essie, misses her and
looks quickly round to see where she has moved to; then, seeing that
she has left the room without leave, closes her lips vengefully. HAWKINS. "Second, that he shall be a good friend to my old horse Jim"--
(again slacking his head) he should have written James, sir. RICHARD. James shall live in clover. Go on. HAWKINS. " --and keep my deaf farm laborer Prodger Feston in his
service." RICHARD. Prodger Feston shall get drunk every Saturday. HAWKINS. "Third, that he make Christy a present on his marriage out of
the ornaments in the best room." RICHARD (holding up the stuffed birds). Here you are, Christy. CHRISTY (disappointed). I'd rather have the China peacocks. RICHARD. You shall have both. (Christy is greatly pleased.) Go on. HAWKINS. "Fourthly and lastly, that he try to live at peace with his
mother as far as she will consent to it." RICHARD (dubiously). Hm! Anything more, Mr. Hawkins? HAWKINS (solemnly). "Finally I gave and bequeath my soul into my
Maker's hands, humbly asking forgiveness for all my sins and mistakes,
and hoping that he will so guide my son that it may not be said that I
have done wrong in trusting to him rather than to others in the
perplexity of my last hour in this strange place." ANDERSON. Amen. THE UNCLES AND AUNTS. Amen. RICHARD. My mother does not say Amen. MRS. DUDGEON (rising, unable to give up her property without a
struggle). Mr. Hawkins: is that a proper will? Remember, I have his
rightful, legal will, drawn up by yourself, leaving all to me. HAWKINS. This is a very wrongly and irregularly worded will, Mrs.
Dudgeon; though (turning politely to Richard) it contains in my
judgment an excellent disposal of his property. ANDERSON (interposing before Mrs. Dudgeon can retort). That is not what
you are asked, Mr. Hawkins. Is it a legal will? HAWKINS. The courts will sustain it against the other. ANDERSON. But why, if the other is more lawfully worded? HAWKING. Because, sir, the courts will sustain the claim of a man--and
that man the eldest son--against any woman, if they can. I warned you,
Mrs. Dudgeon, when you got me to draw that other will, that it was not
a wise will, and that though you might make him sign it, he would never
be easy until he revoked it. But you wouldn't take advice; and now Mr.
Richard is cock of the walk. (He takes his hat from the floor; rises;
and begins pocketing his papers and spectacles.) This is the signal for the breaking-up of the party. Anderson takes his
hat from the rack and joins Uncle William at the fire. Uncle Titus
fetches Judith her things from the rack. The three on the sofa rise and
chat with Hawkins. Mrs. Dudgeon, now an intruder in her own house,
stands erect, crushed by the weight of the law on women, accepting it,
as she has been trained to accept all monstrous calamities, as proofs
of the greatness of the power that inflicts them, and of her own
wormlike insignificance. For at this time, remember, Mary
Wollstonecraft is as yet only a girl of eighteen, and her Vindication
of the Rights of Women is still fourteen years off. Mrs. Dudgeon is
rescued from her apathy by Essie, who comes back with the jug full of
water. She is taking it to Richard when Mrs. Dudgeon stops her. MRS. DUDGEON (threatening her). Where have you been? (Essie, appalled,
tries to answer, but cannot.) How dare you go out by yourself after the
orders I gave you? ESSIE. He asked for a drink-- (she stops, her tongue cleaving to her
palate with terror). JUDITH (with gentler severity). Who asked for a drink? (Essie,
speechless, points to Richard.) RICHARD. What! I! JUDITH (shocked). Oh Essie, Essie! RICHARD. I believe I did. (He takes a glass and holds it to Essie to be
filled. Her hand shakes.) What! afraid of me? ESSIE (quickly). No. I-- (She pours out the water.) RICHARD (tasting it). Ah, you've been up the street to the market gate
spring to get that. (He takes a draught.) Delicious! Thank you. (Unfortunately, at this moment he chances to catch sight of Judith's
face, which expresses the most prudish disapproval of his evident
attraction for Essie, who is devouring him with her grateful eyes. His
mocking expression returns instantly. He puts down the glass;
deliberately winds his arm round Essie's shoulders; and brings her into
the middle of the company. Mrs. Dudgeon being in Essie's way as they
come past the table, he says) By your leave, mother (and compels her to
make way for them). What do they call you? Bessie? ESSIE. Essie. RICHARD. Essie, to be sure. Are you a good girl, Essie? ESSIE (greatly disappointed that he, of all people should begin at her
in this way) Yes. (She looks doubtfully at Judith.) I think so. I mean
I--I hope so. RICHARD. Essie: did you ever hear of a person called the devil? ANDERSON (revolted). Shame on you, sir, with a mere child--

RICHARD. By your leave, Minister: I do not interfere with your sermons:
do not you interrupt mine. (To Essie.) Do you know what they call me,
Essie? ESSIE. Dick. RICHARD (amused: patting her on the shoulder). Yes, Dick; but something
else too. They call me the Devil's Disciple. ESSIE. Why do you let them? RICHARD (seriously). Because it's true. I was brought up in the other
service; but I knew from the first that the Devil was my natural master
and captain and friend. I saw that he was in the right, and that the
world cringed to his conqueror only through fear. I prayed secretly to
him; and he comforted me, and saved me from having my spirit broken in
this house of children's tears. I promised him my soul, and swore an
oath that I would stand up for him in this world and stand by him in
the next. (Solemnly) That promise and that oath made a man of me. From
this day this house is his home; and no child shall cry in it: this
hearth is his altar; and no soul shall ever cower over it in the dark
evenings and be afraid. Now (turning forcibly on the rest) which of you
good men will take this child and rescue her from the house of the
devil? JUDITH (coming to Essie and throwing a protecting arm about her). I
will. You should be burnt alive. ESSIE. But I don't want to. (She shrinks back, leaving Richard and
Judith face to face.) RICHARD (to Judith). Actually doesn't want to, most virtuous lady! UNCLE TITUS. Have a care, Richard Dudgeon. The law--

RICHARD (turning threateningly on him). Have a care, you. In an hour
from this there will be no law here but martial law. I passed the
soldiers within six miles on my way here: before noon Major Swindon's
gallows for rebels will be up in the market place. ANDERSON (calmly). What have we to fear from that, sir? RICHARD. More than you think. He hanged the wrong man at Springtown: he
thought Uncle Peter was respectable, because the Dudgeons had a good
name. But his next example will be the best man in the town to whom he
can bring home a rebellious word. Well, we're all rebels; and you know
it. ALL THE MEN (except Anderson). No, no, no! RICHARD. Yes, you are. You haven't damned King George up hill and down
dale as I have; but you've prayed for his defeat; and you, Anthony
Anderson, have conducted the service, and sold your family bible to buy
a pair of pistols. They mayn't hang me, perhaps; because the moral
effect of the Devil's Disciple dancing on nothing wouldn't help them. But a Minister! (Judith, dismayed, clings to Anderson) or a lawyer! (Hawkins smiles like a man able to take care of himself) or an upright
horsedealer! (Uncle Titus snarls at him in rags and terror) or a
reformed drunkard (Uncle William, utterly unnerved, moans and wobbles
with fear) eh? Would that show that King George meant business--ha? ANDERSON (perfectly self-possessed). Come, my dear: he is only trying
to frighten you. There is no danger. (He takes her out of the house. The rest crowd to the door to follow him, except Essie, who remains
near Richard.) RICHARD (boisterously derisive). Now then: how many of you will stay
with me; run up the American flag on the devil's house; and make a
fight for freedom? (They scramble out, Christy among them, hustling one
another in their haste.) Ha ha! Long live the devil! (To Mrs. Dudgeon,
who is following them) What mother! are you off too? MRS. DUDGEON (deadly pale, with her hand on her heart as if she had
received a deathblow). My curse on you! My dying curse! (She goes out.) RICHARD (calling after her). It will bring me luck. Ha ha ha! ESSIE (anxiously). Mayn't I stay? RICHARD (turning to her). What! Have they forgotten to save your soul
in their anxiety about their own bodies? Oh yes: you may stay. (He
turns excitedly away again and shakes his fist after them. His left
fist, also clenched, hangs down. Essie seizes it and kisses it, her
tears falling on it. He starts and looks at it.) Tears! The devil's
baptism! (She falls on her knees, sobbing. He stoops goodnaturedly to
raise her, saying) Oh yes, you may cry that way, Essie, if you like. ACT II

Minister Anderson's house is in the main street of Websterbridge, not
far from the town hall. To the eye of the eighteenth century New
Englander, it is much grander than the plain farmhouse of the Dudgeons;
but it is so plain itself that a modern house agent would let both at
about the same rent. The chief dwelling room has the same sort of
kitchen fireplace, with boiler, toaster hanging on the bars, movable
iron griddle socketed to the hob, hook above for roasting, and broad
fender, on which stand a kettle and a plate of buttered toast. The
door, between the fireplace and the corner, has neither panels,
fingerplates nor handles: it is made of plain boards, and fastens with
a latch. The table is a kitchen table, with a treacle colored cover of
American cloth, chapped at the corners by draping. The tea service on
it consists of two thick cups and saucers of the plainest ware, with
milk jug and bowl to match, each large enough to contain nearly a
quart, on a black japanned tray, and, in the middle of the table, a
wooden trencher with a big loaf upon it, and a square half pound block
of butter in a crock. The big oak press facing the fire from the
opposite side of the room, is for use and storage, not for ornament;
and the minister's house coat hangs on a peg from its door, showing
that he is out; for when he is in it is his best coat that hangs there. His big riding boots stand beside the press, evidently in their usual
place, and rather proud of themselves. In fact, the evolution of the
minister's kitchen, dining room and drawing room into three separate
apartments has not yet taken place; and so, from the point of view of
our pampered period, he is no better off than the Dudgeons. But there is a difference, for all that. To begin with, Mrs. Anderson
is a pleasanter person to live with than Mrs. Dudgeon. To which Mrs.
Dudgeon would at once reply, with reason, that Mrs. Anderson has no
children to look after; no poultry, pigs nor cattle; a steady and
sufficient income not directly dependent on harvests and prices at
fairs; an affectionate husband who is a tower of strength to her: in
short, that life is as easy at the minister's house as it is hard at
the farm. This is true; but to explain a fact is not to alter it; and
however little credit Mrs. Anderson may deserve for making her home
happier, she has certainly succeeded in doing it. The outward and
visible signs of her superior social pretensions are a drugget on the
floor, a plaster ceiling between the timbers and chairs which, though
not upholstered, are stained and polished. The fine arts are
represented by a mezzotint portrait of some Presbyterian divine, a
copperplate of Raphael's St. Paul preaching at Athens, a rococo
presentation clock on the mantelshelf, flanked by a couple of
miniatures, a pair of crockery dogs with baskets in their mouths, and,
at the corners, two large cowrie shells. A pretty feature of the room
is the low wide latticed window, nearly its whole width, with little
red curtains running on a rod half way up it to serve as a blind. There
is no sofa; but one of the seats, standing near the press, has a railed
back and is long enough to accommodate two people easily. On the whole,
it is rather the sort of room that the nineteenth century has ended in
struggling to get back to under the leadership of Mr. Philip Webb and
his disciples in domestic architecture, though no genteel clergyman
would have tolerated it fifty years ago. The evening has closed in; and the room is dark except for the cosy
firelight and the dim oil lamps seen through the window in the wet
street, where there is a quiet, steady, warm, windless downpour of
rain. As the town clock strikes the quarter, Judith comes in with a
couple of candles in earthenware candlesticks, and sets them on the
table. Her self-conscious airs of the morning are gone: she is anxious
and frightened. She goes to the window and peers into the street. The
first thing she sees there is her husband, hurrying here through the
rain. She gives a little gasp of relief, not very far removed from a
sob, and turns to the door. Anderson comes in, wrapped in a very wet
cloak. JUDITH (running to him). Oh, here you are at last, at last! (She
attempts to embrace him.) ANDERSON (keeping her off). Take care, my love: I'm wet. Wait till I
get my cloak off. (He places a chair with its back to the fire; hangs
his cloak on it to dry; shakes the rain from his hat and puts it on the
fender; and at last turns with his hands outstretched to Judith.) Now! (She flies into his arms.) I am not late, am I? The town clock struck
the quarter as I came in at the front door. And the town clock is
always fast. JUDITH. I'm sure it's slow this evening. I'm so glad you're back. ANDERSON (taking her more closely in his arms). Anxious, my dear? JUDITH. A little. ANDERSON. Why, you've been crying. JUDITH. Only a little. Never mind: it's all over now. (A bugle call is
heard in the distance. She starts in terror and retreats to the long
seat, listening.) What's that? ANDERSON (following her tenderly to the seat and making her sit down
with him). Only King George, my dear. He's returning to barracks, or
having his roll called, or getting ready for tea, or booting or
saddling or something. Soldiers don't ring the bell or call over the
banisters when they want anything: they send a boy out with a bugle to
disturb the whole town. JUDITH. Do you think there is really any danger? ANDERSON. Not the least in the world. JUDITH. You say that to comfort me, not because you believe it. ANDERSON. My dear: in this world there is always danger for those who
are afraid of it. There's a danger that the house will catch fire in
the night; but we shan't sleep any the less soundly for that. JUDITH. Yes, I know what you always say; and you're quite right. Oh,
quite right: I know it. But--I suppose I'm not brave: that's all. My
heart shrinks every time I think of the soldiers. ANDERSON. Never mind that, dear: bravery is none the worse for costing
a little pain. JUDITH. Yes, I suppose so. (Embracing him again.) Oh how brave you are,
my dear! (With tears in her eyes.) Well, I'll be brave too: you shan't
be ashamed of your wife. ANDERSON. That's right. Now you make me happy. Well, well! (He rises
and goes cheerily to the fire to dry his shoes.) I called on Richard
Dudgeon on my way back; but he wasn't in. JUDITH (rising in consternation). You called on that man! ANDERSON (reassuring her). Oh, nothing happened, dearie. He was out. JUDITH (almost in tears, as if the visit were a personal humiliation to
her). But why did you go there? ANDERSON (gravely). Well, it is all the talk that Major Swindon is
going to do what he did in Springtown--make an example of some
notorious rebel, as he calls us. He pounced on Peter Dudgeon as the
worst character there; and it is the general belief that he will pounce
on Richard as the worst here. JUDITH. But Richard said--

ANDERSON (goodhumoredly cutting her short). Pooh! Richard said! He said
what he thought would frighten you and frighten me, my dear. He said
what perhaps (God forgive him!) he would like to believe. It's a
terrible thing to think of what death must mean for a man like that. I
felt that I must warn him. I left a message for him. JUDITH (querulously). What message? ANDERSON. Only that I should be glad to see him for a moment on a
matter of importance to himself; and that if he would look in here when
he was passing he would be welcome. JUDITH (aghast). You asked that man to come here! ANDERSON. I did. JUDITH (sinking on the seat and clasping her hands). I hope he won't
come! Oh, I pray that he may not come! ANDERSON. Why? Don't you want him to be warned? JUDITH. He must know his danger. Oh, Tony, is it wrong to hate a
blasphemer and a villain? I do hate him! I can't get him out of my
mind: I know he will bring harm with him. He insulted you: he insulted
me: he insulted his mother. ANDERSON (quaintly). Well, dear, let's forgive him; and then it won't
matter. JUDITH. Oh, I know it's wrong to hate anybody; but--

ANDERSON (going over to her with humorous tenderness). Come, dear,
you're not so wicked as you think. The worst sin towards our fellow
creatures is not to hate them, but to be indifferent to them: that's
the essence of inhumanity. After all, my dear, if you watch people
carefully, you'll be surprised to find how like hate is to love. (She
starts, strangely touched--even appalled. He is amused at her.) 