



Produced by Eve Sobol. HTML version by Al Haines. THE MAN OF DESTINY

BERNARD SHAW

1898



The twelfth of May, 1796, in north Italy, at Tavazzano, on the road
from Lodi to Milan. The afternoon sun is blazing serenely over the
plains of Lombardy, treating the Alps with respect and the anthills
with indulgence, not incommoded by the basking of the swine and oxen in
the villages nor hurt by its cool reception in the churches, but
fiercely disdainful of two hordes of mischievous insects which are the
French and Austrian armies. Two days before, at Lodi, the Austrians
tried to prevent the French from crossing the river by the narrow
bridge there; but the French, commanded by a general aged 27, Napoleon
Bonaparte, who does not understand the art of war, rushed the fireswept
bridge, supported by a tremendous cannonade in which the young general
assisted with his own hands. Cannonading is his technical specialty; he
has been trained in the artillery under the old regime, and made
perfect in the military arts of shirking his duties, swindling the
paymaster over travelling expenses, and dignifying war with the noise
and smoke of cannon, as depicted in all military portraits. He is,
however, an original observer, and has perceived, for the first time
since the invention of gunpowder, that a cannon ball, if it strikes a
man, will kill him. To a thorough grasp of this remarkable discovery,
he adds a highly evolved faculty for physical geography and for the
calculation of times and distances. He has prodigious powers of work,
and a clear, realistic knowledge of human nature in public affairs,
having seen it exhaustively tested in that department during the French
Revolution. He is imaginative without illusions, and creative without
religion, loyalty, patriotism or any of the common ideals. Not that he
is incapable of these ideals: on the contrary, he has swallowed them
all in his boyhood, and now, having a keen dramatic faculty, is
extremely clever at playing upon them by the arts of the actor and
stage manager. Withal, he is no spoiled child. Poverty, ill-luck, the
shifts of impecunious shabby-gentility, repeated failure as a would-be
author, humiliation as a rebuffed time server, reproof and punishment
as an incompetent and dishonest officer, an escape from dismissal from
the service so narrow that if the emigration of the nobles had not
raised the value of even the most rascally lieutenant to the famine
price of a general he would have been swept contemptuously from the
army: these trials have ground the conceit out of him, and forced him
to be self-sufficient and to understand that to such men as he is the
world will give nothing that he cannot take from it by force. In this
the world is not free from cowardice and folly; for Napoleon, as a
merciless cannonader of political rubbish, is making himself useful. indeed, it is even now impossible to live in England without sometimes
feeling how much that country lost in not being conquered by him as
well as by Julius Caesar. However, on this May afternoon in 1796, it is early days with him. He
is only 26, and has but recently become a general, partly by using his
wife to seduce the Directory (then governing France) partly by the
scarcity of officers caused by the emigration as aforesaid; partly by
his faculty of knowing a country, with all its roads, rivers, hills and
valleys, as he knows the palm of his hand; and largely by that new
faith of his in the efficacy of firing cannons at people. His army is,
as to discipline, in a state which has so greatly shocked some modern
writers before whom the following story has been enacted, that they,
impressed with the later glory of "L'Empereur," have altogether refused
to credit it. But Napoleon is not "L'Empereur" yet: he has only just
been dubbed "Le Petit Caporal," and is in the stage of gaining
influence over his men by displays of pluck. He is not in a position to
force his will on them, in orthodox military fashion, by the cat o'
nine tails. The French Revolution, which has escaped suppression solely
through the monarchy's habit of being at least four years in arrear
with its soldiers in the matter of pay, has substituted for that habit,
as far as possible, the habit of not paying at all, except in promises
and patriotic flatteries which are not compatible with martial law of
the Prussian type. Napoleon has therefore approached the Alps in
command of men without money, in rags, and consequently indisposed to
stand much discipline, especially from upstart generals. This
circumstance, which would have embarrassed an idealist soldier, has
been worth a thousand cannon to Napoleon. He has said to his army, "You
have patriotism and courage; but you have no money, no clothes, and
deplorably indifferent food. In Italy there are all these things, and
glory as well, to be gained by a devoted army led by a general who
regards loot as the natural right of the soldier. I am such a general. En avant, mes enfants!" The result has entirely justified him. The army
conquers Italy as the locusts conquered Cyprus. They fight all day and
march all night, covering impossible distances and appearing in
incredible places, not because every soldier carries a field marshal's
baton in his knapsack, but because he hopes to carry at least half a
dozen silver forks there next day. It must be understood, by the way, that the French army does not make
war on the Italians. It is there to rescue them from the tyranny of
their Austrian conquerors, and confer republican institutions on them;
so that in incidentally looting them, it merely makes free with the
property of its friends, who ought to be grateful to it, and perhaps
would be if ingratitude were not the proverbial failing of their
country. The Austrians, whom it fights, are a thoroughly respectable
regular army, well disciplined, commanded by gentlemen trained and
versed in the art of war: at the head of them Beaulieu, practising the
classic art of war under orders from Vienna, and getting horribly
beaten by Napoleon, who acts on his own responsibility in defiance of
professional precedents or orders from Paris. Even when the Austrians
win a battle, all that is necessary is to wait until their routine
obliges them to return to their quarters for afternoon tea, so to
speak, and win it back again from them: a course pursued later on with
brilliant success at Marengo. On the whole, with his foe handicapped by
Austrian statesmanship, classic generalship, and the exigencies of the
aristocratic social structure of Viennese society, Napoleon finds it
possible to be irresistible without working heroic miracles. The world,
however, likes miracles and heroes, and is quite incapable of
conceiving the action of such forces as academic militarism or Viennese
drawing-roomism. Hence it has already begun to manufacture
"L'Empereur," and thus to make it difficult for the romanticists of a
hundred years later to credit the little scene now in question at
Tavazzano as aforesaid. The best quarters at Tavazzano are at a little inn, the first house
reached by travellers passing through the place from Milan to Lodi. It
stands in a vineyard; and its principal room, a pleasant refuge from
the summer heat, is open so widely at the back to this vineyard that it
is almost a large veranda. The bolder children, much excited by the
alarums and excursions of the past few days, and by an irruption of
French troops at six o'clock, know that the French commander has
quartered himself in this room, and are divided between a craving to
peep in at the front windows and a mortal terror of the sentinel, a
young gentleman-soldier, who, having no natural moustache, has had a
most ferocious one painted on his face with boot blacking by his
sergeant. As his heavy uniform, like all the uniforms of that day, is
designed for parade without the least reference to his health or
comfort, he perspires profusely in the sun; and his painted moustache
has run in little streaks down his chin and round his neck except where
it has dried in stiff japanned flakes, and had its sweeping outline
chipped off in grotesque little bays and headlands, making him
unspeakably ridiculous in the eye of History a hundred years later, but
monstrous and horrible to the contemporary north Italian infant, to
whom nothing would seem more natural than that he should relieve the
monotony of his guard by pitchforking a stray child up on his bayonet,
and eating it uncooked. Nevertheless one girl of bad character, in whom
an instinct of privilege with soldiers is already dawning, does peep in
at the safest window for a moment, before a glance and a clink from the
sentinel sends her flying. Most of what she sees she has seen before:
the vineyard at the back, with the old winepress and a cart among the
vines; the door close down on her right leading to the inn entry; the
landlord's best sideboard, now in full action for dinner, further back
on the same side; the fireplace on the other side, with a couch near
it, and another door, leading to the inner rooms, between it and the
vineyard; and the table in the middle with its repast of Milanese
risotto, cheese, grapes, bread, olives, and a big wickered flask of red
wine. The landlord, Giuseppe Grandi, is also no novelty. He is a swarthy,
vivacious, shrewdly cheerful, black-curled, bullet headed, grinning
little man of 40. Naturally an excellent host, he is in quite special
spirits this evening at his good fortune in having the French commander
as his guest to protect him against the license of the troops, and
actually sports a pair of gold earrings which he would otherwise have
hidden carefully under the winepress with his little equipment of
silver plate. Napoleon, sitting facing her on the further side of the table, and
Napoleon's hat, sword and riding whip lying on the couch, she sees for
the first time. He is working hard, partly at his meal, which he has
discovered how to dispatch, by attacking all the courses
simultaneously, in ten minutes (this practice is the beginning of his
downfall), and partly at a map which he is correcting from memory,
occasionally marking the position of the forces by taking a grapeskin
from his mouth and planting it on the map with his thumb like a wafer. He has a supply of writing materials before him mixed up in disorder
with the dishes and cruets; and his long hair gets sometimes into the
risotto gravy and sometimes into the ink. GIUSEPPE. Will your excellency--

NAPOLEON (intent on his map, but cramming himself mechanically with his
left hand). Don't talk. I'm busy. GIUSEPPE (with perfect goodhumor). Excellency: I obey. NAPOLEON. Some red ink. GIUSEPPE. Alas! excellency, there is none. NAPOLEON (with Corsican facetiousness). Kill something and bring me its
blood. GIUSEPPE (grinning). There is nothing but your excellency's horse, the
sentinel, the lady upstairs, and my wife. NAPOLEON. Kill your wife. GIUSEPPE. Willingly, your excellency; but unhappily I am not strong
enough. She would kill me. NAPOLEON. That will do equally well. GIUSEPPE. Your excellency does me too much honor. (Stretching his hand
toward the flask.) Perhaps some wine will answer your excellency's
purpose. NAPOLEON (hastily protecting the flask, and becoming quite serious). Wine! No: that would be waste. You are all the same: waste! waste! waste! (He marks the map with gravy, using his fork as a pen.) Clear
away. (He finishes his wine; pushes back his chair; and uses his
napkin, stretching his legs and leaning back, but still frowning and
thinking.) GIUSEPPE (clearing the table and removing the things to a tray on the
sideboard). Every man to his trade, excellency. We innkeepers have
plenty of cheap wine: we think nothing of spilling it. You great
generals have plenty of cheap blood: you think nothing of spilling it. Is it not so, excellency? NAPOLEON. Blood costs nothing: wine costs money. (He rises and goes to
the fireplace. ) GIUSEPPE. They say you are careful of everything except human life,
excellency. NAPOLEON. Human life, my friend, is the only thing that takes care of
itself. (He throws himself at his ease on the couch.) GIUSEPPE (admiring him). Ah, excellency, what fools we all are beside
you! If I could only find out the secret of your success! NAPOLEON. You would make yourself Emperor of Italy, eh? GIUSEPPE. Too troublesome, excellency: I leave all that to you. Besides, what would become of my inn if I were Emperor? See how you
enjoy looking on at me whilst I keep the inn for you and wait on you! Well, I shall enjoy looking on at you whilst you become Emperor of
Europe, and govern the country for me. (Whilst he chatters, he takes
the cloth off without removing the map and inkstand, and takes the
corners in his hands and the middle of the edge in his mouth, to fold
it up.) NAPOLEON. Emperor of Europe, eh? Why only Europe? GIUSEPPE. Why, indeed? Emperor of the world, excellency! Why not? (He
folds and rolls up the cloth, emphasizing his phrases by the steps of
the process.) One man is like another (fold): one country is like
another (fold): one battle is like another. (At the last fold, he slaps
the cloth on the table and deftly rolls it up, adding, by way of
peroration) Conquer one: conquer all. (He takes the cloth to the
sideboard, and puts it in a drawer.) NAPOLEON. And govern for all; fight for all; be everybody's servant
under cover of being everybody's master: Giuseppe. GIUSEPPE (at the sideboard). Excellency. NAPOLEON. I forbid you to talk to me about myself. GIUSEPPE (coming to the foot of the couch). Pardon. Your excellency is
so unlike other great men. It is the subject they like best. NAPOLEON. Well, talk to me about the subject they like next best,
whatever that may be. GIUSEPPE (unabashed). Willingly, your excellency. Has your excellency
by any chance caught a glimpse of the lady upstairs? (Napoleon promptly sits up and looks at him with an interest which
entirely justifies the implied epigram.) NAPOLEON. How old is she? GIUSEPPE. The right age, excellency. NAPOLEON. Do you mean seventeen or thirty? GIUSEPPE. Thirty, excellency. NAPOLEON. Goodlooking? GIUSEPPE. I cannot see with your excellency's eyes: every man must
judge that for himself. In my opinion, excellency, a fine figure of a
lady. (Slyly.) Shall I lay the table for her collation here? NAPOLEON (brusquely, rising). No: lay nothing here until the officer
for whom I am waiting comes back. (He looks at his watch, and takes to
walking to and fro between the fireplace and the vineyard.) GIUSEPPE (with conviction). Excellency: believe me, he has been
captured by the accursed Austrians. He dare not keep you waiting if he
were at liberty. NAPOLEON (turning at the edge of the shadow of the veranda). Giuseppe:
if that turns out to be true, it will put me into such a temper that
nothing short of hanging you and your whole household, including the
lady upstairs, will satisfy me. GIUSEPPE. We are all cheerfully at your excellency's disposal, except
the lady. I cannot answer for her; but no lady could resist you,
General. NAPOLEON (sourly, resuming his march). Hm! You will never be hanged. There is no satisfaction in hanging a man who does not object to it. GIUSEPPE (sympathetically). Not the least in the world, excellency: is
there? (Napoleon again looks at his watch, evidently growing anxious.) Ah, one can see that you are a great man, General: you know how to
wait. If it were a corporal now, or a sub-lieutenant, at the end of
three minutes he would be swearing, fuming, threatening, pulling the
house about our ears. NAPOLEON. Giuseppe: your flatteries are insufferable. Go and talk
outside. (He sits down again at the table, with his jaws in his hands,
and his elbows propped on the map, poring over it with a troubled
expression.) GIUSEPPE. Willingly, your excellency. You shall not be disturbed. (He
takes up the tray and prepares to withdraw.) NAPOLEON. The moment he comes back, send him to me. GIUSEPPE. Instantaneously, your excellency. A LADY'S VOICE (calling from some distant part of the inn). Giusep-pe! (The voice is very musical, and the two final notes make an ascending
interval.) NAPOLEON (startled). What's that? What's that? GIUSEPPE (resting the end of his tray on the table and leaning over to
speak the more confidentially). The lady, excellency. NAPOLEON (absently). Yes. What lady? Whose lady? GIUSEPPE. The strange lady, excellency. NAPOLEON. What strange lady? GIUSEPPE (with a shrug). Who knows? She arrived here half an hour
before you in a hired carriage belonging to the Golden Eagle at
Borghetto. Actually by herself, excellency. No servants. A dressing bag
and a trunk: that is all. The postillion says she left a horse--a
charger, with military trappings, at the Golden Eagle. NAPOLEON. A woman with a charger! That's extraordinary. THE LADY'S VOICE (the two final notes now making a peremptory
descending interval). Giuseppe! NAPOLEON (rising to listen). That's an interesting voice. GIUSEPPE. She is an interesting lady, excellency. (Calling.) Coming,
lady, coming. (He makes for the inner door.) NAPOLEON (arresting him with a strong hand on his shoulder). Stop. Let
her come. VOICE. Giuseppe!! (Impatiently.) GIUSEPPE (pleadingly). Let me go, excellency. It is my point of honor
as an innkeeper to come when I am called. I appeal to you as a soldier. A MAN's VOICE (outside, at the inn door, shouting). Here, someone. Hello! Landlord. Where are you? (Somebody raps vigorously with a whip
handle on a bench in the passage.) NAPOLEON (suddenly becoming the commanding officer again and throwing
Giuseppe off). There he is at last. (Pointing to the inner door.) Go. Attend to your business: the lady is calling you. (He goes to the
fireplace and stands with his back to it with a determined military
air.) GIUSEPPE (with bated breath, snatching up his tray). Certainly,
excellency. (He hurries out by the inner door.) THE MAN's VOICE (impatiently). Are you all asleep here? (The door
opposite the fireplace is kicked rudely open; and a dusty
sub-lieutenant bursts into the room. He is a chuckle-headed young man
of 24, with the fair, delicate, clear skin of a man of rank, and a
self-assurance on that ground which the French Revolution has failed to
shake in the smallest degree. He has a thick silly lip, an eager
credulous eye, an obstinate nose, and a loud confident voice. A young
man without fear, without reverence, without imagination, without
sense, hopelessly insusceptible to the Napoleonic or any other idea,
stupendously egotistical, eminently qualified to rush in where angels
fear to tread, yet of a vigorous babbling vitality which bustles him
into the thick of things. He is just now boiling with vexation,
attributable by a superficial observer to his impatience at not being
promptly attended to by the staff of the inn, but in which a more
discerning eye can perceive a certain moral depth, indicating a more
permanent and momentous grievance. On seeing Napoleon, he is
sufficiently taken aback to check himself and salute; but he does not
betray by his manner any of that prophetic consciousness of Marengo and
Austerlitz, Waterloo and St. Helena, or the Napoleonic pictures of
Delaroche and Meissonier, which modern culture will instinctively
expect from him.) NAPOLEON (sharply). Well, sir, here you are at last. Your instructions
were that I should arrive here at six, and that I was to find you
waiting for me with my mail from Paris and with despatches. It is now
twenty minutes to eight. You were sent on this service as a hard rider
with the fastest horse in the camp. You arrive a hundred minutes late,
on foot. Where is your horse! THE LIEUTENANT (moodily pulling off his gloves and dashing them with
his cap and whip on the table). Ah! where indeed? That's just what I
should like to know, General. (With emotion.) You don't know how fond I
was of that horse. NAPOLEON (angrily sarcastic). Indeed! (With sudden misgiving.) Where
are the letters and despatches? THE LIEUTENANT (importantly, rather pleased than otherwise at having
some remarkable news). I don't know. NAPOLEON (unable to believe his ears). You don't know! LIEUTENANT. No more than you do, General. Now I suppose I shall be
court-martialled. Well, I don't mind being court-martialled; but (with
solemn determination) I tell you, General, if ever I catch that
innocent looking youth, I'll spoil his beauty, the slimy little liar! I'll make a picture of him. I'll--

NAPOLEON (advancing from the hearth to the table). What innocent
looking youth? Pull yourself together, sir, will you; and give an
account of yourself. LIEUTENANT (facing him at the opposite side of the table, leaning on it
with his fists). Oh, I'm all right, General: I'm perfectly ready to
give an account of myself. I shall make the court-martial thoroughly
understand that the fault was not mine. Advantage has been taken of the
better side of my nature; and I'm not ashamed of it. But with all
respect to you as my commanding officer, General, I say again that if
ever I set eyes on that son of Satan, I'll--

NAPOLEON (angrily). So you said before. LIEUTENANT (drawing himself upright). I say it again, just wait until I
catch him. Just wait: that's all. (He folds his arms resolutely, and
breathes hard, with compressed lips.) NAPOLEON. I AM waiting, sir--for your explanation. LIEUTENANT (confidently). You'll change your tone, General, when you
hear what has happened to me. NAPOLEON. Nothing has happened to you, sir: you are alive and not
disabled. Where are the papers entrusted to you? LIEUTENANT. Nothing! Nothing!! Oho! Well, we'll see. (Posing himself to
overwhelm Napoleon with his news.) He swore eternal brotherhood with
me. Was that nothing? He said my eyes reminded him of his sister's
eyes. Was that nothing? He cried--actually cried--over the story of my
separation from Angelica. Was that nothing? He paid for both bottles of
wine, though he only ate bread and grapes himself. Perhaps you call
that nothing! He gave me his pistols and his horse and his
despatches--most important despatches--and let me go away with them. (Triumphantly, seeing that he has reduced Napoleon to blank
stupefaction.) Was THAT nothing? NAPOLEON (enfeebled by astonishment). What did he do that for? LIEUTENANT (as if the reason were obvious). To show his confidence in
me. (Napoleon's jaw does not exactly drop; but its hinges become
nerveless. The Lieutenant proceeds with honest indignation.) And I was
worthy of his confidence: I brought them all back honorably. But would
you believe it?--when I trusted him with MY pistols, and MY horse, and
MY despatches--

NAPOLEON (enraged). What the devil did you do that for? LIEUTENANT. Why, to show my confidence in him, of course. And he
betrayed it--abused it--never came back. The thief! the swindler! the
heartless, treacherous little blackguard! You call that nothing, I
suppose. But look here, General: (again resorting to the table with his
fist for greater emphasis) YOU may put up with this outrage from the
Austrians if you like; but speaking for myself personally, I tell you
that if ever I catch--

NAPOLEON (turning on his heel in disgust and irritably resuming his
march to and fro). Yes: you have said that more than once already. LIEUTENANT (excitedly). More than once! I'll say it fifty times; and
what's more, I'll do it. You'll see, General. I'll show my confidence
in him, so I will. I'll--

NAPOLEON. Yes, yes, sir: no doubt you will. What kind of man was he? LIEUTENANT. Well, I should think you ought to be able to tell from his
conduct the sort of man he was. NAPOLEON. Psh! What was he like? LIEUTENANT. Like! He's like--well, you ought to have just seen the
fellow: that will give you a notion of what he was like. He won't be
like it five minutes after I catch him; for I tell you that if ever--

NAPOLEON (shouting furiously for the innkeeper). Giuseppe! (To the
Lieutenant, out of all patience.) Hold your tongue, sir, if you can. LIEUTENANT. I warn you it's no use to try to put the blame on me. (Plaintively.) How was I to know the sort of fellow he was? (He takes a
chair from between the sideboard and the outer door; places it near the
table; and sits down.) If you only knew how hungry and tired I am,
you'd have more consideration. GIUSEPPE (returning). What is it, excellency? NAPOLEON (struggling with his temper). Take this--this officer. Feed
him; and put him to bed, if necessary. When he is in his right mind
again, find out what has happened to him and bring me word. (To the
Lieutenant.) Consider yourself under arrest, sir. LIEUTENANT (with sulky stiffness). I was prepared for that. It takes a
gentleman to understand a gentleman. (He throws his sword on the table. Giuseppe takes it up and politely offers it to Napoleon, who throws it
violently on the couch.) GIUSEPPE (with sympathetic concern). Have you been attacked by the
Austrians, lieutenant? Dear, dear, dear! LIEUTENANT (contemptuously). Attacked! I could have broken his back
between my finger and thumb. I wish I had, now. No: it was by appealing
to the better side of my nature: that's what I can't get over. He said
he'd never met a man he liked so much as me. He put his handkerchief
round my neck because a gnat bit me, and my stock was chafing it. Look! (He pulls a handkerchief from his stock. Giuseppe takes it and examines
it.) GIUSEPPE (to Napoleon). A lady's handkerchief, excellency. (He smells
it.) Perfumed! NAPOLEON. Eh? (He takes it and looks at it attentively.) Hm! (He smells
it.) Ha! (He walks thoughtfully across the room, looking at the
handkerchief, which he finally sticks in the breast of his coat.) LIEUTENANT. Good enough for him, anyhow. I noticed that he had a
woman's hands when he touched my neck, with his coaxing, fawning ways,
the mean, effeminate little hound. (Lowering his voice with thrilling
intensity.) But mark my words, General. If ever--

THE LADY'S VOICE (outside, as before). Giuseppe! LIEUTENANT (petrified). What was that? GIUSEPPE. Only a lady upstairs, lieutenant, calling me. LIEUTENANT. Lady! VOICE. Giuseppe, Giuseppe: where ARE you? LIEUTENANT (murderously). Give me that sword. (He strides to the couch;
snatches the sword; and draws it.) GIUSEPPE (rushing forward and seizing his right arm.) What are you
thinking of, lieutenant? It's a lady: don't you hear that it's a
woman's voice? LIEUTENANT. It's HIS voice, I tell you. Let me go. (He breaks away, and
rushes to the inner door. It opens in his face; and the Strange Lady
steps in. She is a very attractive lady, tall and extraordinarily
graceful, with a delicately intelligent, apprehensive, questioning
face--perception in the brow, sensitiveness in the nostrils, character
in the chin: all keen, refined, and original. She is very feminine, but
by no means weak: the lithe, tender figure is hung on a strong frame:
the hands and feet, neck and shoulders, are no fragile ornaments, but
of full size in proportion to her stature, which considerably exceeds
that of Napoleon and the innkeeper, and leaves her at no disadvantage
with the lieutenant. Only her elegance and radiant charm keep the
secret of her size and strength. She is not, judging by her dress, an
admirer of the latest fashions of the Directory; or perhaps she uses up
her old dresses for travelling. At all events she wears no jacket with
extravagant lappels, no Greco-Tallien sham chiton, nothing, indeed,
that the Princesse de Lamballe might not have worn. Her dress of
flowered silk is long waisted, with a Watteau pleat behind, but with
the paniers reduced to mere rudiments, as she is too tall for them. It
is cut low in the neck, where it is eked out by a creamy fichu. She is
fair, with golden brown hair and grey eyes.) (She enters with the self-possession of a woman accustomed to the
privileges of rank and beauty. The innkeeper, who has excellent natural
manners, is highly appreciative of her. Napoleon, on whom her eyes
first fall, is instantly smitten self-conscious. His color deepens: he
becomes stiffer and less at ease than before. She perceives this
instantly, and, not to embarrass him, turns in an infinitely well bred
manner to pay the respect of a glance to the other gentleman, who is
staring at her dress, as at the earth's final masterpiece of
treacherous dissimulation, with feelings altogether inexpressible and
indescribable. As she looks at him, she becomes deadly pale. There is
no mistaking her expression: a revelation of some fatal error utterly
unexpected, has suddenly appalled her in the midst of tranquillity,
security and victory. The next moment a wave of color rushes up from
beneath the creamy fichu and drowns her whole face. One can see that
she is blushing all over her body. Even the lieutenant, ordinarily
incapable of observation, and just now lost in the tumult of his wrath,
can see a thing when it is painted red for him. Interpreting the blush
as the involuntary confession of black deceit confronted with its
victim, he points to it with a loud crow of retributive triumph, and
then, seizing her by the wrist, pulls her past him into the room as he
claps the door to, and plants himself with his back to it.) LIEUTENANT. So I've got you, my lad. So you've disguised yourself, have
you? (In a voice of thunder.) Take off that skirt. GIUSEPPE (remonstrating). Oh, lieutenant! LADY (affrighted, but highly indignant at his having dared to touch
her). Gentlemen: I appeal to you. Giuseppe. (Making a movement as if to
run to Giuseppe.) LIEUTENANT (interposing, sword in hand). No you don't. LADY (taking refuge with Napoleon). Ah, sir, you are an officer--a
general. You will protect me, will you not? LIEUTENANT. Never you mind him, General. Leave me to deal with him. NAPOLEON. With him! With whom, sir? Why do you treat this lady in such
a fashion? LIEUTENANT. Lady! He's a man! the man I showed my confidence in. (Advancing threateningly.) Here you--

LADY (running behind Napoleon and in her agitation embracing the arm
which he instinctively extends before her as a fortification). Oh,
thank you, General. Keep him away. NAPOLEON. Nonsense, sir. This is certainly a lady (she suddenly drops
his arm and blushes again); and you are under arrest. Put down your
sword, sir, instantly. LIEUTENANT. General: I tell you he's an Austrian spy. He passed himself
off on me as one of General Massena's staff this afternoon; and now
he's passing himself off on you as a woman. Am I to believe my own eyes
or not? LADY. General: it must be my brother. He is on General Massena's staff. He is very like me. LIEUTENANT (his mind giving way). Do you mean to say that you're not
your brother, but your sister?--the sister who was so like me?--who had
my beautiful blue eyes? It was a lie: your eyes are not like mine:
they're exactly like your own. What perfidy! NAPOLEON. Lieutenant: will you obey my orders and leave the room, since
you are convinced at last that this is no gentleman? LIEUTENANT. Gentleman! I should think not. No gentleman would have
abused my confi--

NAPOLEON (out of all patience). Enough, sir, enough. Will you leave the
room. I order you to leave the room. LADY. Oh, pray let ME go instead. NAPOLEON (drily). Excuse me, madame. With all respect to your brother,
I do not yet understand what an officer on General Massena's staff
wants with my letters. I have some questions to put to you. GIUSEPPE (discreetly). Come, lieutenant. (He opens the door.) LIEUTENANT. I'm off. General: take warning by me: be on your guard
against the better side of your nature. (To the lady.) Madame: my
apologies. I thought you were the same person, only of the opposite
sex; and that naturally misled me. LADY (sweetly). It was not your fault, was it? I'm so glad you're not
angry with me any longer, lieutenant. (She offers her hand.) LIEUTENANT (bending gallantly to kiss it). Oh, madam, not the lea--
(Checking himself and looking at it.) You have your brother's hand. And
the same sort of ring. LADY (sweetly). We are twins. LIEUTENANT. That accounts for it. (He kisses her hand.) A thousand
pardons. I didn't mind about the despatches at all: that's more the
General's affair than mine: it was the abuse of my confidence through
the better side of my nature. (Taking his cap, gloves, and whip from
the table and going.) You'll excuse my leaving you, General, I hope. Very sorry, I'm sure. (He talks himself out of the room. Giuseppe
follows him and shuts the door.) NAPOLEON (looking after them with concentrated irritation). Idiot! (The
Strange Lady smiles sympathetically. He comes frowning down the room
between the table and the fireplace, all his awkwardness gone now that
he is alone with her.) LADY. How can I thank you, General, for your protection? NAPOLEON (turning on her suddenly). My despatches: come! (He puts out
his hand for them.) LADY. General! (She involuntarily puts her hands on her fichu as if to
protect something there.) NAPOLEON. You tricked that blockhead out of them. You disguised
yourself as a man. I want my despatches. They are there in the bosom of
your dress, under your hands. LADY (quickly removing her hands). Oh, how unkindly you are speaking to
me! (She takes her handkerchief from her fichu.) You frighten me. (She
touches her eyes as if to wipe away a tear.) NAPOLEON. I see you don't know me madam, or you would save yourself the
trouble of pretending to cry. LADY (producing an effect of smiling through her tears). Yes, I do know
you. You are the famous General Buonaparte. (She gives the name a
marked Italian pronunciation Bwaw-na-parr-te.) NAPOLEON (angrily, with the French pronunciation). Bonaparte, madame,
Bonaparte. The papers, if you please. LADY. But I assure you-- (He snatches the handkerchief rudely from
her.) General! (Indignantly.) NAPOLEON (taking the other handkerchief from his breast). You were good
enough to lend one of your handkerchiefs to my lieutenant when you
robbed him. (He looks at the two handkerchiefs.) They match one
another. (He smells them.) The same scent. (He flings them down on the
table.) I am waiting for the despatches. I shall take them, if
necessary, with as little ceremony as the handkerchief. (This
historical incident was used eighty years later, by M. Victorien
Sardou, in his drama entitled "Dora.") LADY (in dignified reproof). General: do you threaten women? NAPOLEON (bluntly). Yes. LADY (disconcerted, trying to gain time). But I don't understand. I--

NAPOLEON. You understand perfectly. You came here because your Austrian
employers calculated that I was six leagues away. I am always to be
found where my enemies don't expect me. You have walked into the lion's
den. Come: you are a brave woman. Be a sensible one: I have no time to
waste. The papers. (He advances a step ominously). LADY (breaking down in the childish rage of impotence, and throwing
herself in tears on the chair left beside the table by the lieutenant). I brave! How little you know! I have spent the day in an agony of fear. I have a pain here from the tightening of my heart at every suspicious
look, every threatening movement. Do you think every one is as brave as
you? Oh, why will not you brave people do the brave things? Why do you
leave them to us, who have no courage at all? I'm not brave: I shrink
from violence: danger makes me miserable. NAPOLEON (interested). Then why have you thrust yourself into danger? LADY. Because there is no other way: I can trust nobody else. And now
it is all useless--all because of you, who have no fear, because you
have no heart, no feeling, no-- (She breaks off, and throws herself on
her knees.) Ah, General, let me go: let me go without asking any
questions. You shall have your despatches and letters: I swear it. NAPOLEON (holding out his hand). Yes: I am waiting for them. (She
gasps, daunted by his ruthless promptitude into despair of moving him
by cajolery; but as she looks up perplexedly at him, it is plain that
she is racking her brains for some device to outwit him. He meets her
regard inflexibly.) LADY (rising at last with a quiet little sigh). I will get them for
you. They are in my room. (She turns to the door.) NAPOLEON. I shall accompany you, madame. LADY (drawing herself up with a noble air of offended delicacy).I
cannot permit you, General, to enter my chamber. NAPOLEON. Then you shall stay here, madame, whilst I have your chamber
searched for my papers. LADY (spitefully, openly giving up her plan). You may save yourself the
trouble. They are not there. NAPOLEON. No: I have already told you where they are. (Pointing to her
breast.) LADY (with pretty piteousness). General: I only want to keep one little
private letter. Only one. Let me have it. NAPOLEON (cold and stern). Is that a reasonable demand, madam? LADY (encouraged by his not refusing point blank). No; but that is why
you must grant it. Are your own demands reasonable? thousands of lives
for the sake of your victories, your ambitions, your destiny! And what
I ask is such a little thing. And I am only a weak woman, and you a
brave man. (She looks at him with her eyes full of tender pleading and
is about to kneel to him again.) NAPOLEON (brusquely). Get up, get up. (He turns moodily away and takes
a turn across the room, pausing for a moment to say, over his shoulder)
You're talking nonsense; and you know it. (She gets up and sits down in
almost listless despair on the couch. When he turns and sees her there,
he feels that his victory is complete, and that he may now indulge in a
little play with his victim. He comes back and sits beside her. She
looks alarmed and moves a little away from him; but a ray of rallying
hope beams from her eye. He begins like a man enjoying some secret
joke.) How do you know I am a brave man? LADY (amazed). You! General Buonaparte. (Italian pronunciation.) NAPOLEON. Yes, I, General Bonaparte (emphasizing the French
pronunciation). LADY. Oh, how can you ask such a question? you! who stood only two days
ago at the bridge at Lodi, with the air full of death, fighting a duel
with cannons across the river! (Shuddering.) Oh, you DO brave things. NAPOLEON. So do you. LADY. I! (With a sudden odd thought.) Oh! Are you a coward? NAPOLEON (laughing grimly and pinching her cheek). That is the one
question you must never ask a soldier. The sergeant asks after the
recruit's height, his age, his wind, his limb, but never after his
courage. (He gets up and walks about with his hands behind him and his
head bowed, chuckling to himself.) LADY (as if she had found it no laughing matter). Ah, you can laugh at
fear. Then you don't know what fear is. NAPOLEON (coming behind the couch). Tell me this. Suppose you could
have got that letter by coming to me over the bridge at Lodi the day
before yesterday! Suppose there had been no other way, and that this
was a sure way--if only you escaped the cannon! (She shudders and
covers her eyes for a moment with her hands.) Would you have been
afraid? LADY. Oh, horribly afraid, agonizingly afraid. (She presses her hands
on her heart.) It hurts only to imagine it. NAPOLEON (inflexibly). Would you have come for the despatches? LADY (overcome by the imagined horror). Don't ask me. I must have come. NAPOLEON. Why? LADY. Because I must. Because there would have been no other way. NAPOLEON (with conviction). Because you would have wanted my letter
enough to bear your fear. There is only one universal passion: fear. Of
all the thousand qualities a man may have, the only one you will find
as certainly in the youngest drummer boy in my army as in me, is fear. It is fear that makes men fight: it is indifference that makes them run
away: fear is the mainspring of war. Fear! I know fear well, better
than you, better than any woman. I once saw a regiment of good Swiss
soldiers massacred by a mob in Paris because I was afraid to interfere:
I felt myself a coward to the tips of my toes as I looked on at it. Seven months ago I revenged my shame by pounding that mob to death with
cannon balls. Well, what of that? Has fear ever held a man back from
anything he really wanted--or a woman either? Never. Come with me; and
I will show you twenty thousand cowards who will risk death every day
for the price of a glass of brandy. And do you think there are no women
in the army, braver than the men, because their lives are worth less? Psha! I think nothing of your fear or your bravery. If you had had to
come across to me at Lodi, you would not have been afraid: once on the
bridge, every other feeling would have gone down before the
necessity--the necessity--for making your way to my side and getting
what you wanted. And now, suppose you had done all this--suppose you had come safely out
with that letter in your hand, knowing that when the hour came, your
fear had tightened, not your heart, but your grip of your own
purpose--that it had ceased to be fear, and had become strength,
penetration, vigilance, iron resolution--how would you answer then if
you were asked whether you were a coward? LADY (rising). Ah, you are a hero, a real hero. NAPOLEON. Pooh! there's no such thing as a real hero. (He strolls down
the room, making light of her enthusiasm, but by no means displeased
with himself for having evoked it.) LADY. Ah, yes, there is. There is a difference between what you call my
bravery and yours. You wanted to win the battle of Lodi for yourself
and not for anyone else, didn't you? NAPOLEON. Of course. (Suddenly recollecting himself.) Stop: no. (He
pulls himself piously together, and says, like a man conducting a
religious service) I am only the servant of the French republic,
following humbly in the footsteps of the heroes of classical antiquity. I win battles for humanity--for my country, not for myself. LADY (disappointed). Oh, then you are only a womanish hero, after all. (She sits down again, all her enthusiasm gone, her elbow on the end of
the couch, and her cheek propped on her hand.) NAPOLEON (greatly astonished). Womanish! LADY (listlessly). Yes, like me. (With deep melancholy.) Do you think
that if I only wanted those despatches for myself, I dare venture into
a battle for them? No: if that were all, I should not have the courage
to ask to see you at your hotel, even. My courage is mere slavishness:
it is of no use to me for my own purposes. It is only through love,
through pity, through the instinct to save and protect someone else,
that I can do the things that terrify me. NAPOLEON (contemptuously). Pshaw! (He turns slightingly away from her.) LADY. Aha! now you see that I'm not really brave. (Relapsing into
petulant listlessness.) But what right have you to despise me if you
only win your battles for others? for your country! through patriotism! That is what I call womanish: it is so like a Frenchman! NAPOLEON (furiously). I am no Frenchman. LADY (innocently). I thought you said you won the battle of Lodi for
your country, General Bu-- shall I pronounce it in Italian or French? NAPOLEON. You are presuming on my patience, madam. I was born a French
subject, but not in France. LADY (folding her arms on the end of the couch, and leaning on them
with a marked access of interest in him). You were not born a subject
at all, I think. NAPOLEON (greatly pleased, starting on a fresh march). Eh? Eh? You
think not. LADY. I am sure of it. NAPOLEON. Well, well, perhaps not. (The self-complacency of his assent
catches his own ear. He stops short, reddening. Then, composing himself
into a solemn attitude, modelled on the heroes of classical antiquity,
he takes a high moral tone.) But we must not live for ourselves alone,
little one. Never forget that we should always think of others, and
work for others, and lead and govern them for their own good. Self-sacrifice is the foundation of all true nobility of character. LADY (again relaxing her attitude with a sigh). Ah, it is easy to see
that you have never tried it, General. NAPOLEON (indignantly, forgetting all about Brutus and Scipio). What do
you mean by that speech, madam? LADY. Haven't you noticed that people always exaggerate the value of
the things they haven't got? The poor think they only need riches to be
quite happy and good. Everybody worships truth, purity, unselfishness,
for the same reason--because they have no experience of them. Oh, if
they only knew! NAPOLEON (with angry derision). If they only knew! Pray, do you know? LADY (with her arms stretched down and her hands clasped on her knees,
looking straight before her). Yes. I had the misfortune to be born
good. (Glancing up at him for a moment.) And it is a misfortune, I can
tell you, General. I really am truthful and unselfish and all the rest
of it; and it's nothing but cowardice; want of character; want of being
really, strongly, positively oneself. NAPOLEON. Ha? (Turning to her quickly with a flash of strong interest.) LADY (earnestly, with rising enthusiasm). What is the secret of your
power? Only that you believe in yourself. You can fight and conquer for
yourself and for nobody else. You are not afraid of your own destiny. You teach us what we all might be if we had the will and courage; and
that (suddenly sinking on her knees before him) is why we all begin to
worship you. (She kisses his hands.) NAPOLEON (embarrassed). Tut, tut! Pray rise, madam. LADY. Do not refuse my homage: it is your right. You will be emperor of
France. NAPOLEON (hurriedly). Take care. Treason! LADY (insisting). Yes, emperor of France; then of Europe; perhaps of
the world. I am only the first subject to swear allegiance. (Again
kissing his hand.) My Emperor! NAPOLEON (overcome, raising her). Pray, pray. No, no, little one: this
is folly. Come: be calm, be calm. (Petting her.) There, there, my girl. LADY (struggling with happy tears). Yes, I know it is an impertinence
in me to tell you what you must know far better than I do. But you are
not angry with me, are you? NAPOLEON. Angry! No, no: not a bit, not a bit. Come: you are a very
clever and sensible and interesting little woman. (He pats her on the
cheek.) Shall we be friends? LADY (enraptured). Your friend! You will let me be your friend! Oh! (She offers him both her hands with a radiant smile.) You see: I show
my confidence in you. NAPOLEON (with a yell of rage, his eyes flashing). What! LADY. What's the matter? NAPOLEON. Show your confidence in me! So that I may show my confidence
in you in return by letting you give me the slip with the despatches,
eh? Ah, Dalila, Dalila, you have been trying your tricks on me; and I
have been as great a gull as my jackass of a lieutenant. (He advances
threateningly on her.) Come: the despatches. Quick: I am not to be
trifled with now. LADY (flying round the couch). General--

NAPOLEON. Quick, I tell you. (He passes swiftly up the middle of the
room and intercepts her as she makes for the vineyard.) LADY (at bay, confronting him). You dare address me in that tone. NAPOLEON. Dare! LADY. Yes, dare. Who are you that you should presume to speak to me in
that coarse way? Oh, the vile, vulgar Corsican adventurer comes out in
you very easily. NAPOLEON (beside himself). You she devil! (Savagely.) Once more, and
only once, will you give me those papers or shall I tear them from
you--by force? LADY (letting her hands fall ). Tear them from me--by force! (As he
glares at her like a tiger about to spring, she crosses her arms on her
breast in the attitude of a martyr. The gesture and pose instantly
awaken his theatrical instinct: he forgets his rage in the desire to
show her that in acting, too, she has met her match. He keeps her a
moment in suspense; then suddenly clears up his countenance; puts his
hands behind him with provoking coolness; looks at her up and down a
couple of times; takes a pinch of snuff; wipes his fingers carefully
and puts up his handkerchief, her heroic pose becoming more and more
ridiculous all the time.) NAPOLEON (at last). Well? LADY (disconcerted, but with her arms still crossed devotedly). Well:
what are you going to do? NAPOLEON. Spoil your attitude. LADY. You brute! (abandoning the attitude, she comes to the end of the
couch, where she turns with her back to it, leaning against it and
facing him with her hands behind her.) NAPOLEON. Ah, that's better. Now listen to me. I like you. What's
more, I value your respect. LADY. You value what you have not got, then. NAPOLEON. I shall have it presently. Now attend to me. Suppose I were
to allow myself to be abashed by the respect due to your sex, your
beauty, your heroism and all the rest of it? Suppose I, with nothing
but such sentimental stuff to stand between these muscles of mine and
those papers which you have about you, and which I want and mean to
have: suppose I, with the prize within my grasp, were to falter and
sneak away with my hands empty; or, what would be worse, cover up my
weakness by playing the magnanimous hero, and sparing you the violence
I dared not use, would you not despise me from the depths of your
woman's soul? Would any woman be such a fool? Well, Bonaparte can rise
to the situation and act like a woman when it is necessary. Do you
understand? The lady, without speaking, stands upright, and takes a packet of
papers from her bosom. For a moment she has an intense impulse to dash
them in his face. But her good breeding cuts her off from any vulgar
method of relief. She hands them to him politely, only averting her
head. The moment he takes them, she hurries across to the other side of
the room; covers her face with her hands; and sits down, with her body
turned away to the back of the chair. NAPOLEON (gloating over the papers). Aha! That's right. That's right. (Before opening them he looks at her and says) Excuse me. (He sees that
she is hiding her face.) Very angry with me, eh? (He unties the packet,
the seal of which is already broken, and puts it on the table to
examine its contents.) LADY (quietly, taking down her hands and showing that she is not
crying, but only thinking). No. You were right. But I am sorry for you. NAPOLEON (pausing in the act of taking the uppermost paper from the
packet). Sorry for me! Why? LADY. I am going to see you lose your honor. NAPOLEON. Hm! Nothing worse than that? (He takes up the paper.) LADY. And your happiness. NAPOLEON. Happiness, little woman, is the most tedious thing in the
world to me. Should I be what I am if I cared for happiness? Anything
else? LADY. Nothing-- (He interrupts her with an exclamation of satisfaction. She proceeds quietly) except that you will cut a very foolish figure in
the eyes of France. NAPOLEON (quickly). What? (The hand holding the paper involuntarily
drops. The lady looks at him enigmatically in tranquil silence. He
throws the letter down and breaks out into a torrent of scolding.) What
do you mean? Eh? Are you at your tricks again? Do you think I don't
know what these papers contain? I'll tell you. First, my information as
to Beaulieu's retreat. There are only two things he can
do--leatherbrained idiot that he is!--shut himself up in Mantua or
violate the neutrality of Venice by taking Peschiera. You are one of
old Leatherbrain's spies: he has discovered that he has been betrayed,
and has sent you to intercept the information at all hazards--as if
that could save him from ME, the old fool! The other papers are only my
usual correspondence from Paris, of which you know nothing. LADY (prompt and businesslike). General: let us make a fair division. Take the information your spies have sent you about the Austrian army;
and give me the Paris correspondence. That will content me. NAPOLEON (his breath taken away by the coolness of the proposal). A
fair di-- (He gasps.) It seems to me, madame, that you have come to
regard my letters as your own property, of which I am trying to rob you. LADY (earnestly). No: on my honor I ask for no letter of yours--not a
word that has been written by you or to you. That packet contains a
stolen letter: a letter written by a woman to a man--a man not her
husband--a letter that means disgrace, infamy--

NAPOLEON. A love letter? LADY (bitter-sweetly). What else but a love letter could stir up so
much hate? NAPOLEON. Why is it sent to me? To put the husband in my power, eh? LADY. No, no: it can be of no use to you: I swear that it will cost you
nothing to give it to me. It has been sent to you out of sheer
malice--solely to injure the woman who wrote it. NAPOLEON. Then why not send it to her husband instead of to me? LADY (completely taken aback). Oh! (Sinking back into the chair.) I--I
don't know. (She breaks down.) NAPOLEON. Aha! I thought so: a little romance to get the papers back. (He throws the packet on the table and confronts her with cynical
goodhumor.) Per Bacco, little woman, I can't help admiring you. If I
could lie like that, it would save me a great deal of trouble. LADY (wringing her hands). Oh, how I wish I really had told you some
lie! You would have believed me then. The truth is the one thing that
nobody will believe. NAPOLEON (with coarse familiarity, treating her as if she were a
vivandiere). Capital! Capital! (He puts his hands behind him on the
table, and lifts himself on to it, sitting with his arms akimbo and his
legs wide apart.) Come: I am a true Corsican in my love for stories. But I could tell them better than you if I set my mind to it. Next time
you are asked why a letter compromising a wife should not be sent to
her husband, answer simply that the husband would not read it. Do you
suppose, little innocent, that a man wants to be compelled by public
opinion to make a scene, to fight a duel, to break up his household, to
injure his career by a scandal, when he can avoid it all by taking care
not to know? LADY (revolted). Suppose that packet contained a letter about your own
wife? NAPOLEON (offended, coming off the table). You are impertinent, madame. LADY (humbly). I beg your above suspicion. NAPOLEON (with a deliberate assumption of superiority). You have
committed an indiscretion. I pardon you. In future, do not permit
yourself to introduce real persons in your romances. LADY (politely ignoring a speech which is to her only a breach of good
manners, and rising to move towards the table). General: there really
is a woman's letter there. (Pointing to the packet.) Give it to me. NAPOLEON (with brute conciseness, moving so as to prevent her getting
too near the letters). 