



Produced by Tapio Riikonen and David Widger





                THE PICCOLOMINI

             By Frederich Schiller



          Translated by S. T. Coleridge. "Upon the whole there can be no doubt that this trilogy forms, in its
original tongue, one of the most splendid specimens of tragic art the
world has witnessed; and none at all, that the execution of the version
from which we have quoted so largely, places Mr. Coleridge in the very
first rank of poetical translators. He is, perhaps, the solitary example
of a man of very great original genius submitting to all the labors, and
reaping all the honors of this species of literary exertion." --Blackwood,
1823. PREFACE. The two dramas,--PICCOLOMINI, or the first part of WALLENSTEIN, and the
DEATH OF WALLENSTEIN, are introduced in the original manuscript by a
prelude in one act, entitled WALLENSTEIN'S CAMP. This is written in
rhyme, and in nine-syllable verse, in the same lilting metre (if that
expression may be permitted), with the second Eclogue of Spenser's
Shepherd's Calendar. This prelude possesses a sort of broad humor, and is not deficient in
character: but to have translated it into prose, or into any other metre
than that of the original, would have given a false idea both of its
style and purport; to have translated it into the same metre would have
been incompatible with a faithful adherence to the sense of the German
from the comparative poverty of our language in rhymes; and it would have
been unadvisable, from the incongruity of those lax verses with the
present taste of the English public. Schiller's intention seems to have
been merely to have prepared his reader for the tragedies by a lively
picture of laxity of discipline and the mutinous dispositions of
Wallenstein's soldiery. It is not necessary as a preliminary
explanation. For these reasons it has been thought expedient not to
translate it. The admirers of Schiller, who have abstracted their idea of that author
from the Robbers, and the Cabal and Love, plays in which the main
interest is produced by the excitement of curiosity, and in which the
curiosity is excited by terrible and extraordinary incident, will not
have perused without some portion of disappointment the dramas, which it
has been my employment to translate. They should, however, reflect that
these are historical dramas taken from a popular German history; that we
must, therefore, judge of them in some measure with the feelings of
Germans; or, by analogy, with the interest excited in us by similar
dramas in our own language. Few, I trust, would be rash or ignorant
enough to compare Schiller with Shakspeare; yet, merely as illustration,
I would say that we should proceed to the perusal of Wallenstein, not
from Lear or Othello, but from Richard II., or the three parts of Henry
VI. We scarcely expect rapidity in an historical drama; and many prolix
speeches are pardoned from characters whose names and actions have formed
the most amusing tales of our early life. On the other hand, there exist
in these plays more individual beauties, more passages whose excellence
will bear reflection than in the former productions of Schiller. The
description of the Astrological Tower, and the reflections of the Young
Lover, which follow it, form in the original a fine poem; and my
translation must have been wretched indeed if it can have wholly
overclouded the beauties of the scene in the first act of the first play
between Questenberg, Max, and Octavio Piccolomini. If we except the
scene of the setting sun in the Robbers, I know of no part in Schiller's
plays which equals the first scene of the fifth act of the concluding
plays. [In this edition, scene iii., act v.] It would be unbecoming in
me to be more diffuse on this subject. A translator stands connected
with the original author by a certain law of subordination which makes it
more decorous to point out excellences than defects; indeed, he is not
likely to be a fair judge of either. The pleasure or disgust from his
own labor will mingle with the feelings that arise from an afterview of
the original. Even in the first perusal of a work in any foreign
language which we understand, we are apt to attribute to it more
excellence than it really possesses from our own pleasurable sense of
difficulty overcome without effort. Translation of poetry into poetry is
difficult, because the translator must give a brilliancy to his language
without that warmth of original conception from which such brilliancy
would follow of its own accord. But the translator of a living author is
incumbered with additional inconveniences. If he render his original
faithfully as to the sense of each passage, he must necessarily destroy a
considerable portion of the spirit; if he endeavor to give a work
executed according to laws of compensation he subjects himself to
imputations of vanity or misrepresentation. I have thought it my duty to
remain bound by the sense of my original with as few exceptions as the
nature of the languages rendered possible. S. T. C.



THE PICCOLOMINI. DRAMATIS PERSONAE. WALLENSTEIN, Duke of Friedland, Generalissimo of the Imperial Forces
   in the Thirty Years' War. OCTAVIO PICCOLOMINI, Lieutenant-General. MAX. PICCOLOMINI, his Son, Colonel of a Regiment of Cuirassiers. COUNT TERZKY, the Commander of several Regiments, and Brother-in-law
   of Wallenstein. ILLO, Field-Marshal, Wallenstein's Confidant. ISOLANI, General of the Croats. BUTLER, an Irishman, Commander of a Regiment of Dragoons. TIEFENBACH,  |
DON MARADAS, | Generals under Wallenstein. GOETZ,       |
KOLATTO,     |
NEUMANN, Captain of Cavalry, Aide-de-Camp to Terzky. VON QUESTENBERG, the War Commissioner, Imperial Envoy. BAPTISTA SENI, an Astrologer. DUCHESS OF FRIEDLAND, Wife of Wallenstein. THEKLA, her Daughter, Princess of Friedland. THE COUNTESS TERZRY, Sister of the Duchess. A CORNET. COLONELS and GENERALS (several). PAGES and ATTENDANTS belonging to Wallenstein. ATTENDANTS and HOBOISTS belonging to Terzky. MASTER OF THE CELLAR to Count Terzky. VALET DE CHAMBRE of Count Piccolomini. ACT I. SCENE I. An old Gothic Chamber in the Council-House at Pilsen,
   decorated with Colors and other War Insignia. ILLO, with BUTLER and ISOLANI. ILLO. Ye have come too late-but ye are come! The distance,
Count Isolani, excuses your delay. ISOLANI. Add this too, that we come not empty-handed. At Donauwerth [1] it was reported to us,
A Swedish caravan was on its way,
Transporting a rich cargo of provision,
Almost six hundreds wagons. This my Croats
Plunged down upon and seized, this weighty prize!--
We bring it hither----

ILLO. Just in time to banquet
The illustrious company assembled here. BUTLER. 'Tis all alive! a stirring scene here! ISOLANI. Ay! The very churches are full of soldiers. [Casts his eye round. And in the council-house, too, I observe,
You're settled quite at home! Well, well! we soldiers
Must shift and suit us in what way we can. ILLO. We have the colonels here of thirty regiments. You'll find Count Terzky here, and Tiefenbach,
Kolatto, Goetz, Maradas, Hinnersam,
The Piccolomini, both son and father--
You'll meet with many an unexpected greeting
From many an old friend and acquaintance. Only
Gallas is wanting still, and Altringer. BUTLER. Expect not Gallas. ILLO (hesitating). How so? Do you know----

ISOLANI (interrupting him). Max. Piccolomini here? O bring me to him. I see him yet ('tis now ten years ago,
We were engaged with Mansfeldt hard by Dessau),
I see the youth, in my mind's eye I see him,
Leap his black war-horse from the bridge adown,
And t'ward his father, then in extreme peril,
Beat up against the strong tide of the Elbe. The down was scarce upon his chin! I hear
He has made good the promise of his youth,
And the full hero now is finished in him. ILLO. You'll see him yet ere evening. He conducts
The Duchess Friedland hither, and the princess [2]
From Caernthen [3]. We expect them here at noon. BUTLER. Both wife and daughter does the duke call hither? He crowds in visitants from all sides. ISOLANI. Hm! So much the better! I had framed my mind
To hear of naught but warlike circumstance,
Of marches and attacks, and batteries;
And lo! the duke provides, and something too
Of gentler sort and lovely, should be present
To feast our eyes. ILLO (who has been standing in the attitude of meditation, to BUTLER,
   whom he leads a little on one side). And how came you to know
That the Count Gallas joins us not? BUTLER. Because
He importuned me to remain behind. ILLO (with warmth). And you? You hold out firmly! [Grasping his hand with affection. Noble Butler! BUTLER. After the obligation which the duke
Had laid so newly on me----

ILLO. I had forgotten
A pleasant duty--major-general,
I wish you joy! ISOLANI. What, you mean, of this regiment? I hear, too, that to make the gift still sweeter,
The duke has given him the very same
In which he first saw service, and since then
Worked himself step by step, through each preferment,
From the ranks upwards. And verily, it gives
A precedent of hope, a spur of action
To the whole corps, if once in their remembrance
An old deserving soldier makes his way. BUTLER. I am perplexed and doubtful whether or no
I dare accept this your congratulation. The emperor has not yet confirmed the appointment. ISOLANI. Seize it, friend, seize it! The hand which in that post
Placed you is strong enough to keep you there,
Spite of the emperor and his ministers! ILLO. Ay, if we would but so consider it!--
If we would all of us consider it so! The emperor gives us nothing; from the duke
Comes all--whate'er we hope, whate'er we have. ISOLANI (to ILLO). My noble brother! did I tell you how
The duke will satisfy my creditors? Will be himself my bankers for the future,
Make me once more a creditable man! And this is now the third time, think of that! This kingly-minded man has rescued me
From absolute ruin and restored my honor. ILLO. Oh that his power but kept pace with his wishes! Why, friend! he'd give the whole world to his soldiers. But at Vienna, brother!--here's the grievance,--
What politic schemes do they not lay to shorten
His arm, and where they can to clip his pinions. Then these new dainty requisitions! these
Which this same Questenberg brings hither! BUTLER. Ay! Those requisitions of the emperor--
I too have heard about them; but I hope
The duke will not draw back a single inch! ILLO. Not from his right most surely, unless first
From office! BUTLER (shocked and confused). Know you aught then? You alarm me. ISOLANI (at the same time with BUTLER, and in a hurrying voice). We should be ruined, every one of us! ILLO. Yonder I see our worthy friend [spoken with a sneer] approaching
With the Lieutenant-General Piccolomini. BUTLER (shaking his head significantly). I fear we shall not go hence as we came. SCENE II. Enter OCTAVIO PICCOLOMINI and QUESTENBERG. OCTAVIO (still in the distance). Ay! ah! more still! Still more new visitors! Acknowledge, friend! that never was a camp,
Which held at once so many heads of heroes. QUESTENBERG. Let none approach a camp of Friedland's troops
Who dares to think unworthily of war;
E'en I myself had nigh forgot its evils
When I surveyed that lofty soul of order,
By which, while it destroys the world--itself
Maintains the greatness which itself created. OCTAVIO (approaching nearer). Welcome, Count Isolani! ISOLANI. My noble brother! Even now am I arrived; it has been else my duty----

OCTAVIO. And Colonel Butler--trust me, I rejoice
Thus to renew acquaintance with a man
Whose worth and services I know and honor. See, see, my friend! There might we place at once before our eyes
The sum of war's whole trade and mystery--

   [To QUESTENBERG, presenting BUTLER and ISOLANI at the same time
   to him. These two the total sum--strength and despatch. QUESTENBERG (to OCTAVIO). And lo! betwixt them both, experienced prudence! OCTAVIO (presenting QUESTENBERG to BUTLER and ISOLANI). The Chamberlain and War-Commissioner Questenberg. The bearer of the emperor's behests,--
The long-tried friend and patron of all soldiers,
We honor in this noble visitor. [Universal silence. ILLO (moving towards QUESTENBERG). 'Tis not the first time, noble minister,
You've shown our camp this honor. QUESTENBERG. Once before
I stood beside these colors. ILLO. Perchance too you remember where that was;
It was at Znaeim [4] in Moravia, where
You did present yourself upon the part
Of the emperor to supplicate our duke
That he would straight assume the chief command. QUESTENBURG. To supplicate? Nay, bold general! So far extended neither my commission
(At least to my own knowledge) nor my zeal. ILLO. Well, well, then--to compel him, if you choose,
I can remember me right well, Count Tilly
Had suffered total rout upon the Lech. Bavaria lay all open to the enemy,
Whom there was nothing to delay from pressing
Onwards into the very heart of Austria. At that time you and Werdenberg appeared
Before our general, storming him with prayers,
And menacing the emperor's displeasure,
Unless he took compassion on this wretchedness. ISOLANI (steps up to them). Yes, yes, 'tis comprehensible enough,
Wherefore with your commission of to-day,
You were not all too willing to remember
Your former one. QUESTENBERG. Why not, Count Isolani? No contradiction sure exists between them. It was the urgent business of that time
To snatch Bavaria from her enemy's hand;
And my commission of to-day instructs me
To free her from her good friends and protectors. ILLO. A worthy office! After with our blood
We have wrested this Bohemia from the Saxon,
To be swept out of it is all our thanks,
The sole reward of all our hard-won victories. QUESTENBERG. Unless that wretched land be doomed to suffer
Only a change of evils, it must be
Freed from the scourge alike of friend or foe. ILLO. What? 'Twas a favorable year; the boors
Can answer fresh demands already. QUESTENBERG. Nay,
If you discourse of herds and meadow-grounds----

ISOLANI. The war maintains the war. Are the boors ruined
The emperor gains so many more new soldiers. QUESTENBERG. And is the poorer by even so many subjects. ISOLANI. Poh! we are all his subjects. QUESTENBERG. Yet with a difference, general! The one fill
With profitable industry the purse,
The others are well skilled to empty it. The sword has made the emperor poor; the plough
Must reinvigorate his resources. ISOLANI. Sure! Times are not yet so bad. Methinks I see
   [Examining with his eye the dress and ornaments of QUESTENBERG. Good store of gold that still remains uncoined. QUESTENBERG. Thank Heaven! that means have been found out to hide
Some little from the fingers of the Croats. ILLO. There! The Stawata and the Martinitz,
On whom the emperor heaps his gifts and graces,
To the heart-burning of all good Bohemians--
Those minions of court favor, those court harpies,
Who fatten on the wrecks of citizens
Driven from their house and home--who reap no harvests
Save in the general calamity--
Who now, with kingly pomp, insult and mock
The desolation of their country--these,
Let these, and such as these, support the war,
The fatal war, which they alone enkindled! BUTLER. And those state-parasites, who have their feet
So constantly beneath the emperor's table,
Who cannot let a benefice fall, but they
Snap at it with dogs' hunger--they, forsooth,
Would pare the soldiers bread and cross his reckoning! ISOLANI. My life long will it anger me to think,
How when I went to court seven years ago,
To see about new horses for our regiment,
How from one antechamber to another
They dragged me on and left me by the hour
To kick my heels among a crowd of simpering
Feast-fattened slaves, as if I had come thither
A mendicant suitor for the crumbs of favor
That fell beneath their tables. And, at last,
Whom should they send me but a Capuchin! Straight I began to muster up my sins
For absolution--but no such luck for me! This was the man, this Capuchin, with whom
I was to treat concerning the army horses! And I was forced at last to quit the field,
The business unaccomplished. Afterwards
The duke procured me in three days what I
Could not obtain in thirty at Vienna. QUESTENBERG. Yes, yes! your travelling bills soon found their way to us! Too well I know we have still accounts to settle. ILLO. War is violent trade; one cannot always
Finish one's work by soft means; every trifle
Must not be blackened into sacrilege. If we should wait till you, in solemn council,
With due deliberation had selected
The smallest out of four-and-twenty evils,
I' faith we should wait long--
"Dash! and through with it!" That's the better watchword. Then after come what may come. 'Tis man's nature
To make the best of a bad thing once past. A bitter and perplexed "what shall I do?" Is worse to man than worst necessity. QUESTENBERG. Ay, doubtless, it is true; the duke does spare us
The troublesome task of choosing. BUTLER. Yes, the duke
Cares with a father's feelings for his troops;
But how the emperor feels for us, we see. QUESTENBERG. His cares and feelings all ranks share alike,
Nor will he offer one up to another. ISOLANI. And therefore thrusts he us into the deserts
As beasts of prey, that so he may preserve
His dear sheep fattening in his fields at home. QUESTENBERG (with a sneer). Count! this comparison you make, not I.

ILLO. Why, were we all the court supposes us
'Twere dangerous, sure, to give us liberty. QUESTENBERG (gravely). You have taken liberty--it was not given you,
And therefore it becomes an urgent duty
To rein it in with the curbs. ILLO. Expect to find a restive steed in us. QUESTENBERG. A better rider may be found to rule it. ILLO. He only brooks the rider who has tamed him. QUESTENBERG. Ay, tame him once, and then a child may lead him. ILLO. The child, we know, is found for him already. QUESTENBERG. Be duty, sir, your study, not a name. BUTLER (who has stood aside with PICCOLOMINI, but with visible interest
    in the conversation, advances). Sir president, the emperor has in Germany
A splendid host assembled; in this kingdom
Full twenty thousand soldiers are cantoned,
With sixteen thousand in Silesia;
Ten regiments are posted on the Weser,
The Rhine, and Maine; in Swabia there are six,
And in Bavaria twelve, to face the Swedes;
Without including in the account the garrisons
Who on the frontiers hold the fortresses. This vast and mighty host is all obedient
To Friedland's captains; and its brave commanders,
Bred in one school, and nurtured with one milk,
Are all excited by one heart and soul;
They are as strangers on the soil they tread,
The service is their only house and home. No zeal inspires then for their country's cause,
For thousands like myself were born abroad;
Nor care they for the emperor, for one half
Deserting other service fled to ours,
Indifferent what their banner, whether 'twere,
The Double Eagle, Lily, or the Lion. Yet one sole man can rein this fiery host
By equal rule, by equal love and fear;
Blending the many-nationed whole in one;
And like the lightning's fires securely led
Down the conducting rod, e'en thus his power
Rules all the mass, from guarded post to post,
From where the sentry hears the Baltic roar,
Or views the fertile vales of the Adige,
E'en to the body-guard, who holds his watch
Within the precincts of the imperial palace! QUESTENBERG. What's the short meaning of this long harangue? BUTLER. That the respect, the love, the confidence,
Which makes us willing subjects of Duke Friedland,
Are not to be transferred to the first comer
That Austria's court may please to send to us. We have not yet so readily forgotten
How the command came into Friedland's hands. Was it, forsooth, the emperor's majesty
That gave the army ready to his hand,
And only sought a leader for it? No. The army then had no existence. He,
Friedland, it was who called it into being,
And gave it to his sovereign--but receiving
No army at his hand; nor did the emperor
Give Wallenstein to us as general. No,
It was from Wallenstein we first received
The emperor as our master and our sovereign;
And he, he only, binds us to our banners! OCTAVIO (interposing and addressing QUESTENBERG). My noble friend,
This is no more than a remembrancing
That you are now in camp, and among warriors;
The soldier's boldness constitutes his freedom. Could he act daringly, unless he dared
Talk even so? One runs into the other. The boldness of this worthy officer,
                [Pointing to BUTLER. Which now is but mistaken in its mark,
Preserved, when naught but boldness could preserve it,
To the emperor, his capital city, Prague,
In a most formidable mutiny
Of the whole garrison. [Military music at a distance. Hah! here they come! ILLO. The sentries are saluting them: this signal
Announces the arrival of the duchess. OCTAVIO (to QUESTENBERG). Then my son Max., too, has returned. 'Twas he
Fetched and attended them from Caernthen hither. ISOLANI (to ILLO). Shall we not go in company to greet them? ILLO. Well, let us go--Ho! Colonel Butler, come. [To OCTAVIO. You'll not forget that yet ere noon we meet
The noble envoy at the general's palace. [Exeunt all but QUESTENBERG and OCTAVIO. SCENE III. QUESTENBERG and OCTAVIO. QUESTENBERG (with signs of aversion and astonishment). What have I not been forced to hear, Octavio! What sentiments! what fierce, uncurbed defiance! And were this spirit universal----

OCTAVIO. Hm! You're now acquainted with three-fourths of the army. QUESTENBERG. Where must we seek, then, for a second host
To have the custody of this? That Illo
Thinks worse, I fear me, than he speaks. And then
This Butler, too--he cannot even conceal
The passionate workings of his ill intentions. OCTAVIO. Quickness of temper--irritated pride;
'Twas nothing more. I cannot give up Butler. I know a spell that will soon dispossess
The evil spirit in him. QUESTENBERG (walking up and down in evident disquiet). Friend, friend! O! this is worse, far worse, than we had suffered
Ourselves to dream of at Vienna. There
We saw it only with a courtier's eyes,
Eyes dazzled by the splendor of the throne. We had not seen the war-chief, the commander,
The man all-powerful in his camp. Here, here,
'Tis quite another thing. Here is no emperor more--the duke is emperor. Alas, my friend! alas, my noble friend! This walk which you have ta'en me through the camp
Strikes my hopes prostrate. OCTAVIO. Now you see yourself
Of what a perilous kind the office is,
Which you deliver to me from the court. The least suspicion of the general
Costs me my freedom and my life, and would
But hasten his most desperate enterprise. QUESTENBERG. Where was our reason sleeping when we trusted
This madman with the sword, and placed such power
In such a hand? I tell you, he'll refuse,
Flatly refuse to obey the imperial orders. Friend, he can do it, and what he can, he will. And then the impunity of his defiance--
Oh! what a proclamation of our weakness! OCTAVIO. D'ye think, too, he has brought his wife and daughter
Without a purpose hither? Here in camp! And at the very point of time in which
We're arming for the war? That he has taken
These, the last pledges of his loyalty,
Away from out the emperor's dominions--
This is no doubtful token of the nearness
Of some eruption. QUESTENBERG. How shall we hold footing
Beneath this tempest, which collects itself
And threats us from all quarters? The enemy
Of the empire on our borders, now already
The master of the Danube, and still farther,
And farther still, extending every hour! In our interior the alarum-bells
Of insurrection--peasantry in arms--
All orders discontented--and the army,
Just in the moment of our expectation
Of aidance from it--lo! this very army
Seduced, run wild, lost to all discipline,
Loosened, and rent asunder from the state
And from their sovereign, the blind instrument
Of the most daring of mankind, a weapon
Of fearful power, which at his will he wields. OCTAVIO. Nay, nay, friend! let us not despair too soon
Men's words are even bolder than their deeds;
And many a resolute, who now appears
Made up to all extremes, will, on a sudden,
Find in his breast a heart he wot not of,
Let but a single honest man speak out
The true name of his crime! Remember, too,
We stand not yet so wholly unprotected. Counts Altringer and Gallas have maintained
Their little army faithful to its duty,
And daily it becomes more numerous. Nor can he take us by surprise; you know
I hold him all encompassed by my listeners. What'er he does, is mine, even while 'tis doing--
No step so small, but instantly I hear it;
Yea, his own mouth discloses it. QUESTENBERG. 'Tis quite
Incomprehensible, that he detects not
The foe so near! OCTAVIO. Beware, you do not think,
That I, by lying arts, and complaisant
Hypocrisy, have sulked into his graces,
Or with the substance of smooth professions
Nourish his all-confiding friendship! No--
Compelled alike by prudence, and that duty
Which we all owe our country and our sovereign,
To hide my genuine feelings from him, yet
Ne'er have I duped him with base counterfeits! QUESTENBERG. It is the visible ordinance of heaven. OCTAVIO. I know not what it is that so attracts
And links him both to me and to my son. Comrades and friends we always were--long habit,
Adventurous deeds performed in company,
And all those many and various incidents
Which stores a soldier's memory with affections,
Had bound us long and early to each other--
Yet I can name the day, when all at once
His heart rose on me, and his confidence
Shot out into sudden growth. It was the morning
Before the memorable fight at Luetzen. Urged by an ugly dream, I sought him out,
To press him to accept another charger. At a distance from the tents, beneath a tree,
I found him in a sleep. When I had waked him
And had related all my bodings to him,
Long time he stared upon me, like a man
Astounded: thereon fell upon my neck,
And manifested to me an emotion
That far outstripped the worth of that small service. Since then his confidence has followed me
With the same pace that mine has fled from him. QUESTENBERG. You lead your son into the secret? OCTAVIO. No! QUESTENBERG. What! and not warn him either, what bad hands
His lot has placed him in? OCTAVIO. I must perforce
Leave him in wardship to his innocence. His young and open soul--dissimulation
Is foreign to its habits! Ignorance
Alone can keep alive the cheerful air,
The unembarrassed sense and light free spirit,
That makes the duke secure. QUESTENBERG (anxiously). My honored friend! most highly do I deem
Of Colonel Piccolomini--yet--if--
Reflect a little----

OCTAVIO. I must venture it. Hush! There he comes! SCENE IV. MAX. PICCOLOMINI, OCTAVIO PICCOLOMINI, QUESTENBERG. MAX. Ha! there he is himself. Welcome, my father! [He embraces his father. As he turns round, he observes
   QUESTENBERG, and draws back with a cold and reserved air. You are engaged, I see. I'll not disturb you. OCTAVIO. How, Max.? Look closer at this visitor. Attention, Max., an old friend merits--reverence
Belongs of right to the envoy of your sovereign. MAX. (drily). Von Questenberg!--welcome--if you bring with you
Aught good to our headquarters. QUESTENBERG (seizing his hand). Nay, draw not
Your hand away, Count Piccolimini! Not on my own account alone I seized it,
And nothing common will I say therewith. [Taking the hands of both. Octavio--Max. Piccolomini! O savior names, and full of happy omen! Ne'er will her prosperous genius turn from Austria,
While two such stars, with blessed influences
Beaming protection, shine above her hosts. MAX. Heh! Noble minister! You miss your part. You come not here to act a panegyric. You're sent, I know, to find fault and to scold us--
I must not be beforehand with my comrades. OCTAVIO (to MAX.). He comes from court, where people are not quite
So well contented with the duke as here. MAX. What now have they contrived to find out in him? That he alone determines for himself
What he himself alone doth understand! Well, therein he does right, and will persist in't
Heaven never meant him for that passive thing
That can be struck and hammered out to suit
Another's taste and fancy. He'll not dance
To every tune of every minister. It goes against his nature--he can't do it,
He is possessed by a commanding spirit,
And his, too, is the station of command. And well for us it is so! There exist
Few fit to rule themselves, but few that use
Their intellects intelligently. Then
Well for the whole, if there be found a man
Who makes himself what nature destined him,
The pause, the central point, to thousand thousands
Stands fixed and stately, like a firm-built column,
Where all may press with joy and confidence--
Now such a man is Wallenstein; and if
Another better suits the court--no other
But such a one as he can serve the army. QUESTENBERG. The army? Doubtless! MAX. What delight to observe
How he incites and strengthens all around him,
Infusing life and vigor. Every power
Seems as it were redoubled by his presence
He draws forth every latent energy,
Showing to each his own peculiar talent,
Yet leaving all to be what nature made them,
And watching only that they be naught else
In the right place and time; and he has skill
To mould the power's of all to his own end. QUESTENBERG. But who denies his knowledge of mankind,
And skill to use it? Our complaint is this:
That in the master he forgets the servant,
As if he claimed by birth his present honors. MAX. And does he not so? Is he not endowed
With every gift and power to carry out
The high intents of nature, and to win
A ruler's station by a ruler's talent? QUESTENBERG. So then it seems to rest with him alone
What is the worth of all mankind beside! MAX. Uncommon men require no common trust;
Give him but scope and he will set the bounds. QUESTENBERG. The proof is yet to come. MAX. Thus are ye ever. Ye shrink from every thing of depth, and think
Yourselves are only safe while ye're in shallows. OCTAVIO (to QUESTENBERG). 'Twere best to yield with a good grace, my friend;
Of him there you'll make nothing. MAX. (continuing). In their fear
They call a spirit up, and when he comes,
Straight their flesh creeps and quivers, and they dread him
More than the ills for which they called him up. The uncommon, the sublime, must seem and be
Like things of every day. But in the field,
Ay, there the Present Being makes itself felt. The personal must command, the actual eye
Examine. If to be the chieftain asks
All that is great in nature, let it be
Likewise his privilege to move and act
In all the correspondences of greatness. The oracle within him, that which lives,
He must invoke and question--not dead books,
Not ordinances, not mould-rotted papers. OCTAVIO. My son! of those old narrow ordinances
Let us not hold too lightly. They are weights
Of priceless value, which oppressed mankind,
Tied to the volatile will of their oppressors. For always formidable was the League
And partnership of free power with free will. The way of ancient ordinance, though it winds,
Is yet no devious path. Straight forward goes
The lightning's path, and straight the fearful path
Of the cannon-ball. Direct it flies, and rapid;
Shattering that it may reach, and shattering what it reaches,
My son, the road the human being travels,
That, on which blessing comes and goes, doth follow
The river's course, the valley's playful windings,
Curves round the cornfield and the hill of vines,
Honoring the holy bounds of property! And thus secure, though late, leads to its end. QUESTENBERG. Oh, hear your father, noble youth! hear him
Who is at once the hero and the man. OCTAVIO. My son, the nursling of the camp spoke in thee! A war of fifteen years
Hath been thy education and thy school. Peace hast thou never witnessed! There exists
An higher than the warrior's excellence. In war itself war is no ultimate purpose,
The vast and sudden deeds of violence,
Adventures wild, and wonders of the moment,
These are not they, my son, that generate
The calm, the blissful, and the enduring mighty! Lo there! the soldier, rapid architect! Builds his light town of canvas, and at once
The whole scene moves and bustles momently. With arms, and neighing steeds, and mirth and quarrel
The motley market fills; the roads, the streams
Are crowded with new freights; trade stirs and hurries,
But on some morrow morn, all suddenly,
The tents drop down, the horde renews its march. Dreary, and solitary as a churchyard;
The meadow and down-trodden seed-plot lie,
And the year's harvest is gone utterly. MAX. Oh, let the emperor make peace, my father! Most gladly would I give the blood-stained laurel
For the first violet [5] of the leafless spring,
Plucked in those quiet fields where I have journeyed. OCTAVIO. What ails thee? What so moves thee all at once? MAX. Peace have I ne'er beheld? I have beheld it. From thence am I come hither: oh, that sight,
It glimmers still before me, like some landscape
Left in the distance,--some delicious landscape! My road conducted me through countries where
The war has not yet reached. Life, life, my father--
My venerable father, life has charms
Which we have never experienced. We have been
But voyaging along its barren coasts,
Like some poor ever-roaming horde of pirates,
That, crowded in the rank and narrow ship,
House on the wild sea with wild usages,
Nor know aught of the mainland, but the bays
Where safeliest they may venture a thieves' landing. Whate'er in the inland dales the land conceals
Of fair and exquisite, oh, nothing, nothing,
Do we behold of that in our rude voyage. OCTAVIO (attentive, with an appearance of uneasiness). And so your journey has revealed this to you? MAX. 'Twas the first leisure of my life. O tell me,
What is the meed and purpose of the toil,
The painful toil which robbed me of my youth,
Left me a heart unsouled and solitary,
A spirit uninformed, unornamented! For the camp's stir, and crowd, and ceaseless larum,
The neighing war-horse, the air-shattering trumpet,
The unvaried, still returning hour of duty,
Word of command, and exercise of arms--
There's nothing here, there's nothing in all this,
To satisfy the heart, the gasping heart! Mere bustling nothingness, where the soul is not--
This cannot be the sole felicity,
These cannot be man's best and only pleasures! OCTAVIO. Much hast thou learnt, my son, in this short journey. MAX. Oh day, thrice lovely! when at length the soldier
Returns home into life; when he becomes
A fellow-man among his fellow-men. The colors are unfurled, the cavalcade
Mashals, and now the buzz is hushed, and hark! Now the soft peace-march beats, home, brothers, home! The caps and helmet are all garlanded
With green boughs, the last plundering of the fields. The city gates fly open of themselves,
They need no longer the petard to tear them. The ramparts are all filled with men and women,
With peaceful men and women, that send onwards. Kisses and welcomings upon the air,
Which they make breezy with affectionate gestures. From all the towers rings out the merry peal,
The joyous vespers of a bloody day. O happy man, O fortunate! for whom
The well-known door, the faithful arms are open,
The faithful tender arms with mute embracing. QUESTENBERG (apparently much affected). O that you should speak
Of such a distant, distant time, and not
Of the to-morrow, not of this to-day. MAX. (turning round to him quick and vehement). Where lies the fault but on you in Vienna! I will deal openly with you, Questenberg. Just now, as first I saw you standing here
(I'll own it to you freely), indignation
Crowded and pressed my inmost soul together. 'Tis ye that hinder peace, ye!--and the warrior,
It is the warrior that must force it from you. Ye fret the general's life out, blacken him,
Hold him up as a rebel, and heaven knows
What else still worse, because he spares the Saxons,
And tries to awaken confidence in the enemy;
Which yet's the only way to peace: for if
War intermit not during war, how then
And whence can peace come? Your own plagues fall on you! Even as I love what's virtuous, hate I you. And here I make this vow, here pledge myself,
My blood shall spurt out for this Wallenstein,
And my heart drain off, drop by drop, ere ye
Shall revel and dance jubilee o'er his ruin. [Exit. SCENE V.

   QUESTENBERG, OCTAVIO PICCOLOMINI. QUESTENBERG. Alas! alas! and stands it so? [Then in pressing and impatient tones. What friend! and do we let him go away
In this delusion--let him go away? Not call him back immediately, not open
His eyes, upon the spot? OCTAVIO (recovering himself out of a deep study). He has now opened mine,
And I see more than pleases me. QUESTENBERG. What is it? OCTAVIO. Curse on this journey! QUESTENBERG. But why so? What is it? OCTAVIO. Come, come along, friend! I must follow up
The ominous track immediately. Mine eyes
Are opened now, and I must use them. Come! [Draws QUESTENBERG on with him. QUESTENBERG. What now? Where go you then? OCTAVIO. To her herself. QUESTENBERG. To----

OCTAVIO (interrupting him and correcting himself). To the duke. Come, let us go 'Tis done, 'tis done,
I see the net that is thrown over him. Oh! he returns not to me as he went. QUESTENBERG. Nay, but explain yourself. OCTAVIO. And that I should not
Foresee it, not prevent this journey! Wherefore
Did I keep it from him? You were in the right. I should have warned him. Now it is too late. QUESTENBERG. But what's too late? Bethink yourself, my friend,
That you are talking absolute riddles to me. OCTAVIO (more collected). Come I to the duke's. 'Tis close upon the hour
Which he appointed you for audience. Come! A curse, a threefold curse, upon this journey! [He leads QUESTENBERG off. ACT II. SCENE I. Changes to a spacious chamber in the house of the Duke of
   Friedland. Servants employed in putting the tables and chairs
   in order. During this enters SENI, like an old Italian doctor,
   in black, and clothed somewhat fantastically. He carries a white
   staff, with which he marks out the quarters of the heavens. FIRST SERVANT. Come--to it, lads, to it! Make an end of it. I hear the
sentry call out, "Stand to your arms!" They will be here in a minute. SECOND SERVANT. Why were we not told before that the audience would be
held here? Nothing prepared--no orders--no instructions. THIRD SERVANT. Ay, and why was the balcony chamber countermanded, that
with the great worked carpet? There one can look about one. FIRST SERVANT. Nay, that you must ask the mathematician there. He says
it is an unlucky chamber. SECOND SERVANT. Poh! stuff and nonsense! that's what I call a hum. A
chamber is a chamber; what much can the place signify in the affair? SENI (with gravity). My son, there's nothing insignificant,
Nothing! But yet in every earthly thing,
First and most principal is place and time. FIRST SERVANT (to the second). Say nothing to him, Nat. The duke
himself must let him have his own will. SENI (counts the chairs, half in a loud, half in a low voice, till
   he comes to eleven, which he repeats). Eleven! an evil number! Set twelve chairs. Twelve! twelve signs hath the zodiac: five and seven,
The holy numbers, include themselves in twelve. SECOND SERVANT. And what may you have to object against eleven? I
should like to know that now. SENI. Eleven is transgression; eleven oversteps
The ten commandments. SECOND SERVANT. That's good? and why do you call five a holy number? SENI. Five is the soul of man: for even as man
Is mingled up of good and evil, so
The five is the first number that's made up
Of even and odd. SECOND SERVANT. The foolish old coxcomb! FIRST SERVANT. Ay! let him alone though. I like to hear him; there is
more in his words than can be seen at first sight. THIRD SERVANT. Off, they come. SECOND SERVANT. There! Out at the side-door. [They hurry off: SENI follows slowly. A page brings the staff
   of command on a red cushion, and places it on the table, near the
   duke's chair. They are announced from without, and the wings of
   the door fly open. SCENE II. WALLENSTEIN, DUCHESS. WALLENSTEIN. You went, then, through Vienna, were presented
To the Queen of Hungary? DUCHESS. Yes; and to the empress, too,
And by both majesties were we admitted
To kiss the hand. WALLENSTEIN. And how was it received,
That I had sent for wife and daughter hither
To the camp, in winter-time? DUCHESS. I did even that
Which you commissioned me to do. I told them
You had determined on our daughter's marriage,
And wished, ere yet you went into the field,
To show the elected husband his betrothed. WALLENSTEIN. And did they guess the choice which I had made? DUCHESS. They only hoped and wished it may have fallen
Upon no foreign nor yet Lutheran noble. WALLENSTEIN. And you--what do you wish, Elizabeth? DUCHESS. Your will, you know, was always mine. WALLENSTEIN (after a pause). Well, then,--
And in all else, of what kind and complexion
Was your reception at the court? [The DUCHESS casts her eyes on the ground, and remains silent. Hide nothing from me. How were you received? DUCHESS. O! my dear lord, all is not what it was. A canker-worm, my lord, a canker-worm
Has stolen into the bud. WALLENSTEIN. Ay! is it so? What, they were lax? they failed of the old respect? DUCHESS. Not of respect. No honors were omitted,
No outward courtesy; but in the place
Of condescending, confidential kindness,
Familiar and endearing, there were given me
Only these honors and that solemn courtesy. Ah! and the tenderness which was put on,
It was the guise of pity, not of favor. No! Albrecht's wife, Duke Albrecht's princely wife,
Count Harrach's noble daughter, should not so--
Not wholly so should she have been received. WALLENSTEIN. Yes, yes; they have taken offence. My latest conduct
They railed at it, no doubt. DUCHESS. O that they had! I have been long accustomed to defend you,
To heal and pacify distempered spirits. No; no one railed at you. They wrapped them up,
O Heaven! in such oppressive, solemn silence! Here is no every-day misunderstanding,
No transient pique, no cloud that passes over;
Something most luckless, most unhealable,
Has taken place. The Queen of Hungary
Used formerly to call me her dear aunt,
And ever at departure to embrace me----

WALLENSTEIN. Now she omitted it? DUCHESS (wiping away her tears after a pause). She did embrace me,
But then first when I had already taken
My formal leave, and when the door already
Had closed upon me, then did she come out
In haste, as she had suddenly bethought herself,
And pressed me to her bosom, more with anguish
Than tenderness. WALLENSTEIN (seizes her hand soothingly). Nay, now collect yourself. And what of Eggenberg and Lichtenstein,
And of our other friends there? DUCHESS (shaking her head). I saw none. WALLENSTEIN. The ambassador from Spain, who once was wont
To plead so warmly for me? DUCHESS. Silent, silent! WALLENSTEIN. These suns then are eclipsed for us. Henceforward
Must we roll on, our own fire, our own light. DUCHESS. And were it--were it, my dear lord, in that
Which moved about the court in buzz and whisper,
But in the country let itself be heard
Aloud--in that which Father Lanormain
In sundry hints and----

WALLENSTEIN (eagerly). Lanormain! what said he? DUCHESS. That you're accused of having daringly
O'erstepped the powers intrusted to you, charged
With traitorous contempt of the emperor
And his supreme behests. The proud Bavarian,
He and the Spaniards stand up your accusers--
That there's a storm collecting over you
Of far more fearful menace than the former one
Which whirled you headlong down at Regensburg. And people talk, said he, of----Ah! [Stifling extreme emotion. WALLENSTEIN. Proceed! DUCHESS. I cannot utter it! WALLENSTEIN. Proceed! DUCHESS. They talk----

WALLENSTEIN. Well! DUCHESS. Of a second----
       (catches her voice and hesitates.) WALLENSTEIN. Second----

DUCHESS. Most disgraceful
Dismission. WALLENSTEIN. Talk they? [Strides across the chamber in vehement agitation. Oh! they force, they thrust me
With violence, against my own will, onward! DUCHESS (presses near him in entreaty). Oh! if there yet be time, my husband, if
By giving way and by submission, this
Can be averted--my dear Lord, give way! Win down your proud heart to it! Tell the heart,
It is your sovereign lord, your emperor,
Before whom you retreat. Oh! no longer
Low trickling malice blacken your good meaning
With abhorred venomous glosses. Stand you up
Shielded and helmed and weaponed with the truth,
And drive before you into uttermost shame
These slanderous liars! Few firm friends have we--
You know it! The swift growth of our good fortune
It hath but set us up a mark for hatred. What are we, if the sovereign's grace and favor
Stand not before us! SCENE III. Enter the Countess TERZKY, leading in her hand the Princess THEKLA,
   richly adorned with brilliants. COUNTESS, TEKLA, WALLENSTEIN, DUCHESS. COUNTESS. How sister? What, already upon business? [Observing the countenance of the DUCHESS. And business of no pleasing kind I see,
Ere he has gladdened at his child. The first
Moment belongs to joy. Here, Friedland! father! This is thy daughter. [THEKLA approaches with a shy and timid air, and bends herself as
   about to kiss his hand. He receives her in his arms, and remains
   standing for some time lost in the feeling of her presence. WALLENSTEIN. Yes! pure and lovely hath hope risen on me,
I take her as the pledge of greater fortune. DUCHESS. 'Twas but a little child when you departed
To raise up that great army for the emperor
And after, at the close of the campaign,
When you returned home out of Pomerania,
Your daughter was already in the convent,
Wherein she has remained till now. WALLENSTEIN. The while
We in the field here gave our cares and toils
To make her great, and fight her a free way
To the loftiest earthly good; lo! mother Nature
Within the peaceful, silent convent walls,
Has done her part, and out of her free grace
Hath she bestowed on the beloved child
The god-like; and now leads her thus adorned
To meet her splendid fortune, and my hope. DUCHESS (to THEKLA). Thou wouldst not now have recognized thy father,
Wouldst thou, my child? She counted scarce eight years
When last she saw your face. THEKLA. O yes, yes, mother! At the first glance! My father has not altered. The form that stands before me falsifies
No feature of the image that hath lived
So long within me! WALLENSTEIN. The voice of my child! [Then after a pause. I was indignant at my destiny,
That it denied me a man-child, to be
Heir of my name and of my prosperous fortune,
And re-illume my soon-extinguished being
In a proud line of princes. I wronged my destiny. Here upon this head,
So lovely in its maiden bloom, will I
Let fall the garland of a life of war,
Nor deem it lost, if only I can wreath it,
Transmuted to a regal ornament,
Around these beauteous brows. [He clasps her in his arms as PICCOLOMINI enters. SCENE IV. Enter MAX. PICCOLOMINI, and some time after COUNT TERZKY, the
   others remaining as before. COUNTESS. There comes the Paladin who protected us. WALLENSTEIN. Max.! Welcome, ever welcome! Always wert thou
The morning star of my best joys! MAX. My general----

WALLENSTEIN. Till now it was the emperor who rewarded thee,
I but the instrument. This day thou hast bound
The father to thee, Max.! the fortunate father,
And this debt Friedland's self must pay. MAX. My prince! You made no common hurry to transfer it. I come with shame: yea, not without a pang! For scarce have I arrived here, scarce delivered
The mother and the daughter to your arms,
But there is brought to me from your equerry [6]
A splendid richly-plated hunting dress
So to remunerate me for my troubles--
Yes, yes, remunerate me,--since a trouble
It must be, a mere office, not a favor
Which I leaped forward to receive, and which
I came with grateful heart to thank you for. No! 'twas not so intended, that my business
Should be my highest best good fortune! [TERZKY enters; and delivers letters to the DUKE, which he
   breaks open hurriedly. COUNTESS (to MAX.). Remunerate your trouble! For his joy,
He makes you recompense. 'Tis not unfitting
For you, Count Piccolomini, to feel
So tenderly--my brother it beseems
To show himself forever great and princely. THEKLA. Then I too must have scruples of his love:
For his munificent hands did ornament me
Ere yet the father's heart had spoken to me. MAX
Yes; 'tis his nature ever to be giving
And making happy. [He grasps the hand of the DUCHESS with still increasing warmth. How my heart pours out
Its all of thanks to him! O! how I seem
To utter all things in the dear name--Friedland. While I shall live, so long will I remain
The captive of this name: in it shall bloom
My every fortune, every lovely hope. Inextricably as in some magic ring
In this name hath my destiny charm-bound me! COUNTESS (who during this time has been anxiously watching the DUKE,
   and remarks that he is lost in thought over the letters). My brother wishes us to leave him. Come. WALLENSTEIN (turns himself round quick, collects himself, and speaks
   with cheerfulness to the DUCHESS). Once more I bid thee welcome to the camp,
Thou art the hostess of this court. You, Max.,
Will now again administer your old office,
While we perform the sovereign's business here. [MAX. PICCOLOMINI offers the DUCHESS his arm; the COUNTESS
   accompanies the PRINCESS. TERZKY (calling after him). Max., we depend on seeing you at the meeting. SCENE V.

   WALLENSTEIN, COUNT TERZKY. WALLENSTEIN (in deep thought, to himself). She has seen all things as they are--it is so,
And squares completely with my other notices,
They have determined finally in Vienna,
Have given me my successor already;
It is the King of Hungary, Ferdinand,
The emperor's delicate son! he's now their savior,
He's the new star that's rising now! Of us
They think themselves already fairly rid,
And as we were deceased, the heir already
Is entering on possession--Therefore--despatch! [As he turns round he observes TERZKY, and gives him a letter. Count Altringer will have himself excused,
And Gallas too--I like not this! TERZKY. And if
Thou loiterest longer, all will fall away,
One following the other. WALLENSTEIN. Altringer
Is master of the Tyrol passes. I must forthwith
Send some one to him, that he let not in
The Spaniards on me from the Milanese. --Well, and the old Sesin, that ancient trader
In contraband negotiations, he
Has shown himself again of late. What brings he
From the Count Thur? TERZKY. The count communicates
He has found out the Swedish chancellor
At Halberstadt, where the convention's held,
Who says, you've tired him out, and that he'll have
No further dealings with you. WALLENSTEIN. And why so? TERZKY. He says, you are never in earnest in your speeches;
That you decoy the Swedes--to make fools of them;
Will league yourself with Saxony against them,
And at last make yourself a riddance of them
With a paltry sum of money. WALLENSTEIN. So then, doubtless,
Yes, doubtless, this same modest Swede expects
That I shall yield him some fair German tract
For his prey and booty, that ourselves at last
On our own soil and native territory
May be no longer our own lords and masters! An excellent scheme! No, no! They must be off,
Off, off! away! we want no such neighbors. TERZKY. Nay, yield them up that dot, that speck of land--
It goes not from your portion. If you win
The game, what matters it to you who pays it? WALLENSTEIN. Off with them, off! Thou understand'st not this. Never shall it be said of me, I parcelled
My native land away, dismembered Germany,
Betrayed it to a foreigner, in order
To come with stealthy tread, and filch away
My own share of the plunder--Never! never! No foreign power shall strike root in the empire,
And least of all these Goths! these hungry wolves! Who send such envious, hot, and greedy glances
Toward the rich blessings of our German lands! I'll have their aid to cast and draw my nets,
But not a single fish of all the draught
Shall they come in for. TERZKY. You will deal, however,
More fairly with the Saxons? they lose patience
While you shift round and make so many curves. Say, to what purpose all these masks? Your friends
Are plunged in doubts, baffled, and led astray in you. There's Oxenstiern, there's Arnheim--neither knows
What he should think of your procrastinations,
And in the end I prove the liar; all
Passes through me. I've not even your handwriting. WALLENSTEIN. I never give handwriting; and thou knowest it. TERZKY. But how can it be known that you are in earnest,
If the act follows not upon the word? You must yourself acknowledge, that in all
Your intercourses hitherto with the enemy,
You might have done with safety all you have done. Had you meant nothing further than to gull him
For the emperor's service. WALLENSTEIN (after a pause, during which he looks narrowly on TERZKY). And from whence dost thou know
That I'm not gulling him for the emperor's service? Whence knowest thou that I'm not gulling all of you? Dost thou know me so well? When made I thee
The intendant of my secret purposes? I am not conscious that I ever opened
My inmost thoughts to thee. The emperor, it is true,
Hath dealt with me amiss; and if I would
I could repay him with usurious interest
For the evil he hath done me. It delights me
To know my power; but whether I shall use it,
Of that I should have thought that thou couldst speak
No wiser than thy fellows. TERZKY. So hast thou always played thy game with us. [Enter ILLO. SCENE VI. ILLO, WALLENSTEIN, TERZKY. WALLENSTEIN. How stand affairs without? Are they prepared? ILLO. You'll find them in the very mood you wish. They know about the emperor's requisition,
And are tumultuous. WALLENSTEIN. How hath Isolani
declared himself? ILLO. He's yours, both soul and body,
Since you built up again his faro-bank. WALLENSTEIN. And which way doth Kolatto bend? Hast thou
Made sure of Tiefenbach and Deodati? ILLO. What Piccolomini does that they do too. WALLENSTEIN. You mean, then, I may venture somewhat with them? ILLO. If you are assured of the Piccolomini. WALLENSTEIN. Not more assured of mine own self. TERZKY. And yet
I would you trusted not so much to Octavio,
The fox! WALLENSTEIN. Thou teachest me to know my man? Sixteen campaigns I have made with that old warrior. Besides, I have his horoscope;
We both are born beneath like stars--in short,
           [With an air of mystery. To this belongs its own peculiar aspect,
If therefore thou canst warrant me the rest----

ILLO. There is among them all but this one voice,
You must not lay down the command. I hear
They mean to send a deputation to you. WALLENSTEIN. If I'm in aught to bind myself to them
They too must bind themselves to me. ILLO. Of course. WALLENSTEIN. Their words of honor they must give, their oaths,
Give them in writing to me, promising
Devotion to my service unconditional. ILLO. Why not? TERZKY. Devotion unconditional? The exception of their duties towards Austria
They'll always place among the premises. With this reserve----

WALLENSTEIN (shaking his head). All unconditional;
No premises, no reserves. ILLO. A thought has struck me. Does not Count Terzky give us a set banquet
This evening? TERZKY. Yes; and all the generals
Have been invited. ILLO (to WALLENSTEIN). Say, will you here fully
Commission me to use my own discretion? I'll gain for you the generals' word of honor,
Even as you wish. WALLENSTEIN. Gain me their signatures! How you come by them that is your concern. ILLO. And if I bring it to you in black on white,
That all the leaders who are present here
Give themselves up to you, without condition;
Say, will you then--then will you show yourself
In earnest, and with some decisive action
Try your fortune. WALLENSTEIN. Get but the signatures! ILLO. Think what thou dost, thou canst not execute
The emperor's orders, nor reduce thine army,
Nor send the regiments to the Spaniards' aid,
Unless thou wouldst resign thy power forever. Think on the other hand--thou canst not spurn
The emperor's high commands and solemn orders,
Nor longer temporize, nor seek evasion,
Wouldst thou avoid a rupture with the court. Resolve then! Wilt thou now by one bold act
Anticipate their ends, or, doubting still,
Await the extremity? WALLENSTEIN. There's time before
The extremity arrives. ILLO. Seize, seize the hour,
Ere it slips from you. Seldom comes the moment
In life, which is indeed sublime and weighty. To make a great decision possible,
O! many things, all transient and all rapid,
Must meet at once: and, haply, they thus met
May by that confluence be enforced to pause
Time long-enough for wisdom, though too short,
Far, far too short a time for doubt and scruple! This is that moment. See, our army chieftains,
Our best, our noblest, are assembled round you,
Their king-like leader! On your nod they wait. The single threads, which here your prosperous fortune
Hath woven together in one potent web
Instinct with destiny, O! let them not
Unravel of themselves. If you permit
These chiefs to separate, so unanimous
Bring you them not a second time together. 'Tis the high tide that heaves the stranded ship,
And every individual's spirit waxes
In the great stream of multitudes. Behold
They are still here, here still! But soon the war
Bursts them once more asunder, and in small
Particular anxieties and interests
Scatters their spirit, and the sympathy
Of each man with the whole. He who to-day
Forgets himself, forced onward with the stream,
Will become sober, seeing but himself. Feel only his own weakness, and with speed
Will face about, and march on in the old
High road of duty, the old broad-trodden road,
And seek but to make shelter in good plight. WALLENSTEIN. The time is not yet come. TERZKY. So you say always. But when will it be time? WALLENSTEIN. When I shall say it. ILLO. You'll wait upon the stars, and on their hours,
Till the earthly hour escapes you. 