



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





FIRST PLAYS

By A. A. Milne


TO MY MOTHER


CONTENTS

     INTRODUCTION
     WURZEL-FLUMMERY
     THE LUCKY ONE
     THE BOY COMES HOME
     BELINDA
     THE RED FEATHERS




INTRODUCTION

These five plays were written, in the order in which they appear now,
during the years 1916 and 1917. They would hardly have been written had
it not been for the war, although only one of them is concerned with
that subject. To his other responsibilities the Kaiser now adds this
volume. For these plays were not the work of a professional writer, but the
recreation of a (temporary) professional soldier. Play-writing is a
luxury to a journalist, as insidious as golf and much more expensive in
time and money. When an article is written, the financial reward (and we
may as well live as not) is a matter of certainty. A novelist, too,
even if he is not in "the front rank"--but I never heard of one who
wasn't--can at least be sure of publication. But when a play is written,
there is no certainty of anything save disillusionment. To write a play, then, while I was a journalist seemed to me a depraved
proceeding, almost as bad as going to Lord's in the morning. I thought
I could write one (we all think we can), but I could not afford so
unpromising a gamble. But once in the Army the case was altered. No duty
now urged me to write. My job was soldiering, and my spare time was my
own affair. Other subalterns played bridge and golf; that was one way of
amusing oneself. Another way was--why not?--to write plays. So we began with Wurzel-Flummery. I say "we," because another is mixed
up in this business even more seriously than the Kaiser. She wrote;
I dictated. And if a particularly fine evening drew us out for a walk
along the byways--where there was no saluting, and one could smoke a
pipe without shocking the Duke of Cambridge--then it was to discuss
the last scene and to wonder what would happen in the next. We did not
estimate the money or publicity which might come from this new
venture; there has never been any serious thought of making money by my
bridge-playing, nor desire for publicity when I am trying to play golf. But secretly, of course, we hoped. It was that which made it so much
more exciting than any other game. Our hopes were realized to the following extent:

Wurzel-Flummery was produced by Mr. Dion Boucicault at the New Theatre
in April, 1917. It was originally written in three acts, in which form
it was shown to one or two managers. At the beginning of 1917 I was
offered the chance of production in a triple bill if I cut it down into
a two-act play. To cut even a line is painful, but to cut thirty pages
of one's first comedy, slaughtering whole characters on the way, has at
least a certain morbid fascination. It appeared, therefore, in two acts;
and one kindly critic embarrassed us by saying that a lesser artist
would have written it in three acts, and most of the other critics
annoyed us by saying that a greater artist would have written it in
one act. However, I amused myself some months later by slaying another
character--the office-boy, no less--thereby getting it down to one act,
and was surprised to find that the one-act version was, after all, the
best... At least I think it is.... At any rate, that is the version I am
printing here; but, as can be imagined, I am rather tired of the whole
business by now, and I am beginning to wonder if anyone ever did take
the name of Wurzel-Flummery at all. Probably the whole thing is an
invention. The Lucky One was doomed from the start with a name like that. And the
girl marries the wrong man. I see no hope of its being produced. But
if any critic wishes to endear himself to me (though I don't see why he
should) he will agree with me that it is the best play of the five. The Boy Comes Home was produced by Mr. Owen Nares at the Victoria Palace
in September, 1918, introduced afterwards into Hallo, America! at
the Palace, and played by Mr. Godfrey Tearle at the Coliseum in the
following April. Belinda was produced by Mr. Dion Boucicault at the New Theatre in April,
1918, with Miss Irene Vanbrugh in the name-part. Miss Ethel Barrymore
played it in New York. I hope it will read pleasantly, but I am quite
incapable of judging it, for every speech of Belinda's comes to me now
in Miss Vanbrugh's voice. The Red Feathers has not yet been produced, one reason being (perhaps)
that it has never been offered to anybody. It is difficult enough to
find a manager, but when one has also to get hold of a composer, the
business of production becomes terrifying. I suppose there is a way of
negotiating these difficulties, but I suspect that most of the fun to be
got out of this operetta we have already had in writing it. In conclusion, I must distress my friend J. M. Barrie (who gave me a
first chance) by acknowledging my great debt to him. It would be more
polite to leave him out of it, but I cannot let him off. After all,
these are only "First Plays." I can always hope that "Last Plays" will
be more worthy of that early encouragement. A. A. MILNE. WURTZEL-FLUMMERY

A COMEDY IN ONE ACT

CHARACTERS. ROBERT CRAWSHAW, M.P. MARGARET CRAWSHAW (his wife). VIOLA CRAWSHAW (his daughter). RICHARD MERITON, M.P. DENIS CLIFTON. A Two-Act version of this play was produced by Mr. Dion Boucicault at
the New Theatre on April 7, 1917, with the following cast:

     Robert Crawshaw--NIGEL PLAYFAIR. Margaret Crawshaw--HELEN HAYE. Viola Crawshaw--PEGGY KURTON. Richard Meriton--MARTIN LEWIS. Denis Clifton--DION BOUCICAULT. Lancelot Dodd--BERTRAM SIEMS. [SCENE.--ROBERT CRAWSHAW'S town house. Morning.] [It is a June day before the war in the morning-room of ROBERT
CRAWSHAW'S town house. Entering it with our friend the house-agent, our
attention would first be called to the delightful club fender round the
fireplace. On one side of this a Chesterfield sofa comes out at right
angles. In a corner of the sofa MISS VIOLA CRAWSHAW is sitting, deep
in "The Times." The house-agent would hesitate to catalogue her, but
we notice for ourselves, before he points out the comfortable armchair
opposite, that she is young and pretty. In the middle of the room and
facing the fireplace is (observe) a solid knee-hole writing-table,
covered with papers and books of reference, and supported by a chair at
the middle and another at the side. The rest of the furniture, and the
books and pictures round the walls, we must leave until another time,
for at this moment the door behind the sofa opens and RICHARD MERITON
comes in. He looks about thirty-five, has a clean-shaven intelligent
face, and is dressed in a dark tweed suit. We withdraw hastily, as he
comes behind VIOLA and puts his hands over her eyes.] RICHARD. Three guesses who it is. VIOLA (putting her hands over his). The Archbishop of Canterbury. RICHARD. No. VIOLA. The Archbishop of York. RICHARD. Fortunately that exhausts the archbishops. Now, then, your last
guess. VIOLA. Richard Meriton, M.P. RICHARD. Wonderful! (He kisses the top of her head lightly and goes
round to the club fender, where he sits with his back to the fireplace.) How did you know? (He begins to fill a pipe.) VIOLA (smiling). Well, it couldn't have been father. RICHARD. N-no, I suppose not. Not just after breakfast anyway. Anything
in the paper? VIOLA. There's a letter from father pointing out that--

RICHARD. I never knew such a man as Robert for pointing out. VIOLA. Anyhow, it's in big print. RICHARD. It would be. VIOLA. You are very cynical this morning, Dick. RICHARD. The sausages were cold, dear. VIOLA. Poor Dick! Oh, Dick, I wish you were on the same side as father. RICHARD. But he's on the wrong side. Surely I've told you that
before.... Viola, do you really think it would make a difference? VIOLA. Well, you know what he said about you at Basingstoke the other
day. RICHARD. No, I don't, really. VIOLA. He said that your intellectual arrogance was only equalled by
your spiritual instability. I don't quite know what it means, but it
doesn't sound the sort of thing you want in a son-in-law. RICHARD. Still, it was friendly of him to go right away to Basingstoke
to say it. Anyhow, you don't believe it. VIOLA. Of course not. RICHARD. And Robert doesn't really. VIOLA. Then why does he say it? RICHARD. Ah, now you're opening up very grave questions. The whole
structure of the British Constitution rests upon Robert's right to say
things like that at Basingstoke.... But really, darling, we're very good
friends. He's always asking my advice about things--he doesn't take it,
of course, but still he asks it; and it awfully good of him to insist on
my staying here while my flat was being done up. (Seriously) I bless him
for that. If it hadn't been for the last week I should never have known
you. You were just "Viola"--the girl I'd seen at odd times since she was
a child; now--oh, why won't you let me tell your father? I hate it like
this. VIOLA, Because I love you, Dick, and because I know father. He would,
as they say in novels, show you the door. (Smiling) And I want you this
side of the door for a little bit longer. RICHARD (firmly). I shall tell him before I go. VIOLA (pleadingly). But not till then; that gives us two more days. You
see, darling, it's going to take me all I know to get round him. You
see, apart from politics you're so poor--and father hates poor people. RICHARD (viciously). Damn money! VIOLA (thoughtfully). I think that's what father means by spiritual
instability. RICHARD. Viola! (He stands up and holds out his arms to her. She goes to
him and--) Oh, Lord, look out! VIOLA (reaching across to the mantelpiece). Matches? RICHARD. Thanks very much. (He lights his pipe as ROBERT CRAWSHAW comes
in.) (CRAWSHAW is forty-five, but his closely-trimmed moustache and whiskers,
his inclination to stoutness, and the loud old-gentlemanly style in
trousers which he affects with his morning-coat, make him look
older, and, what is more important, the Pillar of the State which he
undoubtedly is.) CRAWSHAW. Good-morning, Richard. Down at last? RICHARD. Good morning. I did warn you, didn't I, that I was bad at
breakfasts? CRAWSHAW. Viola, where's your mother? VIOLA (making for the door). I don't know, father; do you want her? CRAWSHAW. I wish to speak to her. VIOLA. All right, I'll tell her. [She goes out.] (RICHARD Picks up "The Times" and sits down again.) CRAWSHAW (sitting down in a business-like way at his desk). Richard, why
don't you get something to do? RICHARD. My dear fellow, I've only just finished breakfast. CRAWSHAW. I mean generally. And apart, of course, from your--ah--work in
the House. RICHARD (a trifle cool). I have something to do. CRAWSHAW. Oh, reviewing. I mean something serious. You should get a
directorship or something in the City. RICHARD. I hate the City. CRAWSHAW. Ah! there, my dear Richard, is that intellectual arrogance to
which I had to call attention the other day at Basingstoke. RICHARD (drily). Yes, so Viola was telling me. CRAWSHAW. You understood, my dear fellow, that I meant nothing personal. (Clearing his throat) It is justly one of the proudest boasts of the
Englishman that his political enmities are not allowed to interfere with
his private friendships. RICHARD (carelessly). Oh, I shall go to Basingstoke myself one day. [Enter MARGARET. MARGARET has been in love with ROBERT CRAWSHAW for
twenty-five years, the last twenty four years from habit. She is small,
comfortable, and rather foolish; you would certainly call her a dear,
but you might sometimes call her a poor dear.] MARGARET. Good-morning, Mr. Meriton. I do hope your breakfast was all
right. RICHARD. Excellent, thank you. MARGARET. That's right. Did you want me, Robert? CRAWSHAW. (obviously uncomfortable). Yes--er--h'rm--Richard--er--what
are your--er--plans? RICHARD. Is he trying to get rid of me, Mrs. Crawshaw? MARGARET. Of course not. (TO ROBERT) Are you, dear? CRAWSHAW. Perhaps we had better come into my room, Margaret. We can
leave Richard here with the paper. RICHARD. No, no; I'm going. CRAWSHAW (going to the door with him). I have some particular business
to discuss. If you aren't going out, I should like to consult you in the
matter afterwards. RICHARD. Right! [He goes out.] CRAWSHAW. Sit down, Margaret. I have some extraordinary news for you. MARGARET (sitting down). Yes, Robert? CRAWSHAW. This letter has just come by hand. (He reads it) "199,
Lincoln's Inn Fields. Dear Sir, I have pleasure to inform you that under
the will of the late Mr. Antony Clifton you are a beneficiary to the
extent of L50,000." MARGARET. Robert! CRAWSHAW. Wait! "A trifling condition is attached--namely, that you
should take the name of--Wurzel-Flummery." MARGARET. Robert! CRAWSHAW. "I have the honour to be, your obedient servant, Denis
Clifton." (He folds the letter up and puts it away.) MARGARET. Robert, whoever is he? I mean the one who's left you the
money?--

CRAWSHAW (calmly). I have not the slightest idea, Margaret. Doubtless we
shall find out before long. I have asked Mr. Denis Clifton to come and
see me. MARGARET. Leaving you fifty thousand pounds! Just fancy! CRAWSHAW. Wurzel-Flummery! MARGARET. We can have the second car now, dear, can't we? And what about
moving? You know you always said you ought to be in a more central part. Mr. Robert Crawshaw, M.P., of Curzon Street sounds so much more--more
Cabinety. CRAWSHAW. Mr. Robert Wurzel-Flummery, M.P., of Curzon Street--I don't
know what _that_ sounds like. MARGARET. I expect that's only a legal way of putting it, dear. They
can't really expect us to change our name to--Wurzley-Fothergill. CRAWSHAW. Wurzel-Flummery. MARGARET. Yes, dear, didn't I say that? I am sure you could talk the
solicitor round--this Mr. Denis Clifton. After all, it doesn't matter to
him what we call ourselves. Write him one of your letters, dear. CRAWSHAW. You don't seem to apprehend the situation, Margaret. MARGARET. Yes, I do, dear. This Mr.--Mr.--

CRAWSHAW. Antony Clifton. MARGARET. Yes, he's left you fifty thousand pounds, together with the
name of Wurzley-Fothergill--

CRAWSHAW. Wurzel--oh, well, never mind. MARGARET. Yes, well, you tell the solicitor that you will take the fifty
thousand pounds, but you don't want the name. It's too absurd, when
everybody knows of Robert Crawshaw, M.P., to expect you to call yourself
Wurzley-Fothergill. CRAWSHAW (impatiently). Yes, yes. The point is that this Mr. Clifton has
left me the money on _condition_ that I change my name. If I don't take
the name, I don't take the money. MARGARET. But is that legal? CRAWSHAW. Perfectly. It is often done. People change their names on
succeeding to some property. MARGARET. I thought it was only when your name was Moses and you changed
it to Talbot. CRAWSHAW (to himself). Wurzel-Flummery! MARGARET. I wonder why he left you the money at all. Of course it was
very nice of him, but if you didn't know him--Why do you think he did,
dear? CRAWSHAW. I know no more than this letter. I suppose he
had--ah--followed my career, and was--ah--interested in it, and being a
man with no relations, felt that he could--ah--safely leave this money
to me. No doubt Wurzel-Flummery was his mother's maiden name, or
the name of some other friend even dearer to him; he wished the
name--ah--perpetuated, perhaps even recorded not unworthily in the
history of our country, and--ah--made this will accordingly. In a way it
is a kind of--ah--sacred trust. MARGARET. Then, of course, you'll accept it, dear? CRAWSHAW. It requires some consideration. I have my career to think
about, my duty to my country. MARGARET. Of course, dear. Money is a great help in politics, isn't it? CRAWSHAW. Money wisely spent is a help in any profession. The view of
riches which socialists and suchlike people profess to take is entirely
ill-considered. A rich man, who spends his money thoughtfully, is
serving his country as nobly as anybody. MARGARET. Yes, dear. Then you think we _could_ have that second car and
the house in Curzon Street? CRAWSHAW. We must not be led away. Fifty thousand pounds, properly
invested, is only two thousand a year. When you have deducted the
income-tax--and the tax on unearned income is extremely high just now--

MARGARET. Oh, but surely if we have to call ourselves Wurzel-Flummery it
would count as _earned_ income. CRAWSHAW. I fear not. Strictly speaking, all money is earned. Even if it
is left to you by another, it is presumably left to you in recognition
of certain outstanding qualities which you possess. But Parliament takes
a different view. I do not for a moment say that fifty thousand pounds
would not be welcome. Fifty pounds is certainly not to be sneezed at--

MARGARET. I should think not, indeed! CRAWSHAW (unconsciously rising from his chair). And without this
preposterous condition attached I should be pleased to accept this
trust, and I would endeavour, Mr. Speaker--(He sits down again
suddenly.) I would, Margaret, to, carry it out to the best of my poor
ability. But--Wurtzel-Flummery! MARGARET. You would soon get used to it, dear. I had to get used to the
name of Crawshaw after I had been Debenham for twenty-five years. It is
surprising how quickly it comes to you. I think I only signed my name
Margaret Debenham once after I was married. CRAWSHAW (kindly). The cases are rather different, Margaret. Naturally a
woman, who from her cradle looks forward to the day when she will change
her name, cannot have this feeling for the--ah--honour of his name,
which every man--ah--feels. Such a feeling is naturally more present in
my own case since I have been privileged to make the name of Crawshaw in
some degree--ah--well-known, I might almost say famous. MARGARET (wistfully). I used to be called "the beautiful Miss Debenham
of Leamington." Everybody in Leamington knew of me. Of course, I am very
proud to be Mrs. Robert Crawshaw. CRAWSHAW (getting up and walking over to the fireplace). In a way it
would mean beginning all over again. It is half the battle in
politics to get your name before the public. "Whoever is this man
Wurzel-Flummery?" people will say. MARGARET. Anyhow, dear, let us look on the bright side. Fifty thousand
pounds is fifty thousand pounds. CRAWSHAW. It is, Margaret. And no doubt it is my duty to accept it. But--well, all I say is that a _gentleman_ would have left it without
any conditions. Or at least he would merely have expressed his _wish_
that I should take the name, without going so far as to enforce it. Then
I could have looked at the matter all round in an impartial spirit. MARGARET (pursuing her thoughts). The linen is marked R. M. C. now. Of
course, we should have to have that altered. Do you think R. M. F. would
do, or would it have to be R. M. W. hyphen F.? CRAWSHAW. What? Oh--yes, there will be a good deal of that to attend to. (Going up to her) I think, Margaret, I had better talk to Richard about
this. Of course, it would be absurd to refuse the money, but--well, I
should like to have his opinion. MARGARET (getting up). Do you think he would be very sympathetic, dear? He makes jokes about serious things--like bishops and hunting just as if
they weren't at all serious. CRAWSHAW. I wish to talk to him just to obtain a new--ah--point of view. I do not hold myself in the least bound to act on anything he says. I
regard him as a constituent, Margaret. MARGARET. Then I will send him to you. CRAWSHAW (putting his hands on her shoulders). Margaret, what do you
really feel about it? MARGARET. Just whatever you feel, Robert. CRAWSHAW (kissing her). Thank you, Margaret; you are a good wife to me. [She goes out]

(CRAWSHAW goes to his desk and selects a "Who's Who" from a little pile
of reference-books on it. He walks round to his chair, sits down in
it and begins to turn the pages, murmuring names beginning with "C"
to himself as he gets near the place. When he finds it, he murmurs
"Clifton--that's funny," and closes the book. Evidently the publishers
have failed him.) [Enter RICHARD.] RICHARD. Well, what's the news? (He goes to his old seat on the fender.) Been left a fortune? CRAWSHAW (simply). Yes.... By a Mr. Antony Clifton. I never met him and
I know nothing about him. RICHARD (surprised). Not really? Well, I congratulate you. (He sighs.) To them that hath--But what on earth do you want my advice about? CRAWSHAW. There is a slight condition attached. RICHARD. Oho! CRAWSHAW. The condition is that with this money--fifty thousand
pounds--I take the name of--ah--Wurzel-Flummery. RICHARD (jumping up). What! CRAWSHAW (sulkily). I said it quite distinctly--Wurzel-Flummery. (RICHARD in an awed silence walks over to the desk and stands looking
down at the unhappy CRAWSHAW. He throws out his left hand as if
introducing him.) RICHARD (reverently). Mr. Robert Wurzel-Flummery, M. P., one of the most
prominent of our younger Parliamentarians. Oh, you...oh!... oh, how too
heavenly! (He goes back to his seat, looks up and catches CRAWSHAW'S
eye, and breaks down altogether.) CRAWSHAW (rising with dignity). Shall we discuss it seriously, or shall
we leave it? RICHARD. How can we discuss a name like Wurzel-Flummery seriously? "Mr.
Wurzel-Flummery in a few well-chosen words seconded the motion."... "'Sir,' went on Mr. Wurzel-Flummery"--Oh, poor Robert! CRAWSHAW (sitting down sulkily). You seem quite certain that I shall
take the money. RICHARD. I am quite certain. CRAWSHAW. Would you take it? RICHARD (hesitating). Well--I wonder. CRAWSHAW. After all, as William Shakespeare says, "What's in a name?" RICHARD. I can tell you something else that Shakespeare--_William_
Shakespeare--said. (Dramatically rising) Who steals my purse with fifty
thousand in it--steals trash. (In his natural voice) Trash, Robert:
(Dramatically again) But he who filches from me my good name of Crawshaw
(lightly) and substitutes the rotten one of Wurzel--

CRAWSHAW (annoyed). As a matter of fact, Wurzel-Flummery is a very good
old name. I seem to remember some--ah--Hampshire Wurzel-Flummeries. It is a very laudable spirit on the part of a dying man to wish
to--ah--perpetuate these old English names. It all seems to me quite
natural and straightforward. If I take this money I shall have nothing
to be ashamed of. RICHARD. I see.... Look here, may I ask you a few questions? I should
like to know just how you feel about the whole business? CRAWSHAW (complacently folding his hands). Go ahead. RICHARD. Suppose a stranger came up in the street to you and said, "My
poor man, here's five pounds for you," what would you do? Tell him to go
to the devil, I suppose, wouldn't you? CRAWSHAW (humorously). In more parliamentary language, perhaps, Richard. I should tell him I never took money from strangers. RICHARD. Quite so; but that if it were ten thousand pounds, you would
take it? CRAWSHAW. I most certainly shouldn't. RICHARD. But if he died and left it to you, _then_ you would? CRAWSHAW (blandly). Ah, I thought you were leading up to that. That, of
course, is entirely different. RICHARD. Why? CRAWSHAW. Well--ah--wouldn't _you_ take ten thousand pounds if it were
left to you by a stranger? RICHARD. I daresay I should. But I should like to know why it would seem
different. CRAWSHAW (professionally). Ha-hum! Well--in the first place, when a man
is dead he wants his money no longer. You can therefore be certain that
you are not taking anything from him which he cannot spare. And in the
neat place, it is the man's dying wish that you should have the money. To refuse would be to refuse the dead. To accept becomes almost a sacred
duty. RICHARD. It really comes to this, doesn't it? You won't take it from him
when he's alive, because if you did, you couldn't decently refuse him a
little gratitude; but you know that it doesn't matter a damn to him
what happens to his money after he's dead, and therefore you can take it
without feeling any gratitude at all. CRAWSHAW. No, I shouldn't put it like that. RICHARD (smiling). I'm sure you wouldn't, Robert. CRAWSHAW No doubt you can twist it about so that--

RICHARD. All right, we'll leave that and go on to the next point. Suppose a perfect stranger offered you five pounds to part your hair
down the middle, shave off your moustache, and wear only one whisker--if
he met you suddenly in the street, seemed to dislike your appearance,
took out a fiver and begged you to hurry off and alter yourself--of
course you'd pocket the money and go straight to your barber's? CRAWSHAW. Now you are merely being offensive. RICHARD. I beg your pardon. I should have said that if he had left you
five pounds in his will?--well, then twenty pounds? a hundred pounds?--a
thousand pounds?--fifty thousand pounds?--(Jumping up excitedly) It's
only a question of price--fifty thousand pounds, Robert--a pink tie with
purple spots, hair across the back, trousers with a patch in the
fall myself Wurzel-Flummery--any old thing you like, you can't insult
me--anything you like, gentlemen, for fifty thousand pounds. (Lowering
his voice) Only you must leave it in your will, and then I can feel that
it is a sacred duty--a sacred duty, my lords and gentlemen. (He sinks
back into the sofa and relights his pipe.) CRAWSHAW. (rising with dignity). It is evidently useless to prolong this
conversation. RICHARD (waving him dorm again). No, no, Robert; I've finished. I just
took the other side--and I got carried away. I ought to have been at the
Bar. CRAWSHAW. You take such extraordinary views of things. You must look
facts in the face, Richard. This is a modern world, and we are modern
people living in it. Take the matter-of-fact view. You may like or
dislike the name of--ah--Wurzel-Flummery, but you can't get away from
the fact that fifty thousand pounds is not to be sneezed at. RICHARD (wistfully). I don't know why people shouldn't sneeze at money
sometimes. I should like to start a society for sneezing at fifty
thousand pounds. We'd have to begin in a small way, of course; we'd
begin by sneezing at five pounds--and work up. The trouble is that we're
all inoculated in our cradles against that kind of cold. CRAWSHAW (pleasantly). You will have your little joke. But you know as
well as I do that it is only a joke. There can be no serious reason why
I should not take this money. And I--ah--gather that you don't think it
will affect my career? RICHARD (carelessly). Not a bit. It'll help it. It'll get you into all
the comic papers. [MARGARET comes in at this moment, to the relief of CRAWSHAW, who is not
quite certain if he is being flattered or insulted again.] MARGARET. Well, have you told him? RICHARD (making way for her on the sofa). I have heard the news, Mrs.
Crawshaw. And I have told Robert my opinion that he should have no
difficulty in making the name of Wurzel-Flummery as famous as he has
already made that of Crawshaw. At any rate I hope he will. MARGARET. How nice of you! CRAWSHAW. Well, it's settled, then. (Looking
at his watch) This solicitor fellow should be here soon. Perhaps, after
all, we can manage something about--Ah, Viola, did you want your mother? [Enter VIOLA.] VIOLA. Sorry, do I interrupt a family meeting? There's Richard, so it
can't be very serious. RICHARD. What a reputation! CRAWSHAW. Well, it's over now. MARGARET. Viola had better know, hadn't she? CRAWSHAW. She'll have to know some time, of course. VIOLA (sitting done firmly on the sofa). Of course she will. So you'd
better tell her now. I knew there was something exciting going on this
morning. CRAWSHAW (embarrassed). Hum--ha--(To MARGARET) Perhaps you'd better tell
her, dear. MARGARET (simply and naturally). Father has come into some property,
Viola. It means changing our name unfortunately. But your father doesn't
think it will matter. VIOLA. How thrilling! What is the name, mother? MARGARET. Your father says it is--dear me, I shall never remember it. CRAWSHAW (mumbling). Wurzel-Flummery. VIOLA (after a pause). Dick, _you_ tell me, if nobody else will. RICHARD. Robert said it just now. VIOLA. That wasn't a name, was it? I thought it was just a--do say it
again, father. CRAWSHAW (sulkily but plainly). Wurzel-Flummery. VIOLA (surprised). Do you spell it like that? I mean like a wurzel and
like flummery? RICHARD. Exactly, I believe. VIOLA (to herself). Miss Viola Wurzel-Flummery--I mean they'd have to
look at you, wouldn't they? (Bubbling over) Oh, Dick, what a heavenly
name! Who had it first? RICHARD. They are an old Hampshire family--that is so, isn't it, Robert? CRAWSHAW (annoyed). I said I thought that I remembered--Margaret, can
you find Burke there? (She finds it, and he buries himself in the families of the great.) MARGARET. Well, Viola, you haven't told us how you like being Miss
Wurzel-Flummery. VIOLA. I haven't realized myself yet, mummy. I shall have to stand in
front of my glass and tell myself who I am. RICHARD. It's all right for you. You know you'll change your name one
day, and then it won't matter what you've been called before. VIOLA (secretly). H'sh! (She smiles lovingly at him, and then says
aloud) Oh, won't it? It's got to appear in the papers, "A marriage has
been arranged between Miss Viola Wurzel-Flummery..." and everybody will
say, "And about time too, poor girl." MARGARET (to CRAWSHAW). Have you found it, dear? CRAWSHAW (resentfully). This is the 1912 edition. MARGARET. Still, dear, if it's a very old family, it ought to be in by
then. VIOLA. I don't mind how old it is; I think it's lovely. Oh, Dick, what
fun it will be being announced! Just think of the footman throwing open
the door and saying--

MAID (announcing). Mr. Denis Clifton. (There is a little natural confusion as CLIFTON enters jauntily in his
summer suiting with a bundle of papers under his arm. CRAWSHAW goes
towards him and shakes hands.) CRAWSHAW. How do you do, Mr. Clifton? Very good of you to come. (Looking
doubtfully at his clothes) Er--it is Mr. Denis Clifton, the solicitor? CLIFTON (cheerfully). It is. I must apologize for not looking the
part more, but my clothes did not arrive from Clarkson's in time. Very
careless of them when they had promised. And my clerk dissuaded me from
the side-whiskers which I keep by me for these occasions. CRAWSHAW (bewildered). Ah yes, quite so. But you have--ah--full legal
authority to act in this matter? CLIFTON.. Oh, decidedly. Oh, there's no question of that. CRAWSHAW (introducing). My wife--and daughter. (CLIFTON bows
gracefully.) My friend, Mr. Richard Meriton. CLIFTON (happily).Dear me! Mr. Meriton too! This is quite a situation,
as we say in the profession. RICHARD (amused by him). In the legal profession? CLIFTON. In the theatrical profession. (Turning to MARGARET) I am a
writer of plays, Mrs. Crawshaw. I am not giving away a professional
secret when I tell you that most of the managers in London have thanked
me for submitting my work to them. CRAWSHAW (firmly).I understood, Mr. Clifton, that you were the solicitor
employed to wind up the affairs of the late Mr. Antony Clifton. CLIFTON. Oh, certainly. Oh, there's no doubt about my being a solicitor. My clerk, a man of the utmost integrity, not to say probity, would give
me a reference. I am in the books; I belong to the Law Society. But my
heart turns elsewhere. Officially I have embraced the profession of a
solicitor--(Frankly, to MRS. CRAWSHAW) But you know what these official
embraces are. MARGARET. I'm afraid--(She turns to her husband for assistance.) CLIFTON (to RICHARD). Unofficially, Mr. Meriton, I am wedded to the
Muses. VIOLA. Dick, isn't he lovely? CRAWSHAW. Quite so. But just for the moment, Mr. Clifton, I take it that
we are concerned with legal business. Should I ever wish to produce a
play, the case would be different. CLIFTON. Admirably put. Pray regard me entirely as the solicitor for as
long as you wish. (He puts his hat down on a chair with the papers in
it, and taking off his gloves, goes on dreamily) Mr. Denis Clifton was
superb as a solicitor. In spite of an indifferent make-up, his manner of
taking off his gloves and dropping them into his hat--(He does so.) MARGARET (to CRAWSHAW). I think, perhaps, Viola and I--

RICHARD (making a move too). We'll leave you to your business, Robert. CLIFTON (holding up his hand). Just one moment if I may. I have a letter
for you, Mr. Meriton. RICHARD (surprised). For me? CLIFTON. Yes. My clerk, a man of the utmost integrity--oh, but I said
that before--he took it round to your rooms this morning, but found only
painters and decorators there. (He is feeling in his pockets and
now brings the letter out.) I brought it along, hoping that Mr.
Crawshaw--but of course I never expected anything so delightful as this. (He hands over the letter with a bow.) RICHARD. Thanks. (He puts it in his pocket.) CLIFTON. Oh, but do read it now, won't you? (To MR. CRAWSHAW) One so
rarely has an opportunity of being present when one's own letters are
read. I think the habit they have on the stage of reading letters aloud
to other is such a very delightful one. (RICHARD, with a smile and a shrug, has opened his letter while CLIFTON
is talking.) RICHARD. Good Lord! VIOLA. Dick, what is it? RICHARD (reading). "199, Lincoln's Inn Fields. Dear Sir, I have the
pleasure to inform you that under the will of the late Mr. Antony
Clifton you are a beneficiary to the extent of L50,000." VIOLA. Dick! RICHARD. "A trifling condition is attached--namely, that you should take
the name of--Wurzel-Flummery." (CLIFTON, with his hand on his heart,
bows gracefully from one to the other of them.) CRAWSHAW (annoyed). Impossible! Why should he leave any money to _you_? VIOLA. Dick! How wonderful! MARGARET (mildly). I don't remember ever having had a morning quite like
this. RICHARD (angrily). Is this a joke, Mr. Clifton? CLIFTON. Oh, the money is there all right. My clerk, a man of the
utmost--

RICHARD. Then I refuse it. I'll have nothing to do with it. I won't even
argue about it. (Tearing the letter into bits) That's what I think of
your money. [He stalks indignantly from the room.] VIOLA. Dick! Oh, but, mother, he mustn't. Oh, I must tell him--[She
hurries after him.] MARGARET (with dignity). Really, Mr. Clifton, I'm surprised at you. [She
goes out too.] CLIFTON (looking round the room). And now, Mr. Crawshaw, we are alone. CRAWSHAW. Yes. Well, I think, Mr. Clifton, you have a good deal to
explain--

CLIFTON. My dear sir, I'm longing to begin. I have been looking forward
to this day for weeks. I spent over an hour this morning dressing for
it. (He takes papers from his hat and moves to the sofa.) Perhaps I had
better begin from the beginning. CRAWSHAW (interested, indicating the papers). The documents in the case? CLIFTON. Oh dear, no just something to carry in the hand. It makes
one look more like a solicitor. (Reading the title) "Watherston v.
Towser--in re Great Missenden Canal Company." My clerk invents the
titles; it keeps him busy. He is very fond of Towser; Towser is always
coming in. (Frankly) You see, Mr. Crawshaw, this is my first real case,
and I only got it because Antony Clifton is my uncle. My efforts to
introduce a little picturesqueness into the dull formalities of the law
do not meet with that response that one would have expected. CRAWSHAW (looking at his watch). Yes. Well, I'm a busy man, and if you
could tell me as shortly as possible why your uncle left this money
to me, and apparently to Mr. Meriton too, under these extraordinary
conditions, I shall be obliged to you. CLIFTON. Say no more, Mr. Crawshaw; I look forward to being entirely
frank with you. It will be a pleasure. CRAWSHAW. You understand, of course, my position. I think I may say that
I am not without reputation in the country; and proud as I am to accept
this sacred trust, this money which the late Mr. Antony Clifton has seen
fit--(modestly) one cannot say why--to bequeath to me, yet the use of
the name Wurzel-Flummery would be excessively awkward. CLIFTON (cheerfully). Excessively. CRAWSHAW. My object in seeing you was to inquire if it was absolutely
essential that the name should go with the money. CLIFTON. Well (thoughtfully), you may have the name _without_ the money
if you like. But you must have the name. CRAWSHAW (disappointed). Ah! (Bravely) Of course, I have nothing against
the name, a good old Hampshire name--

CLIFTON (shocked). My dear Mr. Crawshaw, you didn't think--you didn't
really think that anybody had been called Wurzel-Flummery before? Oh no,
no. You and Mr. Meriton were to be the first, the founders of the clan,
the designers of the Wurzel-Flummery sporran--

CRAWSHAW. What do you mean, sir? Are you telling me that it is not a
real name at all? CLIFTON. Oh, it's a name all right. I know it is because--er--_I_ made
it up. CRAWSHAW (outraged). And you have the impudence to propose, sir, that I
should take a made-up name? CLIFTON (soothingly). Well, all names are made up some time or other. Somebody had to think of--Adam. CRAWSHAW. I warn you, Mr. Clifton, that I do not allow this trifling
with serious subjects. CLIFTON. It's all so simple, really.... You see, my Uncle Antony was a
rather unusual man. He despised money. He was not afraid to put it in
its proper place. The place he put it in was--er--a little below golf
and a little above classical concerts. If a man said to him, "Would
you like to make fifty thousand this afternoon?" he would say--well,
it would depend what he was doing. If he were going to have a round at
Walton Heath--

CRAWSHAW. It's perfectly scandalous to talk of money in this way. CLIFTON. Well, that's how he talked about it. But he didn't find many to
agree with him. In fact, he used to say that there was nothing, however
contemptible, that a man would not do for money. One day I suggested
that if he left a legacy with a sufficiently foolish name attached to
it, somebody might be found to refuse it. He laughed at the idea. That
put me on my mettle. "Two people," I said; "leave the same silly name to
two people, two well-known people, rival politicians, say, men whose own
names are already public property. Surely they wouldn't both take it." That touched him. "Denis, my boy, you've got it," he said. "Upon what
vile bodies shall we experiment?" We decided on you and Mr. Meriton. The
next thing was to choose the name. I started on the wrong lines. I began
by suggesting names like Porker, Tosh, Bugge, Spiffkins--the obvious
sort. My uncle--

CRAWSHAW (boiling with indignation). How _dare_ you discuss me with your
uncle, Sir! How dare you decide in this cold-blooded way whether I am to
be called--ah--Tosh--or--ah--Porker! CLIFTON. My uncle wouldn't bear of Tosh or Porker. He wanted a humorous
name--a name he could roll lovingly round his tongue--a name expressing
a sort of humorous contempt--Wurzel-Flummery! I can see now the happy
ruminating smile which came so often on my Uncle Antony's face in those
latter months. He was thinking of his two Wurzel-Flummerys. I remember
him saying once--it was at the Zoo--what a pity it was he hadn't enough
to divide among the whole Cabinet. A whole bunch of Wurzel-Flummerys; it
would have been rather jolly. CRAWSHAW. You force me to say, sir, that if _that_ was the way you and
your uncle used to talk together at his death can only be described as a
merciful intervention of Providence. CLIFTON. Oh, but I think he must be enjoying all this somewhere, you
know. I hope he is. He would have loved this morning. It was his one
regret that from the necessities of the case he could not live to
enjoy his own joke; but he had hopes that echoes of it would reach him
wherever he might be. It was with some such idea, I fancy, that toward
the end he became interested in spiritualism. CRAWSHAW (rising solemnly). Mr. Clifton, I have no interest in
the present whereabouts of your uncle, nor in what means he has of
overhearing a private conversation between you and myself. But if, as
you irreverently suggest, he is listening to us, I should like him to
hear this. That, in my opinion, you are not a qualified solicitor at
all, that you never had an uncle, and that the whole story of the will
and the ridiculous condition attached to it is just the tomfool joke
of a man who, by his own admission, wastes most of his time writing
unsuccessful farces. And I propose--

CLIFTON. Pardon my interrupting. But you said farces. Not farces,
comedies--of a whimsical nature. CRAWSHAW. Whatever they were, sir, I propose to report the whole matter
to the Law Society. And you know your way out, sir. CLIFTON. Then I am to understand that you refuse the legacy, Mr.
Crawshaw? CRAWSHAW (startled). What's that? CLIFTON. I am to understand that you refuse the fifty thousand pounds? CRAWSHAW. If the money is really there, I most certainly do not refuse
it. CLIFTON. Oh, the money is most certainly there--and the name. Both
waiting for you. CRAWSHAW (thumping the table). Then, Sir, I accept them. I feel it my
duty to accept them, as a public expression of confidence in the late
Mr. Clifton's motives. I repudiate entirely the motives that you have
suggested to him, and I consider it a sacred duty to show what I think
of your story by accepting the trust which he has bequeathed to me. You
will arrange further matters with my solicitor. Good morning, Sir. CLIFTON (to himself as he rises). Mr. Crawshaw here drank a glass of
water. (To CRAWSHAW) Mr. Wurzel-Flummery, farewell. May I express the
parting wish that your future career will add fresh lustre to--my name. (To himself as he goes out) Exit Mr. Denis Clifton with dignity. (But he
has left his papers behind him.) (CRAWSHAW, walking indignantly back to the sofa, sees the papers and
picks them up.) CRAWSHAW (contemptuously). "Watherston v. Towser--in re Great Missenden
Canal Company" Bah! (He tears them up and throws them into the fare. He
goes back to his writing-table and is seated there as VIOLA, followed by
MERITON, comes in.) VIOLA. Father, Dick doesn't want to take the money, but I have told him
that of course he must. He must, mustn't he? RICHARD. We needn't drag Robert into it, Viola. CRAWSHAW. If Richard has the very natural feeling that it would be
awkward for me if there were two Wurzel-Flummerys in the House of
Commons, I should be the last to interfere with his decision. In any
case, I don't see what concern it is of yours, Viola. VIOLA (surprised). But how can we get married if he doesn't take the
money? CRAWSHAW (hardly understanding). Married? What does this mean, Richard? RICHARD. I'm sorry it has come out like this. We ought to have told you
before, but anyhow we were going to have told you in a day or two. Viola
and I want to get married. CRAWSHAW. And what did you want to get married on? RICHARD (with a smile). Not very much, I'm afraid. VIOLA. We're all right now, father, because we shall have fifty thousand
pounds. RICHARD (sadly). Oh, Viola, Viola! CRAWSHAW. But naturally this puts a very different complexion on
matters. VIOLA. So of course he must take it, mustn't he, father? CRAWSHAW. I can hardly suppose, Richard, that you expect me to entrust
my daughter to a man who is so little provident for himself that he
throws away fifty thousand pounds because of some fanciful objection to
the name which goes with it. RICHARD (in despair). You don't understand, Robert. CRAWSHAW. I understand this, Richard. That if the name is good enough
for me, it should be good enough for you. You don't mind asking Viola to
take _your_ name, but you consider it an insult if you are asked to take
_my_ name. RICHARD (miserably to VIOLA). Do you want to be Mrs. Wurzel-Flummery? VIOLA. Well, I'm going to be Miss Wurzel-Flummery anyhow, darling. RICHARD (beaten). Heaven help me! you'll make me take it. But you'll
never understand. CRAWSHAW (stopping to administer comfort to him on his way out). Come,
come, Richard. (Patting him on the shoulder) I understand perfectly. All
that you were saying about money a little while ago--it's all perfectly
true, it's all just what I feel myself. But in practice we have to make
allowances sometimes. We have to sacrifice our ideals for--ah--others. I
shall be very proud to have you for a son-in-law, and to feel that there
will be the two of us in Parliament together upholding the honour of
the--ah--name. And perhaps now that we are to be so closely related, you
may come to feel some day that your views could be--ah--more adequately
put forward from _my_ side of the House. RICHARD. Go on, Robert; I deserve it. CRAWSHAW. Well, well! Margaret will be interested in our news. And you
must send that solicitor a line--or perhaps a telephone message would be
better. (He goes to the door and turns round just as he is going out.) Yes, I think the telephone, Richard; it would be safer. [Exit.] RICHARD (holding out his hands to VIOLA). Come here, Mrs.
Wurzel-Flummery. VIOLA. Not Mrs. Wurzel-Flummery; Mrs. Dick. And soon, please, darling. (She comes to him.) RICHARD (shaking his head sadly at her). I don't know what I've done,
Viola. (Suddenly) But you're worth it. (He kisses her, and then says in
a low voice) And God help me if I ever stop thinking so! [Enter MR. DENIS CLIFTON. He sees them, and walks about very tactfully
with his back towards them, humming to himself.] RICHARD. Hullo! CLIFTON (to himself). Now where did I put those papers? (He hums to
himself again.) Now where--oh, I beg your pardon! I left some papers
behind. VIOLA. Dick, you'll tell him. (As she goes out, she says to CLIFTON)
Good-bye, Mr. Clifton, and thank you for writing such nice letters. CLIFTON. Good-bye, Miss Crawshaw. VIOLA. Just say it to see how it sounds. CLIFTON. Good-bye, Miss Wurzel-Flummery. VIOLA. (smiling happily). No, not Miss, Mrs.

[She goes out.] CLIFTON. (looking in surprise from her to him). You don't mean--

RICHARD. Yes; and I'm taking the money after all, Mr. Clifton. CLIFTON. Dear me, what a situation! (Thoughtfully to himself) I wonder
how a rough scenario would strike the managers. RICHARD. Poor Mr. Clifton! CLIFTON. Why poor? RICHARD. You missed all the best part. You didn't hear what I said to
Crawshaw about money before you came. CLIFTON (thoughtfully). Oh I was it very--(Brightening up) But I expect
Uncle Antony heard. (After a pause) Well, I must be getting on. I wonder
if you've noticed any important papers lying about, in connection with
the Great Missenden Canal Company--a most intricate case, in which my
clerk and I--(He has murmured himself across to the fireplace, and the
fragments of his important case suddenly catch his eye. He picks up one
of the fragments.) Ah, yes. Well, I shall tell my clerk that we lost the
case. He will be sorry. He had got quite fond of that canal. (He turns
to go, but first says to MERITON) So you're taking the money, Mr.
Meriton? RICHARD. Yes. CLIFTON. And Mr. Crawshaw too? RICHARD. Yes. CLIFTON (to himself as he goes out). They are both taking it. (He stops
and looks up to UNCLE ANTONY with a smile.) Good old Uncle Antony--he
knew--he knew! (MERITON stands watching him as he goes.) THE LUCKY ONE

A PLAY IN THREE ACTS


CHARACTERS. GERALD FARRINGDON. BOB FARRINGDON (his elder brother). SIR JAMES FARRINGDON (his father). 