



Produced by James Rusk and Nicole Apostola





PLAYS BY ANTON CHEKHOV, SECOND SERIES

By Anton Chekhov

Translated, with an Introduction, by Julius West

[The First Series Plays have been previously published
by Project Gutenberg in etext numbers: 1753 through 1756]


CONTENTS

     INTRODUCTION
     ON THE HIGH ROAD
     THE PROPOSAL
     THE WEDDING
     THE BEAR
     A TRAGEDIAN IN SPITE OF HIMSELF
     THE ANNIVERSARY
     THE THREE SISTERS
     THE CHERRY ORCHARD




INTRODUCTION

The last few years have seen a large and generally unsystematic mass of
translations from the Russian flung at the heads and hearts of English
readers. The ready acceptance of Chekhov has been one of the few
successful features of this irresponsible output. He has been welcomed
by British critics with something like affection. Bernard Shaw has
several times remarked: "Every time I see a play by Chekhov, I want to
chuck all my own stuff into the fire." Others, having no such valuable
property to sacrifice on the altar of Chekhov, have not hesitated
to place him side by side with Ibsen, and the other established
institutions of the new theatre. For these reasons it is pleasant to
be able to chronicle the fact that, by way of contrast with the casual
treatment normally handed out to Russian authors, the publishers are
issuing the complete dramatic works of this author. In 1912 they brought
out a volume containing four Chekhov plays, translated by Marian Fell. All the dramatic works not included in her volume are to be found in the
present one. With the exception of Chekhov's masterpiece, "The Cherry
Orchard" (translated by the late Mr. George Calderon in 1912), none of
these plays have been previously published in book form in England or
America. It is not the business of a translator to attempt to outdo all others in
singing the praises of his raw material. This is a dangerous process and
may well lead, as it led Mr. Calderon, to drawing the reader's
attention to points of beauty not to be found in the original. A few
bibliographical details are equally necessary, and permissible, and the
elementary principles of Chekhov criticism will also be found useful. The very existence of "The High Road" (1884); probably the earliest
of its author's plays, will be unsuspected by English readers. During
Chekhov's lifetime it a sort of family legend, after his death it became
a family mystery. A copy was finally discovered only last year in the
Censor's office, yielded up, and published. It had been sent in 1885
under the nom-de-plume "A. Chekhonte," and it had failed to pass. The
Censor, of the time being had scrawled his opinion on the manuscript,
"a depressing and dirty piece,--cannot be licensed." The name of the
gentleman who held this view--Kaiser von Kugelgen--gives another reason
for the educated Russian's low opinion of German-sounding institutions. Baron von Tuzenbach, the satisfactory person in "The Three Sisters,"
it will be noted, finds it as well, while he is trying to secure the
favours of Irina, to declare that his German ancestry is fairly remote. This is by way of parenthesis. "The High Road," found after thirty
years, is a most interesting document to the lover of Chekhov. Every
play he wrote in later years was either a one-act farce or a four-act
drama. [Note: "The Swan Song" may occur as an exception. This, however,
is more of a Shakespeare recitation than anything else, and so neither
here nor there.] In "The High Road" we see, in an embryonic form, the whole later method
of the plays--the deliberate contrast between two strong characters
(Bortsov and Merik in this case), the careful individualization of each
person in a fairly large group by way of an introduction to the main
theme, the concealment of the catastrophe, germ-wise, in the actual
character of the characters, and the of a distinctive group-atmosphere. It need scarcely be stated that "The High Road" is not a "dirty" piece
according to Russian or to German standards; Chekhov was incapable of
writing a dirty play or story. For the rest, this piece differs from the
others in its presentation, not of Chekhov's favourite middle-classes,
but of the moujik, nourishing, in a particularly stuffy atmosphere, an
intense mysticism and an equally intense thirst for vodka. "The Proposal" (1889) and "The Bear" (1890) may be taken as good
examples of the sort of humour admired by the average Russian. The
latter play, in another translation, was put on as a curtain-raiser to a
cinematograph entertainment at a London theatre in 1914; and had quite a
pleasant reception from a thoroughly Philistine audience. The humour is
very nearly of the variety most popular over here, the psychology is a
shade subtler. The Russian novelist or dramatist takes to psychology as
some of his fellow-countrymen take to drink; in doing this he achieves
fame by showing us what we already know, and at the same time he kills
his own creative power. Chekhov just escaped the tragedy of suicide by
introspection, and was only enabled to do this by the possession of
a sense of humour. That is why we should not regard "The Bear," "The
Wedding," or "The Anniversary" as the work of a merely humorous young
man, but as the saving graces which made perfect "The Cherry Orchard." "The Three Sisters" (1901) is said to act better than any other of
Chekhov's plays, and should surprise an English audience exceedingly. It
and "The Cherry Orchard" are the tragedies of doing nothing. The three
sisters have only one desire in the world, to go to Moscow and live
there. There is no reason on earth, economic, sentimental, or other, why
they should not pack their bags and take the next train to Moscow. But
they will not do it. They cannot do it. And we know perfectly well that
if they were transplanted thither miraculously, they would be extremely
unhappy as soon as ever the excitement of the miracle had worn off. In
the other play Mme. Ranevsky can be saved from ruin if she will only
consent to a perfectly simple step--the sale of an estate. She cannot do
this, is ruined, and thrown out into the unsympathetic world. Chekhov is
the dramatist, not of action, but of inaction. The tragedy of inaction
is as overwhelming, when we understand it, as the tragedy of an Othello,
or a Lear, crushed by the wickedness of others. The former is being
enacted daily, but we do not stage it, we do not know how. But who
shall deny that the base of almost all human unhappiness is just this
inaction, manifesting itself in slovenliness of thought and execution,
education, and ideal? The Russian, painfully conscious of his own weakness, has accepted this
point of view, and regards "The Cherry Orchard" as its master-study in
dramatic form. They speak of the palpitating hush which fell upon the
audience of the Moscow Art Theatre after the first fall of the curtain
at the first performance--a hush so intense as to make Chekhov's friends
undergo the initial emotions of assisting at a vast theatrical failure. But the silence ryes almost a sob, to be followed, when overcome, by an
epic applause. And, a few months later, Chekhov died. This volume and that of Marian Fell--with which it is uniform--contain
all the dramatic works of Chekhov. It considered not worth while to
translate a few fragments published posthumously, or a monologue "On the
Evils of Tobacco"--a half humorous lecture by "the husband of his wife;"
which begins "Ladies, and in some respects, gentlemen," as this is
hardly dramatic work. There is also a very short skit on the efficiency
of provincial fire brigades, which was obviously not intended for the
stage and has therefore been omitted. Lastly, the scheme of transliteration employed has been that, generally
speaking, recommended by the Liverpool School of Russian Studies. This
is distinctly the best of those in the field, but as it would compel
one, e.g., to write a popular female name, "Marya," I have not treated
it absolute respect. For the sake of uniformity with Fell's volume, the
author's name is spelt Tchekoff on the title-page and cover. J. W.


RUSSIAN WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

AND MONEY EMPLOYED IN THE PLAYS, WITH ENGLISH EQUIVALENTS

     1 verst = 3600 feet = 2/3 mile (almost)
     1 arshin = 28 inches
     1 dessiatin = 2.7 acres
     1 copeck = 1/4 d
     1 rouble = 100 copecks = 2s. 1d. ON THE HIGH ROAD

A DRAMATIC STUDY


CHARACTERS

     TIHON EVSTIGNEYEV, the proprietor of a inn on the main road
     SEMYON SERGEYEVITCH BORTSOV, a ruined landowner
     MARIA EGOROVNA, his wife
     SAVVA, an aged pilgrim
     NAZAROVNA and EFIMOVNA, women pilgrims
     FEDYA, a labourer
     EGOR MERIK, a tramp
     KUSMA, a driver
     POSTMAN
     BORTSOV'S WIFE'S COACHMAN
     PILGRIMS, CATTLE-DEALERS, ETC. The action takes place in one of the provinces of Southern Russia


[The scene is laid in TIHON'S bar. On the right is the bar-counter and
shelves with bottles. At the back is a door leading out of the house. Over it, on the outside, hangs a dirty red lantern. The floor and the
forms, which stand against the wall, are closely occupied by pilgrims
and passers-by. Many of them, for lack of space, are sleeping as they
sit. It is late at night. As the curtain rises thunder is heard, and
lightning is seen through the door.] [TIHON is behind the counter. FEDYA is half-lying in a heap on one
of the forms, and is quietly playing on a concertina. Next to him
is BORTSOV, wearing a shabby summer overcoat. SAVVA, NAZAROVNA, and
EFIMOVNA are stretched out on the floor by the benches.] EFIMOVNA. [To NAZAROVNA] Give the old man a nudge dear! Can't get any
answer out of him. NAZAROVNA. [Lifting the corner of a cloth covering of SAVVA'S face] Are
you alive or are you dead, you holy man? SAVVA. Why should I be dead? I'm alive, mother! [Raises himself on his
elbow] Cover up my feet, there's a saint! That's it. A bit more on the
right one. That's it, mother. God be good to us. NAZAROVNA. [Wrapping up SAVVA'S feet] Sleep, little father. SAVVA. What sleep can I have? If only I had the patience to endure this
pain, mother; sleep's quite another matter. A sinner doesn't deserve to
be given rest. What's that noise, pilgrim-woman? NAZAROVNA. God is sending a storm. The wind is wailing, and the rain is
pouring down, pouring down. All down the roof and into the windows like
dried peas. Do you hear? The windows of heaven are opened... [Thunder]
Holy, holy, holy...

FEDYA. And it roars and thunders, and rages, sad there's no end to
it! Hoooo... it's like the noise of a forest.... Hoooo.... The wind is
wailing like a dog.... [Shrinking back] It's cold! My clothes are wet,
it's all coming in through the open door... you might put me through a
wringer.... [Plays softly] My concertina's damp, and so there's no music
for you, my Orthodox brethren, or else I'd give you such a concert, my
word!--Something marvellous! You can have a quadrille, or a polka, if
you like, or some Russian dance for two.... I can do them all. In the
town, where I was an attendant at the Grand Hotel, I couldn't make any
money, but I did wonders on my concertina. And, I can play the guitar. A VOICE FROM THE CORNER. A silly speech from a silly fool. FEDYA. I can hear another of them. [Pause.] NAZAROVNA. [To SAVVA] If you'd only lie where it was warm now, old man,
and warm your feet. [Pause.] Old man! Man of God! [Shakes SAVVA] Are you
going to die? FEDYA. You ought to drink a little vodka, grandfather. Drink, and it'll
burn, burn in your stomach, and warm up your heart. Drink, do! NAZAROVNA. Don't swank, young man! Perhaps the old man is giving back
his soul to God, or repenting for his sins, and you talk like that, and
play your concertina.... Put it down! You've no shame! FEDYA. And what are you sticking to him for? He can't do anything and
you... with your old women's talk... He can't say a word in reply, and
you're glad, and happy because he's listening to your nonsense.... You
go on sleeping, grandfather; never mind her! Let her talk, don't you
take any notice of her. A woman's tongue is the devil's broom--it will
sweep the good man and the clever man both out of the house. Don't
you mind.... [Waves his hands] But it's thin you are, brother of mine! Terrible! Like a dead skeleton! No life in you! Are you really dying? SAVVA. Why should I die? Save me, O Lord, from dying in vain.... I'll
suffer a little, and then get up with God's help.... The Mother of God
won't let me die in a strange land.... I'll die at home. FEDYA. Are you from far off? SAVVA. From Vologda. The town itself.... I live there. FEDYA. And where is this Vologda? TIHON. The other side of Moscow....

FEDYA. Well, well, well.... You have come a long way, old man! On foot? SAVVA. On foot, young man. I've been to Tihon of the Don, and I'm
going to the Holy Hills. [Note: On the Donetz, south-east of Kharkov; a
monastery containing a miraculous ikon.]... From there, if God wills it,
to Odessa.... They say you can get to Jerusalem cheap from there, for
twenty-ones roubles, they say....

FEDYA. And have you been to Moscow? SAVVA. Rather! Five times....

FEDYA. Is it a good town? [Smokes] Well-standing? Sews. There are many holy places there, young man.... Where there are
many holy places it's always a good town....

BORTSOV. [Goes up to the counter, to TIHON] Once more, please! For the
sake of Christ, give it to me! FEDYA. The chief thing about a town is that it should be clean. If it's
dusty, it must be watered; if it's dirty, it must be cleaned. There
ought to be big houses... a theatre... police... cabs, which... I've
lived in a town myself, I understand. BORTSOV. Just a little glass. I'll pay you for it later. TIHON. That's enough now. BORTSOV. I ask you! Do be kind to me! TIHON. Get away! BORTSOV. You don't understand me.... Understand me, you fool, if there's
a drop of brain in your peasant's wooden head, that it isn't I who am
asking you, but my inside, using the words you understand, that's what's
asking! My illness is what's asking! Understand! TIHON. We don't understand anything.... Get back! BORTSOV. Because if I don't have a drink at once, just you understand
this, if I don't satisfy my needs, I may commit some crime. God only
knows what I might do! In the time you've kept this place, you rascal,
haven't you seen a lot of drunkards, and haven't you yet got to
understand what they're like? They're diseased! You can do anything you
like to them, but you must give them vodka! Well, now, I implore you! Please! I humbly ask you! God only knows how humbly! TIHON. You can have the vodka if you pay for it. BORTSOV. Where am I to get the money? I've drunk it all! Down to the
ground! What can I give you? I've only got this coat, but I can't give
you that. I've nothing on underneath.... Would you like my cap? [Takes
it off and gives it to TIHON]

TIHON. [Looks it over] Hm.... There are all sorts of caps.... It might
be a sieve from the holes in it....

FEDYA. [Laughs] A gentleman's cap! You've got to take it off in front of
the mam'selles. How do you do, good-bye! How are you? TIHON. [Returns the cap to BORTSOV] I wouldn't give anything for it. It's muck. BORTSOV. If you don't like it, then let me owe you for the drink! I'll
bring in your five copecks on my way back from town. You can take it and
choke yourself with it then! Choke yourself! I hope it sticks in your
throat! [Coughs] I hate you! TIHON. [Banging the bar-counter with his fist] Why do you keep on like
that? What a man! What are you here for, you swindler? BORTSOV. I want a drink! It's not I, it's my disease! Understand that! TIHON. Don't you make me lose my temper, or you'll soon find yourself
outside! BORTSOV. What am I to do? [Retires from the bar-counter] What am I to
do? [Is thoughtful.] EFIMOVNA. It's the devil tormenting you. Don't you mind him, sir. The
damned one keeps whispering, "Drink! Drink!" And you answer him, "I
shan't drink! I shan't drink!" He'll go then. FEDYA. It's drumming in his head.... His stomach's leading him on! [Laughs] Your houour's a happy man. Lie down and go to sleep! What's the
use of standing like a scarecrow in the middle of the inn! This isn't an
orchard! BORTSOV. [Angrily] Shut up! Nobody spoke to you, you donkey. FEDYA. Go on, go on! We've seen the like of you before! There's a lot
like you tramping the high road! As to being a donkey, you wait till
I've given you a clout on the ear and you'll howl worse than the wind. Donkey yourself! Fool! [Pause] Scum! NAZAROVNA. The old man may be saying a prayer, or giving up his soul
to God, and here are these unclean ones wrangling with one another and
saying all sorts of... Have shame on yourselves! FEDYA. Here, you cabbage-stalk, you keep quiet, even if you are in a
public-house. Just you behave like everybody else. BORTSOV. What am I to do? What will become of me? How can I make him
understand? What else can I say to him? [To TIHON] The blood's boiling
in my chest! Uncle Tihon! [Weeps] Uncle Tihon! SAWA. [Groans] I've got shooting-pains in my leg, like bullets of
fire.... Little mother, pilgrim. EFIMOVNA. What is it, little father? SAVVA. Who's that crying? EFIMOVNA. The gentleman. SAVVA. Ask him to shed a tear for me, that I might die in Vologda. Tearful prayers are heard. BORTSOV. I'm not praying, grandfather! These aren't tears! Just juice! My soul is crushed; and the juice is running. [Sits by SAVVA] Juice! But you wouldn't understand! You, with your darkened brain, wouldn't
understand. You people are all in the dark! SAVVA. Where will you find those who live in the light? BORTSOV. They do exist, grandfather.... They would understand! SAVVA. Yes, yes, dear friend.... The saints lived in the light.... They
understood all our griefs.... You needn't even tell them.... and they'll
understand.... Just by looking at your eyes.... And then you'll have
such peace, as if you were never in grief at all--it will all go! FEDYA. And have you ever seen any saints? SAVVA. It has happened, young man.... There are many of all sorts on
this earth. Sinners, and servants of God. BORTSOV. I don't understand all this.... [Gets up quickly] What's the
use of talking when you don't understand, and what sort of a brain have
I now? I've only an instinct, a thirst! [Goes quickly to the counter]
Tihon, take my coat! Understand? [Tries to take it off] My coat...

TIHON. And what is there under your coat? [Looks under it] Your naked
body? Don't take it off, I shan't have it.... I'm not going to burden my
soul with a sin. [Enter MERIK.] BORTSOV. Very well, I'll take the sin on myself! Do you agree? MERIK. [In silence takes of his outer cloak and remains in a sleeveless
jacket. He carries an axe in his belt] A vagrant may sweat where a bear
will freeze. I am hot. [Puts his axe on the floor and takes off his
jacket] You get rid of a pailful of sweat while you drag one leg out of
the mud. And while you are dragging it out, the other one goes farther
in. EFIMOVNA. Yes, that's true... is the rain stopping, dear? MERIK. [Glancing at EFIMOVNA] I don't talk to old women. [A pause.] BORTSOV. [To TIHON] I'll take the sin on myself. Do you hear me or don't
you? TIHON. I don't want to hear you, get away! MERIK. It's as dark as if the sky was painted with pitch. You can't
see your own nose. And the rain beats into your face like a snowstorm! [Picks up his clothes and axe.] FEDYA. It's a good thing for the likes of us thieves. When the cat's
away the mice will play. MERIK. Who says that? FEDYA. Look and see... before you forget. MERIN. We'll make a note of it.... [Goes up to TIHON] How do you do, you
with the large face! Don't you remember me. TIHON. If I'm to remember every one of you drunkards that walks the high
road, I reckon I'd need ten holes in my forehead. MERIK. Just look at me.... [A pause.] TIHON. Oh, yes; I remember. I knew you by your eyes! [Gives him his
hand] Andrey Polikarpov? MERIK. I used to be Andrey Polikarpov, but now I am Egor Merik. TIHON. Why's that? MERIK. I call myself after whatever passport God gives me. I've been
Merik for two months. [Thunder] Rrrr.... Go on thundering, I'm not
afraid! [Looks round] Any police here? TIHON. What are you talking about, making mountains out of
mole-hills?... The people here are all right... The police are fast
asleep in their feather beds now.... [Loudly] Orthodox brothers, mind
your pockets and your clothes, or you'll have to regret it. The man's a
rascal! He'll rob you! MERIK. They can look out for their money, but as to their clothes--I
shan't touch them. I've nowhere to take them. TIHON. Where's the devil taking you to? MERIK. To Kuban. TIHON. My word! FEDYA. To Kuban? Really? [Sitting up] It's a fine place. You wouldn't
see such a country, brother, if you were to fall asleep and dream for
three years. They say the birds there, and the beasts are--my God! The
grass grows all the year round, the people are good, and they've so much
land they don't know what to do with it! The authorities, they say... a
soldier was telling me the other day... give a hundred dessiatins ahead. There's happiness, God strike me! MERIK. Happiness.... Happiness goes behind you.... You don't see it. It's as near as your elbow is, but you can't bite it. It's all
silly.... [Looking round at the benches and the people] Like a lot of
prisoners.... A poor lot. EFIMOVNA. [To MERIK] What great, angry, eyes! There's an enemy in you,
young man.... Don't you look at us! MERIK. Yes, you're a poor lot here. EFIMOVNA. Turn away! [Nudges SAVVA] Savva, darling, a wicked man is
looking at us. He'll do us harm, dear. [To MERIK] Turn away, I tell you,
you snake! SAVVA. He won't touch us, mother, he won't touch us.... God won't let
him. MERIK. All right, Orthodox brothers! [Shrugs his shoulders] Be quiet! You aren't asleep, you bandy-legged fools! Why don't you say something? EFIMOVNA. Take your great eyes away! Take away that devil's own pride! MERIK. Be quiet, you crooked old woman! I didn't come with the devil's
pride, but with kind words, wishing to honour your bitter lot! You're
huddled together like flies because of the cold--I'd be sorry for you,
speak kindly to you, pity your poverty, and here you go grumbling away! [Goes up to FEDYA] Where are you from? FEDYA. I live in these parts. I work at the Khamonyevsky brickworks. MERIK. Get up. FEDYA. [Raising himself] Well? MERIK. Get up, right up. I'm going to lie down here. FEDYA. What's that.... It isn't your place, is it? MERIK. Yes, mine. Go and lie on the ground! FEDYA. You get out of this, you tramp. I'm not afraid of you. MERIK. You're very quick with your tongue.... Get up, and don't talk
about it! You'll be sorry for it, you silly. TIHON. [To FEDYA] Don't contradict him, young man. Never mind. FEDYA. What right have you? You stick out your fishy eyes and think
I'm afraid! [Picks up his belongings and stretches himself out on the
ground] You devil! [Lies down and covers himself all over.] MERIK. [Stretching himself out on the bench] I don't expect you've ever
seen a devil or you wouldn't call me one. Devils aren't like that. [Lies
down, putting his axe next to him.] Lie down, little brother axe... let
me cover you. TIHON. Where did you get the axe from? MERIK. Stole it.... Stole it, and now I've got to fuss over it like a
child with a new toy; I don't like to throw it away, and I've nowhere to
put it. Like a beastly wife.... Yes.... [Covering himself over] Devils
aren't like that, brother. FEDYA. [Uncovering his head] What are they like? MERIK. Like steam, like air.... Just blow into the air. [Blows] They're
like that, you can't see them. A VOICE FROM THE CORNER. You can see them if you sit under a harrow. MERIK. I've tried, but I didn't see any.... Old women's tales, and silly
old men's, too.... You won't see a devil or a ghost or a corpse.... Our
eyes weren't made so that we could see everything.... When I was a boy,
I used to walk in the woods at night on purpose to see the demon of the
woods.... I'd shout and shout, and there might be some spirit, I'd call
for the demon of the woods and not blink my eyes: I'd see all sorts of
little things moving about, but no demon. I used to go and walk about
the churchyards at night, I wanted to see the ghosts--but the women lie. I saw all sorts of animals, but anything awful--not a sign. Our eyes
weren't... THE VOICE FROM THE CORNER. Never mind, it does happen that you
do see.... In our village a man was gutting a wild boar... he was
separating the tripe when... something jumped out at him! SAVVA. [Raising himself] Little children, don't talk about these unclean
things! It's a sin, dears! MERIK. Aaa... greybeard! You skeleton! [Laughs] You needn't go to the
churchyard to see ghosts, when they get up from under the floor to give
advice to their relations.... A sin!... Don't you teach people your
silly notions! You're an ignorant lot of people living in darkness....
[Lights his pipe] My father was peasant and used to be fond of teaching
people. One night he stole a sack of apples from the village priest, and
he brings them along and tells us, "Look, children, mind you don't eat
any apples before Easter, it's a sin." You're like that.... You don't
know what a devil is, but you go calling people devils.... Take this
crooked old woman, for instance. [Points to EFIMOVNA] She sees an enemy
in me, but is her time, for some woman's nonsense or other, she's given
her soul to the devil five times. EFIMOVNA. Hoo, hoo, hoo.... Gracious heavens! [Covers her face] Little
Savva! TIHON. What are you frightening them for? A great pleasure! [The door
slams in the wind] Lord Jesus.... The wind, the wind! MERIK. [Stretching himself] Eh, to show my strength! [The door slams
again] If I could only measure myself against the wind! Shall I tear the
door down, or suppose I tear up the inn by the roots! [Gets up and lies
down again] How dull! NAZAROVNA. You'd better pray, you heathen! Why are you so restless? EFIMOVNA. Don't speak to him, leave him alone! He's looking at us again. [To MERIK] Don't look at us, evil man! Your eyes are like the eyes of a
devil before cockcrow! SAVVA. Let him look, pilgrims! You pray, and his eyes won't do you any
harm. BORTSOV. No, I can't. It's too much for my strength! [Goes up to the
counter] Listen, Tihon, I ask you for the last time.... Just half a
glass! TIHON. [Shakes his head] The money! BORTSOV. My God, haven't I told you! I've drunk it all! Where am I to
get it? And you won't go broke even if you do let me have a drop of
vodka on tick. A glass of it only costs you two copecks, and it will
save me from suffering! I am suffering! Understand! I'm in misery, I'm
suffering! TIHON. Go and tell that to someone else, not to me.... Go and ask the
Orthodox, perhaps they'll give you some for Christ's sake, if they feel
like it, but I'll only give bread for Christ's sake. BORTSOV. You can rob those wretches yourself, I shan't.... I won't do
it! I won't! Understand? [Hits the bar-counter with his fist] I won't. [A pause.] Hm... just wait.... [Turns to the pilgrim women] It's an
idea, all the same, Orthodox ones! Spare five copecks! My inside asks
for it. I'm ill! FEDYA. Oh, you swindler, with your "spare five copecks." Won't you have
some water? BORTSOV. How I am degrading myself! I don't want it! I don't want
anything! I was joking! MERIK. You won't get it out of him, sir.... He's a famous skinflint.... Wait, I've got a five-copeck piece somewhere.... We'll have a glass
between us--half each [Searches in his pockets] The devil... it's lost
somewhere.... Thought I heard it tinkling just now in my pocket.... No;
no, it isn't there, brother, it's your luck! [A pause.] BORTSOV. But if I can't drink, I'll commit a crime or I'll kill
myself.... What shall I do, my God! [Looks through the door] Shall I go
out, then? Out into this darkness, wherever my feet take me....

MERIK. Why don't you give him a sermon, you pilgrims? And you, Tihon,
why don't you drive him out? He hasn't paid you for his night's
accommodation. Chuck him out! Eh, the people are cruel nowadays. There's
no gentleness or kindness in them.... A savage people! A man is drowning
and they shout to him: "Hurry up and drown, we've got no time to look
at you; we've got to go to work." As to throwing him a rope--there's no
worry about that.... A rope would cost money. SAVVA. Don't talk, kind man! MERIK. Quiet, old wolf! You're a savage race! Herods! Sellers of your
souls! [To TIHON] Come here, take off my boots! Look sharp now! TIHON. Eh, he's let himself go I [Laughs] Awful, isn't it. MERIK. Go on, do as you're told! Quick now! [Pause] Do you hear me, or
don't you? Am I talking to you or the wall? [Stands up]

TIHON. Well... give over. MERIK. I want you, you fleecer, to take the boots off me, a poor tramp. TIHON. Well, well... don't get excited. Here have a glass.... Have a
drink, now! MERIK. People, what do I want? Do I want him to stand me vodka, or to
take off my boots? Didn't I say it properly? [To TIHON] Didn't you hear
me rightly? I'll wait a moment, perhaps you'll hear me then. [There is excitement among the pilgrims and tramps, who half-raise
themselves in order to look at TIHON and MERIK. They wait in silence.] TIHON. The devil brought you here! [Comes out from behind the bar] What
a gentleman! Come on now. [Takes off MERIK'S boots] You child of Cain...

MERIK. That's right. Put them side by side.... Like that... you can go
now! TIHON. [Returns to the bar-counter] You're too fond of being clever. You
do it again and I'll turn you out of the inn! Yes! [To BORTSOV, who is
approaching] You, again? BORTSOV. Look here, suppose I give you something made of gold.... I will
give it to you. TIHON. What are you shaking for? Talk sense! BORTSOV. It may be mean and wicked on my part, but what am I to do? I'm
doing this wicked thing, not reckoning on what's to come.... If I was
tried for it, they'd let me off. Take it, only on condition that you
return it later, when I come back from town. I give it to you in front
of these witnesses. You will be my witnesses! [Takes a gold medallion
out from the breast of his coat] Here it is.... I ought to take the
portrait out, but I've nowhere to put it; I'm wet all over.... Well,
take the portrait, too! Only mind this... don't let your fingers touch
that face.... Please... I was rude to you, my dear fellow, I was a fool,
but forgive me and... don't touch it with your fingers.... Don't look at
that face with your eyes. [Gives TIHON the medallion.] TIHON. [Examining it] Stolen property.... All right, then, drink....
[Pours out vodka] Confound you. BORTSOV. Only don't you touch it... with your fingers. [Drinks slowly,
with feverish pauses.] TIHON. [Opens the medallion] Hm... a lady!... Where did you get hold of
this? MERIK. Let's have a look. [Goes to the bar] Let's see. TIHON. [Pushes his hand away] Where are you going to? You look somewhere
else! FEDYA. [Gets up and comes to TIHON] I want to look too! [Several of the tramps, etc., approach the bar and form a group. MERIK
grips TIHON's hand firmly with both his, looks at the portrait, in the
medallion in silence. A pause.] MERIK. A pretty she-devil. A real lady....

FEDYA. A real lady.... Look at her cheeks, her eyes.... Open your hand,
I can't see. Hair coming down to her waist.... It is lifelike! She might
be going to say something.... [Pause.] MERIK. It's destruction for a weak man. A woman like that gets a hold on
one and... [Waves his hand] you're done for! [KUSMA'S voice is heard. "Trrr.... Stop, you brutes!" Enter KUSMA.] KUSMA. There stands an inn upon my way. Shall I drive or walk past it,
say? You can pass your own father and not notice him, but you can see an
inn in the dark a hundred versts away. Make way, if you believe in God! Hullo, there! [Planks a five-copeck piece down on the counter] A glass
of real Madeira! Quick! FEDYA. Oh, you devil! TIHON. Don't wave your arms about, or you'll hit somebody. KUSMA. God gave us arms to wave about. Poor sugary things, you're
half-melted. You're frightened of the rain, poor delicate things. [Drinks.] EFIMOVNA. You may well get frightened, good man, if you're caught on
your way in a night like this. Now, thank God, it's all right, there
are many villages and houses where you can shelter from the weather, but
before that there weren't any. Oh, Lord, it was bad! You walk a hundred
versts, and not only isn't there a village; or a house, but you don't
even see a dry stick. So you sleep on the ground....

KUSMA. Have you been long on this earth, old woman? EFIMOVNA. Over seventy years, little father. KUSMA. Over seventy years! You'll soon come to crow's years. [Looks at
BORTSOV] And what sort of a raisin is this? [Staring at BORTSOV] Sir! [BORTSOV recognizes KUSMA and retires in confusion to a corner of the
room, where he sits on a bench] Semyon Sergeyevitch! Is that you, or
isn't it? Eh? What are you doing in this place? It's not the sort of
place for you, is it? BORTSOV. Be quiet! MERIK. [To KUSMA] Who is it? KUSMA. A miserable sufferer. [Paces irritably by the counter] Eh? In an
inn, my goodness! Tattered! Drunk! I'm upset, brothers... upset....
[To MERIK, in an undertone] It's my master... our landlord. Semyon
Sergeyevitch and Mr. Bortsov.... Have you ever seen such a state? What
does he look like? Just... it's the drink that brought him to this....
Give me some more! [Drinks] I come from his village, Bortsovka; you may
have heard of it, it's 200 versts from here, in the Ergovsky district. We used to be his father's serfs.... What a shame! MERIK. Was he rich? KUSMA. Very. MERIK. Did he drink it all? KUSMA. No, my friend, it was something else.... He used to be great and
rich and sober.... [To TIHON] Why you yourself used to see him riding,
as he used to, past this inn, on his way to the town. Such bold and
noble horses! A carriage on springs, of the best quality! He used to
own five troikas, brother.... Five years ago, I remember, he cam here
driving two horses from Mikishinsky, and he paid with a five-rouble
piece.... I haven't the time, he says, to wait for the change.... There! MERIK. His brain's gone, I suppose. KUSMA. His brain's all right.... It all happened because of his
cowardice! From too much fat. First of all, children, because of a
woman.... He fell in love with a woman of the town, and it seemed to him
that there wasn't any more beautiful thing in the wide world. A fool may
love as much as a wise man. The girl's people were all right.... But
she wasn't exactly loose, but just... giddy... always changing her mind! Always winking at one! Always laughing and laughing.... No sense at all. The gentry like that, they think that's nice, but we moujiks would soon
chuck her out.... Well, he fell in love, and his luck ran out. He began
to keep company with her, one thing led to another... they used to go
out in a boat all night, and play pianos....

BORTSOV. Don't tell them, Kusma! Why should you? What has my life got to
do with them? KUSMA. Forgive me, your honour, I'm only telling them a little... what
does it matter, anyway.... I'm shaking all over. Pour out some more. [Drinks.] MERIK. [In a semitone] And did she love him? KUSMA. [In a semitone which gradually becomes his ordinary voice] How
shouldn't she? He was a man of means.... Of course you'll fall in love
when the man has a thousand dessiatins and money to burn.... He was a
solid, dignified, sober gentleman... always the same, like this... give
me your hand [Takes MERIK'S hand] "How do you do and good-bye, do me
the favour." Well, I was going one evening past his garden--and what a
garden, brother, versts of it--I was going along quietly, and I look and
see the two of them sitting on a seat and kissing each other. [Imitates
the sound] He kisses her once, and the snake gives him back two.... He
was holding her white, little hand, and she was all fiery and kept on
getting closer and closer, too.... "I love you," she says. And he, like
one of the damned, walks about from one place to another and brags,
the coward, about his happiness.... Gives one man a rouble, and two to
another.... Gives me money for a horse. Let off everybody's debts....

BORTSOV. Oh, why tell them all about it? These people haven't any
sympathy.... It hurts! KUSMA. It's nothing, sir! They asked me! Why shouldn't I tell them? But if you are angry I won't... I won't.... What do I care for them....
[Post-bells are heard.] FEDYA. Don't shout; tell us quietly....

KUSMA. I'll tell you quietly.... He doesn't want me to, but it can't be
helped.... But there's nothing more to tell. They got married, that's
all. There was nothing else. Pour out another drop for Kusma the stony! [Drinks] I don't like people getting drunk! Why the time the wedding
took place, when the gentlefolk sat down to supper afterwards, she went
off in a carriage... [Whispers] To the town, to her lover, a lawyer....
Eh? What do you think of her now? Just at the very moment! She would be
let off lightly if she were killed for it! MERIK. [Thoughtfully] Well... what happened then? KUSMA. He went mad.... As you see, he started with a fly, as they say,
and now it's grown to a bumble-bee. It was a fly then, and now--it's
a bumble-bee.... And he still loves her. Look at him, he loves her! I
expect he's walking now to the town to get a glimpse of her with one
eye.... He'll get a glimpse of her, and go back....

[The post has driven up to the in.. The POSTMAN enters and has a drink.] TIHON. The post's late to-day! [The POSTMAN pays in silence and goes out. The post drives off, the
bells ringing.] A VOICE FROM THE CORNER. One could rob the post in weather like
this--easy as spitting. MERIK. I've been alive thirty-five years and I haven't robbed the post
once.... [Pause] It's gone now... too late, too late....

KUSMA. Do you want to smell the inside of a prison? MERIK. People rob and don't go to prison. And if I do go! [Suddenly]
What else? KUSMA. Do you mean that unfortunate? MERIK. Who else? KUSMA. The second reason, brothers, why he was ruined was because of
his brother-in-law, his sister's husband.... He took it into his head to
stand surety at the bank for 30,000 roubles for his brother-in-law. The
brother-in-law's a thief.... The swindler knows which side his bread's
buttered and won't budge an inch.... So he doesn't pay up.... So our man
had to pay up the whole thirty thousand. [Sighs] The fool is suffering
for his folly. His wife's got children now by the lawyer and the
brother-in-law has bought an estate near Poltava, and our man goes
round inns like a fool, and complains to the likes of us: "I've lost all
faith, brothers! I can't believe in anybody now!" It's cowardly! Every
man has his grief, a snake that sucks at his heart, and does that mean
that he must drink? Take our village elder, for example. His wife plays
about with the schoolmaster in broad daylight, and spends his money on
drink, but the elder walks about smiling to himself. He's just a little
thinner...

TIHON. [Sighs] When God gives a man strength....

KUSMA. There's all sorts of strength, that's true.... Well? How much
does it come to? [Pays] Take your pound of flesh! Good-bye, children! Good-night and pleasant dreams! It's time I hurried off. I'm bringing
my lady a midwife from the hospital.... She must be getting wet with
waiting, poor thing.... [Runs out. A pause.] TIHON. Oh, you! Unhappy man, come and drink this! [Pours out.] BORTSOV. [Comes up to the bar hesitatingly and drinks] That means I now
owe you for two glasses. TIHON. You don't owe me anything? Just drink and drown your sorrows! FEDYA. Drink mine, too, sir! Oh! [Throws down a five-copeck piece] If
you drink, you die; if you don't drink, you die. It's good not to drink
vodka, but by God you're easier when you've got some! Vodka takes grief
away.... It is hot! BORTSOV. Boo! The heat! MERIK. Dive it here! [Takes the medallion from TIHON and examines her
portrait] Hm. Ran off after the wedding. What a woman! A VOICE FROM THE CORNER. Pour him out another glass, Tihon. Let him
drink mine, too. MERIK. [Dashes the medallion to the ground] Curse her! [Goes quickly to
his place and lies down, face to the wall. General excitement.] BORTSOV. Here, what's that? [Picks up the medallion] How dare you, you
beast? What right have you? [Tearfully] Do you want me to kill you? You
moujik! You boor! TIHON. Don't be angry, sir.... It isn't glass, it isn't broken.... Have
another drink and go to sleep. [Pours out] Here I've been listening to
you all, and when I ought to have locked up long ago. [Goes and looks
door leading out.] BORTSOV. [Drinks] How dare he? The fool! [to MERIK] Do you understand? You're a fool, a donkey! SAVVA. Children! If you please! Stop that talking! What's the good of
making a noise? Let people go to sleep. TIHON. Lie down, lie down... be quiet! [Goes behind the counter and
locks the till] It's time to sleep. FEDYA. It's time! [Lies down] Pleasant dreams, brothers! MERIK. [Gets up and spreads his short fur and coat the bench] Come on,
lie down, sir. TIHON. And where will you sleep. MERIK. Oh, anywhere.... The floor will do.... [Spreads a coat on the
floor] It's all one to me [Puts the axe by him] It would be torture for
him to sleep on the floor. He's used to silk and down....

TIHON. [To BORTSOV] Lie down, your honour! You've looked at that
portrait long enough. [Puts out a candle] Throw it away! BORTSOV. [Swaying about] Where can I lie down? TIHON. In the tramp's place! Didn't you hear him giving it up to you? BORTSOV. [Going up to the vacant place] I'm a bit... drunk... after all
that.... Is this it?... Do I lie down here? Eh? TIHON. Yes, yes, lie down, don't be afraid. [Stretches himself out on
the counter.] BORTSOV. [Lying down] I'm... drunk.... Everything's going round....
[Opens the medallion] Haven't you a little candle? [Pause] You're
a queer little woman Masha.... Looking at me out of the frame and
laughing.... [Laughs] I'm drunk! And should you laugh at a man because
he's drunk? You look out, as Schastlivtsev says, and... love the
drunkard. FEDYA. How the wind howls. It's dreary! BORTSOV. [Laughs] What a woman.... Why do you keep on going round? I
can't catch you! MERIK. He's wandering. Looked too long at the portrait. [Laughs] What
a business! Educated people go and invent all sorts of machines and
medicines, but there hasn't yet been a man wise enough to invent a
medicine against the female sex.... They try to cure every sort of
disease, and it never occurs to them that more people die of women
than of disease.... Sly, stingy, cruel, brainless.... The mother-in-law
torments the bride and the bride makes things square by swindling the
husband... and there's no end to it....

TIHON. The women have ruffled his hair for him, and so he's bristly. MERIK. It isn't only I.... From the beginning of the ages, since the
world has been in existence, people have complained.... It's not for
nothing that in the songs and stories, the devil and the woman are put
side by side.... Not for nothing! It's half true, at any rate... [Pause]
Here's the gentleman playing the fool, but I had more sense, didn't I,
when I left my father and mother, and became a tramp? FEDYA. Because of women? MERIK. Just like the gentleman... I walked about like one of the damned,
bewitched, blessing my stars... on fire day and night, until at last my
eyes were opened... It wasn't love, but just a fraud....

FEDYA. What did you do to her? MERIK. Never you mind.... [Pause] Do you think I killed her?... I
wouldn't do it.... If you kill, you are sorry for it.... She can live
and be happy! If only I'd never set eyes on you, or if I could only
forget you, you viper's brood! [A knocking at the door.] TIHON. Whom have the devils brought.... Who's there? [Knocking] Who
knocks? [Gets up and goes to the door] Who knocks? Go away, we've locked
up! A VOICE. Please let me in, Tihon. The carriage-spring's broken! Be a
father to me and help me! If I only had a little string to tie it round
with, we'd get there somehow or other. TIHON. Who are you? THE VOICE. My lady is going to Varsonofyev from the town.... It's only
five versts farther on.... Do be a good man and help! TIHON. Go and tell the lady that if she pays ten roubles she can have
her string and we'll mend the spring. THE VOICE. Have you gone mad, or what? Ten roubles! You mad dog! Profiting by our misfortunes! TIHON. Just as you like.... You needn't if you don't want to. THE VOICE. Very well, wait a bit. [Pause] She says, all right. TIHON. Pleased to hear it! [Opens door. The COACHMAN enters.] 