



Produced by Nicole Apostola





GHOSTS

By Henrik Ibsen

Translated, with an Introduction, by William Archer




INTRODUCTION. The winter of 1879-80 Ibsen spent in Munich, and the greater part of the
summer of 1880 at Berchtesgaden. November 1880 saw him back in Rome, and
he passed the summer of 1881 at Sorrento. There, fourteen years earlier,
he had written the last acts of _Peer Gynt_; there he now wrote, or at
any rate completed, _Gengangere_. It was published in December 1881,
after he had returned to Rome. On December 22 he wrote to Ludwig
Passarge, one of his German translators, "My new play has now appeared,
and has occasioned a terrible uproar in the Scandinavian press; every
day I receive letters and newspaper articles decrying or praising it.... I consider it utterly impossible that any German theatre will accept the
play at present. I hardly believe that they will dare to play it in the
Scandinavian countries for some time to come." How rightly he judged we
shall see anon. In the newspapers there was far more obloquy than praise. Two men,
however, stood by him from the first: Bjoernson, from whom he had been
practically estranged ever since _The League of Youth_, and Georg
Brandes. The latter published an article in which he declared (I quote
from memory) that the play might or might not be Ibsen's greatest
work, but that it was certainly his noblest deed. It was, doubtless, in
acknowledgment of this article that Ibsen wrote to Brandes on January 3,
1882: "Yesterday I had the great pleasure of receiving your brilliantly
clear and so warmly appreciative review of _Ghosts_.... All who read
your article must, it seems to me, have their eyes opened to what I
meant by my new book--assuming, that is, that they have any _wish_ to
see. For I cannot get rid of the impression that a very large number of
the false interpretations which have appeared in the newspapers are
the work of people who know better. In Norway, however, I am willing to
believe that the stultification has in most cases been unintentional;
and the reason is not far to seek. In that country a great many of the
critics are theologians, more or less disguised; and these gentlemen
are, as a rule, quite unable to write rationally about creative
literature. That enfeeblement of judgment which, at least in the case
of the average man, is an inevitable consequence of prolonged occupation
with theological studies, betrays itself more especially in the judging
of human character, human actions, and human motives. Practical business
judgment, on the other hand, does not suffer so much from studies of
this order. Therefore the reverend gentlemen are very often excellent
members of local boards; but they are unquestionably our worst critics." This passage is interesting as showing clearly the point of view from
which Ibsen conceived the character of Manders. In the next paragraph
of the same letter he discusses the attitude of "the so-called Liberal
press"; but as the paragraph contains the germ of _An Enemy of the
People_, it may most fittingly be quoted in the introduction to that
play. Three days later (January 6) Ibsen wrote to Schandorph, the Danish
novelist: "I was quite prepared for the hubbub. If certain of our
Scandinavian reviewers have no talent for anything else, they have
an unquestionable talent for thoroughly misunderstanding and
misinterpreting those authors whose books they undertake to judge.... They endeavour to make me responsible for the opinions which certain of
the personages of my drama express. And yet there is not in the whole
book a single opinion, a single utterance, which can be laid to the
account of the author. I took good care to avoid this. The very method,
the order of technique which imposes its form upon the play, forbids
the author to appear in the speeches of his characters. My object was
to make the reader feel that he was going through a piece of real
experience; and nothing could more effectually prevent such an
impression than the intrusion of the author's private opinions into the
dialogue. Do they imagine at home that I am so inexpert in the theory of
drama as not to know this? Of course I know it, and act accordingly. In no other play that I have written is the author so external to the
action, so entirely absent from it, as in this last one." "They say," he continued, "that the book preaches Nihilism. Not at all. It is not concerned to preach anything whatsoever. It merely points
to the ferment of Nihilism going on under the surface, at home as
elsewhere. A Pastor Manders will always goad one or other Mrs. Alving
to revolt. And just because she is a woman, she will, when once she has
begun, go to the utmost extremes." Towards the end of January Ibsen wrote from Rome to Olaf Skavlan:
"These last weeks have brought me a wealth of experiences, lessons, and
discoveries. I, of course, foresaw that my new play would call forth a
howl from the camp of the stagnationists; and for; this I care no more
than for the barking of a pack of chained dogs. But the pusillanimity
which I have observed among the so-called Liberals has given me cause
for reflection. The very day after my play was published the _Dagblad_
rushed out a hurriedly-written article, evidently designed to purge
itself of all suspicion of complicity in my work. This was entirely
unnecessary. I myself am responsible for what I write, I and no one
else. I cannot possibly embarrass any party, for to no party do I
belong. I stand like a solitary franc-tireur at the outposts, and
fight for my own hand. The only man in Norway who has stood up freely,
frankly, and courageously for me is Bjoernson. It is just like him. He
has in truth a great, kingly soul, and I shall never forget his action
in this matter." One more quotation completes the history of these stirring January
days, as written by Ibsen himself. It occurs in a letter to a Danish
journalist, Otto Borchsenius. "It may well be," the poet writes, "that
the play is in several respects rather daring. But it seemed to me
that the time had come for moving some boundary-posts. And this was an
undertaking for which a man of the older generation, like myself, was
better fitted than the many younger authors who might desire to do
something of the kind. I was prepared for a storm; but such storms one
must not shrink from encountering. That would be cowardice." It happened that, just in these days, the present writer had frequent
opportunities of conversing with Ibsen, and of hearing from his own lips
almost all the views expressed in the above extracts. He was especially
emphatic, I remember, in protesting against the notion that the opinions
expressed by Mrs. Alving or Oswald were to be attributed to himself. He
insisted, on the contrary, that Mrs. Alving's views were merely typical
of the moral chaos inevitably produced by re-action from the narrow
conventionalism represented by Manders. With one consent, the leading theatres of the three Scandinavian
capitals declined to have anything to do with the play. It was more
than eighteen months old before it found its way to the stage at all. In
August 1883 it was acted for the first time at Helsingborg, Sweden, by
a travelling company under the direction of an eminent Swedish actor,
August Lindberg, who himself played Oswald. He took it on tour round the
principal cities of Scandinavia, playing it, among the rest, at a minor
theatre in Christiania. It happened that the boards of the Christiania
Theatre were at the same time occupied by a French farce; and public
demonstrations of protest were made against the managerial policy which
gave _Tete de Linotte_ the preference over _Gengangere_. Gradually the
prejudice against the play broke down. Already in the autumn of 1883 it
was produced at the Royal (Dramatiska) Theatre in Stockholm. When the
new National Theatre was opened in Christiania in 1899, _Gengangere_
found an early place in its repertory; and even the Royal Theatre in
Copenhagen has since opened its doors to the tragedy. Not until April 1886 was _Gespenster_ acted in Germany, and then only at
a private performance, at the Stadttheater, Augsburg, the poet himself
being present. In the following winter it was acted at the famous Court
Theatre at Meiningen, again in the presence of the poet. The first
(private) performance in Berlin took place on January 9, 1887, at the
Residenz Theater; and when the Freie Buehne, founded on the model of the
Paris Theatre Libre, began its operations two years later (September 29,
1889), _Gespenster_ was the first play that it produced. The Freie Buehne
gave the initial impulse to the whole modern movement which has given
Germany a new dramatic literature; and the leaders of the movement,
whether authors or critics, were one and all ardent disciples of Ibsen,
who regarded _Gespenster_ as his typical masterpiece. In Germany,
then, the play certainly did, in Ibsen's own words, "move some
boundary-posts." The Prussian censorship presently withdrew its veto,
and on, November 27, 1894, the two leading literary theatres of Berlin,
the Deutsches Theater and the Lessing Theater, gave simultaneous
performances of the tragedy. Everywhere in Germany and Austria it is
now freely performed; but it is naturally one of the least popular of
Ibsen's plays. It was with _Les Revenants_ that Ibsen made his first appearance on the
French stage. The play was produced by the Theatre Libre (at the
Theatre des Menus-Plaisirs) on May 29, 1890. Here, again, it became the
watchword of the new school of authors and critics, and aroused a good
deal of opposition among the old school. But the most hostile French
criticisms were moderation itself compared with the torrents of abuse
which were poured upon _Ghosts_ by the journalists of London when, on
March 13, 1891, the Independent Theatre, under the direction of Mr. J.
T. Grein, gave a private performance of the play at the Royalty Theatre,
Soho. I have elsewhere [Note: See "The Mausoleum of Ibsen," _Fortnightly
Review_, August 1893. See also Mr. Bernard Shaw's _Quintessence of
Ibsenism_, p. 89, and my introduction to Ghosts in the single-volume
edition.] placed upon record some of the amazing feats of vituperation
achieved of the critics, and will not here recall them. It is sufficient
to say that if the play had been a tenth part as nauseous as the
epithets hurled at it and its author, the Censor's veto would have been
amply justified. That veto is still (1906) in force. England enjoys the
proud distinction of being the one country in the world where _Ghosts_
may not be publicly acted. In the United States, the first performance
of the play in English took place at the Berkeley Lyceum, New York City,
on January 5, 1894. The production was described by Mr. W. D. Howells as
"a great theatrical event--the very greatest I have ever known." Other
leading men of letters were equally impressed by it. Five years later, a
second production took place at the Carnegie Lyceum; and an adventurous
manager has even taken the play on tour in the United States. The
Italian version of the tragedy, _Gli Spettri_, has ever since 1892
taken a prominent place in the repertory of the great actors Zaccone and
Novelli, who have acted it, not only throughout Italy, but in Austria,
Germany, Russia, Spain, and South America. In an interview, published immediately after Ibsen's death, Bjoernstjerne
Bjoernson, questioned as to what he held to be his brother-poet's
greatest work, replied, without a moment's hesitation, _Gengangere_. This dictum can scarcely, I think, be accepted without some
qualification. Even confining our attention to the modern plays, and
leaving out of comparison _The Pretenders_, _Brand_, and _Peer Gynt_,
we can scarcely call _Ghosts_ Ibsen's richest or most human play, and
certainly not his profoundest or most poetical. If some omnipotent
Censorship decreed the annihilation of all his works save one, few
people, I imagine, would vote that that one should be _Ghosts_. Even if
half a dozen works were to be saved from the wreck, I doubt whether I,
for my part, would include _Ghosts_ in the list. It is, in my judgment,
a little bare, hard, austere. It is the first work in which Ibsen
applies his new technical method--evolved, as I have suggested, during
the composition of _A Doll's House_--and he applies it with something
of fanaticism. He is under the sway of a prosaic ideal--confessed in the
phrase, "My object was to make the reader feel that he was going through
a piece of real experience"--and he is putting some constraint upon
the poet within him. The action moves a little stiffly, and all in one
rhythm. It lacks variety and suppleness. Moreover, the play affords some
slight excuse for the criticism which persists in regarding Ibsen as a
preacher rather than as a creator--an author who cares more for ideas
and doctrines than for human beings. Though Mrs. Alving, Engstrand and
Regina are rounded and breathing characters, it cannot be denied that
Manders strikes one as a clerical type rather than an individual, while
even Oswald might not quite unfairly be described as simply and solely
his father's son, an object-lesson in heredity. We cannot be said to
know him, individually and intimately, as we know Helmer or Stockmann,
Hialmar Ekdal or Gregors Werle. Then, again, there are one or two
curious flaws in the play. The question whether Oswald's "case" is one
which actually presents itself in the medical books seems to me of very
trifling moment. It is typically true, even if it be not true in detail. The suddenness of the catastrophe may possibly be exaggerated, its
premonitions and even its essential nature may be misdescribed. On the
other hand, I conceive it, probable that the poet had documents to found
upon, which may be unknown to his critics. I have never taken any pains
to satisfy myself upon the point, which seems to me quite immaterial. There is not the slightest doubt that the life-history of a Captain
Alving may, and often does, entail upon posterity consequences quite
as tragic as those which ensue in Oswald's case, and far more
wide-spreading. That being so, the artistic justification of the poet's
presentment of the case is certainly not dependent on its absolute
scientific accuracy. The flaws above alluded to are of another nature. One of them is the prominence given to the fact that the Asylum
is uninsured. No doubt there is some symbolical purport in the
circumstance; but I cannot think that it is either sufficiently clear or
sufficiently important to justify the emphasis thrown upon it at the
end of the second act. Another dubious point is Oswald's argument in
the first act as to the expensiveness of marriage as compared with free
union. Since the parties to free union, as he describes it, accept all
the responsibilities of marriage, and only pretermit the ceremony, the
difference of expense, one would suppose, must be neither more nor less
than the actual marriage fee. I have never seen this remark of Oswald's
adequately explained, either as a matter of economic fact, or as a
trait of character. Another blemish, of somewhat greater moment, is the
inconceivable facility with which, in the third act, Manders suffers
himself to be victimised by Engstrand. All these little things, taken
together, detract, as it seems to me, from the artistic completeness of
the play, and impair its claim to rank as the poet's masterpiece. Even
in prose drama, his greatest and most consummate achievements were yet
to come. Must we, then, wholly dissent from Bjoernson's judgment? I think not. In
a historical, if not in an aesthetic, sense, _Ghosts_ may well rank as
Ibsen's greatest work. It was the play which first gave the full measure
of his technical and spiritual originality and daring. It has done
far more than any other of his plays to "move boundary-posts." It has
advanced the frontiers of dramatic art and implanted new ideals, both
technical and intellectual, in the minds of a whole generation of
playwrights. It ranks with _Hernani_ and _La Dame aux Camelias_ among
the epoch-making plays of the nineteenth century, while in point of
essential originality it towers above them. We cannot, I think, get
nearer to the truth than Georg Brandes did in the above-quoted phrase
from his first notice of the play, describing it as not, perhaps, the
poet's greatest work, but certainly his noblest deed. In another essay,
Brandes has pointed to it, with equal justice, as marking Ibsen's final
breach with his early-one might almost say his hereditary romanticism. He here becomes, at last, "the most modern of the moderns." "This, I am
convinced," says the Danish critic, "is his imperishable glory, and will
give lasting life to his works." GHOSTS

A FAMILY-DRAMA IN THREE ACTS. (1881)


CHARACTERS. MRS. HELEN ALVING, widow of Captain Alving, late Chamberlain to
  the King. [Note: Chamberlain (Kammerherre) is the only title of
  honour now existing in Norway. It is a distinction conferred by the
  King on men of wealth and position, and is not hereditary.] OSWALD ALVING, her son, a painter. PASTOR MANDERS. JACOB ENGSTRAND, a carpenter. REGINA ENGSTRAND, Mrs. Alving's maid. The action takes place at Mrs. Alving's country house, beside one of the
large fjords in Western Norway. ACT FIRST. [A spacious garden-room, with one door to the left, and two doors to the
right. In the middle of the room a round table, with chairs about it. On
the table lie books, periodicals, and newspapers. In the foreground to
the left a window, and by it a small sofa, with a worktable in front of
it. In the background, the room is continued into a somewhat narrower
conservatory, the walls of which are formed by large panes of glass. In
the right-hand wall of the conservatory is a door leading down into
the garden. Through the glass wall a gloomy fjord landscape is faintly
visible, veiled by steady rain.] [ENGSTRAND, the carpenter, stands by the garden door. His left leg
is somewhat bent; he has a clump of wood under the sole of his boot. REGINA, with an empty garden syringe in her hand, hinders him from
advancing.] REGINA. [In a low voice.] What do you want? Stop where you are. You're
positively dripping. ENGSTRAND. It's the Lord's own rain, my girl. REGINA. It's the devil's rain, _I_ say. ENGSTRAND. Lord, how you talk, Regina. [Limps a step or two forward into
the room.] It's just this as I wanted to say--

REGINA. Don't clatter so with that foot of yours, I tell you! The young
master's asleep upstairs. ENGSTRAND. Asleep? In the middle of the day? REGINA. It's no business of yours. ENGSTRAND. I was out on the loose last night--

REGINA. I can quite believe that. ENGSTRAND. Yes, we're weak vessels, we poor mortals, my girl--

REGINA. So it seems. ENGSTRAND.--and temptations are manifold in this world, you see. But all
the same, I was hard at work, God knows, at half-past five this morning. REGINA. Very well; only be off now. I won't stop here and have
_rendezvous's_ [Note: This and other French words by Regina are in that
language in the original] with you. ENGSTRAND. What do you say you won't have? REGINA. I won't have any one find you here; so just you go about your
business. ENGSTRAND. [Advances a step or two.] Blest if I go before I've had
a talk with you. This afternoon I shall have finished my work at the
school house, and then I shall take to-night's boat and be off home to
the town. REGINA. [Mutters.] Pleasant journey to you! ENGSTRAND. Thank you, my child. To-morrow the Orphanage is to be opened,
and then there'll be fine doings, no doubt, and plenty of intoxicating
drink going, you know. And nobody shall say of Jacob Engstrand that he
can't keep out of temptation's way. REGINA. Oh! ENGSTRAND. You see, there's to be heaps of grand folks here to-morrow. Pastor Manders is expected from town, too. REGINA. He's coming to-day. ENGSTRAND. There, you see! And I should be cursedly sorry if he found
out anything against me, don't you understand? REGINA. Oho! is that your game? ENGSTRAND. Is what my game? REGINA. [Looking hard at him.] What are you going to fool Pastor Manders
into doing, this time? ENGSTRAND. Sh! sh! Are you crazy? Do _I_ want to fool Pastor Manders? Oh
no! Pastor Manders has been far too good a friend to me for that. But I
just wanted to say, you know--that I mean to be off home again to-night. REGINA. The sooner the better, say I.

ENGSTRAND. Yes, but I want you with me, Regina. REGINA. [Open-mouthed.] You want me--? What are you talking about? ENGSTRAND. I want you to come home with me, I say. REGINA. [Scornfully.] Never in this world shall you get me home with
you. ENGSTRAND. Oh, we'll see about that. REGINA. Yes, you may be sure we'll see about it! Me, that have been
brought up by a lady like Mrs Alving! Me, that am treated almost as a
daughter here! Is it me you want to go home with you?--to a house like
yours? For shame! ENGSTRAND. What the devil do you mean? Do you set yourself up against
your father, you hussy? REGINA. [Mutters without looking at him.] You've sail often enough I was
no concern of yours. ENGSTRAND. Pooh! Why should you bother about that--

REGINA. Haven't you many a time sworn at me and called me a--? _Fi
donc_! ENGSTRAND. Curse me, now, if ever I used such an ugly word. REGINA. Oh, I remember very well what word you used. ENGSTRAND. Well, but that was only when I was a bit on, don't you know? Temptations are manifold in this world, Regina. REGINA. Ugh! ENGSTRAND. And besides, it was when your mother was that aggravating--I
had to find something to twit her with, my child. She was always setting
up for a fine lady. [Mimics.] "Let me go, Engstrand; let me be. Remember I was three years in Chamberlain Alving's family at Rosenvold." [Laughs.] Mercy on us! She could never forget that the Captain was made
a Chamberlain while she was in service here. REGINA. Poor mother! you very soon tormented her into her grave. ENGSTRAND. [With a twist of his shoulders.] Oh, of course! I'm to have
the blame for everything. REGINA. [Turns away; half aloud.] Ugh--! And that leg too! ENGSTRAND. What do you say, my child? REGINA. _Pied de mouton_. ENGSTRAND. Is that English, eh? REGINA. Yes. ENGSTRAND. Ay, ay; you've picked up some learning out here; and that may
come in useful now, Regina. REGINA. [After a short silence.] What do you want with me in town? ENGSTRAND. Can you ask what a father wants with his only child? A'n't I
a lonely, forlorn widower? REGINA. Oh, don't try on any nonsense like that with me! Why do you want
me? ENGSTRAND. Well, let me tell you, I've been thinking of setting up in a
new line of business. REGINA. [Contemptuously.] You've tried that often enough, and much good
you've done with it. ENGSTRAND. Yes, but this time you shall see, Regina! Devil take me--

REGINA. [Stamps.] Stop your swearing! ENGSTRAND. Hush, hush; you're right enough there, my girl. What I wanted
to say was just this--I've laid by a very tidy pile from this Orphanage
job. REGINA. Have you? That's a good thing for you. ENGSTRAND. What can a man spend his ha'pence on here in this country
hole? REGINA. Well, what then? ENGSTRAND. Why, you see, I thought of putting the money into some paying
speculation. I thought of a sort of a sailor's tavern--

REGINA. Pah! ENGSTRAND. A regular high-class affair, of course; not any sort of
pig-sty for common sailors. No! damn it! it would be for captains and
mates, and--and--regular swells, you know. REGINA. And I was to--? ENGSTRAND. You were to help, to be sure. Only for the look of the thing,
you understand. Devil a bit of hard work shall you have, my girl. You
shall do exactly what you like. REGINA. Oh, indeed! ENGSTRAND. But there must be a petticoat in the house; that's as clear
as daylight. For I want to have it a bit lively like in the evenings,
with singing and dancing, and so on. You must remember they're weary
wanderers on the ocean of life. [Nearer.] Now don't be a fool and
stand in your own light, Regina. What's to become of you out here? Your
mistress has given you a lot of learning; but what good is that to you? You're to look after the children at the new Orphanage, I hear. Is that
the sort of thing for you, eh? Are you so dead set on wearing your life
out for a pack of dirty brats? REGINA. No; if things go as I want them to--Well there's no
saying--there's no saying. ENGSTRAND. What do you mean by "there's no saying"? REGINA. Never you mind.--How much money have you saved? ENGSTRAND. What with one thing and another, a matter of seven or
eight hundred crowns. [A "krone" is equal to one shilling and
three-halfpence.] REGINA. That's not so bad. ENGSTRAND. It's enough to make a start with, my girl. REGINA. Aren't you thinking of giving me any? ENGSTRAND. No, I'm blest if I am! REGINA. Not even of sending me a scrap of stuff for a new dress? ENGSTRAND. Come to town with me, my lass, and you'll soon get dresses
enough. REGINA. Pooh! I can do that on my own account, if I want to. ENGSTRAND. No, a father's guiding hand is what you want, Regina. Now,
I've got my eye on a capital house in Little Harbour Street. They don't
want much ready-money; and it could be a sort of a Sailors' Home, you
know. REGINA. But I will not live with you! I have nothing whatever to do with
you. Be off! ENGSTRAND. You wouldn't stop long with me, my girl. No such luck! If
you knew how to play your cards, such a fine figure of a girl as you've
grown in the last year or two--

REGINA. Well? ENGSTRAND. You'd soon get hold of some mate--or maybe even a captain--

REGINA. I won't marry any one of that sort. Sailors have no _savoir
vivre_. ENGSTRAND. What's that they haven't got? REGINA. I know what sailors are, I tell you. They're not the sort of
people to marry. ENGSTRAND. Then never mind about marrying them. You can make it pay all
the same. [More confidentially.] He--the Englishman--the man with the
yacht--he came down with three hundred dollars, he did; and she wasn't a
bit handsomer than you. REGINA. [Making for him.] Out you go! ENGSTRAND. [Falling back.] Come, come! You're not going to hit me, I
hope. REGINA. Yes, if you begin talking about mother I shall hit you. Get away
with you, I say! [Drives him back towards the garden door.] And don't
slam the doors. Young Mr. Alving--

ENGSTRAND. He's asleep; I know. You're mightily taken up about young Mr.
Alving--[More softly.] Oho! you don't mean to say it's him as--? REGINA. Be off this minute! You're crazy, I tell you! No, not that way. There comes Pastor Manders. Down the kitchen stairs with you. ENGSTRAND. [Towards the right.] Yes, yes, I'm going. But just you talk
to him as is coming there. He's the man to tell you what a child owes
its father. For I am your father all the same, you know. I can prove it
from the church register. [He goes out through the second door to the right, which REGINA has
opened, and closes again after him. REGINA glances hastily at herself in
the mirror, dusts herself with her pocket handkerchief; and settles her
necktie; then she busies herself with the flowers.] [PASTOR MANDERS, wearing an overcoat, carrying an umbrella, and with
a small travelling-bag on a strap over his shoulder, comes through the
garden door into the conservatory.] MANDERS. Good-morning, Miss Engstrand. REGINA. [Turning round, surprised and pleased.] No, really! Good
morning, Pastor Manders. Is the steamer in already? MANDERS. It is just in. [Enters the sitting-room.] Terrible weather we
have been having lately. REGINA. [Follows him.] It's such blessed weather for the country, sir. MANDERS. No doubt; you are quite right. We townspeople give too little
thought to that. [He begins to take of his overcoat.] REGINA. Oh, mayn't I help you?--There! Why, how wet it is? I'll just
hang it up in the hall. And your umbrella, too--I'll open it and let it
dry. [She goes out with the things through the second door on the right. PASTOR MANDERS takes off his travelling bag and lays it and his hat on a
chair. Meanwhile REGINA comes in again.] MANDERS. Ah, it's a comfort to get safe under cover. I hope everything
is going on well here? REGINA. Yes, thank you, sir. MANDERS. You have your hands full, I suppose, in preparation for
to-morrow? REGINA. Yes, there's plenty to do, of course. MANDERS. And Mrs. Alving is at home, I trust? REGINA. Oh dear, yes. She's just upstairs, looking after the young
master's chocolate. MANDERS. Yes, by-the-bye--I heard down at the pier that Oswald had
arrived. REGINA. Yes, he came the day before yesterday. We didn't expect him
before to-day. MANDERS. Quite strong and well, I hope? REGINA. Yes, thank you, quite; but dreadfully tired with the journey. He
has made one rush right through from Paris--the whole way in one train,
I believe. He's sleeping a little now, I think; so perhaps we'd better
talk a little quietly. MANDERS. Sh!--as quietly as you please. REGINA. [Arranging an arm-chair beside the table.] Now, do sit down,
Pastor Manders, and make yourself comfortable. [He sits down; she places
a footstool under his feet.] There! Are you comfortable now, sir? MANDERS. Thanks, thanks, extremely so. [Looks at her.] Do you know, Miss
Engstrand, I positively believe you have grown since I last saw you. REGINA. Do you think so, Sir? Mrs. Alving says I've filled out too. MANDERS. Filled out? Well, perhaps a little; just enough. [Short pause.] REGINA. Shall I tell Mrs. Alving you are here? MANDERS. Thanks, thanks, there is no hurry, my dear child.--By-the-bye,
Regina, my good girl, tell me: how is your father getting on out here? REGINA. Oh, thank you, sir, he's getting on well enough. MANDERS. He called upon me last time he was in town. REGINA. Did he, indeed? He's always so glad of a chance of talking to
you, sir. MANDERS. And you often look in upon him at his work, I daresay? REGINA. I? Oh, of course, when I have time, I--

MANDERS. Your father is not a man of strong character, Miss Engstrand. He stands terribly in need of a guiding hand. REGINA. Oh, yes; I daresay he does. MANDERS. He requires some one near him whom he cares for, and whose
judgment he respects. He frankly admitted as much when he last came to
see me. REGINA. Yes, he mentioned something of the sort to me. But I don't know
whether Mrs. Alving can spare me; especially now that we've got the
new Orphanage to attend to. And then I should be so sorry to leave Mrs.
Alving; she has always been so kind to me. MANDERS. But a daughter's duty, my good girl--Of course, we should first
have to get your mistress's consent. REGINA. But I don't know whether it would be quite proper for me, at my
age, to keep house for a single man. MANDERS. What! My dear Miss Engstrand! When the man is your own father! REGINA. Yes, that may be; but all the same--Now, if it were in a
thoroughly nice house, and with a real gentleman--

MANDERS. Why, my dear Regina--

REGINA.--one I could love and respect, and be a daughter to--

MANDERS. Yes, but my dear, good child--

REGINA. Then I should be glad to go to town. It's very lonely out here;
you know yourself, sir, what it is to be alone in the world. And I can
assure you I'm both quick and willing. Don't you know of any such place
for me, sir? MANDERS. I? No, certainly not. REGINA. But, dear, dear Sir, do remember me if--

MANDERS. [Rising.] Yes, yes, certainly, Miss Engstrand. REGINA. For if I--

MANDERS. Will you be so good as to tell your mistress I am here? REGINA. I will, at once, sir. [She goes out to the left.] MANDERS. [Paces the room two or three times, stands a moment in the
background with his hands behind his back, and looks out over the
garden. Then he returns to the table, takes up a book, and looks at the
title-page; starts, and looks at several books.] Ha--indeed! [MRS. ALVING enters by the door on the left; she is followed by REGINA,
who immediately goes out by the first door on the right.] MRS. ALVING. [Holds out her hand.] Welcome, my dear Pastor. MANDERS. How do you do, Mrs. Alving? Here I am as I promised. MRS. ALVING. Always punctual to the minute. MANDERS. You may believe it was not so easy for me to get away. With all
the Boards and Committees I belong to--

MRS. ALVING. That makes it all the kinder of you to come so early. Now we can get through our business before dinner. But where is your
portmanteau? MANDERS. [Quickly.] I left it down at the inn. I shall sleep there
to-night. MRS. ALVING. [Suppressing a smile.] Are you really not to be persuaded,
even now, to pass the night under my roof? MANDERS. No, no, Mrs. Alving; many thanks. I shall stay at the inn, as
usual. It is so conveniently near the landing-stage. MRS. ALVING. Well, you must have your own way. But I really should have
thought we two old people--

MANDERS. Now you are making fun of me. Ah, you're naturally in great
spirits to-day--what with to-morrow's festival and Oswald's return. MRS. ALVING. Yes; you can think what a delight it is to me! It's more
than two years since he was home last. And now he has promised to stay
with me all the winter. MANDERS. Has he really? That is very nice and dutiful of him. For I can
well believe that life in Rome and Paris has very different attractions
from any we can offer here. MRS. ALVING. Ah, but here he has his mother, you see. My own darling
boy--he hasn't forgotten his old mother! MANDERS. It would be grievous indeed, if absence and absorption in art
and that sort of thing were to blunt his natural feelings. MRS. ALVING. Yes, you may well say so. But there's nothing of that sort
to fear with him. I'm quite curious to see whether you know him again. He'll be down presently; he's upstairs just now, resting a little on the
sofa. But do sit down, my dear Pastor. MANDERS. Thank you. Are you quite at liberty--? MRS. ALVING. Certainly. [She sits by the table.] MANDERS. Very well. Then let me show you--[He goes to the chair where
his travelling-bag lies, takes out a packet of papers, sits down on
the opposite side of the table, and tries to find a clear space for
the papers.] Now, to begin with, here is--[Breaking off.] Tell me, Mrs.
Alving, how do these books come to be here? MRS. ALVING. These books? They are books I am reading. MANDERS. Do you read this sort of literature? MRS. ALVING. Certainly I do. MANDERS. Do you feel better or happier for such reading? MRS. ALVING. I feel, so to speak, more secure. MANDERS. That is strange. How do you mean? MRS. ALVING. Well, I seem to find explanation and confirmation of all
sorts of things I myself have been thinking. For that is the wonderful
part of it, Pastor Manders--there is really nothing new in these books,
nothing but what most people think and believe. Only most people either
don't formulate it to themselves, or else keep quiet about it. MANDERS. Great heavens! Do you really believe that most people--? MRS. ALVING. I do, indeed. MANDERS. But surely not in this country? Not here among us? MRS. ALVING. Yes, certainly; here as elsewhere. MANDERS. Well, I really must say--! MRS. ALVING. For the rest, what do you object to in these books? MANDERS. Object to in them? You surely do not suppose that I have
nothing better to do than to study such publications as these? MRS. ALVING. That is to say, you know nothing of what you are
condemning? MANDERS. I have read enough about these writings to disapprove of them. MRS. ALVING. Yes; but your own judgment--

MANDERS. My dear Mrs. Alving, there are many occasions in life when one
must rely upon others. Things are so ordered in this world; and it is
well that they are. Otherwise, what would become of society? MRS. ALVING. Well, well, I daresay you're right there. MANDERS. Besides, I of course do not deny that there may be much that
is attractive in such books. Nor can I blame you for wishing to keep
up with the intellectual movements that are said to be going on in the
great world-where you have let your son pass so much of his life. But--

MRS. ALVING. But? MANDERS. [Lowering his voice.] But one should not talk about it, Mrs.
Alving. One is certainly not bound to account to everybody for what one
reads and thinks within one's own four walls. MRS. ALVING. Of course not; I quite agree with you. MANDERS. Only think, now, how you are bound to consider the interests
of this Orphanage, which you decided on founding at a time when--if
I understand you rightly--you thought very differently on spiritual
matters. MRS. ALVING. Oh, yes; I quite admit that. But it was about the
Orphanage--

MANDERS. It was about the Orphanage we were to speak; yes. All I say
is: prudence, my dear lady! And now let us get to business. [Opens the
packet, and takes out a number of papers.] Do you see these? MRS. ALVING. The documents? MANDERS. All--and in perfect order. I can tell you it was hard work to
get them in time. I had to put on strong pressure. The authorities are
almost morbidly scrupulous when there is any decisive step to be taken. But here they are at last. [Looks through the bundle.] See! here is the
formal deed of gift of the parcel of ground known as Solvik in the Manor
of Rosenvold, with all the newly constructed buildings, schoolrooms,
master's house, and chapel. And here is the legal fiat for the endowment
and for the Bye-laws of the Institution. Will you look at them? [Reads.] "Bye-laws for the Children's Home to be known as 'Captain Alving's
Foundation.'" MRS. ALVING. (Looks long at the paper.) So there it is. MANDERS. I have chosen the designation "Captain" rather than
"Chamberlain." "Captain" looks less pretentious. MRS. ALVING. Oh, yes; just as you think best. MANDERS. And here you have the Bank Account of the capital lying at
interest to cover the current expenses of the Orphanage. MRS. ALVING. Thank you; but please keep it--it will be more convenient. MANDERS. With pleasure. I think we will leave the money in the Bank for
the present. The interest is certainly not what we could wish--four per
cent. and six months' notice of withdrawal. If a good mortgage could
be found later on--of course it must be a first mortgage and an
unimpeachable security--then we could consider the matter. MRS. ALVING. Certainly, my dear Pastor Manders. You are the best judge
in these things. MANDERS. I will keep my eyes open at any rate.--But now there is one
thing more which I have several times been intending to ask you. MRS. ALVING. And what is that? MANDERS. Shall the Orphanage buildings be insured or not? MRS. ALVING. Of course they must be insured. MANDERS. Well, wait a moment, Mrs. Alving. Let us look into the matter a
little more closely. MRS. ALVING. I have everything insured; buildings and movables and stock
and crops. MANDERS. Of course you have--on your own estate. And so have I--of
course. But here, you see, it is quite another matter. The Orphanage is
to be consecrated, as it were, to a higher purpose. MRS. ALVING. Yes, but that's no reason--

MANDERS. For my own part, I should certainly not see the smallest
impropriety in guarding against all contingencies--

MRS. ALVING. No, I should think not. MANDERS. But what is the general feeling in the neighbourhood? You, of
course, know better than I.

MRS. ALVING. Well--the general feeling--

MANDERS. Is there any considerable number of people--really responsible
people--who might be scandalised? MRS. ALVING. What do you mean by "really responsible people"? MANDERS. Well, I mean people in such independent and influential
positions that one cannot help attaching some weight to their opinions. MRS. ALVING. There are several people of that sort here, who would very
likely be shocked if--

MANDERS. There, you see! In town we have many such people. Think of all
my colleague's adherents! People would be only too ready to interpret
our action as a sign that neither you nor I had the right faith in a
Higher Providence. MRS. ALVING. But for your own part, my dear Pastor, you can at least
tell yourself that--

MANDERS. Yes, I know--I know; my conscience would be quite easy, that
is true enough. But nevertheless we should not escape grave
misinterpretation; and that might very likely react unfavourably upon
the Orphanage. MRS. ALVING. Well, in that case--

MANDERS. Nor can I entirely lose sight of the difficult--I may even say
painful--position in which _I_ might perhaps be placed. In the leading
circles of the town, people take a lively interest in this Orphanage. It
is, of course, founded partly for the benefit of the town, as well;
and it is to be hoped it will, to a considerable extent, result in
lightening our Poor Rates. Now, as I have been your adviser, and have
had the business arrangements in my hands, I cannot but fear that I may
have to bear the brunt of fanaticism--

MRS. ALVING. Oh, you mustn't run the risk of that. MANDERS. To say nothing of the attacks that would assuredly be made upon
me in certain papers and periodicals, which--

MRS. ALVING. Enough, my dear Pastor Manders. That consideration is quite
decisive. MANDERS. Then you do not wish the Orphanage to be insured? MRS. ALVING. No. We will let it alone. MANDERS. [Leaning hack in his chair.] But if, now, a disaster were to
happen? One can never tell--Should you be able to make good the damage? MRS. ALVING. No; I tell you plainly I should do nothing of the kind. MANDERS. Then I must tell you, Mrs. Alving--we are taking no small
responsibility upon ourselves. MRS. ALVING. Do you think we can do otherwise? MANDERS. No, that is just the point; we really cannot do otherwise. We
ought not to expose ourselves to misinterpretation; and we have no right
whatever to give offence to the weaker brethren. MRS. ALVING. You, as a clergyman, certainly should not. MANDERS. I really think, too, we may trust that such an institution has
fortune on its side; in fact, that it stands under a special providence. MRS. ALVING. Let us hope so, Pastor Manders. MANDERS. Then we will let it take its chance? MRS. ALVING. Yes, certainly. MANDERS. Very well. So be it. [Makes a note.] Then--no insurance. MRS. ALVING. It's odd that you should just happen to mention the matter
to-day--

MANDERS. I have often thought of asking you about it--

MRS. ALVING.--for we very nearly had a fire down there yesterday. MANDERS. You don't say so! MRS. ALVING. Oh, it was a trifling matter. A heap of shavings had caught
fire in the carpenter's workshop. MANDERS. Where Engstrand works? MRS. ALVING. Yes. They say he's often very careless with matches. MANDERS. He has so much on his mind, that man--so many things to fight
against. Thank God, he is now striving to lead a decent life, I hear. MRS. ALVING. Indeed! Who says so? MANDERS. He himself assures me of it. And he is certainly a capital
workman. MRS. ALVING. Oh, yes; so long as he's sober--

MANDERS. Ah, that melancholy weakness! But, a is often driven to it
by his injured leg, lie says,' Last time he was in town I was really
touched by him. He came and thanked me so warmly for having got him work
here, so that he might be near Regina. MRS. ALVING. He doesn't see much of her. MANDERS. Oh, yes; he has a talk with her every day. He told me so
himself. MRS. ALVING. Well, it may be so. MANDERS. He feels so acutely that he needs some one to keep a firm hold
on him when temptation comes. That is what I cannot help liking about
Jacob Engstrand: he comes to you so helplessly, accusing himself and
confessing his own weakness. The last time he was talking to me--Believe
me, Mrs. Alving, supposing it were a real necessity for him to have
Regina home again--

MRS. ALVING. [Rising hastily.] Regina! MANDERS.--you must not set yourself against it. MRS. ALVING. Indeed I shall set myself against it. And besides--Regina
is to have a position in the Orphanage. MANDERS. But, after all, remember he is her father--

MRS. ALVING. Oh, I know very well what sort of a father he has been to
her. No! She shall never go to him with my goodwill. MANDERS. [Rising.] My dear lady, don't take the matter so warmly. You
sadly misjudge poor Engstrand. You seem to be quite terrified--

MRS. ALVING. [More quietly.] It makes no difference. I have taken Regina
into my house, and there she shall stay. [Listens.] Hush, my dear Mr.
Manders; say no more about it. [Her face lights up with gladness.] Listen! there is Oswald coming downstairs. Now we'll think of no one but
him. [OSWALD ALVING, in a light overcoat, hat in hand, and smoking a large
meerschaum, enters by the door on the left; he stops in the doorway.] OSWALD. Oh, I beg your pardon; I thought you were in the study. [Comes
forward.] Good-morning, Pastor Manders. MANDERS. [Staring.] Ah--! How strange--! MRS. ALVING. Well now, what do you think of him, Mr. Manders? MANDERS. I--I--can it really be--? OSWALD. Yes, it's really the Prodigal Son, sir. MANDERS. [Protesting.] My dear young friend--

OSWALD. Well, then, the Lost Sheep Found. MRS. ALVING. Oswald is thinking of the time when you were so much
opposed to his becoming a painter. MANDERS. To our human eyes many a step seems dubious, which afterwards
proves--[Wrings his hand.] But first of all, welcome, welcome home! Do
not think, my dear Oswald--I suppose I may call you by your Christian
name? OSWALD. What else should you call me? MANDERS. Very good. What I wanted to say was this, my dear Oswald you
must not think that I utterly condemn the artist's calling. I have no
doubt there are many who can keep their inner self unharmed in that
profession, as in any other. OSWALD. Let us hope so. MRS. ALVING. [Beaming with delight.] I know one who has kept both his
inner and his outer self unharmed. Just look at him, Mr. Manders. OSWALD. [Moves restlessly about the room.] Yes, yes, my dear mother;
let's say no more about it. MANDERS. Why, certainly--that is undeniable. And you have begun to make
a name for yourself already. The newspapers have often spoken of you,
most favourably. Just lately, by-the-bye, I fancy I haven't seen your
name quite so often. OSWALD. [Up in the conservatory.] I haven't been able to paint so much
lately. MRS. ALVING. Even a painter needs a little rest now and then. MANDERS. No doubt, no doubt. And meanwhile he can be preparing himself
and mustering his forces for some great work. OSWALD. Yes.--Mother, will dinner soon be ready? MRS. ALVING. In less than half an hour. He has a capital appetite, thank
God. MANDERS. And a taste for tobacco, too. OSWALD. I found my father's pipe in my room--

MANDERS. Aha--then that accounts for it! MRS. ALVING. For what? MANDERS. When Oswald appeared there, in the doorway, with the pipe in
his mouth, I could have sworn I saw his father, large as life. OSWALD. No, really? MRS. ALVING. Oh, how can you say so? Oswald takes after me. MANDERS. Yes, but there is an expression about the corners of the
mouth--something about the lips--that reminds one exactly of Alving: at
any rate, now that he is smoking. MRS. ALVING. Not in the least. Oswald has rather a clerical curve about
his mouth, I think. MANDERS. Yes, yes; some of my colleagues have much the same expression. MRS. ALVING. But put your pipe away, my dear boy; I won't have smoking
in here. OSWALD. [Does so.] By all means. I only wanted to try it; for I once
smoked it when I was a child. MRS. ALVING. You? OSWALD. Yes. I was quite small at the time. I recollect I came up to
father's room one evening when he was in great spirits. MRS. ALVING. Oh, you can't recollect anything of those times. OSWALD. Yes, I recollect it distinctly. He took me on his knee, and gave
me the pipe. "Smoke, boy," he said; "smoke away, boy!" And I smoked
as hard as I could, until I felt I was growing quite pale, and the
perspiration stood in great drops on my forehead. Then he burst out
laughing heartily--

MANDERS. That was most extraordinary. MRS. ALVING. My dear friend, it's only something Oswald has dreamt. OSWALD. No, mother, I assure you I didn't dream it. For--don't you
remember this?--you came and carried me out into the nursery. Then I
was sick, and I saw that you were crying.--Did father often play such
practical jokes? MANDERS. In his youth he overflowed with the joy of life--

OSWALD. And yet he managed to do so much in the world; so much that was
good and useful; although he died so early. MANDERS. Yes, you have inherited the name of an energetic and admirable
man, my dear Oswald Alving. No doubt it will be an incentive to you--

OSWALD. It ought to, indeed. MANDERS. It was good of you to come home for the ceremony in his honour. OSWALD. I could do no less for my father. MRS. ALVING. And I am to keep him so long! That is the best of all. MANDERS. You are going to pass the winter at home, I hear. OSWALD. 