



Produced by Gary R. Young





THE JEW OF MALTA. By Christopher Marlowe

Edited By The Rev. Alexander Dyce. The Famous Tragedy of The Rich Iew of Malta. As it was playd before the
King and Qveene, in His Majesties Theatre at White-Hall, by her
Majesties Servants at the Cock-pit. Written by Christopher Marlo. London; Printed by I. B. for Nicholas Vavasour, and are to be sold at
his Shop in the Inner-Temple, neere the Church. 1633. 4to. TO MY WORTHY FRIEND, MASTER THOMAS HAMMON, of GRAY'S INN, ETC. This play, composed by so worthy an author as Master Marlowe, and the
part of the Jew presented by so unimitable an actor as Master Alleyn,
being in this later age commended to the stage; as I ushered it unto the
court, and presented it to the Cock-pit, with these Prologues and
Epilogues here inserted, so now being newly brought to the press, I was
loath it should be published without the ornament of an Epistle; making
choice of you unto whom to devote it; than whom (of all those gentlemen
and acquaintance within the compass of my long knowledge) there is none
more able to tax ignorance, or attribute right to merit. Sir, you have
been pleased to grace some of mine own works [1] with your courteous
patronage:  I hope this will not be the worse accepted, because
commended by me; over whom none can claim more power or privilege than
yourself. I had no better a new-year's gift to present you with;
receive it therefore as a continuance of that inviolable obligement, by
which he rests still engaged, who, as he ever hath, shall always remain,

     Tuissimus,
          Tho. Heywood. [2]





THE PROLOGUE SPOKEN AT COURT. Gracious and great, that we so boldly dare
     ('Mongst other plays that now in fashion are)
     To present this, writ many years agone,
     And in that age thought second unto none,
     We humbly crave your pardon. We pursue
     The story of a rich and famous Jew
     Who liv'd in Malta:  you shall find him still,
     In all his projects, a sound Machiavill;
     And that's his character. He that hath past
     So many censures [3] is now come at last
     To have your princely ears:  grace you him; then
     You crown the action, and renown the pen. EPILOGUE SPOKEN AT COURT. It is our fear, dread sovereign, we have bin [4]
     Too tedious; neither can't be less than sin
     To wrong your princely patience:  if we have,
     Thus low dejected, we your pardon crave;
     And, if aught here offend your ear or sight,
     We only act and speak what others write. THE PROLOGUE TO THE STAGE, AT THE COCK-PIT. We know not how our play may pass this stage,
     But by the best of poets [5] in that age
     THE MALTA-JEW had being and was made;
     And he then by the best of actors [6] play'd:
     In HERO AND LEANDER [7] one did gain
     A lasting memory; in Tamburlaine,
     This Jew, with others many, th' other wan
     The attribute of peerless, being a man
     Whom we may rank with (doing no one wrong)
     Proteus for shapes, and Roscius for a tongue,--
     So could he speak, so vary; nor is't hate
     To merit in him [8] who doth personate
     Our Jew this day; nor is it his ambition
     To exceed or equal, being of condition
     More modest:  this is all that he intends,
     (And that too at the urgence of some friends,)
     To prove his best, and, if none here gainsay it,
     The part he hath studied, and intends to play it. EPILOGUE TO THE STAGE, AT THE COCK-PIT. In graving with Pygmalion to contend,
     Or painting with Apelles, doubtless the end
     Must be disgrace:  our actor did not so,--
     He only aim'd to go, but not out-go. Nor think that this day any prize was play'd; [9]
     Here were no bets at all, no wagers laid: [10]
     All the ambition that his mind doth swell,
     Is but to hear from you (by me) 'twas well. DRAMATIS PERSONAE. FERNEZE, governor of Malta. LODOWICK, his son. SELIM CALYMATH, son to the Grand Seignior. MARTIN DEL BOSCO, vice-admiral of Spain. MATHIAS, a gentleman. JACOMO,     |
     BARNARDINE, | friars. BARABAS, a wealthy Jew. ITHAMORE, a slave. PILIA-BORZA, a bully, attendant to BELLAMIRA. Two Merchants. Three Jews. Knights, Bassoes, Officers, Guard, Slaves, Messenger,
          and Carpenters

     KATHARINE, mother to MATHIAS. ABIGAIL, daughter to BARABAS. BELLAMIRA, a courtezan. Abbess. Nun. MACHIAVEL as Prologue speaker. Scene, Malta. THE JEW OF MALTA. Enter MACHIAVEL. MACHIAVEL. Albeit the world think Machiavel is dead,
     Yet was his soul but flown beyond the Alps;
     And, now the Guise [11] is dead, is come from France,
     To view this land, and frolic with his friends. To some perhaps my name is odious;
     But such as love me, guard me from their tongues,
     And let them know that I am Machiavel,
     And weigh not men, and therefore not men's words. Admir'd I am of those that hate me most:
     Though some speak openly against my books,
     Yet will they read me, and thereby attain
     To Peter's chair; and, when they cast me off,
     Are poison'd by my climbing followers. I count religion but a childish toy,
     And hold there is no sin but ignorance. Birds of the air will tell of murders past! I am asham'd to hear such fooleries. Many will talk of title to a crown:
     What right had Caesar to the empery? [12]
     Might first made kings, and laws were then most sure
     When, like the Draco's, [13] they were writ in blood. Hence comes it that a strong-built citadel
     Commands much more than letters can import:
     Which maxim had [14] Phalaris observ'd,
     H'ad never bellow'd, in a brazen bull,
     Of great ones' envy:  o' the poor petty wights
     Let me be envied and not pitied. But whither am I bound? I come not, I,
     To read a lecture here [15] in Britain,
     But to present the tragedy of a Jew,
     Who smiles to see how full his bags are cramm'd;
     Which money was not got without my means. I crave but this,--grace him as he deserves,
     And let him not be entertain'd the worse
     Because he favours me. [Exit.] ACT I. [16]

          BARABAS discovered in his counting-house, with heaps
          of gold before him. BARABAS. So that of thus much that return was made;
     And of the third part of the Persian ships
     There was the venture summ'd and satisfied. As for those Samnites, [17] and the men of Uz,
     That bought my Spanish oils and wines of Greece,
     Here have I purs'd their paltry silverlings. [18]
     Fie, what a trouble 'tis to count this trash! Well fare the Arabians, who so richly pay
     The things they traffic for with wedge of gold,
     Whereof a man may easily in a day
     Tell [19] that which may maintain him all his life. The needy groom, that never finger'd groat,
     Would make a miracle of thus much coin;
     But he whose steel-barr'd coffers are cramm'd full,
     And all his life-time hath been tired,
     Wearying his fingers' ends with telling it,
     Would in his age be loath to labour so,
     And for a pound to sweat himself to death. Give me the merchants of the Indian mines,
     That trade in metal of the purest mould;
     The wealthy Moor, that in the eastern rocks
     Without control can pick his riches up,
     And in his house heap pearl like pebble-stones,
     Receive them free, and sell them by the weight;
     Bags of fiery opals, sapphires, amethysts,
     Jacinths, hard topaz, grass-green emeralds,
     Beauteous rubies, sparkling diamonds,
     And seld-seen [20] costly stones of so great price,
     As one of them, indifferently rated,
     And of a carat of this quantity,
     May serve, in peril of calamity,
     To ransom great kings from captivity. This is the ware wherein consists my wealth;
     And thus methinks should men of judgment frame
     Their means of traffic from the vulgar trade,
     And, as their wealth increaseth, so inclose
     Infinite riches in a little room. But now how stands the wind? Into what corner peers my halcyon's bill? [21]
     Ha! to the east? yes. See how stand the vanes--
     East and by south:  why, then, I hope my ships
     I sent for Egypt and the bordering isles
     Are gotten up by Nilus' winding banks;
     Mine argosy from Alexandria,
     Loaden with spice and silks, now under sail,
     Are smoothly gliding down by Candy-shore
     To Malta, through our Mediterranean sea.--
     But who comes here? Enter a MERCHANT. How now! MERCHANT. Barabas, thy ships are safe,
     Riding in Malta-road; and all the merchants
     With other merchandise are safe arriv'd,
     And have sent me to know whether yourself
     Will come and custom them. [22]

     BARABAS. The ships are safe thou say'st, and richly fraught? MERCHANT. They are. BARABAS. Why, then, go bid them come ashore,
     And bring with them their bills of entry:
     I hope our credit in the custom-house
     Will serve as well as I were present there. Go send 'em threescore camels, thirty mules,
     And twenty waggons, to bring up the ware. But art thou master in a ship of mine,
     And is thy credit not enough for that? MERCHANT. The very custom barely comes to more
     Than many merchants of the town are worth,
     And therefore far exceeds my credit, sir. BARABAS. Go tell 'em the Jew of Malta sent thee, man:
     Tush, who amongst 'em knows not Barabas? MERCHANT. I go. BARABAS. So, then, there's somewhat come.--
     Sirrah, which of my ships art thou master of? MERCHANT. Of the Speranza, sir. BARABAS. And saw'st thou not
     Mine argosy at Alexandria? Thou couldst not come from Egypt, or by Caire,
     But at the entry there into the sea,
     Where Nilus pays his tribute to the main,
     Thou needs must sail by Alexandria. MERCHANT. I neither saw them, nor inquir'd of them:
     But this we heard some of our seamen say,
     They wonder'd how you durst with so much wealth
     Trust such a crazed vessel, and so far. BARABAS. Tush, they are wise! I know her and her strength. But [23] go, go thou thy ways, discharge thy ship,
     And bid my factor bring his loading in. [Exit MERCHANT.] And yet I wonder at this argosy. Enter a Second MERCHANT. SECOND MERCHANT. Thine argosy from Alexandria,
     Know, Barabas, doth ride in Malta-road,
     Laden with riches, and exceeding store
     Of Persian silks, of gold, and orient pearl. BARABAS. How chance you came not with those other ships
     That sail'd by Egypt? SECOND MERCHANT. Sir, we saw 'em not. BARABAS. Belike they coasted round by Candy-shore
     About their oils or other businesses. But 'twas ill done of you to come so far
     Without the aid or conduct of their ships. SECOND MERCHANT. Sir, we were wafted by a Spanish fleet,
     That never left us till within a league,
     That had the galleys of the Turk in chase. BARABAS. O, they were going up to Sicily. Well, go,
     And bid the merchants and my men despatch,
     And come ashore, and see the fraught [24] discharg'd. SECOND MERCHANT. I go. [Exit.] BARABAS. Thus trolls our fortune in by land and sea,
     And thus are we on every side enrich'd:
     These are the blessings promis'd to the Jews,
     And herein was old Abraham's happiness:
     What more may heaven do for earthly man
     Than thus to pour out plenty in their laps,
     Ripping the bowels of the earth for them,
     Making the sea[s] their servants, and the winds
     To drive their substance with successful blasts? Who hateth me but for my happiness? Or who is honour'd now but for his wealth? Rather had I, a Jew, be hated thus,
     Than pitied in a Christian poverty;
     For I can see no fruits in all their faith,
     But malice, falsehood, and excessive pride,
     Which methinks fits not their profession. Haply some hapless man hath conscience,
     And for his conscience lives in beggary. They say we are a scatter'd nation:
     I cannot tell; but we have scambled [25] up
     More wealth by far than those that brag of faith:
     There's Kirriah Jairim, the great Jew of Greece,
     Obed in Bairseth, Nones in Portugal,
     Myself in Malta, some in Italy,
     Many in France, and wealthy every one;
     Ay, wealthier far than any Christian. I must confess we come not to be kings:
     That's not our fault:  alas, our number's few! And crowns come either by succession,
     Or urg'd by force; and nothing violent,
     Oft have I heard tell, can be permanent. Give us a peaceful rule; make Christians kings,
     That thirst so much for principality. I have no charge, nor many children,
     But one sole daughter, whom I hold as dear
     As Agamemnon did his Iphigen;
     And all I have is hers.--But who comes here? Enter three JEWS. [26]

     FIRST JEW. Tush, tell not me; 'twas done of policy. SECOND JEW. Come, therefore, let us go to Barabas;
     For he can counsel best in these affairs:
     And here he comes. BARABAS. Why, how now, countrymen! Why flock you thus to me in multitudes? What accident's betided to the Jews? FIRST JEW. A fleet of warlike galleys, Barabas,
     Are come from Turkey, and lie in our road:
     And they this day sit in the council-house
     To entertain them and their embassy. BARABAS. Why, let 'em come, so they come not to war;
     Or let 'em war, so we be conquerors.--
     Nay, let 'em combat, conquer, and kill all,
     So they spare me, my daughter, and my wealth. [Aside.] FIRST JEW. Were it for confirmation of a league,
     They would not come in warlike manner thus. SECOND JEW. I fear their coming will afflict us all. BARABAS. Fond [27] men, what dream you of their multitudes? What need they treat of peace that are in league? The Turks and those of Malta are in league:
     Tut, tut, there is some other matter in't. FIRST JEW. Why, Barabas, they come for peace or war. BARABAS. Haply for neither, but to pass along,
     Towards Venice, by the Adriatic sea,
     With whom they have attempted many times,
     But never could effect their stratagem. THIRD JEW. And very wisely said; it may be so. SECOND JEW. But there's a meeting in the senate-house,
     And all the Jews in Malta must be there. BARABAS. Hum,--all the Jews in Malta must be there! Ay, like enough:  why, then, let every man
     Provide him, and be there for fashion-sake. If any thing shall there concern our state,
     Assure yourselves I'll look--unto myself. [Aside.] [28]

     FIRST JEW. I know you will.--Well, brethren, let us go. SECOND JEW. Let's take our leaves.--Farewell, good Barabas. BARABAS. [29] Farewell, Zaareth; farewell, Temainte. [Exeunt JEWS.] And, Barabas, now search this secret out;
     Summon thy senses, call thy wits together:
     These silly men mistake the matter clean. Long to the Turk did Malta contribute;
     Which tribute all in policy, I fear,
     The Turk has [30] let increase to such a sum
     As all the wealth of Malta cannot pay;
     And now by that advantage thinks, belike,
     To seize upon the town; ay, that he seeks. Howe'er the world go, I'll make sure for one,
     And seek in time to intercept the worst,
     Warily guarding that which I ha' got:
     Ego mihimet sum semper proximus: [31]
     Why, let 'em enter, let 'em take the town. [Exit.] [32]

          Enter FERNEZE governor of Malta, KNIGHTS, and OFFICERS;
          met by CALYMATH, and BASSOES of the TURK. FERNEZE. Now, bassoes, [33] what demand you at our hands? FIRST BASSO. Know, knights of Malta, that we came from Rhodes,
     ]From Cyprus, Candy, and those other isles
     That lie betwixt the Mediterranean seas. FERNEZE. What's Cyprus, Candy, and those other isles
     To us or Malta? what at our hands demand ye? CALYMATH. The ten years' tribute that remains unpaid. FERNEZE. Alas, my lord, the sum is over-great! I hope your highness will consider us. CALYMATH. I wish, grave governor, [34] 'twere in my power
     To favour you; but 'tis my father's cause,
     Wherein I may not, nay, I dare not dally. FERNEZE. Then give us leave, great Selim Calymath. CALYMATH. Stand all aside, [35] and let the knights determine;
     And send to keep our galleys under sail,
     For happily [36] we shall not tarry here.--
     Now, governor, how are you resolv'd? FERNEZE. Thus; since your hard conditions are such
     That you will needs have ten years' tribute past,
     We may have time to make collection
     Amongst the inhabitants of Malta for't. FIRST BASSO. That's more than is in our commission. CALYMATH. What, Callapine! a little courtesy:
     Let's know their time; perhaps it is not long;
     And 'tis more kingly to obtain by peace
     Than to enforce conditions by constraint.--
     What respite ask you, governor? FERNEZE. But a month. CALYMATH. We grant a month; but see you keep your promise. Now launch our galleys back again to sea,
     Where we'll attend the respite you have ta'en,
     And for the money send our messenger. Farewell, great governor, and brave knights of Malta. FERNEZE. And all good fortune wait on Calymath! [Exeunt CALYMATH and BASSOES.] Go one and call those Jews of Malta hither:
     Were they not summon'd to appear to-day? FIRST OFFICER. They were, my lord; and here they come. Enter BARABAS and three JEWS. FIRST KNIGHT. Have you determin'd what to say to them? FERNEZE. Yes; give me leave:--and, Hebrews, now come near. ]From the Emperor of Turkey is arriv'd
     Great Selim Calymath, his highness' son,
     To levy of us ten years' tribute past:
     Now, then, here know that it concerneth us. BARABAS. Then, good my lord, to keep your quiet still,
     Your lordship shall do well to let them have it. FERNEZE. Soft, Barabas! there's more 'longs to't than so. To what this ten years' tribute will amount,
     That we have cast, but cannot compass it
     By reason of the wars, that robb'd our store;
     And therefore are we to request your aid. BARABAS. Alas, my lord, we are no soldiers! And what's our aid against so great a prince? FIRST KNIGHT. Tut, Jew, we know thou art no soldier:
     Thou art a merchant and a money'd man,
     And 'tis thy money, Barabas, we seek. BARABAS. How, my lord! my money! FERNEZE. Thine and the rest;
     For, to be short, amongst you't must be had. FIRST JEW. Alas, my lord, the most of us are poor! FERNEZE. Then let the rich increase your portions. BARABAS. Are strangers with your tribute to be tax'd? SECOND KNIGHT. Have strangers leave with us to get their wealth? Then let them with us contribute. BARABAS. How! equally? FERNEZE. No, Jew, like infidels;
     For through our sufferance of your hateful lives,
     Who stand accursed in the sight of heaven,
     These taxes and afflictions are befall'n,
     And therefore thus we are determined.--
     Read there the articles of our decrees. OFFICER. [37] [reads] FIRST, THE TRIBUTE-MONEY OF THE TURKS
     SHALL ALL BE LEVIED AMONGST THE JEWS, AND EACH OF THEM TO PAY
     ONE HALF OF HIS ESTATE. BARABAS. How! half his estate!--I hope you mean not mine. [Aside.] FERNEZE. Read on. OFFICER. [reads] SECONDLY, HE THAT DENIES [38] TO PAY, SHALL
     STRAIGHT-BECOME A CHRISTIAN. BARABAS. How! a Christian!--Hum,--what's here to do? [Aside.] OFFICER. [reads] LASTLY, HE THAT DENIES THIS, SHALL ABSOLUTELY
     LOSE ALL HE HAS. THREE JEWS. O my lord, we will give half! BARABAS. O earth-mettled villains, and no Hebrews born! And will you basely thus submit yourselves
     To leave your goods to their arbitrement? FERNEZE. Why, Barabas, wilt thou be christened? BARABAS. No, governor, I will be no convertite. [39]

     FERNEZE. Then pay thy half. BARABAS. Why, know you what you did by this device? Half of my substance is a city's wealth. Governor, it was not got so easily;
     Nor will I part so slightly therewithal. FERNEZE. Sir, half is the penalty of our decree;
     Either pay that, or we will seize on all. BARABAS. Corpo di Dio! stay:  you shall have half;
     Let me be us'd but as my brethren are. FERNEZE. No, Jew, thou hast denied the articles,
     And now it cannot be recall'd. [Exeunt OFFICERS, on a sign from FERNEZE]

     BARABAS. Will you, then, steal my goods? Is theft the ground of your religion? FERNEZE. No, Jew; we take particularly thine,
     To save the ruin of a multitude:
     And better one want for a common good,
     Than many perish for a private man:
     Yet, Barabas, we will not banish thee,
     But here in Malta, where thou gott'st thy wealth,
     Live still; and, if thou canst, get more. BARABAS. Christians, what or how can I multiply? Of naught is nothing made. FIRST KNIGHT. From naught at first thou cam'st to little wealth,
     ]From little unto more, from more to most:
     If your first curse fall heavy on thy head,
     And make thee poor and scorn'd of all the world,
     'Tis not our fault, but thy inherent sin. BARABAS. What, bring you Scripture to confirm your wrongs? Preach me not out of my possessions. Some Jews are wicked, as all Christians are:
     But say the tribe that I descended of
     Were all in general cast away for sin,
     Shall I be tried by their transgression? The man that dealeth righteously shall live;
     And which of you can charge me otherwise? FERNEZE. Out, wretched Barabas! Sham'st thou not thus to justify thyself,
     As if we knew not thy profession? If thou rely upon thy righteousness,
     Be patient, and thy riches will increase. Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness;
     And covetousness, O, 'tis a monstrous sin! BARABAS. Ay, but theft is worse:  tush! take not from me, then,
     For that is theft; and, if you rob me thus,
     I must be forc'd to steal, and compass more. FIRST KNIGHT. Grave governor, list not to his exclaims:
     Convert his mansion to a nunnery;
     His house will harbour many holy nuns. FERNEZE. It shall be so. Re-enter OFFICERS. Now, officers, have you done? FIRST OFFICER. Ay, my lord, we have seiz'd upon the goods
     And wares of Barabas, which, being valu'd,
     Amount to more than all the wealth in Malta:
     And of the other we have seized half. FERNEZE. Then we'll take [40] order for the residue. BARABAS. Well, then, my lord, say, are you satisfied? You have my goods, my money, and my wealth,
     My ships, my store, and all that I enjoy'd;
     And, having all, you can request no more,
     Unless your unrelenting flinty hearts
     Suppress all pity in your stony breasts,
     And now shall move you to bereave my life. FERNEZE. No, Barabas; to stain our hands with blood
     Is far from us and our profession. BARABAS. Why, I esteem the injury far less,
     To take the lives of miserable men
     Than be the causers of their misery. You have my wealth, the labour of my life,
     The comfort of mine age, my children's hope;
     And therefore ne'er distinguish of the wrong. FERNEZE. Content thee, Barabas; thou hast naught but right. BARABAS. Your extreme right does me exceeding wrong:
     But take it to you, i'the devil's name! FERNEZE. Come, let us in, and gather of these goods
     The money for this tribute of the Turk. FIRST KNIGHT. 'Tis necessary that be look'd unto;
     For, if we break our day, we break the league,
     And that will prove but simple policy. [Exeunt all except BARABAS and the three JEWS.] BARABAS. Ay, policy! that's their profession,
     And not simplicity, as they suggest.--
     The plagues of Egypt, and the curse of heaven,
     Earth's barrenness, and all men's hatred,
     Inflict upon them, thou great Primus Motor! And here upon my knees, striking the earth,
     I ban their souls to everlasting pains,
     And extreme tortures of the fiery deep,
     That thus have dealt with me in my distress! FIRST JEW. O, yet be patient, gentle Barabas! BARABAS. O silly brethren, born to see this day,
     Why stand you thus unmov'd with my laments? Why weep you not to think upon my wrongs? Why pine not I, and die in this distress? FIRST JEW. Why, Barabas, as hardly can we brook
     The cruel handling of ourselves in this:
     Thou seest they have taken half our goods. BARABAS. Why did you yield to their extortion? You were a multitude, and I but one;
     And of me only have they taken all. FIRST JEW. Yet, brother Barabas, remember Job. BARABAS. What tell you me of Job? I wot his wealth
     Was written thus; he had seven thousand sheep,
     Three thousand camels, and two hundred yoke
     Of labouring oxen, and five hundred
     She-asses:  but for every one of those,
     Had they been valu'd at indifferent rate,
     I had at home, and in mine argosy,
     And other ships that came from Egypt last,
     As much as would have bought his beasts and him,
     And yet have kept enough to live upon;
     So that not he, but I, may curse the day,
     Thy fatal birth-day, forlorn Barabas;
     And henceforth wish for an eternal night,
     That clouds of darkness may inclose my flesh,
     And hide these extreme sorrows from mine eyes;
     For only I have toil'd to inherit here
     The months of vanity, and loss of time,
     And painful nights, have been appointed me. SECOND JEW. Good Barabas, be patient. BARABAS. Ay, I pray, leave me in my patience. You, that
     Were ne'er possess'd of wealth, are pleas'd with want;
     But give him liberty at least to mourn,
     That in a field, amidst his enemies,
     Doth see his soldiers slain, himself disarm'd,
     And knows no means of his recovery:
     Ay, let me sorrow for this sudden chance;
     'Tis in the trouble of my spirit I speak:
     Great injuries are not so soon forgot. FIRST JEW. Come, let us leave him; in his ireful mood
     Our words will but increase his ecstasy. [41]

     SECOND JEW. On, then:  but, trust me, 'tis a misery
     To see a man in such affliction.--
     Farewell, Barabas. BARABAS. Ay, fare you well. [Exeunt three JEWS.] [42]
     See the simplicity of these base slaves,
     Who, for the villains have no wit themselves,
     Think me to be a senseless lump of clay,
     That will with every water wash to dirt! No, Barabas is born to better chance,
     And fram'd of finer mould than common men,
     That measure naught but by the present time. A reaching thought will search his deepest wits,
     And cast with cunning for the time to come;
     For evils are apt to happen every day. Enter ABIGAIL. But whither wends my beauteous Abigail? O, what has made my lovely daughter sad? What, woman! moan not for a little loss;
     Thy father has enough in store for thee. ABIGAIL. Nor for myself, but aged Barabas,
     Father, for thee lamenteth Abigail:
     But I will learn to leave these fruitless tears;
     And, urg'd thereto with my afflictions,
     With fierce exclaims run to the senate-house,
     And in the senate reprehend them all,
     And rent their hearts with tearing of my hair,
     Till they reduce [43] the wrongs done to my father. BARABAS. No, Abigail; things past recovery
     Are hardly cur'd with exclamations:
     Be silent, daughter; sufferance breeds ease,
     And time may yield us an occasion,
     Which on the sudden cannot serve the turn. Besides, my girl, think me not all so fond [44]
     As negligently to forgo so much
     Without provision for thyself and me:
     Ten thousand portagues, [45] besides great pearls,
     Rich costly jewels, and stones infinite,
     Fearing the worst of this before it fell,
     I closely hid. ABIGAIL. Where, father? BARABAS. In my house, my girl. ABIGAIL. Then shall they ne'er be seen of Barabas;
     For they have seiz'd upon thy house and wares. BARABAS. But they will give me leave once more, I trow,
     To go into my house. ABIGAIL. That may they not;
     For there I left the governor placing nuns,
     Displacing me; and of thy house they mean
     To make a nunnery, where none but their own sect [46]
     Must enter in; men generally barr'd. BARABAS. My gold, my gold, and all my wealth is gone!--
     You partial heavens, have I deserv'd this plague? What, will you thus oppose me, luckless stars,
     To make me desperate in my poverty? And, knowing me impatient in distress,
     Think me so mad as I will hang myself,
     That I may vanish o'er the earth in air,
     And leave no memory that e'er I was? No, I will live; nor loathe I this my life:
     And, since you leave me in the ocean thus
     To sink or swim, and put me to my shifts,
     I'll rouse my senses, and awake myself.--
     Daughter, I have it:  thou perceiv'st the plight
     Wherein these Christians have oppressed me:
     Be rul'd by me, for in extremity
     We ought to make bar of no policy. ABIGAIL. Father, whate'er it be, to injure them
     That have so manifestly wronged us,
     What will not Abigail attempt? BARABAS. Why, so. Then thus:  thou told'st me they have turn'd my house
     Into a nunnery, and some nuns are there? ABIGAIL. I did. BARABAS. Then, Abigail, there must my girl
     Entreat the abbess to be entertain'd. ABIGAIL. How! as a nun? BARABAS. Ay, daughter; for religion
     Hides many mischiefs from suspicion. ABIGAIL. Ay, but, father, they will suspect me there. BARABAS. Let 'em suspect; but be thou so precise
     As they may think it done of holiness:
     Entreat 'em fair, and give them friendly speech,
     And seem to them as if thy sins were great,
     Till thou hast gotten to be entertain'd. ABIGAIL. Thus, father, shall I much dissemble. BARABAS. Tush! As good dissemble that thou never mean'st,
     As first mean truth and then dissemble it:
     A counterfeit profession is better
     Than unseen hypocrisy. ABIGAIL. Well, father, say I be entertain'd,
     What then shall follow? BARABAS. This shall follow then. There have I hid, close underneath the plank
     That runs along the upper-chamber floor,
     The gold and jewels which I kept for thee:--
     But here they come:  be cunning, Abigail. ABIGAIL. Then, father, go with me. BARABAS. No, Abigail, in this
     It is not necessary I be seen;
     For I will seem offended with thee for't:
     Be close, my girl, for this must fetch my gold. [They retire.] Enter FRIAR JACOMO, [47] FRIAR BARNARDINE, ABBESS, and a NUN. FRIAR JACOMO. Sisters,
     We now are almost at the new-made nunnery. ABBESS. [48] The better; for we love not to be seen:
     'Tis thirty winters long since some of us
     Did stray so far amongst the multitude. FRIAR JACOMO. But, madam, this house
     And waters of this new-made nunnery
     Will much delight you. ABBESS. It may be so.--But who comes here? [ABIGAIL comes forward.] ABIGAIL. Grave abbess, and you happy virgins' guide,
     Pity the state of a distressed maid! ABBESS. What art thou, daughter? ABIGAIL. The hopeless daughter of a hapless Jew,
     The Jew of Malta, wretched Barabas,
     Sometimes [49] the owner of a goodly house,
     Which they have now turn'd to a nunnery. ABBESS. Well, daughter, say, what is thy suit with us? ABIGAIL. Fearing the afflictions which my father feels
     Proceed from sin or want of faith in us,
     I'd pass away my life in penitence,
     And be a novice in your nunnery,
     To make atonement for my labouring soul. FRIAR JACOMO. No doubt, brother, but this proceedeth of
     the spirit. FRIAR BARNARDINE. Ay, and of a moving spirit too, brother:  but come,
     Let us entreat she may be entertain'd. ABBESS. Well, daughter, we admit you for a nun. ABIGAIL. First let me as a novice learn to frame
     My solitary life to your strait laws,
     And let me lodge where I was wont to lie:
     I do not doubt, by your divine precepts
     And mine own industry, but to profit much. BARABAS. As much, I hope, as all I hid is worth. [Aside.] ABBESS. Come, daughter, follow us. BARABAS. [coming forward] Why, how now, Abigail! What mak'st thou 'mongst these hateful Christians? FRIAR JACOMO. Hinder her not, thou man of little faith,
     For she has mortified herself. BARABAS. How! mortified! FRIAR JACOMO. And is admitted to the sisterhood. BARABAS. Child of perdition, and thy father's shame! What wilt thou do among these hateful fiends? I charge thee on my blessing that thou leave
     These devils and their damned heresy! ABIGAIL. Father, forgive me-- [50]

     BARABAS. Nay, back, Abigail,
     And think upon the jewels and the gold;
     The board is marked thus that covers it.--
          [Aside to ABIGAIL in a whisper.] Away, accursed, from thy father's sight! FRIAR JACOMO. Barabas, although thou art in misbelief,
     And wilt not see thine own afflictions,
     Yet let thy daughter be no longer blind. BARABAS. Blind friar, I reck not thy persuasions,--
     The board is marked thus [51] that covers it--
          [Aside to ABIGAIL in a whisper.] For I had rather die than see her thus.--
     Wilt thou forsake me too in my distress,
     Seduced daughter?--Go, forget not.-- [52]
          [Aside to her in a whisper.] Becomes it Jews to be so credulous?--
     To-morrow early I'll be at the door.--
          [Aside to her in a whisper.] No, come not at me; if thou wilt be damn'd,
     Forget me, see me not; and so, be gone!--
     Farewell; remember to-morrow morning.--
          [Aside to her in a whisper.] Out, out, thou wretch! [Exit, on one side, BARABAS. Exeunt, on the other side,
          FRIARS, ABBESS, NUN, and ABIGAIL:  and, as they are going
          out,]

          Enter MATHIAS. MATHIAS. Who's this? fair Abigail, the rich Jew's daughter,
     Become a nun! her father's sudden fall
     Has humbled her, and brought her down to this:
     Tut, she were fitter for a tale of love,
     Than to be tired out with orisons;
     And better would she far become a bed,
     Embraced in a friendly lover's arms,
     Than rise at midnight to a solemn mass. Enter LODOWICK. LODOWICK. Why, how now, Don Mathias! in a dump? MATHIAS. Believe me, noble Lodowick, I have seen
     The strangest sight, in my opinion,
     That ever I beheld. LODOWICK. What was't, I prithee? MATHIAS. A fair young maid, scarce fourteen years of age,
     The sweetest flower in Cytherea's field,
     Cropt from the pleasures of the fruitful earth,
     And strangely metamorphos'd [to a] nun. LODOWICK. But say, what was she? MATHIAS. Why, the rich Jew's daughter. LODOWICK. What, Barabas, whose goods were lately seiz'd? Is she so fair? MATHIAS. And matchless beautiful,
     As, had you seen her, 'twould have mov'd your heart,
     Though countermin'd with walls of brass, to love,
     Or, at the least, to pity. LODOWICK. An if she be so fair as you report,
     'Twere time well spent to go and visit her:
     How say you? shall we? MATHIAS. I must and will, sir; there's no remedy. LODOWICK. And so will I too, or it shall go hard. Farewell, Mathias. MATHIAS. Farewell, Lodowick. [Exeunt severally.] ACT II. Enter BARABAS, with a light. [53]

     BARABAS. Thus, like the sad-presaging raven, that tolls
     The sick man's passport in her hollow beak, [54]
     And in the shadow of the silent night
     Doth shake contagion from her sable wings,
     Vex'd and tormented runs poor Barabas
     With fatal curses towards these Christians. The incertain pleasures of swift-footed time
     Have ta'en their flight, and left me in despair;
     And of my former riches rests no more
     But bare remembrance; like a soldier's scar,
     That has no further comfort for his maim.--
     O Thou, that with a fiery pillar ledd'st
     The sons of Israel through the dismal shades,
     Light Abraham's offspring; and direct the hand
     Of Abigail this night! or let the day
     Turn to eternal darkness after this!--
     No sleep can fasten on my watchful eyes,
     Nor quiet enter my distemper'd thoughts,
     Till I have answer of my Abigail. Enter ABIGAIL above. ABIGAIL. Now have I happily espied a time
     To search the plank my father did appoint;
     And here, behold, unseen, where I have found
     The gold, the pearls, and jewels, which he hid. BARABAS. Now I remember those old women's words,
     Who in my wealth would tell me winter's tales,
     And speak of spirits and ghosts that glide by night
     About the place where treasure hath been hid:
     And now methinks that I am one of those;
     For, whilst I live, here lives my soul's sole hope,
     And, when I die, here shall my spirit walk. ABIGAIL. Now that my father's fortune were so good
     As but to be about this happy place! 'Tis not so happy:  yet, when we parted last,
     He said he would attend me in the morn. Then, gentle Sleep, where'er his body rests,
     Give charge to Morpheus that he may dream
     A golden dream, and of [55] the sudden wake, [56]
     Come and receive the treasure I have found. BARABAS. Bueno para todos mi ganado no era: [57]
     As good go on, as sit so sadly thus.--
     But stay:  what star shines yonder in the east? [58]
     The loadstar of my life, if Abigail.--
     Who's there? ABIGAIL. Who's that? BARABAS. Peace, Abigail! 'tis I.

     ABIGAIL. Then, father, here receive thy happiness. BARABAS. Hast thou't? ABIGAIL. Here. [throws down bags]  Hast thou't? There's more, and more, and more. BARABAS. O my girl,
     My gold, my fortune, my felicity,
     Strength to my soul, death to mine enemy;
     Welcome the first beginner of my bliss! O Abigail, Abigail, that I had thee here too! Then my desires were fully satisfied:
     But I will practice thy enlargement thence:
     O girl! O gold! O beauty! O my bliss! [Hugs the bags.] ABIGAIL. Father, it draweth towards midnight now,
     And 'bout this time the nuns begin to wake;
     To shun suspicion, therefore, let us part. BARABAS. Farewell, my joy, and by my fingers take
     A kiss from him that sends it from his soul. [Exit ABIGAIL above.] Now, Phoebus, ope the eye-lids of the day. And, for the raven, wake the morning lark,
     That I may hover with her in the air,
     Singing o'er these, as she does o'er her young. Hermoso placer de los dineros. [59]
          [Exit.] Enter FERNEZE, [60] MARTIN DEL BOSCO, KNIGHTS, and OFFICERS. FERNEZE. Now, captain, tell us whither thou art bound? Whence is thy ship that anchors in our road? And why thou cam'st ashore without our leave? MARTIN DEL BOSCO. Governor of Malta, hither am I bound;
     My ship, the Flying Dragon, is of Spain,
     And so am I; Del Bosco is my name,
     Vice-admiral unto the Catholic King. FIRST KNIGHT. 'Tis true, my lord; therefore entreat [61] him well. MARTIN DEL BOSCO. Our fraught is Grecians, Turks, and Afric Moors;
     For late upon the coast of Corsica,
     Because we vail'd not [62] to the Turkish [63] fleet,
     Their creeping galleys had us in the chase:
     But suddenly the wind began to rise,
     And then we luff'd and tack'd, [64] and fought at ease:
     Some have we fir'd, and many have we sunk;
     But one amongst the rest became our prize:
     The captain's slain; the rest remain our slaves,
     Of whom we would make sale in Malta here. FERNEZE. Martin del Bosco, I have heard of thee:
     Welcome to Malta, and to all of us! But to admit a sale of these thy Turks,
     We may not, nay, we dare not give consent,
     By reason of a tributary league. FIRST KNIGHT. Del Bosco, as thou lov'st and honour'st us,
     Persuade our governor against the Turk:
     This truce we have is but in hope of gold,
     And with that sum he craves might we wage war. MARTIN DEL BOSCO. Will knights of Malta be in league with Turks,
     And buy it basely too for sums of gold? My lord, remember that, to Europe's shame,
     The Christian isle of Rhodes, from whence you came,
     Was lately lost, and you were stated [65] here
     To be at deadly enmity with Turks. FERNEZE. Captain, we know it; but our force is small. MARTIN DEL BOSCO. What is the sum that Calymath requires? FERNEZE. A hundred thousand crowns. MARTIN DEL BOSCO. My lord and king hath title to this isle,
     And he means quickly to expel you hence;
     Therefore be rul'd by me, and keep the gold:
     I'll write unto his majesty for aid,
     And not depart until I see you free. FERNEZE. On this condition shall thy Turks be sold.--
     Go, officers, and set them straight in show.--
          [Exeunt OFFICERS.] Bosco, thou shalt be Malta's general;
     We and our warlike knights will follow thee
     Against these barbarous misbelieving Turks. MARTIN DEL BOSCO. So shall you imitate those you succeed;
     For, when their hideous force environ'd Rhodes,
     Small though the number was that kept the town,
     They fought it out, and not a man surviv'd
     To bring the hapless news to Christendom. FERNEZE. So will we fight it out:  come, let's away. Proud daring Calymath, instead of gold,
     We'll send thee bullets wrapt in smoke and fire:
     Claim tribute where thou wilt, we are resolv'd,--
     Honour is bought with blood, and not with gold. [Exeunt.] Enter OFFICERS, [66] with ITHAMORE and other SLAVES. FIRST OFFICER. This is the market-place; here let 'em stand:
     Fear not their sale, for they'll be quickly bought. SECOND OFFICER. Every one's price is written on his back,
     And so much must they yield, or not be sold. FIRST OFFICER. Here comes the Jew:  had not his goods been seiz'd,
     He'd give us present money for them all. Enter BARABAS. BARABAS. In spite of these swine-eating Christians,
     (Unchosen nation, never circumcis'd,
     Poor villains, such as were [67] ne'er thought upon
     Till Titus and Vespasian conquer'd us,)
     Am I become as wealthy as I was. They hop'd my daughter would ha' been a nun;
     But she's at home, and I have bought a house
     As great and fair as is the governor's:
     And there, in spite of Malta, will I dwell,
     Having Ferneze's hand; whose heart I'll have,
     Ay, and his son's too, or it shall go hard. I am not of the tribe of Levi, I,
     That can so soon forget an injury. We Jews can fawn like spaniels when we please;
     And when we grin we bite; yet are our looks
     As innocent and harmless as a lamb's. I learn'd in Florence how to kiss my hand,
     Heave up my shoulders when they call me dog,
     And duck as low as any bare-foot friar;
     Hoping to see them starve upon a stall,
     Or else be gather'd for in our synagogue,
     That, when the offering-basin comes to me,
     Even for charity I may spit into't.--
     Here comes Don Lodowick, the governor's son,
     One that I love for his good father's sake. Enter LODOWICK. LODOWICK. I hear the wealthy Jew walked this way:
     I'll seek him out, and so insinuate,
     That I may have a sight of Abigail,
     For Don Mathias tells me she is fair. BARABAS. Now will I shew myself to have more of the serpent than
     the dove; that is, more knave than fool. [Aside.] LODOWICK. Yond' walks the Jew:  now for fair Abigail. BARABAS. Ay, ay, no doubt but she's at your command. [Aside.] LODOWICK. Barabas, thou know'st I am the governor's son. BARABAS. I would you were his father too, sir! that's all the harm
     I wish you.--The slave looks like a hog's cheek new-singed. [Aside.] LODOWICK. Whither walk'st thou, Barabas? BARABAS. No further:  'tis a custom held with us,
     That when we speak with Gentiles like to you,
     We turn into [68] the air to purge ourselves;
     For unto us the promise doth belong. LODOWICK. Well, Barabas, canst help me to a diamond? BARABAS. O, sir, your father had my diamonds:
     Yet I have one left that will serve your turn.--
     I mean my daughter; but, ere he shall have her,
     I'll sacrifice her on a pile of wood:
     I ha' the poison of the city [69] for him,
     And the white leprosy. [Aside.] LODOWICK. What sparkle does it give without a foil? BARABAS. The diamond that I talk of ne'er was foil'd:--
     But, when he touches it, it will be foil'd.-- [70]
          [Aside.] Lord Lodowick, it sparkles bright and fair. LODOWICK. Is it square or pointed? pray, let me know. BARABAS. Pointed it is, good sir,--but not for you. [Aside.] LODOWICK. I like it much the better. BARABAS. So do I too. LODOWICK. How shews it by night? BARABAS. Outshines Cynthia's rays:--
     You'll like it better far o' nights than days. [Aside.] LODOWICK. And what's the price? BARABAS. Your life, an if you have it [Aside].--O my lord,
     We will not jar about the price:  come to my house,
     And I will give't your honour--with a vengeance. [Aside.] LODOWICK. No, Barabas, I will deserve it first. BARABAS. Good sir,
     Your father has deserv'd it at my hands,
     Who, of mere charity and Christian ruth,
     To bring me to religious purity,
     And, as it were, in catechising sort,
     To make me mindful of my mortal sins,
     Against my will, and whether I would or no,
     Seiz'd all I had, and thrust me out o' doors,
     And made my house a place for nuns most chaste. LODOWICK. No doubt your soul shall reap the fruit of it. BARABAS. Ay, but, my lord, the harvest is far off:
     And yet I know the prayers of those nuns
     And holy friars, having money for their pains,
     Are wondrous;--and indeed do no man good;--
          [Aside.] And, seeing they are not idle, but still doing,
     'Tis likely they in time may reap some fruit,
     I mean, in fullness of perfection. LODOWICK. Good Barabas, glance not at our holy nuns. BARABAS. No, but I do it through a burning zeal,--
     Hoping ere long to set the house a-fire;
     For, though they do a while increase and multiply,
     I'll have a saying to that nunnery.-- [71]
          [Aside.] As for the diamond, sir, I told you of,
     Come home, and there's no price shall make us part,
     Even for your honourable father's sake,--
     It shall go hard but I will see your death.--
          [Aside.] But now I must be gone to buy a slave. LODOWICK. And, Barabas, I'll bear thee company. BARABAS. Come, then; here's the market-place.--
     What's the price of this slave? two hundred crowns! do the Turks
     weigh so much? FIRST OFFICER. Sir, that's his price. BARABAS. What, can he steal, that you demand so much? Belike he has some new trick for a purse;
     An if he has, he is worth three hundred plates, [72]
     So that, being bought, the town-seal might be got
     To keep him for his life-time from the gallows:
     The sessions-day is critical to thieves,
     And few or none scape but by being purg'd. LODOWICK. Rat'st thou this Moor but at two hundred plates? FIRST OFFICER. No more, my lord. BARABAS. Why should this Turk be dearer than that Moor? FIRST OFFICER. Because he is young, and has more qualities. BARABAS. What, hast the philosopher's stone? an thou hast, break
     my head with it, I'll forgive thee. SLAVE. [73] No, sir; I can cut and shave. BARABAS. Let me see, sirrah; are you not an old shaver? SLAVE. Alas, sir, I am a very youth! BARABAS. A youth! I'll buy you, and marry you to Lady Vanity, [74]
     if you do well. SLAVE. I will serve you, sir. BARABAS. Some wicked trick or other:  it may be, under colour
     of shaving, thou'lt cut my throat for my goods. Tell me,
     hast thou thy health well? SLAVE. Ay, passing well. BARABAS. So much the worse:  I must have one that's sickly, an't
     be but for sparing victuals:  'tis not a stone of beef a-day
     will maintain you in these chops.--Let me see one that's
     somewhat leaner. FIRST OFFICER. Here's a leaner; how like you him? BARABAS. Where wast thou born? ITHAMORE. In Thrace; brought up in Arabia. BARABAS. So much the better; thou art for my turn. An hundred crowns? I'll have him; there's the coin. [Gives money.] FIRST OFFICER. Then mark him, sir, and take him hence. BARABAS. Ay, mark him, you were best; for this is he
     That by my help shall do much villany.--
          [Aside.] My lord, farewell.--Come, sirrah; you are mine.--
     As for the diamond, it shall be yours:
     I pray, sir, be no stranger at my house;
     All that I have shall be at your command. Enter MATHIAS and KATHARINE. [75]

     MATHIAS. What make the Jew and Lodowick so private? I fear me 'tis about fair Abigail. [Aside.] BARABAS. [to LODOWICK.] Yonder comes Don Mathias; let us stay: [76]
     He loves my daughter, and she holds him dear;
     But I have sworn to frustrate both their hopes,
     And be reveng'd upon the--governor. [Aside.] [Exit LODOWICK.] KATHARINE. This Moor is comeliest, is he not? speak, son. MATHIAS. No, this is the better, mother, view this well. BARABAS. Seem not to know me here before your mother,
     Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand:
     When you have brought her home, come to my house;
     Think of me as thy father:  son, farewell. MATHIAS. But wherefore talk'd Don Lodowick with you? BARABAS. Tush, man! we talk'd of diamonds, not of Abigail. KATHARINE. Tell me, Mathias, is not that the Jew? BARABAS. As for the comment on the Maccabees,
     I have it, sir, and 'tis at your command. MATHIAS. Yes, madam, and my talk with him was [77]
     About the borrowing of a book or two. KATHARINE. Converse not with him; he is cast off from heaven.--
     Thou hast thy crowns, fellow.--Come, let's away. MATHIAS. Sirrah Jew, remember the book. BARABAS. Marry, will I, sir. [Exeunt KATHARlNE and MATHIAS.] FIRST OFFICER. Come, I have made a reasonable market; let's away. [Exeunt OFFICERS with SLAVES.] BARABAS. Now let me know thy name, and therewithal
     Thy birth, condition, and profession. ITHAMORE. Faith, sir, my birth is but mean; my name's Ithamore;
     my profession what you please. BARABAS. Hast thou no trade? then listen to my words,
     And I will teach [thee] that shall stick by thee:
     First, be thou void of these affections,
     Compassion, love, vain hope, and heartless fear;
     Be mov'd at nothing, see thou pity none,
     But to thyself smile when the Christians moan. ITHAMORE. O, brave, master! [78] I worship your nose [79] for this. BARABAS. As for myself, I walk abroad o' nights,
     And kill sick people groaning under walls:
     Sometimes I go about and poison wells;
     And now and then, to cherish Christian thieves,
     I am content to lose some of my crowns,
     That I may, walking in my gallery,
     See 'em go pinion'd along by my door. Being young, I studied physic, and began
     To practice first upon the Italian;
     There I enrich'd the priests with burials,
     And always kept the sexton's arms in ure [80]
     With digging graves and ringing dead men's knells:
     And, after that, was I an engineer,
     And in the wars 'twixt France and Germany,
     Under pretence of helping Charles the Fifth,
     Slew friend and enemy with my stratagems:
     Then, after that, was I an usurer,
     And with extorting, cozening, forfeiting,
     And tricks belonging unto brokery,
     I fill'd the gaols with bankrupts in a year,
     And with young orphans planted hospitals;
     And every moon made some or other mad,
     And now and then one hang himself for grief,
     Pinning upon his breast a long great scroll
     How I with interest tormented him. But mark how I am blest for plaguing them;--
     I have as much coin as will buy the town. But tell me now, how hast thou spent thy time? ITHAMORE. Faith, master,
     In setting Christian villages on fire,
     Chaining of eunuchs, binding galley-slaves. One time I was an hostler in an inn,
     And in the night-time secretly would I steal
     To travellers' chambers, and there cut their throats:
     Once at Jerusalem, where the pilgrims kneel'd,
     I strewed powder on the marble stones,
     And therewithal their knees would rankle so,
     That I have laugh'd a-good [81] to see the cripples
     Go limping home to Christendom on stilts. BARABAS. Why, this is something:  make account of me
     As of thy fellow; we are villains both;
     Both circumcised; we hate Christians both:
     Be true and secret; thou shalt want no gold. But stand aside; here comes Don Lodowick. Enter LODOWICK. [82]

     LODOWICK. O, Barabas, well met;
     Where is the diamond you told me of? BARABAS. I have it for you, sir:  please you walk in with me.--
     What, ho, Abigail! open the door, I say! Enter ABIGAIL, with letters. ABIGAIL. In good time, father; here are letters come
     ]From Ormus, and the post stays here within. BARABAS. Give me the letters.--Daughter, do you hear? Entertain Lodowick, the governor's son,
     With all the courtesy you can afford,
     Provided that you keep your maidenhead:
     Use him as if he were a Philistine;
     Dissemble, swear, protest, vow love to him: [83]
     He is not of the seed of Abraham.--
          [Aside to her.] I am a little busy, sir; pray, pardon me.--
     Abigail, bid him welcome for my sake. ABIGAIL. For your sake and his own he's welcome hither. BARABAS. Daughter, a word more:  kiss him, speak him fair,
     And like a cunning Jew so cast about,
     That ye be both made sure [84] ere you come out. [Aside to her.] ABIGAIL. O father, Don Mathias is my love! BARABAS. I know it:  yet, I say, make love to him;
     Do, it is requisite it should be so.--
          [Aside to her.] Nay, on my life, it is my factor's hand;
     But go you in, I'll think upon the account. [Exeunt ABIGAIL and LODOWICK into the house.] The account is made, for Lodovico [85] dies. My factor sends me word a merchant's fled
     That owes me for a hundred tun of wine:
     I weigh it thus much[snapping his fingers]! I have wealth enough;
     For now by this has he kiss'd Abigail,
     And she vows love to him, and he to her. As sure as heaven rain'd manna for the Jews,
     So sure shall he and Don Mathias die:
     His father was my chiefest enemy. Enter MATHIAS. Whither goes Don Mathias? stay a while. MATHIAS. Whither, but to my fair love Abigail? BARABAS. Thou know'st, and heaven can witness it is true,
     That I intend my daughter shall be thine. MATHIAS. Ay, Barabas, or else thou wrong'st me much. BARABAS. O, heaven forbid I should have such a thought! Pardon me though I weep:  the governor's son
     Will, whether I will or no, have Abigail;
     He sends her letters, bracelets, jewels, rings. MATHIAS. Does she receive them? BARABAS. She! no, Mathias, no, but sends them back;
     And, when he comes, she locks herself up fast;
     Yet through the key-hole will he talk to her,
     While she runs to the window, looking out
     When you should come and hale him from the door. MATHIAS. O treacherous Lodowick! BARABAS. Even now, as I came home, he slipt me in,
     And I am sure he is with Abigail. MATHIAS. I'll rouse him thence. BARABAS. Not for all Malta; therefore sheathe your sword;
     If you love me, no quarrels in my house;
     But steal you in, and seem to see him not:
     I'll give him such a warning ere he goes,
     As he shall have small hopes of Abigail. Away, for here they come. Re-enter LODOWICK and ABIGAIL. MATHIAS. What, hand in hand! I cannot suffer this. BARABAS. Mathias, as thou lov'st me, not a word. MATHIAS. Well, let it pass; another time shall serve. [Exit into the house.] LODOWICK. Barabas, is not that the widow's son? BARABAS. Ay, and take heed, for he hath sworn your death. LODOWICK. My death! what, is the base-born peasant mad? BARABAS. No, no; but happily [86] he stands in fear
     Of that which you, I think, ne'er dream upon,--
     My daughter here, a paltry silly girl. LODOWICK. Why, loves she Don Mathias? BARABAS. Doth she not with her smiling answer you? ABIGAIL. He has my heart; I smile against my will. [Aside.] LODOWICK. Barabas, thou know'st I have lov'd thy daughter long. BARABAS. And so has she done you, even from a child. LODOWICK. And now I can no longer hold my mind. BARABAS. Nor I the affection that I bear to you. LODOWICK. This is thy diamond; tell me, shall I have it? BARABAS. Win it, and wear it; it is yet unsoil'd. [87]
     O, but I know your lordship would disdain
     To marry with the daughter of a Jew:
     And yet I'll give her many a golden cross [88]
     With Christian posies round about the ring. LODOWICK. 'Tis not thy wealth, but her that I esteem;
     Yet crave I thy consent. BARABAS. And mine you have; yet let me talk to her.--
     This offspring of Cain, this Jebusite,
     That never tasted of the Passover,
     Nor e'er shall see the land of Canaan,
     Nor our Messias that is yet to come;
     This gentle maggot, Lodowick, I mean,
     Must be deluded:  let him have thy hand,
     But keep thy heart till Don Mathias comes. [Aside to her.] ABIGAIL. What, shall I be betroth'd to Lodowick? BARABAS. It's no sin to deceive a Christian;
     For they themselves hold it a principle,
     Faith is not to be held with heretics:
     But all are heretics that are not Jews;
     This follows well, and therefore, daughter, fear not.--
          [Aside to her.] I have entreated her, and she will grant. LODOWICK. Then, gentle Abigail, plight thy faith to me. ABIGAIL. I cannot choose, seeing my father bids:
     Nothing but death shall part my love and me. LODOWICK. Now have I that for which my soul hath long'd. BARABAS. So have not I; but yet I hope I shall. [Aside.] ABIGAIL. O wretched Abigail, what hast thou [89] done? [Aside.] LODOWICK. Why on the sudden is your colour chang'd? ABIGAIL. I know not:  but farewell; I must be gone. BARABAS. Stay her, but let her not speak one word more. LODOWICK. Mute o' the sudden! here's a sudden change. BARABAS. O, muse not at it; 'tis the Hebrews' guise,
     That maidens new-betroth'd should weep a while:
     Trouble her not; sweet Lodowick, depart:
     She is thy wife, and thou shalt be mine heir. LODOWICK. O, is't the custom? then I am resolv'd: [90]
     But rather let the brightsome heavens be dim,
     And nature's beauty choke with stifling clouds,
     Than my fair Abigail should frown on me.--
     There comes the villain; now I'll be reveng'd. Re-enter MATHIAS. BARABAS. Be quiet, Lodowick; it is enough
     That I have made thee sure to Abigail. LODOWICK. Well, let him go. [Exit.] BARABAS. Well, but for me, as you went in at doors
     You had been stabb'd:  but not a word on't now;
     Here must no speeches pass, nor swords be drawn. MATHIAS. Suffer me, Barabas, but to follow him. BARABAS. No; so shall I, if any hurt be done,
     Be made an accessary of your deeds:
     Revenge it on him when you meet him next. MATHIAS. For this I'll have his heart. BARABAS. Do so. Lo, here I give thee Abigail! MATHIAS. What greater gift can poor Mathias have? Shall Lodowick rob me of so fair a love? My life is not so dear as Abigail. BARABAS. My heart misgives me, that, to cross your love,
     He's with your mother; therefore after him. MATHIAS. What, is he gone unto my mother? BARABAS. Nay, if you will, stay till she comes herself. MATHIAS. I cannot stay; for, if my mother come,
     She'll die with grief. [Exit.] ABIGAIL. I cannot take my leave of him for tears. Father, why have you thus incens'd them both? BARABAS. What's that to thee? ABIGAIL. I'll make 'em friends again. BARABAS. You'll make 'em friends! are there not Jews enow in Malta,
     But thou must dote upon a Christian? ABIGAIL. I will have Don Mathias; he is my love. BARABAS. Yes, you shall have him.--Go, put her in. ITHAMORE. Ay, I'll put her in. [Puts in ABIGAIL.] BARABAS. Now tell me, Ithamore, how lik'st thou this? ITHAMORE. Faith, master, I think by this
     You purchase both their lives:  is it not so? BARABAS. True; and it shall be cunningly perform'd. ITHAMORE. O, master, that I might have a hand in this! BARABAS. Ay, so thou shalt; 'tis thou must do the deed:
     Take this, and bear it to Mathias straight,
          [Giving a letter.] And tell him that it comes from Lodowick. ITHAMORE. 