

E-text prepared by G. Edward Johnson and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations. See 14917-h.htm or 14917-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/9/1/14917/14917-h/14917-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/9/1/14917/14917-h.zip)





THE WINGS OF THE MORNING

by

LOUIS TRACY

Author of _A Son of the Immortals_, _The Stowaways_, _The Message_,
_The Wheel o' Fortune_, etc. New York Grosset & Dunlap Publishers

1903. _If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts
of the sea; even there shall Thy hand lead me, and Thy right hand shall
hold me. Psalm CXXXIX, 9, 10_




[Illustration: INVOLUNTARILY SHE CAUGHT HIS ARM. HE STEPPED A HALF-PACE
IN FRONT OF HER TO WARD OFF ANY DANGER THAT MIGHT BE HERALDED BY THIS
UNCANNY PHENOMENON. _Frontispiece_]




CONTENTS

I     The Wreck of the _Sirdar_
II    The Survivors
III   Discoveries
IV    Rainbow Island
V     Iris to the Rescue
VI    Some Explanations
VII   Surprises
VIII  Preparations
IX    The Secret of the Cave
X     Reality v. Romance--The Case for the Plaintiff
XI    The Fight
XII   A Truce
XIII  Reality v. Romance--The Case for the Defendant
XIV   The Unexpected Happens
XV    The Difficulty of Pleasing Everybody
XVI   Bargains, Great and Small
XVII  Rainbow Island Again--and Afterward




CHAPTER I

THE WRECK OF THE _SIRDAR_


Lady Tozer adjusted her gold-rimmed eye-glasses with an air of
dignified aggressiveness. She had lived too many years in the Far East. In Hong Kong she was known as the "Mandarin." Her powers of merciless
inquisition suggested torments long drawn out. The commander of the
_Sirdar_, homeward bound from Shanghai, knew that he was about to
be stretched on the rack when he took his seat at the saloon table. "Is it true, captain, that we are running into a typhoon?" demanded her
ladyship. "From whom did you learn that, Lady Tozer?" Captain Ross was wary,
though somewhat surprised. "From Miss Deane. I understood her a moment ago to say that you had
told her." "I?" "Didn't you? Some one told me this morning. I couldn't have guessed it,
could I?" Miss Iris Deane's large blue eyes surveyed him with innocent
indifference to strict accuracy. Incidentally, she had obtained the
information from her maid, a nose-tilted coquette who extracted ship's
secrets from a youthful quartermaster. "Well--er--I had forgotten," explained the tactful sailor. "Is it true?" Lady Tozer _was_ unusually abrupt today. But she was annoyed by
the assumption that the captain took a mere girl into his confidence
and passed over the wife of the ex-Chief Justice of Hong Kong. "Yes, it is," said Captain Ross, equally curt, and silently thanking
the fates that her ladyship was going home for the last time. "How horrible!" she gasped, in unaffected alarm. This return to
femininity soothed the sailor's ruffled temper. Sir John, her husband, frowned judicially. That frown constituted his
legal stock-in-trade, yet it passed current for wisdom with the Hong
Kong bar. "What evidence have you?" he asked. "Do tell us," chimed in Iris, delightfully unconscious of interrupting
the court. "Did you find out when you squinted at the sun?" The captain smiled. "You are nearer the mark than possibly you imagine,
Miss Deane," he said. "When we took our observations yesterday there
was a very weird-looking halo around the sun. This morning you may have
noticed several light squalls and a smooth sea marked occasionally by
strong ripples. The barometer is falling rapidly, and I expect that, as
the day wears, we will encounter a heavy swell. If the sky looks wild
tonight, and especially if we observe a heavy bank of cloud approaching
from the north-west, you see the crockery dancing about the table at
dinner. I am afraid you are not a good sailor, Lady Tozer. Are you,
Miss Deane?" "Capital! I should just love to see a real storm. Now promise me
solemnly that you will take me up into the charthouse when this typhoon
is simply tearing things to pieces." "Oh dear! I do hope it will not be very bad. Is there no way in which
you can avoid it, captain? Will it last long?" The politic skipper for once preferred to answer Lady Tozer. "There is
no cause for uneasiness," he said. "Of course, typhoons in the China
Sea are nasty things while they last, but a ship like the _Sirdar_
is not troubled by them. She will drive through the worst gale she is
likely to meet here in less than twelve hours. Besides, I alter the
course somewhat as soon as I discover our position with regard to its
center. You see, Miss Deane--"

And Captain Ross forthwith illustrated on the back of a menu card the
spiral shape and progress of a cyclone. He so thoroughly mystified the
girl by his technical references to northern and southern hemispheres,
polar directions, revolving air-currents, external circumferences, and
diminished atmospheric pressures, that she was too bewildered to
reiterate a desire to visit the bridge. Then the commander hurriedly excused himself, and the passengers saw no
more of him that day. But his short scientific lecture achieved a double result. It rescued
him from a request which he could not possibly grant, and reassured
Lady Tozer. To the non-nautical mind it is the unknown that is fearful. A storm classed as "periodic," whose velocity can be measured, whose
duration and direction can be determined beforehand by hours and
distances, ceases to be terrifying. It becomes an accepted fact, akin
to the steam-engine and the electric telegraph, marvelous yet
commonplace. So her ladyship dismissed the topic as of no present interest, and
focused Miss Deane through her eye-glasses. "Sir Arthur proposes to come home in June, I understand?" she inquired. Iris was a remarkably healthy young woman. A large banana momentarily
engaged her attention. She nodded affably. "You will stay with relatives until he arrives?" pursued Lady Tozer. The banana is a fruit of simple characteristics. The girl was able to
reply, with a touch of careless hauteur in her voice:

"Relatives! We have none--none whom we specially cultivate, that is. I
will stop in town a day or two to interview my dressmaker, and then go
straight to Helmdale, our place in Yorkshire." "Surely you have a chaperon!" "A chaperon! My dear Lady Tozer, did my father impress you as one who
would permit a fussy and stout old person to make my life miserable?" The acidity of the retort lay in the word "stout." But Iris was not
accustomed to cross-examination. During a three months' residence on
the island she had learnt how to avoid Lady Tozer. Here it was
impossible, and the older woman fastened upon her asp-like. Miss Iris
Deane was a toothsome morsel for gossip. Not yet twenty-one, the only
daughter of a wealthy baronet who owned a fleet of stately ships--the
_Sirdar_ amongst them--a girl who had been mistress of her
father's house since her return from Dresden three years ago--young,
beautiful, rich--here was a combination for which men thanked a
judicious Heaven, whilst women sniffed enviously. Business detained Sir Arthur. A war-cloud over-shadowed the two great
divisions of the yellow race. He must wait to see how matters
developed, but he would not expose Iris to the insidious treachery of a
Chinese spring. So, with tears, they separated. She was confided to the
personal charge of Captain Ross. At each point of call the company's
agents would be solicitous for her welfare. The cable's telegraphic eye
would watch her progress as that of some princely maiden sailing in
royal caravel. This fair, slender, well-formed girl--delightfully
English in face and figure--with her fresh, clear complexion, limpid
blue eyes, and shining brown hair, was a personage of some importance. Lady Tozer knew these things and sighed complacently. "Ah, well," she resumed. "Parents had different views when I was a
girl. But I assume Sir Arthur thinks you should become used to being
your own mistress in view of your approaching marriage." "My--approaching--marriage!" cried Iris, now genuinely amazed. "Yes. Is it not true that you are going to marry Lord Ventnor?" A passing steward heard the point-blank question. It had a curious effect upon him. He gazed with fiercely eager eyes at
Miss Deane, and so far forgot himself as to permit a dish of water ice
to rest against Sir John Tozer's bald head. Iris could not help noting his strange behavior. A flash of humor
chased away her first angry resentment at Lady Tozer's interrogatory. "That may be my happy fate," she answered gaily, "but Lord Ventnor has
not asked me." "Every one says in Hong Kong--" began her ladyship. "Confound you, you stupid rascal! what are you doing?" shouted Sir
John. His feeble nerves at last conveyed the information that something
more pronounced than a sudden draught affected his scalp; the ice was
melting. The incident amused those passengers who sat near enough to observe it. But the chief steward, hovering watchful near the captain's table,
darted forward. Pale with anger he hissed--

"Report yourself for duty in the second saloon tonight," and he hustled
his subordinate away from the judge's chair. Miss Deane, mirthfully radiant, rose. "Please don't punish the man, Mr. Jones," she said sweetly. "It was a
sheer accident. He was taken by surprise. In his place I would have
emptied the whole dish." The chief steward smirked. He did not know exactly what had happened;
nevertheless, great though Sir John Tozer might be, the owner's
daughter was greater. "Certainly, miss, certainly," he agreed, adding confidentially:--"It
_is_ rather hard on a steward to be sent aft, miss. It makes such
a difference in the--er--the little gratuities given by the
passengers." The girl was tactful. She smiled comprehension at the official and bent
over Sir John, now carefully polishing the back of his skull with a
table napkin. "I am sure you will forgive him," she whispered. "I can't say why, but
the poor fellow was looking so intently at me that he did not see what
he was doing." The ex-Chief Justice was instantly mollified. He did not mind the
application of ice in that way--rather liked it, in fact--probably ice
was susceptible to the fire in Miss Deane's eyes. Lady Tozer was not so easily appeased. When Iris left the saloon she
inquired tartly: "How is it, John, that Government makes a shipowner a
baronet and a Chief Justice only a knight?" "That question would provide an interesting subject for debate at the
Carlton, my dear," he replied with equal asperity. Suddenly the passengers still seated experienced a prolonged sinking
sensation, as if the vessel had been converted into a gigantic lift. They were pressed hard into their chairs, which creaked and tried to
swing round on their pivots. As the ship yielded stiffly to the sea a
whiff of spray dashed through an open port. "There," snapped her ladyship, "I knew we should run into a storm, yet
Captain Ross led us to believe---- John, take me to my cabin at once." From the promenade deck the listless groups watched the rapid advance
of the gale. There was mournful speculation upon the _Sirdar's_
chances of reaching Singapore before the next evening. "We had two hundred and ninety-eight miles to do at noon," said
Experience. "If the wind and sea catch us on the port bow the ship will
pitch awfully. Half the time the screw will be racing. I once made this
trip in the _Sumatra_, and we were struck by a south-east typhoon
in this locality. How long do you think it was before we dropped anchor
in Singapore harbor?" No one hazarded a guess. "Three days!" Experience was solemnly pompous. "Three whole days. They
were like three years. By Jove! I never want to see another gale like
that." A timid lady ventured to say--

"Perhaps this may not be a typhoon. It may only be a little bit of
a storm." Her sex saved her from a jeer. Experience gloomily shook his head. "The barometer resists your plea," he said. "I fear there will be a
good many empty saddles in the saloon at dinner." The lady smiled weakly. It was a feeble joke at the best. "You think we
are in for a sort of marine steeple-chase?" she asked. "Well, thank Heaven, I had a good lunch," sniggered a rosy-faced
subaltern, and a ripple of laughter greeted his enthusiasm. Iris stood somewhat apart from the speakers. The wind had freshened and
her hat was tied closely over her ears. She leaned against the
taffrail, enjoying the cool breeze after hours of sultry heat. The sky
was cloudless yet, but there was a queer tinge of burnished copper in
the all-pervading sunshine. The sea was coldly blue. The life had gone
out of it. It was no longer inviting and translucent. That morning,
were such a thing practicable, she would have gladly dived into its
crystal depths and disported herself like a frolicsome mermaid. Now
something akin to repulsion came with the fanciful remembrance. Long sullen undulations swept noiselessly past the ship. Once, after a
steady climb up a rolling hill of water, the _Sirdar_ quickly
pecked at the succeeding valley, and the propeller gave a couple of
angry flaps on the surface, whilst a tremor ran through the stout iron
rails on which the girl's arms rested. The crew were busy too. Squads of Lascars raced about, industriously
obedient to the short shrill whistling of jemadars and quartermasters. Boat lashings were tested and tightened, canvas awnings stretched
across the deck forward, ventilator cowls twisted to new angles, and
hatches clamped down over the wooden gratings that covered the holds. Officers, spotless in white linen, flitted quietly to and fro. When the
watch was changed. Iris noted that the "chief" appeared in an old blue
suit and carried oilskins over his arm as he climbed to the bridge. Nature looked disturbed and fitful, and the ship responded to her mood. There was a sense of preparation in the air, of coming ordeal, of
restless foreboding. Chains clanked with a noise the girl never noticed
before; the tramp of hurrying men on the hurricane deck overhead
sounded heavy and hollow. There was a squeaking of chairs that was
abominable when people gathered up books and wraps and staggered
ungracefully towards the companion-way. Altogether Miss Deane was not
wholly pleased with the preliminaries of a typhoon, whatever the
realities might be. And then, why did gales always spring up at the close of day? Could
they not start after breakfast, rage with furious grandeur during
lunch, and die away peacefully at dinner-time, permitting one to sleep
in comfort without that straining and groaning of the ship which seemed
to imply a sharp attack of rheumatism in every joint? Why did that silly old woman allude to her contemplated marriage to
Lord Ventnor, retailing the gossip of Hong Kong with such malicious
emphasis? For an instant Iris tried to shake the railing in comic
anger. She hated Lord Ventnor. She did not want to marry him, or
anybody else, just yet. Of course her father had hinted approval of his
lordship's obvious intentions. Countess of Ventnor! Yes, it was a nice
title. Still, she wanted another couple of years of careless freedom;
in any event, why should Lady Tozer pry and probe? And finally, why did the steward--oh, poor old Sir John! What
_would_ have happened if the ice had slid down his neck? Thoroughly comforted by this gleeful hypothesis, Miss Deane seized a
favorable opportunity to dart across to the starboard side and see if
Captain Ross's "heavy bank of cloud in the north-west" had put in an
appearance. Ha! there it was, black, ominous, gigantic, rolling up over the horizon
like some monstrous football. Around it the sky deepened into purple,
fringed with a wide belt of brick red. She had never seen such a
beginning of a gale. From what she had read in books she imagined that
only in great deserts were clouds of dust generated. There could not be
dust in the dense pall now rushing with giant strides across the
trembling sea. Then what was it? Why was it so dark and menacing? And
where was desert of stone and sand to compare with this awful expanse
of water? What a small dot was this great ship on the visible surface! But the ocean itself extended away beyond there, reaching out to the
infinite. The dot became a mere speck, undistinguishable beneath a
celestial microscope such as the gods might condescend to use. Iris shivered and aroused herself with a startled laugh. A nice book in a sheltered corner, and perhaps forty winks until
tea-time--surely a much more sensible proceeding than to stand there,
idly conjuring up phantoms of affright. The lively fanfare of the dinner trumpet failed to fill the saloon. By
this time the _Sirdar_ was fighting resolutely against a stiff
gale. But the stress of actual combat was better than the eerie
sensation of impending danger during the earlier hours. The strong,
hearty pulsations of the engines, the regular thrashing of the screw,
the steadfast onward plunging of the good ship through racing seas and
flying scud, were cheery, confident, and inspiring. Miss Deane justified her boast that she was an excellent sailor. She
smiled delightedly at the ship's surgeon when he caught her eye through
the many gaps in the tables. She was alone, so he joined her. "You are a credit to the company--quite a sea-king's daughter," he
said. "Doctor, do you talk to all your lady passengers in that way?" "Alas, no! Too often I can only be truthful when I am dumb." Iris laughed. "If I remain long on this ship I will certainly have my
head turned," she cried. "I receive nothing but compliments from the
captain down to--to----

"The doctor!" "No. You come a good second on the list." In very truth she was thinking of the ice-carrying steward and his
queer start of surprise at the announcement of her rumored engagement. The man interested her. He looked like a broken-down gentleman. Her
quick eyes traveled around the saloon to discover his whereabouts. She
could not see him. The chief steward stood near, balancing himself in
apparent defiance of the laws of gravitation, for the ship was now
pitching and rolling with a mad zeal. For an instant she meant to
inquire what had become of the transgressor, but she dismissed the
thought at its inception. The matter was too trivial. With a wild swoop all the plates, glasses, and cutlery on the saloon
tables crashed to starboard. Were it not for the restraint of the
fiddles everything must have been swept to the floor. There were one or
two minor accidents. A steward, taken unawares, was thrown headlong on
top of his laden tray. Others were compelled to clutch the backs of
chairs and cling to pillars. One man involuntarily seized the hair of a
lady who devoted an hour before each meal to her coiffure. The
_Sirdar_, with a frenzied bound, tried to turn a somersault. "A change of course," observed the doctor. "They generally try to avoid
it when people are in the saloon, but a typhoon admits of no labored
politeness. As its center is now right ahead we are going on the
starboard tack to get behind it." "I must hurry up and go on deck," said Miss Deane. "You will not be able to go on deck until the morning." She turned on him impetuously. "Indeed I will. Captain Ross promised
me--that is, I asked him----"

The doctor smiled. She was so charmingly insistent. "It is simply
impossible," he said. "The companion doors are bolted. The promenade
deck is swept by heavy seas every minute. A boat has been carried away
and several stanchions snapped off like carrots. For the first time in
your life, Miss Deane, you are battened down." The girl's face must have paled somewhat. He added hastily, "There is
no danger, you know, but these precautions are necessary. You would not
like to see several tons of water rushing down the saloon stairs; now,
would you?" "Decidedly not." Then after a pause, "It is not pleasant to be fastened
up in a great iron box, doctor. It reminds one of a huge coffin." "Not a bit. The _Sirdar_ is the safest ship afloat. Your father
has always pursued a splendid policy in that respect. The London and
Hong Kong Company may not possess fast vessels, but they are seaworthy
and well found in every respect." "Are there many people ill on board?" "No; just the usual number of disturbed livers. We had a nasty accident
shortly before dinner." "Good gracious! What happened?" "Some Lascars were caught by a sea forward. One man had his leg
broken." "Anything else?" The doctor hesitated. He became interested in the color of some
Burgundy. "I hardly know the exact details yet," he replied. "Tomorrow
after breakfast I will tell you all about it." An English quartermaster and four Lascars had been licked from off the
forecastle by the greedy tongue of a huge wave. The succeeding surge
flung the five men back against the quarter. One of the black sailors
was pitched aboard, with a fractured leg and other injuries. The others
were smashed against the iron hull and disappeared. For one tremulous moment the engines slowed. The ship commenced to veer
off into the path of the cyclone. Captain Ross set his teeth, and the
telegraph bell jangled "Full speed ahead." "Poor Jackson!" he murmured. "One of my best men. I remember seeing his
wife, a pretty little woman, and two children coming to meet him last
homeward trip. They will be there again. Good God! That Lascar who was
saved has some one to await him in a Bombay village, I suppose." The gale sang a mad requiem to its victims. The very surface was torn
from the sea. The ship drove relentlessly through sheets of spray that
caused the officers high up on the bridge to gasp for breath. They held
on by main force, though protected by strong canvas sheets bound to the
rails. The main deck was quite impassable. The promenade deck, even the
lofty spar deck, was scourged with the broken crests of waves that
tried with demoniac energy to smash in the starboard bow, for the
_Sirdar_ was cutting into the heart of the cyclone. The captain fought his way to the charthouse. He wiped the salt water
from his eyes and looked anxiously at the barometer. "Still falling!" he muttered. "I will keep on until seven o'clock and
then bear three points to the southward. By midnight we should be
behind it." He struggled back into the outside fury. By comparison the sturdy
citadel he quitted was Paradise on the edge of an inferno. Down in the saloon the hardier passengers were striving to subdue the
ennui of an interval before they sought their cabins. Some talked. One
hardened reprobate strummed the piano. Others played cards, chess,
draughts, anything that would distract attention. The stately apartment offered strange contrast to the warring elements
without. Bright lights, costly upholstery, soft carpets, carved panels
and gilded cornices, with uniformed attendants passing to and fro
carrying coffee and glasses--these surroundings suggested a floating
palace in which the raging seas were defied. Yet forty miles away,
somewhere in the furious depths, four corpses swirled about with
horrible uncertainty, lurching through battling currents, and perchance
convoyed by fighting sharks. The surgeon had been called away. Iris was the only lady left in the
saloon. She watched a set of whist players for a time and then essayed
the perilous passage to her stateroom. She found her maid and a
stewardess there. Both women were weeping. "What is the matter?" she inquired. The stewardess tried to speak. She choked with grief and hastily went
out. The maid blubbered an explanation. "A friend of hers was married, miss, to the man who is drowned." "Drowned! What man?" "Haven't you heard, miss? I suppose they are keeping it quiet. An
English sailor and some natives were swept off the ship by a sea. One
native was saved, but he is all smashed up. The others were never seen
again." Iris by degrees learnt the sad chronicles of the Jackson family. She
was moved to tears. She remembered the doctor's hesitancy, and her own
idle phrase--"a huge coffin." Outside the roaring waves pounded upon the iron walls. Were they not satiated? This tragedy had taken all the grandeur out of
the storm. It was no longer a majestic phase of nature's power, but an
implacable demon, bellowing for a sacrifice. And that poor woman, with
her two children, hopefully scanning the shipping lists for news of the
great steamer, news which, to her, meant only the safety of her
husband. Oh, it was pitiful! Iris would not be undressed. The maid sniveled a request to be allowed
to remain with her mistress. She would lie on a couch until morning. Two staterooms had been converted into one to provide Miss Deane with
ample accommodation. There were no bunks, but a cozy bed was screwed to
the deck. She lay down, and strove to read. It was a difficult task. Her eyes wandered from the printed page to mark the absurd antics of
her garments swinging on their hooks. At times the ship rolled so far
that she felt sure it must topple over. She was not afraid; but
subdued, rather astonished, placidly prepared for vague eventualities. Through it all she wondered why she clung to the belief that in another
day or two the storm would be forgotten, and people playing quoits on
deck, dancing, singing coon songs in the music-room, or grumbling at
the heat. Things were ridiculous. What need was there for all this external fury? Why should poor sailors be cast forth to instant death in such awful
manner? If she could only sleep and forget--if kind oblivion would blot
out the storm for a few blissful hours! But how could one sleep with
the consciousness of that watery giant thundering his summons upon the
iron plates a few inches away? Then came the blurred picture of Captain Ross high up on the bridge,
peering into the moving blackness. How strange that there should be
hidden in the convolutions of a man's brain an intelligence that laid
bare the pretences of that ravenous demon without. Each of the ship's
officers, the commander more than the others, understood the why and
the wherefore of this blustering combination of wind and sea. Iris knew
the language of poker. Nature was putting up a huge bluff. What was it the captain said in his little lecture? "When a ship meets
a cyclone north of the equator on a westerly course she nearly always
has the wind at first on the port side, but, owing to the revolution of
the gale, when she passes its center the wind is on the starboard
side." Yes, that was right, as far as the first part was concerned. Evidently
they had not yet passed the central path. Oh, dear! She was so tired. It demanded a physical effort to constantly shove away an unseen force
that tried to push you over. How funny that a big cloud should travel
up against the wind! And so, amidst confused wonderment, she lapsed
into an uneasy slumber, her last sentient thought being a quiet
thankfulness that the screw went thud-thud, thud-thud with such firm
determination. After the course was changed and the _Sirdar_ bore away towards
the south-west, the commander consulted the barometer each half-hour. The tell-tale mercury had sunk over two inches in twelve hours. The
abnormally low pressure quickly created dense clouds which enhanced the
melancholy darkness of the gale. For many minutes together the bows of the ship were not visible. Masthead and sidelights were obscured by the pelting scud. The engines
thrust the vessel forward like a lance into the vitals of the storm. Wind and wave gushed out of the vortex with impotent fury. At last, soon after midnight, the barometer showed a slight upward
movement. At 1.30 a.m. the change became pronounced; simultaneously the
wind swung round a point to the westward. Then Captain Ross smiled wearily. His face brightened. He opened his
oilskin coat, glanced at the compass, and nodded approval. "That's right," he shouted to the quartermaster at the steam-wheel. "Keep her steady there, south 15 west." "South 15 west it is, sir," yelled the sailor, impassively watching the
moving disk, for the wind alteration necessitated a little less help
from the rudder to keep the ship's head true to her course. Captain Ross ate some sandwiches and washed them down with cold tea. He
was more hungry than he imagined, having spent eleven hours without
food. The tea was insipid. He called through a speaking-tube for a
further supply of sandwiches and some coffee. Then he turned to consult a chart. He was joined by the chief officer. Both men examined the chart in silence. Captain Ross finally took a pencil. He stabbed its point on the paper
in the neighborhood of 14 deg. N. and 112 deg. E.

"We are about there, I think." The chief agreed. "That was the locality I had in my mind." He bent
closer over the sheet. "Nothing in the way tonight, sir," he added. "Nothing whatever. It is a bit of good luck to meet such weather here. We can keep as far south as we like until daybreak, and by that
time--How did it look when you came in?" "A trifle better, I think." "I have sent for some refreshments. Let us have another
_dekko_[Footnote: Hindustani for "look"--word much used by sailors
in the East.] before we tackle them." The two officers passed out into the hurricane. Instantly the wind
endeavored to tear the charthouse from off the deck. They looked aloft
and ahead. The officer on duty saw them and nodded silent
comprehension. It was useless to attempt to speak. The weather was
perceptibly clearer. Then all three peered ahead again. They stood, pressing against the
wind, seeking to penetrate the murkiness in front. Suddenly they were
galvanized into strenuous activity. A wild howl came from the lookout forward. The eyes of the three men
glared at a huge dismasted Chinese junk, wallowing helplessly in the
trough of the sea, dead under the bows. The captain sprang to the charthouse and signaled in fierce pantomime
that the wheel should be put hard over. The officer in charge of the bridge pressed the telegraph lever to
"stop" and "full speed astern," whilst with his disengaged hand he
pulled hard at the siren cord, and a raucous warning sent stewards
flying through the ship to close collision bulkhead doors. The "chief"
darted to the port rail, for the _Sirdar's_ instant response to
the helm seemed to clear her nose from the junk as if by magic. It all happened so quickly that whilst the hoarse signal was still
vibrating through the ship, the junk swept past her quarter. The chief
officer, joined now by the commander, looked down into the wretched
craft. They could see her crew lashed in a bunch around the capstan on
her elevated poop. She was laden with timber. Although water-logged,
she could not sink if she held together. A great wave sucked her away from the steamer and then hurled her back
with irresistible force. The _Sirdar_ was just completing her
turning movement, and she heeled over, yielding to the mighty power of
the gale. For an appreciable instant her engines stopped. The mass of
water that swayed the junk like a cork lifted the great ship high by
the stern. The propeller began to revolve in air--for the third officer
had corrected his signal to "full speed ahead" again--and the cumbrous
Chinese vessel struck the _Sirdar_ a terrible blow in the counter,
smashing off the screw close to the thrust-block and wrenching the
rudder from its bearings. There was an awful race by the engines before the engineers could shut
off steam. The junk vanished into the wilderness of noise and tumbling
seas beyond, and the fine steamer of a few seconds ago, replete with
magnificent energy, struggled like a wounded leviathan in the grasp of
a vengeful foe. She swung round, as if in wrath, to pursue the puny assailant which had
dealt her this mortal stroke. No longer breasting the storm with
stubborn persistency, she now drifted aimlessly before wind and wave. She was merely a larger plaything, tossed about by Titantic gambols. The junk was burst asunder by the collision. Her planks and cargo
littered the waves, were even tossed in derision on to the decks of the
_Sirdar_. Of what avail was strong timber or bolted iron against
the spleen of the unchained and formless monster who loudly proclaimed
his triumph? The great steamship drifted on through chaos. The typhoon
had broken the lance. But brave men, skilfully directed, wrought hard to avert further
disaster. After the first moment of stupor, gallant British sailors
risked life and limb to bring the vessel under control. By their calm courage they shamed the paralyzed Lascars into activity. A sail was rigged on the foremast, and a sea anchor hastily constructed
as soon as it was discovered that the helm was useless. Rockets flared
up into the sky at regular intervals, in the faint hope that should
they attract the attention of another vessel she would follow the
disabled _Sirdar_ and render help when the weather moderated. When the captain ascertained that no water was being shipped, the
damage being wholly external, the collision doors were opened and the
passengers admitted to the saloon, a brilliant palace, superbly
indifferent to the wreck and ruin without. Captain Ross himself came down and addressed a few comforting words to
the quiet men and pallid women gathered there. He told them exactly
what had happened. Sir John Tozer, self-possessed and critical, asked a question. "The junk is destroyed, I assume?" he said. "It is." "Would it not have been better to have struck her end on?" "Much better, but that is not the view we should take if we encountered
a vessel relatively as big as the _Sirdar_ was to the unfortunate
junk." "But," persisted the lawyer, "what would have been the result?" "You would never have known that the incident had happened, Sir John." "In other words, the poor despairing Chinamen, clinging to their little
craft with some chance of escape, would be quietly murdered to suit our
convenience." It was Iris's clear voice that rang out this downright exposition of
the facts. Sir John shook his head; he carried the discussion no
further. The hours passed in tedious misery after Captain Ross's visit. Every
one was eager to get a glimpse of the unknown terrors without from the
deck. This was out of the question, so people sat around the tables to
listen eagerly to Experience and his wise saws on drifting ships and
their prospects. Some cautious persons visited their cabins to secure valuables in case
of further disaster. A few hardy spirits returned to bed. Meanwhile, in the charthouse, the captain and chief officer were
gravely pondering over an open chart, and discussing a fresh risk that
loomed ominously before them. The ship was a long way out of her usual
course when the accident happened. She was drifting now, they
estimated, eleven knots an hour, with wind, sea, and current all
forcing her in the same direction, drifting into one of the most
dangerous places in the known world, the south China Sea, with its
numberless reefs, shoals, and isolated rocks, and the great island of
Borneo stretching right across the path of the cyclone. Still, there was nothing to be done save to make a few unobtrusive
preparations and trust to idle chance. To attempt to anchor and ride
out the gale in their present position was out of the question. Two, three, four o'clock came, and went. Another half-hour would
witness the dawn and a further clearing of the weather. The barometer
was rapidly rising. The center of the cyclone had swept far ahead. There was only left the aftermath of heavy seas and furious but
steadier wind. Captain Ross entered the charthouse for the twentieth time. He had aged many years in appearance. The smiling, confident, debonair
officer was changed into a stricken, mournful man. He had altered with
his ship. The _Sirdar_ and her master could hardly be recognized,
so cruel were the blows they had received. "It is impossible to see a yard ahead," he confided to his second in
command. "I have never been so anxious before in my life. Thank God the
night is drawing to a close. Perhaps, when day breaks----"

His last words contained a prayer and a hope. Even as he spoke the ship
seemed to lift herself bodily with an unusual effort for a vessel
moving before the wind. The next instant there was a horrible grinding crash forward. Each
person who did not chance to be holding fast to an upright was thrown
violently down. The deck was tilted to a dangerous angle and remained
there, whilst the heavy buffeting of the sea, now raging afresh at this
unlooked-for resistance, drowned the despairing yells raised by the
Lascars on duty. The _Sirdar_ had completed her last voyage. She was now a battered
wreck on a barrier reef. She hung thus for one heart-breaking second. Then another wave, riding triumphantly through its fellows, caught the
great steamer in its tremendous grasp, carried her onward for half her
length and smashed her down on the rocks. Her back was broken. She
parted in two halves. Both sections turned completely over in the utter
wantonness of destruction, and everything--masts, funnels, boats, hull,
with every living soul on board--was at once engulfed in a maelstrom of
rushing water and far-flung spray. CHAPTER II

THE SURVIVORS


When the _Sirdar_ parted amidships, the floor of the saloon heaved
up in the center with a mighty crash of rending woodwork and iron. Men
and women, too stupefied to sob out a prayer, were pitched headlong
into chaos. Iris, torn from the terrified grasp of her maid, fell
through a corridor, and would have gone down with the ship had not a
sailor, clinging to a companion ladder, caught her as she whirled along
the steep slope of the deck. He did not know what had happened. With the instinct of
self-preservation he seized the nearest support when the vessel struck. It was the mere impulse of ready helpfulness that caused him to stretch
out his left arm and clasp the girl's waist as she fluttered past. By
idle chance they were on the port side, and the ship, after pausing for
one awful second, fell over to starboard. The man was not prepared for this second gyration. Even as the stairway
canted he lost his balance; they were both thrown violently through the
open hatchway, and swept off into the boiling surf. Under such
conditions thought itself was impossible. A series of impressions, a
number of fantastic pictures, were received by the benumbed faculties,
and afterwards painfully sorted out by the memory. Fear, anguish,
amazement--none of these could exist. All he knew was that the lifeless
form of a woman--for Iris had happily fainted--must be held until death
itself wrenched her from him. Then there came the headlong plunge into
the swirling sea, followed by an indefinite period of gasping oblivion. Something that felt like a moving rock rose up beneath his feet. He was
driven clear out of the water and seemed to recognize a familiar object
rising rigid and bright close at hand. It was the binnacle pillar,
screwed to a portion of the deck which came away from the charthouse
and was rent from the upper framework by contact with the reef. He seized this unlooked-for support with his disengaged hand. For one
fleet instant he had a confused vision of the destruction of the ship. Both the fore and aft portions were burst asunder by the force of
compressed air. Wreckage and human forms were tossing about foolishly. The sea pounded upon the opposing rocks with the noise of ten thousand
mighty steam-hammers. A uniformed figure--he thought it was the captain--stretched out an
unavailing arm to clasp the queer raft which supported the sailor and
the girl. But a jealous wave rose under the platform with devilish
energy and turned it completely over, hurling the man with his
inanimate burthen into the depths. He rose, fighting madly for his
life. Now surely he was doomed! But again, as if human existence
depended on naught more serious than the spinning of a coin, his knees
rested on the same few staunch timbers, now the ceiling of the
music-room, and he was given a brief respite. His greatest difficulty
was to get his breath, so dense was the spray through which he was
driven. Even in that terrible moment he kept his senses. The girl,
utterly unconscious, showed by the convulsive heaving of her breast
that she was choking. With a wild effort he swung her head round to
shield her from the flying scud with his own form. The tiny air-space thus provided gave her some relief, and in that
instant the sailor seemed to recognize her. He was not remotely capable
of a definite idea. Just as he vaguely realized the identity of the
woman in his arms the unsteady support on which he rested toppled over. Again he renewed the unequal contest. A strong resolute man and a
typhoon sea wrestled for supremacy. This time his feet plunged against something gratefully solid. He was
dashed forward, still battling with the raging turmoil of water, and a
second time he felt the same firm yet smooth surface. His dormant
faculties awoke. It was sand. With frenzied desperation, buoyed now by
the inspiring hope of safety, he fought his way onwards like a maniac. Often he fell, three times did the backwash try to drag him to the
swirling death behind, but he staggered blindly on, on, until even the
tearing gale ceased to be laden with the suffocating foam, and his
faltering feet sank in deep soft white sand. [Illustration: WITH FRENZIED DESPERATION, BUOYED NOW BY THE INSPIRING
HOPE OF SAFETY, HE FOUGHT HIS WAY ONWARD LIKE A MANIAC.] Then he fell, not to rise again. With a last weak flicker of exhausted
strength he drew the girl closely to him, and the two lay, clasped
tightly together, heedless now of all things. How long the man remained prostrate he could only guess subsequently. The _Sirdar_ struck soon after daybreak and the sailor awoke to a
hazy consciousness of his surroundings to find a shaft of sunshine
flickering through the clouds banked up in the east. The gale was
already passing away. Although the wind still whistled with shrill
violence it was more blustering than threatening. The sea, too, though
running very high, had retreated many yards from the spot where he had
finally dropped, and its surface was no longer scourged with venomous
spray. Slowly and painfully he raised himself to a sitting posture, for he was
bruised and stiff. With his first movement he became violently ill. He
had swallowed much salt water, and it was not until the spasm of
sickness had passed that he thought of the girl. She had slipped from his breast as he rose, and was lying, face
downwards, in the sand. The memory of much that had happened surged
into his brain with horrifying suddenness. "She cannot be dead," he hoarsely murmured, feebly trying to lift her. "Surely Providence would not desert her after such an escape. What a
weak beggar I must be to give in at the last moment. I am sure she was
living when we got ashore. What on earth can I do to revive her?" Forgetful of his own aching limbs in this newborn anxiety, he sank on
one knee and gently pillowed Iris's head and shoulders on the other. Her eyes were closed, her lips and teeth firmly set--a fact to which
she undoubtedly owed her life, else she would have been suffocated--and
the pallor of her skin seemed to be that terrible bloodless hue which
indicates death. The stern lines in the man's face relaxed, and
something blurred his vision. He was weak from exhaustion and want of
food. For the moment his emotions were easily aroused. "Oh, it is pitiful," he almost whimpered. "It cannot be!" With a gesture of despair he drew the sleeve of his thick jersey across
his eyes to clear them from the gathering mist. Then he tremblingly
endeavored to open the neck of her dress and unclasp her corsets. He
had a vague notion that ladies in a fainting condition required such
treatment, and he was desperately resolved to bring Iris Deane back to
conscious existence if it were possible. His task was rendered
difficult by the waistband of her dress. He slipped out a clasp-knife
and opened the blade. Not until then did he discover that the nail of the forefinger on his
right hand had been torn out by the quick, probably during his
endeavors to grasp the unsteady support which contributed so materially
to his escape. It still hung by a shred and hindered the free use of
his hand. Without any hesitation he seized the offending nail in his
teeth and completed the surgical operation by a rapid jerk. Bending to resume his task he was startled to find the girl's eyes wide
open and surveying him with shadowy alarm. She was quite conscious,
absurdly so in a sense, and had noticed his strange action. "Thank God!" he cried hoarsely. "You are alive." Her mind as yet could only work in a single groove. "Why did you do that?" she whispered. "Do what?" "Bite your nail off!" "It was in my way. I wished to cut open your dress at the waist. You
were collapsed, almost dead, I thought, and I wanted to unfasten your
corsets." Her color came back with remarkable rapidity. From all the rich variety
of the English tongue few words could have been selected of such
restorative effect. She tried to assume a sitting posture, and instinctively her hands
traveled to her disarranged costume. "How ridiculous!" she said, with a little note of annoyance in her
voice, which sounded curiously hollow. But her brave spirit could not
yet command her enfeebled frame. She was perforce compelled to sink
back to the support of his knee and arm. "Do you think you could lie quiet until I try to find some water?" he
gasped anxiously. She nodded a childlike acquiescence, and her eyelids fell. It was only
that her eyes smarted dreadfully from the salt water, but the sailor
was sure that this was a premonition of a lapse to unconsciousness. "Please try not to faint again," he said. "Don't you think I had better
loosen these things? You can breathe more easily." A ghost of a smile flickered on her lips. "No--no," she murmured. "My
eyes hurt me--that is all. Is there--any--water?" He laid her tenderly on the sand and rose to his feet. His first glance
was towards the sea. He saw something which made him blink with
astonishment. A heavy sea was still running over the barrier reef which
enclosed a small lagoon. The contrast between the fierce commotion
outside and the comparatively smooth surface of the protected pool was
very marked. At low tide the lagoon was almost completely isolated. Indeed, he imagined that only a fierce gale blowing from the north-west
would enable the waves to leap the reef, save where a strip of broken
water, surging far into the small natural harbor, betrayed the position
of the tiny entrance. Yet at this very point a fine cocoanut palm reared its stately column
high in air, and its long tremulous fronds were now swinging wildly
before the gale. From where he stood it appeared to be growing in the
midst of the sea, for huge breakers completely hid the coral
embankment. This sentinel of the land had a weirdly impressive effect. It was the only fixed object in the waste of foam-capped waves. Not a
vestige of the _Sirdar_ remained seaward, but the sand was
littered with wreckage, and--mournful spectacle!--a considerable number
of inanimate human forms lay huddled up amidst the relics of the
steamer. This discovery stirred him to action. He turned to survey the land on
which he was stranded with his helpless companion. To his great relief
he discovered that it was lofty and tree-clad. He knew that the ship
could not have drifted to Borneo, which still lay far to the south. This must be one of the hundreds of islands which stud the China Sea
and provide resorts for Hainan fishermen. Probably it was inhabited,
though he thought it strange that none of the islanders had put in an
appearance. In any event, water and food, of some sort, were assured. But before setting out upon his quest two things demanded attention. The girl must be removed from her present position. It would be too
horrible to permit her first conscious gaze to rest upon those crumpled
objects on the beach. Common humanity demanded, too, that he should
hastily examine each of the bodies in case life was not wholly extinct. So he bent over the girl, noting with sudden wonder that, weak as she
was, she had managed to refasten part of her bodice. "You must permit me to carry you a little further inland," he explained
gently. Without another word he lifted her in his arms, marveling somewhat at
the strength which came of necessity, and bore her some little
distance, until a sturdy rock, jutting out of the sand, offered shelter
from the wind and protection from the sea and its revelations. "I am so cold, and tired," murmured Iris. "Is there any water? My
throat hurts me." He pressed back the tangled hair from her forehead as he might soothe a
child. "Try to lie still for a very few minutes," he said. "You have not long to suffer. I will return immediately." His own throat and palate were on fire owing to the brine, but he first
hurried back to the edge of the lagoon. There were fourteen bodies in
all, three women and eleven men, four of the latter being Lascars. The
women were saloon passengers whom he did not know. One of the men was
the surgeon, another the first officer, a third Sir John Tozer. The
rest were passengers and members of the crew. They were all dead; some
had been peacefully drowned, others were fearfully mangled by the
rocks. Two of the Lascars, bearing signs of dreadful injuries, were
lying on a cluster of low rocks overhanging the water. The remainder
rested on the sand. The sailor exhibited no visible emotion whilst he conducted his sad
scrutiny. When he was assured that this silent company was beyond
mortal help he at once strode away towards the nearest belt of trees. He could not tell how long the search for water might be protracted,
and there was pressing need for it. When he reached the first clump of brushwood he uttered a delighted
exclamation. There, growing in prodigal luxuriance, was the beneficent
pitcher-plant, whose large curled-up leaf, shaped like a teacup, not
only holds a lasting quantity of rain-water, but mixes therewith its
own palatable and natural juices. With his knife he severed two of the leaves, swearing emphatically the
while on account of his damaged finger, and hastened to Iris with the
precious beverage. She heard him and managed to raise herself on an
elbow. The poor girl's eyes glistened at the prospect of relief. Without a
word of question or surprise she swallowed the contents of both leaves. Then she found utterance. "How odd it tastes! What is it?" she
inquired. But the eagerness with which she quenched her thirst renewed his own
momentarily forgotten torture. His tongue seemed to swell. He was
absolutely unable to reply. The water revived Iris like a magic draught. Her quick intuition told
her what had happened. "You have had none yourself," she cried. "Go at once and get some. And
please bring me some more." He required no second bidding. After hastily gulping down the contents
of several leaves he returned with a further supply. Iris was now
sitting up. The sun had burst royally through the clouds, and her
chilled limbs were gaining some degree of warmth and elasticity. "What is it?" she repeated after another delicious draught. "The leaf of the pitcher-plant. Nature is not always cruel. In an
unusually generous mood she devised this method of storing water." Miss Deane reached out her hand for more. Her troubled brain refused to
wonder at such a reply from an ordinary seaman. The sailor deliberately
spilled the contents of a remaining leaf on the sand. "No, madam," he said, with an odd mixture of deference and firmness. "No more at present. I must first procure you some food." She looked up at him in momentary silence. "The ship is lost?" she said after a pause. "Yes, madam." "Are we the only people saved?" "I fear so." "Is this a desert island?" "I think not, madam. It may, by chance, be temporarily uninhabited, but
fishermen from China come to all these places to collect tortoise-shell
and _beche-de-mer_. I have seen no other living beings except
ourselves; nevertheless, the islanders may live on the south side." Another pause. Amidst the thrilling sensations of the moment Iris found
herself idly speculating as to the meaning of _beche-de-mer_, and
why this common sailor pronounced French so well. Her thoughts reverted
to the steamer. "It surely cannot be possible that the _Sirdar_ has gone to
pieces--a magnificent vessel of her size and strength?" He answered quietly--"It is too true, madam. I suppose you hardly knew
she struck, it happened so suddenly. Afterwards, fortunately for you,
you were unconscious." "How do you know?" she inquired quickly. A flood of vivid recollection
was pouring in upon her. "I--er--well, I happened to be near you, madam, when the ship broke up,
and we--er--drifted ashore together." She rose and faced him. "I remember now," she cried hysterically. "You
caught me as I was thrown into the corridor. We fell into the sea when
the vessel turned over. You have saved my life. Were it not for you I
could not possibly have escaped." She gazed at him more earnestly, seeing that he blushed beneath the
crust of salt and sand that covered his face. "Why," she went on with
growing excitement, "you are the steward I noticed in the saloon
yesterday. How is it that you are now dressed as a sailor?" He answered readily enough. "There was an accident on board during the
gale, madam. I am a fair sailor but a poor steward, so I applied for a
transfer. As the crew were short-handed my offer was accepted." Iris was now looking at him intently. "You saved my life," she repeated slowly. It seemed that this obvious
fact needed to be indelibly established in her mind. Indeed the girl
was overwrought by all that she had gone through. Only by degrees were
her thoughts marshaling themselves with lucid coherence. As yet, she
recalled so many dramatic incidents that they failed to assume due
proportion. But quickly there came memories of Captain Ross, of Sir John and Lady
Tozer, of the doctor, her maid, the hundred and one individualities of
her pleasant life aboard ship. Could it be that they were all dead? The
notion was monstrous. But its ghastly significance was instantly borne
in upon her by the plight in which she stood. Her lips quivered; the
tears trembled in her eyes. "Is it really true that all the ship's company except ourselves are
lost?" she brokenly demanded. The sailor's gravely earnest glance fell before hers. "Unhappily there
is no room for doubt," he said. "Are you quite, quite sure?" "I am sure--of some." Involuntarily he turned seawards. She understood him. She sank to her knees, covered her face with her
hands, and broke into a passion of weeping. With a look of infinite
pity he stooped and would have touched her shoulder, but he suddenly
restrained the impulse. Something had hardened this man. It cost him an
effort to be callous, but he succeeded. His mouth tightened and his
expression lost its tenderness. "Come, come, my dear lady," he exclaimed, and there was a tinge of
studied roughness in his voice, "you must calm yourself. It is the
fortune of shipwreck as well as of war, you know. We are alive and must
look after ourselves. Those who have gone are beyond our help." "But not beyond our sympathy," wailed Iris, uncovering her swimming
eyes for a fleeting look at him. Even in the utter desolation of the
moment she could not help marveling that this queer-mannered sailor,
who spoke like a gentleman and tried to pose as her inferior, who had
rescued her with the utmost gallantry, who carried his Quixotic zeal to
the point of first supplying her needs when he was in far worse case
himself, should be so utterly indifferent to the fate of others. He waited silently until her sobs ceased. "Now, madam," he said, "it is essential that we should obtain some
food. I don't wish to leave you alone until we are better acquainted
with our whereabouts. Can you walk a little way towards the trees, or
shall I assist you?" Iris immediately stood up. She pressed her hair back defiantly. "Certainly I can walk," she answered. "What do you propose to do?" "Well, madam--"

"What is your name?" she interrupted imperiously. "Jenks, madam. Robert Jenks." "Thank you. Now, listen, Mr. Robert Jenks. My name is Miss Iris Deane. On board ship I was a passenger and you were a steward--that is, until
you became a seaman. Here we are equals in misfortune, but in all else
you are the leader--I am quite useless. I can only help in matters by
your direction, so I do not wish to be addressed as 'madam' in every
breath. Do you understand me?" Conscious that her large blue eyes were fixed indignantly upon him Mr.
Robert Jenks repressed a smile. She was still hysterical and must be
humored in her vagaries. What an odd moment for a discussion on
etiquette! "As you wish, Miss Deane," he said. "The fact remains that I have many
things to attend to, and we really must eat something." "What can we eat?" "Let us find out," he replied, scanning the nearest trees with keen
scrutiny. They plodded together through the sand in silence. Physically, they
were a superb couple, but in raiment they resembled scarecrows. Both,
of course, were bare-headed. The sailor's jersey and trousers were old
and torn, and the sea-water still soughed loudly in his heavy boots
with each step. But Iris was in a deplorable plight. Her hair fell in a great wave of
golden brown strands over her neck and shoulders. Every hairpin had
vanished, but with a few dexterous twists she coiled the flying tresses
into a loose knot. Her beautiful muslin dress was rent and draggled. It
was drying rapidly under the ever-increasing power of the sun, and she
surreptitiously endeavored to complete the fastening of the open
portion about her neck. Other details must be left until a more
favorable opportunity. She recalled the strange sight that first met her eyes when she
recovered consciousness. "You hurt your finger," she said abruptly. "Let me see it." They had reached the shelter of the trees, pleasantly grateful now, so
powerful are tropical sunbeams at even an early hour. He held out his right hand without looking at her. Indeed, his eyes had
been studiously averted during the past few minutes. Her womanly
feelings were aroused by the condition of the ragged wound. "Oh, you poor fellow," she said. "How awful it must be! How did it
happen? Let me tie it up." "It is not so bad now," he said. "It has been well soaked in salt
water, you know. I think the nail was torn off when we--when a piece of
wreckage miraculously turned up beneath us." Iris shredded a strip from her dress. She bound the finger with deft
tenderness. "Thank you," he said simply. Then he gave a glad shout. "By Jove! Miss
Deane, we are in luck's way. There is a fine plantain tree." The pangs of hunger could not be resisted. Although the fruit was
hardly ripe they tore at the great bunches and ate ravenously. Iris
made no pretence in the matter, and the sailor was in worse plight, for
he had been on duty continuously since four o'clock the previous
afternoon. At last their appetite was somewhat appeased, though plantains might
not appeal to a gourmand as the solitary joint. "Now," decided Jenks, "you must rest here a little while, Miss Deane. I
am going back to the beach. You need not be afraid. There are no
animals to harm you, and I will not be far away." "What are you going to do on the beach?" she demanded. "To rescue stores, for the most part." "May I not come with you--I can be of some little service, surely?" He answered slowly: "Please oblige me by remaining here at present. In
less than an hour I will return, and then, perhaps, you will find
plenty to do." She read his meaning intuitively and shivered. "I could not do
_that_," she murmured. "I would faint. Whilst you are away I will
pray for them--my unfortunate friends." As he passed from her side he heard her sobbing quietly. When he reached the lagoon he halted suddenly. Something startled him. He was quite certain that he had counted fourteen corpses. Now there
were only twelve. The two Lascars' bodies, which rested on the small
group of rocks on the verge of the lagoon, had vanished. Where had they gone to? CHAPTER III

DISCOVERIES


The sailor wasted no time in idle bewilderment. He searched carefully
for traces of the missing Lascars. He came to the conclusion that the
bodies had been dragged from off the sun-dried rocks into the lagoon by
some agency the nature of which he could not even conjecture. They were lying many feet above the sea-level when he last saw them,
little more than half an hour earlier. At that point the beach shelved
rapidly. He could look far into the depths of the rapidly clearing
water. Nothing was visible there save several varieties of small fish. The incident puzzled and annoyed him. Still thinking about it, he sat
down on the highest rock and pulled off his heavy boots to empty the
water out. He also divested himself of his stockings and spread them
out to dry. The action reminded him of Miss Deane's necessities. He hurried to a
point whence he could call out to her and recommend her to dry some of
her clothing during his absence. He retired even more quickly, fearing
lest he should be seen. Iris had already displayed to the sunlight a
large portion of her costume. Without further delay he set about a disagreeable but necessary task. From the pockets of the first officer and doctor he secured two
revolvers and a supply of cartridges, evidently intended to settle any
dispute which might have arisen between the ship's officers and the
native members of the crew. He hoped the cartridges were uninjured; but
he could not test them at the moment for fear of alarming Miss Deane. Both officers carried pocket-books and pencils. In one of these,
containing dry leaves, the sailor made a careful inventory of the money
and other valuable effects he found upon the dead, besides noting names
and documents where possible. Curiously enough, the capitalist of this
island morgue was a Lascar jemadar, who in a belt around his waist
hoarded more than one hundred pounds in gold. The sailor tied in a
handkerchief all the money he collected, and ranged pocket-books,
letters, and jewelry in separate little heaps. Then he stripped the men
of their boots and outer clothing. He could not tell how long the girl
and he might be detained on the island before help came, and fresh
garments were essential. It would be foolish sentimentality to trust to
stores thrown ashore from the ship. Nevertheless, when it became necessary to search and disrobe the women
he almost broke down. For an instant he softened. Gulping back his
emotions with a savage imprecation he doggedly persevered. At last he
paused to consider what should be done with the bodies. His first
intent was to scoop a large hole in the sand with a piece of timber;
but when he took into consideration the magnitude of the labor
involved, requiring many hours of hard work and a waste of precious
time which might be of infinite value to his helpless companion and
himself, he was forced to abandon the project. It was not only
impracticable but dangerous. Again he had to set his teeth with grim resolution. One by one the
bodies were shot into the lagoon from the little quay of rock. He knew
they would not be seen again. He was quite unnerved now. He felt as if he had committed a colossal
crime. In the smooth water of the cove a number of black fins were
cutting arrow-shaped ripples. The sharks were soon busy. He shuddered. God's Providence had ferried him and the girl across that very place a
few hours ago. How wonderful that he and she should be snatched from
the sea whilst hundreds perished! Why was it? And those others--why
were they denied rescue? For an instant he was nearer to prayer than he
had been for years. Some lurking fiend of recollection sprang from out the vista of bygone
years and choked back the impulse. He arose and shook himself like a
dog. There was much to be done. He gathered the clothes and other
articles into a heap and placed portions of shattered packing-cases
near--to mislead Iris. Whilst thus engaged he kicked up out of the sand
a rusty kriss, or Malay sword. The presence of this implement startled
him. He examined it slowly and thrust it out of sight. Then he went back to her, after donning his stockings and boots, now
thoroughly dry. "Are you ready now, Miss Deane?" he sang out cheerily. "Ready? I have been waiting for you." Jenks chuckled quietly. "I must guard my tongue: it betrays me," he
said to himself. Iris joined him. By some mysterious means she had effected great
improvement in her appearance. Yet there were manifest gaps. "If only I had a needle and thread--" she began. "If that is all," said the sailor, fumbling in his pockets. He produced
a shabby little hussif, containing a thimble, scissors, needles and
some skeins of unbleached thread. Case and contents were sodden or
rusted with salt water, but the girl fastened upon this treasure with a
sigh of deep content. "Now, please," she cried, "I want a telegraph office and a ship." It was impossible to resist the infection of her high spirits. This
time he laughed without concealment. "We will look for them, Miss Deane. Meanwhile, will you oblige me by
wearing this? The sun is climbing up rapidly." He handed her a sou'wester which he carried. He had secured another for
himself. The merriment died away from her face. She remembered his
errand. Being an eminently sensible young woman she made no protest,
even forcing herself to tie the strings beneath her chin. When they reached the sands she caught sight of the pile of clothes and
the broken woodwork, with the small heaps of valuables methodically
arranged. The harmless subterfuge did not deceive her. She darted a
quick look of gratitude at her companion. How thoughtful he was! After
a fearful glance around she was reassured, though she wondered what had
become of--them. "I see you have been busy," she said, nodding towards the clothes and
boots. It was his turn to steal a look of sharp inquiry. 'Twere an easier task
to read the records of time in the solid rock than to glean knowledge
from the girl's face. "Yes," he replied simply. "Lucky find, wasn't it?" "Most fortunate. When they are quite dry I will replenish my wardrobe. What is the first thing to be done?" "Well, Miss Deane, I think our programme is, in the first place, to
examine the articles thrown ashore and see if any of the cases contain
food. Secondly, we should haul high and dry everything that may be of
use to us, lest the weather should break again and the next tide sweep
away the spoil. Thirdly, we should eat and rest, and finally, we must
explore the island before the light fails. I am convinced we are alone
here. It is a small place at the best, and if any Chinamen were ashore
they would have put in an appearance long since." "Do you think, then, that we may remain here long?" "It is impossible to form an opinion on that point. Help may come in a
day. On the other hand----"

"Yes?" "It is a wise thing, Miss Deane, to prepare for other contingencies." She stood still, and swept the horizon with comprehensive eyes. The
storm had vanished. Masses of cloud were passing away to the west,
leaving a glorious expanse of blue sky. Already the sea was calming. Huge breakers roared over the reef, but beyond it the waves were
subsiding into a heavy unbroken swell. The sailor watched her closely. In the quaint oilskin hat and her
tattered muslin dress she looked bewitchingly pretty. She reminded him
of a well-bred and beautiful society lady whom he once saw figuring as
Grace Darling at a fashionable bazaar. But Miss Iris's thoughts were serious. "Do you mean," she said slowly, without moving her gaze from the
distant meeting-place of sky and water, "that we may be imprisoned here
for weeks, perhaps months?" "If you cast your mind back a few hours you will perhaps admit that we
are very fortunate to be here at all." She whisked round upon him. "Do not fence with my question, Mr. Jenks. Answer me!" He bowed. There was a perceptible return of his stubborn cynicism when
he spoke. "The facts are obvious, Miss Deane. The loss of the _Sirdar_ will
not be definitely known for many days. It will be assumed that she has
broken down. The agents in Singapore will await cabled tidings of her
whereabouts. She might have drifted anywhere in that typhoon. Ultimately they will send out a vessel to search, impelled to that
course a little earlier by your father's anxiety. Pardon me. I did not
intend to pain you. I am speaking my mind." "Go on," said Iris bravely. "The relief ship must search the entire China Sea. The gale might have
driven a disabled steamer north, south, east or west. A typhoon travels
in a whirling spiral, you see, and the direction of a drifting ship
depends wholly upon the locality where she sustained damage. The coasts
of China, Java, Borneo, and the Philippines are not equipped with
lighthouses on every headland and cordoned with telegraph wires. There
are river pirates and savage races to be reckoned with. Casting aside
all other possibilities, and assuming that a prompt search is made to
the south of our course, this part of the ocean is full of reefs and
small islands, some inhabited permanently, others visited occasionally
by fishermen." He was about to add something, but checked himself. "To sum up," he continued hurriedly, "we may have to remain here for
many days, even months. There is always a chance of speedy help. We
must act, however, on the basis of detention for an indefinite period. I am discussing appearances as they are. A survey of the island may
change all these views." "In what way?" He turned and pointed to the summit of the tree-covered hill behind
them. "From that point," he said, "we may see other and larger islands. If
so, they will certainly be inhabited. I am surprised this one is not." He ended abruptly. They were losing time. Before Iris could join him he
was already hauling a large undamaged case out of the water. He laughed unmirthfully. "Champagne!" he said, "A good brand, too!" This man was certainly an enigma. Iris wrinkled her pretty forehead in
the effort to place him in a fitting category. His words and accent
were those of an educated gentleman, yet his actions and manners were
studiously uncouth when he thought she was observing him. The veneer of
roughness puzzled her. That he was naturally of refined temperament she
knew quite well, not alone by perception but by the plain evidence of
his earlier dealings with her. Then why this affectation of coarseness,
this borrowed aroma of the steward's mess and the forecastle? To the best of her ability she silently helped in the work of salvage. They made a queer collection. A case of champagne, and another of
brandy. A box of books. A pair of night glasses. A compass. Several
boxes of ship's biscuits, coated with salt, but saved by their
hardness, having been immersed but a few seconds. Two large cases of
hams in equally good condition. Some huge dish-covers. A bit of twisted
ironwork, and a great quantity of cordage and timber. There was one very heavy package which their united strength could not
lift. The sailor searched round until he found an iron bar that could
be wrenched from its socket. With this he pried open the strong outer
cover and revealed the contents--regulation boxes of Lee-Metford
ammunition, each containing 500 rounds. "Ah!" he cried, "now we want some rifles." "What good would they be?" inquired Iris. He softly denounced himself as a fool, but he answered at once: "To
shoot birds, of course, Miss Deane. There are plenty here, and many of
them are edible." "You have two revolvers and some cartridges." "Yes. They are useful in a way, but not for pot hunting." 