

E-text prepared by Janet Kegg and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations. See 15591-h.htm or 15591-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/5/9/15591/15591-h/15591-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/5/9/15591/15591-h.zip)





A WOMAN NAMED SMITH

by

MARIE CONWAY OEMLER

Author of _Slippy McGee_, etc. Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers New York

1919







[Frontispiece illustration: "Sophy," he said,
"I have found the lost key of Hynds House"]





                          To

               ELIZABETH HEYWARD OEMLER

              _Sometimes my Little Girl._


          When you were yet an Awful Baby,
          And bawled o' bed-time, I said "Maybe
          It is not best to spank or scold her:
          Suppose a fairy-tale were told her?" And gave you then, to my undoing,
          The wolf Red Riding-Hood pursuing;
          Sang Mother Goose her artless rhyming;
          Showed Jack the Magic Beanstalk climbing;
          Three Little Pigs were so appealing,
          You set up sympathetic squealing! Then, Bitsybet, you had your mother--
          _You bawled until I told another!_

          The Awful Baby's gone. Here lately
          You bear your little self sedately. You've shed your rompers; you want dresses
          Prinked out with frillies; fluff your tresses;
          Delight your daddy, aunts, and mother;
          And sisterly set straight your brother. Your bib-and-tucker days abolished,
          Your manners and your nails are polished. One baby trait remains, thank glory! You're still a glutton for a story. Still, Bitsybet, you beg another:
          So here's one for you from

                                  YOUR MOTHER. CONTENTS

CHAPTER

      I  THE SCARLET WITCH DEPARTS
     II  AND ARIEL MAKES MUSIC
    III  THE DEAR LITTLE GOD! IV  THE HYNDSES OF HYNDS HOUSE
      V  "THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF"
     VI  GLAMOURY
    VII  A BRIGHT PARTICULAR STAR
   VIII  PEACOCKS AND IVORY
     IX  THE JUDGMENT OF SPRING
      X  THE FOREST OF ARDEN
     XI  THE JINNEE INTERVENES
    XII  MAN PROPOSES
   XIII  FIRES OF YESTERDAY
    XIV  THE TALISMAN
     XV  THE HEART OF HYNDS HOUSE
    XVI  THE DEVILL HIS RAINBOW
   XVII  ON THE KNEES OF THE GODS
  XVIII  THE GREATEST GIFT
    XIX  DEEP WATERS
     XX  HARBOR




CHARACTERS


SOPHY: A woman named Smith. ALICIA GAINES: Flower o' the Peach. NICHOLAS JELNIK: Peacocks and Ivory. DOCTOR RICHARD GEDDES: _Coeur-de-Lion._

THE AUTHOR: Himself. THE SECRETARY: A Pleasant Person. MISS EMMELINE PHELPS-PARSONS: of Boston, Massachusetts. MISS MARTHA HOPKINS: "Clothed in White Samite." JUDGE GATCHELL: The Law. SCHMETZ AND RIEDRIECH: Workmen and Visionaries. THE JINNEE: A Son of the Prophet. SOPHRONISBA SCARLETT: "The Scarlett Witch." THE HYNDSES OF HYNDS HOUSE. PAYING GUESTS. THE PEOPLE OF HYNDSVILLE, SOUTH CAROLINA. MARY MAGDALEN; QUEEN-OF-SHEEBA; FERNOLIA: Important Persons. BORIS: A Russian Wolfhound. THE BLACK FAMILY: A Witch's Cat's Kittens. BEAUTIFUL DOG: Last but not Least. A WOMAN NAMED SMITH


CHAPTER I

THE SCARLETT WITCH DEPARTS


If it had been humanly possible for Great-Aunt Sophronisba Scarlett
to lug her place in Hyndsville, South Carolina, along with her into
the next world, plump it squarely in the middle of the Elysian
Fields, plaster it over with "No Trespassing" signs, and then settle
herself down to a blissful eternity of serving writs upon the angels
for flying over her fences without permission, and setting the saved
by the ears in general, she would have done so and felt that heaven
was almost as desirable a place as South Carolina. But as even she
couldn't impose her will upon the next world, and there was nobody
in this one she hated less than she did me--possibly because she had
never laid eyes on me--she willed me Hynds House and what was left
of the Hynds fortune; tying this string to her bequest: I must
occupy Hynds House within six months, and I couldn't rent it, or
attempt to sell it, without forfeiture of the entire estate. I can fancy the ancient beldam sniggering sardonically the while she
figured to herself the chagrined astonishment, the helpless wrath,
of her watchfully waiting neighbors, when they should discover that
historic Hynds House, dating from the beginning of things
Carolinian, had passed into the unpedigreed hands of a woman named
Smith. I can fancy her balefully exact perception of the attitude so
radically conservative a community must needs assume toward such an
intruder as myself, foisted upon it, so to speak, by an enemy who
never failed to turn the trick. Because I'm not a Hynds, at all. Great Aunt Sophronisba was my aunt
not by blood but by marriage; she having, when she was no longer
what is known as a spring chicken, met my Great-Uncle Johnny
Scarlett and scandalized all Hyndsville by marrying him out of hand. I have heard that she was insanely in love with him, and I believe
it; nothing short of an over-mastering passion could have induced
one of the haughty Hyndses to marry a person with such family
connections as his. For my father, George Smith, was a ruddy
English ship-chandler who pitched upon Boston for a home, and lived
with his family in the rooms above his shop; and my grandmother
Smith dropped her "aitches" with the cheerful ease of one to the
manner born, bless her stout old Cockney heart! I can remember her
hearing me my spelling-lesson of a night, her spectacles far down on
her old button of a nose, her white curls bobbing from under her
cap. "What! Carn't spell 'saloon'? Listen, then, Miss: There's a hess and
a hay and a hell and two hoes and a henn! Now, then, d 'ye spell
it!" Not that Mrs. Johnny ever accepted us. It was borne in upon the
Smiths that undesirable in-laws are outlaws. This despite the fact
that my mother's pink-and-white English face was a gentler copy of
what her uncle's had been in his youth; and that when I came along,
some years after the dear old man's death, I was named Sophronisba
at Mrs. Johnny's urgent request. After Great-Uncle Johnny died, as if the last tie which bound her to
ordinary humanity had snapped, his widow retired into a seclusion
from which she emerged only to sue somebody. She said the world was
being turned topsyturvy by people who were allowed to misbehave to
their betters, and who needed to be taught a lesson and their proper
place; and that so long as she retained her faculties, she would do
her duty in that respect, please God! She did her duty so well in that respect that the Hynds fortune,
which even civil war and reconstruction hadn't been able altogether
to wreck, dwindled to a mere fifteen thousand dollars; and she
wasn't on speaking terms with anybody but Judge Gatchell, her
lawyer. She would have quarreled with him, too, had she dared. To the minister, who bearded her for her soul's sake every now and
then, she spoke in words brief and curt:

"You here again? Wanted to see me, hey? Well, you've done it. Now
get out!" And in the meantime the years passed and my own immediate family
passed with them; but still the gaunt old woman lived on in her
gaunt old house, becoming in time a myth to me, and to Hyndsville as
well; where they referred to her, succinctly, as "the Scarlet
Witch." I heard from her directly only once, and that was the year
she sent me a red flannel petticoat for a Christmas present. After
that, as if she'd done her worst, she ignored me altogether. My mother had wanted me to be a school-teacher, in her eyes the acme
of respectability. But as it happens, there are two things I
wouldn't be: one's a school-teacher, the other a minister's wife. If I had to marry the average minister, I should infallibly hate all
church-goers; if I had to teach the average school-child and wrestle
with the average school-board, I should end by burning joss-sticks
to Herod. So I disappointed my mother by becoming a typist. After her death I
secured a foothold in a New York house--I'd always wanted to live in
New York--and went up, step by step, from what may be called a
rookie in the outside office, to private secretary to the Head. And
I'd been a business woman for all of seventeen years when Great-Aunt
Sophronisba Scarlett departed at the age of ninety-eight years and
eleven months, and willed that I should take up my life in the house
where she had dropped hers. "Oh, Sophy!" cried Alicia Gaines, the one person in the world who
didn't call me Miss Smith. "Oh, Sophy, it's like a fairy-story come
true! Think of falling heir to an old, old, old lady's old, old, old
house, in South Carolina! I hope there's a big old door with a
fan-light, and a Greeky front with white pillars, and a big old
hall, and a big old garden--"

"And an old stove that smokes and old windows that rattle and an old
roof that leaks, and maybe big, big old rats that squeak o' nights,"
I said darkly. For the first rapture of the astonishing news was
beginning to wear thin, and doubt was appearing in spots. "Sophy Smith! Why, if such a wonderful, beautiful, unexpected thing
had happened to _me_--" Alicia's blue eyes misted. I have known her
since the day she was born, next door to us in Boston, and she is
the only person I have ever seen who can cry and look pretty while
she's doing it; also, she can cry and laugh at the same time, being
Irish. Some foolish people, who have been deceived by Alicia
Gaines's baby stare and complexion, have said she hasn't sense
enough to get in out of a shower of rain. This is, of course, a
libel. But what's the odds, when every male being in sight would
rush to her aid with an umbrella? After her mother's death I fell heir to Alicia, who, like me, was an
only child, and without relatives. Lately, I'd gotten her into our
filing-department. She didn't belong in a business office, she whose
proper background should have been an adoring husband and the latest
thing in pink-and-white babies. "But somebody's got to think of stoves and roofs and rats and such,
or there'd be no living in any old house," I reminded her,
practically. "My dear girl, don't you realize that this thing isn't
all beer and skittles?" Alicia wrinkled her white forehead. "Consider me, a hardy late-summer plant forced to uproot and
transplant myself to a soil which may not in the least agree with
me. Why, this means changing all my fixed habits, to trot off to
live in an old house that is probably haunted by the cross-grained
ghost of a lady of ninety-nine!" "If I were a ghost, you'd be the very last person on earth I'd want
to tackle, Sophy," remarked Alicia, dimpling. "And as for that new
soil, why, you'll bloom in it! You--well, Sophy dear, up to now you
have been root-bound; you've never had a chance to grow, much less
to blossom. Now you can do both." I who was confidential secretary to the Head, looked at the girl who
was admittedly the worst file-clerk on record; and she looked back
at me, nodding her bright head with young wisdom. "I hope," she said, wistfully, "that there'll be all sorts of lovely
things in your house, Sophy,--old mirrors, old books, old pictures,
old furniture, old china. Lord send you'll find an attic! All my
life I've day-dreamed of finding an attic that's been shut up and
forgotten for ages and ages, and discovering all sorts of lovely
things in all sorts of hiding-places. When I think my day-dream may
come true for you, Sophy, it almost reconciles me to the pain of
parting from you; though what on earth I'm to do without you,
goodness only knows!" She was sitting on my bed, kimonoed,
slippered, and braided. And now she looked at me with a suddenly
quivering chin. "Alicia," said I, "ever since I discovered that there's no mistake
about that lawyer's letter--that Hynds House is unaccountably, but
undoubtedly mine and I've got to live in it if I want to keep it--it
has been borne in upon me that you are just about the worst
file-clerk on earth. You're a navy-blue failure in a business
office. Business isn't your _motif_. Now, will you resign the job
you fill execrably, and accept one you can fill beyond all
praise--come South with me, share half-and-half whatever comes, and
help make that old house a happy home for us both?" "Don't joke." Her lips went white. "Please, please, Sophy dear,
don't joke like that! I--well, I just couldn't bear it." "I never joke," I said indignantly. "You little goose, did you
imagine for one minute that I contemplated leaving you here by
yourself, any more than I contemplate going down there by myself, if
I can help it? Stop to think for a moment, Alicia. You have been
like a little sister to me, ever since you were born. And--I'm
alone, except for you--and not in my first youth--and not
beautiful--and not gifted." At that she hurled herself off my bed and cried upon my shoulder,
with her slim arms around my neck. Those young arms were beginning
to make me feel wistful. If things had been different--if I had been
lovely like the Scarletts, instead of looking like the Smiths--there
might have been--

Well, I don't look like the Scarletts; so there wasn't. The best I
could do was to drop a kiss on Alicia's forehead, where the bright
young hair begins to break into curls. And that is how, neither of us having the faintest notion of what
was in store for us, Alicia Gaines and I turned our backs upon New
York and set our faces toward Hynds House. CHAPTER II

AND ARIEL MAKES MUSIC


We had wired Judge Gatchell when to expect us, but the venerable
negro hackman who was on the lookout for us explained that the judge
had a "misery in the laigs" which confined him to his room, and that
he advised us to go to the hotel for a while. We couldn't, for wasn't our own house waiting for us? A minute later
we had bundled into the ancient hack and were bumping and splashing
through unpaved streets, getting wet, gray glimpses of old houses in
old gardens, and every now and then a pink crape-myrtle blushing in
the pouring rain. Hyndsville was, it seemed, one of those sprawling,
easy-going old Carolina towns that liked plenty of elbow-room and
wasn't particular about architectural order. Hynds House itself was
on the extreme edge of things. The hack presently stopped before a high iron gate in a waist-high
brick wall with a spiked iron railing on top of it, the whole
overrun with weeds and creepers. Of Hynds House itself one couldn't
see anything but a stack of chimneys above a forest of trees. The gate creaked and groaned on its rusty hinges; then we were
walking up a weedy, rain-soaked path where untrimmed branches
slapped viciously at our faces, and tough brambles, like snares and
gins, tried to catch our feet. On each side was a jungle. Of a
sudden the path turned, widened into a fairly cleared space; and
Hynds House was before us. We had expected a fair-sized dwelling-house in its garden. And there
confronted us, glooming under the gray and threatening sky that
seemed the only proper and fitting canopy for it, what looked like a
pile reared in medieval Europe rather than a home in America. Its
stained brick walls, partly covered with ivy and lichens; its
smokeless chimneys; its barred doors; its many shuttered windows,
like blind eyes--all appeared deliberately to thrust aside human
habitancy. _A residence for woman, child, and man,
          A dwelling-place,--and yet no habitation;
          A House,--but under some prodigious ban
          Of Excommunication._

Yet there was nothing ruinous about it, for the Hyndses had sought
to build it as the old Egyptians sought to build their temples--to
last forever, to defy time and decay. It was not only meant to be a
place for Hyndses to be born and live and die in: it was a monument
to Family Pride, a brick-and-granite symbol of place and power. The walls were of an immense thickness, the corners further
strengthened with great blocks of granite. The house had but two
stories, with an attic under its sloping roofs, but it gave an
effect of height as well as of solidity. Behind it was another brick
building, the lower part of which had been used for stables and
carriage house, and the upper portion as quarters for the house
slaves, in the old days. Another smaller building, slate-roofed and
ivy covered, was the spring-house, with a clear, cold little spring
still bubbling away as merrily in its granite basin, as if all the
Hyndses were not dead and gone. And there was a deep well, protected
by a round stone wall, with a cupola-like roof supported by four
slender pillars. And everything was dank and weedy and splotched
with mildew and with mold. _O'er all there hung a shadow and a fear
             A sense of mystery the spirit daunted
           And said, as plain as whisper in the ear,
             The place is Haunted!_

When we opened the great front door, above which was the fan-light
of Alicia's hope, just as the round front porch had the big pillars,
a damp and moldy air met us. The house had not been opened since
Sophronisba's funeral, and everything--stairs, settles, tables,
cabinets, pictures, the chairs backed inhospitably against the wall
as if to prevent anybody from sitting in them--was covered with a
shrouding pall of dust. The hall was cross-shaped, the side passage running between the back
drawing-room and library on one side, and the dining-room and two
locked rooms on the other. It was a nice place, that side passage,
with a fireplace and settles; and beautiful windows opening upon the
tangled garden. All the down-stairs walls were paneled: precious
woods were not so hard to come by when Hynds House was built. It was
lovely, of course, but depressingly dark. We got one of the big windows open, and let some stale damp air out
and some fresh damp air in. Then, having despatched our hackman for
certain necessities, Alicia and I turned and stared at each other,
another Alicia and Sophy staring back at us from a dim and dusty
mirror opposite. If, at that moment, I could have heard the familiar
buzzer at my elbow! If I could have heard the good everyday New York
"Miss Smith, attend to this, please"! God wot, if I had not
literally burned my bridges behind me--Oh, oh, I had! "The garden around this house,"--Alicia spoke in a
whisper--"stretches to the end of the world and then laps over. It
hasn't been trimmed since Adam and Eve moved out. But those
crape-myrtle trees are quite the loveliest things left over from
Paradise, and I'm glad we came here to see them with our own eyes! Brace up, Sophy! We'll feel heaps better when we've had something to
eat. Aren't you frightfully hungry, and doesn't a chill suspicion
strike you, somewhere around the wishbone, that if that Ancient
Mariner of a hackman doesn't get back soon we shall starve?" At that moment, from somewhere--it seemed to us from up-stairs--a
sudden flood of sweetest sound poured goldenly through that sad,
dim, dusty house, as if a blithe spirit had slipped in unawares and
was bidding us welcome. For a few wonderful moments the exquisite
music filled the dark old place and banished gloom and neglect and
decay; then, with a pattering scamper, as of the bare, rosy feet of
a beloved and mischievous child making a rush for his crib, it went
as suddenly as it had come. There was nothing to break the silence
but the swishing downpour of the outside rain. When I could speak: "It came from up-stairs! Somebody's playing a
violin up-stairs. I'm going up-stairs to find out who it is." Alicia demurred: "It may be a real person, Sophy!--a real person
with a real violin. But I'd rather believe it's Ariel's self, come
out of those pink crape-myrtles. Don't go up-stairs, please, Sophy!" "Nonsense!" said I. "Somebody's played a violin and I mean to know
who he is!" And up-stairs I went, into a huge dark hall, with the cross-passage
cutting it, and closed doors everywhere. At the front end was a most
beautiful window, opening doorlike upon a tiny iron bird-cage of a
balcony, hung up Southern fashion under the roof of the pillared
front porch. At the rear a more ordinary door opened upon the broad
veranda that ran the full width of the house. Both door and window
were closed, and bolted on the inside, and the big, dark, dusty
rooms which I resolutely entered were quite empty, their fireplaces
boarded up, their windows close-shuttered. There was no sign
anywhere of violin or player. I went down-stairs just as wise as I
had gone up. "I told you it was Ariel!" Alicia stood by the open window--our
windows are sunk into the walls, and cased with solid black walnut
as Impervious to decay as the granite itself--and leaned out to the
wet and dripping garden. "Sophy," said she, in her high, sweet voice that carries like a
thrush's. "Sophy, the best thing about this world is, that the best
things in it aren't really _real_. This is one of its enchanted
places. Sycorax used to live in this house: that's what you feel
about it yet. But now she's gone, her spell is lifting, and Hynds
House is going to come alive and be young again!" "At least," I grumbled, "admit that the dust inside and the rain
outside and the weeds and mud are real; and I'm really hungry!" "Me too!" Alicia assented instantly and ungrammatically. "Oh, for a
square meal!" She thrust her charming head out far enough for the
rain to splatter on her bright hair and whip it into curls, and
bring a deeper shade of pink to her cheeks, and a deeper blue
to her eyes. "Ariel!" she fluted, "Spirit of the Violin, I'm
hungry--earthily, worm-of-the-dustly, unromantically hungry! Send us
something to eat." "Why don't you rap on one of the tables," I suggested ironically,
"and call up your high spirits to do your bidding?" "My high spirits won't be above making you a soothing cup of coffee
just as soon as that ancient African returns. In the meantime,
let's look around us." People had forests to draw from when they built rooms like those in
Hynds House. There were eight of them on the first floor. On one
side the two drawing-rooms, the library, and behind that a room
evidently used for an office. We didn't know it then, of course, but
that library was treasure trove. Almost every book and pamphlet
covering the early American settlements, that is of any value at
all, is in Hynds House library; we have some pamphlets that even the
British Museum lacks. The rooms had enough furniture to stock half a dozen antique-shops,
all of it in a shocking state, the brocades in tatters, the carvings
caked with dust. You couldn't see yourself in the tarnished mirrors,
the portraits were black with dirt, and most of the prints were
badly stained. Alicia swooped upon a pair of china dogs with mauve
eyes and black spots and sloppy red tongues, on a what-not in a
corner. She said she had been aching for a china dog ever since she
was born. "Oh, Sophy!" cried she, dancing, "wasn't it heavenly of that old
soul to die and leave you two whole china dogs! I wouldn't want
sure-enough dogs that looked like these, but as china dogs they're
perfect! And cast your eyes about you, Sophy! Have you ever in all
your life seen a house that needed so much done to it as this house
does? "'If seven maids with seven mops,
              Swept it for half a year,
            Do you suppose,' the Walrus said,
              'That that would make it clear?' 'I doubt it,' said the Carpenter,
              'And--'

"Sophy! I shall clean some of these windows myself. Did you know
that Queen Victoria, when she was a child, had the same virtuous
inclination? Well, she had, and you see how she turned out!" "I don't believe it!" "Don't be skeptical!--Look at that pink mustache-cup over there on
that little table! Who do you suppose had a mustache and drank out
of that cup? It couldn't have been Sophronisba herself? _I_
insist that it was a black-mustached Confederate with a red sash
around his waist. I adore Confederates! They're the most glamorous,
romantic figures in American history. I wish a black mustache went
along with the cup and the house; don't you? It would make things so
much more interesting!" And she began to sing, at the top of her
voice, in the sad and faded room that hadn't heard a singing voice
these many, many years:

          "'Arrah, Missis McGraw,' the Captain said,
           'Will ye make a sojer av your son Ted? Wid a g-r-rand mus-tache, an' a three-cocked hat,
           Wisha, Missis McGraw, wouldn't you like that! _You like that--tooroo looroo loo!_
          _Wisha, Missis McGraw, wouldn't you like that!_'"

If Great-Aunt Sophronisba's ghost, and the scandalized ghosts of all
the haughy Hyndses ever intended to walk, now was the accepted time! And as if that graceless ballad were the signal for something to
happen, upon the hall window-shutter sounded three loud, imperative
knocks. Alicia dashed down the hall. "Sophy!" she called, breathlessly, "Sophy!" Framed in the open window, with the dripping trees and the slanting
rain behind him, was the bizarre, the astounding figure of a
gnomelike negro in a terra-cotta robe fastened about the waist with
a girdle made of a twisted black shawl with the most beautiful
Persian border and fringe. A striped silk scarf was bound
turban-wise about his head, from which tufts of snowy wool
protruded. From his ears hung crescent-shaped silver ear-rings
studded with coral and turquoise; a necklace of the same barbaric
magnificence was about his neck, and his arms were covered with
bracelets. His deep-set eyes, his flat nose, his mouth set in a
thousand fine wrinkles, the whole aspect of him, breathed a sly and
impish drollery. He glanced from Alicia to me with the smiling
malice of a jinnee delighted to mystify mortals. Then with a rapid
movement he shifted the umbrella he carried over a large
linen-covered tray, eased the latter upon the deep window-ledge, and
beckoned with a very black and beringed hand. "For _us_?" breathed Alicia. With a fine flourish he swept aside the linen covering. And there
was golden-brown chicken, white rice, cream gravy, hot biscuit, cool
sliced tomatoes with sprigs of green parsley, fresh butter, fresh
cream, a great slab of heavenly cake, a wicker basket of Elberta
peaches, rain-cooled, odorous, delicious, and a pot of steaming
coffee. On the edge of the tray was a cluster of rain-washed roses. "No," Alicia doubted, "this is not true: it can't be!--Sophy, do you
see it, too?" He motioned her to take the tray; and his ear-rings swung, and all
his bracelets set up a silver tinkling. An automobile honked outside
in the street shut off by our garden trees, and a dog barked. Our
jinnee cocked a cautious head and a listening ear, thrust the tray
upon Alicia, and with inconceivable swiftness vanished around a
corner. "Let's hurry and eat it before it, too, takes to its heels," said
Alicia, practically. Without further ado we dragged forward a small
table, and fell to. Aladdin probably tasted fare like that, the
first time he rubbed the magic lamp. When we had polished the last chicken bone, and had that comfortable
feeling that nothing can give so thoroughly as a good meal, Alicia
carefully examined the china and silver. "Old blue-and-white English china; English silver initialed 'R.H.G.' Sophy, handle this prayerfully: it's an apostle spoon. Think of
having a jinnee fetch you your coffee, and of stirring it with an
apostle spoon." She spoke reverently. Alicia is the sort who flattens her nose
against antique-shop windows, and would go without dessert for a
month of Sundays and trudge afoot to save carfare, if thereby she
might buy an old print, or a bit of pottery; just as I am content to
admire the print or the pottery in the shop window, feeling sure
that when they are finally sold to somebody better able to buy them,
something else I can admire just as much will take their place. Mine
is a philosophy not altogether to be despised, though Alicia rejects
it. She handled the blue-and-white ware with tender hands, laid the
silver together, and set the tray upon the window-ledge. Then, on a
leaf of my pocket memorandum--she never carries one of her own--she
scribbled the following absurdity and pinned it to the linen cover:

     Ariel, accept the gratitude of mortals set down hungry in
     the house of Sycorax. Gay and kind spirit, when we broke
     your bread you broke her spell: the wishbone of your chicken
     has cooked her goose! Maker of Music, Donator of Dinners,
     thanks! "And now," said she, "having been serenaded, and satisfied with
nothing short of perfection, let's go up-stairs, Sophy, and decide
where we shall sleep to-night." We chose the front room because of a gate-legged table that Alicia
wanted to say her prayers beside, and because of the particularly
fine portrait of a colonial gentleman above the mantel, a very
handsome man in claret-colored satin, with a vest of flowered gold
brocade, a gold-hilted sword upon which his fine fingers rested, and
a pair of silk-stockinged legs of which he seemed complacently
aware. "I wish you weren't dead," Alicia told him regretfully. "Your taste
in clothes is above all praise, though I fancy you were somewhat too
vain of your legs, sir. I never knew before that men had legs like
that, did you, Sophy?" "I take no pleasure in the legs of a man." I quoted the Psalmist
acridly enough. "Don't pay any attention to Sophy," Alicia advised the portrait,
naughtily. "Just to prove how much we both admire you, you shall
have Ariel's roses." She had brought them up-stairs with us, and now
she walked over to the mantel to place them beneath the picture. "Why!" exclaimed Alicia, "why!" and she held up nothing more
remarkable than a package of cigarettes, evidently left there
recently, for it was not dusty. "I dare say Judge Gatchell forgot it, when he was looking over the
house. That reminds me: the silver you admired so much was marked
'G.' Then, in all probability, Judge Gatchell sent us that spread,
and very thoughtful it was of him, I must say." "Rheumatic old judges don't smoke superfine cigarettes, Sophy, nor
send black tray-bearers in terra-cotta robes out on rainy days for
the entertainment of strange ladies. No: this is something, or
somebody, _young_. But since when did Ariel take to tobacco?" "Let's go down-stairs," I suggested, "and wait for that old darky,
if he is a real darky and ever means to return." I did not fancy
those big forlorn rooms, with their great beds that didn't seem made
for people to sleep and dream in, but to stay awake and worry over
their sins--and then die in. The down-stairs halls had grown darker, and the rain came down in a
gray sheet, so that the open window seemed a hole cut into it. The
tray we had left on the window-ledge was gone. In its place was
nothing more romantic than a freshly filled and trimmed kerosene
lamp, two candles, and a box of matches. When our Jehu finally returned he rummaged out some firewood from
the sooty kitchen and built us a fire in the hall. He was a pleasant
old negro, garrulous and kindly, by name Adam King, or, as he
informed us, "Unc' Adam" to all Hyndsville folks. "Uncle Adam," Alicia asked, while he was drying himself before the
blazing logs, "Uncle Adam, who's the violinist around here?" Uncle Adam looked at the Yankee lady a bit doubtfully. The old
fellow was slightly deaf, but he would have died rather than admit
it. "Wellum," he told us, "since ol' Mis' Scarlett's gone, folks does
say de doctor is. Dat's 'cause ob de Hynds' blood in 'im. All dem
Hyndses was natchelly de violentest kind o' pussons, an' Doctor, he
ain't behin' de do'." He rubbed his hands and chuckled. "Lawd, yes! I know de Doctor, man an' boy, an' he suttinly rips an' ta'hs when
he's riled! You ought ter seen 'im de day ol' Mis' Scarlett let fly
wid 'er shot-gun an' blowed de tails spang off'n two of 'is hens an'
de haid off'n 'is prize rooster! De fowls come thoo' de haidge, an'
ol' Mis' grab 'er gun an' blaze away. De Doctor hear de squallation,
an' come flyin' outer de office an' right ovah de haidge. I 'uz
totin' fiahwood fo' ol' Mis' dat day, an' I drap een de bushes; it
ain't no place fo' sensible niggahs when white folks grab shot-guns. Doctor see me an' holler: 'Adam! git outer dem bushes, you ol' fool! You my witness what dis hellion's done to my fowls!' "Ol' Mis' Scarlett she s'anter ter de winder wid 'er gun sort o'
hangin' loose, an' holler: 'Adam! Come outer dem bushes 'fo' I
pickle yo' hide! You my witness ob dis ruffian trispassin' on my
prop'ty an' cussin' an' seducin' a ol' woman widout 'er consent,'
she says. 'Has I retched my age,' says ol' Mis' Scarlett, 'to have
his fowls ruinin' my gyardin', an' him whut's a dunghill rooster
himself flyin' ovah my fences unbeknownst?' "'If there evah was a leather-hided ol' hen ripe foh roastin' on
Beelzebub's own griddle, it's you, you gallows ol' witch!' says
Doctor, shakin' 'is fist up at her. "'Aha! I got a plain case!' says ol' Mis', grim-like. 'I'll have a
warrant out foh you dis day, Geddes, you owdacious villyum!' "And she done it. Yas'm. An' dey done sont de shariff atter me for
witness, all two bofe o' dem." "Well, and what did you do?" I asked, curiously. I was getting a
side-light on Great-Aunt Sophronisba. "Me? I got on muh knees an' wrastled wid de speret," said Uncle
Adam. "I done tuck mah troubles to de Lawd, whichin He _'bleeged_
ter know I cyant deal wid ol' Mis' Scarlett an' de Doctor. Missis, I
prayed!" "Oh! And what happened then?" The old man looked around him, cautiously, and lowered his voice:
"Wellum, Mis' Scarlett she tuck an' went an' up an' died. Yessum! She done daid. An' next thing we-all heah, she 'd went an' lef de
Hynds place to youna, 'stead ob de Doctor, or dat furriner." "She had Hynds relatives, then? I didn't know." "Wellum, de Doctor an' ol' Mis' Scarlett wuz cousins. Dat's how come
dey could fight so powerful. Ain't you nevah had no relations to
fight wid, ma'ams?" We explained, regretfully, that we hadn't. "Den you ain't nevah knowed, an' you ain't nevah gwine ter knew,
whut real, sho-nough fightin' _is_," said Unc' Adam, with
conviction. "You mentioned a foreigner," hinted Alicia. The old man shook his head deprecatingly. "Don't seem lak I evah
able to rickermembah dat boy's name, nohow. His grampa' 'uz a Hynds,
likewise his ma, but she 'sisted on marryin' er furriner, an' de
boy takes atter de furriners 'stead er we-all. 'Taint de po' boy's
fault, but ol' Mis' Scarlett hated 'im wuss 'n pizen. De only notice
she take er de boy is ter warrant 'im fo' trispassin'. Dat 's how
come folkses ter say--" he paused suddenly. "Well, what do folks say?" I wanted to know. "Well, Missis," he admitted, "dey say it's natchel to fight wid yo'
kin whilst you 're livin', but 'taint natchel ter carry de fight
inter de grave-yahd. Dat's whut she done, ma'ams. An' folks is
outdone wid 'er, whichin' she ain't lef de Hynds place to de
Hyndses, but done tuhn it ovah ter--uh--ah--"

"To a Yankee woman named Smith?" "Yessum, dat's it." "Had either the Doctor or the foreigner any real claim or right to
this property, do you know?" "No, ma'am, we-all 'lows dey ain't got no mo' law-right dan whut
you's got. Ol' Mis' Scarlett ain't _'bleeged_ ter lef it to de
Hyndses, but folks thinks she oughter done it, an' dey's powerful
riled 'cause she ain't. Dey minds dis wuss'n all de warrantin' an'
rampagin' an' rucusses she cut up whilst she wuz wid us." "I see," said I, thoughtfully. "Missises," said the old man, anxiously, "you-all ain't meanin' ter
stay hyuh to-night, is you?" He seemed really distressed at the
notion. "Lemme take you-all to de hotel, please, Missises! Don't
stay hyuh to-night!" "Why not? What's the matter with this house?" Again he looked around him, stealthily. "It's h'anted!" said he, desperately. "Missis, listen: I 'uz comin'
home from prayer-meetin', 'bout two weeks ago, walkin' back er dis
same place in de dark ob de moon. An' all ob a suddin I hyuh de
pianner in de pahlor, _ting-a-ling-a-ling! ting-a-ling-a-ling!_ I
say, 'Who de name er Gawd in ol' Mis' Scarlett's pahlor, when dey
ain't nobody in it?' I look thoo de haidge, an' dey's one weenchy
light in de room, an' whilst I'm lookin', it goes out! An' de
pianner, she's a-playin' right along! Yessum, de pianner, she's er
tingalingin' by 'erself in de middle o' de night!" "And who was playing it, Uncle Adam?" "Dat's what I axin yit: who playin' Mis' Scarlett's pianner when dey
wasn't nobody in de house?" "Why didn't you find out?" "Who, me?" cried the old man, with horror. "If I could er borried a
extra pahr er laigs from er yaller dawg, I'd a did it right den, so 's
I could run twict faster 'n I done!--Whichin' please, ma'ams, lemme
take you-all ter de hotel." When he saw that he couldn't prevail upon us to do so, he left us
regretfully, shaking his head. He would come back early in the
morning to do anything we might require. But he wouldn't stay
overnight in Hynds House for any consideration. No negro in the
county would. "Alicia," said I, when we had had a cup of tea made over our spirit
lamp, and firelight and lamplight made the place less depressing and
eerie, "Alicia, that terrible old woman has played me, like an ace
up her sleeve, against her neighbors and her family. She has left me
a house that needs everything done to it except to burn it down and
rebuild it, and a garden that will have to be cleared out with
dynamite. And she has seen to it that I have the preconceived
prejudice of all Hyndsville." Alicia's pretty, soft lips closed firmly. "Here we are and here we stay!" she said determinedly. "Nobody's
been disinherited to make room for us. Sophy, in all our lives we
have never had a chance to make a real home. Well, then, Hynds House
is our chance, and I'd just like to see anybody take it away from
us!" "Up, Guards, and at 'em!" said I, smiling at her tone. I am slower
than she, but even more stubborn, as the English are. "Tell your admiral that if he gets in my way I will blow his ships
out of the water!" said Alicia, gallantly. But when we went up-stairs, we took good care to lock our door, and
bolt it, too. Alicia said her prayers kneeling by the gate-legged
table, snuggled into bed between the clean sheets we had brought
with us, tucked a china dog under her chin, and went to sleep like
the child that she was. I said the Shepherd's Psalm and went to
sleep, too. I was awakened suddenly, and found myself sitting up in bed, staring
wildly about the strange room. The house was breathlessly still. My
heart pounded against my ribs, the blood beat in my ears. I was
oppressed with a nameless terror, an anguished sense that something
had happened, something irremediable. The feeling was so strong that
my throat closed chokingly. I am particular in thus setting it down, because it was an
experience that all of us under that roof had to undergo. You had to
fight it, shut your mind against it, oppose your will to it like a
stone wall, refuse to let it master you. Then, as if defeated, it
would go as suddenly, as inexplicably, as it had come. That's what I did then, more by instinct than reason. But I was
exhausted when I finally got back to sleep. CHAPTER III

THE DEAR LITTLE GOD! When we went over Hynds House the next morning and took stock, I
began to entertain very, very peculiar feelings toward Great-Aunt
Sophronisba Scarlett, who, it would appear, had given me a white
elephant which I could neither hire out for its keep, nor yet sell
out of hand. I had to live in Hynds House, and Hynds House as it
stood wasn't to be lived in. The rain had ceased, and from the outside jungle came innumerable
calls of birds, and fresh and woodsy odors; but the whole aspect of
the place was grim and forbidding. At the back, where there wasn't
such an overgrowth, the lane had been closed, barricaded with
barbed-wire entanglements, and fairly bristled with thistles and "No
Trespassing" signs. "All this house needs is a mortuary tablet set up over the front
door." But Alicia demurred. "I'm not a bit disheartened," she declared stoutly. "There's just
one thing to be done to this house--first make it beautiful, and
then make it pay. It can be done. It's going to be done. It's _got_
to be done. And when it's done--we'll have a home. Vision it as it's
going to be, Sophy--rosewood and mahogany and walnut, old brass and
china and prints and portraits, the sort of things we've only been
able to dream of up to now. Why, this house has been waiting for us! We were born to come here and make it over: it's _our_ house!" Alicia, has the gay courage of the Irish. The heavy iron knocker on the front door resounded clamorously. "Uncle Adam thinks we've been ha'nted out of existence, and he's
hammering to wake the dead," said I. But it wasn't Uncle Adam to whom we opened the door. An enormous,
square-shouldered man stood there, looking from me to Alicia with
bright, keen blue eyes behind glasses. He was so big, so
magnificently proportioned, that he held one's attention, at first,
by mere size. Then one had time to observe that although he hadn't
the sleek and careful grooming of successful New Yorkers, he wore
his clothes as, say, Coeur de Lion must have worn mail. He hadn't
the brisk business manner, either; but there radiated from him an
assured authority, as of one used to having his orders obeyed
without question. No one could pass him over with a casual eye. I
have known people who hated him frankly and heartily; I have known
people who adored him. I have never known any one who was lukewarm
where he was concerned. "Which of you is Miss Smith?" he asked, in a very pleasant voice. "Miss Smith, I'm your next-door neighbor, house to the right:
Doctor Richard Geddes, at your service." We gave him to understand, with the usual polite commonplaces, that
we were pleased to make his acquaintance, and ushered him into the
dilapidated drawing-room. "I'd have come over yesterday, when I learned you'd arrived, except
that my cook was suddenly seized with the notion she'd been
conjured, and I had to--er--stand by and persuade her she wasn't. Swore she had my lunch ready, as usual; swore she'd placed it on a
tray, left it on the kitchen table for a few minutes, and when she
came back from the pantry, not ten feet away, the tray was gone. Vanished. Disappeared. Nowhere to be found. She flopped on the floor
and howled. She weighs two hundred and forty pounds and I hadn't a
derrick handy. I had to roll her up on bed-slats. You've never had a
conjured two-hundred-and-forty-pounder on your hands, have you? No? Well, then, don't. _But_ if you ever do, try a bed-slat. This
morning she discovered the tray in its usual place, dishes and
silver intact, nothing missing. She's looking for the end of the
world." "O-o-h!" quavered Alicia, while I could feel my knees knocking
together. "O-o-o-h! How very, very singular! And--and was that all?" "All! Wasn't that enough? I've had burned biscuit and muddy coffee,
because my cook's got liver and nerves, and insists it's her soul,"
said the doctor, grimly. "I've given her to understand that if she
hasn't got her soul saved before to-night, I'll physic it out of her
and hang her hide on the bushes, inside out, _salted_." He added,
hastily: "In the meantime, I hope you haven't fared too badly in
this mildewed jail?" "Thank you, no," Alicia said demurely. "We have fared very well." "Glad to hear it." The big man looked at her with the frank pleasure
all masculinity evinces at sight of Alicia. And then he asked,
abruptly:

"Has Jelnik called yet?--gray house on the other side of you.--No? I
dare say he's off on one of his prowls then. A bit of a lunatic, but
a very charming fellow, Jelnik, though your amiable predecessor,
Miss Smith, chose to consider him a sort of outlawed tom-cat, and
warned him off with a shot-gun." The doctor paused, stroked his
beard, and regarded me earnestly. "Having heired the old girl's domain, I hope you won't consider it
necessary to heir her--er--prejudices," he remarked hopefully. "Bad
lot, Sophronisba. Very bad!" "Mrs. Scarlett," I reminded him gently, "was my relative only by
marriage." "Cousin of mine; mother's relative. Not on speaking-, only on
fighting-terms," he interjected. I remembered what Uncle Adam had told us; and I'm afraid I eyed him
a bit harder than politeness warranted. "I discern by your eye, Miss Smith," said the doctor, "that you
think a blood relation is more likely to walk in that old demon's
footsteps than an outsider is. My dear lady, under ordinary
circumstances and with _human_ neighbors, I'm as meek as Moses; I am
a lamb, a veritable lamb! As for your aunt, she was a man-eating,
saber-toothed tigress!" "Not my aunt, Doctor Geddes; your cousin." "Your aunt-by-marriage. It's just as bad. Anyhow, she preferred you
to any of us, didn't she?" "Perhaps because she didn't know _me_." "Have it so. _But_ she did whatever she did because she was an old
devil of a woman, and an old devil of a woman can give points to
Satan. If," cried the doctor, vehemently, "there is one great reason
why a man should be glad he's a man, it is because he will never
live to be an old woman!" "That depends upon one's point of view," I told him firmly. "Now,
I'm glad I'm a woman because I shall never live to be an old man. Old ladies are far, far nicer. Have you ever known an old lady who
thought herself captivating? Have you ever known any old man who
didn't think he could be if he wished?" "Yes," shouted the doctor, "and no!--in both cases! There is no sex
in fools. There is no age limit, either." "The Talmud says: 'An old woman in the house is a blessing; but an
old man is a nuisance.'" "I don't give a bobtailed scat what the Talmud says. I know what I
know.--Miss Gaines, I leave it to you." "Why, I like them both, when they're nice; and I'm sorry for them
both when they're not." And she added, with a naive air of
confidence: "But I think I like young men better than either, as a
rule." The doctor removed his hat again, and sat down. His eyebrows went
up, his eyes crinkled. "Miss Alicia Gaines," he said genially, "I perceive you are a
girl-child of fine promise.--As for us, Miss Smith, what have we to
do with age and foolishness, who, as yet, have neither? Let's get
down to business. What are you going to do about the lane behind
Hynds House? We had the use of that lane this hundred years and
more, until the devil got too strong in Sophronisba and she shut it
up. Now, shall you keep the lane closed, or shall you dismiss the
injunctions?" "I shall have to consult Judge Gatchell." "Gatchell's a fossilized remains. He's got no more blood in his
liver than a flea. Gatchell would hang his grandmother on a point of
law. Why should you, or any other ordinarily intelligent person, be
guided by Gatchell?" "By whom, then, shall I be guided? You?" I wondered. "That's not in my line," replied the doctor, shortly, and thrust his
hands into his gloves. "In the meantime, ladies, I'm your next-door
neighbor; I have no wife to gossip about you, no children to annoy
you; I'm far enough away to keep you from smelling my pipe; and I
shall quarrel with you only when I can't help it. In return, I have
but one favor to beg of you: don't use a shot-gun on my prize
chickens! Get a dog and train him to chase them home, if they get
into your yard. Or catch them and throw them over the hedge. I'll
pay any damages within reason. And please send for your cat." "We have a cat?" "You have. After Sophronisba's death, Mandy took her in; or rather,
Mandy was afraid to turn her out, for it's bad luck to cross a
witch's cat. In return for this charity the hussy immediately
foisted upon us two wholly unnecessary kittens. Mandy wouldn't allow
them to be decently drowned, for it's worse luck yet to tamper with
a witch's cat's kittens, particularly when they're as black as the
hinges of Gehenna. Mandy thinks their mother had them black as a
delicate mark of respect for the late crone." "Send them over, please. Black cats will just go with this house. It
was very thoughtful of that cat to have two black kittens ready for
us, and very kind of you to let them stay with you until we came." "I? I abhor the whole tribe of cats!" cried the doctor. "Don't thank
my kindness: thank Mandy's idiocy, of which she has more than her
just share. To my mind, the best place for cats is under the grape
arbor." "Let us strike a bargain. You keep your chickens in your own yard,
and we'll keep our cats in our own house." "Compromise: you get a dog," suggested the doctor. "Perhaps I may. I've always wanted a poodle." "I said a _dog_!" said the doctor, lifting his lip. "A poodle! In
Hynds House! The lamented Sophronisba had a bloodhound." "The lamented Sophronisba could have what she chose. This
Sophronisba prefers a poodle." "_Sophronisba?_ What! Another one? Good God!" cried the doctor. "All
right! Get a poodle. Keep the cats. Get a parrot--and an orphan
with the itch--and a hyena--and a blunderbuss! _Her name is
Sophronisba_!--I--oh, Lord, where's Jelnik? I have got to go and
warn Jelnik!" And he made for the door. At that Alicia laughed. Peal upon peal, like silver bells,
irrepressibly, infectiously, irresistibly, Alicia laughed. She cries
with her eyes open and her mouth shut, and she laughs with her eyes
shut and her mouth open. The effect is beyond all words enchanting. The doctor paused in his headlong flight. "All right: laugh!" he said, darkly. "But I shall warn Jelnik, none
the less!" And muttering: "_Sophronisba!_ Lord have mercy on us! _Sophronisba!_" he departed hastily. "What a nice neighbor!" commented Alicia. She added, musingly:
"Sophy, this is an enchanted place--a place where one has good
meals, bad advice, and black cats showered on one, free and gratis. All one has to do is to stand still and take things as they come!" "And hope one won't follow in the footsteps of one's predecessor,
who was an unmitigated old devil." "At least," said Alicia, laughing, "_he_'ll never live to be an old
woman, will he, Sophy?" "The man has the tact of a cannibal--"

"The shoulders of a Hercules--"

"An abominable temper--"

"And a beautiful beard. Somehow, Sophy, I rather approve of a beard,
on somebody his size. I decidedly approve of a beard!" "If his miserable hens come over here, I shall most certainly--"

"Keep the eggs. We'll tell him so when he comes again." "Comes again? What, and my name Sophronisba?" "My own grandmother had the second sight; and _I_ don't need
spectacles," said Alicia. "Sophy, that man has come into our lives
to stay. I feel it in my bones! It's not an unpleasant feeling," she
finished gracelessly. When Unc' Adam presently put in his appearance, he was profoundly
impressed and respectful: we were brisk, unhaunted, and unafraid,
after a night in Hynds House! The three colored women who had come
with him, induced by cupidity and curiosity to enter ol' Mis'
Scarlett's ill-omened domain, at first hung back. They were plainly
prepared to bolt at the first unusual noise. Of the three, one--by name Mary Magdalen--proved to be a
heaven-born, predestinated cook; and her we persuaded, by bribery,
cajolery, and subornation of scruples, to remain with us
permanently. Only, she flatly refused to stay on the place
overnight. Darkness shouldn't catch Mary Magdalen under the Scarlett
Witch's roof-tree. There are certain gifted beings who possess the secret of bringing
order out of chaos; for them the total depravity of inanimate
objects has no terrors; inanimate objects become docile to their
will. Such a one was Mary Magdalen. In two days she had transformed
a sooty cavern into a clean and orderly kitchen. For she was a
singing and a scourful woman, and her Sign was the speretual and the
scrubbing-brush. It is true that she put a precious old Spode
tea-pot on the stove and boiled the tea in it; that she hung her wig
and the dish-towel on the same nail; and that she immediately asked
for a white stocking foot to use as a coffee-bag. "But don't you-all go bust no new pai'h," she advised economically. "Ah 'd rathah make mah coffee in a ol' white stockin' foot any day,
jes' so you ain't done wo' out de toes too much." "Sophy," said the horror-struck Alicia, "that woman must be watched
until we can buy a percolater. Suppose she's got 'a ol' white
stockin' foot' of her own!" Despite which there never was, never will be, such another cook as
Mary Magdalen. It is true she wasn't amenable to discipline, and
reason wasn't her guiding-lamp. And nothing--not bribes, threats,
entreaties, prayers, orders, commands, moral suasion--could break
her of doing just what she wanted to do just when and how she wanted
to do it. You'd be entertaining your dearest enemies, serene in the
consciousness that your house was a credit to your good management;
and behold, Mary Magdalen in the drawing-room door, with her wig
askew and her hands rolled in her apron:

"Oh, Miss Sophy!" "Well?" say you, resignedly, with a feigned smile; "what is it, Mary
Magdalen?" "Miss Sophy, you know we-all's sugah?" "Yes." "Wellum, Miss Sophy, 't ain't any." "I have already ordered more, Mary Magdalen." "An' you know ouah flouah, Miss Sophy?" "I--"

"Us ain't got a Gawd's speck!" Then she would beam upon the visitors, all of whom were known to
her. "Howdy, Miss Sally! How you-all comin' on? Ah comin' 'round to see
de baby soon 's Ah gits chanst." Or, "Lawsy me, Miss Jinny, dat boy
o' yo's is jes' natchelly bustin' outer da clo'es wid growin', ain't
he? He jes' de spit o' he pa, bless 'im!" Which untoward confidence didn't seem to surprise our visitors. They
had Mary Magdalens of their own. A few days later Doctor Geddes sent us Schmetz, the gardener, a
gnarled little man with a peppery temper, a torrential flow of
Alsatian French, and a tireless energy. I don't know why nor how
Schmetz had come to Hyndsville, except that somehow he had acquired
a small farm near by and couldn't get away from it. He explained to
us, gently but firmly, that if we wouldn't meddle after the manner
of women, but would leave his job in his own hands, it would be
better for us, and for the garden. We meekly acquiescing, he called
in helpers and with a wave of his hand set hoe and ax and spade to
work. The weather had changed into days of deep blue skies, splendid days
full of the warmth of potential power; and nights filled with
fragrance, nights of fierce beauty, and the glamour of golden moons,
and the thrilling melody of that feathered Israfel, the
mocking-bird. Through our open windows immense moths, spirits of the
summer nights, drifted in on enameled and jeweled wings and circled
in a fire-worshiping dance around our light. Those were wonderful days. For that was a house of surprises, a
house full of laid-by things. One never knew what one was going to
find. One morning it might be a Ridgway jug all delicate vine leaves
and faun heads, or an old blue-and-white English platter, or a piece
of fine salt-glaze. On the top shelf of a long-locked closet, pushed
back in the corner, you'd discover a full set of the most beautiful
sapphire glassware, and a pagoda work-box with ivory corners; and on
a lower shelf, wrapped in half a moth-eaten shawl, two glowing
luster jugs in proof condition. Mary Magdalen salvaged a fine china
sillabub stand, with little white-and-gold covered cups on it, from
a sooty box under a kitchen cupboard. A back drawer of the dusty
office desk yielded up half a dozen exquisite prints. And I'm sure
Alicia will remember even in heaven the ecstasy she experienced when
a battered bureau gave into her hands the adorable Bow figures of
Kitty Clive and Woodward the actor, she pink-and-white, petticoated
and furbelowed, lovely as when London went mad over her, and he
cocked-hatted and ruffled and dandified; and neither with so much as
the least littlest chip to mar their perfection. Or a hair trunk would reveal little frocks stitched by hand, and a
pair of tiny flat slippers with strings gone to dust like the little
feet that had worn them. With these were two dolls, one dressed in
sprigged India muslin and lace, with a shepherdess hat glued on her
painted head; the other dressed in a poke-bonnet, a satin sack, and
a much-flounced skirt. They had evidently belonged to "Lydia, our
Darling Child," whose name, in unsteady letters, was painfully set
down in the printed picture-books at the bottom of the trunk. These
things that had belonged to a "darling child" so long dead lent the
grim old house a softening touch. Poor old house, whose little
children had all gone, so long ago! It was the day we were taking up the beautiful old carpet in the
back drawing-room. Alicia was rejoicing for the thousandth time over
this treasure of hand-woven French art. Of a sudden, horrible yells
rose from the garden, and a shrieking negro went by the window like
an arrow. We caught "Murder!--Ol' Witch!--Corpses!" as he
disappeared. Uncle Adam, catching his panic, bolted with him; the
two negro women followed. Only Mary Magdalen, amazonian arms bare, a
rolling-pin grasped in a formidable fist, stood like a rock of
defense behind us. "Ah jes' wants to catch any ol' corpses trapesin' 'round mah
kitchin, trackin' up mah clean flo', an Ah 'll suah settle day hash
once fo' all!" trumpeted Mary Magdalen. Outside, Schmetz was jumping up and down, flapping his arms, and
screaming in voluble French:

"Name of a dog! Senseless Senegambians, remain! Iron-skulled
offspring of the union of a black mule and a pickax, cease to fly!" "What is the matter? For heaven's sake? what is the matter?" I
shouted. "We done dig up de corpses! We done fin' wha'h dat ol' witch 'oman
bury de bodies!" howled a workman in reply. "Imbeciles, asses, beings without brains, listen to me!" shrieked
Schmetz, this time in good English. "This corpse is not alive! Never
yet was he alive! Return, sons of perdition, and assist me to raise
him--may he fall upon your brain-pans of donkeys!" As if that had been all that was needed, the last wavering workman
flung down his shovel and took to his heels, running like a rabbit
and roaring as he ran. "Schmetz!" called a clear and peremptory voice. "Schmetz! what's the
matter over there?" "Ah! It is Monsieur Jelnik!" bawled Schmetz. "_Nom de Dieu_,
Monsieur Jelnik, come with a great quickness! I have dug from the
earth the leetle boy of stone--you know him, _hein_? Those niggers,
_sacrement_! they think they have uncovered the deceased corpse, the
victim of Madame the late mistress, with which she made her spells
of a sorceress." "What!" said the voice. "You've found the statue, Schmetz? Ask, my
good fellow, if it is permitted that I come and view it." "Why, of course!" said I, quickly. "Thank you," said the voice. There had been a great space cleared in our garden, and on the edge
of this, in removing a stubborn gum-tree, the negroes had uncovered
what they supposed to be the body of one murdered. Upon our knees,
with Schmetz helping us, we were trying to tear away the rotten
coverings, and the dirt and mold. And there, beautiful despite the
stains disfiguring him, lay the boy Love. The marble pedestal from
which he had been removed lay near him. On the base, decipherable,
was the sculptor's name, and on one side, in small letters,
"_Brought from Italy, 1803, by R.H._"

"Why, he is perfect!" cried Alicia, joyfully. "Oh, who could have
been so stupid and so cruel as to hide away something so lovely? Poor dear little god, aren't you glad to get out of that grave and
come back to the sun? Aren't you grateful, little god, that Sophy
and I came to Hynds House?" And at that moment a tall, slim, dark-skinned young man walked up,
hands behind his back, and stood there regarding us with eyes as
clear and cool as mountain water when the sunlight is upon it and
golden flecks come and go in its brown depths. The exquisitely
aquiline features, the small black mustache, an indescribably proud
and high-bred ease and grace of manner and bearing, were oddly
exotic and even more oddly fascinating. His slenderness was as
strong as a tempered sword-blade, his quietness was trained power in
repose. And the hair of his head was so black that a purplish shadow
rested upon it, and so thick that one was minded of Absalom:

     ... in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as
     Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot to the
     crown of his head there was no blemish in him. And when he polled his head (for it was at every year's end
     that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him,
     therefore he polled it:), he weighed the hair of his head at
     two hundred shekels after the king's weight. He was so vivid and so new to me that my whole being was breathless
with the wonder of him. I knew, of course, that he did not belong
to _my_ world at all. King's sons are for princesses, for those
human birds of paradise that flash, beautiful and fortunate, in
larger spheres than those prosaic paths trodden by a workaday woman
named Smith. "What have you found?" he asked, in a delightful voice. Alicia looked up. Her face was like the break of day for youngness
and freshness, and a wisp of a bright curl misbehaved itself on her
cheek, a flirtatious curl that knew exactly how to make the most of
its opportunities. The young man's eyes approved of it. "We have found Love!" cried Alicia, breathlessly. "Sophy and I have
found Love in our garden! Isn't it wonderful and impossible and
exciting and delightful? But it's true! And it just goes with this
whole place!" cried Alicia, morning-eyed and May-faced. The young man's glance came back to me. I should hate to be
untruthful, and have to meet so straight a glance! "Why, yes. It is impossible, and, like all impossible things,
perfectly true," he agreed, with the golden flecks dancing in and
out of his eyes and a slow and lazy smile, a sort of secret smile,
curving his beautiful, mocking mouth. "Fancy finding Love, of all
things, in Sophronisba's garden!" A fine black line of eyebrow went
up whimsically. "And now that you have found him," said Mr. Jelnik,
"hadn't you better let me help you set him up?" CHAPTER IV

THE HYNDSES OF HYNDS HOUSE


When the fine weather had taken the kinks out of Judge Gatchell's
joints, he came to see us--a tall, thin, punctilious, saturnine old
gentleman with frosty Scotch eyes and the complexion of a pair of
washed khaki trousers. Chaos reigned in Hynds House then, and he was
forced to pick his way, like an elderly and cautious cat, between
piled-up chairs, tables, and rolls of carpet. In the most stately
manner he parted the tails of his skirted coat, seated himself upon
the sofa, placed his hat beside him, drew up the knees of his black
broadcloth trousers, took off and wiped his spectacles with great
thoroughness and deliberation upon a large silk handkerchief,
replaced them upon the middle of his Roman nose, cleared his throat,
pursed his lips, and drily but clearly talked business. Great-Aunt Sophronisba would have left a much larger fortune had she
been less addicted to lawsuits. You wouldn't think an old soul of
almost a hundred could find very much chance to brew mischief,
would you? You didn't know Great-Aunt Sophronisba! I was informed that the case of Scarlett vs. Geddes had been
automatically closed by the death of the plaintiff; _but_ I had
inherited along with Hynds House:

The case of Scarlett vs. The Vestry and Pastor of St. Polycarp's
Church, from whom Mrs. Scarlett sought to recover three
paintings--"Faith," "Hope," and "Charity"--which her father had
commissioned a visiting artist to paint, and had then presented to
St. Polycarp's, with the stipulation that they should "forever hang
in the sacred edifice, reminding the brethren of the Cardinal
Virtues of the Christian Religion." They did hang in the church for a century. Then, when the Ladies'
Missionary Society was helping "do over" the parsonage, a faded
Faith, a dulled Hope, and a fly-specked Charity were transported
thither. Whereupon suit was immediately brought by the donor's
daughter, who averred that the church had lost all right and title
to the paintings by an action directly contrary to her father's
will, and insisted that they should be turned over to herself as
sole heiress. It was a nice little case, and called forth an
imposing array of counsel. Mrs. Scarlett had added a codicil to her
will, leaving _me_ her claim to the three paintings "fraudulently
withheld by the pastor and vestrymen of St. Polycarp's Church." There was, too, the question of the lot on Lafayette Street, between
Zion Church on the one hand, and the Y.M.C.A. on the other. Both had
tried to buy it; and both had been refused with contumely. Instead,
that nice old lady ran up extra-sized bill-boards. Every time the
Zionist brethren looked out of their side windows of a Sunday, they
had ample opportunity to learn considerable about the art of
advertising on bill-boards. And if a circus happened to be coming to
Hyndsville, they could count on every child in their Sunday school
missing his lesson, unless the text, by a fortunate chance, happened
to touch upon the prophet Daniel. And when the Y.M.C.A. people looked out of _their_ side windows,
Sophronisba's alluring bill-boards besought them to smoke only
certain cigarettes and to be sure to look for the trademark on their
playing-cards. Naturally, this made the Y.M.C.A. secretaries very,
very happy. A weather-beaten picket fence protected the lot upon the street
front; the bill-boards formed the side attractions; and in the
center front was the monument, a stone of stumbling and offense. It
was a neat, plain granite obelisk, which bore this inscription:

             This Stone is Erected
               By the Affection
                      of
           Sophronisba Hynds Scarlett
        To Commemorate the Many Virtues
                      of
    The Most Perfect Gentleman in Hyndsville
                Her Bloodhound
                    NIPPER

"There should have been an open season for Sophronisba," Alicia said
with conviction. Then she put her head down and laughed. The judge looked at her over his glasses, doubtfully. With a slight
edge to his voice he referred to the several prosecutions "for
wanton and wilful trespassings" upon the closed, barbed-wire lane
behind Hynds House. As the strip in question was not a public
thoroughfare, and Mrs. Scarlett had rock-ribbed titles covering it,
she could close it; and she did, greatly to the inconvenience of her
immediate neighbors, particularly Doctor Richard Geddes. "There is something to be said for Mrs. Scarlett's methods," said
the judge dryly. "The Lafayette Street bill-boards are the
best-paying ones in Hyndsville. As to closing the lane, Miss Smith,
let me remind you that Doctor Geddes, although an estimable man and
a very able physician, is not at all backward in coming forward in a
quarrel. He greatly angered my late client." "Nevertheless, that barbed wire comes down. He may use the lane
whenever he wants to," I decided. The judge bowed. "And now," he said, politely, "let us take up the
case of Mr. Nicholas Jelnik, if you please. It was Mrs. Scarlett's
wish that you should be fully informed concerning Mr. Jelnik's
antecedents, that you might be on your guard." "Against Mr. Jelnik? But, good heavens, why? Why?" I was beginning
to get angry. "Let me see: I am to make myself odious to Mr. Jelnik,
and I am to refuse to allow a physician to run his car through a
barren strip of weeds and sand, because they are her relatives and
she hated her relatives. I am to vex the souls of harmless
Christians with bill-posters of the world, the flesh, and the devil,
and I'm to pay taxes on a lot that's been turned into a cemetery for
a hound dog. I'm to fight St. Polycarp's Church, for a couple of
chromos I should probably loathe.--I don't like pictures of cardinal
virtues, anyhow. It altogether depends on who possesses them as to
whether I can stand for the cardinal virtues themselves." "Faith looking up, and Charity looking down, and Hope hanging to an
anchor, _something_ like Britannia-Rules-the-Waves. Make the church
keep them, please, Sophy!" begged Alicia. Judge Gatchell made an odd noise in his throat. "One of my little granddaughters, taken to Saint Polycarp's by her
mother, asked, 'Mamma, who is that big woman up there with the
pick-axe?' And they told her," said the Judge, scathingly, "they
told her it was _Hope_! "When the vestry came to me about the case, I reminded them that
Aholah and Aholibah were damned for doting upon paintings on the
wall, painted in vermilion, which in plain English is Scarlett!" A
covenanting gleam shot into his frosty eyes, and the old fighting
Scotch blood showed for a second in his lank cheek. He was a godly
man, and when he saw confusion in the ranks of the Philistines, he
rejoiced. "I can't help who was damned," said I. "My job is to live in peace
with my neighbors. St. Polycarp's people may hang their Virtues
wherever they please, for all of me." Did a faint, faint shade of regret flit over the parchment-like
face? It seemed so to me. But he said, composedly:

"You must act according to your best judgment. And now, please, let
us go back to Mr. Nicholas Jelnik." We rather prided ourselves upon the possession of so pleasant a
neighbor, and we said so. He had helped us with our garden, and it
was he who selected the spot upon which the resurrected Love should
be set up. "Ah, yes, the statue, brought from Italy by Richard Hynds, a great
grandfather of his. Did he tell you anything about Richard?" asked
the judge. "Nothing." "I shall have to go a long way back, more than a hundred years, to
make you understand," said the judge. "When I was a boy some of the
oldest folk here in Hyndsville used to say that Hynds House never
should have come to Freeman Hynds, Mrs. Scarlett's father; but to
Richard Hynds, his elder brother--that same Richard whose initials
are cut in the base of the statue he brought in his pagan
godlessness from Italy, and which his brother afterward buried,
wishing to remove all trace of him and his follies. "You are to understand that it was the unwritten law of the Hyndses'
that this house should come to the eldest son. Primogeniture is of
course foreign to American ideas, but this is an old house, Miss
Smith. When it was built, American ideas hadn't been born. And the
Hyndses were a law to themselves. "The then head of the house was James Hampden Hynds, a man of an
immense pride, a rigid sense of duty, and the nicest notions of
honor. He had two sons, Richard, and the younger brother, Freeman. The daughters do not count: it is with these two sons we are
concerned. "From every account Freeman Hynds was a good man, a quiet,
God-fearing, methodical man, attentive to his affairs, and
meticulously exact in all his dealings; not warm-hearted, perhaps,
but just. But as if the bad blood of the entire family had come to a
head in one man, Richard was born a roisterer and a spendthrift. "He grew up a magnificent young scapegrace, reckless to the point of
madness, and with that inherent love of risk that is the very breath
of life to such men. Despite these defects there is no doubt that
his was one of those personalities that win love without effort. So
of course it was a foregone conclusion that he should win the girl
that his younger brother, among others, adored to distraction. "His family hoped that his love for his young wife would change him
for the better. But there was something tamelessly wild in Richard
Hynds. He would have done very well, very well indeed, in the
_Golden Hind_ with Drake, or in the _Jesus_ with Morgan. He did not
fit in a gentler generation, and a mild life had no charm for him. Gossip buzzed with his name, even in a day when gentlemen were
permitted to behave pretty much as they pleased. "Up to this time there had never been anything altogether
unpardonable charged against him. But one fine morning the Hynds
jewels were missing. Remember that the Hyndses had always been a
wealthy and powerful family. The theft of those jewels was no
trumpery affair. For generations they had been adding to that
collection--sometimes a lustrous pearl, sometimes a flawless
emerald; once it was a sapphire that had belonged to a French queen,
once a pair of rubies that had hung in the ears of a duchess beloved
of King Charles. "Richard's mother happened to be a meek and quiet body, deeply
religious, something of a Quakeress, so she wore them but seldom. It
was upon the occasion of a ball to be given in honor of Freeman's
twenty-first birthday that the question of what jewels his mother
should wear came up, and the strong-box in which they were kept was
opened. Only the settings remained. "When the clamor quieted and sane questions began to be asked,
suspicion fastened upon Richard Hynds. His affairs were chaotic, his
needs imperative and desperate. He had been heard to ask his mother
if she intended wearing what he called 'the Hynds fortune' at
Freeman's ball. He knew, of course, where they were kept--in the
anteroom of his mother's apartment. It was not only possible but
easy for him to gain access to them. "Let us consider the case without prejudice: Here is a young man--a
gambler, a wastrel--with pressing debts, and clamoring creditors
threatening what might be considered dishonor. Within reach of this
young man's hand are certain very valuable properties which he might
even consider his own, since they would in time descend to him. His
mother's resources are exhausted, his father's heart steeled against
further advancements. Cause and effect, you see--debts: missing
jewels. "The case not only formed two factions in public opinion; it split
the Hynds family itself. His two sisters, and his cousin Jessamine,
raised in this house, believed him guilty. His mother and his wife
believed in his innocence and refused to hear a word against him. These two things only did Richard Hynds salvage in that utter wreck
and catastrophe--his mother's faith and his wife's love. "He lost his father's. This was a man, who, under his pleasant
exterior of a landed gentleman, was rigid and inflexible. He had
already borne a great deal, remember; but this was disgrace, an
indelible stain upon a stainless name. Therefore this father, who
was at the same time a just and good man, disinherited his favorite
child and eldest son. House, slaves, lands, money, the great
position of the head of a powerful family, came to Freeman Hynds,
my late client's father, born five years later than his brother, on
the twentieth day of September, 1785--a long time ago! a long time
ago! "Richard was disgraced, and a beggar. And it seemed that the rod
that had lain in pickle for the Hyndses for their pride, was brought
forth to scourge them all. For Richard, desperate, distracted,
careless of what happened to him, rode out one day through a pelting
rain. Result, congested lungs; the poor wastrel, who had no wish to
live, was soon satisfactorily dead. "When James Hampden got that news, he rose up from his chair, laid
the book he had been reading--it was Baxter's 'Saint's Rest'--down
on the library table and fell as if lightning had struck him. Apoplexy, it was said; a thrust through the heart, I should call it. Richard the sinner was none the less Richard his first-born. "Hard upon the heels of these two disasters came a third, the case
of Jessamine Hynds. This Jessamine--a highly gifted, imperious
creature, proud as Lucifer, after the manner of the Hyndses--was an
orphan, reared in Hynds House. She was some several years older than
her cousins, to whom she was greatly attached. The trouble so preyed
upon her that she became melancholy, and one fine day disappeared
and was never afterward found. There was great hue and cry made for
her, and men riding hither and yon, for this was a Hynds woman, and
her story touched popular imagination, so that she is supposed,"
said the lawyer dryly, "to wander around Hynds House o' nights,
crying for Richard and searching for the lost jewels. "After the death of James Hampden Hynds, it was discovered that he
had added a singular enough codicil to his will. This codicil
provided that in the event the jewels were found intact, and Richard
Hynds's innocence thereby incontrovertibly established, Hynds House
as it stood should revert to him as eldest son, after the custom of
the family. _But_ until the jewels were recovered, Richard and his
heirs were to have exactly--nothing. And nothing is what Richard and
his heirs got." "And was he really guilty?" breathed Alicia. Her sympathy was
instantly with Richard. That is exactly like Alicia, who is sorry
for the fatted calf, and the Egyptians drowned in the Red Sea, and
Esau swindled out of his birthright; had she been one of the wise
virgins she would have trimmed the lamps of all the foolish ones and
waked them up in time. "In theory," said the judge, "a man is innocent until he is proved
guilty. In practice, he is guilty until he can prove his innocence." "And was nothing, absolutely nothing, ever heard or known
further?--nothing that would justify his mother's faith, or comfort
his poor young wife's heart?" "There was but one incident to which even the most credulous could
attach the slightest importance. You shall judge for yourself
whether it deserved any. Freeman Hynds, riding about the plantation
after his habit, was thrown from his horse and died from the
injuries sustained. He recovered consciousness for a few minutes
before he died; some said he never really regained it. Be that as it
may, the dying man cried out, in a voice of great anguish and
affliction: '_Richard! Brother Richard! The jewels--the jewels!_' He
struggled to say more, and failed; looked into the concerned faces
around him, with the awful look of the soul about to depart;
struggled to raise himself; and fell back upon his pillow a corpse. "Some--they were in the majority--said, sensibly enough, that the
pain and disgrace of his brother's downfall had haunted the poor
gentleman's death-bed, and occasioned that last sad cry. Some few
said he had wished to confess a thing heavy upon his conscience, who
had taken his brother's place as Jacob took Esau's. Richard's wife,
of course, was of these latter. She went to her grave a passionate
believer in the innocence of her husband, whom she averred to have
been a deeply wronged and cruelly used man; and, for heaven's sake,
who do you suppose she claimed had wronged him? Freeman! She
couldn't prove anything; she hadn't the ghost of a clue to hang the
ghost of an accusation upon; yet, womanlike, she clung to her
notion, and she taught it to her son as one teaches a holy creed. "The Hyndses were excellent haters. Freeman's daughter, born into an
atmosphere of family disruption, abhorred the very memory of her
uncle, and hated her uncle's wife, the woman who doubted and led
others to doubt her father's honesty. This hatred she discovered for
Richard's son, who, as he grew older, referred to Freeman as 'my
Uncle Judas.' "This second Richard became in time a highly successful physician, a
man honored and beloved by this community. There was no wildness in
_him_, nor in his son, the third Richard. His granddaughter Sarah
Hynds married Professor Doctor Max Jelnik, the celebrated Viennese
alienist, whom she met abroad. Your next-door neighbor is Sarah's
son, born somewhere in Hungary, I believe. Both the young man's
parents are dead, and I understand he has led a vagrant and
irresponsible life, preferring to rove about rather than follow his
father's profession, to which he was educated. "My late client, indeed, held that he had inherited the deplorable
characteristics of the first Richard. She asserted--she allowed
herself great freedom of speech--that you can't make a silk purse
out of a sow's ear. It displeased her that he should come to
Hyndsville. She thought it showed a malignant nature and a peculiar
shamelessness that he chose to reside next door to Hynds House, from
which his great-great-grandfather had been so ignominously driven. Her first meeting with the young man bred in her an ineradicable
dislike." Now what really happened is this: The fences having been neglected,
and in consequence fallen down, and the hedge broken in many places,
Mr. Jelnik, just come to Hyndsville, thoughtlessly and perhaps
ignorantly crossed the sacred Scarlett boundaries. Up-stairs behind
her blind, like an ancient spider in her web, the old lady spied
him. She flung open the window and leaned out. "Who are you that prowl about other peoples' yards like a thievish
cat?" she demanded peremptorily. The young man looked up, uncovering his beautiful head. "I am Nicholas Jelnik. And I pray your pardon, Madame: I did not
mean to intrude," and he made as if to go. "Jelnik!" said she, in a hoarse and croaking voice. "Jelnik! Aha! I
know your breed! I smell the blood in you--bad blood! rotten bad
blood! You've a bad face, young man: a scoundrelly face, the face of
a fellow whose grandfather robbed his house and shamed his name! And
why have you come near Hynds House, at this hour of the day? He, he,
he! _I_ know, _I_ know!" Lost in astonishment, Jelnik remained staring up at her. The
apparition of this venerable vixen, who had hated Richard's son and
now hated him of a later generation, who had seen those that had
talked to Richard himself in his ill-fated lifetime, so stirred his
imagination that it deprived him of utterance. All he could do was
to stand still and stare and stare and stare. He had never seen
anybody so old--she was nearly a hundred, and looked a thousand--and
he stared at the old, old, wrinkled, yellow face, the unhuman face,
in which the beady black eyes burned with wicked fire; at the nearly
bald head, thinly covered with a floating wisp or so of wool-like
white hair; at the claw-like, shriveled, yellow hands, the stringy
neck, the whole sexless meager wreck of what had been a woman. It
was a stare made up of wonder, and instinctive dislike, and human
pity, and young disgust. She raised her voice:

"Did you not see those signs? Scoundrel, puppy, foreign-born poacher,
didn't you see my sign-boards?" And as she looked down at
him--Richard's blood alive and red in a youthful and beautiful body:
and _she_ what she was--she fell into one of those futile and
dreadful fits of rage to which the evil old are subject; and mumbled
with her skinny bags of lips, and shook and nodded her deathly head,
and waved her claw-like hands, screeching insults and abuse. The pity died out of Jelnik's face. He regarded her with his
father's eyes, the calm, impersonal, passionless gaze of the trained
alienist. She was an unlovely exhibition, to be studied critically. In some subtle manner she understood, for she jerked herself out of
her anger, and fell silent, regarding him with a glance as
brilliantly, deadly bright as a tarantula's. The cold, relentless
hate of that glance chilled him. He forced himself to bow to her
again, and to beat a dignified retreat, when his inclination was to
take to his heels like a school-boy caught pilfering apples. The next morning a bailiff presented Mr. Nicholas Jelnik with a
notice forbidding him to enter the grounds of Hynds House without
the written permission of the owner, and threatening prosecution
should he disobey. "The Hyndses, as I have said, are good haters," finished Judge
Gatchell. "And so she left Hynds House to me," said I without, I am afraid,
much gratitude. "It was hers, to dispose of as she chose." The lawyer spoke crisply. "If you have any scruples, dismiss them. My late client understood
that it was far better for the estate to fall into the hands of a
sensible woman like yourself than into the keeping of a young man
with what foolish people like to call the artistic temperament,
which in plain English means a person who can't earn his salt in any
useful, sensible business. "You doubt this? Let us consider this same artistic temperament and
its results," continued the judge, making a wry face. "Once or twice
it has been my bad fortune to meet it. One trifling scamp I have in
mind, painted. A house, a fence, a barn, even a sign-board? Not at
all, but messes he called 'The Sea,' one doesn't know why, save that
the things slightly resembled raw oysters. However, the women raved
over him. His laundress and his landlady had good cause to rave! "He wrote, too. A text-book, a title, a will, a deed, a business
letter? Far from it! He wrote _poetry_, if you please! The little
wretch wrote _poetry_! That's what the artistic temperament leads a
man to! Bah! I hate, I despise, I abhor, the artistic temperament!" We looked at the judge, open-mouthed. "Who would have thought the
old man to have had so much blood in him?" "There have been times," admitted the judge, subsiding, "when I
radically disagreed with my late client; when I opposed her
strongly. But when she willed her whole estate to you, Miss Smith,
instead of to Nicholas Jelnik, I heartily approved. Understand, I
have no personal bias, no animosity against this young man; but he
is, I am told, more or less of an artist, and one might as well
leave an estate to an anarchist at once. I have expressed this
opinion to the town at large, and I seldom express my opinion
publicly," finished the old jurist stiffly. I heard that opinion with mingled emotions. "But we like Mr. Jelnik," I said at last. "The injunction against
him doesn't hold water. Personally, I feel like apologizing to him." "Oh, no! One can't afford to cuddle an old vendetta, as Abishag
dry-nursed old King David. I always _hated_ Abishag!" Alicia said
naively. "My late client," said the judge enigmatically, "hadn't counted on
_you_." He almost succeeded in looking human when he said it, and
his eyes upon Alicia weren't at all frosty. Then he folded his
papers, replaced them in his wallet, wiped his glasses, shot his
cuffs, hoped we'd find Hynds House all we'd hoped, hoped the town
would be to our liking, hoped he could be of further service to us,
bowed creakily, and took his departure. "Sophy," said Alicia, after a long pause, "if ever I had to
rechristen this house, I'd call it Hornets' Nest." *       *       *       *       *

We had not attended church on our first Sunday, because we were too
tired. But on our second Sunday we plucked up heart of grace and
went to St. Polycarp's. The old town wore an air of Sabbath peace and quietness infinitely
soothing to the spirit. People passed and repassed us. We knew they
knew who we were. The old gentlemen, indeed, bowed to us with
stately uncoverings of the head; the rest regarded us with the sort
of impersonal and perfunctory interest one bestows upon
uninteresting passing strangers. Nobody spoke to us, though the eyes
of the young men were not unaware of Alicia's fairness. In a great city, of course, one takes that sort of thing for
granted; but in this small town, where everybody knew and spoke to
everybody else, the effect was chilling. "Talk about the sunny South!" murmured Alicia. "Why, my teeth want
to chatter!" During the services I was conscious of covert glances in our
direction, but whenever a pair of feminine eyes met mine, they slid
off like lizards and glided another way, with calculated Christian
indifference. They weren't hostile, nor unfriendly: they were just
deliberately indifferent. Nobody had the faintest notion of being
heedful of us strangers among them; and I should be sorry for angels
who expected to be entertained unawares in South Carolina! When the congregation had filed out and gone about its leisurely
business, the minister and his wife came forward to greet us. They
were a bit nervous, remembering the diabolic uproar about Faith,
Hope, and Charity. Mr. Haile was a mild-mannered little man of the
saved-sheep type, with box-plaited teeth and a bleating voice. His
wife had the worried face and the anxious eyes of the minister's
helpmeet, and the painfully ready smile for newcomers who might, or
might not, prove desirable parishioners. She wanted to be nice to us as a Christian woman to women, but not
too nice as the minister's wife of a church whose members looked
upon us as interlopers. I had deputed Judge Gatchell to inform the
trustees that the suit was dropped. I suppose Mrs. Haile was timid
about broaching the delicate subject, for she ignored it with a
nervous intensity that made me feel sorry for her. She and Mr. Haile
would call just as soon as it was convenient for us to receive
visitors; and then they shook hands with us, and I think they
breathed a sigh of relief. "Oh, Sophy! And we've got to keep on going there!--next Sunday, and
Sunday after next Sunday, and maybe every Sunday after that until we
die! Perhaps after a while some of them will bow to us, or maybe
even say, 'How do you do?' _but_ we'll feel as if we'd been put in
cold storage every time we enter that door!" wailed Alicia. "It is our Father's house," I reminded her. "But I don't want to be made to feel like a spanked child, in
anybody's house!" Alicia said, resentfully. "You say that because you're Irish." "You say I say it because I'm Irish because you're English." Then
she screwed up her mouth like a coral button, and squinted her eyes:
"I'm Irish, and you're English, and we're both American. Sophy,
let's join my Irish and your English to our Yankee, and teach this
town a lesson!" "Barkis is willin'. But in the meantime let's go home and see what
Mary Magdalen has for lunch." We walked slowly, enjoying the calm, lovely late-summer day. Hyndsville at its best was a big, green, sprawling old town, a
quaint, unpainted, leisurely, flowery, bird-haunted place, with
glorious trees, and do-as-they-please, independent gardens. Nobody
ever seemed to be in a hurry, and at first we used to wonder how
they ever got anything done, or kept pace with the moving world; yet
they did. Only, they did it without haste and without noise. And
they were _always_ polite. Though they should take your substance,
your reputation, or even, perhaps, your life, they would do it like
ladies and gentlemen. We paused a while, just inside the big brick-pillared gate, and
looked up the oak-arched garden path toward our house. Of course one
can't expect an old fortress of a brick house that's been neglected
for more than three quarters of a century to look spick and span
inside of a brief fortnight, but already Hynds House was sitting up,
so to speak, and taking notice. Life had begun to flow back into it. Mary Magdalen had brought a dog
with her--a yellow dog of unknown ancestry, of shamefaced demeanor,
a ropy tail, splay feet, and a rolling eye; named, she and heaven
alone knew why, Beautiful Dog. He shunned Alicia and me because we were white people: Beautiful Dog
was intuitively aware that colored people's dogs must meet white
people with suspicion, aloofness, and reserve. When we fatuously
sought to make friends with him, he tucked his tail between his
legs, and shivered as if we made goose-flesh come out on his spine;
and once when I took him by his rope collar he fell down and
shrieked. But just let Mary Magdalen roll out an unctious, "Whah is
yuh, Beaut'ful Dawg?" and his ears and tail went up, he curveted,
and made uncouth movements with his splay feet, and grinned from ear
to ear. Doctor Geddes's Mandy had brought over the black kittens and their
mother. Mary Magdalen made sure of their staying at home by the
simple process of buttering their paws. In South Carolina, when you
want a cat to stay in your house, you butter its paws and let it
lick the butter off leisurely, the while you whisper in its left
ear: "_Stay in my house for keeps, cat!_" The cat will ever
thereafter play Ruth to your Naomi. Our cat was Mrs. Belinda Black, and her children were Potty Black
and Sir Thomas More Black, this last being a creature of noble mien
and a meditative turn of mind. "Homage and praise to Bast, the cat-headed, the wise one, the great
goddess!" 