

E-text prepared by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



THE NORTHERN LIGHT

From the German of E. WERNER

Author of "At a High Price," "His Word of Honor," etc. Translated by MRS. D. M. LOWREY

1891







CHAPTER I. The grey mist of an autumn morning lay upon forest and field. Through
its shadowy vapors a swarm of birds were sweeping by, on their Southward
way, now dipping low over the tops of the tall fir forest, as if giving
a last greeting to their summer homes, and then rising high in the air;
turning their flight due South, they disappeared slowly through the fog. At the window of a large manor-house, which lay at the edge of the
forest, two men stood, watching the course of the birds and conversing
earnestly with each other. One was a tall, stalwart figure, whose firm
and erect bearing betokened the soldier fully as much as the uniform he
wore. He was blonde and blue-eyed, not handsome, but with a strong and
speaking countenance; a typical German in form and feature. Yet
something like a shadow lay upon the man's face, and there were,
wrinkles, on his brow which surely were not the result of age, for he
was yet in the prime of life. "The birds have started already on their journey to the south," said he,
after watching the flight attentively until they had finally disappeared
in the cloud of mist. "The autumn has come to nature and to our lives as
well." "Not to yours yet," objected his companion. "You are just in the hey-day
of life, in the full strength of your manhood." "True enough, as to years, but I have a feeling that age will overtake
me sooner than others. I often feel as if it were autumn with me now." The other man, who might have been a few years the speaker's senior, was
slender, and of middle height, and clad in civilian's dress. He shook
his head impatiently at his companion's last observation. He appeared
insignificant when compared with the strong, well-built officer near
him; but his pale, sharply cut face wore a look of cold, superior
repose, and the sarcastic expression around the thin lips, together with
his aristocratic air and bearing, suggested a hidden strength behind a
feeble exterior. "You take life too hard, Falkenried," he said reprovingly. "You have
changed strangely in the last few years. Who would recognize in you now,
the gay young officer of other days? And what's the reason of it all? The shadow which once darkened your life has long since disappeared. You
are a soldier, heart and soul, and have repeatedly distinguished
yourself in your profession. A high position awaits you in the future,
and the thing above all others is--you have your son." Falkenried did not answer; he folded his arms and looked out again into
the mist, while the other continued: "The boy has grown handsome as a
god in the last few years. I was quite overcome with surprise when I
saw him again, and you yourself, told me that he was unusually gifted
and in many things showed great talent." "I would that Hartmut had fewer talents and more character," said
Falkenried, in an almost acrid tone. "He can make verses quick enough,
and to learn a language is child's play to him, but as soon as he tries
some earnest science, he's behind all the others, and in military
tactics I can make nothing of him at all. You cannot comprehend,
Wallmoden, what iron severity I am constantly compelled to employ." "I fear you accomplish little by this same severity," interrupted
Wallmoden. "You should take my advice and leave your son to his studies. He has not the qualifications for a soldier. You must see that for
yourself by this time." "He shall and must acquire those qualifications. It is the only possible
career for such an intractable nature as his, which revolts at every
restraint and to which every duty is a burden. The life of a student at
the university would give him unrestrained liberty; only the iron
dicipline of the service will force him to bend." "The only question is, how long will you be able to force him to do your
will? You should not deceive yourself; there are inherited tendencies
which will not allow themselves to be repressed or eradicated. Hartmut,
now, is in appearance the counterpart of his mother; he has her features
and her eyes." "Yes," assented Falkenried gloomily, "her dark, demoniacal, glowing
eyes, which cast their spell upon all who knew her." "And were your ruin," supplemented Wallmoden. "How often did I warn and
advise you then; but you would not listen. Your passion had seized you
like a fever and held you like chains. I declare I never have been able
to understand it." Falkenried's lips were drawn in with a bitter smile. "I can readily believe that you, the cool, calculating diplomat, you,
whose every word is weighed, are protected against all such witcheries." "I should at least be cautious in my choice. Your marriage carried
unhappiness on its face from the very beginning. A women of a foreign
race, with strange blood in her veins and the wild, passionate Sclave
nature, without character, without understanding of what we here call
duty and morality; and you with your rigid principles, with your
sensitive feeling of honor, it could ultimately lead to but one end. And
I believe you loved her in spite of all, until your separation." "No," said Falkenried, in a hard tone, "the fire burned out in the first
year; I saw that only too clearly. But I shrank back from publishing to
the world my household misery by a legal separation. So I bore it until
no choice remained, until I was forced. But enough of this." He turned abruptly on his heel and looked from the window again; but the
quick movement betrayed rather than concealed the torture which he with
difficulty repressed. "Yes, it takes a great deal to tear up a nature like yours by the
roots," said Wallmoden earnestly. "But the divorce freed you from the
unhappy bond, and why should you not bury the memory as well?" Falkenried shook his head and sighed heavily. "One cannot bury such
memories; they are forever rising from their supposed sepulchres, and
just now--" he broke off suddenly. "Just now; what do you mean?" "Nothing; let us speak of other things. You have been in Burgsdorf
since day before yesterday; how long do you expect to remain?" "About two weeks. I haven't much time at my disposal, and am for that
matter only nominally Willibald's guardian, for my diplomatic position
keeps me out of the country most of the time. The guardianship really
rests in the hands of my sister, who rules over everything." "Well, Regine is equal to the position. She governs the great estate and
the numerous servants as though she were a man." "And gives her orders like a cavalry officer from morning to night," put
in her brother. "Recognizing all her excellent qualities, I,
nevertheless, feel a slight creepy sensation whenever I am constrained
to visit Burgsdorf, and I always leave the place with shattered nerves. They live in a most primitive fashion over yonder. Willibald is a
perfect young bear, and of course at the same time the apple of his
mother's eye, and she, by the way, is doing her best to bring him up as
a bluff country squire. It's useless to enter any protest, and, for the
matter of that, it seems just what the youngster's good for." Their conversation was interrupted at this moment by a servant, who
entered and handed his master a card. Falkenried glanced at it. "Counsellor Egern? I am glad of that. Tell the gentleman to come in." "You have a business engagement I see," said Wallmoden rising. "Then
I'll not disturb you." "On the contrary I beg you to remain. I have had an intimation of this
visit and its purpose, and know what will be the result of our
conversation. The question is--" He did not finish, for the door opened
and the lawyer entered. He seemed surprised not to find the officer
alone, as he had fully expected, but Falkenried took no notice of his
ill-concealed astonishment. "Herr Counsellor Egern--Herr von Wallmoden, secretary of legation," said
the host, presenting them. The man of law bowed with cool politeness as
he took the seat offered him. "I have the honor of being known to you, I believe, Herr Major," he
began. "As your wife's attorney at the time the suit for divorce was in
progress, I had the opportunity of making your acquaintance." He paused
as if expecting an answer; but Major Falkenried gave no sign beyond an
affirmative nod. Wallmoden was all attention. He could understand now his friend's
irritation on his arrival. "I come to you to-day in the name of my former client," continued the
counsellor. "She has authorized me--have I your permission to speak
freely?" He glanced at the diplomat, but Falkenried answered shortly: "Herr von
Wallmoden is my friend, and knows all about this affair. So you may
speak freely." "Very well. The lady has, after an absence of many years, returned to
Germany, and naturally enough wishes to see her son. She has already
written you about the matter but has received no answer." "I should think that was answer enough. I do not wish any such meeting,
and I will not permit it." "That sounds very blunt, Herr Major. Frau von Falkenried, in that case,
has--"

"Say Frau Zalika Rojanow, if you please," interrupted the Major. "I
believe she assumed her maiden name again when she returned to her own
country." "The name does not signify on this occasion," responded the lawyer
composedly. "The question concerns only and alone a mother's natural
desire, which the father neither can nor dare refuse, even though, as
in this case, the son has been unconditionally adjudged to him." "Dare not? But suppose he does dare?" "In so doing he will overstep the limit of his rights. I beg you, Herr
Major, to consider the matter quietly before giving so decided a no. A
mother has rights of which no judicial decree can ever divest her, and
one of those rights is the privilege of seeing her only child again. In
this case my client has the law on her side, and she will appeal to it,
too, if my demand meets with the same refusal as did her written
request." "Very well, she can make the attempt. I'll run the risk. My son does not
know that his mother is living, and shall not learn it now. I will not
have him see her or speak with her, and I will know how to prevent it,
too. My no is absolute under all circumstances." This declaration left nothing to be wished for as regarded energy; but
Falkenried's face was deathly pale, and his voice had a hollow, menacing
sound. One could see how fearfully the interview had excited him. He was
scarcely able to preserve the semblance of outward composure. The attorney seemed to see the uselessness of further endeavor, and only
shrugged his shoulders. "If this is your last word, then my errand is at an end, and we will
determine hereafter what our next step will be. I regret having troubled
you about the matter, Herr Major." He bowed himself out with the same
cool, indifferent manner with which he had entered. As the door closed
upon him, Falkenried sprang up and began pacing excitedly up and down
the room; there were a few minutes of oppressive silence, then Wallmoden
said, half aloud: "You should not have done that. Zalika will not resign
herself readily to your no; she made a desperate struggle for her child
in the beginning." "But I obtained the victory. It is to be hoped she has not forgotten
that." "At that time the question concerned the possession of the child,"
objected the secretary. "Now the mother only asks permission to see him
again, and you will not be able to refuse her that, if she demands it
peremptorily." The Major stopped suddenly, and his voice was full of undisguised
contempt as he answered:

"She will not venture to do that after all that has happened. Zalika
learned to know me in the hour of our separation; she'll be cautious
about driving me to extremes a second time." "But perhaps she will seek to accomplish secretly what you have openly
refused." "That is impossible; the discipline of our institution is so severe
there could be no intercourse here of which I should not learn at once." Wallmoden did not seem to share his friend's confidence. He shook his
head doubtfully. "To speak openly, I regard it as a great mistake that you are
obstinately silent toward your son concerning his mother and the fact
that she is living. When he learns it from some other source, what then? And sometime you must tell him." "Perhaps, in a couple of years, when he'll have to enter the world. Now
he's only a student, a half-grown boy, and I cannot disclose to him the
drama which was once played in his father's house--I cannot." "So be it. You know the woman who was once your wife, and know what to
expect from her. I fear there is nothing impossible for this woman to
accomplish." "Ah, I know her," said Falkenried with intense bitterness, "and because
I know her I will protect my son from her at any price. He shall not
breath the poisonous breath of her presence; no, not even for an hour. I
do not under estimate the danger from Zalika's return, but as long as
Hartmut remains at my side he is safe from her, for she will never come
near me, I give you my word for that." "We will hope so," answered Wallmoden, as he rose and reached out his
hand at parting. "But do not forget that the greatest danger with which
you have to contend lies in Hartmut himself; he is in every trait the
son of his mother. You are coming over to Burgsdorf with him day after
to-morrow, I hear?" "Yes, he is to spend his short autumn vacation with Willibald. I shall
be able to remain a day only, but I'll surely come for that time. Good-bye." The secretary left the house, and Falkenried returned once more to the
window, but he only gave a fleeting glance after his friend, who waved
him a parting greeting, then returned gloomily to his own thoughts. "The son of his mother." The words rang in his ears, but the thought was
not new to him; he had known it a long time, and it was this knowledge
which had furrowed his brow so deeply, and wrung from him many a deep
sigh. He was a man who could brave any outward danger; but against this
unfortunate heritage of blood in his only child he had battled with all
his energy for years, but in vain. *       *       *       *       *

"Now I tell you for the last time that all this noise and confusion must
come to an end, for my patience is finally exhausted. Such goings on as
we have had for the last three days are enough to make one think that
all Burgsdorf is bewitched. That Hartmut is full of mad tricks from his
head to his feet. When he once gets loose from the reins which his
father holds tight enough, I'll admit that, there's no getting on with
him, and of course you follow after him through thick and thin, and obey
your lord and master's slightest behest. Oh, you are a fine pair." This philippic, which was delivered in a loud tone, came from the lips
of Frau von Eschenhagen of Burgsdorf, while sitting with her son and
mother at breakfast. The great dining-room lay on the ground floor of
the old mansion, and was an extremely simple room, with glass doors
leading out upon a broad stone terrace, and to the garden beyond. On the
brightly tinted walls hung a number of antlers, which bore witness to
the sporting tastes of former possessors, but these were the only
adornments of the room. A dozen high-backed chairs, arranged stiffly in rows like grenadiers, a
cumbrous dining-table and a couple of old-fashioned sideboards
constituted the entire furniture of the room; and one could see at a
glance that they had already done service for several generations. Such
luxuries as wall-paper, paintings or carpet could not be found here. Evidently the occupants were contented to live on just as their
ancestors had done, although Burgsdorf was one of the richest estates in
the district. The appearance of the mistress of the house was in keeping with her
surroundings She was forty years old or there abouts, with a large,
strong figure, cheeks glowing with health, and firm, solid features,
which could never have been called beautiful, but denoted great energy. Very little escaped the sharp glance of her gray eye, her dark hair was
brushed back smoothly, her gown was of coarse texture, simply made, and
looking at her hands, you saw at once that they were made for work. There was nothing attractive in her appearance, and her manner and
bearing were thoroughly masculine. The heir and future master of Burgsdorf, who had just been reprimanded
so sharply, sat opposite his mother, listening, as in duty bound, while
he helped himself liberally to ham and eggs. He was a handsome,
fresh-looking youth, about seventeen years old, whose appearance
indicated no great intellectual strength, but he seemed to beam with
good nature. His sun-burned face was the picture of health, but
otherwise he showed little resemblance to his mother. He lacked her
energetic expression, and the blue eyes and blonde hair were not from
her, but were an inheritance from his father. With his large, but very
awkward limbs, he looked like a young giant, and formed a striking
contrast to his more delicately formed, aristocratic looking uncle,
Wallmoden, who sat next him, and who said now with a slight _soupcon_ of
irony in his tone: "You certainly cannot hold Willibald answerable for
all these mad pranks; he certainly is a model son." "I would advise him not to be anything else; who lives with me must obey
orders," cried Frau von Eschenhagen, as she struck an emphatic blow upon
the table, which made her brother wince. "A man is bound to obey orders under your government," he answered. "At
the same time I would advise you, dear Regine, to do something more for
the intellectual development of your son. I have no doubt that under
your guidance he will become, in time, a most excellent farmer, but to
the education of a future landed proprietor, something more than that is
needed. Willibald has outgrown home instructors and should be sent away
now." "Sent a--?" Frau Regine laid down knife and fork in unbounded
astonishment. "Sent away," she exclaimed, greatly irritated, "and in the
name of common sense, where?" "Well, first to the university, and later to travel, that he may learn
something of the world and of men." "That he may be altogether ruined by this world and these men, and no
comfort to me at all! No, Herbert, I'll never do that, and I tell you so
now, once for all. I have educated my son to be honest and fear God, and
do not think I shall turn him loose in your Sodom and Gomorrah which the
dear Lord in his forbearance has yet spared from the fire and brimstone
which it so richly deserves." "You only know this Sodom and Gomorrah by hearsay, Regine," interrupted
Herbert, sarcastically. "You have lived in Burgsdorf ever since your
marriage; you must acknowledge that yourself!" "I acknowledge nothing at all," declared Frau von Eschenhagen,
obstinately. "Will shall become a capable farmer; he is qualified for
that, and for that he needs no cramming at your universities. Or perhaps
you'd like to educate him in your own school, and make a diplomatist of
him? That would be too great an honor." She began to laugh loudly, and Will, to whom the whole conversation had
appeared very comical, joined in in the same key. Herr von Wallmoden
took no part in this sudden explosion of gaiety; he only winced again,
as though his nerves were affected, and shrugged his shoulders. "No, I had not thought of that. I know full well I should have my
trouble for my pains. But Willibald and I are the only representatives
of our family, and if I should not marry--"

"Should not? You are not thinking of marrying in your old age?" interrupted his sister, sharply. "I am in my forty-fifth year, dear Regine, and a man is not usually
considered old at that age," said Wallmoden, somewhat vexed. "Above all
things I consider marriages made late in life by far the happiest; one
is not influenced then by passion, as Falkenried was, to his lasting
wretchedness, but gives to reason the decisive word." "The saints protect us! What if Willibald should wait to marry until he
is fifty years old and gray-headed?" cried Frau von Eschenhagen, greatly
vexed. "As an only son and future heir he will have to consider such matters;
as for the rest, the main point will be his own inclinations. What do
you think, Willibald?" The young heir, who had disposed of his ham and eggs by this time, and
with undiminished appetite was now attacking the sausage, was evidently
much astonished that his opinion had been asked. Such a thing had never
happened before, and he was obliged to reflect deeply before he could
answer at all. At length he reached a conclusion. "Yes, of course I must marry some
time, but mamma will choose a wife for me when the right time comes." "She will indeed, my boy," assented his mother, warmly. "That is my
affair, so you need not trouble your head about it, and until then you
will remain here in Burgsdorf where I can have my eye upon you. As to
the university and traveling, that matter is--settled." She threw a defiant glance at her brother, but he was gazing with a look
of horror at the enormous sausage to which his nephew and ward was
helping himself for the second time. "Have you always such a large appetite, Will?" he asked. "Always," Will assured him complacently, as he helped himself to a
large slice of bread and butter. "No, we don't suffer thank God, with indigestion or any other stomach
trouble," said the mistress of the house tartly, "but we earn our bread
honestly here. First pray and work, then eat and drink, but what we do,
we do thoroughly, and that keeps body and soul together. Just look at
Will, now, and you will see that what I say is true." She gave her
brother a friendly slap on the shoulder with her last words, but this
token of her good will was so energetic that Wallmoden shrank back in
his chair, and immediately moved it sidewise to be out of the reach of
that muscular hand. The expression of his face showed clearly that the "creepy sensation"
was coming over him again. In the presence of these patriarchial
conditions, he thought it best to forego any attempt to enforce his
prerogative as guardian, an office, moreover, which, so far as he was
concerned, had always been purely nominal. It was plain from Will's
manner that his mother's praise was highly gratifying to the young man's
feelings. "And Hartmut is not here for breakfast again, this morning. He seems to
think there is no necessity for being punctual at Burgsdorf, but I will
enlighten the young gentleman when he comes and make it clear to him
that--"

"There he is now," exclaimed Willibald. On the clear sunshine which
flooded the room through the open windows, there fell a shadow, and a
tall, slender figure appeared suddenly at the window and vaulted upon
the high sill. "Well, what kind of an imp are you anyway, that you can only come in
through the window?" said Frau von Eschenhagen indignantly. "What are
the doors for?" "For Will and all other well-ordered human beings," laughed the
new-comer good-naturedly. "I always take the nearest way, and that led
this time through the window." So saying he gave one spring from the
high seat into the middle of the room. Hartmut Falkenried, like the young heir of Burgsdorf, stood upon the
boundary line where boyhood and manhood meet, but it needed only a
glance to recognize that he was his friend's superior in every respect. He wore a cadet's uniform which became him well, but yet there was
something in his whole appearance which seemed to be at war with the
military cut and fit. The tall, slender boy was a true picture of youth
and beauty, yet there was something odd about this beauty, something
wild in his motions and appearance, with absolutely nothing to remind
one of the martial figure and earnest repose of his father. The
luxuriant, curly locks which crowned the high forehead, were of a deep,
blue black, and the warm, dark coloring of the skin betokened rather a
son of the south than of German parentage. Neither did the eyes, which
flashed in the youthful countenance, belong to the cool, earnest north;
they were enigmatical eyes, dark as the night, and full of hot,
passionate fire. Beautiful as they were, however, there was something
uncanny hidden in their depths, and though the laughter which
accompanied Hartmut's words was free and unrestrained, it was not a
hearty, merry boy's laugh. "You certainly conduct yourself in a very free and easy manner," said
Wallmoden, sharply. "You evidently take advantage of the fact that the
inmates of Burgsdorf think little of etiquette. I have no doubt,
however, that your father would protest against such an entrance into
the dining-room." "He would not do it if his father were here," said Frau von Eschenhagen,
who did not seem to notice the stab intended for herself in her
brother's remark. "And so you have come to your breakfast at last,
Hartmut. But laggards get nothing to eat; did you know that?" "Yes, I know that," replied Hartmut, quite undisturbed, "so I got my
breakfast some time ago from the housekeeper. You can't starve me, Aunt
Regine. I stand on too good a footing with your people." "And so you think you can do as you please and go unpunished," cried the
irate lady. "Break all the rules of the house, leave no one and nothing
in peace, and stand all Burgsdorf on its head; but I'll soon stop all
this business, my lad. To-morrow I'll send a messenger over to your
father requesting him to come and take home his son who knows neither
punctuality nor obedience." The threat had its effect. The youth was frightened, and thought it well
to surrender at discretion. "Oh, you are only jesting; shall I not enjoy my short vacation with--"

"With all manner of folly?" Frau von Eschenhagen added for him. "Will
has not done so much mischief in all his life as you have accomplished
in the last three days, and you'll spoil him with your bad example and
lead him into all manner of misdoing." "Oh, Will is not the kind to be spoiled. I could not do it if I tried,"
said Hartmut very warmly. The young heir, who certainly did not look as if he could be led into
any impropriety, ate on, untroubled by these personal allusions, until
he had finished the last slice of bread on the table; but his mother was
highly incensed at this remark. "That must grieve you greatly," she retorted. "It is certainly not your
fault, for you have tried hard enough to ruin him; but as I just said I
will write to your father to-morrow." "That he is to come and fetch me away? You won't do that Aunt Regine,
you are far too good. You know how very strict papa is, how severely he
can punish; you won't complain of me to him; you have never done it
yet." "Leave me alone, don't bother me with your flatteries." Frau Regine's
face was as inflexible as ever, but her voice had a certain unsteadiness
which made Hartmut feel he had won the day. He laid his arm upon her
shoulder with the freedom of a child. "I believe you do love me a little, Aunt Regine, and I--I have been
happy for weeks over the thought of my visit to Burgsdorf. I have been
sick with longing for woods and sea, for the green meadows and the far
blue heavens. I have been so happy here; but of course, if you really do
not want me, I'll go away from the place. I won't wait to have you send
me." His voice had sunk to a soft, seductive whisper, while his eyes spoke
more eloquently than his tongue. They could plead more powerfully than
the lips, and Frau von Eschenhagen, who yielded to no one, from her only
son to the lowest tenant on the estate, permitted herself to be
persuaded by them now. "You are incorrigible, you merry-andrew" she said, brushing the curls
from his forehead. "And as to sending you away, you know only too well
that Will and all my people are always ready to make fools of themselves
for you, and I, too, for that matter." Hartmut laughed aloud at the last words, and kissed her hand with
impetuous gratitude, then he turned to his friend, who, having finally
ended his meal, was looking on in silent wonderment. "Have you finished your breakfast at last, Will? Come, we'll go to the
Burgsdorf fishing pond--don't be so vexatiously slow. Good-bye, Aunt
Regine, I can see Uncle Wallmoden does not approve of your having
pardoned me. Hurrah, now we're off for the woods." And away he rushed
over the terrace and across the garden. There was something attractive
in his exuberance and enthusiasm. The lad was all life and fire. Will
trotted after him like a young deer, and in a few moments the two
disappeared behind the trees. "He comes and goes like a wind storm," said Frau von Eschenhagen, gazing
after them. "That boy is not to be restrained once the reins are
slackened." "A dangerous youth," said Wallmoden. "He even understands how to manage
you, who usually have all your commands obeyed. It is, within my
knowledge, the first time you have ever forgiven disobedience and lack
of punctuality." "Yes, Hartmut has something about him which bewitches one," exclaimed
Regine, half angry at her own irresolution. "If he did not look at me
with those big black eyes of his while he begged and flattered, I might
be able to resist him. You are right, he is a dangerous lad." "Well, we've had enough of Hartmut for this morning. The question which
interests me concerns the education of your own son. You have really
decided--"

"To keep him here. Don't bother yourself about him, Herbert; you may be
a great diplomatist, and have the politics of the whole country in your
pocket, but I wont give my boy into your keeping; he belongs to me
alone, and I intend to keep him, and--that's enough." A sounding blow on the table accompanied the "that's enough." Then the
ruling lady of Burgsdorf rose from her chair and left the room. Her
brother shrugged his shoulders and said half aloud: "He can grow up an
ignorant country squire for all of me--perhaps it's the best thing for
him after all." Hartmut and Willibald had, in the meantime, reached the tolerably
extensive forest which belonged to the estate. The Burgsdorf fish pond,
a lonely, reedy sheet of water in the middle of the wood, lay glittering
in the sun in the still morning hours. Willibald had chosen for himself
a shady place upon the bank, and gave himself up, with as much
perseverance as comfort, to the delights of angling, while the impatient
Hartmut wandered here and there, now scaring a bird, now breaking off a
branch for the blossoms, and at last, after a series of gymnastic
performances, seating himself on the trunk of an old tree which lay half
in the water. "Can you never be quiet in any place? You frighten the
fish away every time," exclaimed Will, out of humor. "I've caught
nothing at all to-day!" "How can you sit for hours on the one spot waiting for the stupid fish
to bite?" retorted Hartmut. "Ah, you can spend the whole long year in
the woods if you desire, you are free, free." "Are you a prisoner, then?" asked his friend. "You and your comrades are
out daily, are you not?" "But never alone, never without supervision and control. We are always
and eternally in the service, even in recreation hours. O how I hate it,
this service, and the whole slavish life." "But Hartmut, what if your father heard you?" "Oh, then he would punish me again as he always does. He has nothing
else for me but force and punishment, all for my own good--that goes
without saying." He threw himself full length on the grass, but hard as the words
sounded, there was a tremor in his tone which told of pain and passion. The young heir only shook his head soberly while he put a new bait on
his hook and for a few minutes there was perfect silence. Then suddenly something black swooped down like a flash of lightning
from the height above them into the water, and a second later rose again
in the air with the slippery, glittering prey in its beak. "Bravo, that was a good catch!" cried Hartmut, rising. But Will spoke
angrily. "The wretched robber robs our whole pond. I will speak to the forester
and tell him to fill him full of lead." "A robber?" repeated Hartmut, as his glance followed the heron who was
just disappearing behind the high tree tops. "Yes, of course, but how
fine it must be to live such a free robber's life up there in the air. To descend like a flash for your booty and be up and off again where no
one can follow; that's a hunt that pays." "Hartmut, I verily believe you'd take pleasure in such a wild, lawless
life," said Willibald, with the repugnance of a well-trained boy for
such sentiments. His companion laughed, but it was the same bitter laugh without the
joyousness of youth in its sound. "Well, if I had any such desire, they'd take it out of me at the
military academy. There obedience and discipline is the Alpha and Omega
of all things. Will, have you never wished that you had wings?" "I, wings?" asked Will, whose whole attention was again directed to his
bait. "How ridiculous! Who would wish for impossibilities?" "I only wish I had them," cried Hartmut excitedly. "I would I were one
of the falcons from whom we take our name. Then I would mount higher and
always higher in the blue sky towards the sun, and never come back
again." "I believe you're crazy," answered his listener good-naturedly. "Well, I
wont catch anything, if I sit here all day, for the fish wont bite. I
must move to another place." With that he gathered up his fishing tackle and crossed to the other
side of the pond, while Hartmut threw himself on the ground again. It was one of those autumn days which during the midday hours recall
thoughts of early spring. The sunshine was so golden, the air so mild,
the woods so fresh and odorous. Upon the glistening little lake danced
thousands of shining sparks, and the long grass whispered softly and
mysteriously to itself whenever a breath of wind passed over it. Hartmut lay stretched out motionless on the grass as if listening to the
secrets it told to the autumnal wind. The wild passion and excitement
which flashed from his eyes when he spoke of the bird of prey had all
vanished. Now the eyes which looked into the heavens above were sad and
dreamy, and there rested in them an expression of ardent longing. A light step, almost unheard on the soft ground, approached, and the low
bushes rustled as if against a silk garment. Then they parted and a
woman's figure appeared and stood looking intently at the young dreamer. "Hartmut!" The boy started and sprang up instantly. He knew neither the voice nor
the apparition which stood before him, but saw it was a lady, and he
made her one of his courtly bows. "Pardon, Madame--"

A slender, trembling hand was laid quickly and restrainingly on his arm. "Be quiet, not so loud; your companion might hear us, and I want to
speak to you, and to you alone, Hartmut." She stepped back again into the thicket and motioned him to follow. Hartmut hesitated a moment. How came this heavily-veiled and
richly-attired stranger into the lonely wood, and why did she speak so
familiarly to him whom she had never seen before? But the mysteriousness
of her behavior beginning to charm him, he followed. She stood now in the shadow of the low trees, where she could not be
seen from the lake, and slowly threw back her veil. She was not very
young, a woman of more than thirty, but her face with its great burning
eyes, possessed an indefinable witchery, and a certain charm lay in her
voice, which, though she talked in whispers, had a soft, deep tone, and
an odd intonation, as though the German which she spoke so fluently was
not her mother tongue. "Hartmut, look at me. Do you really not know me any more? Does no memory
of your childhood come back to you, to tell you who I am?" The young man shook his head slowly, and yet some dreamy and obscure
memory did come to his recollection, of having heard this voice before,
and of this face which had looked into his at some far distant period. Half shy, half fascinated, he stood looking at this stranger, who
suddenly threw her arms around him. "My son, my only child! Do you not know your own mother?" "My mother is dead," he answered, half aloud. The stranger laughed bitterly, shrilly, and her laugh seemed but an echo
of the hard, joyless sounds which had come from Hartmut's lips a few
moments since. "So that's how it is. They would even say I was dead and not leave you
the memory of a mother. It is not true, Hartmut. I live, I stand before
you; look at me, look at my features, are they not your very own? That
at least they could not take from you. Child of my heart, do you not
feel that you belong to me?" Still Hartmut stood motionless, looking into that face in which his own
was so faithfully mirrored. He saw the same lines, the same luxuriant,
blue-black hair, the same dark, flashing eyes; and the same demoniacal
expression which was a flame in the eye of the mother, was a spark in
the eye of the son. Their close resemblance to one another was witness
enough that they were of one blood. The young man felt the influence of
the mysterious tie. He demanded no explanation, no proof; the dreamy, confused recollections
of his childhood were suddenly clear, and after a second's hesitation he
threw himself into the arms which were stretched out to him. "Mother!" In this cry lay the whole fervid intensity of the boy, who had never
known what it was to have a mother, and who had longed for one with all
the passion of his nature. His mother! And now he lay in her arms, now
she covered him with warm kisses, and called him by sweet, tender names,
which had been strangers to his ear until that moment--everything else
seemed forgotten by him in this flood of stormy ecstasy. After a few minutes Hartmut loosed himself from the arms which still
enfolded him. "Why have you never been with me, mamma?" he asked vehemently. "Why have
I always been told that you were dead?" Zalika stepped back, and in an instant all tenderness had died out of
her eyes, and in its place was a wild, deadly hate, as the answer came
like a hiss from between her set lips. "Because your father hates me, my son--and because he wishes to deny me
the love of my only child since he thrust me from him." Hartmut was silent. He knew well enough that the name of his mother
dare not be mentioned in his father's presence, and that he had been
sharply reproved once for doing so, but he had been too much a child at
the time to ask "why." Zalika gave him no time to do so now. She brushed
the thick locks back from his brow and a shadow crossed her face. "You get your forehead from him," she said slowly. "But that is the only
thing that reminds me of him, all the rest belongs to me and me alone. Every feature tells that you are mine--I always knew that." She suddenly clasped him in her arms again with unspeakable tenderness,
and Hartmut returned the embrace with ardor. It seemed to him like the
fairy tales which he had so often dreamed, and he gave himself up
unresistingly to the spell of happiness which some wonderful magic had
cast over him. Just at that moment, Will called loudly to his friend from the opposite
shore to come on, that it was time to go home. Zalika spoke at once. "We must part now. Nobody must learn that I have seen and spoken with
you; above all things your father must not know it. When do you return
to him?" "In eight days." "Not for eight days?" The words sounded almost triumphant. "Until then I can see you daily. Be here by the pond to-morrow at this
same hour; make some pretext for leaving your friend behind, so that we
may be undisturbed. You will come, Hartmut?" "Certainly, mother, but--"

She gave him no time for any objection, but continued in a passionate
whisper:

"Above all things maintain absolute silence toward every one. Do not
forget that. Good-bye, my child, my own dear son, good-bye." Another kiss and she had retreated in the woods as noiselessly as she
had come. It was high time, for Willibald appeared at this moment,
though not noiselessly by any means, for he broke the twigs with many a
crackle as he stepped heavily on them. "Why didn't you answer me?" he asked. "I called you three times. You
have been asleep; you look as if you were dreaming." Hartmut did have a dazed look as he stood gazing at the trees behind
which his mother had disappeared. Now he straightened himself and drew
his hand across his forehead. "Yes, I have been dreaming. A very strange, marvelous dream," he said
slowly. "You had better have been fishing," returned Will. "See what a fine
catch I have made. A man should never dream in daylight--that's the time
to be at something serious--mother says." CHAPTER II. The Falkenried and Wallmoden families had been on friendly terms for
years. Living upon adjoining estates, their intercourse was frequent,
and their children grew up together, while many common interests united
the bonds of friendship still more closely. Neither of the families were
wealthy, and the sons, after completing their education, always had to
make their own way in the world, and this in their turn Major Hartmut
von Falkenried and Herbert von Wallmoden had done. They had played together in their youth, and as men had remained true to
their boyhood's friendship. At one time it looked as if they would be
more closely allied, for their parents had planned a marriage between
Lieutenant Falkenried, as he was then, and Regine Wallmoden. The young
couple seemed to understand one another fully, and everything stood on
the happiest footing, when an event occurred which put an abrupt
termination to all their plans. A cousin of the Wallmoden family, an incorrigible idler and spendthrift,
who had made his longer residence at home an impossibility by his wild
conduct, had gone out into the world years before, and after much
wandering, and an adventurous career, had finally turned his steps in
the direction of Roumania, where he obtained the management of a wealthy
Bojar's estate. After the Bojar's death he succeeded in winning the
widow's hand, and once more regained the position among the nobility
which he had lost earlier in life, through his own folly. And now, after
an absence of more than ten years, he returned with his wife to make a
long visit to his kinsfolk. Frau von Wallmoden was by no means a youthful bride. She had long since
reached maturity, but she was accompanied by her daughter by her first
marriage, Zalika Rojanow; and this young Sclave, scarcely seventeen
years old, turned the heads of the simple country gentry, who after all
had seen but little of the world, by her grace and strange beauty, and
the fascination of her warm southern temperament. She was a strange
enough figure in this little circle, whose forms and customs she set
aside with such sovereign indifference. But there was many an earnest
shake of the head, many a word of blame, which was not outspoken,
because they only considered the girl a fleeting guest; she would vanish
again as suddenly as she had appeared on their little horizon. Then Hartmut Falkenried came home from his garrison on leave, and met
the new family in the house of his friends. He saw Zalika, and his
life's destiny was sealed. It was a sudden and blinding passion, for
which one too often pays with the peace of a whole life. He forgot the wishes of his parents, their plans for his future, and his
quiet, warm attachment for his youth's playfellow, Regine. He had eyes
no longer for the simple woodland flower, which yet bloomed young and
fresh for him; but, inhaling the fragrance of the strange and beautiful
exotic, all else sank into insignificance. In an unguarded hour he threw
himself at her feet, and told her of his love. Strangely enough, Zalika returned his affection. Perhaps it was
according to the old adage of extremes meeting, for this man was, in
every particular, her opposite; perhaps it flattered her to see that a
word, a glance from her, could so powerfully effect this earnest, quiet
officer, who, even then, had a touch of melancholy in his disposition. Enough, she accepted him, and with joy he clasped his affianced bride in
his arms. The news of their betrothal aroused a storm in the family circle. From
all sides came objections and warnings. Zalika's mother and step-father
were sorely opposed to it, but resistance only increased the ardor of
the young lovers. The engagement, in spite of kinsfolk, was soon an
established fact, and six months later Falkenried took his young bride
to his own house. But the voices which had foretold unhappiness from this marriage were
prophetic. It was not long before the brief intoxication of joy was followed by
bitter disenchantment. It had been a fatal error to believe a woman like
Zalika Rojanow, who had grown up in the unrestrained freedom of a
disorderly, extravagant Bojar family, could accommodate herself to the
rules and restrictions of a settled German household. The only life she had ever known, and the only life which suited her
temper, was one of excitement and outward splendor. A house full of
guests, horses, cards, hunting, racing, and the utmost liberty of
conversation with the men of her acquaintance; this was the life she had
led in her Roumanian home. She had no notion of duty and no understanding for the obligations and
requirements of her new position. And this was the wife who must adapt
herself to the narrow life of a little German garrison town, and direct
the household of a young officer with but limited means at his command. That it was impossible for her to do so, was shown within the first few
weeks. Zalika began at once; regardless of all prudent considerations,
to order her house after the same fashion as her father's, and
squandered her large marriage portion right and left. In vain her husband pleaded with and admonished her; she paid no heed to
him. She had nothing but jeers for forms and ceremonies which were
sacred to him, only a shrug of the shoulders for his strict ideas of
honor and propriety. Soon there were violent quarrels, and Falkenried
recognized, too late, what his precipitancy had done for him. He had had great faith in the power of love, notwithstanding all the
warnings he had received about Zalika's foreign birth, and the seal
which her erratic education had stamped upon her character. But he had
now to learn that she had never loved him; that it was the whim of the
hour, or, more probably, the fleeting passion of a moment, which had
made her throw herself into his arms. And she saw in him only an
uncomfortable companion, who spoiled all her pleasure in life with his
foolish pendantries and his laughable notions of honor with which he
wished to bind her hand and foot. But with it all, she feared this man,
who, in his energy and force, was striving to bend her characterless
nature to his will. The birth of little Hartmut did nothing to relieve the strain of this
unhappy marriage, but it was a tie which, outwardly at least, still
bound them together. Zalika loved her child passionately, and she knew
her husband well enough to recognize fully, that if it ever came to a
separation between them, he would demand the boy. That thought alone
kept her by his side, while Falkenried suffered intensely, hid his
misery in his own breast, and gave a brave front to the world. But, in spite of all, the world knew the truth; it knew things of which
the husband had never dreamed, and was only silent out of compassion for
him. But at last there came a day when his eyes were opened, and what
had been so long an open secret to all his little world excepting
himself, was known to him. The immediate consequence of this knowledge was a duel, in which
Falkenried's antagonist fell. Falkenried was sentenced to a long imprisonment, but very soon released,
for every one recognized that he had only fought to vindicate his
wounded honor. In the meantime the suit for divorce had been begun, and a decree
obtained; Zalika made no contest, nor did she venture to approach her
husband again. Since the last terrible hour when he had called her to account, she
trembled at the thought of him. She made desperate efforts however to
secure possession of her son, but all in vain. Hartmut was given to the father unconditionally, and Falkenried barred
the mother's every effort with iron inexorableness. Zalika made many
attempts to see her son once more, but to no purpose, and fully
convinced at last, that she could accomplish nothing, she returned to
her own country and her mother's house. For years her husband had heard nothing from her, until now when she
suddenly and unexpectedly appeared in the neighborhood of the German
capital, where Major von Falkenried had assumed control of a large
military school. It was the eighth day since Hartmut's arrival at Burgsdorf. Frau von
Eschenhagen was in her sitting-room, and opposite her sat the Major, who
had arrived but fifteen minutes before. Her conversation must have been as disagreeable as it was earnest, for
Falkenried listened with a face which grew darker at every word, as she
went on with her account. "Hartmut seemed to me greatly altered after the third or fourth day he
was here. The first few days nothing could check his overflow of
spirits, and indeed one morning I had to threaten to send him home. But,
all of a sudden, he became silent and quite downcast. He attempted no
more of his mad pranks, spent hours by himself in wandering through our
woods, and when he returned from his solitary rambles, just sat and
dreamed with open eyes, so that we often had to arouse him as if from a
sound slumber. 'He's beginning to think of the future,' Herbert said,
but I said: 'There's something more than that wrong; there's something
back of all this.' So I took Will to task and questioned him closely; he
astonished me with what I extorted from him. He was in the conspiracy. He had surprised the mother and the son one day at their tryst, and
Hartmut had pledged him to secrecy, and my boy had really kept silence
towards me, me, his own mother! He finally confessed the little he knew,
after I had talked to him seriously. Well, it won't happen a second
time. I'll look after my Will more sharply for the future." "And Hartmut, what does he say?" interrupted the father hastily. "Nothing at all, for I haven't spoken a syllable to him on the subject. He would probably have asked why he had never been allowed to see, or
speak to his mother, and that question can only be answered--by his
father." "He has heard it all from the other side, by this time," answered the
father bitterly. "Though, of course, he has not heard the truth." "That is what I feared, so I didn't lose a moment in communicating with
you after I discovered the thing. And what will you do?" "I'll have to think that over," responded the Major with enforced quiet. "I thank you, Regine. I suspected mischief when your letter came urging
me to come over at once. Herbert was right, I should not have allowed
Hartmut to leave my side for an hour, under any circumstances. But I
believed him to be so safe from every approach here at Burgsdorf. And he
was so rejoiced at the thought of spending his little vacation here, had
so set his heart upon it, that I had not the strength to refuse
him;--and then he is seldom happy except when away from me." A hidden pain lay in the last words, but his listener only shrugged his
shoulders. "That's not altogether the boy's fault," she answered, outspokenly. "I
keep my Will under pretty sharp discipline, but he knows well enough, in
spite of all that, that he lives in his mother's heart. Hartmut has
never learned as much of his father; he only knows his severe,
unapproachable side. If he imagined that you almost adored--"'

"He would at once misuse the knowledge and leave me weaponless with his
flattery and caresses. He'd rule over me as he does over every one else
who comes near him. His comrades follow him blindly, and are as often
punished as he for his misdoings. He has your Willibald completely under
his control, and his teachers treat him with especial indulgence. I am
the only one whom he fears, and, as a natural consequence, the only one
whom he respects." "And you believe fear to be the only weapon to use against him? just
now, too, when his mother is, without doubt, overwhelming him with
lavish caresses? Do not turn away, old friend, you know I have never
mentioned that name before you, but now that it is brought unavoidably
to the front again I must speak plainly. I must admit we could expect
nothing less from Frau Zalika, than that she would appear again. Nothing
would have been gained even if you had not allowed him to leave your
side, for you could not guard a lad of seventeen like a little child. The mother would have found some way to see her child, and that is her
right--I should do the same." "Her right?" interrupted the Major violently. "And you say that to me,
Regine?" "I say it, because I know what it is to have an only son. It was right
for you to take your child, for such a mother was not fit to educate
him; but that you should refuse to let her see her son again, after an
absence of twelve years, is a hardness and cruelty which can only be
prompted by hate. No matter how great her guilt may have been--the
punishment is too hard." Falkenried looked gloomily on the ground; he knew there was truth in her
words; at last he said slowly:

"I should never have believed you would espouse Zalika's cause. Once I
injured you deeply for her sake. I tore asunder a bond--"

"Which never had been united," broke in Frau von Eschenhagen, anxious to
avoid the subject. "It was only a plan of our parents, nothing more." "But the thought was a familiar and cherished one in our childhood's
years. Do not seek to shield me, Regine, I know only too well how I
treated you then--and myself too." Regine looked straight at him with her clear, gray eyes, but there was
something like moisture in them as she answered:

"Well, well, Hartmut, it's all over now, so many years that I do not
hesitate to admit that I would have had you then, willingly enough, and
perhaps you would have been able to make something more out of me than I
have become. I was always a headstrong creature, you know, and not
easily ruled, but I should have obeyed you, perhaps you alone, of all
the world. But when Willibald Eschenhagen led me to the altar three
months after your own marriage, the situation was reversed, and I took
the reins in my own hands and began to govern, and have had plenty of
practice since then. But let's not talk of that time so long gone by. I
never have borne any grudge against you, you know that; we have always
been friends in spite of everything, and if you want my assistance or
advice now--here I am." She held out her hand and he placed his own in it. "I know it, Regine, but in this matter I can only help and advise
myself. If you will send Hartmut to me now, I'll speak with him." Frau von Eschenhagen arose at once to fulfil his wish, but as she left
the room she murmured half aloud:

"If it be not already too late. She blinded the father and made him
almost insane once; she has surely done as much for the son by this
time." In about ten minutes Hartmut entered; he closed the door behind him, but
remained standing near it. Falkenried turned to him. "Come near,
Hartmut, I wish to speak with you." His son obeyed, but reluctantly. He knew already that Willibald had
confessed, and that Regine had summoned his father at once, but, united
to the shyness with which he always approached his father, there was
to-day an obvious defiance, which did not escape the Major. He gave his
handsome young son a long, gloomy look. "My sudden arrival does not appear to surprise you. Perhaps you know why
I am come!" "Yes father, I imagine why!" "That is well; then we need waste no time with explanatory words. You
have learned that your mother still lives, she has seen you and spoken
with you. I know that already. When did you see her first?" "Five days ago." "And have you seen her daily since then?" "Yes, at the Burgsdorf fish pond?" Questions and answers were alike short and precise. Hartmut was
accustomed to the abrupt, military manner of his father, for in all his
intercourse with him, no superfluous word, no hesitancy or evasion of an
answer, was permitted. To-day Falkenried was especially abrupt, in order that he might conceal
his intense excitement from his son's unpracticed eye. But Hartmut saw
only the earnest, unmoved countenance, and heard only the cold, severe
accents as his father continued:

"I have nothing for which to reprove you, for in this matter I have
given you no commands and no word has ever been spoken on the subject
between us. But now I am forced to break the silence. You have always
believed your mother dead, and I have tacitly encouraged this belief,
for I have wished to protect you from recollections which poisoned my
life. Your youth at least should be free, I said. But I have not been
able to carry out that plan, I see, so now you must learn the truth." The father paused a moment. To a man of his sensitive feelings it was
torture to discuss this subject with his son, but there was no option
now, he must speak farther. "When I was a young man I loved your mother devotedly, and married her
against the wishes of my parents, who saw only unhappiness for me in a
union with a woman from a foreign land. They were right, the marriage
was a most unhappy one, and was finally dissolved by my desire. My son
was awarded to me unconditionally, for it was my absolute right. More I
will not tell you, for I cannot denounce a mother to her own son, so let
that be enough for you." Short and bitter as this declaration was, it made a singular impression
upon Hartmut. His father would not denounce his mother to him, to him,
who heard daily the bitterest accusations and invectives against his
father from her lips. Zalika had, as might be supposed, cast all the blame of the separation
upon her husband and his countless tyrannies, and her son, who had
suffered so much from his father's austerity, gave a willing ear to all
her tirades. And yet these few short, earnest words had more effect than
all Zalika's passionate outbreaks. Hartmut felt instinctively on which
side the truth lay. "And now, to the main point," Falkenried went on. "What was the tenor of
your daily interviews?" Perhaps Hartmut had not expected this question; a deep red overspread
his face, he was silent and cast his eyes on the ground. "Ah, you do not care to repeat it. I desire to know it. I command you
to answer me!" But Hartmut was still silent; he only pressed his lips closer together,
and looked defiantly at his father, who had come close to him now. "You will not speak? Perhaps a command from the other side keeps you
silent? No matter, your silence tells me more than any words. I see how
much you are estranged from me already; a little longer with such
influences, and you would be lost to me forever. These meetings with
your mother are now at an end. I forbid you to see her again. You will
go home with me to-day and remain under my protection. Whether that
appears cruel to you or not, it must be, and you must obey." But the Major erred when he believed his son would, as formerly, bow to
his stern decree. Hartmut had been for the past few days in a school
where all the antagonism of his nature had been aroused against his
father. "Father, you cannot, you dare not order me thus," he cried out now in
great excitement. "It is my own mother whom I have found at last, the
only one in the whole world who loves me. I will not be separated from
her again as I once was. I will not be forced to hate her; threaten,
punish me, do what you will with me, but I will not obey this time, I
will not obey!" All the ungovernable passion of his nature broke out in these words; an
unearthly fire gleamed in his eyes, and his hands were clenched; every
fiber quivered in wild revolt; he was resolved to fight out this battle
with his father to the bitter end. But the burst of anger which he expected did not come. Falkenried looked
silently at him, but with a glance of earnest, sad reproof. "The only one in the whole world who loves you," he repeated slowly. "You seem to forget that you have a father." "Who has never loved me," cried Hartmut with excessive bitterness. "Since I have found my mother, I have learned for the first time what
love is." "Hartmut!" The boy seemed almost staggered by this strange tone, vibrating with
pain, which he had never heard in all his life before, and the defiance
which was about to break forth anew, died on his lips. "Because I have had no flattering words and caresses for you, because I
have been strict and severe in my training, have you doubted my love?" said Falkenried, even in that same strange tone. "Do you know what that
severity has cost me against my only, my dearly loved child?" "Father!" The word had a shy, hesitating sound, but it was not the old
shyness and fear; there lay in it a joyful, almost incredulous
astonishment, and Hartmut gazed on his father's face as if he could
never take his eyes from it. Falkenried put his hand on his son's arm
and drew him nearer, while he continued:

"Once I was ambitious, had proud hopes of life, great plans and
projects, but I received a blow from which I could never recover. If I
strive and struggle now, Hartmut, the only spur I have in life, besides
my sense of duty, is you, my son. All my ambitions are centered in you. I strive for nought else on earth but to make your future great and
happy; and you can become great my boy, for your talents are unusual,
and your mind is as capable for good as for evil. But there is
something more, there are dangerous elements in your nature which are
less your fault than your fate, and which must be curbed in time, before
they obtain a mastery over you, and plunge you into misery. I have been
severe with you in order to expel the germs, but it has not been easy
for me." The youth's countenance was in a glow, he hung with bated breath upon
his father's every word, and now he said in a whisper, behind which he
could scarcely conceal his joy:

"I never dared to think you loved me, you were always so inflexible, so
unapproachable--" he broke off and looked up at his father, who put his
arm around him and drew him closer to himself. Their eyes met in a long,
tender gaze, and the iron man's voice broke as he said softly:

"You are my only child, Hartmut, all that remains to me of a dream of
happiness which vanished, leaving only bitterness and disenchantment in
its wake. I lost much and bore it;--but if I were to lose you, you,--I
could not bear it." He held his son close in his arms, and the boy threw himself sobbing on
his breast, and in this passionate embrace all else seemed to sink from
view. They had both forgotten the threatening shadow from the past which
was forcing itself between them. In the meantime Frau von Eschenhagen was harangueing Will in the
dining-room. She had already performed that duty once this morning, but
she thought the occasion required a second portion. The young heir
looked sorely disturbed, he felt himself in a false position both as
regarded his mother and his friend, and yet he was quite innocent in the
matter. As a dutiful son he listened patiently to the tirade, and only
threw a wistful glance now and then toward the table upon which the
evening meal was already spread, and of which his mother took not the
slightest notice. "This is what comes of it, when a boy has secrets behind his parents'
back," she said in conclusion. "Hartmut will be well watched now, and
the Major won't deal any too gently with him, either, and you, I think,
will refrain from assisting in any more plots, if I have anything to
say." "I had nothing to do with it," said Will, defending himself. "I only
promised to be silent, and I had to keep my word." "You should never keep silence toward your mother. She is always and
ever an exception," said Frau Regine, decidedly. "Yes, mamma, that was probably what Hartmut thought; that's how he acted
toward his mother," said Willibald, and the remark was so just that
nothing could be said in contradiction; it provoked Frau von
Jischenhagen none the less, on that account. "That's something different, something quite different," she answered
shortly. But her son asked obstinately:

"Why is it something different here, then?" "Do not bother me any more with your talk and your questions," his
mother went on angrily. "That is a thing which you do not understand,
and about which you have no business to trouble your head. It's bad
enough that Hartmut has brought you into the affair at all. Now be
quiet, and don't trouble me any more about it. Do you understand?" Will was silent as requested. It was the first time in his life that he
had been catechised so sharply and had received so severe a lecture. At
this moment his uncle Wallmoden, just back from a walk, entered the
room. "I hear Falkenried has come already?" he said to his sister. "Yes," she answered. "He came immediately upon receipt of my letter." "And how did he take the news?" "Quietly enough, outwardly; but I saw only too well that he was moved
to his very soul. He is alone with Hartmut now, and the pent-up storm
will burst." "How unfortunate. But I warned him of all this as soon as I heard of
Zalika's return. He should have spoken to his son at once. Now I fear he
is adding a second blunder to the first in seeking, with commands and
force, to prevent further meetings. That fatal stubbornness of his,
which knows no alternative, is terribly out of place now." "Yes, and their talk has lasted a long time already. I'll just go and
see how they're getting on, and whether the Major is too severe or not. You remain here, Herbert. I'll be back immediately." She left the room, and while Wallmoden paced the floor dejectedly, his
nephew sat alone at the supper-table, which no one but himself seemed to
notice. He did not venture to eat his supper, for his mother was in
anything but a pleasant humor to-day, and he felt no liberties were to
be taken. Fortunately she came back in a short time with a gleam of
bright sunshine across her face. "It's all right," she said shortly and concisely. "He has the boy in his
arms and Hartmut is clinging to him. They can do as they please now. God
be praised! Now you can eat your supper, Will; the confusion that the
house has been in all day is over at last." Will didn't wait to be told twice, but began his meal at the word. Wallmoden shook his head and said half aloud:

"If it only really is over at last!" Neither Falkenried nor his son perceived that the door had been softly
opened and closed again. Hartmut still clung to his father. He seemed to have lost all shyness
and reserve in his newly found happiness. He was so tender, so
caressing, that perhaps the Major was not far wrong in saying he would
be left defenseless when his son learned of his great love for him. He
said little; but pressed his lips again and again to his boy's forehead,
and his eyes never left his son's glowing face, which was so near his
own. At last Hartmut said softly:

"And my mother?" A shadow darkened Falkenried's face, but he did not unclasp the arms
which held his son. "Your mother will leave Germany as soon as she learns that she must keep
aloof from you," he said, this time without harshness, but most
decisively. "You may write her that I will allow you to correspond with
her under certain conditions, but I cannot nor dare not allow any
personal intercourse." "Father, consider--"

"I cannot, Hartmut, it is impossible!" "Do you hate her so much, then?" asked the boy reprovingly. "It was you
that sought the divorce, not my mother; she told me so herself." Falkenried's lips trembled, and bitter words were on them; he felt like
telling his son, once for all, that his honor had demanded the
separation; but he looked in his child's dark, questioning eyes, and the
words died on his lips. He could not betray the mother to her son. "Let that question rest," he said gloomily. "Perhaps later, you may
learn to appreciate my reasons. Now I cannot spare you the bitter
alternative; you can only belong to one of us, and must shun the other;
you must accept that as your fate." Hartmut bowed his head; he felt that nothing more was to be said. That
all meetings with his mother must cease when he was again under the
rigid discipline of the institute, he knew full well; now he was at
least permitted to write to her, which was more than he had ventured to
hope. "Well, I will tell my mother," he said, dejectedly. "Now that you know
all, you will not oppose my seeing her again?" The Major was startled; he had not thought of such a possibility. "When were you to see her again?" he asked. "To-day, at this hour, at the lake in the wood. She is already waiting
for me there." Falkenried had a fierce battle with himself; a voice within him warned
him not to permit this meeting, but he felt that it would seem cruel for
him to refuse. "Will you be back in two hours?" he asked at last. "Certainly father, or sooner, if you desire it." "Well, go," said the Major with a deep sigh. It was only his sense of
justice which forced the permission from his lips. "As soon as you come
back, we will go home. It is nearly the end of your vacation anyway." Hartmut, who was on the point of starting, turned back suddenly. The
words brought forcibly to his mind, what he had forgotten in the last
hour, the compulsion and severity of the hated regimen he would again
have to endure. He had never ventured openly to avow his aversion for
the army, but this hour, which took from him all shyness towards his
father, also removed the seal from his lips. After a moment's hesitation
he returned to his father, and putting his arm around his neck, said:

"I have a request, a most earnest request to make of you, which I know
you will grant, as a proof of your love for me." The Major's brows contracted as he asked, reprovingly:

"Do you need any proof? Well, let's hear it." Hartmut clung still closer to him and his voice assumed its sweetest
and most flattering tones, and the dark eyes were almost irresistible in
their look of entreaty, as he said beseechingly:

"Do not let me become a soldier, father. I do not like the profession
you have chosen for me, and I shall never learn to like it. If I have
until now, bowed to your will, it has been with repugnance and secret
hatred, for I have been wretchedly unhappy; but I have never dared until
now, to tell you of it." The frown on Falkenried's brow deepened, and he unfolded his son's arms
from his neck. "In other words you will not obey," he said in a bitter tone, "and for
you obedience is more necessary than anything else." "I cannot endure force and compulsion," Hartmut broke out passionately. "And the service is nothing else but force and slavery. Always and
eternally, obedience; never to have your own way, but ever, day after
day, to bow to an iron discipline. Always the same still, cold forms,
with your own feelings never allowed to come to the surface--I cannot
bear it longer! Everything within me strives for freedom, for light and
life. Let me leave it, father; do not confine me longer in such chains. I shall die, I shall suffocate!" He could not have chosen more ill-advised words with which to plead his
cause, to a man who was heart and soul a soldier. They sounded
passionate and bitter, yet his arm was still on his father's shoulder;
but the Major pushed him back now. "I had thought the service an honor, and no slavery," he said cuttingly. "It is pretty bad when my own son is the first one to bring it to my
notice. Freedom, light and life! Perhaps you think when one reaches his
seventeenth year he has acquired the right to plunge into life without
any further care or guidance. For you, freedom from restraint would
mean destruction." "And if it did?" cried Hartmut, quite beside himself. "Rather
destruction with freedom, than longer life with such restraint. For me
the army means bondage and slavery--"

"Silence! Not a word more," ordered Falkenried, so threateningly that
the youth, in spite of his fearful passion, was awed. "You have now no
choice, and woe to you if you forget your duty. First you must become an
officer and do your duty as such to the full, like your comrades; then,
if you are still of the same mind and I have no power to prevent it, you
can leave, but if I am alive then, I will receive my death blow when my
only son--runs away from the service." "Father, do you take me for a coward?" interrupted Hartmut. "If there
were only a war and I could stand in battle--"

"Yes, you would plunge madly and blindly into danger, and, with that
very self-will which knows no discipline, rush on to destruction. I
know, only too well, this wild, measureless desire for freedom from
every restraint, which knows no limits, recognizes no duties; I know
from whom you have inherited it, and to what it will eventually lead. But as long as you are under my jurisdiction I will hold you fast to
that 'slavery' whether you hate it or not. You shall obey and learn to
yield while there is yet time; and you shall learn it. I give you my
word for that." His voice had again the old harsh sound to which his son was so well
accustomed, and every vestige of tenderness had died out of his face. Hartmut knew that prayers or defiance were alike useless now. He uttered
no syllable, but the old demon-like gleam in his eyes, which robbed him
of all his beauty, was again manifest land on the lips so tightly
pressed together lay a strange, evil expression as he turned silently
to leave the room. His father followed him with his eyes, again he heard
the warning voice which came to him as a presentiment of coming evil,
and he called his son back. "Hartmut, you'll be back in two hours? You give me your word for it?" "Yes, father." The answer sounded angry, but steadfast. "Very well, then I will treat you as a man. You have pledged your word
and may go in peace; be punctual." The young man had only been gone a few minutes when Wallmoden entered. "I knew you were alone," he said. "I would not have disturbed you, but I
saw Hartmut hasten across the garden just now. Where is he going so
late?" "To his mother, to take leave of her." The diplomatist looked up startled at this unexpected intelligence. "With your consent?" he said surprised. "Certainly, I gave him permission." "How unwise. I thought you would have seen to it that Zalika did not
accomplish her ends; and now, whether it's right or wrong, you are
sending your son to her." "Only for an hour, and only for a farewell, which I could not refuse. What are you afraid of now? Not that there will be any foul play? Hartmut is no baby to be carried off in a carriage in spite of himself." "But if he were willing it would be a different matter." "I have his word that he'll be back in a couple of hours," said the
Major with emphasis. Wallmoden shrugged his shoulders: "The word of a boy of seventeen!" "Who has had a soldier's education and knows the significance of his
word of honor. That gives me no anxiety; my fears are in another
direction." "Regine told me you and he understood one another at last," remarked
Wallmoden, with a glance at his friend's dark, gloomy face. "For a few minutes; then I had to be the stern, hard father again, and
this last hour has shown me how hard a task it will be to conquer and
direct this unruly, undisciplined nature, but for all that, I must and
will subdue it." His friend stepped to the window and looked out upon the garden. "It is twilight already and the Burgsdorf fish-pond is half an hour's
walk from here," he said, half aloud. "You could have this last meeting
held in your presence if you saw fit." "And see Zalika again? Impossible! I could and would not do that." "If this farewell does not end as you anticipate--if Hartmut does not
come back?" "Then he would be beneath contempt, a liar," said Falkenried, "a
deserter too, for he already carries arms at his side. But do not insult
me with such thoughts, Herbert. It is my son of whom you speak." "He is Zalika's son also. But we won't discuss it any more. They are
waiting for you in the dining-room; you will not go to-night?" "Yes, in two hours," answered the Major, steadily and quietly. "Hartmut
will be back by then--I'll answer for it." The gray shadows of evening already lay on field and meadow, and they
grew each moment thicker and darker. The short hazy autumn day was at an
end, and the clouded sky brought the night down more quickly than usual. A woman's figure could be seen pacing impatiently up and down on the
shore of the little lake. She had a dark mantle drawn closely around
her shoulders, but she paid little heed to the frosty evening air which
was blowing about her; she was feverish with expectation, and her ear
was strained to catch the first echo of approaching footsteps. Since the first day on which Willibald had surprised them both, and they
had been forced to take him into their confidence, Zalika had chosen a
late hour in the afternoon, and a lonely place in the wood for her
meetings with her son. She was accustomed to meet him before the
twilight began, in order that he might not attract attention by
returning late to Burgsdorf. He had always been punctual, but to-day his
mother had waited already an hour, in vain. What accident had detained
him, or had their secret been disclosed? Since a third knew it, she was
prepared for such a contingency. All was so silent in the wood that the rustle of her gown and her light
footsteps as she walked to and fro, were the only sounds which greeted
her ear. Beneath the tall trees lay long nocturnal shadows; over the pond where
there was more light, being free from shade, hung a faint vapory cloud,
and over yonder in the meadows, where a pool of water, concealed by the
mossy moorland, had formed, the mists had gathered still more thickly
and hung like a gray-white veil over all the heath. The air from the
meadows was blowing damp and chill. At last there was a light step, faint and uncertain--then, as it came on
quickly in the direction of the pond, firmer and more resolute. Now a
slender figure came in view, scarcely recognizable in the gathering
darkness, and Zalika flew to meet her son, who, in the next minute lay
in her arms. "What has happened?" she asked amidst the wonted stormy caresses. "Why
are you so late? I had begun to despair of seeing you to-day. What
detained you?" "I could not come sooner," Hartmut explained, still breathless, after
his long run. "I come from my father." Zalika drew back. "From your father? And he knows--?" "All!" "So he is at Burgsdorf? Since when? who told him?" The young man related in a few words all that had happened, but he had
not finished when a bitter laugh from his mother interrupted him. "Of course, they are all in the plot together to keep me from my child. And your father? He has threatened and punished you again as if you were
a criminal, because you have been in your mother's arms?" Hartmut shook his head. The memory of the moment when his father drew
him to his breast was yet before him, despite all the bitterness with
which the scene had ended. "No," he said sadly, "but he has forbidden me to see you again, and
sternly commanded me to part from you." "And in spite of all, you are here? O, I knew it!" Her words had a joyful sound. "Do not triumph too soon, mamma," her son answered her bitterly. "I only
came to say good-bye." "Hartmut!" "Father has given me permission to see you this time, and then--"

"Then he will take you away again, and you will be forever lost to me. Is that it?" Hartmut did not answer, he only threw himself upon his mother's breast
with a wild, passionate sob, which had as much anger and bitterness in
it, as pain. It had now grown quite dark and the night was upon them, a cold, misty,
autumn night, without moon or starlight, and over in the meadows, where
the vapor was so dense, a light rain had just begun to fall, and
through the rain and the mist a blue shimmering light appeared, now
faint and dull, now with a clear, bright gleam like a flame. It disappeared, then started forth again a second and a third time--the
will-o'-the-wisp had begun its unearthly, spectral dance. "You are crying!" said Zalika holding her son fast in her arms. "I have
long foreseen this day, and if young Eschenhagen had not surprised us
the other morning. I should before this have given you the choice
between returning to your father and forming some other plan." "What other plan? What do you mean?" asked Hartmut, perplexed. Zalika bent over him and although they were alone, her voice sank into a
whisper. "Will you allow this tyranny to go on, will you permit yourself to be
separated from your mother and our holy love trodden under foot, without
asserting yourself, or protecting our joint right? If you do permit it,
you are no son of mine, and my blood does not flow in your veins. He
sent you to bid me farewell, and you take his word as final. Do you
really come to take leave of me, for long years, in all probability?" "I must do it," her son broke out despairingly. "You know my father. Against his iron will there is no appeal." "If you return to him--no! But who will force you to return?" "Mamma. Do not tempt me, for the love of heaven!" he cried trying to
free himself from the arms which held him so fast, but the passionate
voice still whispered in his ear:

"What alarms you in the thought? You but go with your mother, who loves
you with a boundless love and will live only for you. You have often
complained to me that you hate the service into which you are forced. Have you forgotten your longing for freedom? If you go back you have no
option, for your father will bind you fast in the chains, and he will
but shorten the links, when he sees you are intolerant of them." She had no need to tell her son this, for he knew it all better than she
could tell him. Scarcely an hour since, had he not heard the words: "You
shall obey and learn to yield while yet there is time." His voice was full of bitterness as he replied. "In any case, I must go back. I have given my word to be at Burgsdorf
again in two hours." "Really?" asked Zalika, sharply and scornfully. "I thought as much. I
see he treats you like a child, marks out your every step for you and
gives you your allotted time, as if you had no judgment or mind of your
own; but the time has gone by to treat you thus, you are old enough to
assume the prerogatives of a man. The day has come when you must show
that you are a man in action as well as word. A promise wrung from one
is valueless; tear asunder this invisible chain by which you are held,
and set yourself free." "No--no," murmured Hartmut, with another effort to free himself, but his
mother held him fast in her arms. He turned his face away and looked
with hot eyes into the dark night, upon the desolate blackness of the
wood and across at the will-o'-the-wisp, still pursuing its erratic
course, now rising with convulsive, trembling flame, now sinking into
the ground beneath, only to come up again quivering and glimmering. There was something ghostly and horrible, and withal strangely
fascinating in the ceaseless dance of this imp of night. "Come with me, my son," Zalika begged, in those dulcet tones which were
hers, as well as her son's. "I have long since prepared all for your
coming; I knew of a certainty that this day would surely come. My
carriage is waiting a short distance from here. We can soon reach the
railway station and will be far on our way before they are any the wiser
at Burgsdorf. With me lies freedom, life, happiness! I will take you
away and show you the great world, and when you are once in it, you will
learn to breathe freely and enjoy life, as one redeemed from slavery. I
know what it is to be liberated from slavery. I, too, wore the chains
which, in an hour of foolish fascination, I forged for myself, but I
should have torn them apart in the first year had it not been for my
unborn child. O, freedom is sweet, as you will soon learn." She knew only too well the words to choose to accomplish her purpose. Freedom, life, happiness. They signified so much. They echoed and
re-echoed in the heart of the boy, whose longing for freedom had always
been repressed by a powerful hand. Now like a picture from a magician's
hand, the fairy-like visions of promised liberty stood before him. He
need but stretch out his hand and it was his own. "My word," he murmured with a last feeble attempt to rescue himself. "My
father will despise me--"

"When you have attained to a great, proud future," Zalika interrupted
him excitedly, "then go to your father and ask him if he dares to
despise you; he would bind you to the earth, but you have wings to fly
above it. He does not understand a nature like yours, and never will. Will you destroy yourself for the sake of a mere word and be a slave
forever? Come with me, Hartmut, with me to whom you are all the world." She led him slowly away, and he did not tear himself from her, but, as
she caressed him and called him fond names she felt that his going was
under protest, and that she had needed all her wiles to accomplish it. A
few minutes later the pond was deserted, mother and son had disappeared,
and even the sound of their retiring footsteps had died out in the night
air. Over the moor moved only that weird, spectral life. The flashing
lights appeared and sank again in restless play,--mysterious breaths of
flame from the deep. CHAPTER III. It was autumn again, and the warm, golden light of a September day lay
upon the woodland, which stretched away like a green ocean as far as eye
could reach. Hill and valley alternated with each other, all forest clad, and many a
mighty and moss-grown trunk in that great wilderness told of the forest
primeval which in the early days had covered all this part of South
Germany. Elsewhere in the land, railways had been built, until there was
scarcely a hamlet whose slumbers were undisturbed by the shrill scream
of the locomotive--but "the forest," as the people called it, remained
apart, cut off from the world, a vast territory many miles in width,
like a great, green island, unmoved by the waves of commotion and
progress from without. Here and there amid the forest green a little village peeped out, or an
old castle reared its gray and weather-beaten battlements on high, as if
protesting against its impending decay. There was but one building in
the whole region which yet stood strong, intact and massive,
notwithstanding it was gray with age. It was called Fuerstenstein, and was originally built as a hunting box,
for the use of the sovereign. The duke's head forester occupied it all
the year round; and during the hunting season some members of the ducal
family always held court there for several weeks. It had been built in
the early part of the last century, with the lavish waste of room which
marked the style of that period. Standing on a high elevation, it
commanded a superb view over the surrounding country. The approach to the castle allowed no view of its proportions, for woods
covered the hill upon which it stood, and in places tall fir trees threw
their shadows on tower and turret, so that one scarcely realized the
immensity of the building until he stood quite at the entrance gate. There were also a number of little structures clustering around the main
edifice, which had been added at different periods. Time was not allowed
to make inroads here; everything was in perfect order and repair, and
the countless rooms on the second floor were always kept ready for the
prince, who took possession of them at any time. The head forester, von Schoenau, had occupied the immense ground floor
for years, and between filling his house with guests, and making
frequent visits to his neighbors, managed to have a very agreeable time,
notwithstanding the lonely situation. He had visitors now; his sister-in-law, Frau Regine von Eschenhagen had
arrived yesterday, and her son was expected soon. The two daughters of
the Wallmoden family had made good marriages; while the elder married
the heir to Burgsdorf, the younger had wedded Herr von Schoenau, the son
of a wealthy landed gentleman of a noble South German family. The sisters, in spite of the distance which separated them, had always
maintained a close and affectionate intercourse, and since Frau von
Schoenau's death, which occurred a few years after her marriage, Frau
Regine had kept up the intimacy with her brother-in-law. It was a singular enough friendship which existed between these two, for
they always met, armed cap-a-pie, for battle. They were both strong,
inconsiderate natures, and every time they saw one another they
quarrelled, and as regularly made their peace again, always promising
there should be no further strife between them, which promise was kept
until their next dispute, for which some opportunity would give rise,
sometimes within an hour after their reconciliation, when another
pitched battle would begin, as passionate and wordy as the last. At the present moment there seemed a truce between them as they sat on
the terrace in front of the reception room. The head forester, in spite
of his advancing years, was an erect, stately man, with strong, sunburnt
features; his hair and beard were slightly gray, but still luxuriant. Now he leaned back in his chair listening to his sister-in-law, who
generally did most of the talking. Frau Regine was now in her fiftieth
year, but the last ten years had not changed her much; her life ran on
so smoothly and evenly. A wrinkle was to be found here and there in her face, and silver threads
were weaving their way into her dark hair, but the gray eyes had lost
nothing of their clearness and sharpness, the voice was as full and
resolute as ever, and her bearing as erect and energetic as formerly. "Willibald will be here in eight days," she was saying. "The harvesting
was not quite done; but everything will be finished within the week, and
then he can come to meet his bride. The matter has been settled between
us for a long time, but I was resolved to postpone it for some time, for
what did a young thing of sixteen or seventeen, with childish notions
still in her head know about the orderly direction of a household? Now
that Toni is twenty years old, and Will twenty-seven, it is all right. Are you still perfectly satisfied that this betrothal is the best thing
for our children's future?" "Perfectly satisfied," assented the head forester. "I think everything
is as it should be. One half my fortune will go, some day, to my son,
the other half to my daughter, and I think you may be well content with
the portion I have set aside as Toni's wedding gift." "Yes, you have been very liberal. As to Will, he came into possession of
Burgsdorf three years ago; the remainder of the fortune remains, by the
will, in my hands, and at my death goes, of course, to him. But I've
seen to it that the young people won't suffer. I have made ample
provision for them." "No need for haste. We are only going to celebrate the betrothal now;
the marriage won't be until next spring." And now the first cloud appeared on the clear heaven of their perfect
harmony. Frau von Eschenhagen shook her head and said dictatorially:

"We won't postpone it any longer now. The wedding must take place this
winter. Willibald has no time to get married in the spring." "Nonsense, a man always has time to get married," declared Schoenau, just
as dictatorially. "Not in the country," asserted Frau Regine. "There something else must
be considered; first work, then pleasure. That's always been the rule
with us, and that's what I've taught Will." "I trust he'd make an exception as regards his young wife; otherwise
he's little better than a milksop," cried the forester, angrily. "Above
all, Regine, you must remember my stipulation. My Toni has not seen your
son for two years. If he does not please her--she has free choice, you
understand." His speech touched his sister-in-law on her most sensitive point; her
motherly pride was outraged. "My dear Moritz, I have more confidence than you, apparently, in your
daughter's good taste. As for the rest, I hold to the good old custom
that children should marry whom their parents select. It was that way in
our day, and we have found no cause of complaint. What do young people
know of such serious matters any way? But you have let your children
have their own way from the very start; any one could soon tell that
there was no mother in this house." "Well, was that my fault?" asked Schoenau, incensed. "Perhaps, I ought to
have given them a step-mother. I suggested it to you once, but you
wouldn't hear of it, Regine." "No, I had been married once," was the dry answer, and it seemed to
increase the head forester's irritation. He shrugged his shoulders
spitefully. "Well, I certainly think you had no cause for complaint against poor
Eschenhagen. He, and all his people at Burgsdorf danced when you piped. With me you would not have ordered the regiment about so easily." "In about four weeks," Frau Regine declared calmly, "you would all have
been under my command, Moritz." "What! You say that to my face? Well, I'd just like to prove it for
once," retorted Schoenau, full of wrath now. "Thank you, I shouldn't care to marry a second time, so give yourself no
uneasiness." "I can assure you I didn't mean an offer. I wouldn't think of such a
thing for a moment. One refusal was enough for me. So you need not
trouble giving me a second one." With these words the master of the house rose, pushed back his chair
noisily, and left his guest abruptly. Frau von Eschenhagen remained
quietly sitting alone for some time, then she called out in a friendly
tone:

"Moritz." "What is it?" he growled from the other side of the terrace. "When are Herbert and his young wife coming?" "At twelve o'clock," the voice had an ill-tempered ring yet. "I am so glad. I have not seen him since he was sent to the South German
capital, but I have always maintained that Herbert was the pride of our
family, and he keeps up enough state for us all. Now you see he is
Prussian ambassador at your court, and is 'Your Excellency.'" "And then he's a young husband of six and fifty, don't forget that,"
interrupted the forester spitefully. "Yes, he took his time about marrying, but he made a dazzling match at
last. For a man of his years it was no easy matter to win such a wife as
Adelheid, young, beautiful, rich--"

"And of common birth," added Schoenau. "Stuff and nonsense! Who asks any questions now-a-days about birth when an
immense fortune stands behind it? Herbert can use money now, too; he has
been hampered for means his life long, and now, as ambassador, he needs
more to keep up the position than he could possibly supply. But my
brother need never be ashamed of his father-in-law. Stahlberg was at the
head of one of our greatest industries, and a man of honor, through and
through. It was a pity he died so soon after his daughter's marriage. 