

E-text prepared by Manette Rothermel



THE ENCHANTED APRIL

by

ELIZABETH VON ARNIM







It began in a Woman's Club in London on a February afternoon--an
uncomfortable club, and a miserable afternoon--when Mrs. Wilkins, who
had come down from Hampstead to shop and had lunched at her club, took
up The Times from the table in the smoking-room, and running her
listless eye down the Agony Column saw this:

To Those Who Appreciate Wistaria and Sunshine. Small mediaeval Italian
Castle on the shores of the Mediterranean to be Let furnished for the
month of April. Necessary servants remain. Z, Box 1000, The Times. That was its conception; yet, as in the case of many another, the
conceiver was unaware of it at the moment. So entirely unaware was Mrs. Wilkins that her April for that year
had then and there been settled for her that she dropped the newspaper
with a gesture that was both irritated and resigned, and went over to
the window and stared drearily out at the dripping street. Not for her were mediaeval castles, even those that are specially
described as small. Not for her the shores in April of the
Mediterranean, and the wisteria and sunshine. Such delights were only
for the rich. Yet the advertisement had been addressed to persons who
appreciate these things, so that it had been, anyhow addressed too to
her, for she certainly appreciated them; more than anybody knew; more
than she had ever told. But she was poor. In the whole world she
possessed of her very own only ninety pounds, saved from year to year,
put by carefully pound by pound, out of her dress allowance. She had
scraped this sum together at the suggestion of her husband as a shield
and refuge against a rainy day. Her dress allowance, given her by her
father, was L100 a year, so that Mrs. Wilkins's clothes were what her
husband, urging her to save, called modest and becoming, and her
acquaintance to each other, when they spoke of her at all, which was
seldom for she was very negligible, called a perfect sight. Mr. Wilkins, a solicitor, encouraged thrift, except that branch
of it which got into his food. He did not call that thrift, he called
it bad housekeeping. But for the thrift which, like moth, penetrated
into Mrs. Wilkins's clothes and spoilt them, he had much praise. "You
never know," he said, "when there will be a rainy day, and you may be
very glad to find you have a nest-egg. Indeed we both may." Looking out of the club window into Shaftesbury Avenue--hers was
an economical club, but convenient for Hampstead, where she lived, and
for Shoolbred's, where she shopped--Mrs. Wilkins, having stood there
some time very drearily, her mind's eye on the Mediterranean in April,
and the wisteria, and the enviable opportunities of the rich, while her
bodily eye watched the really extremely horrible sooty rain falling
steadily on the hurrying umbrellas and splashing omnibuses, suddenly
wondered whether perhaps this was not the rainy day Mellersh--Mellersh
was Mr. Wilkins--had so often encouraged her to prepare for, and
whether to get out of such a climate and into the small mediaeval
castle wasn't perhaps what Providence had all along intended her to do
with her savings. Part of her savings, of course; perhaps quite a
small part. The castle, being mediaeval, might also be dilapidated,
and dilapidations were surely cheap. She wouldn't in the least mind a
few of them, because you didn't pay for dilapidations which were
already there, on the contrary--by reducing the price you had to pay
they really paid you. But what nonsense to think of it . . . She turned away from the window with the same gesture of mingled
irritation and resignation with which she had laid down The Times, and
crossed the room towards the door with the intention of getting her
mackintosh and umbrella and fighting her way into one of the
overcrowded omnibuses and going to Shoolbred's on her way home and
buying some soles for Mellersh's dinner--Mellersh was difficult with
fish and liked only soles, except salmon--when she beheld Mrs.
Arbuthnot, a woman she knew by sight as also living in Hampstead and
belonging to the club, sitting at the table in the middle of the room
on which the newspapers and magazines were kept, absorbed, in her turn,
in the first page of The Times. Mrs. Wilkins had never yet spoken to Mrs. Arbuthnot, who belonged
to one of the various church sets, and who analysed, classified,
divided and registered the poor; whereas she and Mellersh, when they
did go out, went to the parties of impressionist painters, of whom in
Hampstead there were many. Mellersh had a sister who had married one
of them and lived up on the Heath, and because of this alliance Mrs.
Wilkins was drawn into a circle which was highly unnatural to her, and
she had learned to dread pictures. She had to say things about them,
and she didn't know what to say. She used to murmur, "marvelous," and
feel that it was not enough. But nobody minded. Nobody listened. Nobody took any notice of Mrs. Wilkins. She was the kind of person who
is not noticed at parties. Her clothes, infested by thrift, made her
practically invisible; her face was non-arresting; her conversation was
reluctant; she was shy. And if one's clothes and face and conversation
are all negligible, thought Mrs. Wilkins, who recognized her
disabilities, what, at parties, is there left of one? Also she was always with Wilkins, that clean-shaven, fine-looking
man, who gave a party, merely by coming to it, a great air. Wilkins
was very respectable. He was known to be highly thought of by his
senior partners. His sister's circle admired him. He pronounced
adequately intelligent judgments on art and artists. He was pithy; he
was prudent; he never said a word too much, nor, on the other had, did
he ever say a word too little. He produced the impression of keeping
copies of everything he said; and he was so obviously reliable that it
often happened that people who met him at these parties became
discontented with their own solicitors, and after a period of
restlessness extricated themselves and went to Wilkins. Naturally Mrs. Wilkins was blotted out. "She," said his sister, with
something herself of the judicial, the digested, and the final in her
manner, "should stay at home." But Wilkins could not leave his wife
at home. He was a family solicitor, and all such have wives and show
them. With his in the week he went to parties, and with his on Sundays
he went to church. Being still fairly young--he was thirty-nine--and
ambitious of old ladies, of whom he had not yet acquired in his
practice a sufficient number, he could not afford to miss church,
and it was there that Mrs. Wilkins became familiar, though never
through words, with Mrs. Arbuthnot. She saw her marshalling the children of the poor into pews. She
would come in at the head of the procession from the Sunday School
exactly five minutes before the choir, and get her boys and girls
neatly fitted into their allotted seats, and down on their little knees
in their preliminary prayer, and up again on their feet just as, to the
swelling organ, the vestry door opened, and the choir and clergy, big
with the litanies and commandments they were presently to roll out,
emerged. She had a sad face, yet she was evidently efficient. The
combination used to make Mrs. Wilkins wonder, for she had been told my
Mellersh, on days when she had only been able to get plaice, that if
one were efficient one wouldn't be depressed, and that if one does
one's job well one becomes automatically bright and brisk. About Mrs. Arbuthnot there was nothing bright and brisk, though
much in her way with the Sunday School children that was automatic; but
when Mrs. Wilkins, turning from the window, caught sight of her in the
club she was not being automatic at all, but was looking fixedly at one
portion of the first page of The Times, holding the paper quite still,
her eyes not moving. She was just staring; and her face, as usual, was
the face of a patient and disappointed Madonna. Mrs. Wilkins watched her a minute, trying to screw up courage to
speak to her. She wanted to ask her if she had seen the advertisement. She did not know why she wanted to ask her this, but she wanted to. How stupid not to be able to speak to her. She looked so kind. She
looked so unhappy. Why couldn't two unhappy people refresh each
other on their way through this dusty business of life by a little
talk--real, natural talk, about what they felt, what they would have
liked, what they still tried to hope? And she could not help thinking
that Mrs. Arbuthnot, too, was reading that very same advertisement. Her eyes were on the very part of the paper. Was she, too, picturing
what it would be like--the colour, the fragrance, the light, the soft
lapping of the sea among little hot rocks? Colour, fragrance, light,
sea; instead of Shaftesbury Avenue, and the wet omnibuses, and the fish
department at Shoolbred's, and the Tube to Hampstead, and dinner, and
to-morrow the same and the day after the same and always the same . . . Suddenly Mrs. Wilkins found herself leaning across the table. "Are you reading about the mediaeval castle and the wisteria?" she
heard herself asking. Naturally Mrs. Arbuthnot was surprised; but she was not half so
much surprised as Mrs. Wilkins was at herself for asking. Mrs. Arbuthnot had not yet to her knowledge set eyes on the
shabby, lank, loosely-put-together figure sitting opposite her, with
its small freckled face and big grey eyes almost disappearing under a
smashed-down wet-weather hat, and she gazed at her a moment without
answering. She was reading about the mediaeval castle and the
wisteria, or rather had read about it ten minutes before, and since
then had been lost in dreams--of light, of colour, of fragrance, of the
soft lapping of the sea among little hot rocks . . . "Why do you ask me that?" she said in her grave voice, for her
training of and by the poor had made her grave and patient. Mrs. Wilkins flushed and looked excessively shy and frightened. "Oh, only because I saw it too, and I thought perhaps--I thought
somehow--" she stammered. Whereupon Mrs. Arbuthnot, her mind being used to getting people
into lists and divisions, from habit considered, as she gazed
thoughtfully at Mrs. Wilkins, under what heading, supposing she had to
classify her, she could most properly be put. "And I know you by sight," went on Mrs. Wilkins, who, like all
the shy, once she was started; lunged on, frightening herself to more
and more speech by the sheer sound of what she had said last in her
ears. "Every Sunday--I see you every Sunday in church--"

"In church?" echoed Mrs. Arbuthnot. "And this seems such a wonderful thing--this advertisement about
the wisteria--and--"

Mrs. Wilkins, who must have been at least thirty, broke off and
wriggled in her chair with the movement of an awkward and embarrassed
schoolgirl. "It seems so wonderful," she went on in a kind of burst, "and--it
is such a miserable day . . ." And then she sat looking at Mrs. Arbuthnot with the eyes of an
imprisoned dog. "This poor thing," thought Mrs. Arbuthnot, whose life was spent
in helping and alleviating, "needs advice." She accordingly prepared herself patiently to give it. "If you see me in church," she said, kindly and attentively, "I
suppose you live in Hampstead too?" "Oh yes," said Mrs. Wilkins. And she repeated, her head on its
long thin neck drooping a little as if the recollection of Hampstead
bowed her, "Oh yes." "Where?" asked Mrs. Arbuthnot, who, when advice was needed,
naturally first proceeded to collect the facts. But Mrs. Wilkins, laying her hand softly and caressingly on the
part of The Times where the advertisement was, as though the mere
printed words of it were precious, only said, "Perhaps that is why this
seems so wonderful." "No--I think that's wonderful anyhow," said Mrs. Arbuthnot,
forgetting facts and faintly sighing. "Then you were reading it?" "Yes," said Mrs. Arbuthnot, her eyes going dreamy again. "Wouldn't it be wonderful?" murmured Mrs. Wilkins. "Wonderful," said Mrs. Arbuthnot. Her face, which had lit up,
faded into patience again. "Very wonderful," she said. "But it's no
use wasting one's time thinking of such things." "Oh, but it is," was Mrs. Wilkins's quick, surprising reply;
surprising because it was so much unlike the rest of her--the
characterless coat and skirt, the crumpled hat, the undecided wisp of
hair straggling out, "And just the considering of them is worth while
in itself--such a change from Hampstead--and sometimes I believe--I
really do believe--if one considers hard enough one gets things." Mrs. Arbuthnot observed her patiently. In what category would
she, supposing she had to, put her? "Perhaps," she said, leaning forward a little, "you will tell me
your name. If we are to be friends"--she smiled her grave smile--"as I
hope we are, we had better begin at the beginning." "Oh yes--how kind of you. I'm Mrs. Wilkins," said Mrs. Wilkins. "I don't expect," she added, flushing, as Mrs. Arbuthnot said nothing,
"that it conveys anything to you. Sometimes it--it doesn't seem to
convey anything to me either. But"--she looked round with a movement
of seeking help--"I am Mrs. Wilkins." She did not like her name. It was a mean, small name, with a
kind of facetious twist, she thought, about its end like the upward
curve of a pugdog's tail. There it was, however. There was no doing
anything with it. Wilkins she was and Wilkins she would remain; and
though her husband encouraged her to give it on all occasions as Mrs.
Mellersh-Wilkins she only did that when he was within earshot, for she
thought Mellersh made Wilkins worse, emphasizing it in the way
Chatsworth on the gate-posts of a villa emphasizes the villa. When first he suggested she should add Mellersh she had objected
for the above reason, and after a pause--Mellersh was much too prudent
to speak except after a pause, during which presumably he was taking a
careful mental copy of his coming observation--he said, much
displeased, "But I am not a villa," and looked at her as he looks who
hopes, for perhaps the hundredth time, that he may not have married a
fool. Of course he was not a villa, Mrs. Wilkins assured him; she had
never supposed he was; she had not dreamed of meaning . . . she was
only just thinking . . . The more she explained the more earnest became Mellersh's hope,
familiar to him by this time, for he had then been a husband for two
years, that he might not by any chance have married a fool; and they
had a prolonged quarrel, if that can be called a quarrel which is
conducted with dignified silence on one side and earnest apology on the
other, as to whether or no Mrs. Wilkins had intended to suggest that
Mr. Wilkins was a villa. "I believe," she had thought when it was at last over--it took a
long while--"that anybody would quarrel about anything when they've not
left off being together for a single day for two whole years. What we
both need is a holiday." "My husband," went on Mrs. Wilkins to Mrs. Arbuthnot, trying to
throw some light on herself, "is a solicitor. He--" She cast about for
something she could say elucidatory of Mellersh, and found:  "He's very
handsome." "Well," said Mrs. Arbuthnot kindly, "that must be a great
pleasure to you." "Why?" asked Mrs. Wilkins. "Because," said Mrs. Arbuthnot, a little taken aback, for
constant intercourse with the poor had accustomed her to have her
pronouncements accepted without question, "because beauty--handsomeness--
is a gift like any other, and if it is properly used--"

She trailed off into silence. Mrs. Wilkins's great grey eyes
were fixed on her, and it seemed suddenly to Mrs. Arbuthnot that
perhaps she was becoming crystallized into a habit of exposition, and
of exposition after the manner of nursemaids, through having an
audience that couldn't but agree, that would be afraid, if it wished,
to interrupt, that didn't know, that was, in fact, at her mercy. But Mrs. Wilkins was not listening; for just then, absurd as it
seemed, a picture had flashed across her brain, and there were two
figures in it sitting together under a great trailing wisteria that
stretched across the branches of a tree she didn't know, and it was
herself and Mrs. Arbuthnot--she saw them--she saw them. And behind
them, bright in sunshine, were old grey walls--the mediaeval castle
--she saw it--they were there . . . She therefore stared at Mrs. Arbuthnot and did not hear a word
she said. And Mrs. Arbuthnot stared too at Mrs. Wilkins, arrested by
the expression on her face, which was swept by the excitement of what
she saw, and was as luminous and tremulous under it as water in
sunlight when it is ruffled by a gust of wind. At this moment, if she
had been at a party, Mrs. Wilkins would have been looked at with
interest. They stared at each other; Mrs. Arbuthnot surprised, inquiringly,
Mrs. Wilkins with the eyes of some one who has had a revelation. Of
course. That was how it could be done. She herself, she by herself,
couldn't afford it, and wouldn't be able, even if she could afford it,
to go there all alone; but she and Mrs. Arbuthnot together . . . She leaned across the table, "Why don't we try and get it?" she
whispered. Mrs. Arbuthnot became even more wide-eyed. "Get it?" she
repeated. "Yes," said Mrs. Wilkins, still as though she were afraid of
being overheard. "Not just sit here and say How wonderful, and then go
home to Hampstead without having put out a finger--go home just as usual
and see about the dinner and the fish just as we've been doing for
years and years and will go on doing for years and years. In fact,"
said Mrs. Wilkins, flushing to the roots of her hair, for the sound of
what she was saying, of what was coming pouring out, frightened her,
and yet she couldn't stop, "I see no end to it. There is no end to it. So that there ought to be a break, there ought to be intervals--in
everybody's interests. Why, it would really be being unselfish to go
away and be happy for a little, because we would come back so much
nicer. You see, after a bit everybody needs a holiday." "But--how do you mean, get it?" asked Mrs. Arbuthnot. "Take it," said Mrs. Wilkins. "Take it?" "Rent it. Hire it. Have it." "But--do you mean you and I?" "Yes. Between us. Share. Then it would only cost half, and you
look so--you look exactly as if you wanted it just as much as I do--as
if you ought to have a rest--have something happy happen to you." "Why, but we don't know each other." "But just think how well we would if we went away together for a
month! And I've saved for a rainy day--look at it--"

"She is unbalanced," thought Mrs. Arbuthnot; yet she felt
strangely stirred. "Think of getting away for a whole month--from everything--to
heaven--"

"She shouldn't say things like that," thought Mrs. Arbuthnot. "The
vicar--"  Yet she felt strangely stirred. It would indeed be wonderful
to have a rest, a cessation. Habit, however, steadied her again; and years of intercourse with
the poor made her say, with the slight though sympathetic superiority
of the explainer, "But then, you see, heaven isn't somewhere else. It
is here and now. We are told so." She became very earnest, just as she did when trying patiently to
help and enlighten the poor. "Heaven is within us," she said in her
gentle low voice. "We are told that on the very highest authority. And you know the lines about the kindred points, don't you--"

"Oh yes, I know them," interrupted Mrs. Wilkins impatiently. "The kindred points of heaven and home," continued Mrs.
Arbuthnot, who was used to finishing her sentences. "Heaven is in our
home." "It isn't," said Mrs. Wilkins, again surprisingly. Mrs. Arbuthnot was taken aback. Then she said gently, "Oh, but
it is. It is there if we choose, if we make it." "I do choose, and I do make it, and it isn't," said Mrs. Wilkins. Then Mrs. Arbuthnot was silent, for she too sometimes had doubts
about homes. She sat and looked uneasily at Mrs. Wilkins, feeling more
and more the urgent need to getting her classified. If she could only
classify Mrs. Wilkins, get her safely under her proper heading, she
felt that she herself would regain her balance, which did seem very
strangely to be slipping all to one side. For neither had she had a
holiday for years, and the advertisement when she saw it had set her
dreaming, and Mrs. Wilkins's excitement about it was infectious, and
she had the sensation, as she listened to her impetuous, odd talk and
watched her lit-up face, that she was being stirred out of sleep. Clearly Mrs. Wilkins was unbalanced, but Mrs. Arbuthnot had met
the unbalanced before--indeed she was always meeting them--and they had
no effect on her own stability at all; whereas this one was making her
feel quite wobbly, quite as though to be off and away, away from her
compass points of God, Husband, Home and Duty--she didn't feel as if
Mrs. Wilkins intended Mr. Wilkins to come too--and just for once be
happy, would be both good and desirable. Which of course it wasn't;
which certainly of course it wasn't. She, also, had a nest-egg,
invested gradually in the Post Office Savings Bank, but to suppose that
she would ever forget her duty to the extent of drawing it out and
spending it on herself was surely absurd. Surely she couldn't, she
wouldn't ever do such a thing? Surely she wouldn't, she couldn't ever
forget her poor, forget misery and sickness as completely as that? No
doubt a trip to Italy would be extraordinarily delightful, but there
were many delightful things one would like to do, and what was strength
given to one for except to help one not to do them? Steadfast as the points of the compass to Mrs. Arbuthnot were the
great four facts of life:  God, Husband, Home, Duty. She had gone to
sleep on these facts years ago, after a period of much misery, her head
resting on them as on a pillow; and she had a great dread of being
awakened out of so simple and untroublesome a condition. Therefore it
was that she searched with earnestness for a heading under which to put
Mrs. Wilkins, and in this way illumine and steady her own mind; and
sitting there looking at her uneasily after her last remark, and
feeling herself becoming more and more unbalanced and infected, she
decided pro tem, as the vicar said at meetings, to put her under the
heading Nerves. It was just possible that she ought to go straight
into the category Hysteria, which was often only the antechamber to
Lunacy, but Mrs. Arbuthnot had learned not to hurry people into their
final categories, having on more than one occasion discovered with
dismay that she had made a mistake; and how difficult it had been to
get them out again, and how crushed she had been with the most terrible
remorse. Yes. Nerves. Probably she had no regular work for others,
thought Mrs. Arbuthnot; no work that would take her outside herself. Evidently she was rudderless--blown about by gusts, by impulses. Nerves
was almost certainly her category, or would be quite soon if no one
helped her. Poor little thing, thought Mrs. Arbuthnot, her own balance
returning hand in hand with her compassion, and unable, because of the
table, to see the length of Mrs. Wilkins's legs. All she saw was her
small, eager, shy face, and her thin shoulders, and the look of
childish longing in her eyes for something that she was sure was going
to make her happy. No; such things didn't make people happy, such
fleeting things. Mrs. Arbuthnot had learned in her long life with
Frederick--he was her husband, and she had married him at twenty and was
not thirty-three--where alone true joys are to be found. They are to be
found, she now knew, only in daily, in hourly, living for others; they
are to be found only--hadn't she over and over again taken her
disappointments and discouragements there, and come away comforted?--at
the feet of God. Frederick had been the kind of husband whose wife betakes herself
early to the feet of God. From him to them had been a short though
painful step. It seemed short to her in retrospect, but I had really
taken the whole of the first year of their marriage, and every inch of
the way had been a struggle, and every inch of it was stained, she felt
at the time, with her heart's blood. All that was over now. She had
long since found peace. And Frederick, from her passionately loved
bridegroom, from her worshipped young husband, had become second only
to God on her list of duties and forbearances. There he hung, the
second in importance, a bloodless thing bled white by her prayers. For
years she had been able to be happy only by forgetting happiness. She
wanted to stay like that. She wanted to shut out everything that would
remind her of beautiful things, that might set her off again long,
desiring . . . "I'd like so much to be friends," she said earnestly. "Won't you
come and see me, or let me come to you sometimes? Whenever you feel as
if you wanted to talk. I'll give you my address"--she searched in her
handbag--"and then you won't forget." And she found a card and held
it out. Mrs. Wilkins ignored the card. "It's so funny," said Mrs. Wilkins, just as if she had not heard
her, "But I see us both--you and me--this April in the mediaeval
castle." Mrs. Arbuthnot relapsed into uneasiness. "Do you?" she said,
making an effort to stay balanced under the visionary gaze of the
shining grey eyes. "Do you?" "Don't you ever see things in a kind of flash before they
happen?" asked Mrs. Wilkins. "Never," said Mrs. Arbuthnot. She tried to smile; she tried to smile the sympathetic yet wise
and tolerant smile with which she was accustomed to listen to the
necessarily biased and incomplete view of the poor. She didn't
succeed. The smile trembled out. "Of course," she said in a low voice, almost as if she were
afraid the vicar and the Savings Bank were listening, "it would be most
beautiful--most beautiful--"

"Even if it were wrong," said Mrs. Wilkins, "it would only be for
a month." "That--" began Mrs. Arbuthnot, quite clear as to the
reprehensibleness of such a point of view; but Mrs. Wilkins stopped her
before she could finish. "Anyhow," said Mrs. Wilkins, stopping her, "I'm sure it's wrong
to go on being good for too long, till one gets miserable. And I can
see you've been good for years and years, because you look so unhappy"--
Mrs. Arbuthnot opened her mouth to protest--"and I--I've done nothing
but duties, things for other people, ever since I was a girl, and I
don't believe anybody loves me a bit--a bit--the b-better--and I long--
oh, I long--for something else--something else--"

Was she going to cry? Mrs. Arbuthnot became acutely
uncomfortable and sympathetic. She hoped she wasn't going to cry. Not
there. Not in that unfriendly room, with strangers coming and going. But Mrs. Wilkins, after tugging agitatedly at a handkerchief that
wouldn't come out of her pocket, did succeed at last in merely
apparently blowing her nose with it, and then, blinking her eyes very
quickly once or twice, looked at Mrs. Arbuthnot with a quivering air of
half humble, half frightened apology, and smiled. "Will you believe," she whispered, trying to steady her mouth,
evidently dreadfully ashamed of herself, "that I've never spoken to any
one before in my life like this? I can't think, I simply don't know,
what has come over me." "It's the advertisement," said Mrs. Arbuthnot, nodding gravely. "Yes," said Mrs. Wilkins, dabbing furtively at her eyes, "and us
both being so--"--she blew her nose again a little--"miserable." Chapter 2


Of Course Mrs. Arbuthnot was not miserable--how could she be, she
asked herself, when God was taking care of her?--but she let that pass
for the moment unrepudiated, because of her conviction that here was
another fellow-creature in urgent need of her help; and not just boots
and blankets and better sanitary arrangements this time, but the more
delicate help of comprehension, of finding the exact right words. The exact right words, she presently discovered, after trying
various ones about living for others, and prayer, and the peace to be
found in placing oneself unreservedly in God's hands--to meet all these
words Mrs. Wilkins had other words, incoherent and yet, for the moment
at least, till one had had more time, difficult to answer--the exact
right words were a suggestion that it would do no harm to answer the
advertisement. Non-committal. Mere inquiry. And what disturbed Mrs.
Arbuthnot about this suggestion was that she did not make it solely to
comfort Mrs. Wilkins; she made it because of her own strange longing
for the mediaeval castle. This was very disturbing. There she was, accustomed to direct,
to lead, to advise, to support--except Frederick; she long since had
learned to leave Frederick to God--being led herself, being influenced
and thrown off her feet, by just an advertisement, by just an
incoherent stranger. It was indeed disturbing. She failed to
understand her sudden longing for what was, after all, self-indulgence,
when for years no such desire had entered her heart. "There's no harm in simply asking," she said in a low voice, as
if the vicar and the Savings Bank and all her waiting and dependent
poor were listening and condemning. "It isn't as if it committed us to anything," said Mrs. Wilkins,
also in a low voice, but her voice shook. They got up simultaneously--Mrs. Arbuthnot had a sensation of surprise
that Mrs. Wilkins should be so tall--and went to a writing-table, and
Mrs. Arbuthnot wrote to Z, Box 1000, The Times, for particulars. She
asked for all particulars, but the only one they really wanted was the
one about the rent. They both felt that it was Mrs. Arbuthnot who
ought to write the letter and do the business part. Not only was she
used to organizing and being practical, but she also was older, and
certainly calmer; and she herself had no doubt too that she was wiser. Neither had Mrs. Wilkins any doubt of this; the very way Mrs. Arbuthnot
parted her hair suggested a great calm that could only proceed from
wisdom. But if she was wiser, older and calmer, Mrs. Arbuthnot's new
friend nevertheless seemed to her to be the one who impelled. Incoherent, she yet impelled. She appeared to have, apart from her
need of help, an upsetting kind of character. She had a curious
infectiousness. She led one on. And the way her unsteady mind leaped
at conclusions--wrong ones, of course; witness the one that she, Mrs.
Arbuthnot, was miserable--the way she leaped at conclusions was
disconcerting. Whatever she was, however, and whatever her unsteadiness, Mrs.
Arbuthnot found herself sharing her excitement and her longing; and
when the letter had been posted in the letter-box in the hall and
actually was beyond getting back again, both she and Mrs. Wilkins felt
the same sense of guilt. "It only shows," said Mrs. Wilkins in a whisper, as they turned
away from the letter-box, "how immaculately good we've been all our
lives. The very first time we do anything our husbands don't know
about we feel guilty." "I'm afraid I can't say I've been immaculately good," gently
protested Mrs. Arbuthnot, a little uncomfortable at this fresh example
of successful leaping at conclusions, for she had not said a word about
her feeling of guilt. "Oh, but I'm sure you have--I see you being good--and that's why
you're not happy." "She shouldn't say things like that," thought Mrs. Arbuthnot. "I
must try and help her not to." Aloud she said gravely, "I don't know why you insist that I'm not
happy. When you know me better I think you'll find that I am. And I'm
sure you don't mean really that goodness, if one could attain it, makes
one unhappy." "Yes, I do," said Mrs. Wilkins. "Our sort of goodness does. We
have attained it, and we are unhappy. There are miserable sorts of
goodness and happy sorts--the sort we'll have at the mediaeval castle,
for instance, is the happy sort." "That is, supposing we go there," said Mrs. Arbuthnot
restrainingly. She felt that Mrs. Wilkins needed holding on to. "After all, we've only written just to ask. Anybody may do that. I
think it quite likely we shall find the conditions impossible, and even
if they were not, probably by to-morrow we shall not want to go." "I see us there," was Mrs. Wilkins's answer to that. All this was very unbalancing. Mrs. Arbuthnot, as she presently
splashed though the dripping streets on her way to a meeting she was to
speak at, was in an unusually disturbed condition of mind. She had,
she hoped, shown herself very calm to Mrs. Wilkins, very practical and
sober, concealing her own excitement. But she was really
extraordinarily moved, and she felt happy, and she felt guilty, and she
felt afraid, and she had all the feelings, though this she did not
know, of a woman who was come away from a secret meeting with her
lover. That, indeed, was what she looked like when she arrived late on
her platform; she, the open-browed, looked almost furtive as her eyes
fell on the staring wooden faces waiting to hear her try and persuade
them to contribute to the alleviation of the urgent needs of the
Hampstead poor, each one convinced that they needed contributions
themselves. She looked as though she were hiding something
discreditable but delightful. Certainly her customary clear expression
of candor was not there, and its place was taken by a kind of
suppressed and frightened pleasedness, which would have led a more
worldly-minded audience to the instant conviction of recent and
probably impassioned lovemaking. Beauty, beauty, beauty . . . the words kept ringing in her ears as
she stood on the platform talking of sad things to the sparsely attended
meeting. She had never been to Italy. Was that really what her nest-egg
was to be spent on after all? Though she couldn't approve of the
way Mrs. Wilkins was introducing the idea of predestination into her
immediate future, just as if she had no choice, just as if to struggle,
or even to reflect, were useless, it yet influenced her. Mrs.
Wilkins's eyes had been the eyes of a seer. Some people were like
that, Mrs. Arbuthnot knew; and if Mrs. Wilkins had actually seen her at
the mediaeval castle it did seem probable that struggling would be a
waste of time. Still, to spend her nest-egg on self-indulgence--  The
origin of this egg had been corrupt, but she had at least supposed its
end was to be creditable. Was she to deflect it from its intended
destination, which alone had appeared to justify her keeping it, and
spend it on giving herself pleasure? Mrs. Arbuthnot spoke on and on, so much practiced in the kind of
speech that she could have said it all in her sleep, and at the end of
the meeting, her eyes dazzled by her secret visions, she hardly noticed
that nobody was moved in any way whatever, least of all in the way of
contributions. But the vicar noticed. The vicar was disappointed. Usually his
good friend and supporter Mrs. Arbuthnot succeeded better than this. And, what was even more unusual, she appeared, he observed, not even to
mind. "I can't imagine," he said to her as they parted, speaking
irritably, for he was irritated both by the audience and by her, "what
these people are coming to. Nothing seems to move them." "Perhaps they need a holiday," suggested Mrs. Arbuthnot; an
unsatisfactory, a queer reply, the vicar thought. "In February?" he called after her sarcastically. "Oh no--not till April," said Mrs. Arbuthnot over her shoulder. "Very odd," thought the vicar. "Very odd indeed." And he went
home and was not perhaps quite Christian to his wife. That night in her prayers Mrs. Arbuthnot asked for guidance. She
felt she ought really to ask, straight out and roundly, that the
mediaeval castle should already have been taken by some one else and
the whole thing thus be settled, but her courage failed her. Suppose
her prayer were to be answered? No; she couldn't ask it; she couldn't
risk it. And after all--she almost pointed this out to God--if she
spent her present nest-egg on a holiday she could quite soon accumulate
another. Frederick pressed money on her; and it would only mean, while
she rolled up a second egg, that for a time her contributions to the
parish charities would be less. And then it could be the next nest-egg
whose original corruption would be purged away by the use to which it
was finally put. For Mrs. Arbuthnot, who had no money of her own, was obliged to
live on the proceeds of Frederick's activities, and her very nest-egg
was the fruit, posthumously ripened, of ancient sin. The way Frederick
made his living was one of the standing distresses of her life. He
wrote immensely popular memoirs, regularly, every year, of the
mistresses of kings. There were in history numerous kings who had had
mistresses, and there were still more numerous mistresses who had had
kings; so that he had been able to publish a book of memoirs during
each year of his married life, and even so there were greater further
piles of these ladies waiting to be dealt with. Mrs. Arbuthnot was
helpless. Whether she liked it or not, she was obliged to live on the
proceeds. He gave her a dreadful sofa once, after the success of his
Du Barri memoir, with swollen cushions and soft, receptive lap, and it
seemed to her a miserable thing that there, in her very home, should
flaunt this re-incarnation of a dead old French sinner. Simply good, convinced that morality is the basis of happiness,
the fact that she and Frederick should draw their sustenance from
guilt, however much purged by the passage of centuries, was one of the
secret reasons of her sadness. The more the memoired lady had
forgotten herself, the more his book about her was read and the more
free-handed he was to his wife; and all that he gave her was spent,
after adding slightly to her nest-egg--for she did hope and believe
that some day people would cease to want to read of wickedness, and
then Frederick would need supporting--on helping the poor. The parish
flourished because, to take a handful at random, of the ill-behavior of
the ladies Du Barri, Montespan, Pompadour, Ninon de l'Enclos, and even
of learned Maintenon. The poor were the filter through which the money
was passed, to come out, Mrs. Arbuthnot hoped, purified. She could do
no more. She had tried in days gone by to think the situation out, to
discover the exact right course for her to take, but had found it, as
she had found Frederick, too difficult, and had left it, as she had
left Frederick, to God. Nothing of this money was spent on her house
or dress; those remained, except for the great soft sofa, austere. It
was the poor who profited. Their very boots were stout with sins. But
how difficult it had been. Mrs. Arbuthnot, groping for guidance,
prayed about it to exhaustion. Ought she perhaps to refuse to touch
the money, to avoid it as she would have avoided the sins which were
its source? But then what about the parish's boots? She asked the
vicar what he thought, and through much delicate language, evasive and
cautious, it did finally appear that he was for the boots. At least she had persuaded Frederick, when first he began his
terrible successful career--he only began it after their marriage; when
she married him he had been a blameless official attached to the
library of the British Museum--to publish the memoirs under another
name, so that she was not publicly branded. Hampstead read the books
with glee, and had no idea that their writer lived in its midst. Frederick was almost unknown, even by sight, in Hampstead. He never
went to any of its gatherings. Whatever it was he did in the way of
recreation was done in London, but he never spoke of what he did or
whom he saw; he might have been perfectly friendless for any mention he
ever made of friends to his wife. Only the vicar knew where the money
for the parish came from, and he regarded it, he told Mrs. Arbuthnot,
as a matter of honour not to mention it. And at least her little house was not haunted by the loose lived
ladies, for Frederick did his work away from home. He had two rooms
near the British Museum, which was the scene of his exhumations, and
there he went every morning, and he came back long after his wife was
asleep. Sometimes he did not come back at all. Sometimes she did not
see him for several days together. Then he would suddenly appear at
breakfast, having let himself in with his latchkey the night before,
very jovial and good-natured and free-handed and glad if she would
allow him to give her something--a well-fed man, contented with the
world; a jolly, full-blooded, satisfied man. And she was always
gentle, and anxious that his coffee should be as he liked it. He seemed very happy. Life, she often thought, however much one
tabulated was yet a mystery. There were always some people it was
impossible to place. Frederick was one of them. He didn't seem to
bear the remotest resemblance to the original Frederick. He didn't
seem to have the least need of any of the things he used to say were so
important and beautiful--love, home, complete communion of thoughts,
complete immersion in each other's interests. After those early
painful attempts to hold him up to the point from which they had hand
in hand so splendidly started, attempts in which she herself had got
terribly hurt and the Frederick she supposed she had married was
mangled out of recognition, she hung him up finally by her bedside as
the chief subject of her prayers, and left him, except for those,
entirely to God. She had loved Frederick too deeply to be able now to
do anything but pray for him. He had no idea that he never went out of
the house without her blessing going with him too, hovering, like a
little echo of finished love, round that once dear head. She didn't
dare think of him as he used to be, as he had seemed to her to be in
those marvelous first days of their love-making, of their marriage. Her child had died; she had nothing, nobody of her own to lavish
herself on. The poor became her children, and God the object of her
love. What could be happier than such a life, she sometimes asked
herself; but her face, and particularly her eyes, continued sad. "Perhaps when we're old . . . perhaps when we are both quite old . . ." she would think wistfully. Chapter 3


The owner of the mediaeval castle was an Englishman, a Mr.
Briggs, who was in London at the moment and wrote that it had beds
enough for eight people, exclusive of servants, three sitting-rooms,
battlements, dungeons, and electric light. The rent was L60 for the
month, the servants' wages were extra, and he wanted references--he
wanted assurances that the second half of his rent would be paid, the
first half being paid in advance, and he wanted assurances of
respectability from a solicitor, or a doctor, or a clergyman. He was
very polite in his letter, explaining that his desire for references
was what was usual and should be regarded as a mere formality. Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins had not thought of references,
and they had not dreamed a rent could be so high. In their minds had
floated sums like three guineas a week; or less, seeing that the place
was small and old. Sixty pounds for a single month. It staggered them. Before Mrs. Arbuthnot's eyes rose up boots:  endless vistas, all the
stout boots that sixty pounds would buy; and besides the rent there
would be the servants' wages and the food, and the railway journeys
out and home. While as for references, these did indeed seem a
stumbling-block; it did seem impossible to give any without making
their plan more public than they had intended. They had both--even Mrs. Arbuthnot, lured for once away from
perfect candour by the realization of the great saving of trouble and
criticism an imperfect explanation would produce--they had both thought
it would be a good plan to give out, each to her own circle, their
circles being luckily distinct, that each was going to stay with a
friend who had a house in Italy. It would be true as far as it went--
Mrs. Wilkins asserted that it would be quite true, but Mrs. Arbuthnot
thought it wouldn't be quite--and it was the only way, Mrs. Wilkins
said, to keep Mellersh even approximately quiet. To spend any of her
money just on the mere getting to Italy would cause him indignation;
what he would say if he knew she was renting part of a mediaeval castle
on her own account Mrs. Wilkins preferred not to think. It would take
him days to say it all; and this although it was her very own money,
and not a penny of it had ever been his. "But I expect," she said, "your husband is just the same. I
expect all husbands are alike in the long run." Mrs. Arbuthnot said nothing, because her reason for not wanting
Frederick to know was the exactly opposite one--Frederick would by only
to pleased for her to go, he would not mind it in the very least;
indeed, he would hail such a manifestation of self-indulgence and
worldliness with an amusement that would hurt, and urge her to have a
good time and not to hurry home with a crushing detachment. Far
better, she thought, to be missed by Mellersh than to be sped by
Frederick. To be missed, to be needed, from whatever motive, was, she
thought, better than the complete loneliness of not being missed or
needed at all. She therefore said nothing, and allowed Mrs. Wilkins to leap at
her conclusions unchecked. But they did, both of them, for a whole day
feel that the only thing to be done was to renounce the mediaeval
castle; and it was in arriving at this bitter decision that they really
realized how acute had been their longing for it. Then Mrs. Arbuthnot, whose mind was trained in the finding of
ways out of difficulties, found a way out of the reference difficulty;
and simultaneously Mrs. Wilkins had a vision revealing to her how to
reduce the rent. Mrs. Arbuthnot's plan was simple, and completely successful. She
took the whole of the rent in person to the owner, drawing it out of
her Savings Bank--again she looked furtive and apologetic, as if the
clerk must know the money was wanted for purposes of self-indulgence--
and, going up with the six ten pound notes in her hand-bag to the
address near the Brompton Oratory where the owner lived, presented them
to him, waiving her right to pay only half. And when he saw her, and
her parted hair and soft dark eyes and sober apparel, and heard her
grave voice, he told her not to bother about writing round for those
references. "It'll be all right," he said, scribbling a receipt for the rent. "Do sit down, won't you? Nasty day, isn't it? You'll find the old
castle has lots of sunshine, whatever else it hasn't got. Husband
going?" Mrs. Arbuthnot, unused to anything but candour, looked troubled
at this question and began to murmur inarticulately, and the owner at
once concluded that she was a widow--a war one, of course, for other
widows were old--and that he had been a fool not to guess it. "Oh, I'm sorry," he said, turning red right up to his fair hair. "I didn't mean--h'm, h'm, h'm--"

He ran his eye over the receipt he had written. "Yes, I think
that's all right," he said, getting up and giving it to her. "Now," he
added, taking the six notes she held out and smiling, for Mrs.
Arbuthnot was agreeable to look at, "I'm richer, and you're happier. I've got money, and you've got San Salvatore. I wonder got is best." "I think you know," said Mrs. Arbuthnot with her sweet smile. He laughed and opened the door for her. It was a pity the
interview was over. He would have liked to ask her to lunch with him. She made him think of his mother, of his nurse, of all things kind and
comforting, besides having the attraction of not being his mother or
his nurse. "I hope you'll like the old place," he said, holding her hand a
minute at the door. The very feel of her hand, even through its glove,
was reassuring; it was the sort of hand, he thought, that children
would like to hold in the dark. "In April, you know, it's simply a
mass of flowers. And then there's the sea. You must wear white. You'll fit in very well. There are several portraits of you there." "Portraits?" "Madonnas, you know. There's one on the stairs really exactly
like you." Mrs. Arbuthnot smiled and said good-bye and thanked him. Without
the least trouble and at once she had got him placed in his proper
category: he was an artist and of an effervescent temperament. She shook hands and left, and he wished she hadn't. After she
was gone he supposed that he ought to have asked for those references,
if only because she would think him so unbusiness-like not to, but he
could as soon have insisted on references from a saint in a nimbus as
from that grave, sweet lady. Rose Arbuthnot. Her letter, making the appointment, lay on the table. Pretty name. That difficulty, then, was overcome. But there still remained
the other one, the really annihilating effect of the expense on the
nest-eggs, and especially on Mrs. Wilkins's, which was in size,
compared with Mrs. Arbuthnot's, as the egg of the plover to that of the
duck; and this in its turn was overcome by the vision vouchsafed to
Mrs. Wilkins, revealing to her the steps to be taken for its
overcoming. Having got San Salvatore--the beautiful, the religious
name, fascinated them--they in their turn would advertise in the Agony
Column of The Times, and would inquire after two more ladies, of
similar desires to their own, to join them and share the expenses. At once the strain of the nest-eggs would be reduced from half to
a quarter. Mrs. Wilkins was prepared to fling her entire egg into the
adventure, but she realized that if it were to cost even sixpence over
her ninety pounds her position would be terrible. Imagine going to
Mellersh and saying, "I owe." It would be awful enough if some day
circumstances forced her to say, "I have no nest-egg," but at least she
would be supported in such a case by the knowledge that the egg had
been her own. She therefore, though prepared to fling her last penny
into the adventure, was not prepared to fling into it a single farthing
that was not demonstrably her own; and she felt that if her share of
the rent was reduced to fifteen pounds only, she would have a safe
margin for the other expenses. Also they might economise very much on
food--gather olives off their own trees and eat them, for instance, and
perhaps catch fish. Of course, as they pointed out to each other, they could reduce
the rent to an almost negligible sum by increasing the number of
sharers; they could have six more ladies instead of two if they wanted
to, seeing that there were eight beds. But supposing the eight beds
were distributed in couples in four rooms, it would not be altogether
what they wanted, to find themselves shut up at night with a stranger. Besides they thought that perhaps having so many would not be quite so
peaceful. After all, they were going to San Salvatore for peace and
rest and joy, and six more ladies, especially if they got into one's
bedroom, might a little interfere with that. However, there seemed to be only two ladies in England at that
moment who had any wish to join them, for they had only two answers to
their advertisement. "Well, we only want two," said Mrs. Wilkins, quickly recovering,
for she had imagined a great rush. "I think a choice would have been a good thing," said Mrs.
Arbuthnot. "You mean because then we needn't have had Lady Caroline Dester." "I didn't say that," gently protested Mrs. Arbuthnot. "We needn't have her," said Mrs. Wilkins. "Just one more person
would help us a great deal with the rent. We're not obliged to have
two." "But why should we not have her? She seems really quite what we
want." "Yes--she does from her letter," said Mrs. Wilkins doubtfully. She felt she would be terribly shy of Lady Caroline. Incredible
as it may seem, seeing how they get into everything, Mrs. Wilkins had
never come across any members of the aristocracy. They interviewed Lady Caroline, and they interviewed the other
applicant, a Mrs. Fisher. Lady Caroline came to the club in Shaftesbury Avenue, and
appeared to be wholly taken up by one great longing, a longing to get
away from everybody she had ever known. When she saw the club, and
Mrs. Arbuthnot, and Mrs. Wilkins, she was sure that here was exactly
what she wanted. She would be in Italy--a place she adored; she would
not be in hotels--places she loathed; she would not be staying with
friends--persons she disliked; and she would be in the company of
strangers who would never mention a single person she knew, for the
simple reason that they had not, could not have, and would not come
across them. She asked a few questions about the fourth woman, and was
satisfied with the answers. Mrs. Fisher, of Prince of Wales Terrace. A widow. She too would be unacquainted with any of her friends. Lady
Caroline did not even know where Prince of Wales Terrace was. "It's in London," said Mrs. Arbuthnot. "Is it?" said Lady Caroline. It all seemed most restful. Mrs. Fisher was unable to come to the club because, she explained
by letter, she could not walk without a stick; therefore Mrs. Arbuthnot
and Mrs. Wilkins went to her. "But if she can't come to the club how can she go to Italy?" wondered Mrs. Wilkins, aloud. "We shall hear that from her own lips," said Mrs. Arbuthnot. From Mrs. Fisher's lips they merely heard, in reply to delicate
questioning, that sitting in trains was not walking about; and they
knew that already. Except for the stick, however, she appeared to be a
most desirable fourth--quiet, educated, elderly. She was much older
than they or Lady Caroline--Lady Caroline had informed them she was
twenty-eight--but not so old as to have ceased to be active-minded. She was very respectable indeed, and still wore a complete suit of
black though her husband had died, she told them, eleven years before. Her house was full of signed photographs of illustrious Victorian dead,
all of whom she said she had known when she was little. Her father had
been an eminent critic, and in his house she had seen practically
everybody who was anybody in letters and art. Carlyle had scowled at
her; Matthew Arnold had held her on his knee; Tennyson had sonorously
rallied her on the length of her pig-tail. She animatedly showed them
the photographs, hung everywhere on her walls, pointing out the
signatures with her stick, and she neither gave any information about
her own husband nor asked for any about the husbands of her visitors;
which was the greatest comfort. Indeed, she seemed to think that they
also were widows, for on inquiring who the fourth lady was to be, and
being told it was a Lady Caroline Dester, she said, "Is she a widow
too?" And on their explaining that she was not, because she had not
yet been married, observed with abstracted amiability, "All in good
time." But Mrs. Fisher's very abstractedness--and she seemed to be
absorbed chiefly in the interesting people she used to know and in
their memorial photographs, and quite a good part of the interview was
taken up by reminiscent anecdote of Carlyle, Meredith, Matthew Arnold,
Tennyson, and a host of others--her very abstractedness was a
recommendation. She only asked, she said, to be allowed to sit quiet
in the sun and remember. That was all Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins
asked of their sharers. It was their idea of a perfect sharer that she
should sit quiet in the sun and remember, rousing herself on Saturday
evenings sufficiently to pay her share. Mrs. Fisher was very fond,
too, she said, of flowers, and once when she was spending a week-end
with her father at Box Hill--

"Who lived at Box Hill?" interrupted Mrs. Wilkins, who hung on
Mrs. Fisher's reminiscences, intensely excited by meeting somebody who
had actually been familiar with all the really and truly and
undoubtedly great--actually seen them, heard them talking, touched
them. Mrs. Fisher looked at her over the top of her glasses in some
surprise. Mrs. Wilkins, in her eagerness to tear the heart out quickly
of Mrs. Fisher's reminiscences, afraid that at any moment Mrs.
Arbuthnot would take her away and she wouldn't have heard half, had
already interrupted several times with questions which appeared
ignorant to Mrs. Fisher. "Meredith of course," said Mrs. Fisher rather shortly. "I
remember a particular week-end"--she continued. "My father often took
me, but I always remember this week-end particularly--"

"Did you know Keats?" eagerly interrupted Mrs. Wilkins. Mrs. Fisher, after a pause, said with sub-acid reserve that she
had been unacquainted with both Keats and Shakespeare. "Oh of course--how ridiculous of me!" cried Mrs. Wilkins,
flushing scarlet. "It's because"--she floundered--"it's because the
immortals somehow still seem alive, don't they--as if they were here,
going to walk into the room in another minute--and one forgets they are
dead. In fact one knows perfectly well that they're not dead--not
nearly so dead as you and I even now," she assured Mrs. Fisher, who
observed her over the top of her glasses. "I thought I saw Keats the other day," Mrs. Wilkins incoherently
proceeded, driven on by Mrs. Fisher's look over the top of her glasses. "In Hampstead--crossing the road in front of that house--you know--the
house where he lived--"

Mrs. Arbuthnot said they must be going. Mrs. Fisher did nothing to prevent them. "I really thought I saw him," protested Mrs. Wilkins, appealing
for belief first to one and then to the other while waves of colour
passed over her face, and totally unable to stop because of Mrs.
Fisher's glasses and the steady eyes looking at her over their tops. "I
believe I did see him--he was dressed in a--"

Even Mrs. Arbuthnot looked at her now, and in her gentlest voice
said they would be late for lunch. It was at this point that Mrs. Fisher asked for references. She
had no wish to find herself shut up for four weeks with somebody who
saw things. It is true that there were three sitting-rooms, besides
the garden and the battlements at San Salvatore, so that there would be
opportunities of withdrawal from Mrs. Wilkins; but it would be
disagreeable to Mrs. Fisher, for instance, if Mrs. Wilkins were
suddenly to assert that she saw Mr. Fisher. Mr. Fisher was dead; let
him remain so. She had no wish to be told he was walking about the
garden. The only reference she really wanted, for she was much too old
and firmly seated in her place in the world for questionable associates
to matter to her, was one with regard to Mrs. Wilkins's health. Was
her health quite normal? Was she an ordinary, everyday, sensible
woman? Mrs. Fisher felt that if she were given even one address she
would be able to find out what she needed. So she asked for
references, and her visitors appeared to be so much taken aback--Mrs.
Wilkins, indeed, was instantly sobered--that she added, "It is usual." Mrs. Wilkins found her speech first. "But," she said "aren't we
the ones who ought to ask for some from you?" And this seemed to Mrs. Arbuthnot too the right attitude. Surely
it was they who were taking Mrs. Fisher into their party, and not Mrs.
Fisher who was taking them into it? For answer Mrs. Fisher, leaning on her stick, went to the
writing-table and in a firm hand wrote down three names and offered
them to Mrs. Wilkins, and the names were so respectable, more, they
were so momentous, they were so nearly august, that just to read them
was enough. The President of the Royal Academy, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Governor of the Bank of England--who would dare
disturb such personages in their meditations with inquires as to
whether a female friend of theirs was all she should be? "They have know me since I was little," said Mrs. Fisher--
everybody seemed to have known Mrs. Fisher since or when she was
little. "I don't think references are nice things at all between--between
ordinary decent women," burst out Mrs. Wilkins, made courageous by
being, as she felt, at bay; for she very well knew that the only
reference she could give without getting into trouble was Shoolbred,
and she had little confidence in that, as it would be entirely based on
Mellersh's fish. "We're not business people. We needn't distrust each
other--"

And Mrs. Arbuthnot said, with a dignity that yet was sweet, "I'm
afraid references do bring an atmosphere into our holiday plan that
isn't quite what we want, and I don't think we'll take yours up or give
you any ourselves. So that I suppose you won't wish to join us." And she held out her hand in good-bye. Then Mrs. Fisher, her gaze diverted to Mrs. Arbuthnot, who
inspired trust and liking even in Tube officials, felt that she would
be idiotic to lose the opportunity of being in Italy in the particular
conditions offered, and that she and this calm-browed woman between
them would certainly be able to curb the other one when she had her
attacks. So she said, taking Mrs. Arbuthnot's offered hand, "Very
well. I waive references." She waived references. The two as they walked to the station in Kensington High Street
could not help thinking that this way of putting it was lofty. Even
Mrs. Arbuthnot, spendthrift of excuses for lapses, thought Mrs. Fisher
might have used other words; and Mrs. Wilkins, by the time she got to
the station, and the walk and the struggle on the crowded pavement with
other people's umbrellas had warmed her blood, actually suggested
waiving Mrs. Fisher. "If there is any waiving to be done, do let us be the ones who
waive," she said eagerly. But Mrs. Arbuthnot, as usual, held on to Mrs. Wilkins; and
presently, having cooled down in the train, Mrs. Wilkins announced that
at San Salvatore Mrs. Fisher would find her level. "I see her finding
her level there," she said, her eyes very bright. Whereupon Mrs. Arbuthnot, sitting with her quiet hands folded,
turned over in her mind how best she could help Mrs. Wilkins not to see
quite so much; or at least, if she must see, to see in silence. Chapter 4


It had been arranged that Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins,
traveling together, should arrive at San Salvatore on the evening of
March 31st--the owner, who told them how to get there, appreciated
their disinclination to begin their time in it on April 1st--and Lady
Caroline and Mrs. Fisher, as yet unacquainted and therefore under no
obligations to bore each other on the journey, for only towards the end
would they find out by a process of sifting who they were, were to
arrive on the morning of April 2nd. In this way everything would be
got nicely ready for the two who seemed, in spite of the equality of
the sharing, yet to have something about them of guests. There were disagreeable incidents towards the end of March, when
Mrs. Wilkins, her heart in her mouth and her face a mixture of guilt,
terror and determination, told her husband that she had been invited to
Italy, and he declined to believe it. Of course he declined to believe
it. Nobody had ever invited his wife to Italy before. There was no
precedent. He required proofs. The only proof was Mrs. Arbuthnot, and
Mrs. Wilkins had produced her; but after what entreaties, what
passionate persuading! Mrs. Arbuthnot had not imagined she would have
to face Mr. Wilkins and say things to him that were short of the truth,
and it brought home to her what she had for some time suspected, that
she was slipping more and more away from God. Indeed, the whole of March was filled with unpleasant, anxious
moments. It was an uneasy month. Mrs. Arbuthnot's conscience, made
super-sensitive by years of pampering, could not reconcile what she was
doing with its own high standard of what was right. It gave her little
peace. It nudged her at her prayers. It punctuated her entreaties for
divine guidance with disconcerting questions, such as, "Are you not a
hypocrite? Do you really mean that? Would you not, frankly, be
disappointed if that prayer were granted?" The prolonged wet, raw weather was on the side too of her
conscience, producing far more sickness than usual among the poor. They had bronchitis; they had fevers; there was no end to the distress. And here she was going off, spending precious money on going off,
simply and solely to be happy. One woman. One woman being happy, and
these piteous multitudes . . . She was unable to look the vicar in the face. He did not know,
nobody knew, what she was going to do, and from the very beginning she
was unable to look anybody in the face. She excused herself from
making speeches appealing for money. How could she stand up and ask
people for money when she herself was spending so much on her own
selfish pleasure? Nor did it help her or quiet her that, having
actually told Frederick, in her desire to make up for what she was
squandering, that she would be grateful if he would let her have some
money, he instantly gave her a cheque for L100. He asked no questions. She was scarlet. He looked at her a moment and then looked away. It
was a relief to Frederick that she should take some money. She gave it
all immediately to the organization she worked with, and found herself
more tangled in doubts than ever. Mrs. Wilkins, on the contrary, had no doubts. She was quite
certain that it was a most proper thing to have a holiday, and
altogether right and beautiful to spend one's own hard-collected
savings on being happy. "Think how much nicer we shall be when we come back," she said to
Mrs. Arbuthnot, encouraging that pale lady. No, Mrs. Wilkins had no doubts, but she had fears; and March was
for her too an anxious month, with the unconscious Mr. Wilkins coming
back daily to his dinner and eating his fish in the silence of imagined
security. Also things happened so awkwardly. It really is astonishing, how
awkwardly they happen. Mrs. Wilkins, who was very careful all this
month to give Mellersh only the food he liked, buying it and hovering
over its cooking with a zeal more than common, succeeded so well the
Mellersh was pleased; definitely pleased; so much pleased that he began
to think that he might, after all, have married the right wife instead
of, as he had frequently suspected, the wrong one. The result was that
on the third Sunday in the month--Mrs. Wilkins had made up her
trembling mind that on the fourth Sunday, there being five in that
March and it being on the fifth of them that she and Mrs. Arbuthnot
were to start, she would tell Mellersh of her invitation--on the third
Sunday, then, after a very well-cooked lunch in which the Yorkshire
pudding had melted in his mouth and the apricot tart had been so
perfect that he ate it all, Mellersh, smoking his cigar by the brightly
burning fire the while hail gusts banged on the window, said "I am
thinking of taking you to Italy for Easter." And paused for her
astounded and grateful ecstasy. None came. The silence in the room, except for the hail hitting
the windows and the gay roar of the fire, was complete. Mrs. Wilkins
could not speak. She was dumbfounded. The next Sunday was the day she
had meant to break her news to him, and she had not yet even prepared
the form of words in which she would break it. Mr. Wilkins, who had not been abroad since before the war, and
was noticing with increasing disgust, as week followed week of wind and
rain, the peculiar persistent vileness of the weather, and slowly
conceived a desire to get away from England for Easter. He was doing
very well in his business. He could afford a trip. Switzerland was
useless in April. There was a familiar sound about Easter in Italy. To Italy he would go; and as it would cause comment if he did not take
his wife, take her he must--besides, she would be useful; a second
person was always useful in a country whose language one did not speak
for holding things, for waiting with the luggage. He had expected an explosion of gratitude and excitement. The
absence of it was incredible. She could not, he concluded, have heard. Probably she was absorbed in some foolish day-dream. It was
regrettable how childish she remained. He turned his head--their chairs were in front of the fire--and
looked at her. She was staring straight into the fire, and it was no
doubt the fire that made her face so red. "I am thinking," he repeated, raising his clear, cultivated voice
and speaking with acerbity, for inattention at such a moment was
deplorable, "of taking you to Italy for Easter. Did you not hear me?" Yes, she had heard him, and she had been wondering at the
extraordinary coincidence--really most extraordinary--she was just
going to tell him how--how she had been invited--a friend had invited
her--Easter, too--Easter was in April, wasn't it?---her friend had a--
had a house there. In fact Mrs. Wilkins, driven by terror, guilt and surprise, had
been more incoherent if possible than usual. It was a dreadful afternoon. Mellersh, profoundly indignant,
besides having his intended treat coming back on him like a blessing to
roost, cross-examined her with the utmost severity. He demanded that
she refuse the invitation. He demanded that, since she had so
outrageously accepted it without consulting him, she should write and
cancel her acceptance. Finding himself up against an unsuspected,
shocking rock of obstinacy in her, he then declined to believe she had
been invited to Italy at all. He declined to believe in this Mrs.
Arbuthnot, of whom till that moment he had never heard; and it was only
when the gentle creature was brought round--with such difficulty, with
such a desire on her part to throw the whole thing up rather than tell
Mr. Wilkins less than the truth--and herself endorsed his wife's
statements that he was able to give them credence. He could not but
believe Mrs. Arbuthnot. She produced the precise effect on him that
she did on Tube officials. She hardly needed to say anything. But
that made no difference to her conscience, which knew and would not let
her forget that she had given him an incomplete impression. "Do you,"
asked her conscience, "see any real difference between an incomplete
impression and a completely stated lie? God sees none." The remainder of March was a confused bad dream. Both Mrs.
Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins were shattered; try as they would not to,
both felt extraordinarily guilty; and when on the morning of the 30th
they did finally get off there was no exhilaration about the departure,
no holiday feeling at all. "We've been too good--much too good," Mrs. Wilkins kept on
murmuring as they walked up and down the platform at Victoria, having
arrived there an hour before they need have, "and that's why we feel as
though we're doing wrong. We're brow-beaten--we're not any longer real
human beings. Real human beings aren't ever as good as we've been. Oh"--she clenched her thin hands--"to think that we ought to be so
happy now, here on the very station, actually starting, and we're not,
and it's being spoilt for us just simply because we've spoilt them! What have we done--what have we done, I should like to know," she
inquired of Mrs. Arbuthnot indignantly, "except for once want to go
away by ourselves and have a little rest from them?" Mrs. Arbuthnot, patiently pacing, did not ask who she meant by them,
because she knew. Mrs. Wilkins meant their husbands, persisting in her
assumption that Frederick was as indignant as Mellersh over the departure
of his wife, whereas Frederick did not even know his wife had gone. Mrs. Arbuthnot, always silent about him, had said nothing of this
to Mrs. Wilkins. Frederick went too deep into her heart for her to
talk about him. He was having an extra bout of work finishing another
of those dreadful books, and had been away practically continually the
last few weeks, and was away when she left. Why should she tell him
beforehand? Sure as she so miserably was that he would have no
objection to anything she did, she merely wrote him a note and put it
on the hall-table ready for him if and when he should come home. She
said she was going for a month's holiday as she needed a rest and she
had not had one for so long, and that Gladys, the efficient
parlourmaid, had orders to see to his comforts. She did not say where
she was going; there was no reason why she should; he would not be
interested, he would not care. The day was wretched, blustering and wet; the crossing was
atrocious, and they were very sick. But after having been very sick,
just to arrive at Calais and not be sick was happiness, and it was
there that the real splendour of what they were doing first began to
warm their benumbed spirits. It got hold of Mrs. Wilkins first, and
spread from her like a rose-coloured flame over her pale companion. Mellersh at Calais, where they restored themselves with soles because
of Mrs. Wilkins's desire to eat a sole Mellersh wasn't having--Mellersh
at Calais had already begun to dwindle and seem less important. None
of the French porters knew him; not a single official at Calais cared a
fig for Mellersh. In Paris there was no time to think of him because
their train was late and they only just caught the Turin train at the
Gare de Lyons; and by the afternoon of the next day when they got into
Italy, England, Frederick, Mellersh, the vicar, the poor, Hampstead,
the club, Shoolbred, everybody and everything, the whole inflamed sore
dreariness, had faded to the dimness of a dream. Chapter 5


It was Cloudy in Italy, which surprised them. They had expected
brilliant sunshine. But never mind:  it was Italy, and the very clouds
looked fat. Neither of them had ever been there before. Both gazed
out of the windows with rapt faces. The hours flew as long as it was
daylight, and after that there was the excitement of getting nearer,
getting quite near, getting there. At Genoa it had begun to rain--
Genoa! Imagine actually being at Genoa, seeing its name written up in
the station just like any other name--at Nervi it was pouring, and when
at last towards midnight, for again the train was late, they got to
Mezzago, the rain was coming down in what seemed solid sheets. But it
was Italy. Nothing it did could be bad. The very rain was different--
straight rain, falling properly on to one's umbrella; not that
violently blowing English stuff that got in everywhere. And it did
leave off; and when it did, behold the earth would be strewn with
roses. Mr. Briggs, San Salvatore's owner, had said, "You get out at
Mezzago, and then you drive." But he had forgotten what he amply knew,
that trains in Italy are sometimes late, and he had imagined his
tenants arriving at Mezzago at eight o'clock and finding a string of
flys to choose from. The train was four hours late, and when Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs.
Wilkins scrambled down the ladder-like high steps of their carriage
into the black downpour, their skirts sweeping off great pools of sooty
wet because their hands were full of suit-cases, if it had not been for
the vigilance of Domenico, the gardener at San Salvatore, they would
have found nothing for them to drive in. All ordinary flys had long
since gone home. Domenico, foreseeing this, had sent his aunt's
fly, driven by her son his cousin; and his aunt and her fly lived in
Castagneto, the village crouching at the feet of San Salvatore, and
therefore, however late the train was, the fly would not dare come home
without containing that which it had been sent to fetch. Domenico's cousin's name was Beppo, and he presently emerged out
of the dark where Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins stood, uncertain what
to do next after the train had gone on, for they could see no porter
and they thought from the feel of it that they were standing not so
much on a platform as in the middle of the permanent way. Beppo, who had been searching for them, emerged from the dark
with a kind of pounce and talked Italian to them vociferously. Beppo
was a most respectable young man, but he did not look as if he were,
especially not in the dark, and he had a dripping hat slouched over one
eye. They did not like the way he seized their suit-cases. He could
not be, they thought, a porter. However, they presently from out of
his streaming talk discerned the words San Salvatore, and after that
they kept on saying them to him, for it was the only Italian they knew,
as they hurried after him, unwilling to lose sight of their suit-cases,
stumbling across rails and through puddles out to where in the road a
small, high fly stood. Its hood was up, and its horse was in an attitude of thought. They climbed in, and the minute they were in--Mrs. Wilkins, indeed,
could hardly be called in--the horse awoke with a start from its
reverie and immediately began going home rapidly; without Beppo;
without the suit-cases. Beppo darted after him, making the night ring with his shouts,
and caught the hanging reins just in time. He explained proudly, and
as it seemed to him with perfect clearness, that the horse always did
that, being a fine animal full of corn and blood, and cared for by him,
Beppo, as if he were his own son, and the ladies must be alarmed--he
had noticed they were clutching each other; but clear, and loud, and
profuse of words though he was, they only looked at him blankly. He went on talking, however, while he piled the suit-cases up
round them, sure that sooner or later they must understand him,
especially as he was careful to talk very loud and illustrate
everything he said with the simplest elucidatory gestures, but they
both continued only to look at him. They both, he noticed
sympathetically, had white faces, fatigued faces, and they both had big
eyes, fatigued eyes. They were beautiful ladies, he thought, and their
eyes, looking at him over the tops of the suit-cases watching his every
movement--there were no trunks, only numbers of suit-cases--were like
the eyes of the Mother of God. The only thing the ladies said, and
they repeated it at regular intervals, even after they had started,
gently prodding him as he sat on his box to call his attention to it,
was, "San Salvatore?" And each time he answered vociferously, encouragingly, "Si, si--
San Salvatore." "We don't know of course if he's taking us there," said Mrs.
Arbuthnot at last in a low voice, after they had been driving as it
seemed to them a long while, and had got off the paving-stones of the
sleep-shrouded town and were out on a winding road with what they could
just see was a low wall on their left beyond which was a great black
emptiness and the sound of the sea. On their right was something close
and steep and high and black--rocks, they whispered to each other; huge
rocks. They felt very uncomfortable. It was so late. It was so dark. The road was so lonely. Suppose a wheel came off. Suppose they met
Fascisti, or the opposite of Fascisti. How sorry they were now that
they had not slept at Genoa and come on the next morning in daylight. "But that would have been the first of April," said Mrs. Wilkins,
in a low voice. "It is that now," said Mrs. Arbuthnot beneath her breath. "So it is," murmured Mrs. Wilkins. They were silent. Beppo turned round on his box--a disquieting habit already
noticed, for surely his horse ought to be carefully watched--and again
addressed them with what he was convinced was lucidity--no patois, and
the clearest explanatory movements. How much they wished their mothers had made them learn Italian
when they were little. If only now they could have said, "Please sit
round the right way and look after the horse." They did not even know
what horse was in Italian. It was contemptible to be so ignorant. In their anxiety, for the road twisted round great jutting rocks,
and on their left was only the low wall to keep them out of the sea
should anything happen, they too began to gesticulate, waving their
hands at Beppo, pointing ahead. They wanted him to turn round again and
face his horse, that was all. He thought they wanted him to drive
faster; and there followed a terrifying ten minutes during which, as he
supposed, he was gratifying them. He was proud of his horse, and it
could go very fast. He rose in his seat, the whip cracked, the horse
rushed forward, the rocks leaped towards them, the little fly swayed,
the suit-cases heaved, Mrs. Arbuthnot and Mrs. Wilkins clung. In this
way they continued, swaying, heaving, clattering, clinging, till at a
point near Castagneto there was a rise in the road, and on reaching the
foot of the rise the horse, who knew every inch of the way, stopped
suddenly, throwing everything in the fly into a heap, and then
proceeded up at the slowest of walks. Beppo twisted himself round to receive their admiration, laughing
with pride in his horse. There was no answering laugh from the beautiful ladies. Their
eyes, fixed on him, seemed bigger than ever, and their faces against
the black of the night showed milky. But here at least, once they were up the slope, were houses. The
rocks left off, and there were houses; the low wall left off, and there
were houses; the sea shrunk away, and the sound of it ceased, and the
loneliness of the road was finished. No lights anywhere, of course,
nobody to see them pass; and yet Beppo, when the houses began, after
looking over his shoulder and shouting "Castagneto" at the ladies, once
more stood up and cracked his whip and once more made his horse dash
forward. "We shall be there in a minute," Mrs. Arbuthnot said to herself,
holding on. "We shall soon stop now," Mrs. Wilkins said to herself, holding
on. They said nothing aloud, because nothing would have been heard
above the whip-cracking and the wheel-clattering and the boisterous
inciting noises Beppo was making at his horse. Anxiously they strained their eyes for any sight of the beginning
of San Salvatore. They had supposed and hoped that after a reasonable amount of
village a mediaeval archway would loom upon them, and through it they
would drive into a garden and draw up at an open, welcoming door, with
light streaming from it and those servants standing in it who,
according to the advertisement, remained. Instead the fly suddenly stopped. Peering out they could see they were still in the village street,
with small dark houses each side; and Beppo, throwing the reins over
the horse's back as if completely confident this time that he would not
go any farther, got down off his box. At the same moment, springing as
it seemed out of nothing, a man and several half-grown boys appeared on
each side of the fly and began dragging out the suit-cases. "No, no--San Salvatore, San Salvatore"--exclaimed Mrs. Wilkins,
trying to hold on to what suit-cases she could. "Si, si--San Salvatore," they all shouted, pulling. "This can't be San Salvatore," said Mrs. Wilkins, turning to Mrs.
Arbuthnot, who sat quite still watching her suit-cases being taken from
her with the same patience she applied to lesser evils. She knew she
could do nothing if these men were wicked men determined to have her
suit-cases. "I don't think it can be," she admitted, and could not refrain
from a moment's wonder at the ways of God. Had she really been brought
here, she and poor Mrs. Wilkins, after so much trouble in arranging it,
so much difficulty and worry, along such devious paths of prevarication
and deceit, only to be--

She checked her thoughts, and gently said to Mrs. Wilkins, while
the ragged youths disappeared with the suit-cases into the night and
the man with the lantern helped Beppo pull the rug off her, that they
were both in God's hands; and for the first time on hearing this, Mrs.
Wilkins was afraid. There was nothing for it but to get out. Useless to try to go on
sitting in the fly repeating San Salvatore. Every time they said it,
and their voices each time were fainter, Beppo and the other man merely
echoed it in a series of loud shouts. If only they had learned Italian
when they were little. If only they could have said, "We wish to be
driven to the door." But they did not even know what door was in
Italian. Such ignorance was not only contemptible, it was, they now
saw, definitely dangerous. Useless, however, to lament it now. Useless to put off whatever it was that was going to happen to them by
trying to go on sitting in the fly. They therefore got out. The two men opened their umbrellas for them and handed them to
them. From this they received a faint encouragement, because they
could not believe that if these men were wicked they would pause to
open umbrellas. The man with the lantern then made signs to them to
follow him, talking loud and quickly, and Beppo, they noticed, remained
behind. Ought they to pay him? Not, they thought, if they were going
to be robbed and perhaps murdered. Surely on such an occasion one did
not pay. Besides, he had not after all brought them to San Salvatore. Where they had got to was evidently somewhere else. Also, he did not
show the least wish to be paid; he let them go away into the night with
no clamour at all. This, they could not help thinking, was a bad sign. He asked for nothing because presently he was to get so much. They came to some steps. The road ended abruptly in a church and
some descending steps. The man held the lantern low for them to see
the steps. "San Salvatore?" said Mrs. Wilkins once again, very faintly,
before committing herself to the steps. It was useless to mention it
now, of course, but she could not go down steps in complete silence. No mediaeval castle, she was sure, was ever built at the bottom of
steps. Again, however, came the echoing shout--"Si, si--San Salvatore." They descended gingerly, holding up their skirts just as if they
would be wanting them another time and had not in all probability
finished with skirts for ever. The steps ended in a steeply sloping path with flat stone slabs
down the middle. They slipped a good deal on these wet slabs, and the
man with the lantern, talking loud and quickly, held them up. His way
of holding them up was polite. "Perhaps," said Mrs. Wilkins in a low voice to Mrs. Arbuthnot,
"It is all right after all." "We're in God's hands," said Mrs. Arbuthnot again; and again Mrs.
Wilkins was afraid. They reached the bottom of the sloping path, and the light of the
lantern flickered over an open space with houses round three sides. The sea was the fourth side, lazily washing backwards and forwards on
pebbles. "San Salvatore," said the man pointing with his lantern to a
black mass curved round the water like an arm flung about it. They strained their eyes. They saw the black mass, and on the
top of it a light. "San Salvatore?" they both repeated incredulously, for where were
the suit-cases, and why had they been forced to get out of the fly? "Si, si--San Salvatore." They went along what seemed to be a quay, right on the edge of
the water. There was not even a low wall here--nothing to prevent the
man with the lantern tipping them in if he wanted to. He did not,
however, tip them in. Perhaps it was all right after all, Mrs. Wilkins
again suggested to Mrs. Arbuthnot on noticing this, who this time was
herself beginning to think that it might be, and said no more about
God's hands. The flicker of the lantern danced along, reflected in the wet
pavement of the quay. Out to the left, in the darkness and evidently
at the end of a jetty, was a red light. They came to an archway with a
heavy iron gate. The man with the lantern pushed the gate open. This
time they went up steps instead of down, and at the top of them was a
little path that wound upwards among flowers. They could not see the
flowers, but the whole place was evidently full of them. It here dawned on Mrs. Wilkins that perhaps the reason why the fly had
not driven them up to the door was that there was no road, only a
footpath. That also would explain the disappearance of the suit-cases. She began to feel confident that they would find their suit-cases
waiting for them when they got up to the top. San Salvatore was, it
seemed, on the top of a hill, as a mediaeval castle should be. At a
turn of the path they saw above them, much nearer now and shining
more brightly, the light they had seen from the quay. She told Mrs.
Arbuthnot of her dawning belief, and Mrs. Arbuthnot agreed that it was
very likely a true one. Once more, but this time in a tone of real hopefulness, Mrs.
Wilkins said, pointing upwards at the black outline against the only
slightly less black sky, "San Salvatore?" And once more, but this time
comfortingly, encouragingly, came back the assurance, "Si, si--San
Salvatore." They crossed a little bridge, over what was apparently a ravine,
and then came a flat bit with long grass at the sides and more flowers. They felt the grass flicking wet against their stockings, and the
invisible flowers were everywhere. Then up again through trees, along
a zigzag path with the smell all the way of the flowers they could not
see. The warm rain was bringing out all the sweetness. Higher and
higher they went in this sweet darkness, and the red light on the jetty
dropped farther and farther below them. The path wound round to the other side of what appeared to be a
little peninsula; the jetty and the red light disappeared; across the
emptiness on their left were distant lights. "Mezzago," said the man, waving his lantern at the lights. "Si, si," they answered, for they had by now learned si, si. Upon which the man congratulated them in a great flow of polite words,
not one of which they understood, on their magnificent Italian; for
this was Domenico, the vigilant and accomplished gardener of San
Salvatore, the prop and stay of the establishment, the resourceful, the
gifted, the eloquent, the courteous, the intelligent Domenico. Only
they did not know that yet; and he did in the dark, and even sometimes
in the light, look, with his knife-sharp swarthy features and swift,
panther movements, very like somebody wicked. They passed along another flat bit of path, with a black shape
like a high wall towering above them on their right, and then the path
went up again under trellises, and trailing sprays of scented things
caught at them and shook raindrops on them, and the light of the
lantern flickered over lilies, and then came a flight of ancient steps
worn with centuries, and then another iron gate, and then they were
inside, though still climbing a twisting flight of stone steps with old
walls on either side like the walls of dungeons, and with a vaulted
roof. At the top was a wrought-iron door, and through it shone a flood
of electric light. "Ecco," said Domenico, lithely running up the last few steps
ahead and pushing the door open. And there they were, arrived; and it was San Salvatore; and their
suit-cases were waiting for them; and they had not been murdered. They looked at each other's white faces and blinking eyes very
solemnly. It was a great, a wonderful moment. Here they were, in their
mediaeval castle at last. Their feet touched its stones. Mrs. Wilkins put her arm round Mrs. Arbuthnot's neck and kissed
her. "The first thing to happen in this house," she said softly,
solemnly, "shall be a kiss." "Dear Lotty," said Mrs. Arbuthnot. "Dear Rose," said Mrs. Wilkins, her eyes brimming with gladness. Domenico was delighted. He liked to see beautiful ladies kiss. He made them a most appreciative speech of welcome, and they stood arm
in arm, holding each other up, for they were very tired, blinking
smilingly at him, and not understanding a word. Chapter 6


When Mrs. Wilkins woke next morning she lay in bed a few minutes
before getting up and opening the shutters. What would she see out of
her window? A shining world, or a world of rain? But it would be
beautiful; whatever it was would be beautiful. She was in a little bedroom with bare white walls and a stone
floor and sparse old furniture. The beds--there were two--were made of
iron, enameled black and painted with bunches of gay flowers. She lay
putting off the great moment of going to the window as one puts off
opening a precious letter, gloating over it. She had no idea what time
it was; she had forgotten to wind up her watch ever since, centuries
ago, she last went to bed in Hampstead. No sounds were to be heard in
the house, so she supposed it was very early, yet she felt as if she
had slept a long while--so completely rested, so perfectly content. She lay with her arms clasped round her head thinking how happy she
was, her lips curved upwards in a delighted smile. In bed by herself:
adorable condition. She had not been in a bed without Mellersh once now
for five whole years; and the cool roominess of it, the freedom of
one's movements, the sense of recklessness, of audacity, in giving the
blankets a pull if one wanted to, or twitching the pillows more
comfortably! It was like the discovery of an entirely new joy. Mrs. Wilkins longed to get up and open the shutters, but where
she was was really so very delicious. She gave a sigh of contentment,
and went on lying there looking round her, taking in everything in her
room, her own little room, her very own to arrange just as she pleased
for this one blessed month, her room bought with her own savings, the
fruit of her careful denials, whose door she could bolt if she wanted
to, and nobody had the right to come in. It was such a strange little
room, so different from any she had known, and so sweet. It was like a
cell. Except for the two beds, it suggested a happy austerity. "And
the name of the chamber," she thought, quoting and smiling round at it,
"was Peace." Well, this was delicious, to lie there thinking how happy she
was, but outside those shutters it was more delicious still. She
jumped up, pulled on her slippers, for there was nothing on the stone
floor but one small rug, ran to the window and threw open the shutters. "Oh!" cried Mrs. Wilkins. All the radiance of April in Italy lay gathered together at her
feet. The sun poured in on her. The sea lay asleep in it, hardly
stirring. Across the bay the lovely mountains, exquisitely different
in colour, were asleep too in the light; and underneath her window, at
the bottom of the flower-starred grass slope from which the wall of the
castle rose up, was a great cypress, cutting through the delicate blues
and violets and rose-colours of the mountains and the sea like a great
black sword. She stared. Such beauty; and she there to see it. Such beauty;
and she alive to feel it. Her face was bathed in light. Lovely scents
came up to the window and caressed her. A tiny breeze gently lifted
her hair. Far out in the bay a cluster of almost motionless fishing
boats hovered like a flock of white birds on the tranquil sea. How
beautiful, how beautiful. Not to have died before this . . . to have
been allowed to see, breathe, feel this. . . . She stared, her lips
parted. Happy? Poor, ordinary, everyday word. But what could one
say, how could one describe it? It was as though she could hardly stay
inside herself, it was as though she were too small to hold so much of
joy, it was as though she were washed through with light. And how
astonishing to feel this sheer bliss, for here she was, not doing and
not going to do a single unselfish thing, not going to do a thing she
didn't want to do. According to everybody she had ever some across she
ought at least to have twinges. She had not one twinge. Something was
wrong somewhere. Wonderful that at home she should have been so good,
so terribly good, and merely felt tormented. Twinges of every sort had
there been her portion; aches, hurts, discouragements, and she the
whole time being steadily unselfish. Now she had taken off all her
goodness and left it behind her like a heap in rain-sodden clothes, and
she only felt joy. She was naked of goodness, and was rejoicing in
being naked. She was stripped, and exulting. And there, away in the
dim mugginess of Hampstead, was Mellersh being angry. She tried to visualize Mellersh, she tried to see him having
breakfast and thinking bitter things about her; and lo, Mellersh
himself began to shimmer, became rose-colour, became delicate violet,
became an enchanting blue, became formless, became iridescent. Actually Mellersh, after quivering a minute, was lost in light. "Well," thought Mrs. Wilkins, staring, as it were, after him. How extraordinary not to be able to visualize Mellersh; and she who
used to know every feature, every expression of his by heart. She
simply could not see him as he was. She could only see him resolved
into beauty, melted into harmony with everything else. The familiar
words of the General Thanksgiving came quite naturally into her mind,
and she found herself blessing God for her creation, preservation, and
all the blessings of this life, but above all for His inestimable Love;
out loud; in a burst of acknowledgment. While Mellersh, at that moment
angrily pulling on his boots before going out into the dripping
streets, was indeed thinking bitter things about her. She began to dress, choosing clean white clothes in honour of the
summer's day, unpacking her suit-cases, tidying her adorable little
room. She moved about with quick, purposeful steps, her long thin body
held up straight, her small face, so much puckered at home with effort
and fear, smoothed out. All she had been and done before this morning,
all she had felt and worried about, was gone. Each of her worries
behaved as the image of Mellersh had behaved, and dissolved into colour
and light. And she noticed things she had not noticed for years--when
she was doing her hair in front of the glass she noticed it, and
thought, "Why, what pretty stuff." For years she had forgotten she had
such a thing as hair, plaiting it in the evening and unplaiting it in
the morning with the same hurry and indifference with which she laced
and unlaced her shoes. Now she suddenly saw it, and she twisted it
round her fingers before the glass, and was glad it was so pretty. Mellersh couldn't have seen it either, for he had never said a word
about it. Well, when she got home she would draw his attention to it. "Mellersh," she would say, "look at my hair. Aren't you pleased you've
got a wife with hair like curly honey?" She laughed. She had never said anything like that to Mellersh
yet, and the idea of it amused her. But why had she not? Oh yes--she
used to be afraid of him. Funny to be afraid of anybody; and
especially of one's husband, whom one saw in his more simplified
moments, such as asleep, and not breathing properly through his nose. When she was ready she opened her door to go across to see if
Rose, who had been put the night before by a sleepy maidservant into a
cell opposite, were awake. She would say good-morning to her, and then
she would run down and stay with that cypress tree till breakfast was
ready, and after breakfast she wouldn't so much as look out of a window
till she had helped Rose get everything ready for Lady Caroline and
Mrs. Fisher. There was much to be done that day, settling in,
arranging the rooms; she mustn't leave Rose to do it alone. They would
make it all so lovely for the two to come, have such an entrancing
vision ready for them of little cells bright with flowers. She
remembered she had wanted Lady Caroline not to come; fancy wanting to
shut some one out of heaven because she thought she would be shy of
her! And as though it mattered if she were, and as though she would be
anything so self-conscious as shy. Besides, what a reason. She could
not accuse herself of goodness over that. And she remembered she had
wanted not to have Mrs. Fisher either, because she had seemed lofty. How funny of her. So funny to worry about such little things, making
them important. The bedrooms and two of the sitting-rooms at San Salvatore were
on the top floor, and opened into a roomy hall with a wide glass window
at the north end. San Salvatore was rich in small gardens in different
parts and on different levels. The garden this window looked down on
was made on the highest part of the walls, and could only be reached
through the corresponding spacious hall on the floor below. When Mrs.
Wilkins came out of her room this window stood wide open, and beyond it
in the sun was a Judas tree in full flower. There was no sign of
anybody, no sound of voices or feet. Tubs of arum lilies stood about
on the stone floor, and on a table flamed a huge bunch of fierce
nasturtiums. Spacious, flowery, silent, with the wide window at the
end opening into the garden, and the Judas tree absurdly beautiful in
the sunshine, it seemed to Mrs. Wilkins, arrested on her way across to
Mrs. Arbuthnot, too good to be true. Was she really going to live in
this for a whole month? Up to now she had had to take what beauty she
could as she went along, snatching at little bits of it when she came
across it--a patch of daisies on a fine day in a Hampstead field, a
flash of sunset between two chimney pots. She had never been in
definitely, completely beautiful places. She had never been even in a
venerable house; and such a thing as a profusion of flowers in her
rooms was unattainable to her. Sometimes in the spring she had bought
six tulips at Shoolbred's, unable to resist them, conscious that
Mellersh if he knew what they had cost would think it inexcusable; but
they had soon died, and then there were no more. As for the Judas
tree, she hadn't an idea what it was, and gazed at it out there against
the sky with the rapt expression of one who sees a heavenly vision. Mrs. Arbuthnot, coming out of her room, found her there like
that, standing in the middle of the hall staring. "Now what does she think she sees now?" thought Mrs. Arbuthnot. "We are in God's hands," said Mrs. Wilkins, turning to her,
speaking with extreme conviction. "Oh!" said Mrs. Arbuthnot quickly, her face, which had been
covered with smiles when she came out of her room, falling. "Why, what
has happened?" For Mrs. Arbuthnot had woken up with such a delightful feeling of
security, of relief, and she did not want to find she had not after all
escaped from the need of refuge. She had not even dreamed of
Frederick. For the first time in years she had been spared the nightly
dream that he was with her, that they were heart to heart, and its
miserable awakening. She had slept like a baby, and had woken up
confident; she had found there was nothing she wished to say in her
morning prayer, except Thank you. It was disconcerting to be told she
was after all in God's hands. "I hope nothing has happened?" she asked anxiously. Mrs. Wilkins looked at her a moment, and laughed. "How funny,"
she said, kissing her. "What is funny?" asked Mrs. Arbuthnot, her face clearing because
Mrs. Wilkins laughed. "We are. This is. Everything. It's all so wonderful. It's so
funny and so adorable that we should be in it. I daresay when we
finally reach heaven--the one they talk about so much--we shan't find
it a bit more beautiful." Mrs. Arbuthnot relaxed to smiling security again. "Isn't it
divine?" she said? "Were you ever, ever in your life so happy?" asked Mrs. Wilkins,
catching her by the arm. "No," said Mrs. Arbuthnot. Nor had she been; not ever; not even
in her first love-days with Frederick. Because always pain had been
close at hand in that other happiness, ready to torture with doubts,
to torture even with the very excess of her love; while this was the
simple happiness of complete harmony with her surroundings, the
happiness that asks for nothing, that just accepts, just breathes, just
is. "Let's go and look at that tree close," said Mrs. Wilkins. "I
don't believe it can only be a tree." And arm in arm they went along the hall, and their husbands would
not have known them their faces were so young with eagerness, and
together they stood at the open window, and when their eyes, having
feasted on the marvelous pink thing, wandered farther among the
beauties of the garden, they saw sitting on the low wall at the east
edge of it, gazing out over the bay, her feet in lilies, Lady Caroline. They were astonished. They said nothing in their astonishment,
but stood quite still, arm in arm, staring down at her. She too had on a white frock, and her head was bare. They had
had no idea that day in London, when her hat was down to her nose and
her furs were up to her ears, that she was so pretty. They had merely
thought her different from the other women in the club, and so had
the other women themselves, and so had all the waitresses, eyeing her
sideways and eyeing her again as they passed the corner where she
sat talking; but they had had no idea she was so pretty. She was
exceedingly pretty. Everything about her was very much that which it
was. Her fair hair was very fair, her lovely grey eyes were very
lovely and grey, her dark eyelashes were very dark, her white skin was
very white, her red mouth was very red. She was extravagantly slender--
the merest thread of a girl, though not without little curves beneath
her thin frock where little curves should be. She was looking out
across the bay, and was sharply defined against the background of empty
blue. She was full in the sun. Her feet dangled among the leaves and
flowers of the lilies just as if it did not matter that they should be
bent or bruised. "She ought to have a headache," whispered Mrs. Arbuthnot at last,
"sitting there in the sun like that." "She ought to have a hat," whispered Mrs. Wilkins. "She is treading on lilies." "But they're hers as much as ours." "Only one-fourth of them." Lady Caroline turned her head. She looked up at them a moment,
surprised to see them so much younger than they had seemed that day at
the club, and so much less unattractive. Indeed, they were really
almost quite attractive, if any one could ever be really quite
attractive in the wrong clothes. Her eyes, swiftly glancing over them,
took in every inch of each of them in the half second before she smiled
and waved her hand and called out Good-morning. There was nothing, she
saw at once to be hoped for in the way of interest from their clothes. She did not consciously think this, for she was having a violent
reaction against beautiful clothes and the slavery they impose on one,
her experience being that the instant one had got them they took one in
hand and gave one no peace till they had been everywhere and been seen
by everybody. You didn't take your clothes to parties; they took you. It was quite a mistake to think that a woman, a really well-dressed
woman, wore out her clothes; it was the clothes that wore out the
woman--dragging her about at all hours of the day and night. No wonder
men stayed younger longer. Just new trousers couldn't excite them. She couldn't suppose that even the newest trousers ever behaved like
that, taking the bit between their teeth. Her images were disorderly,
but she thought as she chose, she used what images she like. As she
got off the wall and came towards the window, it seemed a restful thing
to know she was going to spend an entire month with people in dresses
made as she dimly remembered dresses used to be made five summers ago. "I got here yesterday morning," she said, looking up at them and
smiling. She really was bewitching. She had everything, even a
dimple. "It's a great pity," said Mrs. Arbuthnot, smiling back, "because
we were going to choose the nicest room for you." "Oh, but I've done that," said Lady Caroline. "At least, I think
it's the nicest. It looks two ways--I adore a room that looks two
ways, don't you? 