

E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/c/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration. See 20632-h.htm or 20632-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/6/3/20632/20632-h/20632-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/6/3/20632/20632-h.zip)





MOLLY BROWN'S ORCHARD HOME

by

NELL SPEED

Author of
"The Tucker Twins Series," "The Carter Girls Series," etc. A. L. Burt Company
Publishers      New York
Printed in U. S. A. Copyright, 1915,
by
Hurst & Company
Printed in U. S. A. [Illustration: Jo proved to be a singularly tactful hostess.] CONTENTS

   CHAPTER

       I. Letters

      II. Bon Voyage

     III. The Deep Sea

      IV. What Molly Overheard

       V. Paris

      VI. La Marquise

     VII. The Faubourg

    VIII. The Opera

      IX. The Postscript

       X. Bohemia

      XI. A Studio Tea in the Latin Quarter

     XII. The Green-eyed Monster

    XIII. A Julia Kean Scrape

     XIV. Coals of Fire

      XV. Mr. Kinsella's Indian Summer

     XVI. Apple Blossom Time in Normandy

    XVII. The Ghost in the Chapel

   XVIII. The Prescription

     XIX. Fontainebleau and What Came of It

      XX. More Letters

     XXI. Molly Brown's Orchard Home




Molly Brown's Orchard Home. CHAPTER I. LETTERS. From Miss Molly Brown of Kentucky to Miss Nance Oldham of Vermont. Chatsworth, Kentucky. My dearest Nance:

     Our passage to Antwerp is really engaged and in two weeks Mother
     and I will be on the water. I can hardly believe it is I, Molly
     Brown, about to have this "great adventure." That is what Mother
     and I call this undertaking: "Our great adventure." Mother says it
     sounds Henry Jamesy and I take her word for it (so far I have not
     read that novelist), but he must be very interesting, as Mother and
     Professor Green used to discuss him for hours at a time. Our going is not quite so happy as we meant it to be. Kent can't
     come with us as we had planned, but will have to stay in Louisville
     for some months, and may not be able to leave at all this winter. There is some complication of our affairs, that makes it best for
     him to be on hand until the matter is settled. I remember how
     interested you were in the fact that oil was found on my mother's
     land and that she expected to realize an independent income from
     the sale of the land, also pay off the mortgage on Chatsworth, our
     beloved home. Don't be too uneasy, the oil is there all right
     enough and we shall finally get the money, but the arrangement was:
     so much down and the rest when the wells should begin operation. The first payment Mother used immediately to pay the mortgage, but
     the second payment has not been made yet, as Mother's sister, Aunt
     Clay, living on the adjoining place, has got out an injunction
     against the Oil Trust as a public nuisance, and all work in the oil
     land has had to be stopped for the time being. The lawyer for the
     Trust told my brother, Paul, that Aunt Clay has not a leg to stand
     on, but of course the law has to take its leisurely course, and in
     the meantime the money for Mother is not forthcoming until the
     wells are in operation. Aunt Clay is in her element, making
     everyone as uncomfortable as possible and engaged in a foolish
     lawsuit. She is always going to law about something and always
     losing. We are devoutly thankful that her suit is with the Trust
     and not our Mother, as we know that Mother is so constituted she
     could not stand up against a member of her family in a lawsuit. I
     truly believe she would let Aunt Clay take the oil lands and all
     the rest of Chatsworth, rather than have a row over it. This property, where the oil was found, was given to Mother by Aunt
     Clay when she settled up Grandfather Carmichael's estate. Of course
     she considered the property of no value or she would never have let
     it out of her clutches, and as executrix and administratrix of the
     estate she had absolute power. Now that she sees it is worth more
     than all the rest put together, she is in such a rage with Mother
     that it is really absurd. She does not want us to go to Paris and
     is furious at the idea of Kent's "stopping work," as she calls it. She has got out this injunction just to keep us from going, I
     believe, as she is intelligent enough to know there is no use in
     trying to get ahead of a mighty Trust, and they will have to win in
     the end; but she had an idea that we would not go unless we had
     plenty of money to have a good time on. She little knows our
     Mother, in spite of being her sister. Mother says she believes it will be more fun and easier to
     economize in Paris than in Kentucky; and she is as gay as a lark
     over the prospect. Kent may be able to come later and take that
     much talked of and longed for course in Architecture at the Beaux
     Arts. In the meantime, he is very busy and, as he says, "making
     good with his boss." Mother refuses to discuss Aunt Clay's behavior
     and actually goes to see her as though nothing had happened; but I
     know she has had many a sleepless night, brooding over her sister's
     unsisterly act. I am longing to see you, dearest Nance, and wish you could manage
     to meet me in New York before we sail, but if you can't, be sure to
     have a letter on the steamer for me. We are going on a slow boat to
     Antwerp. We think the long sea trip will be good for Mother, who is
     tired out with all this worry and the work of getting Chatsworth in
     condition to leave; and besides, the slow boats are much cheaper. _Laurens_ is the name of our boat, sailing from Hoboken. I will
     write you from Paris, where Julia Kean is already installed and
     hard at work on her beloved art. I am afraid you will think I am horrid about Aunt Clay. Mother says
     she is the only person she ever knew me to feel bitter about. So
     she is, but then she is the only person who was ever mean to my
     beloved Mother. Maybe when my hair turns gray I can be as much of a
     lady as Mother is, but so far I am too red-headed to be a perfect
     lady. I am going to miss you, Nance, more than I can tell you. We have
     been roommates for five years at college, and never once did we
     have a shadow of a disagreement. Of course we occasionally got in a
     kind of penumbra. Once I remember when I was touchy because you
     called Professor Edwin Green an oldish person, but my pettishness
     only lasted "like a cloud's flying shadow," and that ought not to
     count. I think you are splendid to make such a happy home for your father
     and I know you are a wonderful housekeeper. Please give him my
     kindest regards. Kent drove Mother and me into Louisville to hear
     your mother speak at the Equal Suffrage Convention. She was simply
     overpowering in her arguments, and converted Kent in five minutes. I wish Aunt Clay, who is such an ardent Anti, had heard her. We
     were so sorry Mrs. Oldham could not come out to Chatsworth to visit
     us, but she did not have the time. I must stop. I have written two
     stamps' worth already. Ever your devoted friend and roommate in heart,

     MOLLY BROWN. *       *       *       *       *

     To Miss Molly Brown, Chatsworth, Kentucky,

     From Miss Julia Kean, Paris, France. 71 Boulevard St. Michel, Paris. Molly dear:

     The news that you and your mother are to sail in a few weeks threw
     me into the seventh heaven of happiness,--I am already on the
     seventh floor of a _pension_ with not much more of an elevator than
     the tower of Babel had. Mamma and Papa brought me here and
     installed me and then shot off to Turkey, Papa like a comet and
     Mamma like the tail of one, to finish up the bridge that has kept
     them so busy for the last year. This _pension_ is kept by an American lady and is full of
     Americans. It is rather fun to be here for a while, but I am
     longing for the time to come when you will be with me and we can go
     apartment hunting, that is, if your mother still thinks it will be
     wiser for us to keep house and not try to board. Of course you will
     come here first and we can take our time about getting settled for
     the winter. Mrs. Pace, the landlady, (but you had better not call
     her that to her face, as she is very much the _grande dame_, with
     so much blue blood she finds it difficult to keep it to herself,)
     wants you to stay all winter with her and has many arguments
     against housekeeping, but I'll let her get them off herself to your
     mother. She is looking forward with great interest to meeting dear Mrs.
     Brown, as it seems she knows intimately a cousin and old friend of
     hers, a certain Sally Bolling of Kentucky, who is now the Marquise
     d'Ochte, a swell of the Faubourg St. Germain, with a chateau in
     Normandy, family ghost, devoted peasantry and what not. I fancy
     your mother has told you of her. It will be great fun to meet some
     of the nobility, I think. I am enrolled at the Julien Academy for the winter and am going to
     put in some months of hard drawing before I jump into color. I work
     only in the morning and spend the afternoons looking at pictures. I
     am such a sober person pacing the long galleries of the Louvre
     studying the wonderful paintings that no one would dream I am the
     harum-scarum I really am. Papa gave me a very serious talking to
     about how to conduct myself in Paris and I find, as usual, his
     advice is excellent. His theory is that any grown woman can go
     anywhere she wants to alone in Paris, provided she has some
     business to attend to and attends to it. Of course Mrs. Pace is merely a nominal chaperone for me until your
     mother comes. She really seldom sees me, and when she does she is
     so full of her own affairs that she hardly remembers I have any;
     and then when she recalls that she is supposed to be my chaperone,
     she feels called upon to tell me to do my hair differently, or she
     does not like my best hat, or something else equally out of her
     province. But I am not going to tell you any more about her, as you
     can judge for yourself when you see her. I am sorry your brother, Kent, cannot carry out his plan of
     studying at the Beaux Arts, but maybe something will turn up and he
     can come after all. I might have known Aunt Clay would obstruct,
     all she had in her power, but thank goodness, her power is limited
     and your mother will finally get the full amount of money for her
     oil lands that Papa thought she should have. As for being in Paris
     without much money, it really is a grand place to be poor in; and
     one can have more fun here on a franc than in New York on a dollar. Hug your darling mother for me, and tell Kent that I refuse to
     answer his letters unless he gets some thin paper to write on. I am
     tired of paying double extra postage on his bulky epistles. Let me know in plenty of time when to expect you and your mother,
     so I can engage the room of Mrs. Pace and meet you at the station. I wish I could go to Antwerp to be there when you arrive or even
     meet you halfway in Brussels, but I must put the temptation from me
     and await you quietly in Paris. Good-by, my darling old Molly
     Brown,

     Your own devoted, ever loving

     JUDY. *       *       *       *       *

     Steamer letter from Professor Edwin Green
     of Wellington College to Miss Molly Brown of
     Kentucky, sailing on _S. S. Laurens_. Wellington College. My dear Miss Molly:

     Surely the "best laid schemes of mice and men gang aft aglee." I
     feel more like a mouse caught in a trap than a man, just now. I
     have been thinking of nothing else all summer but the delightful
     time I should have with you and your mother in Paris. It is my
     sabbatical year at Wellington, which means a fine long holiday, one
     much needed and looked forward to by all hard-worked professors. But just as I began to prepare for this delightful trip, I found
     that my substitute had in the most unaccountable manner,
     disappointed the President, Miss Walker, and Wellington was in a
     fair way to open without a professor of English. Of course I had to
     rush to the rescue and here I am in the old grind again. I really do not mind teaching, enjoy it, in fact, but oh, my
     holiday and those walks and jaunts I have been dreaming of in
     Paris! Miss Walker is deeply grateful to me for helping her out of
     this difficulty, and is doing all in her power to find a suitable
     person to take my place; and of course, I, too, am reaching out in
     every direction for help. One thing, I do not intend to be like poor Jacob: serve seven years
     more before I get my reward. I feel in a way that this is making up
     to the College for the long, enforced holiday two years ago, when I
     was so ill with typhoid fever. My sister Grace had made her plans to spend the winter in New York
     as she did not expect to be needed by me as housekeeper, so I am
     "baching" again; and very lonesome it is after being so spoiled and
     looked after by Grace. The place seems sad and gloomy to me and the College is full of raw
     and unattractive girls. I could hardly refrain from throwing a copy
     of Rosetti at a forward miss the other day in class, when she
     attempted to read "The Blessed Damozel" and I remembered a certain
     little Freshman, who, five years ago, held me enthralled by her
     rendering of that wonderful poem. I was delighted to see your friend Miss Melissa Hathaway, who is a
     relief indeed, after all of these chattering school girls. What a
     wonderful personality she has! Her beauty is even richer and more
     glowing than formerly. She reminds me of October in the mountains,
     her own Kentucky mountains. Did you ever notice her eyes and the
     quality they possess, which is a very rare one: that of seeming to
     hold the reflection of trees and skies when she is indoors? It is
     as though she were still seeing her forests at home. I hope to help her a great deal in her English as she is afraid
     this will have to be her last year at college. She feels that she
     is needed at home to carry on the work of her friend and teacher
     Miss Allfriend, whose long and arduous labors among the mountain
     folk have impaired her health. Melissa thinks she should take up
     the work and give her friend a rest. Noble girl! Dicky Blount
     thinks so, too, and even more so. Did you know that he found or
     manufactured some business in Catlettsburg, Kentucky, last summer
     and surprised Miss Hathaway in her mountain fastness? Please give my kindest regards to your mother and express to her my
     deep regret that I am not to be her cicerone for some of the sights
     of Paris. I am hoping that before the winter is over I may be
     relieved and then, ho, for the fastest steamer afloat! I am sending you some novels that may amuse you both on your
     voyage; also, a box of crystallized ginger that is the very best
     thing for seasickness that I know,--not that you are to be seasick,
     but just in case. I am trying to be cheerful and not let Miss Walker see how I am
     kicking at fate, but I am as mad as a schoolboy who has to do
     chores on Saturday! Very sincerely your friend,

     EDWIN GREEN. CHAPTER II. BON VOYAGE. Mrs. Brown and her daughter Molly were at last safely off on what they
called their "great adventure." They had waved their handkerchiefs until
the dock at Hoboken was nothing more than a blur to them and they felt
sure that the _Laurens_ was little more than a speck to the friends that
had turned up to see them off. Molly's classmates at Wellington College, Katherine and Edith Williams,
Edith with the nice, new husband whom Molly was overjoyed to meet, had
appeared, bearing books and candy for the trip. Jimmy Lufton, of course,
just to show that there was no hard feeling, as he whispered to Molly,
was there, also, doing everything for their comfort; finding their
luggage; engaging the steamer chairs; seeing to it that the stewardess
understood about the baths before breakfast; and attending to many
things of the importance of which Molly and her mother were ignorant. Richard Blount, too, had turned up ten minutes before sailing, but he
had managed to get in a word with Molly about Melissa Hathaway. "She is a queen among women, Miss Molly, and I consider that Edwin Green
is a lucky dog to have the privilege of teaching her. To think of seeing
her day after day and hearing her read poetry with that wonderful voice! He tells me she is the most remarkable reader he has ever known. I am
too fond of old Ed to hate him, otherwise I should find it easy. By the
way I have left something in care of the steward for you and your mother
as a cure for seasickness. You will find that there is nothing like it!" "Oh, thank you so much! I feel sure that I shall not be sick, but I am
just as obliged as though I were going to be. Mother may be. You see we
have never been on the ocean in our lives, but we have always felt that
we would like it beyond anything, and that liking it so much would keep
us from being harmed by it," Molly had answered, a little chagrined at
what Richard Blount had had to say about Professor Green and Melissa,
but determined not to show it to that young man or to let herself think
there was anything in it. Miss Grace Green and dear, good Mary Stewart had been on the steamer
waiting when Molly and her mother came aboard. Their devotion to Molly
was so apparent that they won Mrs. Brown's heart at once, and that
charming lady with her cordial manner and gracious bearing as usual made
Molly's friends hers. Miss Green had had a little private talk with Molly, giving her messages
from her younger brother, Dodo, and telling her what she knew of
Professor Edwin's disappointment in having to go on with his duties for
the time being at least. Molly had not had a chance to open and read the
steamer letter he had written her, but was forced to postpone it until
the vessel sailed and she could compose herself after the flurry of
good-bys and the bustle of the departure. There were many letters waiting in the cabin, but the harbor was so
fascinating to these two women who had done so little traveling, that
they could not tear themselves from the deck until they were out of
sight of land. "Mother, isn't it too lovely and aren't we going to be the happiest pair
on earth? I am glad we are seeing the ocean for the first time together,
because you know exactly how I feel and I know how you feel. The idea of
our being seasick! Richard Blount sent some remedy to the steamer for
us, just in case we were seasick. It was very kind of him but absolutely
unnecessary, I am sure. I never felt better in my life and look, there
is quite a little swell." "Seasick indeed! I have no more feeling of sickness than I have on the
Ohio River at home," said Mrs. Brown, taking deep breaths of the bracing
salt air. "I suspect it is incumbent upon us to go read our letters now,
but I must say I do not want to miss one moment on deck during our
entire voyage. I feel as though twenty years had dropped off me." And
indeed she looked it, too, with a pretty pink in her cheeks and her wavy
hair blown about her face. Molly rather wanted to read Professor Green's letter first, but she put
it aside and opened those from Nance Oldham and several other college
mates. Then she discovered a thoroughly characteristic note from Aunt
Clay, dry and dictatorial but enclosing a check for ten dollars on
Monroe & Co., the Paris bankers. "For you and your extravagant mother to
spend on foolishness," wrote that stern lady. "Oh, Mother! Isn't she hateful? How easy it would have been to send a
pleasant message with the check! Now all the fun of having it is gone
and I have a great mind to send it back!" "No, my dear, don't do that. Your Aunt Clay does not mean to be as
unkind as she seems. I know she intended this check as a kind of peace
offering to me, and we must take it as she meant it and pay no attention
to her words." "Mother, you are an angel and I have to hug you right here in the cabin,
even if that black-eyed man over there with the pile of telegrams in
front of him is looking a hole through us." She suited the action to the word and Mrs. Brown, emerging from the bear
hug that Molly was prone to give, surprised a smile on the dark face of
their fellow traveler. He was seated across from them at the same table
behind a pile of telegrams a foot high, and was very busy opening the
messages, making notes on them as he read. He was an interesting looking
man with dark, fathomless eyes, swarthy complexion and iron gray hair,
but he bore a youthful look that made one feel he had not the right of
years to the gray hair. His expression was gloomy and not altogether
pleasant, but when he smiled he displayed a row of dazzling white teeth
and his eyes lost the sad look and held the smile long after his mouth
had closed with a determined click. "'Duty before pleasure,' as King Richard said when he killed the old
king before a-smothering of the babies," said Molly as she finished Aunt
Clay's letter and opened Edwin Green's. What a nice letter it was to be
sure! She laughed aloud over his wanting to throw Rosetti at the girl
and blushed with pleasure at the compliment to her reading of the
blessed Damozel, for well she knew whom he had in mind. His praise of
Melissa would have merely pleased her as praise of her friends always
did, had she not already been somewhat disturbed by what Dicky Blount
had said to her of Professor Edwin Green and the beautiful mountain
girl. "I am a silly girl and intend to put all such foolish notions out of my
head," declared Molly to herself. "Surely Professor Green has as much
right to make friends as I have, and I intend to know as many people and
like as many as I can. I am not the least bit in love with Edwin
Green,--but somehow I don't think he and Melissa are suited to one
another." As the young girl sat reading over her letter, a feeling of sadness and
loneliness took possession of her and, looking up, she surprised a
furtive tear in her mother's eye. Mrs. Brown was reading a letter from
her married daughter Mildred, then living in Iowa where her husband
Crittenden Rutledge was at work as a bridge engineer. The cabin had begun to fill with people who were leaving decks and
staterooms to hunt up their letters and belongings and generally prepare
themselves for a ten-day trip on the Atlantic. "Mother, they say this is a small steamer, but it seems huge to me! Did
you ever see so many strange people? I don't believe we ever shall know
any of them. They all of them look at home and I feel so far from home. Don't you?" "Now, Molly, please don't get blue or I shall have to weep outright. Of
course we shall come to know most of the passengers and no doubt will
find many charming persons ready to know and like us. Suppose we hurry
up with our letters and go on deck again." Just then a young man bounded into the cabin, made a hasty survey of the
crowd and came rapidly over to the dark gentleman seated opposite them. "Oh, Uncle Tom, how can you stay down in this stuffy cabin? There is a
sunset on the water that is just screaming out to be looked at. As for
that work, you have ten days to attend to those tiresome telegrams and
letters." "Nonsense, Pierce, I have no idea of waiting ten days for this important
business. You forget the wireless," answered the uncle, looking fondly
at the enthusiastic young fellow, who was so like him except for the
gray hair that it was almost ludicrous. "Oh, goodness gracious me, where is your holiday to be, with you tied to
your Mother Country with a stringless apron? That is what that old
wireless telegraphy reminds me of," laughed the young man, showing all
his perfect teeth. "Well, I've got your chair and steamer rug all ready
for you and all you have to do is come sit in it." "Now, Pierce, don't wait on me. Part of having a holiday is to forget
how old I am. When I get these telegrams off, I am going to show you how
skittish I can be and forget all about business. I fancy you will have
to hold me back in my race for a good time. This limerick is to be my
motto:

    "Said this long-legged daddy of Troy,
    'Although I'm no longer a boy,
    I bet I can show
    You chaps how to go.' Which he did to his own savage joy." Mrs. Brown and Molly could not help overhearing this conversation and at
the above limerick they laughed outright. The young man called Pierce
looked at them with a friendly glance and the uncle smiled another of
his rare smiles, which made the ladies from Kentucky feel that the ocean
was not going to be such a terribly lonesome place after all. They
gathered up their belongings and made their way on deck to view the
sunset that was "screaming to be looked at." "It really is worth seeing, isn't it, Mother? Somehow, though, I never
do like to be made to look at a sunset. The persons who insist on your
doing it always seem to have a kind of proprietary air. Now that young
man wanted to bulldoze his uncle into coming when--when----" Molly
stopped suddenly, realizing that the two men in great-coats, with the
collars turned up to their ears, who had taken their places at the
railing next to her mother, were no other than the two in question. "You are perfectly right, madam," said the elder, raising his hat. "This
nephew of mine is always doing it. Now I should much rather come on deck
when the sun is down and see the after-glow. The crepuscule appeals to
me more than the brilliancy of the sunset." "I fancy my daughter had no complaint to make of the brilliancy of the
color, but of being coerced into looking at it. She likes to be the
discoverer herself and the one to make others come to look. Isn't it so,
Molly?" "Maybe it is," said Molly blushing. "I did not really mean much of
anything and was just talking for talk's sake." "Anyhow," spoke the nephew, "this sunset is mine and I think it is
beautiful and all of you have simply got to look at it." Turning to
Molly, "You can have to-morrow's and make us look all you want to, but
this is my discovery." The ice was broken and Molly and her mother made their first
acquaintances on their travels. Mr. Kinsella introduced himself and his
nephew Pierce and in the course of half an hour they were all good
steamer friends. Everyone must make up his or her mind to be ready to
make friends on a steamer or to have a very stupid, lonesome crossing. Mrs. Brown and Molly were both too sociable and friendly to be guilty of
such standoffishness and were as pleased at making friends with the two
Kinsellas as those gentlemen were to secure such pleasant companions as
these ladies were proving themselves to be. "We are all of us to be at the captain's table," said Pierce. "And how do you know where we are to be?" asked Molly. "I don't know
myself where we are to sit, and how can you know?" "Oh, that is easy. While you and your mother and Uncle Tom were busy
reading your letters and before I got my sunset ready, I was finding out
things like Rikki-tikki. First I got the steward's list and located the
Kinsellas at mess; then I looked over all the names and where the people
hailed from and decided that Miss Molly Brown of Kentucky sounded kind
of cheerful. And when I knew there was a Mrs. Brown along, too, I
decided that Miss Molly Brown was young enough to have a mother along
and the mother was young enough to be along, and you were more than
likely a pretty nice couple to cultivate. The steward told me you were
to be at the captain's table, too, as you were friends of Miss Mary
Stewart. Her father owns much stock in these nice old tubs of steamers,
and the daughter had made a special request that you should be very well
looked after." "Isn't that too like Mary? She did not say one word about it. That
accounts for our having such a lovely stateroom to ourselves, too. We
had engaged a stateroom that was supposed to hold three persons. The
company had the privilege of putting someone else in with us, and as the
steamer is quite full, of course we had expected to have a roommate. We
hated the thought of it, too, but it was so much less expensive. And
Mother and I hoped to spend most of our time on deck, anyhow. We could
not understand the number not being the same as that on our tickets, but
thought the officials knew best and if we did not belong there they
would oust us in good time." "Well, I am jolly glad you have the best stateroom on board. Uncle tried
to get it but had to content himself with second best." "Are you seasick, as a rule? I do hope not," asked the young man of Mrs.
Brown, who had been conversing with Mr. Kinsella while the nephew and
Molly were making friends. "No, we don't make it a rule to be any kind of sick; but my daughter and
I are on the ocean for the first time. In fact, we are really seeing the
ocean for the first time and do not know how we are to behave. So far we
feel as well as possible, but I fancy such a smooth sea is no test." "Only fancy, Uncle Tom, what it must seem to see the ocean for the first
time! I almost wish I had never seen it until now, just for the
sensation." "There was a superior New York girl at Wellington College who had a
great time trying to tease me because I had never seen the ocean. She
kept it up so long that I began to feel like a 'po' nigger at a frolic',
so I retaliated by asking her if she had ever been to a hanging. I
completely took the wind out of her sails, and then confessed that I
hadn't either," said Molly with a laugh. "Good for you, Miss Brown, give it to him. New York people are certainly
very superior in their own estimation and need a good taking down every
now and then. They are often more provincial than villagers, with no
excuse for so being," and Mr. Kinsella gave his nephew an affectionate
push. The air was clear and crisp, with a rising wind that gave promise of a
heavy sea. The passengers had begun to fill the decks, dragging steamer
chairs into sheltered nooks and looking about for desirable places out
of the wind, where they could see the sun set and the moon rise, get out
of the way of the smokestacks, the fog horn and the whistle, and at the
same time be in a good locality to see everything that was going on. Molly and her mother were much amused at the sight. They were both
inclined to be rather careless of their ease and it had never entered
their heads to hustle and bustle to make themselves comfortable on the
trip. "Jimmy Lufton has had our chairs placed on deck and lashed to the
railing. He said he knew we would never look out for ourselves, and
unless he saw to it, we would go abroad standing up or sitting on the
floor! He tagged our chairs, too, as our names were on the backs only. He said there were always some 'chair hogs' who would push the chairs
against the wall with the name out of sight and refuse to budge," said
Molly. "Where are your chairs?" asked Pierce. "Let's go find them and afterward
we can get Uncle's and mine and have a snug foursome of a chat. Oh, Miss
Brown, how lovely your mother is! I want to paint her; but I should have
to put you in the picture, too, so that I could catch the wonderful
expression on her face. It is when she is looking at _you_ that she is
most lovely." "Well, don't you think I could be present to inspire the desired
expression without being in the picture?" laughed Molly, delighted by
the praise of her beloved mother. "But can you paint? I have been
wondering what you are and what your uncle is, but I did not like to be
too inquisitive." "Well, one does not have to be with me long to hear the story of my
life," said the boy. "You ask if I can paint: yes, I can paint; not as
well as I want to by a long shot, but I mean to be a great painter. That
sounds conceited, but it is not. I have talent and there is no use in
being mealy-mouthed over it. To be a great painter means work, work,
work; and I am prepared to do that with every breath I breathe. Painting
isn't work to me; it is joy and life. Besides, I mean to make it up to
Uncle for his disappointment in life, and the only way I can do it is by
succeeding." Molly was dying to know more about the uncle and what his disappointment
was, but she was too well bred to show her desire and Pierce did not
seem inclined to go on with his family disclosures. He stood looking at
two ladies who had just come on deck, followed by a maid carrying rugs
and cushions. The ladies were a very handsome mother and daughter,
although the mother appeared too young to have such a very
sophisticated, grown-up daughter. They were beautifully dressed in long
fur coats and small toques. "Rather warm for October," thought Molly,
but the rising cold wind soon made her know her mistake. "There are our chairs," said Molly, starting toward the railing where
the ever handy-man, Jimmy, had lashed the two steamer chairs. At the same moment the elegant, fur-clad lady rapidly crossed the deck
and placing her hand on the back of the nearest chair, said in a cold
and haughty tone to the maid: "Here, Marie, place the rugs and cushions
in these chairs. They will do quite nicely." "Excuse me, but these chairs are ours, mine and my mother's," said
Molly. "But we are not going to use them until after supper, I mean
dinner, so you are welcome to them until then." "Some mistake surely," rejoined the older woman, eying Molly scornfully
through her lorgnette. "You will have to complain to the steward if you
cannot find your chairs, young woman; these are mine, engaged and paid
for." With that, she prepared to seat herself with the help of the maid,
who was blushing furiously, mortified by the flagrant untruth of her
mistress. Molly was, by nature, easy-going and peace-loving and her inclination
was to leave the haughty dame in possession of the chairs and beat a
hasty retreat; but she remembered Jimmy Lufton's remark about "chair
hogs" and a joking promise she had made him to stand up for her mother
if not for herself, so she braced herself for battle. Despite her
girlish face and figure, Molly Brown could command as much dignity as
any member of the Four Hundred. With a polite smile and gently modulated voice she said, very calmly and
firmly: "Madam, as I said before, these are my chairs but you are quite
welcome to them until after dinner. If you have any doubt about it, you
will find our names on the backs; but to save you the trouble of moving
to look behind you, if you will be so kind as to glance at these tags
you can verify my statement." "Oh, I did not dream I was to call forth such a tirade," yawned the
nonplussed woman, reading the tags: "'Mrs. M. Brown, Kentucky; Miss M.
Brown, Kentucky.' If you are not going to use the chairs until after
dinner, my daughter and I will just stay in them until other
arrangements can be made. These small steamers are wretchedly managed. I
can't imagine where our chairs are. Elise," calling to her daughter, "it
seems these are not our chairs, after all." "Well, I did not think they could be, as these chairs seem real enough
and ours are entirely imaginary," answered the daughter rudely. "Mother,
this is Mr. Kinsella, whom I have known at the Art Students' League. My
mother, Mrs. Huntington, Mr. Kinsella." "I am so glad to meet you, Mrs. Huntington. Your daughter, Miss O'Brien,
and I have been working in the same costume class at the League. I did
not dream she was to be on this boat and when I saw her come on deck I
thought I was seeing ghosts." Pierce had come eagerly forward to meet the mother of the interesting
girl he had known and liked at the art school; but Mrs. Huntington
looked as though she, too, were seeing ghosts. She shrank back in her
down pillows and her face became pinched and pale, and it was a moment
before the hardened woman of the world could command her voice to return
the greeting of the young man. "Kinsella, did you say? Could you be Tom Kinsella's son? You are
strangely like him." "Thank you, madam, for that. There is no one I want to be like so much
as my Uncle Tom. I am his nephew; my uncle has never married. Did you
know my uncle? He is on board and I know would be glad to renew his
acquaintance with you. But let me introduce Miss Brown to both of you." The two girls shook hands, and as they looked in each other's eyes,
Molly felt in her heart an instinctive liking for the older girl. There
was something honest and straight about her face despite the rather
sullen expression of her mouth. She was beautiful, besides, and beauty
always appealed to Molly,--almost always, at least, for although Mrs.
Huntington was beautiful, too, Molly felt no leaning toward her. Mother
and daughter looked enough alike to make it not difficult to guess the
relationship at the first glance; but the more one saw of them, the
fainter grew the resemblance. The older woman was smaller, fairer and
plumper; her hair was golden while the daughter's was light brown; her
complexion pink and white, the daughter's rather sallow; her eyes baby
blue, the other's gray green. But the daughter's features were more
pronounced and her well-cut chin and mouth showed character and pride,
while the mother's looked a little petulant. "I am very glad to meet you, Miss Brown. I believe I have heard of you. Aren't you Julia Kean's 'Molly'?" And Elise O'Brien gave Molly's hand a
little squeeze. "Of course I am. To think of your knowing my Judy! You must have met her
at the League. Perhaps you knew her, too, Mr. Kinsella." "Who? Miss Kean? I should say I did. She was the life of the outdoor
sketch club we got up; and believe me, she has a soul for color. Why,
that little 'postage stamp landscape' she had in the American Artists'
Exhibition was a winner. Did you see a memory sketch she did for the
final exhibition at the League? It was a tall girl in black standing up
singing and a beautiful red-headed girl in diaphanous blue playing an
accompaniment on a guitar, with a background of holly and a great bunch
of mistletoe at one side." Pierce stopped suddenly in the midst of his
description of Judy's picture and, gazing intently at Molly, cried out,
"By the great jumping jingo, if Miss Brown isn't the red-headed girl in
diaphanous blue!" "Yes, I saw it," exclaimed Elise, "and thought it was wonderfully
clever. Miss Kean got a splendid likeness of you, considering it was
from memory." "Oh, Judy has sketched me until she says doing me is almost as easy as
writing her name. That must have been the Christmas party at Professor
Green's when Melissa Hathaway was singing 'The Mistletoe Bough.' I
remember Judy sat opposite us and I almost laughed out because she kept
making pictures in the air with her thumb, which is a habit of hers when
anything appeals to her as paintable. Won't it be splendid to see her
again? Are you both going to Paris? You know Judy is there now and my
mother and I are to join her." "Glorious!" exclaimed the enthusiastic Pierce. "Of course I am going
there; but how about you, Miss O'Brien?" "Oh, I am to be there for a while, but my art is not considered
seriously enough for me to stick at it long enough to accomplish much. Mother thinks Paris is nothing but one big shop, and when she has bought
all the clothes we are supposed not to be able to be decent without, we
have to go on. I am going to work while she shops. Thank goodness, she
is so fussy that it takes her twice as long to get an outfit as it would
anyone else, so I shall have time to get in some work," answered the
girl bitterly. Just then the gong was sounded for dinner. There was a general movement
toward the saloon and the growing darkness prevented Molly from seeing
the resentment on the face of Mrs. Huntington, if resentment she held,
at the daughter's rudeness toward her. "Such a nice girl," thought Molly, "and so clever and beautiful! But
how, how can she be so horrid to her mother? There is no telling what
provocation she has, though. Her mother was certainly not honest about
the chairs; but then, your mother is your mother. Thank goodness, Aunt
Clay is not mine!" Molly hastened to her own mother's side and they made their way to the
first meal on board. CHAPTER III. THE DEEP SEA. Such a pleasant bustle, as the passengers came streaming into the cabin! Everyone seemed to have made or met some friend, with the exception of a
few shy-looking, lonesome persons, and Molly devoutly hoped that these
would find some congenial souls before very long and not be so forlorn. She and her mother had made such a fine beginning in the way of pleasant
acquaintances that she wished the same good luck to all on board. Their seats were next to the Captain, with Mr. Kinsella and Pierce
opposite. The Captain was just what a captain ought to be: big and
hearty, blond and bearded, with a booming laugh. "Like a Viking of old,"
whispered Molly to her mother. "Good sailor, madam?" asked the Captain of Mrs. Brown. "A Mississippi steamboat is the only test I have given myself so far,
but my daughter and I are hoping we will prove good sailors," answered
his neighbor. "We are evidently expected to be sick by our friends, as
several of them have sent us remedies. Champagne from one, crystallized
ginger from another and a box of big black pills from a third that look
for all the world like shoe buttons." "Well, don't trust to any of them. If you are sick, get on deck all you
can and don't waste your champagne on seasickness, but get ginger ale,
which is much cheaper and quite as effective," boomed the Captain with a
laugh that made the glasses rattle. Molly wished they would stop talking about seasickness! The food looked
good. A plate of cream celery soup had just been placed in front of her. It seemed all that celery soup should be, but a qualm had suddenly
arisen in her soul, (at least she called it her soul,) and she decided
to let the soup go and wait for the next course. "Uncle Tom, I have met an old friend of yours on board; also an
acquaintance of my own from the Art Students' League," said Pierce as
soon as the business of eating was well under way. "Is that so? I'll bet on you for nosing around to find out things! Who
is the gentleman?" inquired Mr. Kinsella. "Gentleman much! It's a lady, and a very beautiful lady at that, who
complimented you greatly by saying you looked like me," laughed the boy. "Her name is Mrs. Huntington." "Huntington? I know no one of that name that I can remember. She must be
some casual acquaintance who has slipped from my memory." "Well, maybe,--anyhow, she called you Tom. Her daughter, Miss Elise
O'Brien, is my friend." Mr. Kinsella's face flushed and his somber eyes lit up with what Molly
thought an angry light. "So," he muttered, "she has married again. Yes, yes, my boy, I--I did
know a Miss Lizzie Peck in my youth who married an old friend of mine,
George O'Brien. I have not seen or heard of them for years and did not
know George was dead. I shall take great pleasure in meeting his little
girl." "Little! She is as tall as Miss Brown, who is certainly not stumpy, and
is some years older, if I am any judge of the fair sex." "Of course you are a judge of the fair sex, a most competent one, I
should say. What boy of eighteen is not?" teased his uncle. "Where are
your new acquaintances seated?" "They are at the other end of the next table with their backs to us. You
will have to rubber a little to get a good view of them." Mr. Kinsella accordingly "rubbered," as his slangy nephew put it, and
satisfied himself of the identity of Mrs. Huntington. Molly was greatly
interested in the occurrence. Mr. Kinsella was different from anyone she
had ever seen before and Pierce's hint of a disappointed life had fired
her imagination, ever ready for a romance. She had a feeling that the
proud, beautiful, inconsiderate woman whose acquaintance she had
recently made was in some way connected with Mr. Kinsella's
disappointment. Soup was removed and the next course of baked bluefish brought on. Molly's senses reeled and a drowsy numbness stole over her. "What a
strange feeling! What on earth is the matter with me? I was so hungry
when I came down here and now I can't touch a thing," she said to
herself. Mr. Kinsella was watching her and finally spoke:

"My dear Miss Brown, let me take you on deck. You will feel much better
in the air." "Why, my darling daughter, are you sick?" inquired the anxious mother,
who was eating her dinner with the greatest enjoyment. "I believe I'll go to bed," gasped poor Molly. "But don't you come,
Mother. I'll be better in a minute." A grim smile went down the Captain's table as Molly beat a hasty and
ignominious retreat. Mrs. Huntington was heard to remark to her daughter
as a white and hollow-eyed Molly flew past their chairs on the way to
her stateroom: "There goes that red-headed girl from Kentucky, who was
so rude to me on deck. I fancy we can occupy her chairs for a while
longer." "Oh, Mamma, why do we not have chairs of our own? It is so embarrassing
to sponge on other people all the time, and the expense of chairs is not
very great," implored Elise. "Nonsense, Elise; I have crossed the ocean innumerable times and never
get chairs. There are always enough seasick people who have to stay in
their bunks, and since I abhor waste, I use their chairs. As you say,
the expense is not very great, but if I do not save in small ways I
cannot make ends meet and keep up appearances and that is most
important, until you see fit to catch a husband." All this was in an aside to her daughter, who seemed accustomed to such
remarks and coolly helped herself to stuffed mangoes without deigning
any reply. But after brooding a few seconds she spoke:

"Do you think that the chair episode on deck before dinner was 'keeping
up appearances' very well?" "And so you have your eye on young Mr. Kinsella, have you?" "Not at all, Mamma, and you know I haven't. In the first place, Pierce
Kinsella is years younger than I am, and while he is tremendously clever
with his brush, he is not the intellectual man I must have or do
without." "Never mind your age. If you do not mind being frank on the subject, you
must have some consideration for me, who am your unwilling mother. No
one will ever believe I was a mere school girl when I married George
O'Brien. If I should not keep up appearances for young Kinsella, who was
it, please? Surely not that Miss Smith!" "Miss Brown, Mamma, Molly Brown. She is a lovely girl and a perfect
lady; and what will have more weight with you, she is a friend of the
Stewarts. Pierce Kinsella told me it was at Mr. Stewart's request that
she and her mother were put next to the Captain and they have the best
stateroom the ship affords." "Ah, dead-heads, I surmise." "Not at all. They had their tickets and stateroom engaged and did not
know of the honor done them until Pierce Kinsella told them himself. I
fancy we are the only dead-heads on board." "Elise, I will not have you be so cynical. Mr. Stewart is a connection
of mine and I am entitled to some consideration from him," snapped the
mother. "Yes, I know, a very close connection: Mr. Huntington's first wife's
cousin-in-law. For that reason, you must have transportation free on a
line of steamers Mr. Stewart is interested in; but you had to send me to
ask for the favor, and I'll tell you now what I did not tell you before
for fear of hurting your feelings, that Mr. Stewart said he was glad to
do it for my sake." The last was a poser for the angry woman, and mother and daughter ceased
their wrangling and devoted themselves to the very good dinner. Poor Molly got to bed as best she could and stayed there twenty-four
hours. She was sure her seasickness was the worst that had ever been
known, but we all feel that. On the second day she was persuaded to go
on deck by her solicitous mother,--who, by the way, was not
uncomfortable one minute,--and as she dropped limply into her steamer
chair, carefully arranged for her by the Kinsellas, she for the first
time had a desire to live. The ocean was a wonderful color, all pearly
gray with little flecks of pink on top of every wave. The sun was
setting in a mist. The wind had died down and there was a delicious
dampness in the air that smelt of salt. "Oh, how glad I am to get up here! All of you are so good to me. It
seems a year since I went to my stateroom and I believe it is only a day
and a night. Has anything happened since I disappeared?" "Nothing," answered Pierce. "The sun and the ship have moved but the
rest of us have just stood still waiting for you to come back. By the
way, this is your sunset, you remember. You forgot to advertise it, so
you have not a very large audience." "Well, if Miss Brown can get up that good a show without even trying,
what couldn't she accomplish if she put her mind on it? I believe I like
yours better than Pierce's," said Mr. Kinsella. "His was so flamboyant,
while yours has a certain reserve and distinction." The conversation went gayly on between uncle and nephew while Mrs. Brown
hovered over her daughter, tucking in the rug and shifting the pillows
for more perfect comfort. Molly smiled a little wanly at first but soon
the good air and gay talk got in their perfect work, and before she knew
it she was laughing outright at some of Pierce's sallies. The color
began to come back into her cheeks. A desire for life grew stronger and
stronger. Mr. Kinsella noticed the change in the girl, and while Mrs.
Brown and Pierce were engaged in an animated discussion on Woman's
Suffrage, Pierce taking the Anti side "just for practice," he slipped
away and soon returned with a tray of dainty food. "Please eat a little something now, Miss Brown. It will put new life in
you and I feel sure you are on the mend and can trust yourself to take
some nourishment. Chicken aspic and dry toast can't hurt you, and I feel
sure it will do you good." "Why, Mr. Kinsella, you are too good to me! How did you know I was
hungry? I was ashamed to say so, but I felt that a little food was all
that was needed to make me perfectly well." And Molly fell to with an
avidity that surprised her mother, who had not been able to persuade her
to take a mouthful all day. "I have seen seasick persons before now," laughed Mr. Kinsella, "and
know by experience that there is a crucial moment when food must be
administered, and then the patient gets well immediately. I noticed you
were laughing, and no one with _mal-de-mer_ can laugh! And then your
color came back, and that is a signal for food, too. I am so glad you
like what I brought you." "Mr. Kinsella, I cannot tell you how grateful I am," said Mrs. Brown. "I
don't wish you to be seasick, but I do wish Molly and I could repay your
kindness in some way." "My dear lady, I am already in your debt for permitting my scape-grace
nephew and me to know you and your daughter. I have had my nose at the
grindstone of business for so many years that I feared it had grown out
of my power to make new friends; but I begin to see that I have not lost
the knack. Perhaps my somber presence is tolerated because of my gay,
jolly boy," and Mr. Kinsella gazed rather wistfully after Pierce, who
had crossed the deck to meet Elise O'Brien, just emerging from the
cabin. "Oh, Mr. Kinsella, you must not think that," eagerly implored Molly. "I
always like serious men better than boys, and besides you are not somber
but full of gaiety and jokes. You are not fair to yourself if you think
people like you only on account of Pierce. He is a delightful boy,
but----"

"But what?" "Don't press her too far, Mr. Kinsella," laughed Mrs. Brown. "She has
already confessed to a penchant to seriousness and finds 'beauty in
extreme old age'," and pinching Molly's blushing cheek, she went over to
join a group of recently made acquaintances who were looking at a
distant sail through an overworked spyglass belonging to one of the
tourists. "What a tease Mother is! But she looks so like my brother Kent when she
teases me that I don't mind. Kent is always teasing and the only reason
I can stand it is that it makes him look like Mother! You see, Kent is
my special beloved brother and you know what my mother is." "Yes, I know," answered Mr. Kinsella, who had sunk into the chair
vacated by Mrs. Brown. "Your mother is a rare woman: beautiful and
honest and tolerant, charming and well-bred, broad-minded and cultured. Eternal youth is in her heart, but she has a character gracefully to
accept the years that Providence has allotted her and that only serve to
make her more lovely. I have no patience with the assumption of extreme
youth in the middle-aged, despite the limerick I have taken for my
motto." "But, Mr. Kinsella, you are not middle-aged," protested Molly. "I never
even think of Mother as being middle-aged. I think that is the ugliest
word in our language, except, maybe, stout. I'd a great deal rather be
called fat and forty than stout and middle-aged!" "Well, it will be many a year before you will be called either, and by
that time you may change your mind. 'A rose by any other name would
smell as sweet,' and, after all, it is being stout and middle-aged that
makes the difference, not being called it." While Molly was having the little chat with Mr. Kinsella, Mrs.
Huntington had come on deck and had approached them from behind. Looking
up, Molly surprised on her face an expression of extreme bitterness, and
she wondered if she had overheard Mr. Kinsella's views on the subject of
the assumption of youth in the middle-aged. "I do hope she didn't,"
thought Molly. "She is so pretty, and it must be hard to give up youth
and to feel your beauty slipping from you. Especially hard when beauty
has been your chief asset in life, as I fancy it has been with Mrs. Huntington." She gave the older woman a polite bow and smile and Mr.
Kinsella formally offered her his chair but with no great cordiality. "Oh, thank you, Tom. And how are you, Miss Brown? I do hope you are
feeling better. My daughter has taken such a fancy to you, she has been
quite _desole_ at your nonappearance all day." "Oh, I am all well again, thanks to Mr. Kinsella's getting me some food
at the psychological moment when health was returning," answered Molly,
wondering at Mrs. Huntington's change of tactics since the evening
before, when she had been so insolent in her bearing to her. "It is
certainly nicer to have her polite to me than rude, whether she means it
or not," she said to herself. "I do wish I had not been sick all day. I
did want to see her first meeting with Mr. Kinsella. I know she had
something to do with his premature grayness and the disappointment that
Pierce hinted at. How coldly polite he is to her now. If a man like that
had ever loved me and then could be so cold to me, I believe it would
kill me," which shows that Molly was very sentimental and on the lookout
for romance. The gong rang for dinner and there was a general move toward the cabin. "Please tell Mother I am all right and will sit here while she is at
dinner, and that she must not hurry. I believe 'discretion would be the
better part of valor' for me and I had better not try to eat anything
more for a while." After the deck was clear except for a few helplessly, hopelessly sick
persons who lay like mummies in their chairs, ranged along the deck,
Molly decided to get up and walk around a little, feeling anxious to try
her sea legs. Then as the wind had shifted, she determined to move her
chair to a sheltered nook behind one of the life-boats. She bundled
herself up in her rug, pulling the corner of it over her head and lay
for all the world like the rest of the mummies. "Only, thank goodness, I
am no longer sick," she thought gratefully. Her soul was at peace, after the night and day of agony, and she dropped
off easily into a doze. She dreamed that she was at home in the old
apple tree that they had called "The Castle" and that Kent was gently
shaking the tree, trying to make her get out so Professor Green could
build his bungalow there; and when she refused and declared it was her
Castle and she intended to stay in it, the Professor himself had come,
with his kind brown eyes looking into hers, and said: "But, Miss Molly,
the bungalow is yours, too, and the Orchard is still your home." She
awoke but lay quite still wondering at the reality of her dream. CHAPTER IV. WHAT MOLLY OVERHEARD. It had grown quite dark. The passengers were evidently still at dinner. A man loomed up close to her and then stopped, evidently unaware of her
presence. Leaning over the rail and gazing into the black depths of
water, he emitted a sigh that seemed to come from his soul. Suddenly a
woman joined him. Molly was still half asleep, thinking of the orchard
at Chatsworth and of what Professor Green's bungalow would look like
among the apple trees. Her thoughts came back to the ship with a bounce
when she heard the woman say:

"Tom, why do you avoid me? Can't you let bygones be bygones?" "That is exactly what I am doing, Mrs. Huntington: letting bygones be
bygones. It seems a useless thing for us to rake up the past." "'Mrs. Huntington' sounds very cold and formal coming from your lips." "Well, I gathered you did not think much of the name of Lizzie since you
have changed your daughter's to Elise." "Oh, Tom, you are cruel!" "Now see here, Mrs. Huntington, I do not want to be rude to you. I have
lived in total ignorance of you and your affairs for twenty-five years,
and since by chance we meet on a steamer, you cannot make me feel that
what I do or say is of the slightest importance to you. You made the
young Tom Kinsella about as miserable as a man could be, but the old Tom
is immune from misery, thank God, and there is no use in trying to get a
flame from the dead ashes of the past. I am very glad to see you again
and especially glad to make the acquaintance of the daughter of my old
friend, George O'Brien." "You forgive George but do not forgive me." "I have nothing to forgive George, and you know it. He was the soul of
honor and had no idea of there being an engagement between us, when he
married you. I am as sure of this as though George himself had told me. In those good old days in Paris when we were all of us art students,
George and I were great chums. I could read him like a book and there
never lived a more honest fellow. "When my father died and his foundry at Newark seemed in a fair way to
be on its last legs for want of management and the family income was in
danger of being decidedly lessened, you persuaded me, in fact, you put
it up to me, to give you up or give up art and go to work and pull the
foundry out of the hole. "Art meant a lot to me, but at the time you meant a lot more. You
remember you would not let me announce our engagement to our friends,
not even to George. "I went back to America and piled into a work, entirely uncongenial, but
determined to win out. Things were in an awful mess because of my
father's long inability to attend to business. My brother Pierce was
still in college and could be of no assistance to me. I had to master
the business from the beginning, learning every detail before I could
put it on the efficiency basis that I knew it must attain before I could
be satisfied. "I wrote you rather discouraged letters, I will admit, but I felt I
could pour out my soul to you and you alone. I knew it would be two or
three years before it would be expedient for us to marry, but my faith
in you was supreme and it never entered my head you would not wait for
me. "When the goal was in sight, you may imagine the shock it gave me when a
casual acquaintance, recently returned from Paris, spoke of having had
such a gay time at your wedding breakfast, given in old George's studio
(the one I used to share with him) by his fellow students. "Not a word from you; later on a letter from George, full of happiness
and your charms and explaining to me how it came about he could marry. He had been one of the poorest among a lot of fellows, where poverty was
the rule and not the exception; but his uncle, the Brooklyn politician,
had died and left him a hundred thousand dollars. That seemed immense
wealth to the Latin Quarter, and there was rejoicing in all of the
ateliers where George O'Brien was a general favorite and Lizzie Peck was
known as the prettiest American girl in the Quarter. "The shock was so great I was like a dead man for weeks, but I never
told a soul of my pitiful love affair. I got over the loss of you as
soon as I could pull myself together enough to think that if you were
the kind who could do as you did, I was well out of it; and George had
my pity and not my envy. But my Art--my Art--nothing can ever make up to
me for giving it up. I could not go back to it, as I had plunged too
deeply into the foundry affairs to pull out, and one cannot serve
business and Art at the same time. Art is too jealous a mistress to
share her lover's time with anything else. I went on with the work and
came out very well. "This is the first real holiday I have had for many years, but I am
determined to have a good time and am not going to let regret prey upon
me." Molly had been a forced listener to this long speech, but she could not
fool herself into thinking she had been an unwilling one. She was
thrilled to the soul by Mr. Kinsella's history. No wonder he was so sad
looking and occasionally so bitter! She was glad he had not truckled to
the spoiled Mrs. Huntington, but had let her know exactly where he
stood. It was not so very chivalrous of him, but she needed a good
mental and moral slap and Mr. Kinsella had administered it as gently as
possible, no doubt. What was Molly to do now? To let them know she was there would make it
horribly embarrassing for all concerned, and still she felt she had
already heard more than she had any business to know. "I'll have to pretend I am asleep and never divulge to a soul, (except
Mother, of course,) that I have overheard this tremendously interesting
conversation." Mrs. Huntington was silenced for a few moments by Mr. Kinsella's
harangue, but finally spoke:

"Tom, you are hard on me. I was very young at the time and had always
been so poor." "That is so, Lizzie. It was hard on you to be so poor; but you were not
so very young. You must have been about the age your daughter is now,
and I fancy you would not excuse much in her because of her youth. You
were two years older than I was in those days." "Brute!" "Mind you, I said 'in those days.' I do not mean you are still two years
older than I am." Molly was sorry that Mr. Kinsella was pushing the poor lady so far. She
made a quick calculation from the evidence in hand and realized that
Mrs. Huntington must be about forty-nine. "Almost as old as Mother! And
just look at her hair and clothes! She looks much younger, and I know it
is hard on her to give up her youth. I do wish Mr. Kinsella had not said
that to her about being two years older than he is! It was not very
kind, even if she did jilt him. It seems a small revenge to me. I wish I
could have made my presence known and then I should not have heard Mr.
Kinsella belittle himself, which I certainly think he did." Poor Mrs. Huntington swallowed her resentment as best she could and
continued the conversation: "There is one thing I should like to ask of
you as a favor, Tom, and that is: please do not tell Elise that her
father and I ever studied art. Not that I ever studied very hard, but
George was certainly much interested and it took a deal of managing to
persuade him to give it up and go into politics. You see, his uncle's
influence was still hot and there were many plums waiting for him. I was
too ignorant in those days to know that it did not necessarily follow
that political jobs brought social success. "George was very successful and doubled his inheritance, but we had no
position at all. He changed a great deal. You would hardly have known
him in his last years. You remember how gay and light-hearted and
good-tempered he always was. Well, he lost it all and became morose and
bitter. Elise was the only person who had any influence on him at all. We had to live in Brooklyn and how I did hate it!" "How long has George been dead?" "Oh, ten years or so. Elise was a mere child and George never spoke to
her of having wished to become an artist. It seemed best to me for her
to live in ignorance of the fact as she is already ridiculously fond of
trying to paint; and if she knew there were any hereditary reasons for
it, there is no telling what stand she would take. I hate the Bohemian
life that artists lead, and now that I have made so many sacrifices for
her to place her in the best society, I have no idea of allowing her to
drop out. "We are received in the most exclusive houses in New York and Newport,
and while our means do not permit us to entertain very largely, our
at-homes are most popular with the Four Hundred. "Elise is very stubborn. She has had several excellent offers but
refuses to consider anyone whom she does not love. George O'Brien was
very sentimental and she has inherited that from him, along with her
love for dabbling." Mr. Kinsella had maintained a grim silence during this heartless speech;
but he now asked: "What sacrifice have you made for your daughter's
welfare, you poor put-upon lady?" "Why, I married Ponsonby Huntington! He had not a _sou_ to his name but
he had the _entree_ into all the fashionable homes in the East. He was a
great expense, but it fully repaid me, as he lived long enough to
establish Elise and me in that society for which we are eminently
fitted. I am deeply grateful to him and his family and do not begrudge
the money, now that he is dead. "I was keen enough not to let him go into my principal very largely. I
am an excellent business woman, Tom, and have managed my affairs
wonderfully well." "So it seems," muttered Mr. Kinsella. "You have evidently satisfied all
your ideals. I am glad to tell you that I have already divulged to Elise
that her father might have become a very good painter, and was
astonished that she was ignorant of the fact that he had ever drawn a
line in his life. I say that I am glad, as I want to talk to George's
daughter about her father, and I cannot think of my old friend, George
O'Brien, as anything but the gay, care-free art student, always ready to
go on a lark and to share his last penny, of which he had very few, with
any needy fellow-student. Don't you ever feel like painting yourself?" "No! I hate the sight of a paint brush, and as for adding in any way to
the ever-increasing flood of poorly painted pictures,--I can at least
claim my innocence of that crime." "Perhaps you are right, but you used to be so clever at catching a
likeness." "Elise has the same power, but I hate to see it in her and never
encourage her by the least praise. Of course you can't understand this
feeling, but I know the girl would fly off at the slightest chance and
live in that shabby Latin Quarter. There, no doubt, she would marry some
down-at-the-heel artist, who would live on her money and go on painting
bad pictures to the end of time; and she would aid and abet him and
paint worse ones herself!" "Elise has money, then?" "The money is all hers except my pitiful third that the law allows me,
and I had to go into that a little to keep Ponsonby Huntington in a good
humor. However, Elise cannot get control of her money until she is
twenty-five and I have several years yet. She is quite equal to throwing
me over in spite of all I have done for her." Mrs. Huntington spoke with
a rancor that was really astounding to Molly, whose own mother was so
different that the girl had an idea that all mothers must have some of
Mrs. Brown's qualities. "Oh, I am sure you are mistaken in judging your daughter thus severely! She must have inherited from George some other traits along with the
artistic talent." "That is just it. She inherited from him this very tendency to be hard
on me. Was it kind or right for George to leave all the money to her;
and to me, his devoted and long-suffering wife, nothing more than the
law exacted? My only hope is that she may marry a man rich enough to
make a handsome settlement on me. One who will have money enough not to
regard Elise's fortune at all, except, perhaps, to realize the necessity
of turning it over to me. Now tell me: do you think the Latin Quarter a
likely place for a girl to find such a husband?" "Oh, I don't know. You did pretty well there, and if you had waited for
me, you might have done even better from a financial standpoint, as I
have been very successful as the world takes it. Perhaps poor little
Elise might have equal luck. Oh, Lizzie, Lizzie, how changed you are! You have spoken only of money and position and society; never once of
love and humanity. I can't bear to see you this way. When I think of you
as a girl with your soft, sweet manner and no more worldliness than a
kitten, I can hardly bear to contemplate this change in you." "Oh la, la, Tom, you and I know that a kitten only takes a year to grow
into a horrid cat, and as you so brutally and frankly put it, I have had
about twenty-five years to grow and sharpen my claws. You struck this
note first in our conversation. I was prepared to be as nice as you once
thought me, but I saw how cynical you had grown and I knew there was no
use in putting on; so I have rather enjoyed showing you my true self. Anyhow, you are grateful to me for throwing you over, now that you see
what I am. Is it not so?" Mr. Kinsella did not answer for a moment, but finally said, changing the
subject: "There is one thing I am going to ask of you for auld lang syne
and I think maybe you will grant it: let Elise put in this winter in a
good studio in Paris. She is hungry for a long period of uninterrupted
work and I know it will soften her toward you instead of hardening her;
and I feel sure that when the dreaded twenty-fifth birthday arrives, she
will want to settle half of the fortune on you. Do this for me, Lizzie. I guarantee it will come out well for you." Mrs. Huntington hesitated for a moment and then by a quick calculation
came to the conclusion that it would be a good thing, after all, and
would leave her free to go where she chose. She well knew how cheaply a
girl could board in Paris when she was at work in a studio, and, as Tom
said, there was every chance of her picking up a rich husband among the
students. There were always some young men who were rolling in wealth,
but still had the artistic bee in their bonnets. "I'll do it, Tom, but if it turns out badly I'll have you to thank." "Lizzie, now you are more like your old self and I am grateful to you
for this concession. Come, let us find Elise and tell her the good
news." Molly was indeed glad to have the interview over. It was against her
whole honest nature to eavesdrop, but she felt it best for all concerned
for her to remain quiet. As soon as Mr. Kinsella and Mrs. Huntington had
disappeared, Molly beat a hasty retreat to her stateroom where her
mother was looking for her, not being able to find her on deck. "Oh, Mother, I am so excited!" And she told Mrs. Brown all about her
forced concealment during the intimate conversation between the old
lovers. "It is very interesting, certainly, and I hardly know how you could help
being a listener. Since it will go no farther, as of course neither of
us will ever mention the matter to a soul, it will do no harm. I wish
you had not had to hear it, however, as I hate for my Molly to realize
that such women as Mrs. Huntington exist, so cold and selfish and
worldly. I am glad poor Elise is to be allowed to stay in Paris all
winter and work. Perhaps we can make up to her some for her mother's
heartlessness." So mother and daughter kissed and went to bed; Molly waked the next
morning with no trace of seasickness, ready and eager to enjoy the rest
of the voyage. The trip was delightful to both mother and daughter. They made many
acquaintances on board, but Elise O'Brien and the two Kinsellas they
counted among their real friends. So closely were the five thrown
together on the voyage, that they often said it seemed as though they
had known one another all their lives. Mrs. Huntington kept to herself
much of the time. She seemed to realize that it was policy to let Elise
have as good a time as she could with her father's old friend and his
nephew; and since the Browns seemed to have influential and wealthy
friends, they could, at least, do her daughter no harm, and might even
prove useful during the girl's sojourn in Paris. Elise bloomed in this congenial atmosphere and did not look like the
same girl. She had a ready wit, was quick at repartee, and after a while
her tongue lost its bitterness and her sarcastic humor became much more
genial. Mr. Kinsella would often say: "That is like your father. He had the
kindest humor in the world and was truly Irish in his wit." But when she
was too critical or inclined to let her wit run away with her heart, he
would shake his head and look sad; and the girl began to care what her
father's friend thought of her, and tried to please him. She had liked Molly from the minute they clasped hands when Pierce
introduced them, and this liking grew to enthusiastic love. She had had
few intimates and this friendship was wonderful to her. Mr. Kinsella
realized the importance of this wholesome influence on his charge, (he
had made Elise his charge ever since he wrung from her mother the
promise to let her continue her studies in art), and he did everything
to throw the girls together and give them opportunities to talk their
eager girls' talk. "I hate to think of the journey coming to an end," said Molly. "It has
been splendid; but if the trip is nearly over, our friendship has just
begun! And what times we can have in Paris! Isn't it great that you and
Judy know each other and that the three of us are so congenial?" Elise looked sad. "Yes, it is fine, but I know you and Judy will want me
out of the way. You are such old friends, and I shall always feel like
an interloper." "Oh, Elise, Elise! You must not feel that way for an instant. Judy and I
love each other a whole lot, but we are not a bit inclined to pair off
and not make new friends. Judy is more than likely already to have begun
a big affair of friendship with somebody. She will get so thick with
that one that she will have no time for anyone else; and then she will
find out the person is not the paragon she had imagined and come weeping
back to me," said Molly, throwing her arm around Elise and giving her a
warm hug. "Well, let's enjoy the few hours left to us. It seems hardly possible
that this is the same, stupid old boat that we boarded a little over
a week ago. I hated it, our stuffy stateroom, the crowded table;
and then I always dread a long voyage with Mamma. She gets so cross
and overbearing when she is cut off from society and amusements
and----" Elise stopped suddenly. She felt Molly's friendly arm growing
slack around her waist and she realized that her new friends, the Browns,
could not tolerate her impertinent remarks to and about her mother. "Oh,
Molly, please excuse me. I am trying to be nicer about Mamma. It is
awfully ill-bred of me to speak of her in that way, no matter how I
feel." "Elise, why don't you try to feel differently and then it would be
impossible for you to speak so?" "Oh, Molly, I will try." And it shows she was already trying, for she
did not add what was in her heart to say, "If you only knew my mother
you would not ask that of me." CHAPTER V.

PARIS. "Judy! Judy! I can't believe that we are really here, that this is
Paris, and that you are you! As for me, I feel like 'there was an old
woman as I've heard tell' who said 'Lawk a mercy on me, this surely
can't be I.'" Molly settled herself with a sigh of supreme enjoyment on the lumpy seat
of an extremely rickety taxi that Judy had engaged to take the Browns
from the station to Mrs. Pace's very exclusive pension on the Boulevard
St. Michel. "It does seem almost too good to be true that I have got you and your
dear mother at last. I have not been able to work for a week because of
the excitement of expectation. I went over to Monroe's this morning and
got your mail. I could hardly lug it home, both of you had such a batch. You see, the mail has beaten your slow steamer in and everyone is
writing to have a greeting ready for you in Paris." And Judy, who was in
the middle, put embracing arms around both Mrs. Brown and Molly as they
rode down the Avenue de l'Opera. How wonderful Paris looked to them on that clear, crisp day in autumn! She was showing her best and most smiling aspect to the travelers, which
delighted Judy, as she felt quite responsible for her beloved city and
wanted her friends to like it as much as she did. They passed various
points of interest which Judy pointed out with pride, and which brought
answering thrills from Mrs. Brown and Molly. The streets were gay with little pushcarts, laden with chrysanthemums
and attended by the most delightful looking old women. Everyone seemed
to be in a good humor and no one in much of a hurry except the
chauffeurs, and they went whizzing by at a most incredible speed through
the crowded thoroughfares. "How clean the streets are!" exclaimed Mrs. Brown. "And what a good
smell!" "Oh, I just wondered if you would notice the smell! That is Paris. 'Every city has an odor of its own,' Papa says, and I believe he is
right. Paris smells better than New York, although I like the smell in
New York, too; but Paris has a strange freshness in its odor that
reminds me of flowers and good things to eat, and suggests gay times,
rollicking fun and adventure." "Same old Judy," laughed Molly, "with her imagination on tap." Just then they ran under the arches of the Louvre into the Place du
Carrousel, and Molly held her breath with wonder and delight. Then came
the Seine with its beautiful bridges, its innumerable boats, and its
quays with the historic secondhand book stalls where Edwin Green had
looked forward to walking with her, searching for treasures of first
editions and what not. "Never mind," thought Molly, "Professor Green may
come later and the first editions will keep." "There is the wonderful statue of Voltaire, and through this street you
can catch a glimpse of the Beaux Arts," chanted Judy. "Now look out, for
before you know it we will be in the aristocratic Faubourg St.
Germain,--and then the Luxembourg Gardens,--and here we are at our own
respectable door before we are ready for it! Now Mrs. Pace will eat both
of you up for a while and I cannot get a word in edgewise." The Pension Pace was on the corner where a small street ran into the
broad boulevard at a sharp angle, making the building wedge-shaped. It
was a very imposing looking house and Mrs. Brown wondered at a woman
being able to conduct such a huge affair. She expressed her surprise to
Judy, who informed her that Mrs. Pace had only the three upper floors
and that the other flats were let to different tenants. "The elevator takes us to the fifth floor, where Mrs. Pace has her
parlors, dining salon and swellest boarders,--at least the boarders able
to pay the most. Of course _we_ do not think that they are the swellest,
since we are on the seventh floor ourselves. Who so truly swell as we?" Judy got out of the taxi with such an assumption of great style that the
chauffeur, much impressed, demanded a larger _pourboire_ than she saw
fit to give him. "They always try to make you pay more, no matter what you offer. I am
adamant, however, where cabbies and chauffeurs are concerned. Papa says,
'Look after the tips and the legitimate expenses will look after
themselves.' So I look after the tips and trust to luck for the rest to
come out right. I am not much of an economist, I fear, but I am
learning, now that I am on a strict allowance." An elevator, so slow that its progress was almost imperceptible, took
them to the fifth floor where Mrs. Pace was in readiness to receive
them. Her greeting was very cordial and condescending. She seemed to be
taking them under her protecting wing, giving them to understand that
with her they had nothing more to fear or worry about; and as Molly and
her mother had nothing in particular to worry about and certainly
nothing to fear, they were very much amused by her attitude toward them. Judy was purple with suppressed merriment as Mrs. Pace advised them to
go right to bed, to rest up from their long journey, poor sick,
miserable, friendless females. Mrs. Brown assured her that she was not at all tired and never felt
better in her life; that she had made many friends on the steamer; and
that she would freshen up a bit with some soap and water and then go out
for a walk with Miss Julia Kean. Mrs. Brown had reckoned without her
host, however, as the intrepid Mrs. Pace took them to their room on the
seventh floor, just across the hall from Judy's, and did not leave them
until they were in their kimonos and actually lying down. "You must not try to keep up, dear ladies, when you are overfatigued and
ill. Bed is the best place for you, bed and quiet. Miss Kean had better
leave you now and let you have a little nap." While Mrs. Pace talked, she had plumped up their pillows and lowered the
shade of the one large window, opened their suitcases and got out their
kimonos and, despite their feeble protest, had actually undressed them
and put them to bed! Then, forcibly ejecting Judy, she shut the door
with admonitions for them to sleep until dinner at six-thirty. Judy went very dutifully to her room until she heard the last of Mrs.
Pace's ponderous tread on the stairs; then she crept softly to the
Browns' door and gently opened it to find Mrs. Brown and Molly rolling
on the bed, overcome with laughter. "Oh, oh, oh! She has taken at least forty-five years off of my age,"
giggled Mrs. Brown like a veritable boarding-school miss. "I have never
in my life seen such a born boss as the redoubtable Mrs. Pace! Did you
see her undo my belt and take off my skirt? I could not have felt more
like a child if my waist had been a pinafore instead of a respectable
black silk. And as for Molly, she was treated as though she were just
about old enough to go into rompers." And they all went off into peals
of laughter. "Well, now is the time to take a stand or you will never be able to,"
said Judy. "I defied her from the first and she lets me alone
wonderfully." "Yes, I noticed how you withstood her authority when you were sent to
your room!" grinned Molly, as she got back into the clothes that had
been forcibly removed only five minutes before. "I see you have sneaked
in our letters and I, for one, am going to read mine, and then if we can
get down stairs without the dragon devouring us, let's take a walk. We
shall have plenty of time before dinner." They accordingly read their letters and crept down stairs and out on the
street for a breath of air and a stroll in the Luxembourg Gardens. It
was too late to try to see the pictures in the Gallery of the Luxembourg
and, after all, they had the winter before them. And now that she was
out on the street, having escaped the dragon, Mrs. Brown confessed to
feeling a little mite tired, so they sat down on a bench in the Gardens
and watched the children play. "Poor Mrs. Brown, of course you are tired! That is the most irritating
thing about Mrs. Pace: she is always right. 'It is best to rest after a
trip whether you feel tired or not, as the reaction after a journey is
obliged to come, and you pay up for it to-morrow if you do not rest
to-day'," and Judy imitated Mrs. Pace to the life. "Well, you may be sure, my dear girls, that wild horses will not drag
the fact from me in the presence of the dragon, even if I am weary unto
death. Does she coerce all her boarders as she did me, Judy?" "Most of them are completely under her dominion, finding it easiest and
best to take the course of least resistance. Some few rebel, but they
usually end by moving on. If you stay at the Pension Pace and wish to
"_requiescat in pace_," you do as she says to do. I have defied her from
the first and now I am rated as an undesirable boarder. Had it not been
that she was wild to have you with her because of your relationship to
the Marquise d'Ochte, she would have raised some cock and bull story
about my room having been engaged by someone a year ago and, since her
honor was at stake, she would have to ask me to vacate. "I tell you she is a sly one. You must either have lots and loads of
money, or you must do as she says, do--or die. Of course she has an
excellent house in a most desirable quarter and she caters to Americans. You will notice that the food is much more American than French; and
after people have been knocking around the Continent, of course they are
overjoyed to have some food that seems like home." "But I don't want American food," wailed Molly. "I want French things,
even snails; and I want to learn how to ask for these things in the most
Frenchy style. What is the use in coming to Paris and staying with a
stuffy old dame from Philadelphia and eating the things we have at
home?" "Oh, I am so glad you feel that way! How about you, Mrs. Brown? Papa and
Mamma made me promise to do just as you thought best. They put me in
Mrs. Pace's house and I have been determined not to worry them about
changing, but I am 'most dead of her and her ways. Do say you think we
ought to go to housekeeping or should get in a French family; anything
to get out of the dragon's den," pleaded Judy. "For how long did you engage our room?" asked Mrs. Brown, smiling at
Judy's despair. "One week; and mine, also, is taken by the week. She tried to make Papa
sign for the whole winter, but he was on to her from the first and
refused to do more than take it from week to week. He and Mamma stayed
here a few days on their way to Turkey, and you would have died laughing
if you had seen Mrs. Pace try to make Papa 'Fletcherize.' You know he
always eats as though the train would not wait. At every meal she
remarked on it and one day said at dinner: 'This is veal, Mr. Kean, and
should be thoroughly masticated.' Whereupon he put down his knife and
fork and, looking her solemnly in the eye, said: 'That is good advice no
doubt for ordinary mortals, but after long years in railroad camps I
have acquired a gizzard.' With that he took a great piece of _blanquette
de veau_ and to all appearances swallowed it whole without changing his
expression. I choked so I had to leave the table and I believe Mrs.
Pace, to this day, thinks that by a skillful legerdemain I swallowed the
veal! Anyhow, Bobby ate to suit himself after that." "Oh, Judy, how ridiculous you are! I wish I could have seen Mr. Kean
execute his daring feat," laughed Molly. "Mother, let's look around for
an apartment and go to housekeeping immediately. I am sorry we told
Elise O'Brien about Mrs. Pace's. I can't bear for her to be anywhere
that is not pleasant. She has had tribulations enough in her day." Judy had not yet heard anything of their fellow passengers, as they had
been so occupied with Paris and the pension that they had had no time to
tell her of their voyage and the pleasant people they had met. She was
much interested in the fact that Miss O'Brien was to be at the art
school for the winter and said she was a girl of undoubted talent. As
for young Kinsella, he was the cleverest draughtsman at the League. "Do you girls think you like Elise enough to have her come to live with
us for the winter?" asked Mrs. Brown. "I feel sure the poor girl would
be happy, and if you would all fit in together and be congenial, I
really think it would be an act of charity to ask her. We must consider
it from all sides before we rush into it, however." "Mother, it would be splendid!" declared Molly. "I believe Mrs.
Huntington was dying for you to ask Elise, but of course had to wait for
you to suggest it. We could divide the expenses into four parts and I
know it would be cheaper than boarding and infinitely more agreeable." "Mrs. Brown, I am sure we should get on like a house afire, and it does
seem as though we might take Elise in and give her a pleasant home. I
promise to be real good and get on with everybody, if I can only know I
am to leave the _Maison Pace_ in peace," promised Judy. So it was decided by these three impulsive souls to take in Elise
O'Brien and to get a flat forthwith and leave the sheltering wing of the
dragon. Mrs. Brown thought it best to stay a fortnight in their present
quarters so they could look well about them; she also wanted to see her
old friend and cousin, the Marquise d'Ochte, for if she were anything
like the Sally Bolling of old, she felt sure she could depend on her for
some assistance in the matter of getting settled. "Of course, she may have changed so, after being married to a French
nobleman for some twenty-eight years, that I will hesitate to ask
anything of her; but I have an idea old Sally could not change. I
remember her as being a great harum-scarum but with the best heart in
the world, and absolutely honest and unaffected. My experience is that
honest, unaffected people do not change in the long run." "What did she look like, Mother?" asked Molly. "Well, when I come to think of it, she looked a little like you. She is
only my second cousin, once removed, not such very close kin; but this
red hair of yours comes cropping out in every generation or so in my
family and the similar coloring makes one fancy a likeness even if there
is none; but Sally had your eyes and your chin. She took life much more
lightly than my Molly does, saw a jest where none was intended and
sometimes cracked a joke when seriousness would have been in better
taste. I have not seen her for many years and she stopped corresponding
with all of us; not that there was any disagreement, but letter-writing
simply died a natural death, as time went on. I am greatly interested in
seeing her." Mrs. Brown also decided to let Mr. Kinsella approach the O'Briens in
regard to having Elise live with her. She was very well aware of Mrs.
Huntington's nature and felt that that lady would be fully capable of
treating her as though Elise were necessary to the housekeeping scheme
to help out the financial end; and Mrs. Brown was determined to have no
one with her as a boarder, but to run the _menage_ on a co-operative
principle, letting all of them share the expense. Mrs. Huntington and Elise had stopped in Brussels for a visit with some
friends and Mr. Kinsella and Pierce were still in Antwerp getting their
fill of the pictures to be seen there. They were uncertain how long it
would take them to grow tired of the interesting Belgian city and could
not tell just when their friends might expect them in Paris. When the three renegades returned from their walk in the Luxembourg
Gardens, they hoped to reach their rooms without being seen by Mrs.
Pace, but that lady's motto was "Eternal Vigilance," and no one went out
of her house or came in unobserved. She met them as they stepped off the
elevator on the fifth floor and gently but firmly admonished them for
their disobedience. Molly noticed her mother's heightening color and her
quivering nostrils and remembered with a smile what Aunt Mary, their old
cook, always said to them when they were children: "Ole Miss is long
suffrin' an' slow to anger but when her nose gits to wuckin', you
chillun ought to learn that she done had 'nuf and you had better make
yo'sefs scurse." Peace-loving Molly drew Mrs. Brown's arm through her
own and gently pressing it, led her upstairs. "Thank you, my dear, I was on the verge of attacking the dragon, and
since we are to be here two weeks, I must not do anything to make it
more difficult. But did you ever see anyone more impertinent?" asked
Mrs. Brown, still sniffing the battle from afar. "Never," sympathized Judy. "I wish you had said your say. I believe you
could get ahead of the fabulous monster in open combat. She is, after
all, a very flabby, fabulous monster and one prick would do for her." CHAPTER VI. LA MARQUISE. "_La Marquise d'Ochte_ is attending _Madame Brune_ in the _salon au
cinquieme etage_," announced a very excited little housemaid, who was
supposed to speak English for the benefit of the American pensionnaires
at _Maison Pace_. "_Madame Pace_ is some time gone at the _boucher_, not
expecting callers at so early _heur_. _La Marquise_ demanded not _Madame
Pace_; but said very _distinctment 'Madame Brune et sa fille'_." "Very well, Alphonsine, thank you so much. My daughter and I will come
down immediately," said Mrs. Brown, smiling at the agitation of the
little maid. Mrs. Pace had evidently given her servants to understand
the importance her pension gained from the visits of a marchioness. "Milly, Milly, how I have longed to see you," and the Marquise d'Ochte
rose from her seat and clasped her one-time friend and beloved cousin in
a warm embrace. "And this is your daughter? Goodness, child, you look
like me,--at least, like me when I was young!" Molly knew in the first second of greeting that she was going to like
this cousin, and Mrs. Brown was delighted to see in the marchioness the
same Sally Bolling of thirty years ago. She was like Molly in a way, but
it was hard to realize that Molly could ever be quite so buxom as this
middle-aged cousin. She was a very large woman with an excellent figure
for her weight, and hair a little darker than Molly's with no silver
threads showing so far. "I pull 'em out if they dare to so much as show their noses. They say
forty will come in when you pull out one, but then I'll make my maid
pull out forty, if it kills me in the pulling," she declared when Mrs.
Brown remarked on it in the course of their inventory of each other. "My
Jean declares he got caught in my hair and could not get away, and I
mean still to keep him." "I am afraid I would snatch myself bald-headed if I tried to pull all of
my gray hairs out," laughed Mrs. Brown; "but, Sally, you are exactly the
same girl who left Kentucky ages ago; there is just a little more of
you." "A little more of me, indeed! There is about twice as much of me as
there used to be. But, Milly, you are exactly the same; there is not
even any more of you. You look much more like a member of the French
nobility than I do." The marchioness did not look in the least French, but more like a
well-groomed English woman. Her dark brown suit was very simple and well
made, and her shoes bore the earmarks of an English boot maker, fitting
her perfectly but with low heels, broad toes and heavy soles. Her hat
was the only French touch about her, and that could have been concocted
in no spot in the world but Paris, so perfectly did it blend with her
hair and furs. "Now tell me all about yourselves and what you are going to do with your
winter, and we can 'reminisce' another time. We must hurry before Henny
Pace gets back from market. I came early so as to avoid her and see you
a moment alone. She is a kind, good soul and I am really very fond of
her for auld lang syne, but you might as well try to hold a conversation
with a bumping bug in the room as Henrietta. Firstly, do you mean to
stay here?" Molly and her mother laughed outright at the bumping bug comparison. It
was very apt. "Why, Cousin Sally, we could not think of spending the winter being
coerced at every turn," returned Molly. "We were hardly in the house
before Mrs. Pace actually took Mother's clothes off and put her to bed,
and last night at dinner she refused to let me have any coffee. She said
it would ruin my complexion!" The marchioness roared with laughter. "How like old Henny that is! She
always was a boss, but I don't blame you for objecting. I let her seem
to boss me just for the fun of it. I have known her since first coming
to Paris and understand how good she is at bottom, but wild horses could
not drag me to spend a night in her house. I ask her to _la Roche Craie_
every year and try to give her a rest, (she really works awfully hard,)
but she is so busy there trying to change my housekeeper's methods and
rearrange the linen presses that she gets very little rest after all. Jean cannot stand her, but my son Philippe sees the good in her that I
have brought him up to see; and then he clings to any and everything
American. I am anxious for you to know my husband and son and for them
to meet you. Do you know French?" "Mother speaks better French than I do in spite of my work at college,"
confessed Molly. "Well, I studied French with the old time method more as we study Latin,
and while my accent is vile, my verbs are all right. I am going to try
to brace up in accent, and Molly and Judy are endeavoring to perfect
themselves in grammar. But you have not met our friend Judy, Miss Julia
Kean," said Mrs. Brown. "No, I have not, but from all the complaints Henny Pace has made of her,
I know she must be charming. When Henny gives a boarder a good
character, I know without meeting her that she is some spineless old
maid who is afraid to call her soul her own, or that she is a hypocrite
like me who wants peace at any price. Now she tells me that Miss Kean is
head-strong, self-willed, flippant, slangy, ill-bred, inconsiderate----"

"Oh, how could she tell such things?" interrupted Molly. "Why, Cousin
Sally, Judy is splendid! She is independent and knows her own mind, and
all of us are a little slangy, I am afraid; but she is very well-bred
and Mother says the most considerate visitor she has ever had." "Well, child, her report of your friend had no effect on me but to make
me want to meet the young lady, so I can judge for myself. I want you
and your mother to come and dine with us this evening at six-thirty and
to bring Miss Kean with you. We will go to the opera to hear _Louise_. It is wonderful and I know you will like it," and la Marquise d'Ochte
smiled on her young Kentucky cousin and pressed her hand, pleased to see
how she could speak up for her friend. "We shall be delighted to come," said Mrs. Brown, "and I know Judy will
appeal to you. She is a dear child and as free from affectation as you
yourself. Now, Sally, tell me how we must go to work to find an
apartment and where we should settle ourselves. We are far from affluent
and want something inexpensive but, of course, respectable. Judy is to
be with us; also a Miss Elise O'Brien, whose acquaintance we made on the
steamer. You know so many persons, I wonder if you ever met her mother:
she was a Miss Lizzie Peck, who married a young artist, George O'Brien,
some twenty-five years ago here in Paris. At his death she married Mr. Huntington." "Know Lizzie Peck? I should say I did,--the outrageous piece! You see,
before Jean succeeded to the estate and before I had my windfall from
Aunt Sarah Carmichael, we lived in a very small way and our principal
society was in Bohemia. At that time Lizzie Peck was the beauty of the
Latin Quarter. She was supposed to be studying art, and indeed she was
quite clever. But she was such a belle and so busy drawing young men to
her, that she did not give much time to any other drawing. George
O'Brien was much too good for her in every way. He was one of the
wittiest men I ever knew and good nature itself. It is to be hoped that
the daughter Elise inherited a disposition from him and not from the
flirtatious Lizzie. Jean always insisted that there was an understanding
between Tom Kinsella and Lizzie, but I hardly think a man as keen as Tom
could ever have been taken in by the likes of Lizzie," and the
marchioness got up preparatory to making her departure. "Why, Mother, to think of Cousin Sally's knowing Mr. Kinsella, too! You
liked him, didn't you, Cousin Sally?" asked Molly eagerly. "He was on
our steamer and so kind to us." "Yes, my dear, I liked him very much and should like to see him again,
and so would my Jean. I fancy a great many persons are kind to my little
cousin," and she pinched Molly's blushing cheek. "Now, Milly, don't
worry for one moment about an apartment as I am almost sure I know of a
place that will just suit you. It is a studio apartment on the Rue Brea,
just across the Luxembourg Garden from here. It belongs to an American
artist named Bent. He and his wife are going to Italy for the winter and
would be delighted to rent it furnished, I am sure. It is very superior
to many of the studios in the Latin Quarter as it has a bathroom. But I
am not going to tell you any more about it until I find out if you can
get it, what the price is, and just what sleeping accommodations it has. I have my limousine at the door and shall go immediately to the Rue
Brea, and to-night when you come to us for dinner I can tell you more. _Au revoir_, then, my long lost cousin," and she kissed Mrs. Brown on
both cheeks. "That is the first Frenchy thing she has done yet," thought Molly; and
then when the elevator had slowly descended out of hearing distance she
remarked to her mother: "How could anyone live in a foreign country for
almost thirty years and stay so exactly like 'home folks'? Cousin
Sally's accent is much more southern than yours and mine. Did you notice
her 'sure' was almost 'sho' and she spoke of Lizzie Peck's dra-a-win'
young men? I love her for keeping the same. And oh what fun to be going
there to dinner! I can hardly wait for Judy to come home from the studio
to tell her." 