













To The Last Man


by

Zane Grey





FOREWORD

It was inevitable that in my efforts to write romantic history of the
great West I should at length come to the story of a feud. For long I
have steered clear of this rock. But at last I have reached it and
must go over it, driven by my desire to chronicle the stirring events
of pioneer days. Even to-day it is not possible to travel into the remote corners of the
West without seeing the lives of people still affected by a fighting
past. How can the truth be told about the pioneering of the West if
the struggle, the fight, the blood be left out? It cannot be done. How can a novel be stirring and thrilling, as were those times, unless
it be full of sensation? My long labors have been devoted to making
stories resemble the times they depict. I have loved the West for its
vastness, its contrast, its beauty and color and life, for its wildness
and violence, and for the fact that I have seen how it developed great
men and women who died unknown and unsung. In this materialistic age, this hard, practical, swift, greedy age of
realism, it seems there is no place for writers of romance, no place
for romance itself. For many years all the events leading up to the
great war were realistic, and the war itself was horribly realistic,
and the aftermath is likewise. Romance is only another name for
idealism; and I contend that life without ideals is not worth living. Never in the history of the world were ideals needed so terribly as
now. Walter Scott wrote romance; so did Victor Hugo; and likewise
Kipling, Hawthorne, Stevenson. It was Stevenson, particularly, who
wielded a bludgeon against the realists. People live for the dream in
their hearts. And I have yet to know anyone who has not some secret
dream, some hope, however dim, some storied wall to look at in the
dusk, some painted window leading to the soul. How strange indeed to
find that the realists have ideals and dreams! To read them one would
think their lives held nothing significant. But they love, they hope,
they dream, they sacrifice, they struggle on with that dream in their
hearts just the same as others. We all are dreamers, if not in the
heavy-lidded wasting of time, then in the meaning of life that makes us
work on. It was Wordsworth who wrote, "The world is too much with us"; and if I
could give the secret of my ambition as a novelist in a few words it
would be contained in that quotation. My inspiration to write has
always come from nature. Character and action are subordinated to
setting. In all that I have done I have tried to make people see how
the world is too much with them. Getting and spending they lay waste
their powers, with never a breath of the free and wonderful life of the
open! So I come back to the main point of this foreword, in which I am trying
to tell why and how I came to write the story of a feud notorious in
Arizona as the Pleasant Valley War. Some years ago Mr. Harry Adams, a cattleman of Vermajo Park, New
Mexico, told me he had been in the Tonto Basin of Arizona and thought I
might find interesting material there concerning this Pleasant Valley
War. His version of the war between cattlemen and sheepmen certainly
determined me to look over the ground. My old guide, Al Doyle of
Flagstaff, had led me over half of Arizona, but never down into that
wonderful wild and rugged basin between the Mogollon Mesa and the
Mazatzal Mountains. Doyle had long lived on the frontier and his
version of the Pleasant Valley War differed markedly from that of Mr.
Adams. I asked other old timers about it, and their remarks further
excited my curiosity. Once down there, Doyle and I found the wildest, most rugged, roughest,
and most remarkable country either of us had visited; and the few
inhabitants were like the country. I went in ostensibly to hunt bear
and lion and turkey, but what I really was hunting for was the story of
that Pleasant Valley War. I engaged the services of a bear hunter who
had three strapping sons as reserved and strange and aloof as he was. No wheel tracks of any kind had ever come within miles of their cabin. I spent two wonderful months hunting game and reveling in the beauty
and grandeur of that Rim Rock country, but I came out knowing no more
about the Pleasant Valley War. These Texans and their few neighbors,
likewise from Texas, did not talk. But all I saw and felt only
inspired me the more. This trip was in the fall of 1918. The next year I went again with the best horses, outfit, and men the
Doyles could provide. And this time I did not ask any questions. But I
rode horses--some of them too wild for me--and packed a rifle many a
hundred miles, riding sometimes thirty and forty miles a day, and I
climbed in and out of the deep canyons, desperately staying at the
heels of one of those long-legged Texans. I learned the life of those
backwoodsmen, but I did not get the story of the Pleasant Valley War. I had, however, won the friendship of that hardy people. In 1920 I went back with a still larger outfit, equipped to stay as
long as I liked. And this time, without my asking it, different
natives of the Tonto came to tell me about the Pleasant Valley War. No
two of them agreed on anything concerning it, except that only one of
the active participants survived the fighting. Whence comes my title,
TO THE LAST MAN. Thus I was swamped in a mass of material out of which
I could only flounder to my own conclusion. Some of the stories told
me are singularly tempting to a novelist. But, though I believe them
myself, I cannot risk their improbability to those who have no idea of
the wildness of wild men at a wild time. There really was a terrible
and bloody feud, perhaps the most deadly and least known in all the
annals of the West. I saw the ground, the cabins, the graves, all so
darkly suggestive of what must have happened. I never learned the truth of the cause of the Pleasant Valley War, or
if I did hear it I had no means of recognizing it. All the given
causes were plausible and convincing. Strange to state, there is still
secrecy and reticence all over the Tonto Basin as to the facts of this
feud. Many descendents of those killed are living there now. But no
one likes to talk about it. Assuredly many of the incidents told me
really occurred, as, for example, the terrible one of the two women, in
the face of relentless enemies, saving the bodies of their dead
husbands from being devoured by wild hogs. Suffice it to say that this
romance is true to my conception of the war, and I base it upon the
setting I learned to know and love so well, upon the strange passions
of primitive people, and upon my instinctive reaction to the facts and
rumors that I gathered. ZANE GREY. AVALON, CALIFORNIA,
    April, 1921



CHAPTER I

At the end of a dry, uphill ride over barren country Jean Isbel
unpacked to camp at the edge of the cedars where a little rocky canyon
green with willow and cottonwood, promised water and grass. His animals were tired, especially the pack mule that had carried a
heavy load; and with slow heave of relief they knelt and rolled in the
dust. Jean experienced something of relief himself as he threw off his
chaps. He had not been used to hot, dusty, glaring days on the barren
lands. Stretching his long length beside a tiny rill of clear water
that tinkled over the red stones, he drank thirstily. The water was
cool, but it had an acrid taste--an alkali bite that he did not like. Not since he had left Oregon had he tasted clear, sweet, cold water;
and he missed it just as he longed for the stately shady forests he had
loved. This wild, endless Arizona land bade fair to earn his hatred. By the time he had leisurely completed his tasks twilight had fallen
and coyotes had begun their barking. Jean listened to the yelps and to
the moan of the cool wind in the cedars with a sense of satisfaction
that these lonely sounds were familiar. This cedar wood burned into a
pretty fire and the smell of its smoke was newly pleasant. "Reckon maybe I'll learn to like Arizona," he mused, half aloud. "But
I've a hankerin' for waterfalls an' dark-green forests. Must be the
Indian in me.... Anyway, dad needs me bad, an' I reckon I'm here for
keeps." Jean threw some cedar branches on the fire, in the light of which he
opened his father's letter, hoping by repeated reading to grasp more of
its strange portent. It had been two months in reaching him, coming by
traveler, by stage and train, and then by boat, and finally by stage
again. Written in lead pencil on a leaf torn from an old ledger, it
would have been hard to read even if the writing had been more legible. "Dad's writin' was always bad, but I never saw it so shaky," said Jean,
thinking aloud. GRASS VALLY, ARIZONA. Son Jean,--Come home. Here is your home and here your needed. When we left Oregon we all reckoned you would not be long behind. But its years now. I am growing old, son, and you was always my
   steadiest boy. Not that you ever was so dam steady. Only your
   wildness seemed more for the woods. You take after mother, and
   your brothers Bill and Guy take after me. That is the red and
   white of it. Your part Indian, Jean, and that Indian I reckon
   I am going to need bad. I am rich in cattle and horses. And my
   range here is the best I ever seen. Lately we have been losing
   stock. But that is not all nor so bad. Sheepmen have moved into
   the Tonto and are grazing down on Grass Vally. Cattlemen and
   sheepmen can never bide in this country. We have bad times ahead. Reckon I have more reasons to worry and need you, but you must wait
   to hear that by word of mouth. Whatever your doing, chuck it and
   rustle for Grass Vally so to make here by spring. I am asking you
   to take pains to pack in some guns and a lot of shells. And hide
   them in your outfit. If you meet anyone when your coming down into
   the Tonto, listen more than you talk. And last, son, dont let
   anything keep you in Oregon. Reckon you have a sweetheart, and
   if so fetch her along. With love from your dad,

   GASTON ISBEL. Jean pondered over this letter. Judged by memory of his father, who
had always been self-sufficient, it had been a surprise and somewhat of
a shock. Weeks of travel and reflection had not helped him to grasp
the meaning between the lines. "Yes, dad's growin' old," mused Jean, feeling a warmth and a sadness
stir in him. "He must be 'way over sixty. But he never looked old.... So he's rich now an' losin' stock, an' goin' to be sheeped off his
range. Dad could stand a lot of rustlin', but not much from sheepmen." The softness that stirred in Jean merged into a cold, thoughtful
earnestness which had followed every perusal of his father's letter. A
dark, full current seemed flowing in his veins, and at times he felt it
swell and heat. It troubled him, making him conscious of a deeper,
stronger self, opposed to his careless, free, and dreamy nature. No
ties had bound him in Oregon, except love for the great, still forests
and the thundering rivers; and this love came from his softer side. It
had cost him a wrench to leave. And all the way by ship down the coast
to San Diego and across the Sierra Madres by stage, and so on to this
last overland travel by horseback, he had felt a retreating of the self
that was tranquil and happy and a dominating of this unknown somber
self, with its menacing possibilities. Yet despite a nameless regret
and a loyalty to Oregon, when he lay in his blankets he had to confess
a keen interest in his adventurous future, a keen enjoyment of this
stark, wild Arizona. It appeared to be a different sky stretching in
dark, star-spangled dome over him--closer, vaster, bluer. The strong
fragrance of sage and cedar floated over him with the camp-fire smoke,
and all seemed drowsily to subdue his thoughts. At dawn he rolled out of his blankets and, pulling on his boots, began
the day with a zest for the work that must bring closer his calling
future. White, crackling frost and cold, nipping air were the same
keen spurs to action that he had known in the uplands of Oregon, yet
they were not wholly the same. He sensed an exhilaration similar to
the effect of a strong, sweet wine. His horse and mule had fared well
during the night, having been much refreshed by the grass and water of
the little canyon. Jean mounted and rode into the cedars with gladness
that at last he had put the endless leagues of barren land behind him. The trail he followed appeared to be seldom traveled. It led,
according to the meager information obtainable at the last settlement,
directly to what was called the Rim, and from there Grass Valley could
be seen down in the Basin. The ascent of the ground was so gradual
that only in long, open stretches could it be seen. But the nature of
the vegetation showed Jean how he was climbing. Scant, low, scraggy
cedars gave place to more numerous, darker, greener, bushier ones, and
these to high, full-foliaged, green-berried trees. Sage and grass in
the open flats grew more luxuriously. Then came the pinyons, and
presently among them the checker-barked junipers. Jean hailed the
first pine tree with a hearty slap on the brown, rugged bark. It was a
small dwarf pine struggling to live. The next one was larger, and
after that came several, and beyond them pines stood up everywhere
above the lower trees. Odor of pine needles mingled with the other dry
smells that made the wind pleasant to Jean. In an hour from the first
line of pines he had ridden beyond the cedars and pinyons into a slowly
thickening and deepening forest. Underbrush appeared scarce except in
ravines, and the ground in open patches held a bleached grass. Jean's
eye roved for sight of squirrels, birds, deer, or any moving creature. It appeared to be a dry, uninhabited forest. About midday Jean halted
at a pond of surface water, evidently melted snow, and gave his animals
a drink. He saw a few old deer tracks in the mud and several huge bird
tracks new to him which he concluded must have been made by wild
turkeys. The trail divided at this pond. Jean had no idea which branch he ought
to take. "Reckon it doesn't matter," he muttered, as he was about to
remount. His horse was standing with ears up, looking back along the
trail. Then Jean heard a clip-clop of trotting hoofs, and presently
espied a horseman. Jean made a pretense of tightening his saddle girths while he peered
over his horse at the approaching rider. All men in this country were
going to be of exceeding interest to Jean Isbel. This man at a
distance rode and looked like all the Arizonians Jean had seen, he had
a superb seat in the saddle, and he was long and lean. He wore a huge
black sombrero and a soiled red scarf. His vest was open and he was
without a coat. The rider came trotting up and halted several paces from Jean

"Hullo, stranger!" he said, gruffly. "Howdy yourself!" replied Jean. He felt an instinctive importance in
the meeting with the man. Never had sharper eyes flashed over Jean and
his outfit. He had a dust-colored, sun-burned face, long, lean, and
hard, a huge sandy mustache that hid his mouth, and eyes of piercing
light intensity. Not very much hard Western experience had passed by
this man, yet he was not old, measured by years. When he dismounted
Jean saw he was tall, even for an Arizonian. "Seen your tracks back a ways," he said, as he slipped the bit to let
his horse drink. "Where bound?" "Reckon I'm lost, all right," replied Jean. "New country for me." "Shore. I seen thet from your tracks an' your last camp. Wal, where
was you headin' for before you got lost?" The query was deliberately cool, with a dry, crisp ring. Jean felt the
lack of friendliness or kindliness in it. "Grass Valley. My name's Isbel," he replied, shortly. The rider attended to his drinking horse and presently rebridled him;
then with long swing of leg he appeared to step into the saddle. "Shore I knowed you was Jean Isbel," he said. "Everybody in the Tonto
has heerd old Gass Isbel sent fer his boy." "Well then, why did you ask?" inquired Jean, bluntly. "Reckon I wanted to see what you'd say." "So? All right. But I'm not carin' very much for what YOU say." Their glances locked steadily then and each measured the other by the
intangible conflict of spirit. "Shore thet's natural," replied the rider. His speech was slow, and
the motions of his long, brown hands, as he took a cigarette from his
vest, kept time with his words. "But seein' you're one of the Isbels,
I'll hev my say whether you want it or not. My name's Colter an' I'm
one of the sheepmen Gass Isbel's riled with." "Colter. Glad to meet you," replied Jean. "An' I reckon who riled my
father is goin' to rile me." "Shore. If thet wasn't so you'd not be an Isbel," returned Colter,
with a grim little laugh. "It's easy to see you ain't run into any
Tonto Basin fellers yet. Wal, I'm goin' to tell you thet your old man
gabbed like a woman down at Greaves's store. Bragged aboot you an' how
you could fight an' how you could shoot an' how you could track a hoss
or a man! Bragged how you'd chase every sheep herder back up on the
Rim.... I'm tellin' you because we want you to git our stand right. We're goin' to run sheep down in Grass Valley." "Ahuh! Well, who's we?" queried Jean, curtly. "What-at? ... We--I mean the sheepmen rangin' this Rim from Black Butte
to the Apache country." "Colter, I'm a stranger in Arizona," said Jean, slowly. "I know little
about ranchers or sheepmen. It's true my father sent for me. It's
true, I dare say, that he bragged, for he was given to bluster an'
blow. An' he's old now. I can't help it if he bragged about me. But
if he has, an' if he's justified in his stand against you sheepmen, I'm
goin' to do my best to live up to his brag." "I get your hunch. Shore we understand each other, an' thet's a
powerful help. You take my hunch to your old man," replied Colter, as
he turned his horse away toward the left. "Thet trail leadin' south is
yours. When you come to the Rim you'll see a bare spot down in the
Basin. Thet 'll be Grass Valley." He rode away out of sight into the woods. Jean leaned against his
horse and pondered. It seemed difficult to be just to this Colter, not
because of his claims, but because of a subtle hostility that emanated
from him. Colter had the hard face, the masked intent, the turn of
speech that Jean had come to associate with dishonest men. Even if Jean
had not been prejudiced, if he had known nothing of his father's
trouble with these sheepmen, and if Colter had met him only to exchange
glances and greetings, still Jean would never have had a favorable
impression. Colter grated upon him, roused an antagonism seldom felt. "Heigho!" sighed the young man, "Good-by to huntin' an' fishing'! Dad's
given me a man's job." With that he mounted his horse and started the pack mule into the
right-hand trail. Walking and trotting, he traveled all afternoon,
toward sunset getting into heavy forest of pine. More than one snow
bank showed white through the green, sheltered on the north slopes of
shady ravines. And it was upon entering this zone of richer, deeper
forestland that Jean sloughed off his gloomy forebodings. These
stately pines were not the giant firs of Oregon, but any lover of the
woods could be happy under them. Higher still he climbed until the
forest spread before and around him like a level park, with thicketed
ravines here and there on each side. And presently that deceitful
level led to a higher bench upon which the pines towered, and were
matched by beautiful trees he took for spruce. Heavily barked, with
regular spreading branches, these conifers rose in symmetrical shape to
spear the sky with silver plumes. A graceful gray-green moss, waved
like veils from the branches. The air was not so dry and it was
colder, with a scent and touch of snow. Jean made camp at the first
likely site, taking the precaution to unroll his bed some little
distance from his fire. Under the softly moaning pines he felt
comfortable, having lost the sense of an immeasurable open space
falling away from all around him. The gobbling of wild turkeys awakened Jean, "Chuga-lug, chug-a-lug,
chug-a-lug-chug." There was not a great difference between the gobble
of a wild turkey and that of a tame one. Jean got up, and taking his
rifle went out into the gray obscurity of dawn to try to locate the
turkeys. But it was too dark, and finally when daylight came they
appeared to be gone. The mule had strayed, and, what with finding it
and cooking breakfast and packing, Jean did not make a very early
start. On this last lap of his long journey he had slowed down. He was
weary of hurrying; the change from weeks in the glaring sun and
dust-laden wind to this sweet coot darkly green and brown forest was
very welcome; he wanted to linger along the shaded trail. This day he
made sure would see him reach the Rim. By and by he lost the trail. It had just worn out from lack of use. Every now and then Jean would
cross an old trail, and as he penetrated deeper into the forest every
damp or dusty spot showed tracks of turkey, deer, and bear. The amount
of bear sign surprised him. Presently his keen nostrils were assailed
by a smell of sheep, and soon he rode into a broad sheep, trail. From
the tracks Jean calculated that the sheep had passed there the day
before. An unreasonable antipathy seemed born in him. To be sure he had been
prepared to dislike sheep, and that was why he was unreasonable. But
on the other hand this band of sheep had left a broad bare swath,
weedless, grassless, flowerless, in their wake. Where sheep grazed
they destroyed. That was what Jean had against them. An hour later he rode to the crest of a long parklike slope, where new
green grass was sprouting and flowers peeped everywhere. The pines
appeared far apart; gnarled oak trees showed rugged and gray against
the green wall of woods. A white strip of snow gleamed like a moving
stream away down in the woods. Jean heard the musical tinkle of bells and the baa-baa of sheep and the
faint, sweet bleating of lambs. As he road toward these sounds a dog
ran out from an oak thicket and barked at him. Next Jean smelled a
camp fire and soon he caught sight of a curling blue column of smoke,
and then a small peaked tent. Beyond the clump of oaks Jean
encountered a Mexican lad carrying a carbine. The boy had a swarthy,
pleasant face, and to Jean's greeting he replied, "BUENAS DIAS." Jean
understood little Spanish, and about all he gathered by his simple
queries was that the lad was not alone--and that it was "lambing time." This latter circumstance grew noisily manifest. The forest seemed
shrilly full of incessant baas and plaintive bleats. All about the
camp, on the slope, in the glades, and everywhere, were sheep. A few
were grazing; many were lying down; most of them were ewes suckling
white fleecy little lambs that staggered on their feet. Everywhere
Jean saw tiny lambs just born. Their pin-pointed bleats pierced the
heavier baa-baa of their mothers. Jean dismounted and led his horse down toward the camp, where he rather
expected to see another and older Mexican, from whom he might get
information. The lad walked with him. Down this way the plaintive
uproar made by the sheep was not so loud. "Hello there!" called Jean, cheerfully, as he approached the tent. No
answer was forthcoming. Dropping his bridle, he went on, rather
slowly, looking for some one to appear. Then a voice from one side
startled him. "Mawnin', stranger." A girl stepped out from beside a pine. She carried a rifle. Her face
flashed richly brown, but she was not Mexican. This fact, and the
sudden conviction that she had been watching him, somewhat disconcerted
Jean. "Beg pardon--miss," he floundered. "Didn't expect, to see a--girl.... I'm sort of lost--lookin' for the Rim--an' thought I'd find a sheep
herder who'd show me. I can't savvy this boy's lingo." While he spoke it seemed to him an intentness of expression, a strain
relaxed from her face. A faint suggestion of hostility likewise
disappeared. Jean was not even sure that he had caught it, but there
had been something that now was gone. "Shore I'll be glad to show y'u," she said. "Thanks, miss. Reckon I can breathe easy now," he replied,

"It's a long ride from San Diego. Hot an' dusty! I'm pretty tired. An' maybe this woods isn't good medicine to achin' eyes!" "San Diego! Y'u're from the coast?" "Yes." Jean had doffed his sombrero at sight of her and he still held it,
rather deferentially, perhaps. It seemed to attract her attention. "Put on y'ur hat, stranger.... Shore I can't recollect when any man
bared his haid to me." She uttered a little laugh in which surprise
and frankness mingled with a tint of bitterness. Jean sat down with his back to a pine, and, laying the sombrero by his
side, he looked full at her, conscious of a singular eagerness, as if
he wanted to verify by close scrutiny a first hasty impression. If
there had been an instinct in his meeting with Colter, there was more
in this. The girl half sat, half leaned against a log, with the shiny
little carbine across her knees. She had a level, curious gaze upon
him, and Jean had never met one just like it. Her eyes were rather a
wide oval in shape, clear and steady, with shadows of thought in their
amber-brown depths. They seemed to look through Jean, and his gaze
dropped first. Then it was he saw her ragged homespun skirt and a few
inches of brown, bare ankles, strong and round, and crude worn-out
moccasins that failed to hide the shapeliness, of her feet. Suddenly
she drew back her stockingless ankles and ill-shod little feet. When
Jean lifted his gaze again he found her face half averted and a stain
of red in the gold tan of her cheek. That touch of embarrassment
somehow removed her from this strong, raw, wild woodland setting. It
changed her poise. It detracted from the curious, unabashed, almost
bold, look that he had encountered in her eyes. "Reckon you're from Texas," said Jean, presently. "Shore am," she drawled. She had a lazy Southern voice, pleasant to
hear. "How'd y'u-all guess that?" "Anybody can tell a Texan. Where I came from there were a good many
pioneers an' ranchers from the old Lone Star state. I've worked for
several. An', come to think of it, I'd rather hear a Texas girl talk
than anybody." "Did y'u know many Texas girls?" she inquired, turning again to face
him. "Reckon I did--quite a good many." "Did y'u go with them?" "Go with them? Reckon you mean keep company. Why, yes, I guess I
did--a little," laughed Jean. "Sometimes on a Sunday or a dance once
in a blue moon, an' occasionally a ride." "Shore that accounts," said the girl, wistfully. "For what?" asked Jean. "Y'ur bein' a gentleman," she replied, with force. "Oh, I've not
forgotten. I had friends when we lived in Texas.... Three years ago. Shore it seems longer. Three miserable years in this damned country!" Then she bit her lip, evidently to keep back further unwitting
utterance to a total stranger. And it was that biting of her lip that
drew Jean's attention to her mouth. It held beauty of curve and
fullness and color that could not hide a certain sadness and
bitterness. Then the whole flashing brown face changed for Jean. He
saw that it was young, full of passion and restraint, possessing a
power which grew on him. This, with her shame and pathos and the fact
that she craved respect, gave a leap to Jean's interest. "Well, I reckon you flatter me," he said, hoping to put her at her ease
again. "I'm only a rough hunter an' fisherman-woodchopper an' horse
tracker. Never had all the school I needed--nor near enough company of
nice girls like you." "Am I nice?" she asked, quickly. "You sure are," he replied, smiling. "In these rags," she demanded, with a sudden flash of passion that
thrilled him. "Look at the holes." She showed rips and worn-out
places in the sleeves of her buckskin blouse, through which gleamed a
round, brown arm. "I sew when I have anythin' to sew with.... Look at
my skirt--a dirty rag. An' I have only one other to my name.... Look!" Again a color tinged her cheeks, most becoming, and giving the lie to
her action. But shame could not check her violence now. A dammed-up
resentment seemed to have broken out in flood. She lifted the ragged
skirt almost to her knees. "No stockings! No Shoes! ... How can a
girl be nice when she has no clean, decent woman's clothes to wear?" "How--how can a girl..." began Jean. "See here, miss, I'm beggin' your
pardon for--sort of stirrin' you to forget yourself a little. Reckon I
understand. You don't meet many strangers an' I sort of hit you
wrong--makin' you feel too much--an' talk too much. Who an' what you
are is none of my business. But we met.... An' I reckon somethin' has
happened--perhaps more to me than to you.... Now let me put you
straight about clothes an' women. Reckon I know most women love nice
things to wear an' think because clothes make them look pretty that
they're nicer or better. But they're wrong. You're wrong. Maybe it 'd
be too much for a girl like you to be happy without clothes. But you
can be--you axe just as nice, an'--an' fine--an', for all you know, a
good deal more appealin' to some men." "Stranger, y'u shore must excuse my temper an' the show I made of
myself," replied the girl, with composure. "That, to say the least,
was not nice. An' I don't want anyone thinkin' better of me than I
deserve. My mother died in Texas, an' I've lived out heah in this wild
country--a girl alone among rough men. Meetin' y'u to-day makes me see
what a hard lot they are--an' what it's done to me." Jean smothered his curiosity and tried to put out of his mind a growing
sense that he pitied her, liked her. "Are you a sheep herder?" he asked. "Shore I am now an' then. My father lives back heah in a canyon. He's
a sheepman. Lately there's been herders shot at. Just now we're short
an' I have to fill in. But I like shepherdin' an' I love the woods,
and the Rim Rock an' all the Tonto. If they were all, I'd shore be
happy." "Herders shot at!" exclaimed Jean, thoughtfully. "By whom? An' what
for?" "Trouble brewin' between the cattlemen down in the Basin an' the
sheepmen up on the Rim. Dad says there'll shore be hell to pay. I tell
him I hope the cattlemen chase him back to Texas." "Then--  Are you on the ranchers' side?" queried Jean, trying to
pretend casual interest. "No. I'll always be on my father's side," she replied, with spirit. "But I'm bound to admit I think the cattlemen have the fair side of the
argument." "How so?" "Because there's grass everywhere. I see no sense in a sheepman goin'
out of his way to surround a cattleman an' sheep off his range. That
started the row. Lord knows how it'll end. For most all of them heah
are from Texas." "So I was told," replied Jean. "An' I heard' most all these Texans got
run out of Texas. Any truth in that?" "Shore I reckon there is," she replied, seriously. "But, stranger, it
might not be healthy for y'u to, say that anywhere. My dad, for one,
was not run out of Texas. Shore I never can see why he came heah. He's
accumulated stock, but he's not rich nor so well off as he was back
home." "Are you goin' to stay here always?" queried Jean, suddenly. "If I do so it 'll be in my grave," she answered, darkly. "But what's
the use of thinkin'? People stay places until they drift away. Y'u
can never tell.... Well, stranger, this talk is keepin' y'u." She seemed moody now, and a note of detachment crept into her voice. Jean rose at once and went for his horse. If this girl did not desire
to talk further he certainly had no wish to annoy her. His mule had
strayed off among the bleating sheep. Jean drove it back and then led
his horse up to where the girl stood. She appeared taller and, though
not of robust build, she was vigorous and lithe, with something about
her that fitted the place. Jean was loath to bid her good-by. "Which way is the Rim?" he asked, turning to his saddle girths. "South," she replied, pointing. "It's only a mile or so. I'll walk
down with y'u.... Suppose y'u're on the way to Grass Valley?" "Yes; I've relatives there," he returned. He dreaded her next
question, which he suspected would concern his name. But she did not
ask. Taking up her rifle she turned away. Jean strode ahead to her
side. "Reckon if you walk I won't ride." So he found himself beside a girl with the free step of a Mountaineer. Her bare, brown head came up nearly to his shoulder. It was a small,
pretty head, graceful, well held, and the thick hair on it was a shiny,
soft brown. She wore it in a braid, rather untidily and tangled, he
thought, and it was tied with a string of buckskin. Altogether her
apparel proclaimed poverty. Jean let the conversation languish for a little. He wanted to think
what to say presently, and then he felt a rather vague pleasure in
stalking beside her. Her profile was straight cut and exquisite in
line. From this side view the soft curve of lips could not be seen. She made several attempts to start conversation, all of which Jean
ignored, manifestly to her growing constraint. Presently Jean, having
decided what he wanted to say, suddenly began: "I like this adventure. Do you?" "Adventure! Meetin' me in the woods?" And she laughed the laugh of
youth. "Shore you must be hard up for adventure, stranger." "Do you like it?" he persisted, and his eyes searched the half-averted
face. "I might like it," she answered, frankly, "if--if my temper had not
made a fool of me. I never meet anyone I care to talk to. Why should
it not be pleasant to run across some one new--some one strange in this
heah wild country?" "We are as we are," said Jean, simply. "I didn't think you made a fool
of yourself. If I thought so, would I want to see you again?" "Do y'u?" The brown face flashed on him with surprise, with a light he
took for gladness. And because he wanted to appear calm and friendly,
not too eager, he had to deny himself the thrill of meeting those
changing eyes. "Sure I do. Reckon I'm overbold on such short acquaintance. But I
might not have another chance to tell you, so please don't hold it
against me." This declaration over, Jean felt relief and something of exultation. He
had been afraid he might not have the courage to make it. She walked
on as before, only with her head bowed a little and her eyes downcast. No color but the gold-brown tan and the blue tracery of veins showed in
her cheeks. He noticed then a slight swelling quiver of her throat;
and he became alive to its graceful contour, and to how full and
pulsating it was, how nobly it set into the curve of her shoulder. Here in her quivering throat was the weakness of her, the evidence of
her sex, the womanliness that belied the mountaineer stride and the
grasp of strong brown hands on a rifle. It had an effect on Jean
totally inexplicable to him, both in the strange warmth that stole over
him and in the utterance he could not hold back. "Girl, we're strangers, but what of that? We've met, an' I tell you it
means somethin' to me. I've known girls for months an' never felt this
way. I don't know who you are an' I don't care. You betrayed a good
deal to me. You're not happy. You're lonely. An' if I didn't want to
see you again for my own sake I would for yours. Some things you said
I'll not forget soon. I've got a sister, an' I know you have no
brother. An' I reckon ..."

At this juncture Jean in his earnestness and quite without thought
grasped her hand. The contact checked the flow of his speech and
suddenly made him aghast at his temerity. But the girl did not make
any effort to withdraw it. So Jean, inhaling a deep breath and trying
to see through his bewilderment, held on bravely. He imagined he felt
a faint, warm, returning pressure. She was young, she was friendless,
she was human. By this hand in his Jean felt more than ever the
loneliness of her. Then, just as he was about to speak again, she
pulled her hand free. "Heah's the Rim," she said, in her quaint Southern drawl. "An' there's
Y'ur Tonto Basin." Jean had been intent only upon the girl. He had kept step beside her
without taking note of what was ahead of him. At her words he looked
up expectantly, to be struck mute. He felt a sheer force, a downward drawing of an immense abyss beneath
him. As he looked afar he saw a black basin of timbered country, the
darkest and wildest he had ever gazed upon, a hundred miles of blue
distance across to an unflung mountain range, hazy purple against the
sky. It seemed to be a stupendous gulf surrounded on three sides by
bold, undulating lines of peaks, and on his side by a wall so high that
he felt lifted aloft on the run of the sky. "Southeast y'u see the Sierra Anchas," said the girl pointing. "That
notch in the range is the pass where sheep are driven to Phoenix an'
Maricopa. Those big rough mountains to the south are the Mazatzals. Round to the west is the Four Peaks Range. An' y'u're standin' on the
Rim." Jean could not see at first just what the Rim was, but by shifting his
gaze westward he grasped this remarkable phenomenon of nature. For
leagues and leagues a colossal red and yellow wall, a rampart, a
mountain-faced cliff, seemed to zigzag westward. Grand and bold were
the promontories reaching out over the void. They ran toward the
westering sun. Sweeping and impressive were the long lines slanting
away from them, sloping darkly spotted down to merge into the black
timber. Jean had never seen such a wild and rugged manifestation of
nature's depths and upheavals. He was held mute. "Stranger, look down," said the girl. Jean's sight was educated to judge heights and depths and distances. This wall upon which he stood sheered precipitously down, so far that
it made him dizzy to look, and then the craggy broken cliffs merged
into red-slided, cedar-greened slopes running down and down into gorges
choked with forests, and from which soared up a roar of rushing waters. Slope after slope, ridge beyond ridge, canyon merging into canyon--so
the tremendous bowl sunk away to its black, deceiving depths, a
wilderness across which travel seemed impossible. "Wonderful!" exclaimed Jean. "Indeed it is!" murmured the girl. "Shore that is Arizona. I reckon I
love THIS. The heights an' depths--the awfulness of its wilderness!" "An' you want to leave it?" "Yes an' no. I don't deny the peace that comes to me heah. But not
often do I see the Basin, an' for that matter, one doesn't live on
grand scenery." "Child, even once in a while--this sight would cure any misery, if you
only see. I'm glad I came. I'm glad you showed it to me first." She too seemed under the spell of a vastness and loneliness and beauty
and grandeur that could not but strike the heart. Jean took her hand again. "Girl, say you will meet me here," he said,
his voice ringing deep in his ears. "Shore I will," she replied, softly, and turned to him. It seemed then
that Jean saw her face for the first time. She was beautiful as he had
never known beauty. Limned against that scene, she gave it life--wild,
sweet, young life--the poignant meaning of which haunted yet eluded
him. But she belonged there. Her eyes were again searching his, as if
for some lost part of herself, unrealized, never known before. Wondering, wistful, hopeful, glad-they were eyes that seemed surprised,
to reveal part of her soul. Then her red lips parted. Their tremulous movement was a magnet to
Jean. An invisible and mighty force pulled him down to kiss them. Whatever the spell had been, that rude, unconscious action broke it. He jerked away, as if he expected to be struck. "Girl--I--I"--he gasped
in amaze and sudden-dawning contrition--"I kissed you--but I swear it
wasn't intentional--I never thought...."

The anger that Jean anticipated failed to materialize. He stood,
breathing hard, with a hand held out in unconscious appeal. By the
same magic, perhaps, that had transfigured her a moment past, she was
now invested again by the older character. "Shore I reckon my callin' y'u a gentleman was a little previous," she
said, with a rather dry bitterness. "But, stranger, yu're sudden." "You're not insulted?" asked Jean, hurriedly. "Oh, I've been kissed before. Shore men are all alike." "They're not," he replied, hotly, with a subtle rush of disillusion, a
dulling of enchantment. "Don't you class me with other men who've
kissed you. I wasn't myself when I did it an' I'd have gone on my
knees to ask your forgiveness.... But now I wouldn't--an' I wouldn't
kiss you again, either--even if you--you wanted it." Jean read in her strange gaze what seemed to him a vague doubt, as if
she was questioning him. "Miss, I take that back," added Jean, shortly. "I'm sorry. I didn't
mean to be rude. It was a mean trick for me to kiss you. A girl alone
in the woods who's gone out of her way to be kind to me! I don't know
why I forgot my manners. An' I ask your pardon." She looked away then, and presently pointed far out and down into the
Basin. "There's Grass Valley. That long gray spot in the black. It's about
fifteen miles. Ride along the Rim that way till y'u cross a trail. Shore y'u can't miss it. Then go down." "I'm much obliged to you," replied Jean, reluctantly accepting what he
regarded as his dismissal. Turning his horse, he put his foot in the
stirrup, then, hesitating, he looked across the saddle at the girl. Her
abstraction, as she gazed away over the purple depths suggested
loneliness and wistfulness. She was not thinking of that scene spread
so wondrously before her. It struck Jean she might be pondering a
subtle change in his feeling and attitude, something he was conscious
of, yet could not define. "Reckon this is good-by," he said, with hesitation. "ADIOS, SENOR," she replied, facing him again. She lifted the little
carbine to the hollow of her elbow and, half turning, appeared ready to
depart. "Adios means good-by?" he queried. "Yes, good-by till to-morrow or good-by forever. Take it as y'u like." "Then you'll meet me here day after to-morrow?" How eagerly he spoke,
on impulse, without a consideration of the intangible thing that had
changed him! "Did I say I wouldn't?" "No. But I reckoned you'd not care to after--" he replied, breaking
off in some confusion. "Shore I'll be glad to meet y'u. Day after to-morrow about
mid-afternoon. Right heah. Fetch all the news from Grass Valley." "All right. Thanks. That'll be--fine," replied Jean, and as he spoke
he experienced a buoyant thrill, a pleasant lightness of enthusiasm,
such as always stirred boyishly in him at a prospect of adventure. Before it passed he wondered at it and felt unsure of himself. He
needed to think. "Stranger shore I'm not recollectin' that y'u told me who y'u are," she
said. "No, reckon I didn't tell," he returned. "What difference does that
make? I said I didn't care who or what you are. Can't you feel the
same about me?" "Shore--I felt that way," she replied, somewhat non-plussed, with the
level brown gaze steadily on his face. "But now y'u make me think." "Let's meet without knowin' any more about each other than we do now." "Shore. I'd like that. In this big wild Arizona a girl--an' I reckon
a man--feels so insignificant. What's a name, anyhow? Still, people
an' things have to be distinguished. I'll call y'u 'Stranger' an' be
satisfied--if y'u say it's fair for y'u not to tell who y'u are." "Fair! No, it's not," declared Jean, forced to confession. "My name's
Jean--Jean Isbel." "ISBEL!" she exclaimed, with a violent start. "Shore y'u can't be son
of old Gass Isbel.... I've seen both his sons." "He has three," replied Jean, with relief, now the secret was out. "I'm
the youngest. I'm twenty-four. Never been out of Oregon till now. On
my way--"

The brown color slowly faded out of her face, leaving her quite pale,
with eyes that began to blaze. The suppleness of her seemed to stiffen. "My name's Ellen Jorth," she burst out, passionately. "Does it mean
anythin' to y'u?" "Never heard it in my life," protested Jean. "Sure I reckoned you
belonged to the sheep raisers who 're on the outs with my father. That's why I had to tell you I'm Jean Isbel.... Ellen Jorth. It's
strange an' pretty.... Reckon I can be just as good a--a friend to
you--"

"No Isbel, can ever be a friend to me," she said, with bitter coldness. Stripped of her ease and her soft wistfulness, she stood before him one
instant, entirely another girl, a hostile enemy. Then she wheeled and
strode off into the woods. Jean, in amaze, in consternation, watched her swiftly draw away with
her lithe, free step, wanting to follow her, wanting to call to her;
but the resentment roused by her suddenly avowed hostility held him
mute in his tracks. He watched her disappear, and when the
brown-and-green wall of forest swallowed the slender gray form he
fought against the insistent desire to follow her, and fought in vain. CHAPTER II

But Ellen Jorth's moccasined feet did not leave a distinguishable trail
on the springy pine needle covering of the ground, and Jean could not
find any trace of her. A little futile searching to and fro cooled his impulse and called
pride to his rescue. Returning to his horse, he mounted, rode out
behind the pack mule to start it along, and soon felt the relief of
decision and action. Clumps of small pines grew thickly in spots on
the Rim, making it necessary for him to skirt them; at which times he
lost sight of the purple basin. Every time he came back to an opening
through which he could see the wild ruggedness and colors and
distances, his appreciation of their nature grew on him. Arizona from
Yuma to the Little Colorado had been to him an endless waste of
wind-scoured, sun-blasted barrenness. This black-forested rock-rimmed
land of untrodden ways was a world that in itself would satisfy him. Some instinct in Jean called for a lonely, wild land, into the
fastnesses of which he could roam at will and be the other strange self
that he had always yearned to be but had never been. Every few moments there intruded into his flowing consciousness the
flashing face of Ellen Jorth, the way she had looked at him, the things
she had said. "Reckon I was a fool," he soliloquized, with an acute
sense of humiliation. "She never saw how much in earnest I was." And
Jean began to remember the circumstances with a vividness that
disturbed and perplexed him. The accident of running across such a girl in that lonely place might
be out of the ordinary--but it had happened. Surprise had made him
dull. The charm of her appearance, the appeal of her manner, must have
drawn him at the very first, but he had not recognized that. Only at
her words, "Oh, I've been kissed before," had his feelings been checked
in their heedless progress. And the utterance of them had made a
difference he now sought to analyze. Some personality in him, some
voice, some idea had begun to defend her even before he was conscious
that he had arraigned her before the bar of his judgment. Such defense
seemed clamoring in him now and he forced himself to listen. He
wanted, in his hurt pride, to justify his amazing surrender to a sweet
and sentimental impulse. He realized now that at first glance he should have recognized in her
look, her poise, her voice the quality he called thoroughbred. Ragged
and stained apparel did not prove her of a common sort. Jean had known
a number of fine and wholesome girls of good family; and he remembered
his sister. This Ellen Jorth was that kind of a girl irrespective of
her present environment. Jean championed her loyally, even after he
had gratified his selfish pride. It was then--contending with an intangible and stealing glamour, unreal
and fanciful, like the dream of a forbidden enchantment--that Jean
arrived at the part in the little woodland drama where he had kissed
Ellen Jorth and had been unrebuked. Why had she not resented his
action? Dispelled was the illusion he had been dreamily and nobly
constructing. "Oh, I've been kissed before!" The shock to him now
exceeded his first dismay. Half bitterly she had spoken, and wholly
scornful of herself, or of him, or of all men. For she had said all
men were alike. Jean chafed under the smart of that, a taunt every
decent man hated. Naturally every happy and healthy young man would
want to kiss such red, sweet lips. But if those lips had been for
others--never for him! Jean reflected that not since childish games
had he kissed a girl--until this brown-faced Ellen Jorth came his way. He wondered at it. Moreover, he wondered at the significance he placed
upon it. After all, was it not merely an accident? Why should he
remember? Why should he ponder? What was the faint, deep, growing
thrill that accompanied some of his thoughts? Riding along with busy mind, Jean almost crossed a well-beaten trail,
leading through a pine thicket and down over the Rim. Jean's pack mule
led the way without being driven. And when Jean reached the edge of
the bluff one look down was enough to fetch him off his horse. That
trail was steep, narrow, clogged with stones, and as full of sharp
corners as a crosscut saw. Once on the descent with a packed mule and
a spirited horse, Jean had no time for mind wanderings and very little
for occasional glimpses out over the cedar tops to the vast blue hollow
asleep under a westering sun. The stones rattled, the dust rose, the cedar twigs snapped, the little
avalanches of red earth slid down, the iron-shod hoofs rang on the
rocks. This slope had been narrow at the apex in the Rim where the
trail led down a crack, and it widened in fan shape as Jean descended. He zigzagged down a thousand feet before the slope benched into
dividing ridges. Here the cedars and junipers failed and pines once
more hid the sun. Deep ravines were black with brush. From somewhere
rose a roar of running water, most pleasant to Jean's ears. Fresh deer
and bear tracks covered old ones made in the trail. Those timbered ridges were but billows of that tremendous slope that
now sheered above Jean, ending in a magnificent yellow wall of rock,
greened in niches, stained by weather rust, carved and cracked and
caverned. As Jean descended farther the hum of bees made melody, the
roar of rapid water and the murmur of a rising breeze filled him with
the content of the wild. Sheepmen like Colter and wild girls like
Ellen Jorth and all that seemed promising or menacing in his father's
letter could never change the Indian in Jean. So he thought. Hard
upon that conclusion rushed another--one which troubled with its
stinging revelation. Surely these influences he had defied were just
the ones to bring out in him the Indian he had sensed but had never
known. The eventful day had brought new and bitter food for Jean to
reflect upon. The trail landed him in the bowlder-strewn bed of a wide canyon, where
the huge trees stretched a canopy of foliage which denied the sunlight,
and where a beautiful brook rushed and foamed. Here at last Jean
tasted water that rivaled his Oregon springs. "Ah," he cried, "that
sure is good!" Dark and shaded and ferny and mossy was this streamway;
and everywhere were tracks of game, from the giant spread of a grizzly
bear to the tiny, birdlike imprints of a squirrel. Jean heard familiar
sounds of deer crackling the dead twigs; and the chatter of squirrels
was incessant. This fragrant, cool retreat under the Rim brought back
to him the dim recesses of Oregon forests. After all, Jean felt that
he would not miss anything that he had loved in the Cascades. But what
was the vague sense of all not being well with him--the essence of a
faint regret--the insistence of a hovering shadow? And then flashed
again, etched more vividly by the repetition in memory, a picture of
eyes, of lips--of something he had to forget. Wild and broken as this rolling Basin floor had appeared from the Rim,
the reality of traveling over it made that first impression a deceit of
distance. Down here all was on a big, rough, broken scale. Jean did
not find even a few rods of level ground. Bowlders as huge as houses
obstructed the stream bed; spruce trees eight feet thick tried to lord
it over the brawny pines; the ravine was a veritable canyon from which
occasional glimpses through the foliage showed the Rim as a lofty
red-tipped mountain peak. Jean's pack mule became frightened at scent of a bear or lion and ran
off down the rough trail, imperiling Jean's outfit. It was not an easy
task to head him off nor, when that was accomplished, to keep him to a
trot. But his fright and succeeding skittishness at least made for
fast traveling. Jean calculated that he covered ten miles under the
Rim before the character of ground and forest began to change. The trail had turned southeast. Instead of gorge after gorge,
red-walled and choked with forest, there began to be rolling ridges,
some high; others were knolls; and a thick cedar growth made up for a
falling off of pine. The spruce had long disappeared. Juniper
thickets gave way more and more to the beautiful manzanita; and soon on
the south slopes appeared cactus and a scrubby live oak. But for the
well-broken trail, Jean would have fared ill through this tough brush. Jean espied several deer, and again a coyote, and what he took to be a
small herd of wild horses. No more turkey tracks showed in the dusty
patches. He crossed a number of tiny brooklets, and at length came to
a place where the trail ended or merged in a rough road that showed
evidence of considerable travel. Horses, sheep, and cattle had passed
along there that day. This road turned southward, and Jean began to
have pleasurable expectations. The road, like the trail, led down grade, but no longer at such steep
angles, and was bordered by cedar and pinyon, jack-pine and juniper,
mescal and manzanita. Quite sharply, going around a ridge, the road
led Jean's eye down to a small open flat of marshy, or at least grassy,
ground. This green oasis in the wilderness of red and timbered ridges
marked another change in the character of the Basin. Beyond that the
country began to spread out and roll gracefully, its dark-green forest
interspersed with grassy parks, until Jean headed into a long, wide
gray-green valley surrounded by black-fringed hills. His pulses
quickened here. He saw cattle dotting the expanse, and here and there
along the edge log cabins and corrals. As a village, Grass Valley could not boast of much, apparently, in the
way of population. Cabins and houses were widely scattered, as if the
inhabitants did not care to encroach upon one another. But the one
store, built of stone, and stamped also with the characteristic
isolation, seemed to Jean to be a rather remarkable edifice. Not
exactly like a fort did it strike him, but if it had not been designed
for defense it certainly gave that impression, especially from the
long, low side with its dark eye-like windows about the height of a
man's shoulder. Some rather fine horses were tied to a hitching rail. Otherwise dust and dirt and age and long use stamped this Grass Valley
store and its immediate environment. Jean threw his bridle, and, getting down, mounted the low porch and
stepped into the wide open door. A face, gray against the background
of gloom inside, passed out of sight just as Jean entered. He knew he
had been seen. In front of the long, rather low-ceiled store were four
men, all absorbed, apparently, in a game of checkers. Two were playing
and two were looking on. One of these, a gaunt-faced man past middle
age, casually looked up as Jean entered. But the moment of that casual
glance afforded Jean time enough to meet eyes he instinctively
distrusted. They masked their penetration. They seemed neither curious
nor friendly. They saw him as if he had been merely thin air. "Good evenin'," said Jean. After what appeared to Jean a lapse of time sufficient to impress him
with a possible deafness of these men, the gaunt-faced one said,
"Howdy, Isbel!" The tone was impersonal, dry, easy, cool, laconic, and yet it could not
have been more pregnant with meaning. Jean's sharp sensibilities
absorbed much. None of the slouch-sombreroed, long-mustached
Texans--for so Jean at once classed them--had ever seen Jean, but they
knew him and knew that he was expected in Grass Valley. All but the
one who had spoken happened to have their faces in shadow under the
wide-brimmed black hats. Motley-garbed, gun-belted, dusty-booted, they
gave Jean the same impression of latent force that he had encountered
in Colter. "Will somebody please tell me where to find my father, Gaston Isbel?" inquired Jean, with as civil a tongue as he could command. Nobody paid the slightest attention. It was the same as if Jean had
not spoken. Waiting, half amused, half irritated, Jean shot a rapid
glance around the store. The place had felt bare; and Jean, peering
back through gloomy space, saw that it did not contain much. Dry goods
and sacks littered a long rude counter; long rough shelves divided
their length into stacks of canned foods and empty sections; a low
shelf back of the counter held a generous burden of cartridge boxes,
and next to it stood a rack of rifles. On the counter lay open cases
of plug tobacco, the odor of which was second in strength only to that
of rum. Jean's swift-roving eye reverted to the men, three of whom were
absorbed in the greasy checkerboard. The fourth man was the one who
had spoken and he now deigned to look at Jean. Not much flesh was
there stretched over his bony, powerful physiognomy. He stroked a lean
chin with a big mobile hand that suggested more of bridle holding than
familiarity with a bucksaw and plow handle. It was a lazy hand. The
man looked lazy. If he spoke at all it would be with lazy speech, yet
Jean had not encountered many men to whom he would have accorded more
potency to stir in him the instinct of self-preservation. "Shore," drawled this gaunt-faced Texan, "old Gass lives aboot a mile
down heah." With slow sweep of the big hand he indicated a general
direction to the south; then, appearing to forget his questioner, he
turned his attention to the game. Jean muttered his thanks and, striding out, he mounted again, and drove
the pack mule down the road. "Reckon I've ran into the wrong folds
to-day," he said. "If I remember dad right he was a man to make an'
keep friends. Somehow I'll bet there's goin' to be hell." Beyond the
store were some rather pretty and comfortable homes, little ranch
houses back in the coves of the hills. The road turned west and Jean
saw his first sunset in the Tonto Basin. It was a pageant of purple
clouds with silver edges, and background of deep rich gold. Presently
Jean met a lad driving a cow. "Hello, Johnny!" he said, genially, and
with a double purpose. "My name's Jean Isbel. By Golly! I'm lost in
Grass Valley. Will you tell me where my dad lives?" "Yep. Keep right on, an' y'u cain't miss him," replied the lad, with a
bright smile. "He's lookin' fer y'u." "How do you know, boy?" queried Jean, warmed by that smile. "Aw, I know. It's all over the valley thet y'u'd ride in ter-day. Shore I wus the one thet tole yer dad an' he give me a dollar." "Was he glad to hear it?" asked Jean, with a queer sensation in his
throat. "Wal, he plumb was." "An' who told you I was goin' to ride in to-day?" "I heerd it at the store," replied the lad, with an air of confidence. "Some sheepmen was talkin' to Greaves. He's the storekeeper. I was
settin' outside, but I heerd. A Mexican come down off the Rim ter-day
an' he fetched the news." Here the lad looked furtively around, then
whispered. "An' thet greaser was sent by somebody. I never heerd no
more, but them sheepmen looked pretty plumb sour. An' one of them,
comin' out, give me a kick, darn him. It shore is the luckedest day
fer us cowmen." "How's that, Johnny?" "Wal, that's shore a big fight comin' to Grass Valley. My dad says so
an' he rides fer yer dad. An' if it comes now y'u'll be heah." "Ahuh!" laughed Jean. "An' what then, boy?" The lad turned bright eyes upward. "Aw, now, yu'all cain't come thet
on me. Ain't y'u an Injun, Jean Isbel? Ain't y'u a hoss tracker thet
rustlers cain't fool? Ain't y'u a plumb dead shot? Ain't y'u wuss'ern
a grizzly bear in a rough-an'-tumble? ... Now ain't y'u, shore?" Jean bade the flattering lad a rather sober good day and rode on his
way. Manifestly a reputation somewhat difficult to live up to had
preceded his entry into Grass Valley. Jean's first sight of his future home thrilled him through. It was a
big, low, rambling log structure standing well out from a wooded knoll
at the edge of the valley. Corrals and barns and sheds lay off at the
back. To the fore stretched broad pastures where numberless cattle and
horses grazed. At sunset the scene was one of rich color. Prosperity
and abundance and peace seemed attendant upon that ranch; lusty voices
of burros braying and cows bawling seemed welcoming Jean. A hound
bayed. The first cool touch of wind fanned Jean's cheek and brought a
fragrance of wood smoke and frying ham. Horses in the Pasture romped to the fence and whistled at these
newcomers. Jean espied a white-faced black horse that gladdened his
sight. "Hello, Whiteface! I'll sure straddle you," called Jean. Then
up the gentle slope he saw the tall figure of his father--the same as
he had seen him thousands of times, bareheaded, shirt sleeved, striding
with long step. Jean waved and called to him. "Hi, You Prodigal!" came the answer. Yes, the voice of his father--and
Jean's boyhood memories flashed. He hurried his horse those last few
rods. No--dad was not the same. His hair shone gray. "Here I am, dad," called Jean, and then he was dismounting. A deep,
quiet emotion settled over him, stilling the hurry, the eagerness, the
pang in his breast. "Son, I shore am glad to see you," said his father, and wrung his hand. "Wal, wal, the size of you! Shore you've grown, any how you favor your
mother." Jean felt in the iron clasp of hand, in the uplifting of the handsome
head, in the strong, fine light of piercing eyes that there was no
difference in the spirit of his father. But the old smile could not
hide lines and shades strange to Jean. "Dad, I'm as glad as you," replied Jean, heartily. "It seems long
we've been parted, now I see you. Are You well, dad, an' all right?" "Not complainin', son. I can ride all day same as ever," he said. "Come. Never mind your hosses. They'll be looked after. Come meet the
folks.... Wal, wal, you got heah at last." On the porch of the house a group awaited Jean's coming, rather
silently, he thought. Wide-eyed children were there, very shy and
watchful. The dark face of his sister corresponded with the image of
her in his memory. She appeared taller, more womanly, as she embraced
him. "Oh, Jean, Jean, I'm glad you've come!" she cried, and pressed
him close. Jean felt in her a woman's anxiety for the present as well
as affection for the past. He remembered his aunt Mary, though he had
not seen her for years. His half brothers, Bill and Guy, had changed
but little except perhaps to grow lean and rangy. Bill resembled his
father, though his aspect was jocular rather than serious. Guy was
smaller, wiry, and hard as rock, with snapping eyes in a brown, still
face, and he had the bow-legs of a cattleman. Both had married in
Arizona. Bill's wife, Kate, was a stout, comely little woman, mother
of three of the children. The other wife was young, a strapping girl,
red headed and freckled, with wonderful lines of pain and strength in
her face. Jean remembered, as he looked at her, that some one had
written him about the tragedy in her life. When she was only a child
the Apaches had murdered all her family. Then next to greet Jean were
the little children, all shy, yet all manifestly impressed by the
occasion. A warmth and intimacy of forgotten home emotions flooded
over Jean. Sweet it was to get home to these relatives who loved him
and welcomed him with quiet gladness. But there seemed more. Jean was
quick to see the shadow in the eyes of the women in that household and
to sense a strange reliance which his presence brought. "Son, this heah Tonto is a land of milk an' honey," said his father, as
Jean gazed spellbound at the bounteous supper. Jean certainly performed gastronomic feats on this occasion, to the
delight of Aunt Mary and the wonder of the children. "Oh, he's
starv-ved to death," whispered one of the little boys to his sister. They had begun to warm to this stranger uncle. Jean had no chance to
talk, even had he been able to, for the meal-time showed a relaxation
of restraint and they all tried to tell him things at once. In the
bright lamplight his father looked easier and happier as he beamed upon
Jean. After supper the men went into an adjoining room that appeared most
comfortable and attractive. It was long, and the width of the house,
with a huge stone fireplace, low ceiling of hewn timbers and walls of
the same, small windows with inside shutters of wood, and home-made
table and chairs and rugs. "Wal, Jean, do you recollect them shootin'-irons?" inquired the
rancher, pointing above the fireplace. Two guns hung on the spreading
deer antlers there. One was a musket Jean's father had used in the war
of the rebellion and the other was a long, heavy, muzzle-loading
flintlock Kentucky, rifle with which Jean had learned to shoot. "Reckon I do, dad," replied Jean, and with reverent hands and a rush of
memory he took the old gun down. "Jean, you shore handle thet old arm some clumsy," said Guy Isbel,
dryly. And Bill added a remark to the effect that perhaps Jean had
been leading a luxurious and tame life back there in Oregon, and then
added,  "But I reckon he's packin' that six-shooter like a Texan." "Say, I fetched a gun or two along with me," replied Jean, jocularly. "Reckon I near broke my poor mule's back with the load of shells an'
guns. Dad, what was the idea askin' me to pack out an arsenal?" "Son, shore all shootin' arms an' such are at a premium in the Tonto,"
replied his father. "An' I was givin' you a hunch to come loaded." His cool, drawling voice seemed to put a damper upon the pleasantries. Right there Jean sensed the charged atmosphere. His brothers were
bursting with utterance about to break forth, and his father suddenly
wore a look that recalled to Jean critical times of days long past. But
the entrance of the children and the women folk put an end to
confidences. Evidently the youngsters were laboring under subdued
excitement. They preceded their mother, the smallest boy in the lead. For him this must have been both a dreadful and a wonderful experience,
for he seemed to be pushed forward by his sister and brother and
mother, and driven by yearnings of his own. "There now, Lee. Say,
'Uncle Jean, what did you fetch us?' The lad hesitated for a shy,
frightened look at Jean, and then, gaining something from his scrutiny
of his uncle, he toddled forward and bravely delivered the question of
tremendous importance. "What did I fetch you, hey?" cried Jean, in delight, as he took the lad
up on his knee. "Wouldn't you like to know? I didn't forget, Lee. I
remembered you all. Oh! the job I had packin' your bundle of
presents.... Now, Lee, make a guess." "I dess you fetched a dun," replied Lee. "A dun!--I'll bet you mean a gun," laughed Jean. "Well, you
four-year-old Texas gunman! Make another guess." That appeared too momentous and entrancing for the other two
youngsters, and, adding their shrill and joyous voices to Lee's, they
besieged Jean. "Dad, where's my pack?" cried Jean. "These young Apaches are after my
scalp." "Reckon the boys fetched it onto the porch," replied the rancher. Guy Isbel opened the door and went out. "By golly! heah's three
packs," he called. "Which one do you want, Jean?" "It's a long, heavy bundle, all tied up," replied Jean. Guy came staggering in under a burden that brought a whoop from the
youngsters and bright gleams to the eyes of the women. Jean lost
nothing of this. How glad he was that he had tarried in San Francisco
because of a mental picture of this very reception in far-off wild
Arizona. When Guy deposited the bundle on the floor it jarred the room. It gave
forth metallic and rattling and crackling sounds. "Everybody stand back an' give me elbow room," ordered Jean,
majestically. "My good folks, I want you all to know this is somethin'
that doesn't happen often. The bundle you see here weighed about a
hundred pounds when I packed it on my shoulder down Market Street in
Frisco. It was stolen from me on shipboard. I got it back in San Diego
an' licked the thief. It rode on a burro from San Diego to Yuma an'
once I thought the burro was lost for keeps. It came up the Colorado
River from Yuma to Ehrenberg an' there went on top of a stage. We got
chased by bandits an' once when the horses were gallopin' hard it near
rolled off. Then it went on the back of a pack horse an' helped wear
him out. An' I reckon it would be somewhere else now if I hadn't
fallen in with a freighter goin' north from Phoenix to the Santa Fe
Trail. The last lap when it sagged the back of a mule was the riskiest
an' full of the narrowest escapes. Twice my mule bucked off his pack
an' left my outfit scattered. Worst of all, my precious bundle made the
mule top heavy comin' down that place back here where the trail seems
to drop off the earth. There I was hard put to keep sight of my pack. Sometimes it was on top an' other times the mule. But it got here at
last.... An' now I'll open it." After this long and impressive harangue, which at least augmented the
suspense of the women and worked the children into a frenzy, Jean
leisurely untied the many knots round the bundle and unrolled it. He
had packed that bundle for just such travel as it had sustained. Three
cloth-bound rifles he laid aside, and with them a long, very heavy
package tied between two thin wide boards. From this came the metallic
clink. "Oo, I know what dem is!" cried Lee, breaking the silence of
suspense. Then Jean, tearing open a long flat parcel, spread before
the mute, rapt-eyed youngsters such magnificent things, as they had
never dreamed of--picture books, mouth-harps, dolls, a toy gun and a
toy pistol, a wonderful whistle and a fox horn, and last of all a box
of candy. Before these treasures on the floor, too magical to be
touched at first, the two little boys and their sister simply knelt. That was a sweet, full moment for Jean; yet even that was clouded by
the something which shadowed these innocent children fatefully born in
a wild place at a wild time. Next Jean gave to his sister the presents
he had brought her--beautiful cloth for a dress, ribbons and a bit of
lace, handkerchiefs and buttons and yards of linen, a sewing case and a
whole box of spools of thread, a comb and brush and mirror, and lastly
a Spanish brooch inlaid with garnets. "There, Ann," said Jean, "I
confess I asked a girl friend in Oregon to tell me some things my
sister might like." Manifestly there was not much difference in girls. Ann seemed stunned by this munificence, and then awakening, she hugged
Jean in a way that took his breath. She was not a child any more, that
was certain. Aunt Mary turned knowing eyes upon Jean. "Reckon you
couldn't have pleased Ann more. She's engaged, Jean, an' where girls
are in that state these things mean a heap.... Ann, you'll be married
in that!" And she pointed to the beautiful folds of material that Ann
had spread out. "What's this?" demanded Jean. His sister's blushes were enough to
convict her, and they were mightily becoming, too. "Here, Aunt Mary," went on Jean, "here's yours, an' here's somethin'
for each of my new sisters." This distribution left the women as happy
and occupied, almost, as the children. It left also another package,
the last one in the bundle. Jean laid hold of it and, lifting it, he
was about to speak when he sustained a little shock of memory. Quite
distinctly he saw two little feet, with bare toes peeping out of
worn-out moccasins, and then round, bare, symmetrical ankles that had
been scratched by brush. Next he saw Ellen Jorth's passionate face as
she looked when she had made the violent action so disconcerting to
him. In this happy moment the memory seemed farther off than a few
hours. It had crystallized. It annoyed while it drew him. As a
result he slowly laid this package aside and did not speak as he had
intended to. "Dad, I reckon I didn't fetch a lot for you an' the boys," continued
Jean. "Some knives, some pipes an' tobacco. An' sure the guns." "Shore, you're a regular Santa Claus, Jean," replied his father. "Wal,
wal, look at the kids. An' look at Mary. An' for the land's sake look
at Ann! Wal, wal, I'm gettin' old. I'd forgotten the pretty stuff an'
gimcracks that mean so much to women. 