

E-text prepared by Roger Frank, Roberta Staehlin, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



THE LOST GIRL

by

D. H. LAWRENCE







New York
Thomas Seltzer
1921

Copyright, 1921,
by Thomas Seltzer, Inc.
All rights reserved

First Printing, February, 1921
Second Printing, February, 1921
Third Printing, September, 1921

Printed in the United States of America




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                      PAGE

   I THE DECLINE OF MANCHESTER HOUSE           7

  II THE RISE OF ALVINA HOUGHTON              27

 III THE MATERNITY NURSE                      36

  IV TWO WOMEN DIE                            49

   V THE BEAU                                 64

  VI HOUGHTON'S LAST ENDEAVOUR                95

 VII NATCHA-KEE-TAWARA                       130

VIII CICCIO                                  164

  IX ALVINA BECOMES ALLAYE                   191

   X THE FALL OF MANCHESTER HOUSE            235

  XI HONOURABLE ENGAGEMENT                   273

 XII ALLAYE ALSO IS ENGAGED                  304

XIII THE WEDDED WIFE                         317

 XIV THE JOURNEY ACROSS                      327

  XV THE PLACE CALLED CALIFANO               350

 XVI SUSPENSE                                359




CHAPTER I

THE DECLINE OF MANCHESTER HOUSE


Take a mining townlet like Woodhouse, with a population of ten
thousand people, and three generations behind it. This space of
three generations argues a certain well-established society. The old
"County" has fled from the sight of so much disembowelled coal, to
flourish on mineral rights in regions still idyllic. Remains one
great and inaccessible magnate, the local coal owner: three
generations old, and clambering on the bottom step of the "County,"
kicking off the mass below. Rule him out. A well established society in Woodhouse, full of fine shades,
ranging from the dark of coal-dust to grit of stone-mason and
sawdust of timber-merchant, through the lustre of lard and butter
and meat, to the perfume of the chemist and the disinfectant of the
doctor, on to the serene gold-tarnish of bank-managers, cashiers for
the firm, clergymen and such-like, as far as the automobile
refulgence of the general-manager of all the collieries. Here the
_ne plus ultra_. The general manager lives in the shrubberied
seclusion of the so-called Manor. The genuine Hall, abandoned by the
"County," has been taken over as offices by the firm. Here we are then: a vast substratum of colliers; a thick sprinkling
of tradespeople intermingled with small employers of labour and
diversified by elementary schoolmasters and nonconformist clergy; a
higher layer of bank-managers, rich millers and well-to-do
ironmasters, episcopal clergy and the managers of collieries, then
the rich and sticky cherry of the local coal-owner glistening over
all. Such the complicated social system of a small industrial town in the
Midlands of England, in this year of grace 1920. But let us go back
a little. Such it was in the last calm year of plenty, 1913. A calm year of plenty. But one chronic and dreary malady: that of
the odd women. Why, in the name of all prosperity, should every
class but the lowest in such a society hang overburdened with Dead
Sea fruit of odd women, unmarried, unmarriageable women, called old
maids? Why is it that every tradesman, every school-master, every
bank-manager, and every clergyman produces one, two, three or more
old maids? Do the middle-classes, particularly the lower
middle-classes, give birth to more girls than boys? Or do the lower
middle-class men assiduously climb up or down, in marriage, thus
leaving their true partners stranded? Or are middle-class women very
squeamish in their choice of husbands? However it be, it is a tragedy. Or perhaps it is not. Perhaps these unmarried women of the middle-classes are the famous
sexless-workers of our ant-industrial society, of which we hear so
much. Perhaps all they lack is an occupation: in short, a job. But
perhaps we might hear their own opinion, before we lay the law down. In Woodhouse, there was a terrible crop of old maids among the
"nobs," the tradespeople and the clergy. The whole town of women,
colliers' wives and all, held its breath as it saw a chance of one
of these daughters of comfort and woe getting off. They flocked to
the well-to-do weddings with an intoxication of relief. For let
class-jealousy be what it may, a woman hates to see another woman
left stalely on the shelf, without a chance. They all _wanted_ the
middle-class girls to find husbands. Every one wanted it, including
the girls themselves. Hence the dismalness. Now James Houghton had only one child: his daughter Alvina. Surely
Alvina Houghton--

But let us retreat to the early eighties, when Alvina was a baby: or
even further back, to the palmy days of James Houghton. In his palmy
days, James Houghton was _creme de la creme_ of Woodhouse society. The house of Houghton had always been well-to-do: tradespeople, we
must admit; but after a few generations of affluence, tradespeople
acquire a distinct _cachet_. Now James Houghton, at the age of
twenty-eight, inherited a splendid business in Manchester goods, in
Woodhouse. He was a tall, thin, elegant young man with side-whiskers,
genuinely refined, somewhat in the Bulwer style. He had a taste for
elegant conversation and elegant literature and elegant Christianity:
a tall, thin, brittle young man, rather fluttering in his manner, full
of facile ideas, and with a beautiful speaking voice: most beautiful. Withal, of course, a tradesman. He courted a small, dark woman, older
than himself, daughter of a Derbyshire squire. He expected to get at
least ten thousand pounds with her. In which he was disappointed, for
he got only eight hundred. Being of a romantic-commercial nature, he
never forgave her, but always treated her with the most elegant
courtesy. To seehim peel and prepare an apple for her was an exquisite
sight. But that peeled and quartered apple was her portion. This
elegant Adam of commerce gave Eve her own back, nicely cored, and had
no more to do with her. Meanwhile Alvina was born. Before all this, however, before his marriage, James Houghton had
built Manchester House. It was a vast square building--vast, that
is, for Woodhouse--standing on the main street and high-road of the
small but growing town. The lower front consisted of two fine shops,
one for Manchester goods, one for silk and woollens. This was James
Houghton's commercial poem. For James Houghton was a dreamer, and something of a poet: commercial,
be it understood. He liked the novels of George Macdonald, and the
fantasies of that author, extremely. He wove one continual fantasy for
himself, a fantasy of commerce. He dreamed of silks and poplins,
luscious in texture and of unforeseen exquisiteness: he dreamed of
carriages of the "County" arrested before his windows, of exquisite
women ruffling charmed, entranced to his counter. And charming,
entrancing, he served them his lovely fabrics, which only he and they
could sufficiently appreciate. His fame spread, until Alexandra,
Princess of Wales, and Elizabeth, Empress of Austria, the two
best-dressed women in Europe, floated down from heaven to the shop in
Woodhouse, and sallied forth to show what could be done by purchasing
from James Houghton. We cannot say why James Houghton failed to become the Liberty or the
Snelgrove of his day. Perhaps he had too much imagination. Be that as
it may, in those early days when he brought his wife to her new home,
his window on the Manchester side was a foam and a may-blossom of
muslins and prints, his window on the London side was an autumn evening
of silks and rich fabrics. What wife could fail to be dazzled! But she,
poor darling, from her stone hall in stony Derbyshire, was a little bit
repulsed by the man's dancing in front of his stock, like David before
the ark. The home to which he brought her was a monument. In the great bedroom
over the shop he had his furniture _built_: built of solid mahogany: oh
too, too solid. No doubt he hopped or skipped himself with satisfaction
into the monstrous matrimonial bed: it could only be mounted by means
of a stool and chair. But the poor, secluded little woman, older than
he, must have climbed up with a heavy heart, to lie and face the gloomy
Bastille of mahogany, the great cupboard opposite, or to turn wearily
sideways to the great cheval mirror, which performed a perpetual and
hideous bow before her grace. Such furniture! It could never be removed
from the room. The little child was born in the second year. And then James Houghton
decamped to a small, half-furnished bedroom at the other end of the
house, where he slept on a rough board and played the anchorite for the
rest of his days. His wife was left alone with her baby and the
built-in furniture. She developed heart disease, as a result of nervous
repressions. But like a butterfly James fluttered over his fabrics. He was a tyrant
to his shop-girls. No French marquis in a Dickens' novel could have
been more elegant and _raffine_ and heartless. The girls detested him. And yet, his curious refinement and enthusiasm bore them away. They
submitted to him. The shop attracted much curiosity. But the
poor-spirited Woodhouse people were weak buyers. They wearied James
Houghton with their demand for common zephyrs, for red flannel which
they would scallop with black worsted, for black alpacas and bombazines
and merinos. He fluffed out his silk-striped muslins, his India
cotton-prints. But the natives shied off as if he had offered them the
poisoned robes of Herakles. There was a sale. These sales contributed a good deal to Mrs.
Houghton's nervous heart-disease. They brought the first signs of wear
and tear into the face of James Houghton. At first, of course, he
merely marked down, with discretion, his less-expensive stock of prints
and muslins, nuns-veilings and muslin delaines, with a few fancy
braidings and trimmings in guimp or bronze to enliven the affair. And
Woodhouse bought cautiously. After the sale, however, James Houghton felt himself at liberty to
plunge into an orgy of new stock. He flitted, with a tense look on his
face, to Manchester. After which huge bundles, bales and boxes arrived
in Woodhouse, and were dumped on the pavement of the shop. Friday
evening came, and with it a revelation in Houghton's window: the first
piques, the first strangely-woven and honey-combed toilet covers and
bed quilts, the first frill-caps and aprons for maid-servants: a wonder
in white. That was how James advertised it. "A Wonder in White." Who
knows but that he had been reading Wilkie Collins' famous novel! As the nine days of the wonder-in-white passed and receded, James
disappeared in the direction of London. A few Fridays later he came out
with his Winter Touch. Weird and wonderful winter coats, for
ladies--everything James handled was for ladies, he scorned the coarser
sex--: weird and wonderful winter coats for ladies, of thick, black,
pockmarked cloth, stood and flourished their bear-fur cuffs in the
background, while tippets, boas, muffs and winter-fancies coquetted in
front of the window-space. Friday-night crowds gathered outside: the
gas-lamps shone their brightest: James Houghton hovered in the
background like an author on his first night in the theatre. The
result was a sensation. Ten villages stared and crushed round the plate
glass. It was a sensation: but what sensation! In the breasts of the
crowd, wonder, admiration, _fear_, and ridicule. Let us stress the word
fear. The inhabitants of Woodhouse were afraid lest James Houghton
should impose his standards upon them. His goods were in excellent
taste: but his customers were in as bad taste as possible. They stood
outside and pointed, giggled, and jeered. Poor James, like an author on
his first night, saw his work fall more than flat. But still he believed in his own excellence: and quite justly. What
he failed to perceive was that the crowd hated excellence. Woodhouse
wanted a gently graduated progress in mediocrity, a mediocrity so
stale and flat that it fell outside the imagination of any sensitive
mortal. Woodhouse wanted a series of vulgar little thrills, as one
tawdry mediocrity was imported from Nottingham or Birmingham to take
the place of some tawdry mediocrity which Nottingham and Birmingham
had already discarded. That Woodhouse, as a very condition of its
own being, hated any approach to originality or real taste, this
James Houghton could never learn. He thought he had not been clever
enough, when he had been far, far too clever already. He always
thought that Dame Fortune was a capricious and fastidious dame, a
sort of Elizabeth of Austria or Alexandra, Princess of Wales,
elegant beyond his grasp. Whereas Dame Fortune, even in London or
Vienna, let alone in Woodhouse, was a vulgar woman of the middle and
lower middle-class, ready to put her heavy foot on anything that was
not vulgar, machine-made, and appropriate to the herd. When he saw
his delicate originalities, as well as his faint flourishes of
draper's fantasy, squashed flat under the calm and solid foot of
vulgar Dame Fortune, he fell into fits of depression bordering on
mysticism, and talked to his wife in a vague way of higher
influences and the angel Israfel. She, poor lady, was thoroughly
scared by Israfel, and completely unhooked by the vagaries of James. At last--we hurry down the slope of James' misfortunes--the real
days of Houghton's Great Sales began. Houghton's Great Bargain
Events were really events. After some years of hanging on, he let go
splendidly. He marked down his prints, his chintzes, his dimities
and his veilings with a grand and lavish hand. Bang went his blue
pencil through 3/11, and nobly he subscribed 1/0-3/4. Prices fell
like nuts. A lofty one-and-eleven rolled down to six-three, 1/6
magically shrank into 4-3/4d, whilst good solid prints exposed
themselves at 3-3/4d per yard. Now this was really an opportunity. Moreover the goods, having
become a little stale during their years of ineffectuality, were
beginning to approximate to the public taste. And besides, good
sound stuff it was, no matter what the pattern. And so the little
Woodhouse girls went to school in petties and drawers made of
material which James had destined for fair summer dresses: petties
and drawers of which the little Woodhouse girls were ashamed, for
all that. For if they should chance to turn up their little skirts,
be sure they would raise a chorus among their companions: "Yah-h-h,
yer've got Houghton's threp'ny draws on!" All this time James Houghton walked on air. He still saw the Fata
Morgana snatching his fabrics round her lovely form, and pointing
him to wealth untold. True, he became also Superintendent of the
Sunday School. But whether this was an act of vanity, or whether it
was an attempt to establish an Entente Cordiale with higher powers,
who shall judge. Meanwhile his wife became more and more an invalid; the little
Alvina was a pretty, growing child. Woodhouse was really impressed
by the sight of Mrs. Houghton, small, pale and withheld, taking a
walk with her dainty little girl, so fresh in an ermine tippet and a
muff. Mrs. Houghton in shiny black bear's-fur, the child in the
white and spotted ermine, passing silent and shadowy down the
street, made an impression which the people did not forget. But Mrs. Houghton had pains at her heart. If, during her walk, she
saw two little boys having a scrimmage, she had to run to them with
pence and entreaty, leaving them dumfounded, whilst she leaned blue
at the lips against a wall. If she saw a carter crack his whip over
the ears of the horse, as the horse laboured uphill, she had to
cover her eyes and avert her face, and all her strength left her. So she stayed more and more in her room, and the child was given to
the charge of a governess. Miss Frost was a handsome, vigorous young
woman of about thirty years of age, with grey-white hair and
gold-rimmed spectacles. The white hair was not at all tragical: it
was a family _trait_. Miss Frost mattered more than any one else to Alvina Houghton,
during the first long twenty-five years of the girl's life. The
governess was a strong, generous woman, a musician by nature. She
had a sweet voice, and sang in the choir of the chapel, and took the
first class of girls in the Sunday-School of which James Houghton
was Superintendent. She disliked and rather despised James Houghton,
saw in him elements of a hypocrite, detested his airy and gracious
selfishness, his lack of human feeling, and most of all, his fairy
fantasy. As James went further into life, he became a dreamer. Sad
indeed that he died before the days of Freud. He enjoyed the most
wonderful and fairy-like dreams, which he could describe perfectly,
in charming, delicate language. At such times his beautifully
modulated voice all but sang, his grey eyes gleamed fiercely under
his bushy, hairy eyebrows, his pale face with its side-whiskers had
a strange _lueur_, his long thin hands fluttered occasionally. He
had become meagre in figure, his skimpy but genteel coat would be
buttoned over his breast, as he recounted his dream-adventures,
adventures that were half Edgar Allan Poe, half Andersen, with
touches of Vathek and Lord Byron and George Macdonald: perhaps more
than a touch of the last. Ladies were always struck by these
accounts. But Miss Frost never felt so strongly moved to impatience
as when she was within hearing. For twenty years, she and James Houghton treated each other with a
courteous distance. Sometimes she broke into open impatience with
him, sometimes he answered her tartly: "Indeed, indeed! Oh, indeed! Well, well, I'm sorry you find it so--" as if the injury consisted
in her finding it so. Then he would flit away to the Conservative
Club, with a fleet, light, hurried step, as if pressed by fate. At
the club he played chess--at which he was excellent--and conversed. Then he flitted back at half-past twelve, to dinner. The whole morale of the house rested immediately on Miss Frost. She
saw her line in the first year. She must defend the little Alvina,
whom she loved as her own, and the nervous, petulant, heart-stricken
woman, the mother, from the vagaries of James. Not that James had
any vices. He did not drink or smoke, was abstemious and clean as an
anchorite, and never lowered his fine tone. But still, the two
unprotected ones must be sheltered from him. Miss Frost
imperceptibly took into her hands the reins of the domestic
government. Her rule was quiet, strong, and generous. She was not
seeking her own way. She was steering the poor domestic ship of
Manchester House, illuminating its dark rooms with her own sure,
radiant presence: her silver-white hair, and her pale, heavy,
reposeful face seemed to give off a certain radiance. She seemed to
give weight, ballast, and repose to the staggering and bewildered
home. She controlled the maid, and suggested the meals--meals which
James ate without knowing what he ate. She brought in flowers and
books, and, very rarely, a visitor. Visitors were out of place in
the dark sombreness of Manchester House. Her flowers charmed the
petulant invalid, her books she sometimes discussed with the airy
James: after which discussions she was invariably filled with
exasperation and impatience, whilst James invariably retired to the
shop, and was heard raising his musical voice, which the work-girls
hated, to one or other of the work-girls. James certainly had an irritating way of speaking of a book. He
talked of incidents, and effects, and suggestions, as if the whole
thing had just been a sensational-aesthetic attribute to himself. Not
a grain of human feeling in the man, said Miss Frost, flushing pink
with exasperation. She herself invariably took the human line. Meanwhile the shops began to take on a hopeless and frowsy look. After ten years' sales, spring sales, summer sales, autumn sales,
winter sales, James began to give up the drapery dream. He himself
could not bear any more to put the heavy, pock-holed black cloth
coat, with wild bear cuffs and collar, on to the stand. He had
marked it down from five guineas to one guinea, and then, oh ignoble
day, to ten-and-six. He nearly kissed the gipsy woman with a basket
of tin saucepan-lids, when at last she bought it for five shillings,
at the end of one of his winter sales. But even she, in spite of the
bitter sleety day, would not put the coat on in the shop. She
carried it over her arm down to the Miners' Arms. And later, with a
shock that really hurt him, James, peeping bird-like out of his shop
door, saw her sitting driving a dirty rag-and-bone cart with a
green-white, mouldy pony, and flourishing her arms like some wild
and hairy-decorated squaw. For the long bear-fur, wet with sleet,
seemed like a _chevaux de frise_ of long porcupine quills round her
fore-arms and her neck. Yet such good, such wonderful material! James
eyed it for one moment, and then fled like a rabbit to the stove in
his back regions. The higher powers did not seem to fulfil the terms of treaty which
James hoped for. He began to back out from the Entente. The Sunday
School was a great trial to him. Instead of being carried away by
his grace and eloquence, the nasty louts of colliery boys and girls
openly banged their feet and made deafening noises when he tried to
speak. He said many acid and withering things, as he stood there on
the rostrum. But what is the good of saying acid things to those
little fiends and gall-bladders, the colliery children. The
situation was saved by Miss Frost's sweeping together all the big
girls, under her surveillance, and by her organizing that the tall
and handsome blacksmith who taught the lower boys should extend his
influence over the upper boys. His influence was more than
effectual. It consisted in gripping any recalcitrant boy just above
the knee, and jesting with him in a jocular manner, in the dialect. The blacksmith's hand was all a blacksmith's hand need be, and his
dialect was as broad as could be wished. Between the grip and the
homely idiom no boy could endure without squealing. So the Sunday
School paid more attention to James, whose prayers were beautiful. But then one of the boys, a protege of Miss Frost, having been left
for half an hour in the obscure room with Mrs. Houghton, gave away
the secret of the blacksmith's grip, which secret so haunted the
poor lady that it marked a stage in the increase of her malady, and
made Sunday afternoon a nightmare to her. And then James Houghton
resented something in the coarse Scotch manner of the minister of
that day. So that the superintendency of the Sunday School came to
an end. At the same time, Solomon had to divide his baby. That is, he let
the London side of his shop to W. H. Johnson, the tailor and
haberdasher, a parvenu little fellow whose English would not bear
analysis. Bitter as it was, it had to be. Carpenters and joiners
appeared, and the premises were completely severed. From her room in
the shadows at the back the invalid heard the hammering and sawing,
and suffered. W. H. Johnson came out with a spick-and-span window,
and had his wife, a shrewd, quiet woman, and his daughter, a
handsome, loud girl, to help him on Friday evenings. Men flocked
in--even women, buying their husbands a sixpence-halfpenny tie. They
could have bought a tie for four-three from James Houghton. But no,
they would rather give sixpence-halfpenny for W.H. Johnson's fresh
but rubbishy stuff. And James, who had tried to rise to another
successful sale, saw the streams pass into the other doorway, and
heard the heavy feet on the hollow boards of the other shop: his
shop no more. After this cut at his pride and integrity he lay in retirement for a
while, mystically inclined. Probably he would have come to
Swedenborg, had not his clipt wings spread for a new flight. He hit
upon the brilliant idea of working up his derelict fabrics into
ready-mades: not men's clothes, oh no: women's, or rather, ladies'. Ladies' Tailoring, said the new announcement. James Houghton was happy once more. A zig-zag wooden stair-way was
rigged up the high back of Manchester House. In the great lofts
sewing-machines of various patterns and movements were installed. A
manageress was advertised for, and work-girls were hired. So a new
phase of life started. At half-past six in the morning there was a
clatter of feet and of girls' excited tongues along the back-yard
and up the wooden stair-way outside the back wall. The poor invalid
heard every clack and every vibration. She could never get over her
nervous apprehension of an invasion. Every morning alike, she felt
an invasion of some enemy was breaking in on her. And all day long
the low, steady rumble of sewing-machines overhead seemed like the
low drumming of a bombardment upon her weak heart. To make matters
worse, James Houghton decided that he must have his sewing-machines
driven by some extra-human force. He installed another plant of
machinery--acetylene or some such contrivance--which was intended to
drive all the little machines from one big belt. Hence a further
throbbing and shaking in the upper regions, truly terrible to
endure. But, fortunately or unfortunately, the acetylene plant was
not a success. Girls got their thumbs pierced, and sewing machines
absolutely refused to stop sewing, once they had started, and
absolutely refused to start, once they had stopped. So that after a
while, one loft was reserved for disused and rusty, but expensive
engines. Dame Fortune, who had refused to be taken by fine fabrics and fancy
trimmings, was just as reluctant to be captured by ready-mades. Again the good dame was thoroughly lower middle-class. James
Houghton designed "robes." Now Robes were the mode. Perhaps it was
Alexandra, Princess of Wales, who gave glory to the slim,
glove-fitting Princess Robe. Be that as it may, James Houghton
designed robes. His work-girls, a race even more callous than
shop-girls, proclaimed the fact that James tried on his own
inventions upon his own elegant thin person, before the privacy of
his own cheval mirror. And even if he did, why not? Miss Frost,
hearing this legend, looked sideways at the enthusiast. Let us remark in time that Miss Frost had already ceased to draw any
maintenance from James Houghton. Far from it, she herself
contributed to the upkeep of the domestic hearth and board. She had
fully decided never to leave her two charges. She knew that a
governess was an impossible item in Manchester House, as things
went. And so she trudged the country, giving music lessons to the
daughters of tradesmen and of colliers who boasted pianofortes. She
even taught heavy-handed but dauntless colliers, who were seized
with a passion to "play." Miles she trudged, on her round from
village to village: a white-haired woman with a long, quick stride,
a strong figure, and a quick, handsome smile when once her face
awoke behind her gold-rimmed glasses. Like many short-sighted
people, she had a certain intent look of one who goes her own way. The miners knew her, and entertained the highest respect and
admiration for her. As they streamed in a grimy stream home from
pit, they diverged like some magic dark river from off the pavement
into the horse-way, to give her room as she approached. And the men
who knew her well enough to salute her, by calling her name "Miss
Frost!" giving it the proper intonation of salute, were fussy men
indeed. "She's a lady if ever there was one," they said. And they
meant it. Hearing her name, poor Miss Frost would flash a smile and
a nod from behind her spectacles, but whose black face she smiled to
she never, or rarely knew. If she did chance to get an inkling, then
gladly she called in reply "Mr. Lamb," or "Mr. Calladine." In her
way she was a proud woman, for she was regarded with cordial
respect, touched with veneration, by at least a thousand colliers,
and by perhaps as many colliers' wives. That is something, for any
woman. Miss Frost charged fifteen shillings for thirteen weeks' lessons,
two lessons a week. And at that she was considered rather dear. She
was supposed to be making money. What money she made went chiefly to
support the Houghton household. In the meanwhile she drilled Alvina
thoroughly in theory and pianoforte practice, for Alvina was
naturally musical, and besides this she imparted to the girl the
elements of a young lady's education, including the drawing of
flowers in water-colour, and the translation of a Lamartine poem. Now incredible as it may seem, fate threw another prop to the
falling house of Houghton, in the person of the manageress of the
work-girls, Miss Pinnegar. James Houghton complained of Fortune, yet
to what other man would Fortune have sent two such women as Miss
Frost and Miss Pinnegar, _gratis_? Yet there they were. And doubtful
if James was ever grateful for their presence. If Miss Frost saved him from heaven knows what domestic debacle and
horror, Miss Pinnegar saved him from the workhouse. Let us not mince
matters. For a dozen years Miss Frost supported the heart-stricken,
nervous invalid, Clariss Houghton: for more than twenty years she
cherished, tended and protected the young Alvina, shielding the
child alike from a neurotic mother and a father such as James. For
nearly twenty years she saw that food was set on the table, and
clean sheets were spread on the beds: and all the time remained
virtually in the position of an outsider, without one grain of
established authority. And then to find Miss Pinnegar! In her way, Miss Pinnegar was very
different from Miss Frost. She was a rather short, stout,
mouse-coloured, creepy kind of woman with a high colour in her
cheeks, and dun, close hair like a cap. It was evident she was not a
lady: her grammar was not without reproach. She had pale grey eyes,
and a padding step, and a soft voice, and almost purplish cheeks. Mrs. Houghton, Miss Frost, and Alvina did not like her. They
suffered her unwillingly. But from the first she had a curious ascendancy over James Houghton. One would have expected his aesthetic eye to be offended. But no
doubt it was her voice: her soft, near, sure voice, which seemed
almost like a secret touch upon her hearer. Now many of her hearers
disliked being secretly touched, as it were beneath their clothing. Miss Frost abhorred it: so did Mrs. Houghton. Miss Frost's voice was
clear and straight as a bell-note, open as the day. Yet Alvina,
though in loyalty she adhered to her beloved Miss Frost, did not
really mind the quiet suggestive power of Miss Pinnegar. For Miss
Pinnegar was not vulgarly insinuating. On the contrary, the things
she said were rather clumsy and downright. It was only that she
seemed to weigh what she said, secretly, before she said it, and
then she approached as if she would slip it into her hearer's
consciousness without his being aware of it. She seemed to slide her
speeches unnoticed into one's ears, so that one accepted them
without the slightest challenge. That was just her manner of
approach. In her own way, she was as loyal and unselfish as Miss
Frost. There are such poles of opposition between honesties and
loyalties. Miss Pinnegar had the _second_ class of girls in the Sunday School,
and she took second, subservient place in Manchester House. By force
of nature, Miss Frost took first place. Only when Miss Pinnegar
spoke to Mr. Houghton--nay, the very way she addressed herself to
him--"What do _you_ think, Mr. Houghton?" --then there seemed to be
assumed an immediacy of correspondence between the two, and an
unquestioned priority in their unison, his and hers, which was a
cruel thorn in Miss Frost's outspoken breast. This sort of secret
intimacy and secret exulting in having, _really_, the chief power,
was most repugnant to the white-haired woman. Not that there was, in
fact, any secrecy, or any form of unwarranted correspondence between
James Houghton and Miss Pinnegar. Far from it. Each of them would
have found any suggestion of such a possibility repulsive in the
extreme. It was simply an implicit correspondence between their two
psyches, an immediacy of understanding which preceded all
expression, tacit, wireless. Miss Pinnegar lived in: so that the household consisted of the
invalid, who mostly sat, in her black dress with a white lace collar
fastened by a twisted gold brooch, in her own dim room, doing
nothing, nervous and heart-suffering; then James, and the thin young
Alvina, who adhered to her beloved Miss Frost, and then these two
strange women. Miss Pinnegar never lifted up her voice in household
affairs: she seemed, by her silence, to admit her own inadequacy in
culture and intellect, when topics of interest were being discussed,
only coming out now and then with defiant platitudes and
truisms--for almost defiantly she took the commonplace, vulgarian
point of view; yet after everything she would turn with her quiet,
triumphant assurance to James Houghton, and start on some point of
business, soft, assured, ascendant. The others shut their ears. Now Miss Pinnegar had to get her footing slowly. She had to let
James run the gamut of his creations. Each Friday night new wonders,
robes and ladies' "suits"--the phrase was very new--garnished the
window of Houghton's shop. It was one of the sights of the place,
Houghton's window on Friday night. Young or old, no individual,
certainly no female left Woodhouse without spending an excited and
usually hilarious ten minutes on the pavement under the window. Muffled shrieks of young damsels who had just got their first view,
guffaws of sympathetic youths, continued giggling and expostulation
and "Eh, but what price the umbrella skirt, my girl!" and "You'd
like to marry me in _that_, my boy--what? not half!" --or else "Eh,
now, if you'd seen me in _that_ you'd have fallen in love with me at
first sight, shouldn't you?" --with a probable answer "I should have
fallen over myself making haste to get away"--loud guffaws:--all
this was the regular Friday night's entertainment in Woodhouse. James Houghton's shop was regarded as a weekly comic issue. His
pique costumes with glass buttons and sort of steel-trimming collars
and cuffs were immortal. But why, once more, drag it out. Miss Pinnegar served in the shop on
Friday nights. She stood by her man. Sometimes when the shrieks grew
loudest she came to the shop door and looked with her pale grey eyes
at the ridiculous mob of lasses in tam-o-shanters and youths half
buried in caps. And she imposed a silence. They edged away. Meanwhile Miss Pinnegar pursued the sober and even tenor of her own
way. Whilst James lashed out, to use the local phrase, in robes and
"suits," Miss Pinnegar steadily ground away, producing strong,
indestructible shirts and singlets for the colliers, sound,
serviceable aprons for the colliers' wives, good print dresses for
servants, and so on. She executed no flights of fancy. She had her
goods made to suit her people. And so, underneath the foam and froth
of James' creative adventure flowed a slow but steady stream of
output and income. The women of Woodhouse came at last to _depend_
on Miss Pinnegar. Growing lads in the pit reduce their garments to
shreds with amazing expedition. "I'll go to Miss Pinnegar for thy
shirts this time, my lad," said the harassed mothers, "and see if
_they'll_ stand thee." It was almost like a threat. But it served
Manchester House. James bought very little stock in these days: just remnants and
pieces for his immortal robes. It was Miss Pinnegar who saw the
travellers and ordered the unions and calicoes and grey flannel. James hovered round and said the last word, of course. But what was
his last word but an echo of Miss Pinnegar's penultimate! He was not
interested in unions and twills. His own stock remained on hand. Time, like a slow whirlpool
churned it over into sight and out of sight, like a mass of dead
sea-weed in a backwash. There was a regular series of sales
fortnightly. The display of "creations" fell off. The new
entertainment was the Friday-night's sale. James would attack some
portion of his stock, make a wild jumble of it, spend a delirious
Wednesday and Thursday marking down, and then open on Friday
afternoon. In the evening there was a crush. A good moire underskirt
for one-and-eleven-three was not to be neglected, and a handsome
string-lace collarette for six-three would iron out and be worth at
least three-and-six. That was how it went: it would nearly all of
it iron out into something really nice, poor James' crumpled stock. His fine, semi-transparent face flushed pink, his eyes flashed as he
took in the sixpences and handed back knots of tape or packets of
pins for the notorious farthings. What matter if the farthing change
had originally cost him a halfpenny! His shop was crowded with women
peeping and pawing and turning things over and commenting in loud,
unfeeling tones. For there were still many comic items. Once, for
example, he suddenly heaped up piles of hats, trimmed and untrimmed,
the weirdest, sauciest, most screaming shapes. Woodhouse enjoyed
itself that night. And all the time, in her quiet, polite, think-the-more fashion Miss
Pinnegar waited on the people, showing them considerable forbearance
and just a tinge of contempt. She became very tired those
evenings--her hair under its invisible hairnet became flatter, her
cheeks hung down purplish and mottled. But while James stood she
stood. The people did not like her, yet she influenced them. And the
stock slowly wilted, withered. Some was scrapped. The shop seemed to
have digested some of its indigestible contents. James accumulated sixpences in a miserly fashion. Luckily for her
work-girls, Miss Pinnegar took her own orders, and received payments
for her own productions. Some of her regular customers paid her a
shilling a week--or less. But it made a small, steady income. She
reserved her own modest share, paid the expenses of her department,
and left the residue to James. James had accumulated sixpences, and made a little space in his
shop. He had desisted from "creations." Time now for a new flight. He decided it was better to be a manufacturer than a tradesman. His
shop, already only half its original size, was again too big. It
might be split once more. Rents had risen in Woodhouse. Why not cut
off another shop from his premises? No sooner said than done. In came the architect, with whom he had
played many a game of chess. Best, said the architect, take off one
good-sized shop, rather than halve the premises. James would be left
a little cramped, a little tight, with only one-third of his present
space. But as we age we dwindle. More hammering and alterations, and James found himself cooped in a
long, long narrow shop, very dark at the back, with a high oblong
window and a door that came in at a pinched corner. Next door to him
was a cheerful new grocer of the cheap and florid type. The new
grocer whistled "Just Like the Ivy," and shouted boisterously to his
shop-boy. In his doorway, protruding on James' sensitive vision, was
a pyramid of sixpence-halfpenny tins of salmon, red, shiny tins with
pink halved salmons depicted, and another yellow pyramid of
four-pence-halfpenny tins of pineapple. Bacon dangled in pale rolls
_almost_ over James' doorway, whilst straw and paper, redolent of
cheese, lard, and stale eggs filtered through the threshold. This was coming down in the world, with a vengeance. But what James
lost downstairs he tried to recover upstairs. Heaven knows what he
would have done, but for Miss Pinnegar. She kept her own work-rooms
against him, with a soft, heavy, silent tenacity that would have
beaten stronger men than James. But his strength lay in his
pliability. He rummaged in the empty lofts, and among the discarded
machinery. He rigged up the engines afresh, bought two new machines,
and started an elastic department, making elastic for garters and
for hat-chins. He was immensely proud of his first cards of elastic, and saw Dame
Fortune this time fast in his yielding hands. But, becoming used to
disillusionment, he almost welcomed it. Within six months he
realized that every inch of elastic cost him exactly sixty per cent. more than he could sell it for, and so he scrapped his new
department. Luckily, he sold one machine and even gained two pounds
on it. After this, he made one last effort. This was hosiery webbing, which
could be cut up and made into as-yet-unheard-of garments. Miss
Pinnegar kept her thumb on this enterprise, so that it was not much
more than abortive. And then James left her alone. Meanwhile the shop slowly churned its oddments. Every Thursday
afternoon James sorted out tangles of bits and bobs, antique
garments and occasional finds. With these he trimmed his window, so
that it looked like a historical museum, rather soiled and scrappy. Indoors he made baskets of assortments: threepenny, sixpenny,
ninepenny and shilling baskets, rather like a bran pie in which
everything was a plum. And then, on Friday evening, thin and alert
he hovered behind the counter, his coat shabbily buttoned over his
narrow chest, his face agitated. He had shaved his side-whiskers,
so that they only grew becomingly as low as his ears. His rather
large, grey moustache was brushed off his mouth. His hair, gone very
thin, was brushed frail and floating over his baldness. But still a
gentleman, still courteous, with a charming voice he suggested the
possibilities of a pad of green parrots' tail-feathers, or of a few
yards of pink-pearl trimming or of old chenille fringe. The women
would pinch the thick, exquisite old chenille fringe, delicate and
faded, curious to feel its softness. But they wouldn't give
threepence for it. Tapes, ribbons, braids, buttons, feathers,
jabots, bussels, appliques, fringes, jet-trimmings, bugle-trimmings,
bundles of old coloured machine-lace, many bundles of strange cord,
in all colours, for old-fashioned braid-patterning, ribbons with
H.M.S. Birkenhead, for boys' sailor caps--everything that nobody
wanted, did the women turn over and over, till they chanced on a
find. And James' quick eyes watched the slow surge of his flotsam,
as the pot boiled but did not boil away. Wonderful that he did not
think of the days when these bits and bobs were new treasures. But
he did not. And at his side Miss Pinnegar quietly took orders for shirts,
discussed and agreed, made measurements and received instalments. The shop was now only opened on Friday afternoons and evenings, so
every day, twice a day, James was seen dithering bare-headed and
hastily down the street, as if pressed by fate, to the Conservative
Club, and twice a day he was seen as hastily returning, to his
meals. He was becoming an old man: his daughter was a young woman:
but in his own mind he was just the same, and his daughter was a
little child, his wife a young invalid whom he must charm by some
few delicate attentions--such as the peeled apple. At the club he got into more mischief. He met men who wanted to
extend a brickfield down by the railway. The brickfield was called
Klondyke. James had now a new direction to run in: down hill towards
Bagthorpe, to Klondyke. Big penny-daisies grew in tufts on the brink
of the yellow clay at Klondyke, yellow eggs-and-bacon spread their
midsummer mats of flower. James came home with clay smeared all over
him, discoursing brilliantly on grit and paste and presses and kilns
and stamps. He carried home a rough and pinkish brick, and gloated
over it. It was a _hard_ brick, it was a non-porous brick. It was an
ugly brick, painfully heavy and parched-looking. This time he was sure: Dame Fortune would rise like Persephone out
of the earth. He was all the more sure, because other men of the
town were in with him at this venture: sound, moneyed grocers and
plumbers. They were all going to become rich. Klondyke lasted a year and a half, and was not so bad, for in the
end, all things considered, James had lost not more than five per
cent. of his money. In fact, all things considered, he was about
square. And yet he felt Klondyke as the greatest blow of all. Miss
Pinnegar would have aided and abetted him in another scheme, if it
would but have cheered him. Even Miss Frost was nice with him. But
to no purpose. In the year after Klondyke he became an old man, he
seemed to have lost all his feathers, he acquired a plucked,
tottering look. Yet he roused up, after a coal-strike. Throttle-Ha'penny put new
life into him. During a coal-strike the miners themselves began
digging in the fields, just near the houses, for the surface coal. They found a plentiful seam of drossy, yellowish coal behind the
Methodist New Connection Chapel. The seam was opened in the side of
a bank, and approached by a footrill, a sloping shaft down which the
men walked. When the strike was over, two or three miners still
remained working the soft, drossy coal, which they sold for
eight-and-sixpence a ton--or sixpence a hundredweight. But a mining
population scorned such dirt, as they called it. James Houghton, however, was seized with a desire to work the
Connection Meadow seam, as he called it. He gathered two miner
partners--he trotted endlessly up to the field, he talked, as he had
never talked before, with inumerable colliers. Everybody he met he
stopped, to talk Connection Meadow. And so at last he sank a shaft, sixty feet deep, rigged up a
corrugated-iron engine-house with a winding-engine, and lowered his
men one at a time down the shaft, in a big bucket. The whole affair
was ricketty, amateurish, and twopenny. The name Connection Meadow
was forgotten within three months. Everybody knew the place as
Throttle-Ha'penny. "What!" said a collier to his wife: "have we got
no coal? You'd better get a bit from Throttle-Ha'penny." "Nay,"
replied the wife, "I'm sure I shan't. I'm sure I shan't burn that
muck, and smother myself with white ash." It was in the early Throttle-Ha'penny days that Mrs. Houghton died. James Houghton cried, and put a black band on his Sunday silk hat. But he was too feverishly busy at Throttle-Ha'penny, selling his
hundredweights of ash-pit fodder, as the natives called it, to
realize anything else. He had three men and two boys working his pit, besides a
superannuated old man driving the winding engine. And in spite of
all jeering, he flourished. Shabby old coal-carts rambled up behind
the New Connection, and filled from the pit-bank. The coal improved
a little in quality: it was cheap and it was handy. James could sell
at last fifty or sixty tons a week: for the stuff was easy getting. And now at last he was actually handling money. He saw millions
ahead. This went on for more than a year. A year after the death of Mrs.
Houghton, Miss Frost became ill and suddenly died. Again James
Houghton cried and trembled. But it was Throttle-Ha'penny that made
him tremble. He trembled in all his limbs, at the touch of success. He saw himself making noble provision for his only daughter. But alas--it is wearying to repeat the same thing over and over. First the Board of Trade began to make difficulties. Then there was
a fault in the seam. Then the roof of Throttle-Ha'penny was so loose
and soft, James could not afford timber to hold it up. In short,
when his daughter Alvina was about twenty-seven years old,
Throttle-Ha'penny closed down. There was a sale of poor machinery,
and James Houghton came home to the dark, gloomy house--to Miss
Pinnegar and Alvina. It was a pinched, dreary house. James seemed down for the last time. But Miss Pinnegar persuaded him to take the shop again on Friday
evening. For the rest, faded and peaked, he hurried shadowily down
to the club. CHAPTER II

THE RISE OF ALVINA HOUGHTON


The heroine of this story is Alvina Houghton. If we leave her out of
the first chapter of her own story it is because, during the first
twenty-five years of her life, she really was left out of count, or
so overshadowed as to be negligible. She and her mother were the
phantom passengers in the ship of James Houghton's fortunes. In Manchester House, every voice lowered its tone. And so from the
first Alvina spoke with a quiet, refined, almost convent voice. She
was a thin child with delicate limbs and face, and wide, grey-blue,
ironic eyes. Even as a small girl she had that odd ironic tilt of
the eyelids which gave her a look as if she were hanging back in
mockery. If she were, she was quite unaware of it, for under Miss
Frost's care she received no education in irony or mockery. Miss
Frost was straightforward, good-humoured, and a little earnest. Consequently Alvina, or Vina as she was called, understood only the
explicit mode of good-humoured straightforwardness. It was doubtful which shadow was greater over the child: that of
Manchester House, gloomy and a little sinister, or that of Miss
Frost, benevolent and protective. Sufficient that the girl herself
worshipped Miss Frost: or believed she did. Alvina never went to school. She had her lessons from her beloved
governess, she worked at the piano, she took her walks, and for
social life she went to the Congregational Chapel, and to the
functions connected with the chapel. While she was little, she went
to Sunday School twice and to Chapel once on Sundays. Then
occasionally there was a magic lantern or a penny reading, to which
Miss Frost accompanied her. As she grew older she entered the choir
at chapel, she attended Christian Endeavour and P.S.A., and the
Literary Society on Monday evenings. Chapel provided her with a
whole social activity, in the course of which she met certain groups
of people, made certain friends, found opportunity for strolls into
the country and jaunts to the local entertainments. Over and above
this, every Thursday evening she went to the subscription library to
change the week's supply of books, and there again she met friends
and acquaintances. It is hard to overestimate the value of church or
chapel--but particularly chapel--as a social institution, in places
like Woodhouse. The Congregational Chapel provided Alvina with a
whole outer life, lacking which she would have been poor indeed. She
was not particularly religious by inclination. Perhaps her father's
beautiful prayers put her off. So she neither questioned nor
accepted, but just let be. She grew up a slim girl, rather distinguished in appearance, with a
slender face, a fine, slightly arched nose, and beautiful grey-blue
eyes over which the lids tilted with a very odd, sardonic tilt. The
sardonic quality was, however, quite in abeyance. She was ladylike,
not vehement at all. In the street her walk had a delicate,
lingering motion, her face looked still. In conversation she had
rather a quick, hurried manner, with intervals of well-bred repose
and attention. Her voice was like her father's, flexible and
curiously attractive. Sometimes, however, she would have fits of boisterous hilarity, not
quite natural, with a strange note half pathetic, half jeering. Her
father tended to a supercilious, sneering tone. In Vina it came out
in mad bursts of hilarious jeering. This made Miss Frost uneasy. She
would watch the girl's strange face, that could take on a gargoyle
look. She would see the eyes rolling strangely under sardonic
eyelids, and then Miss Frost would feel that never, never had she
known anything so utterly alien and incomprehensible and
unsympathetic as her own beloved Vina. For twenty years the strong,
protective governess reared and tended her lamb, her dove, only to
see the lamb open a wolf's mouth, to hear the dove utter the wild
cackle of a daw or a magpie, a strange sound of derision. At such
times Miss Frost's heart went cold within her. She dared not
realize. And she chid and checked her ward, restored her to the
usual impulsive, affectionate demureness. Then she dismissed the
whole matter. It was just an accidental aberration on the girl's
part from her own true nature. Miss Frost taught Alvina thoroughly
the qualities of her own true nature, and Alvina believed what she
was taught. She remained for twenty years the demure, refined
creature of her governess' desire. But there was an odd, derisive
look at the back of her eyes, a look of old knowledge and
deliberate derision. She herself was unconscious of it. But it was
there. And this it was, perhaps, that scared away the young men. Alvina reached the age of twenty-three, and it looked as if she were
destined to join the ranks of the old maids, so many of whom found
cold comfort in the Chapel. For she had no suitors. True there were
extraordinarily few young men of her class--for whatever her
condition, she had certain breeding and inherent culture--in
Woodhouse. The young men of the same social standing as herself were
in some curious way outsiders to her. Knowing nothing, yet her
ancient sapience went deep, deeper than Woodhouse could fathom. The
young men did not like her for it. They did not like the tilt of her
eyelids. Miss Frost, with anxious foreseeing, persuaded the girl to take over
some pupils, to teach them the piano. The work was distasteful to
Alvina. She was not a good teacher. She persevered in an off-hand
way, somewhat indifferent, albeit dutiful. When she was twenty-three years old, Alvina met a man called Graham. He was an Australian, who had been in Edinburgh taking his medical
degree. Before going back to Australia, he came to spend some months
practising with old Dr. Fordham in Woodhouse--Dr. Fordham being in
some way connected with his mother. Alexander Graham called to see Mrs. Houghton. Mrs. Houghton did not
like him. She said he was creepy. He was a man of medium height,
dark in colouring, with very dark eyes, and a body which seemed to
move inside his clothing. He was amiable and polite, laughed often,
showing his teeth. It was his teeth which Miss Frost could not
stand. She seemed to see a strong mouthful of cruel, compact teeth. She declared he had dark blood in his veins, that he was not a man
to be trusted, and that never, never would he make any woman's life
happy. Yet in spite of all, Alvina was attracted by him. The two would stay
together in the parlour, laughing and talking by the hour. What they
could find to talk about was a mystery. Yet there they were,
laughing and chatting, with a running insinuating sound through it
all which made Miss Frost pace up and down unable to bear herself. The man was always running in when Miss Frost was out. He contrived
to meet Alvina in the evening, to take a walk with her. He went a
long walk with her one night, and wanted to make love to her. But
her upbringing was too strong for her. "Oh no," she said. "We are only friends." He knew her upbringing was too strong for him also. "We're more than friends," he said. "We're more than friends." "I don't think so," she said. "Yes we are," he insisted, trying to put his arm round her waist. "Oh, don't!" she cried. "Let us go home." And then he burst out with wild and thick protestations of love,
which thrilled her and repelled her slightly. "Anyhow I must tell Miss Frost," she said. "Yes, yes," he answered. "Yes, yes. Let us be engaged at once." As they passed under the lamps he saw her face lifted, the eyes
shining, the delicate nostrils dilated, as of one who scents battle
and laughs to herself. She seemed to laugh with a certain proud,
sinister recklessness. His hands trembled with desire. So they were engaged. He bought her a ring, an emerald set in tiny
diamonds. Miss Frost looked grave and silent, but would not openly
deny her approval. "You like him, don't you? You don't dislike him?" Alvina insisted. "I don't dislike him," replied Miss Frost. "How can I? He is a
perfect stranger to me." And with this Alvina subtly contented herself. Her father treated
the young man with suave attention, punctuated by fits of jerky
hostility and jealousy. Her mother merely sighed, and took sal
volatile. To tell the truth, Alvina herself was a little repelled by the man's
love-making. She found him fascinating, but a trifle repulsive. And
she was not sure whether she hated the repulsive element, or whether
she rather gloried in it. She kept her look of arch, half-derisive
recklessness, which was so unbearably painful to Miss Frost, and so
exciting to the dark little man. It was a strange look in a refined,
really virgin girl--oddly sinister. And her voice had a curious
bronze-like resonance that acted straight on the nerves of her
hearers: unpleasantly on most English nerves, but like fire on the
different susceptibilities of the young man--the darkie, as people
called him. But after all, he had only six weeks in England, before sailing to
Sydney. He suggested that he and Alvina should marry before he
sailed. Miss Frost would not hear of it. He must see his people
first, she said. So the time passed, and he sailed. Alvina missed him, missed the
extreme excitement of him rather than the human being he was. Miss
Frost set to work to regain her influence over her ward, to remove
that arch, reckless, almost lewd look from the girl's face. It was a
question of heart against sensuality. Miss Frost tried and tried to
wake again the girl's loving heart--which loving heart was certainly
not occupied by _that man_. It was a hard task, an anxious, bitter
task Miss Frost had set herself. But at last she succeeded. Alvina seemed to thaw. The hard shining
of her eyes softened again to a sort of demureness and tenderness. The influence of the man was revoked, the girl was left uninhabited,
empty and uneasy. She was due to follow her Alexander in three months' time, to
Sydney. Came letters from him, en route--and then a cablegram from
Australia. He had arrived. Alvina should have been preparing her
trousseau, to follow. But owing to her change of heart, she lingered
indecisive. "_Do_ you love him, dear?" said Miss Frost with emphasis, knitting
her thick, passionate, earnest eyebrows. "Do you love him
sufficiently? _That's_ the point." The way Miss Frost put the question implied that Alvina did not and
could not love him--because Miss Frost could not. Alvina lifted her
large, blue eyes, confused, half-tender towards her governess, half
shining with unconscious derision. "I don't really know," she said, laughing hurriedly. "I don't
really." Miss Frost scrutinized her, and replied with a meaningful:

"Well--!" To Miss Frost it was clear as daylight. To Alvina not so. In her
periods of lucidity, when she saw as clear as daylight also, she
certainly did not love the little man. She felt him a terrible
outsider, an inferior, to tell the truth. She wondered how he could
have the slightest attraction for her. In fact she could not
understand it at all. She was as free of him as if he had never
existed. The square green emerald on her finger was almost
non-sensical. She was quite, quite sure of herself. And then, most irritating, a complete _volte face_ in her feelings. The clear-as-daylight mood disappeared as daylight is bound to
disappear. She found herself in a night where the little man loomed
large, terribly large, potent and magical, while Miss Frost had
dwindled to nothingness. At such times she wished with all her force
that she could travel like a cablegram to Australia. She felt it was
the only way. She felt the dark, passionate receptivity of Alexander
overwhelmed her, enveloped her even from the Antipodes. She felt
herself going distracted--she felt she was going out of her mind. For she could not act. Her mother and Miss Frost were fixed in one line. Her father said:

"Well, of course, you'll do as you think best. There's a great risk
in going so far--a great risk. You would be entirely unprotected." "I don't mind being unprotected," said Alvina perversely. "Because you don't understand what it means," said her father. He looked at her quickly. Perhaps he understood her better than the
others. "Personally," said Miss Pinnegar, speaking of Alexander, "I don't
care for him. But every one has their own taste." Alvina felt she was being overborne, and that she was letting
herself be overborne. She was half relieved. She seemed to nestle
into the well-known surety of Woodhouse. The other unknown had
frightened her. Miss Frost now took a definite line. "I feel you don't love him, dear. I'm almost sure you don't. So now
you have to choose. Your mother dreads your going--she dreads it. I
am certain you would never see her again. She says she can't bear
it--she can't bear the thought of you out there with Alexander. It
makes her shudder. She suffers dreadfully, you know. So you will
have to choose, dear. You will have to choose for the best." Alvina was made stubborn by pressure. She herself had come fully to
believe that she did not love him. She was quite sure she did not
love him. But out of a certain perversity, she wanted to go. Came his letter from Sydney, and one from his parents to her and one
to her parents. All seemed straightforward--not _very_ cordial, but
sufficiently. Over Alexander's letter Miss Frost shed bitter tears. To her it seemed so shallow and heartless, with terms of endearment
stuck in like exclamation marks. He semed to have no thought, no
feeling for the girl herself. All he wanted was to hurry her out
there. He did not even mention the grief of her parting from her
English parents and friends: not a word. Just a rush to get her out
there, winding up with "And now, dear, I shall not be myself till I
see you here in Sydney--Your ever-loving Alexander." A selfish,
sensual creature, who would forget the dear little Vina in three
months, if she did not turn up, and who would neglect her in six
months, if she did. Probably Miss Frost was right. Alvina knew the tears she was costing all round. She went upstairs
and looked at his photograph--his dark and impertinent muzzle. Who
was _he_, after all? She did not know him. With cold eyes she looked
at him, and found him repugnant. She went across to her governess's room, and found Miss Frost in a
strange mood of trepidation. "Don't trust me, dear, don't trust what I say," poor Miss Frost
ejaculated hurriedly, even wildly. "Don't notice what I have said. Act for yourself, dear. Act for yourself entirely. I am sure I am
wrong in trying to influence you. I know I am wrong. It is wrong and
foolish of me. Act just for yourself, dear--the rest doesn't matter. The rest doesn't matter. Don't take _any_ notice of what I have
said. I know I am wrong." For the first time in her life Alvina saw her beloved governess
flustered, the beautiful white hair looking a little draggled, the
grey, near-sighted eyes, so deep and kind behind the gold-rimmed
glasses, now distracted and scared. Alvina immediately burst into
tears and flung herself into the arms of Miss Frost. Miss Frost also
cried as if her heart would break, catching her indrawn breath with
a strange sound of anguish, forlornness, the terrible crying of a
woman with a loving heart, whose heart has never been able to relax. Alvina was hushed. In a second, she became the elder of the two. The
terrible poignancy of the woman of fifty-two, who now at last had
broken down, silenced the girl of twenty-three, and roused all her
passionate tenderness. The terrible sound of "Never now, never
now--it is too late," which seemed to ring in the curious, indrawn
cries of the elder woman, filled the girl with a deep wisdom. She
knew the same would ring in her mother's dying cry. Married or
unmarried, it was the same--the same anguish, realized in all its
pain after the age of fifty--the loss in never having been able to
relax, to submit. Alvina felt very strong and rich in the fact of her youth. For her
it was not too late. For Miss Frost it was for ever too late. "I don't want to go, dear," said Alvina to the elder woman. "I know
I don't care for him. He is nothing to me." Miss Frost became gradually silent, and turned aside her face. After
this there was a hush in the house. Alvina announced her intention
of breaking off her engagement. Her mother kissed her, and cried,
and said, with the selfishness of an invalid:

"I couldn't have parted with you, I couldn't." Whilst the father
said:

"I think you are wise, Vina. I have thought a lot about it." So Alvina packed up his ring and his letters and little presents,
and posted them over the seas. She was relieved, really: as if she
had escaped some very trying ordeal. For some days she went about
happily, in pure relief. She loved everybody. She was charming and
sunny and gentle with everybody, particularly with Miss Frost, whom
she loved with a deep, tender, rather sore love. Poor Miss Frost
seemed to have lost a part of her confidence, to have taken on a new
wistfulness, a new silence and remoteness. It was as if she found
her busy contact with life a strain now. Perhaps she was getting
old. Perhaps her proud heart had given way. Alvina had kept a little photograph of the man. She would often go
and look at it. Love?--no, it was not love! It was something more
primitive still. It was curiosity, deep, radical, burning curiosity. How she looked and looked at his dark, impertinent-seeming face. A
flicker of derision came into her eyes. Yet still she looked. In the same manner she would look into the faces of the young men of
Woodhouse. But she never found there what she found in her
photograph. They all seemed like blank sheets of paper in
comparison. There was a curious pale surface-look in the faces of
the young men of Woodhouse: or, if there was some underneath
suggestive power, it was a little abject or humiliating, inferior,
common. They were all either blank or common. CHAPTER III

THE MATERNITY NURSE


Of course Alvina made everybody pay for her mood of submission and
sweetness. In a month's time she was quite intolerable. "I can't stay here all my life," she declared, stretching her eyes
in a way that irritated the other inmates of Manchester House
extremely. "I know I can't. I can't bear it. I simply can't bear it,
and there's an end of it. I can't, I tell you. I can't bear it. I'm
buried alive--simply buried alive. And it's more than I can stand. It is, really." There was an odd clang, like a taunt, in her voice. She was trying
them all. "But what do you want, dear?" asked Miss Frost, knitting her dark
brows in agitation. "I want to go away," said Alvina bluntly. Miss Frost gave a slight gesture with her right hand, of helpless
impatience. It was so characteristic, that Alvina almost laughed. "But where do you want to go?" asked Miss Frost. "I don't know. I don't care," said Alvina. "Anywhere, if I can get
out of Woodhouse." "Do you wish you had gone to Australia?" put in Miss Pinnegar. "No, I don't wish I had gone to Australia," retorted Alvina with a
rude laugh. "Australia isn't the only other place besides
Woodhouse." Miss Pinnegar was naturally offended. But the curious insolence
which sometimes came out in the girl was inherited direct from her
father. "You see, dear," said Miss Frost, agitated: "if you knew what you
wanted, it would be easier to see the way." "I want to be a nurse," rapped out Alvina. Miss Frost stood still, with the stillness of a middle-aged
disapproving woman, and looked at her charge. She believed that
Alvina was just speaking at random. Yet she dared not check her, in
her present mood. Alvina was indeed speaking at random. She had never thought of being
a nurse--the idea had never entered her head. If it had she would
certainly never have entertained it. But she had heard Alexander
speak of Nurse This and Sister That. And so she had rapped out her
declaration. And having rapped it out, she prepared herself to stick
to it. Nothing like leaping before you look. "A nurse!" repeated Miss Frost. "But do you feel yourself fitted to
be a nurse? Do you think you could bear it?" "Yes, I'm sure I could," retorted Alvina. "I want to be a maternity
nurse--" She looked strangely, even outrageously, at her governess. "I want to be a maternity nurse. Then I shouldn't have to attend
operations." And she laughed quickly. Miss Frost's right hand beat like a wounded bird. It was reminiscent
of the way she beat time, insistently, when she was giving music
lessons, sitting close beside her pupils at the piano. Now it beat
without time or reason. Alvina smiled brightly and cruelly. "Whatever put such an idea into your head, Vina?" asked poor Miss
Frost. "I don't know," said Alvina, still more archly and brightly. "Of course you don't mean it, dear," said Miss Frost, quailing. "Yes, I do. Why should I say it if I don't." Miss Frost would have done anything to escape the arch, bright,
cruel eyes of her charge. "Then we must think about it," she said, numbly. And she went away. Alvina floated off to her room, and sat by the window looking down
on the street. The bright, arch look was still on her face. But her
heart was sore. She wanted to cry, and fling herself on the breast
of her darling. But she couldn't. No, for her life she couldn't. Some little devil sat in her breast and kept her smiling archly. Somewhat to her amazement, he sat steadily on for days and days. Every minute she expected him to go. Every minute she expected to
break down, to burst into tears and tenderness and reconciliation. But no--she did not break down. She persisted. They all waited for
the old loving Vina to be herself again. But the new and
recalcitrant Vina still shone hard. She found a copy of _The
Lancet_, and saw an advertisement of a home in Islington where
maternity nurses would be fully trained and equipped in six months'
time. The fee was sixty guineas. Alvina declared her intention of
departing to this training home. She had two hundred pounds of her
own, bequeathed by her grandfather. In Manchester House they were all horrified--not moved with grief,
this time, but shocked. It seemed such a repulsive and indelicate
step to take. Which it was. And which, in her curious perverseness,
Alvina must have intended it to be. Mrs. Houghton assumed a remote
air of silence, as if she did not hear any more, did not belong. She
lapsed far away. She was really very weak. Miss Pinnegar said: "Well
really, if she wants to do it, why, she might as well try." And, as
often with Miss Pinnegar, this speech seemed to contain a veiled
threat. "A maternity nurse!" said James Houghton. "A maternity nurse! What
exactly do you mean by a maternity nurse?" "A trained mid-wife," said Miss Pinnegar curtly. "That's it, isn't
it? It is as far as I can see. A trained mid-wife." "Yes, of course," said Alvina brightly. "But--!" stammered James Houghton, pushing his spectacles up on to
his forehead, and making his long fleece of painfully thin hair
uncover his baldness. "I can't understand that any young girl of
any--any upbringing, any upbringing whatever, should want to choose
such a--such an--occupation. I can't understand it." "Can't you?" said Alvina brightly. "Oh well, if she _does_--" said Miss Pinnegar cryptically. Miss Frost said very little. But she had serious confidential talks
with Dr. Fordham. Dr. Fordham didn't approve, certainly he
didn't--but neither did he see any great harm in it. At that time it
was rather the thing for young ladies to enter the nursing
profession, if their hopes had been blighted or checked in another
direction! And so, enquiries were made. Enquiries were made. The upshot was, that Alvina was to go to Islington for her six
months' training. There was a great bustle, preparing her nursing
outfit. Instead of a trousseau, nurse's uniforms in fine
blue-and-white stripe, with great white aprons. Instead of a wreath
of orange blossom, a rather chic nurse's bonnet of blue silk, and
for a trailing veil, a blue silk fall. Well and good! Alvina expected to become frightened, as the time
drew near. But no, she wasn't a bit frightened. Miss Frost watched
her narrowly. Would there not be a return of the old, tender,
sensitive, shrinking Vina--the exquisitely sensitive and nervous,
loving girl? No, astounding as it may seem, there was no return of
such a creature. Alvina remained bright and ready, the half-hilarious
clang remained in her voice, taunting. She kissed them all good-bye,
brightly and sprightlily, and off she set. She wasn't nervous. She came to St. Pancras, she got her cab, she drove off to her
destination--and as she drove, she looked out of the window. Horrid,
vast, stony, dilapidated, crumbly-stuccoed streets and squares of
Islington, grey, grey, greyer by far than Woodhouse, and
interminable. How exceedingly sordid and disgusting! But instead of
being repelled and heartbroken, Alvina enjoyed it. She felt her
trunk rumble on the top of the cab, and still she looked out on the
ghastly dilapidated flat facades of Islington, and still she smiled
brightly, as if there were some charm in it all. Perhaps for her
there was a charm in it all. Perhaps it acted like a tonic on the
little devil in her breast. Perhaps if she had seen tufts of
snowdrops--it was February--and yew-hedges and cottage windows, she
would have broken down. As it was, she just enjoyed it. She enjoyed
glimpsing in through uncurtained windows, into sordid rooms where
human beings moved as if sordidly unaware. She enjoyed the smell of
a toasted bloater, rather burnt. So common! so indescribably common! And she detested bloaters, because of the hairy feel of the spines
in her mouth. But to smell them like this, to know that she was in
the region of "penny beef-steaks," gave her a perverse pleasure. The cab stopped at a yellow house at the corner of a square where
some shabby bare trees were flecked with bits of blown paper, bits
of paper and refuse cluttered inside the round railings of each
tree. She went up some dirty-yellowish steps, and rang the
"Patients'" bell, because she knew she ought not to ring the
"Tradesmen's." A servant, not exactly dirty, but unattractive, let
her into a hall painted a dull drab, and floored with cocoa-matting,
otherwise bare. Then up bare stairs to a room where a stout, pale,
common woman with two warts on her face, was drinking tea. It was
three o'clock. This was the matron. The matron soon deposited her in
a bedroom, not very small, but bare and hard and dusty-seeming, and
there left her. Alvina sat down on her chair, looked at her box
opposite her, looked round the uninviting room, and smiled to
herself. Then she rose and went to the window: a very dirty window,
looking down into a sort of well of an area, with other wells
ranging along, and straight opposite like a reflection another solid
range of back-premises, with iron stair-ways and horrid little doors
and washing and little W. C.'s and people creeping up and down like
vermin. Alvina shivered a little, but still smiled. Then slowly she
began to take off her hat. She put it down on the drab-painted chest
of drawers. Presently the servant came in with a tray, set it down, lit a naked
gas-jet, which roared faintly, and drew down a crackly dark-green
blind, which showed a tendency to fly back again alertly to the
ceiling. "Thank you," said Alvina, and the girl departed. Then Miss Houghton drank her black tea and ate her bread and
margarine. Surely enough books have been written about heroines in similar
circumstances. There is no need to go into the details of Alvina's
six months in Islington. The food was objectionable--yet Alvina got fat on it. The air was
filthy--and yet never had her colour been so warm and fresh, her
skin so soft. Her companions were almost without exception vulgar
and coarse--yet never had she got on so well with women of her own
age--or older than herself. She was ready with a laugh and a word,
and though she was unable to venture on indecencies herself, yet she
had an amazing faculty for _looking_ knowing and indecent beyond
words, rolling her eyes and pitching her eyebrows in a certain
way--oh, it was quite sufficient for her companions! And yet, if
they had ever actually demanded a dirty story or a really open
indecency from her, she would have been floored. But she enjoyed it. Amazing how she enjoyed it. She did not care
_how_ revolting and indecent these nurses were--she put on a look as
if she were in with it all, and it all passed off as easy as
winking. She swung her haunches and arched her eyes with the best
of them. And they behaved as if she were exactly one of themselves. And yet, with the curious cold tact of women, they left her alone,
one and all, in private: just ignored her. It is truly incredible how Alvina became blooming and bouncing at
this time. Nothing shocked her, nothing upset her. She was always
ready with her hard, nurse's laugh and her nurse's quips. No one was
better than she at _double-entendres._ No one could better give the
nurse's leer. She had it all in a fortnight. And never once did she
feel anything but exhilarated and in full swing. It seemed to her
she had not a moment's time to brood or reflect about things--she
was too much in the swing. Every moment, in the swing, living, or
active in full swing. When she got into bed she went to sleep. When
she awoke, it was morning, and she got up. As soon as she was up and
dressed she had somebody to answer, something to say, something to
do. Time passed like an express train--and she seemed to have known
no other life than this. Not far away was a lying-in hospital. A dreadful place it was. There
she had to go, right off, and help with cases. There she had to
attend lectures and demonstrations. There she met the doctors and
students. Well, a pretty lot they were, one way and another. When
she had put on flesh and become pink and bouncing she was just their
sort: just their very ticket. Her voice had the right twang, her
eyes the right roll, her haunches the right swing. She seemed
altogether just the ticket. And yet she wasn't. It would be useless to say she was not shocked. She was profoundly
and awfully shocked. Her whole state was perhaps largely the result
of shock: a sort of play-acting based on hysteria. But the dreadful
things she saw in the lying-in hospital, and afterwards, went deep,
and finished her youth and her tutelage for ever. How many infernos
deeper than Miss Frost could ever know, did she not travel? the
inferno of the human animal, the human organism in its convulsions,
the human social beast in its abjection and its degradation. For in her latter half she had to visit the slum cases. And such
cases! A woman lying on a bare, filthy floor, a few old coats thrown
over her, and vermin crawling everywhere, in spite of sanitary
inspectors. But what did the woman, the sufferer, herself care! She
ground her teeth and screamed and yelled with pains. In her calm
periods she lay stupid and indifferent--or she cursed a little. But
abject, stupid indifference was the bottom of it all: abject, brutal
indifference to everything--yes, everything. Just a piece of female
functioning, no more. Alvina was supposed to receive a certain fee for these cases she
attended in their homes. A small proportion of her fee she kept for
herself, the rest she handed over to the Home. That was the
agreement. She received her grudged fee callously, threatened and
exacted it when it was not forthcoming. Ha!--if they didn't have to
pay you at all, these slum-people, they would treat you with more
contempt than if you were one of themselves. It was one of the
hardest lessons Alvina had to learn--to bully these people, in their
own hovels, into some sort of obedience to her commands, and some
sort of respect for her presence. She had to fight tooth and nail
for this end. And in a week she was as hard and callous to them as
they to her. And so her work was well done. She did not hate them. There they were. They had a certain life, and you had to take them
at their own worth in their own way. What else! If one should be
gentle, one was gentle. The difficulty did not lie there. The
difficulty lay in being sufficiently rough and hard: that was the
trouble. It cost a great struggle to be hard and callous enough. Glad she would have been to be allowed to treat them quietly and
gently, with consideration. But pah--it was not their line. They
wanted to be callous, and if you were not callous to match, they
made a fool of you and prevented your doing your work. Was Alvina her own real self all this time? The mighty question
arises upon us, what is one's own real self? It certainly is not
what we think we are and ought to be. Alvina had been bred to think
of herself as a delicate, tender, chaste creature with unselfish
inclinations and a pure, "high" mind. Well, so she was, in the
more-or-less exhausted part of herself. But high-mindedness had
really come to an end with James Houghton, had really reached the
point, not only of pathetic, but of dry and anti-human, repulsive
quixotry. In Alvina high-mindedness was already stretched beyond the
breaking point. Being a woman of some flexibility of temper,
wrought through generations to a fine, pliant hardness, she flew
back. She went right back on high-mindedness. Did she thereby betray
it? We think not. If we turn over the head of the penny and look at the
tail, we don't thereby deny or betray the head. We do but adjust it
to its own complement. And so with high-mindedness. It is but one
side of the medal--the crowned reverse. On the obverse the three
legs still go kicking the soft-footed spin of the universe, the
dolphin flirts and the crab leers. So Alvina spun her medal, and her medal came down tails. Heads or
tails? Heads for generations. Then tails. See the poetic justice. Now Alvina decided to accept the decision of her fate. Or rather,
being sufficiently a woman, she didn't decide anything. She _was_
her own fate. She went through her training experiences like another
being. She was not herself, said Everybody. When she came home to
Woodhouse at Easter, in her bonnet and cloak, everybody was simply
knocked out. 