

This book was transcribed from the 1880 edition by Andrew Katz. WIRED LOVE:

A ROMANCE

OF

DOTS AND DASHES



BY

ELLA CHEEVER THAYER. "The old, old story,"--in a new, new way. DEDICATION. DEDICATED
TO
THE MEMORY
OF A DEAR
FRIEND BUT FOR WHOM THIS LITTLE
WORK HAD NEVER BEEN

[Transcriber's Note. The dedication was printed in American Railroad
dialect of Morse. It cannot easily be represented in ASCII as it
requires dashes of different lengths]


TABLE OF CONTENTS

    I. Sounds from a Distant "C."
   II. At the Hotel Norman
  III. Visible and Invisible Friends
   IV. Neighborly Calls
    V. Quimby Bursts Forth in Eloquence
   VI. Collapse of the Romance
  VII. "Good-By"
 VIII. The Feast
   IX. Unexpected Visitors
    X. The Broken Circuit Reunited
   XI. Miss Kling Telegraphically Baffled
  XII. Crosses on the Line
 XIII. The Wrong Woman
  XIV. Quimby Accepts the Situation
   XV. One Summer Day
  XVI. O. K.



WIRED LOVE. CHAPTER I. SOUNDS FROM A DISTANT "C."

-... -- .-... -. Just a noise, that is all. But a very significant noise to Miss Nathalie Rogers, or Nattie, as she
was usually abbreviated; a noise that caused her to lay aside her book,
and jump up hastily, exclaiming, with a gesture of impatience:--

"Somebody always 'calls' me in the middle of every entertaining
chapter!" For that noise, that little clatter, like, and yet too irregular to be
the ticking of a clock, expressed to Nattie these four mystic letters:--

"B m--X n;"

which same four mystic letters, interpreted, meant that the
name, or, to use the technical word, "call," of the telegraph office
over which she was present sole presiding genius, was "B m," and that "B
m" was wanted by another office on the wire, designated as "X n."

A little, out-of-the-way, country office, some fifty miles down the
line, was "X n," and, as Nattie signaled in reply to the "call" her
readiness to receive any communications therefrom, she was conscious of
holding in some slight contempt the possible abilities of the human
portion of its machinery. For who but an operator very green in the profession would stay _there_? Consequently, she was quite unprepared for the velocity with which the
telegraph alphabet of sounds in dots and dashes rattled over the
instrument, appropriately termed a "sounder," upon which messages are
received, and found herself wholly unable to write down the words as
fast as they came. "Dear me!" she thought, rather nervously, "the country is certainly
ahead of the city this time! I wonder if this smart operator is a lady
or gentleman!" And, notwithstanding all her efforts, she was compelled to "break"--that
is, open her "key," thereby breaking the circuit, and interrupting "X n"
with the request,

"Please repeat." "X n" took the interruption very good-naturedly--it was after
dinner--and obeyed without expressing any impatience. But, alas! Nattie was even now unable to keep up with this too expert
individual of uncertain sex, and was obliged again to "break," with the
humiliating petition,

"Please send slower!" "Oh!" responded "X n."

For a small one, "Oh!" is a very expressive word. But whether this
particular one signified impatience, or, as Nattie sensitively feared,
contempt for her abilities, she could not tell. But certain it was that
"X n" sent along the letters now, in such a slow, funereal procession
that she was driven half frantic with nervousness in the attempt to
piece them together into words. They had not proceeded far, however,
before a small, thin voice fell upon the ears of the agitated Nattie. "Are you taking a message now?" it asked. Nattie glanced over her shoulder, and saw a sharp, inquisitive nose, a
green veil, a pair of eye-glasses, and a strained smile, sticking
through her little window. Nodding a hasty answer to the question, she wrote down another word of
the message, that she had been able to catch, notwithstanding the
interruption. As she did so the voice again queried,

"Do you take them entirely by sound?" With a determined endeavor not to "break," Nattie replied only with a
frown. But fate was evidently against her establishing a reputation for
being a good operator with "X n."

"Here, please attend to this quick!" exclaimed a new voice, and a tall
gentleman pounded impatiently on the shelf outside the little window
with one hand, and with the other held forth a message. With despair in her heart, once more Nattie interrupted "X n," took the
impatient gentleman's message, studied out its illegible characters, and
changed a bill, the owner of the nose looking on attentively meanwhile;
this done, she bade the really much-abused "X n" to proceed, or in
telegraphic terms, to

"G. A.--the." "G. A." being the telegraphic abbreviation for "go ahead," and "the" the
last word she had received of the message. And this time not even the fact of its being after dinner restrained "X
n's" feelings, and "X n" made the sarcastic inquiry,

"Had you not better go home and send down some one who is capable of
receiving this message?" Now it would seem as if two persons sixty or seventy miles apart might
severally fly into a rage and nurse their wrath comfortably without
particularly annoying each other at the moment. But riot under present
conditions; and Nattie turned red and bit her nails excitedly under the
displeasure of the distant person of unknown sex, at "X n." But no
instrument had yet been invented by which she could see the expression
on the face of this operator at "X n," as she retorted, and her fingers
formed the letters very sharply;

"Do you think it will help the matter at all for you to make a display
of your charming disposition? G. A.--the--." "I am happy to be able to return the compliment implied!" was "X n's"
preface to the continuation of the message. And now indeed Nattie might have recovered some of her fallen glories,
being angry enough to be fiercely determined, had not the owner of the
nose again made her presence manifest by the sudden question:

"Do you have a different sound for every word, or syllable, or what?" And, turning quickly around to scowl this persevering questioner into
silence, Nattie's elbow hit and knocked over the inkstand, its contents
pouring over her hands, dress, the desk and floor, and proving beyond a
doubt, as it descended, the truth of its label--

"Superior Black Ink!" And then, save for the clatter of the "sounder," there was silence. For a moment Nattie gazed blankly at her besmeared hands and ruined
dress, at the "sounder," and at the owner of the nose, who returned her
look with that expression of serene amusement often noticeable in those
who contemplate from afar the mishaps of their fellow beings; then with
the courage of despair, she for the fourth time "broke" "X n," saying,
with inky impression on the instrument,

"Excuse me, but you will have to wait! I am all ink, and I am being
cross-examined!" Having thus delivered herself, she turned a deliberately deaf ear to "X
n's" response, which, judging from the way the movable portion of the
"sounder" danced, was emphatic. "A little new milk will take that out!" complacently said the owner of
the nose, watching Nattie's efforts to remove the ink from her dress
with blotting-paper. "Unfortunately I do not keep a cow here!" Nattie replied, tartly. Not quite polite in Nattie, this. But do not the circumstances plead
strongly in her excuse? For, remember, she was not one of those
impossible, angelic young ladies of whom we read, but one of the
ordinary human beings we meet every day. The owner of the nose, however, was not charitable, and drew herself up
loftily, as she said in imperative accents,

"You did not answer my question! Do you have to learn the sound of each
letter so as to distinguish them from each other?" Nattie constrained herself to reply, very shortly,

"Yes!" "Can you take a message and talk to me at the same time?" pursued the
investigator. "No!" was Nattie's emphatic answer, as she looked ruefully at her dress. "But your instrument there is going it now. Ain't they sending you a
message?" went on the relentless owner of the nose. At this Nattie turned her attention a moment to what was being done "on
the wire," and breathed a sigh of relief. For "X n" had given place to
another office and she replied,

"No! Some office on the wire is sending to some other office." The nose elevated itself in surprise. "Can you hear everything that is sent from every other office?" "Yes," was the weary reply, as Nattie rubbed her dress. "What!" exclaimed the owner of the nose, in accents of incredulous
wonder. "All over the world?" "Certainly not! only the offices on this wire; there are about twenty,"
was the impatient reply. "Ah!" evidently relieved. "But," considering, "supposing you do not
catch all the sounds, what do you do then?" "Break." "Break! Break what? The instruments?" queried the owner of the nose,
perplexedly, and looking as if that must be a very expensive habit. "Break the circuit--the connection,--open the key and ask the sending
office to repeat from the last word I have been able to catch!" Then seeing unmistakable evidence of more questions in the nose, Nattie
threw the ink-soaked blotting-paper and her last remnant of patience
into the waste basket, and added,

"But you must excuse me, I am too busy to be annoy--interrupted longer,
and there are books that will give you all the information that you
require!" So saying, Nattie turned her back, and the owner of the nose withdrew
it, its tip glistening with indignation as she walked away. As it
vanished, Nattie gave a sigh of relief, and sat down to mourn her ruined
dress. Whatever may have been her previous opinion, she was positive now
that this was the prettiest, the most becoming dress she had ever
possessed, or might ever possess! Only the old, old story! We prize most
what is gone forever! "And all that dreadful man's--or woman's--fault at X n!" cried Nattie,
savagely. Unjustly too, for if any one was responsible for the accident,
it was the owner of the nose. But not long did Nattie dare give way to her misery. That fatal message
was not yet received. Glancing over the few words she had of it, she read; "Send the hearse,"
and then she began anxiously "calling" "X n."

"Hearse," looked too serious for trifling. But either "X n's"
attention was now occupied in some other direction, or else he--or
she--was too much out of humor to reply, for it was full twenty minutes
before came the answering,

"X n."

At which Nattie said as fiercely as fingers could, "I have been after
you nearly half an hour!" "Have you?" came coolly back from "X n." "Well, you're not alone, many
are after me--my landlord among others--not to mention a washerwoman or
two!" Then followed the figure "4," which means, "When shall I go ahead?" "Waxing jocose, are you?" Nattie murmured to herself, as she replied:

"G. A.--hearse--"

"G. A.--_what?_"

"Hearse," repeated Nattie, in firm, clear characters. To her surprise and displeasure "X n" laughed--the circumstance being
conveyed to her understanding in the usual way, by the two letters "H
a!" "What are you laughing at?" she asked. "At your grave mistake!" was "X n's" answer, accompanied by another "Ha! To convert a _horse_ into a hearse is really an idea that merits a smile!" As the consciousness of her blunder dawned upon her, Nattie would gladly
have sank into oblivion. But as that was impossible, she took a fresh
blank, and very meekly said,

"G. A.--horse--!" With another laugh, "X n" complied, and Nattie now succeeded in
receiving the message without further mishap. "What did you sign?" she asked, as she thankfully wrote the last word. Every operator is obliged to sign his own private "call," as well as the
office "call," and "O. K." at the close of each message. "C." was replied to Nattie's question. "O. K. N. B m," she then said, and added, perhaps trying to drown the
memory of her ludicrous error in politeness, "I hope another time I
shall not cause you so much trouble." "C" at "X n" was evidently not to be exceeded in little speeches of
this kind, for he--or she--responded immediately,

"On the contrary, it was I who gave you trouble. I know I must certainly
have done so, or you never could have effected such a transformation as
you did. Imagine the feelings of the sender of that message, had he
found a hearse awaiting his arrival instead of a horse!" Biting her lip with secret mortification, but determined to make the
best of the matter outwardly, Nattie replied,

"I suppose I never shall hear the last of that hearse! But at all events
it took the surliness out of you." "Yes, when people come to a hearse they are not apt to have any more
kinks in their disposition! I confess, though," "C" went on frankly, "I
was unpardonably cross; not surly, that is out of my line, but cross. In
truth, I was all out of sorts. Will you forgive me if I will never do so
again?" "Certainly," Nattie replied readily. "I am sure we are far enough apart
to get on without quarreling, if, as they say, distance lends
enchantment!" "Particularly when I pride myself upon my sweet disposition!" said "C."

At which Nattie smiled to herself, to the surprise of a passing
gentleman, on whom her unconscious gaze rested, and who thought, of
course, that she was smiling at him. Appearances are deceitful! "I fear you will have to prove your sweetness before I shall believe in
it," Nattie responded to "C," all unaware of what she had done, or that
the strange young gentleman went on his way with the firm resolve to
pass by that office again and obtain another smile! "It shall be my sole aim hereafter," "C" replied; and then asked, "Have
you a pleasant office there?" "I regret to say no." Then looking around, and describing what she
saw--"a long, dark little room, into which the sun never shines, a crazy
and a wooden chair, a high stool, desk, instruments--that is all--Oh! And me!" "Last but not least," said "C;" "but what a contrast to my office! Mine
is all windows, and in cold days like this the wind whistles in until my
very bones rattle! The outward view is fine. As I sit I see a stable, a
carpenter's shop, the roof of the new Town Hall that has ruined the
town, and--"

"Excuse me,"--some one at another office on the line here broke in--and
with more politeness than is sometimes shown in interrupting
conversations on the wire--"I have a message to send," and forthwith
began calling. At this Nattie resumed her interrupted occupation of bewailing her
spoiled dress, but at the same time she had a feeling of pleased
surprise at the affability of "C" at "X n."

"I wonder," she thought, as she took up her book again, and tried to
bury the remembrance of her accident therein, "I do wonder if this 'C'
is _he_ or _she!_"

Soon, however, she heard "X n" "call" once more, and this time she laid
her book aside very readily. "You did not describe the principal part of your office--yourself!" "C"
said, when she answered the "call." "How can I describe myself?" replied Nattie. "How can anyone--properly? One sees that same old face in the glass day after day, and becomes so
used to it that it is almost impossible to notice even the changes in
it; so I am sure I do not see how one can tell how it really does
look--unless one's nose is broken--or one's eyes crossed--and mine are
not--or one should not see a looking-glass for a year! I can only say I
am very inky just now!" "Oh! that is too bad!" "C" said; then, with a laugh, "It has always been
a source of great wonder to me how certain very plain people of my
acquaintance could possibly think themselves handsome. But I see it all
now! Can you not, however, leave the beauty out, and give me some sort
of an idea-about yourself for my imagination to work upon?" "Certainly!" replied Nattie, with a mischievous twinkle in her eye that
"C" knew not of. "Imagine, if you please, a tall young man, with--"

"C" "broke" quickly, saying,

"Oh, no! You cannot deceive me in that way! Under protest I accept the
height, but spurn the sex!" "Why, you do not suppose I am a lady, do you?" queried Nattie. "I am quite positive you are. There is a certain difference in the
'sending,' of a lady and gentleman, that I have learned to distinguish. Can you truly say I am wrong?" Nattie evaded a direct reply, by saying,

"People who think they know so much are often deceived; now I make no
surmises about you, but ask, fairly and squarely, shall I call you Mr.,
Miss, or Mrs. 'C'?" "Call me neither. Call me plain 'C', or picture, if you like, in place
of your sounder, a blonde, fairy-like girl talking to you, with pensive
cheeks and sunny--"

"Don't you believe a word of it!" --some one on the wire here broke in,
wishing, probably, to have a finger in the pie; "picture a hippopotamus,
an elephant, but picture no fairy!" "Judge not others by yourself, and learn to speak when spoken to!" "C"
replied to the unknown; then "To N.--You know the more mystery there is
about anything, the more interesting it becomes. Therefore, if I envelop
myself in all the mystery possible, I will cherish hopes that you may
dream of me!" "But I am quite sure you can, with propriety be called _Mr._ 'C '--plain,
as you say, I doubt not," replied Nattie. "Now, as it is time for me to
go home, I shall have to say good-night." "To be continued in our next?" queried "C."

"If you are not in a cross mood," replied Nattie. "Now that is a very unkind suggestion, after my abject apology. But,
although our acquaintance had a _grave re-hearse_-al, I trust it will have
a happy ending!" Nattie frowned. "If you will promise never to say '_grave_,' '_hearse,_' or anything in the
undertaking line, I will agree never to say 'cross!'" she said. "The _undertaking_ will not be difficult; with all my heart!" "C"
answered, and with this mutual understanding they bade each other
"good-night." "There certainly is something romantic in talking to a mysterious
person, unseen, and miles away!" thought Nattie, as she put on her hat. "But I would really like to know whether my new friend employs a tailor
or a dressmaker!". Was Nattie conscious of a feeling that it would add to the zest of the
romantic acquaintance should the distant "C" be entitled to the use of
the masculine pronoun? Perhaps so! For Nattie was human, and was only nineteen! CHAPTER II. AT THE HOTEL NORMAN. Miss Nattie Rogers, telegraph operator, lived, as it were, in two
worlds. The one her office, dingy and curtailed as to proportions, but
from whence she could wander away through the medium of that slender
telegraph wire, on a sort of electric wings, to distant cities and
towns; where, although alone all day, she did not lack social
intercourse, and where she could amuse herself if she chose, by
listening to and speculating upon the many messages of joy or of sorrow,
of business and of pleasure, constantly going over the wire. But the
other world in which Miss Rogers lived was very different; the world
bounded by the four walls of a back room at Miss Betsey Kling's. It must
be confessed that there are more pleasing views than sheds in greater or
less degrees of dilapidation, a sickly grape-vine, a line of flapping
sheets, an overflowing ash barrel; sweeter sounds than the dulcet notes
of old rag-men, the serenades of musical cats, or the strains of a
cornet played upon at intervals from nine P. M. to twelve, with the
evident purpose of exhausting superfluous air in the performer's lungs. Perhaps, too, there was more agreeable company possible than Miss Betsey
Kling. Therefore, in the evening, Sunday and holiday, if not in the telegraphic
world of Miss Rogers, loneliness, and the unpleasant sensation known as
"blues" are not uncommon. Miss Betsey Kling, who, although in reduced circumstances, boasted of
certain "blue blood," inherited from dead and gone ancestors--who
perhaps would have been surprised could they have known at this late day
how very genteel they were in life,--rented a flat in Hotel Norman, on
the second floor, of which she let one room; not on account of the
weekly emolument received therefrom, ah, no! but "for the sake of having
some one for company." In this respect she was truly a contrast to Mrs.
Simonson, a hundred and seventy-five pound widow, who lived in the
remaining suite of that floor, and who let every room she possibly
could, in order, as she frankly confessed, to "make both ends meet." For
a constant struggle with the "ways and means" whereby to live had quite
annihilated any superfluous gentility Mrs. Simonson might have had,
excepting only one lingering remnant, that would never allow her to hang
in the window one of those cheaply conspicuous placards, announcing:

"Rooms to Let." Miss Betsey Kling was a spinster--not because she liked it, but on
account of circumstances over which she had no control,--and her
principal object in life, outside of the never-expressed, but much
thought-of one of finding her other self, like her, astray, was to keep
watch and ward over the affairs of the occupants of neighboring flats,
and see that they conducted themselves with the propriety becoming the
neighbors of so very genteel and unexceptionable a person as Miss Betsey
Kling. In pursuit of this occupation she was addicted to sudden and
silent appearances, much after the manner of materialized spirits, at
windows opening into the hall, and doors carelessly left ajar. She was,
however, afflicted with a chronic cold, that somewhat interfered with
her ability to become a first-class listener, on account of its
producing an incessant sniffle and spasms of violent sneezing. Miss Rogers going home to that back room of hers, found herself still
pondering upon the probable sex of "C." Rather to her own chagrin, when
she caught her thoughts thus straying, too; for she had a certain scorn
of anything pertaining to trivial sentiment. A little scorn of herself
she also had some-times. In fact, her desires reached beyond the
obtaining of the every-day commonplaces with which so many are content
to fill their lives, and she possessed an ambition too dominant to allow
her to be content with the dead level of life. Therefore it was that any
happy hours of forgetfulness of all but the present, that sometimes came
in her way, were often followed by others of unrest and dissatisfaction. There were certain dreams she indulged in of the future, now hopefully,
now utterly disheartened, that she was so far away from their
realization. These dreams were of fame, of fame as an authoress. Whether
it was the true genius stirring within her, or that most unfortunate of
all things, an unconquerable desire without the talent to rise above
mediocrity, time alone could tell. Compelled by the failure and subsequent death of her father to support
herself, or become a burden upon her mother, whose now scanty means
barely sufficed for herself and two younger children, Nattie chose the
more independent, but harder course. For she was not the kind of girl to
sit down and wait for some one to come along and marry her, and relieve
her of the burden of self-support. So, from a telegraph office in the
country, where she learned the profession, she drifted to her present
one in the city. To her, as yet, there was a certain fascination about telegraphy. But
she had a presentiment that in time the charm would give place to
monotony, more especially as, beyond a certain point, there was
positively no advancement in the profession. Although knowing she could
not be content to always be merely a telegraph operator, she resolved to
like it as well and as long as she could, since it was the best for the
present. As she lighted the gas in her room, she thought not of these things that
were so often in her mind, but of "C," and then scolded herself for
caring whether that distant individual was man or woman. What mattered
it to a young lady who felt herself above flirtations? So there was a little scowl on her face as she turned around, that did
not lessen when she beheld Miss Kling standing in her door-way. For Miss
Rogers did not, to speak candidly, find her landlady a congenial spirit,
and only remained upon her premises because being there was a lesser
evil than living in that most unhomelike of all places, a
boarding-house. "I thought I would make you a call," the unwelcome visitor remarked,
rubbing her nose, that from constant friction had become red and
shining; "I have been lonesome to-day. I usually run into Mrs.
Simonson's in the afternoon, but she has been out since twelve o'clock. I can't make out--" musingly, "where she can have gone! not that she is
just the company I desire. She has never been used to anything above the
common, poor soul, and will say 'them rooms,' but she is better than no
one, and at least can appreciate in others the culture and standing she
has never attained," and Miss Kling sneezed, and glanced at Nattie with
an expression that plainly said her lodger would do well to imitate, in
this last respect, the lady in question. "I am very little acquainted with Mrs. Simonson," Nattie replied, with a
tinge of scorn curling her lip, for, in truth, she had little reverence
for Miss Kling's blue blood. "Her lodgers like her very much, I believe;
at least, Quimby speaks of her in the highest terms." "Quimby!" repeated Miss Kling, with a sniffle of contempt. "A
blundering, awkward creature, who is always doing or saying some
shocking thing!" "I know that he is neither elegant nor talented, and is often very
awkward, but he is honest and kind-hearted, and one is willing to
overlook other deficiencies for such rare qualities," Nattie replied, a
little warmly, "and so Mrs. Simonson feels, I am confident." Miss Kling eyed her sharply. "Not at all! Allow me, Miss Rogers, to know! Mrs. Simonson endures his
blunders, because, as she says, he can live on the interest of his
money, 'on a pinch,' and she thinks such a lodger something of which to
boast. On a pinch, indeed!" added Miss Kling, with a sneeze, and giving
the principal feature in her face something very like the exclamation,
"a very tight pinch it would be, I am thinking!" Then somewhat
spitefully she continued, "But I was not aware, Miss Rogers, that you
and this Quimby were so intimate! The admiration is mutual, I suppose?" "There is no admiration," replied Nattie, with a flash of her gray eyes,
inwardly indignant that any one should insinuate she admired
Quimby--honest, blundering Quimby, whom no one ever allowed a handle to
his name, and who was so clever, but like all clever people, such a
dreadful bore. "I have only met him two or three times since that
evening you introduced us in the hall, so there has hardly been an
opportunity for anything of that kind." "You spoke so warmly!" Miss Kling remarked. "However," conciliatingly,
"I don't suppose by any means that you are in love with Quimby! You are
much too sensible a young lady for such folly!" Nattie shrugged her shoulders, as if tired of the subject, and after a
spasm of sneezing, Miss Kling continued:

"As you intimate, he means all right, poor fellow! and that is more than
I should be willing to acknowledge regarding Mrs. Simonson's _other_
lodger, that Mr. Norton, who calls himself an artist. I am sure I never
saw any one except a convict wear such short hair!" and Miss Kling shook
her head insinuatingly. From this beginning, to Nattie's dismay, Miss Kling proceeded to the
dissection of their neighbors who lived in the suite above, Celeste
Fishblate and her father. The former, Miss Kling declared, was setting
her cap for Quimby. Mr. Fishblate being an unquestionably disagreeable
specimen of the _genus homo_, with a somewhat startling habit of exploding
in short, but expressive sentences--never using more than three
consecutive words--Nattie naturally expected to hear him even more
severely anathematized than any one else. But to her surprise, the lady
conducting the conversation declared him a "fine sensible man!" At which
Nattie first stared, and then smiled, as it occurred to her that Mr.
Fishblate was a widower, and might it not be that Miss Kling
contemplated the possibility of _his_ becoming that other self not yet
attained? Fortunately Miss Kling did not observe her lodger's looks, so intent was
she in admiration of Mr. Fishblate's fine points, and soon took her
leave. After her departure, Nattie changed her inky dress, and put on her hat
to go out for something forgotten until now. As she stepped into the
hall, a tall young man, with extremely long arms and legs, and mouth,
that, although shaded by a faint outline of a mustache, invariably
suggested an alligator, opened the door of Mrs. Simonson's rooms,
opposite, and seeing Nattie, started back in a sort of nervous
bashfulness. Recovering himself, he then darted out with such
impetuosity that his foot caught in a rug, he fell, and went headlong
down stairs, dragging with him a fire-bucket, at which he clutched in a
vain effort to save himself, the two jointly making a noise that echoed
through the silent halls, and brought out the inhabitants of the rooms
in alarm. "What is it? Is any one killed?" shrieked from above, a voice,
recognizable as that of Celeste Fishblate--two names that could never by
any possibility sound harmonious. "What _is_ the matter now?" screamed Miss Kling, appearing at her door
with the query. "Have you hurt yourself?" Nattie asked, as she went down to where the
hero of the catastrophe sat on the bottom stair, ruefully rubbing his
elbow, but who now picked up his hat and the fire-bucket, and rose to
explain. "It's nothing--nothing at all, you know!" he said, looking upward, and
bowing to the voices; "I caught my foot in the rug, and--"

"Did you tear the rug?" here anxiously interrupted the listening Mrs.
Simonson, suddenly appearing at the banisters; not that she felt for her
lodger less, but for the rug more, a distinction arising from that
constant struggle with the "ways and means." "Oh, no! I assure you, there was no damage done to the rug--or
fire-bucket," the victim responded, reassuringly, and in perfect good
faith. "Or myself," he added modestly, as if the latter was scarce worth
speaking of. "I--I am used to it, you know," reverting to his usual
expression in accidents of all descriptions. "I declare I don't know what you will do next!" muttered Mrs. Simonson,
retreating to examine the rug. "I think you must be in love, Quimby!" giggled Celeste; an assertion
that caused Miss Kling to give vent to a contemptuous "Humph" and
awakened in its subject the most excruciating embarrassment. The poor
fellow glanced at Nattie, blushed, perspired, and frantically clutching
at the fire-bucket, stammered a protest,--

"Now really--I--now!--you are mistaken, you know!" "But people who are in love are always absent-minded," persisted
Celeste, with another giggle. "So it is useless to--"

But exactly what was useless did not appear, as at this point a
stentorian voice, the voice of Miss Kling's "fine, sensible man,"
roared,

"Enough!" At which, to Quimby's relief, Celeste, always in mortal fear of her
father, hastily withdrew. Not so Miss Kling. She silently waited to see
if Nattie and Quimby would go out together, and was rewarded by hearing
the latter ask, as Nattie made a movement towards the door,--

"May I--might I be so bold as to--as to ask to be your escort?" "I should be pleased," Nattie answered, adding with a mischievous
glance, but in a low tone, aware of the listening ears above,--

"That is, if you will consent to dispense with the fire-bucket!" Quimby started, and dropping the article in question, as if it had
suddenly turned red-hot, ejaculated,--

"Bless my soul! really I--I beg pardon, I am sure!" then bashfully
offering his arm, they went out, while Miss Kling balefully shook her
head. "So, Celeste will insist upon it that you are in love, because you
tripped and fell down stairs!" Nattie said, by way of opening a
conversation as they walked along--a remark that did not tend to lessen
his evident disquietude. And having now no fire-bucket, he clutched at
his necktie, twirling it all awry, not at all to the improvement of his
personal appearance, as he replied,--

"Oh! really, you know! its no matter! I--I am used to it, you know!" "Used to falling in love?" queried Nattie, with raised eyebrows. "No--no--the other, you know, that is--" gasped Quimby, hopelessly lost
for a substantive. "I mean, it's a mistake, you know" then with a
desperate rush away from the embarrassing subject, "Did you know
we--that is, Mrs. Simonson, was going to have a new lodger?" "No, is she?" asked Nattie. "Yes, a young lady coming to-morrow, a--a sort of an actress--no, a
prima donna, you know. A Miss Archer. If you and she should happen to
like each other, it would be pleasant for you, now wouldn't it?" asked
Quimby eagerly, with a devout hope that such might be, for then should
he not be a gainer by seeing more often the young lady by his side,
whose gray eyes had already made havoc in his honest and susceptible
heart. "It would be pleasant," acquiesced Nattie, in utter unconsciousness of
Quimby's selfish hidden thought; "for I am lonely sometimes. Miss Kling
is not--not--"

"Oh, certainly! of course not!" Quimby responded sympathetically and
understandingly, as Nattie hesitated for a word that would express her
meaning. "They never are very adaptable--old maids, you know!" "But it isn't because they are unmarried," said Nattie, perhaps feeling
called upon to defend her future self, "but because they were born so!" "Exactly, you know, that's why no fellow ever marries them!" said
Quimby, with a glance of bashful admiration at his companion. Nattie laughed. "And this Miss Archer. Did you say she was a prima donna?" she
questioned. "Yes--that is, a sort of a kind of a one, or going to be, or some way
musical or theatrical, you know," was Quimby's lucid reply. "I'll make
it a point to--to introduce you if you will allow me that pleasure?" "Certainly," responded Nattie, and added, "I shall be quite rich, for
me, in acquaintances soon, if I continue as I have begun. I made a new
one on the wire to-day." "On the--I beg pardon--on the what?" asked Quimby, with visions of
tight-ropes flashing through his mind. "On the wire," repeated Nattie, to whom the phrase was so common, that
it never occurred to her as needing any explanation. "Oh!" said the puzzled Quimby, not at all comprehending, but unwilling
to confess his ignorance. "The worst of it is, I don't know the sex of my new friend, which makes
it a little awkward," continued Nattie. Quimby stared. "Don't--I beg pardon--don't know her--his--sex?" he repeated, with
wide-open eyes. "No, it was on the wire, you know!" again explained Nattie, privately
thinking him unusually stupid; "about seventy miles away. We first
quarreled and then had a pleasant talk." "Talk--seventy miles--" faltered the perplexed Quimby; then brightening,
"Oh! I see! a telephone, you know!" "No indeed!" replied Nattie, laughing at his incomprehensibility. "We
don't need telephones. We can talk without--did you not know that? And
what is better, no one but those who understand our language can know
what we say!" "Exactly!" answered Quimby, relapsing again into wonder. "Exactly--on
the wire!" "Yes, we talk in a language of dots and dashes, that even Miss Kling
might listen to in vain. And do you know," she went on confidentially,
"somehow, I am very much interested in my new friend. I wish I knew--its
so awkward, as I said--but I really think it's a gentleman!" "Exactly--exactly so!" responded Quimby, somewhat dejectedly. And during
the remainder of their walk he was very much harassed in his mind over
this interest Nattie confessed in her new friend--"on the wire,"--who
_would_ appear as a tight-rope performer to his perturbed imagination. And he felt in his inmost heart that it would be a great relief to his
mind if this mysterious person should prove a lady, even though, if a
gentleman, he _was_ many miles away. For Quimby, with all his obtusity,
had an inkling of the power of mystery, and was already far enough on
the road to love to be jealous. Of these thoughts Nattie was of course wholly unaware, and chatted
gayly, now of the distant "C" and now of the coming Miss Archer, to
her somewhat abstracted, but always devoted companion. CHAPTER III. VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE FRIENDS. With perhaps one or two less frowns than usual at the destiny that
compelled her to forego any morning naps, and be up and stirring at the
early hour of six o'clock, Nattie arose next morning, aware of a more
than accustomed willingness to go to the office. And immediately on her
arrival there, she opened the key, and said, without calling, just to
ascertain if her far-away acquaintance would notice it,--

"G. M. (good morning) C!" Apparently "C" had his or her ears on the alert, for immediately came
the response,

"G. M., my dear!" A form of expression rather familiar for so short an acquaintance, that
is, supposing "C" to be a gentleman. "But then, people talk for the sake
of talking, and never say what they mean on the wire," thought Nattie. Besides, did not the distance in any case annul the familiarity? Therefore, without taking offense, even without comment, she asked:

"Are we to get along to-day without quarreling?" "Oh! it is you, is it, 'N'?" responded "C," "I thought so, but wasn't
quite sure. Yes, you, may 'break' at every word, and I will still be
amiable." "I should be afraid to put you to the test," replied Nattie, with a
laugh. "Do you then think me such a hopelessly ill-natured fellow?" inquired
"C."

"Fellow!" triumphantly repeated Nattie. "Be careful, or you will betray
yourself!" "Ha, ha!" laughed "C." "Stupid enough of me, wasn't it? But it only
proves the old adage about giving a man rope enough to hang himself." "Don't mention old adages, for I detest them!" said Nattie. "Especially
that one about the early bird and the worm. But I fear, as a _mys_tery,
you are not a success, _Mr._ 'C'." "A very bad attempt at a pun," said "C." "I trust, however, you will not
desert me, now your curiosity is satisfied, Miss 'N.'?" "Don't be in such a hurry to _miss_ me. I have said nothing yet to give
you that right," Nattie replied. "Nevertheless, it's utterly impossible not to miss you. I missed you
last night after you had gone home, for instance. "But _you_, a great,
hulking fellow! No, indeed! In my mind's eye--"

But what was in "C's" mind's eye did not just then appear, for at this
interesting point some one at Nattie's window, saying. "I would like to
send a message," obliged her reluctantly to interrupt him with,

"Excuse me a moment, a customer is waiting." She then turned as much of her attention as she could separate from "C"
to the customer, enabled, perhaps, to answer the volley of miscellaneous
questions poured upon her with unusual affability, on account of the
settlement--and in the right direction!--of that vexed question of "C's"
sex. But she could not help thinking, as she glanced at the message finally
written, and handed to her that had the writer attended a little more to
the spelling-book, and a little less to the accumulation of diamond
rings, it might have been a very wise proceeding. But perhaps

"Meat me at the train," was sufficiently intelligible for all purposes. "What was it about your mind's eye?" Nattie asked over the wire, at the
first opportunity. "C" was again on the alert, without being called, for the answer came,
after a moment, just long enough for him to cross the room, perhaps. "As I was saying, in the eye aforesaid, me thinks I see a tall slim
young lady with blue eyes and light hair, and dimples that come into her
cheeks when I stupidly betray my sex." As "C" said this, Nattie glanced into the glass just over her head at
the reflection of her face. A face whose expression was its charm; that
never could be called pretty, but that nevertheless suggested a
possibility--only a possibility, of being handsome. For there is a vast
difference between pretty and handsome. Pretty people seldom know very
much; but to be handsome, a person must have brains; an inner as well as
an outer beauty. "How fortunate it is you are not near enough to be disenchanted!" Nattie
replied to "C." "Your mind's eye is very unreliable. Tall! why, I'm
only five feet! never was guilty of a dimple, and my eyes are of some
dreadfully nondescript color." "If you are only five feet, you never can look down on me, which is a
great consolation," "C" responded. "And for the rest imagination will
clothe the unseen with all possible beauty and grace." "I am sure I am perfectly willing you should imagine me as beautiful as
you please," replied Nattie, "As long as we don't come face to face,
which in all probability we never shall, you will not know how different
from the real was the ideal." "Please don't discourage me so soon, for I hope sometime we may clasp
hands bodily as we do now spiritually, on the wire--for we do, don't
we?" said "C" asserting before he questioned. "Certainly--here is mine, spiritually!" responded Nattie, without the
least hesitation, as she thought, of the miles of safe distance between. "Now may I ask--"

"Oh! come, come! this will never do! You are getting on altogether too
fast for people who were quarreling so yesterday!" broke in a third
party, who signed, "Em." and was a young lady wire-acquaintance of
Nattie's, some twenty miles distant. "You think the circuit of our friendship ought to be broken?" queried
Nattie. "Ah! leave that to time and change, by which all circuits are broken,"
remarked "C."

"Yes, but such a sudden friendship is sure to come to a violent end,"
Em. said. "Suppose now I should report you for talking so much--not to
say flirting--on the wire, which is against the rules you know?" "In that event I should know how to be revenged", replied "C." "I should
put on my 'ground' wire and cut off communication between you and that
little fellow at Z!" Em. laughed, and perhaps feeling herself rather weak on that point,
subsided, and Nattie began, "Sentiment--"

But the pretty little speech on that subject she had all ready was
spoiled by an operator--who evidently had none of it in his
soul--usurping the wire with the prefaced remark,

"Get out!" The wire being unusually busy, this was all the conversation Nattie and
"C" had during the day, but Just before six o'clock came the call,

"B m--B m--B m--X n."

"B m," immediately responded Nattie. "I merely want to ask for my character before saying g. n. (good night). Haven't I been amiable to-day?" was asked from X n.

"Very, but there is no merit in it, as Mark Tapley would say," replied
Nattie. "You had no provocation." "Now I flattered myself I had 'come out strong!' Alas! what a hard thing
it is to establish one's reputation," said "C," sagely; "but I trust to
Time, who, after all, is a pretty good fellow to right matters,
notwithstanding a dreadful careless way he has of strewing crow's feet
and wrinkles." "Has he dropped any down your way?" asked Nattie. "Hinting to know my age now, are you? Oh! curiosity! curiosity! Yes, I
think he has implanted a perceptible crow's foot or two; but he has
spared the hairs of my head, and for that I am thankful! Did you ever
see an aged operator? I never did, and don't know whether it's because
electricity acts as a sort of antidote, or whether they grow wise as
they grow old, and leave the business. The case is respectfully
submitted." "Your organs of discernment must be very fully developed," Nattie
replied. "It is fortunate I am too far away to be analyzed personally;
but I don't think I will stay after hours to discuss these things to
night. I am tired, for I have had a run of disagreeable people to-day. So g. n."

"G. n., my dear," said the gallant "C," in whose composition bashfulness
seemed certainly to have no part. But then--as Nattie previously had
thought--he was along way off. It must be confessed "C" could hardly fail to have been flattered had he
known how full Nattie's thoughts were of him, as she went home that
night. A little foolish in the young lady, who rather prided herself on
being strong-minded, this deep interest; but hers was a lonely life,
poor girl, and "C" was certainly entertaining "over the wire," whatever
he might be in a personal interview--of course, not very likely to
occur. No! it was all "over the wire!" As she reached her own door, absorbed in these meditations, she heard
the sound of a merry laugh over in Mrs. Simonson's, and saw a large
trunk in the hall. From this she inferred that Miss Archer had arrived,
a fact Miss Kling confirmed, with uplifted eyebrows, and the remark,

"There must be something wrong about a young woman who has _three_ immense
trunks!" Although Nattie felt a desire to make this newcomer's acquaintance, it
was less strong than it might have been had she arrived a week sooner;
for it was undoubtedly true that the interest she had in her new,
invisible friend far exceeded that towards a possible visible one. Such
is the power of mystery! The office now possessed a new charm for her. To the surprise of an idle
clerk in an office over the way, who had always noted how particular she
was to arrive at exactly eight A. M., and to leave precisely at six P.
M., she suddenly began to appear before hours in the morning, and to
stay after hours at night. Of course this benighted person was not aware
that by so doing she secured quiet chats with "C," uninterrupted, and
without being told in the middle of some pretty speech to "Shut up!" or to " Keep out!" by some soured and inelegant operator on the line, to
whom the romance of telegraphy had long ago given place to the
monotonous, poorly-paid, everyday reality. And it came to pass that "C" soon shared all her daily life, thoughts
and troubles. Annoyances became lighter because she told him, and he
sympathized. Any funny incident that occurred was doubly funny, because
they laughed over it together, and so it went on. That "good-night, dear," previously unchallenged, became a regular
institution and still, on account of those long miles between them,
Nattie made only a faint remonstrance when his usual morning salutation
grew into "Good-morning, little five-foot girl at B m!" then was
shortened to "Good-morning, little girl!" And all this time it never occurred to them that excepting "N" was for
Nattie, and "C" for Clem, they knew really nothing about each other, not
even their names. Thus the acquaintance went on, amid much banter from the
before-mentioned "Em.," and interruptions from disgusted old settlers. It was by no means to the satisfaction of Quimby, that Miss Rogers
should thus allow the telegraphic world to supersede the one in which he
had a part. That intimacy with Miss Archer, of which he had dreamed, as
a means of improving his own acquaintance with her towards whom his
susceptible heart yearned, did not make even a beginning. In fact, what
with Nattie being engaged all day, and stopping after hours for a quiet
talk with "C," and Miss Archer having many evening engagements, the two
had never even met. And how a young man was to make himself agreeable in
the eyes of a young lady he only caught a glimpse of occasionally, was a
problem quite beyond solution by the brain of Quimby. Two or three times, in his distraction of mind, he had stood in very
light clothing, about Nattie's hour of returning home, full twenty-five
minutes at the outer door of the hotel, with a cold wind blowing on him. But Nattie, utterly unconscious of this devotion, was enjoying the
conversation of "C;" and so at last, half frozen, poor Quimby was
compelled to retreat, his object unaccomplished. He would willingly have
wandered about the halls for hours, and waylaid her, had it not been
that the fear of those two terrific ones, Miss Kling and Mr. Fishblate,
"catching him at it," prevailed over all other considerations. As for
going to her office, Quimby, in his bashfulness, dared not even walk
through the street containing it, lest she should penetrate his motives,
and be offended at his presumption. Under these circumstances he began
to despair of ever having the opportunity, to say nothing of the
ability, of making an impression, when one afternoon he chanced to meet
Miss Archer in the vicinity of Nattie's office, and was instantly
overwhelmed by a brilliant idea; that was to ask Miss Archer--to whom he
had talked much of Nattie during their short acquaintance--if she would
call on her with him, omitting the fact that he dared not go alone. Miss Archer, a little curious to see the lady with whom, she was
secretly convinced, Quimbv was in love, readily consented to the
proposition; and so it came to pass that Nattie was interrupted in an
account she was giving "C" of a man who wanted to send a message to his
wife, and seemed to think "My wife, in Providence," all the address
necessary, by the unexpected apparition of Quimby, accompanied by a
stylish and handsome young lady. "I--I beg pardon, if I--if I intrude, you know," he stammered, beginning
to wish he had not done it, as Nattie, with an "Excuse me, visitors," to
"C," rose and came forward. "But I--I brought Miss Archer! To make you
acquainted, you know." "I am indebted to you for that pleasure," Nattie said, with a smile, as
she took the hand Miss Archer extended, saying,

"I have heard Quimby speak about you so much, I already feel
acquainted." Quimby blushed, and nervously fingered his necktie. "Such near neighbors--so lonesome--thought you ought to know each
other," he said confusedly. "Yes, I began to fear we were destined never to meet," Nattie replied,
as she held the private door open for her visitors to enter, a
proceeding contrary to rules, but she preferred rather to transgress in
this way, than in manners, and leave her callers standing out in the
cold. "I don't know as we ever should, had it not been for Quimby," said Miss
Archer, glancing curiously around the office. "I believe I never was in
a telegraph office before. Don't you find the confinement rather
irksome?" "Sometimes," Nattie replied; "but then there always is some one to talk
with on the wire,' and in that way a good deal of the time passes." "Talk with--on the wire?" queried Miss Archer, with uplifted eyebrows. "What does that mean? Do tell me. I am as ignorant as a Hottentot about
anything appertaining to telegraphy. Nearly all I know is, you write a
message, pay for it, and it goes." Nattie smiled and explained, and then turning to Quimby, asked,

"You remember my speaking about 'C' and wondering whether a gentleman or
lady?" "Oh, yes!" Quimby remembered, and fidgeted on his chair. "He proved to be a gentleman." "Oh, yes; exactly, you know!" responded Quimby, looking anything but
elated. "It must be very romantic and fascinating to talk with some one so far
away, a mysterious stranger too, that one has never seen," Miss Archer
said, her black eyes sparkling. "I should get up a nice little
sentimental affair immediately, I know I should, there is something so
nice about anything with a mystery to it." "Yes, telegraphy has its romantic side--it would be dreadfully dull if
it did not," Nattie answered. "But--now really," said Quimby, who sat on the extreme edge of the
chair, with his feet some two yards apart from each other; "really, you
know, now suppose--just suppose, your mysterious invisible shouldn't
be--just what you think, you know. You see, I remember one or two young
men in telegraph offices, whose collars and cuffs are always soiled, you
know!" "I have great faith in my 'C,'" laughed Nattie. "It would be dreadfully unromantic to fall in love with a soiled
invisible, wouldn't it," said Miss Archer, with an expressive shrug of
her shoulders. Nattie colored a little, and answered hastily:

"Oh! it's only fun, you know;" at which Quimby brightened, and Miss
Archer inquired gayly,

"_Pour passer le temps?_"

Nattie nodded in reply, as she took a message from a lady, who had only
a few words to send, but found it necessary to ask about fifteen
questions, and relate all her recent family history, concluding with the
birth of twins, before being satisfied her message would go all
right,--a proceeding that made Quimby stare, and afforded Miss Archer
much amusement. "Oh! that is nothing!" Nattie said, in answer to the latter's
significant laugh, when the customer had retired. "Some very ludicrous
incidents occur almost daily, I assure you. Truly, the ignorance of
people in regard to telegraphy is surprising; aggravating too,
sometimes. Just imagine a person thinking a telegraph office is managed
on the same principle as those stores where they at first charge double
the value of the goods, for the sake of giving people the pleasure of
beating them down! It was only yesterday that a woman tried to coax me
to take off ten cents, and then snarled at me because I wouldn't, and
declared she would patronize some other office next time, as if it
mattered to me, except to wish she might! And there was some one calling
on the wire with a rush message all the time she was detaining me!" "They think you ought to be harnessed with a punch, like a horse-car
conductor," said Miss Archer, laughing, and added,

"I wish I knew how to telegraph, I would have a chat with your 'C.' I am
getting very much interested in him!" Quimby twirled his hat uneasily. "But--I beg pardon, but he may be a soiled invisible, you know!" he
hinted, seemingly determined to keep this possibility uppermost. Before Nattie could again defend her "C" a woman, covered with cheap
finery, thrust her head into the window. "How much does it cost to telegram?" she asked. "To what place did you wish to send?" Nattie inquired. With a look, as if she considered this a very impertinent question, the
woman replied, with a slight toss of her head,

"It's no matter about the place, I only want to know what it costs to
telegram!" "That depends entirely on where the message is going," answered Nattie,
with a glance at Miss Archer. "Oh, does it?" said the woman, looking surprised. "Well, to Chicago,
then." Nattie told her the tariff to that city. "Is that the cheapest?" she then asked. "I only want to send a few
words, about six." "The price is the same for one or ten words," said Nattie rather
impatiently. The woman gave another surprised stare. "That's strange!" she said incredulously. "Well"--moving away--"I'll
write then; I am not going to pay for ten words when I want to send
six." "That is a specimen of the ignorance you were just speaking of, I
presume," laughed Miss Archer, as soon as the would-be sender was out of
hearing. "Yes," replied Nattie, "it's hard to make them believe sometimes that
everything less than ten words is a stated price, and that we only
charge per word after that number. And, speaking of ignorance, do you
know I once actually had a letter brought me, all sealed, to be sent
that way by telegraph." Miss Archer laughed again, and Quimby inquired,

"I--I beg pardon, but did I understand that the last came within your
experience?" "Yes," Nattie replied, "and I had a young woman come in here once, who
asked me to write the message for her, and after I had done so, in a
somewhat hasty scrawl, she took it, looked it all over critically,
dotted some 'i's,' and crossed some 't's,' I all the time staring,
amazed, and wondering if she supposed I could not read my own
hand-writing, then scowled and threw it down disgustedly saying, 'John
never can read _that!_ I shall have to write it myself. He knows my
writing!'" "Can such things be!" cried Miss Archer. "But," asked Quimby, from his uncomfortable perch on the edge of the
chair, "Isn't there a--a something--a _fac-simile_ arrangement?" "I believe there is, but it is not yet perfected," replied Nattie. "Ah, well! then the young woman was only in advance of the age," said
Miss Archer; "and what with that and the telephone, and that dreadful
phonograph that bottles up all one says and disgorges at inconvenient
times, we will soon be able to do everything by electricity; who knows
but some genius will invent something for the especial use of lovers? something, for instance, to carry in their pockets, so when they are far
away from each other, and pine for a sound of 'that beloved voice,' they
will have only to take up this electrical apparatus, put it to their
ears, and be happy. Ah! blissful lovers of the future!" "Yes!--I--yes, that would be a good idea!" cried Quimby eagerly; then
instantly fearing he had betrayed himself, turned red, and clutched at
the mustache that eluded his grasp. Miss Archer looked at him and
smiled, and Nattie was about to expound further when she heard "C"
asking on the wire,

"N, haven't your visitors gone yet? Tell them to hurry!" "You wouldn't say so," Nattie responded to him, "if you knew what a
handsome young lady one of my two visitors is. We have been talking
about you, too." "Introduce me, please do," said "C."

"What are you doing, now?" asked Miss Archer, watchful of Nattie's
smiling face. Leaving the key open, Nattie explained, to Quimby's unconcealed
dissatisfaction; but Miss Archer was delighted. "Oh! do introduce me! Can you any way?" she said. Nattie nodded affirmatively, and taking hold of the key, wrote, "She is
as anxious as you are. So allow me to make you acquainted with Miss
Archer, a young lady with the prettiest black eyes I ever saw!" "Is she an operator?" asked "C."

"Doesn't know a dot from a dash," Nattie answered him. "Then tell her in plain language, that this is the happiest moment of my
life, and also that black eyes are my especial adoration!" "What have you been telling him about me, you dreadful girl?" queried
Miss Archer, shaking her head remonstratingly when this was repeated to
her. "But you may inform him I am delighted to make his acquaintance,
and hope he has curly hair, because it's so nice to pull!" "With the hope of such a happy occurrence, I will hereafter do up my
hair in papers," "C" replied when Nattie had repeated this to him. "But
do not slight your other visitor." "Shall I introduce you?" asked Nattie holding the key open, and turning
to Quimby, who had betrayed various symptoms of uneasiness while this
conversation was going on, and who now grasped his hat firmly, as if to
throw it at the little sounder that represented the offending "C," and
answered,

"Oh, no! I--really I--I beg pardon, but it's really no matter about
me--you know!" "He says he is of no consequence," Nattie said to "C."

"He!" repeated "C," "a he, is it? Ought I to be jealous? Is it you, or
our black-eyed friend who is the attraction?" Nattie replied only with a ha! "Is he talking now?" asked Miss Archer, mindful of Nattie's smile, and
nodding towards the clattering sounder, at which Quimby was scowling. "No, some other office is sending business now, so our conversation is
suspended," answered Nattie, as much to Quimby's relief as to Miss
Archer's regret. "I shall improve the acquaintance, however," the latter said. "I am very
curious to know how he looks, aren't you?" "Yes, but I do not suppose I ever shall," Nattie answered. "Then you--I beg pardon, but you never expect to see him?" queried
Quimby, with great earnestness. "In all probability we never shall meet. I think I should be dreadfully
embarrassed if we should," Nattie replied, as she handed the day's cash
to the boy who just then came after it. "Face to face we would really be
strangers to each other." Quimby evinced more satisfaction at this than the occasion seemed to
warrant, as Nattie noticed, with some surprise, but several customers
claiming her attention, all at once, and all in a hurry, she was kept
too busy for some time, to think upon the cause. As soon as she was at leisure, Miss Archer, with the remark that they
had made an unpardonably long call, arose to go. But you must certainly come again, "Nattie said, cordially, already
feeling her to be an old friend. "Indeed I shall," she answered, in the genial way peculiar to her. "You
have a double attraction here, you know. Can I say good-by to 'C?'" "I fear not, as the wire is busy," replied Nattie. "But I will say it
for you as soon as possible." "Yes, tell him, please, that I will see him--I mean, hear the clatter he
makes again soon: You, I shall see at the hotel, I hope, now we have
met." "Oh, yes!" Nattie replied. "I am very much indebted to Quimby for making
us acquainted." "Oh! really now, do you mean it?" exclaimed Quimby, with sudden delight. "I am so glad I've done something right at last, you know! Always doing
something wrong, you know!" then hugging his hat to his breast, and
speaking in a confidential whisper, he added, to the great amusement of
the two girls, "I have a presentiment--a horrible presentiment--I'm
always making mistakes, you see. I'm used to it, but I couldn't get used
to _that_, you know--that some day I shall marry the wrong woman!" So saying, and with a last glance of implacable dislike at the sounder,
Quimby bowed awkwardly, and departed with the laughing Miss Archer. Soon after their departure, "C" asked,

"Has Black-Eyed Susan gone?" "Yes," responded Nattie. "She left a good-by for you, and means to
improve your acquaintance." "Thrice happy I! But about this he? Who is this he? I want to know all
about him. Is he a hated rival?" "Ha! I never heard him say so, but I will ask him if you wish. He lives
in the same building with me, and brought Miss Archer, a fellow-lodger,
down to introduce her." "Do you ever go to balls, concerts, theaters, or to ride with him?" asked "C," who seemed determined to make a thorough investigation of
matters. "Dear me! No! He never asked me!" "Do you wish he would?" persisted "C."

"Of course I do!" replied Nattie, somewhat regardless of truth. "It is my opinion I shall be obliged to come and look after you," "C"
replied, at this admission. "But you wouldn't know whether you were looking after the right person
or not, when you were here!" Nattie said, with a smiling face and
sparkling eyes turned in the direction of an urchin,' flattening his
nose against her window-glass, who immediately fled, overwhelmed with
astonishment, at being, as he supposed, so smiled upon. "And why wouldn't I?" questioned "C."

"Because I should recognize you immediately, and should pretend it was
not I, but some substitute," replied Nattie. "You seem to be very positive about recognizing me. Is your intuitive
bump so well-developed as all that?" asked "C."

"Yes," Nattie responded. "And then you know there would be a twinkle in
your eye that would betray you at once." "Indeed! We will see about that, young lady. But now, as a customer has
been drumming on my shelf for the past five minutes, in a frantic
endeavor to attract my attention, and has by this time worked himself
into a fine irascible temper, because I will not even glance at him, I
must bid you good-night, with the advice, watch for that _twinkle_, and be
sure you discover it!" CHAPTER IV. NEIGHBORLY CALLS. In the opinion of Miss Betsey Kling, a lone young woman, who possessed
three large trunks, a more than average share of good looks, and who
went out and came in at irregular and unheard-of hours, was a person to
be looked after and inquired about; accordingly, while Miss Archer was
making the acquaintance of Nattie, and of the invisible "C," Miss Kling
descended upon Mrs. Simonson, with the object of dragging from that lady
all possible information she might be possessed of, regarding her latest
lodger. As a result, Miss Kling learned that Miss Archer was studying to
become an opera singer, that she occasionally now sang at concerts,
meeting with encouraging success, and further, that she possessed the
best of references. But Miss Kling gave a sniffle of distrust. "Public characters are not to be trusted. Do you remember," she asked
solemnly, "do you remember the young man you once had here, who ran away
with your teaspoons and your toothbrush?" Ah, yes! Mrs. Simonson remembered him perfectly. Was she likely to
forget him? But he, Mrs. Simonson respectfully submitted, was not a
singer, but a commercial traveler. Miss Kling shook her head. "That experience should be a warning! You cannot deny that no young
woman of a modest and retiring disposition would seek to place herself
in a public position. Can you imagine _me_ upon the stage?" concluded Miss
Kling with great dignity. Mrs. Simonson was free to admit that her imagination could contemplate
no such possibility, and then, neither desirous of criticising a good
paying lodger, or of offending Miss Kling--that struggle with the ways
and means having taught her to, offend no one if it could possibly be
avoided--she changed the subject by expatiating at length upon a topic
she always found safe--the weather. But Miss Celeste Fishblate coming
in, Miss Kling left the weather to take care of itself, and returned to
the more interesting discussion, to her, of Miss Archer. Celeste, a young lady favored with a countenance that impressed the
beholder as being principally nose and teeth, and possessing a large
share of the commodity known as _gush_, was ready enough to be the
recipient of her neighbor's collection of gossip. But, to Miss Kling's
no small disgust, she was rather lukewarm in pre-judging the new-comer. In truth, although somewhat alarmed at the "three trunks," lest she
should be out-dressed, she was already debating within herself whether
Miss Archer, as a medium by which more frequent access to Mrs.
Simonson's gentlemen lodgers could be obtained, was not a person whose
acquaintance it was desirable to cultivate. Moreover, the words opera
singer raised ecstatic visions of a possible future introduction to some
"ravishing tenor," the remote idea of which caused her to be so visibly
preoccupied, that Miss Kling took her leave with angry sniffles, and
returned home to ponder over what she had heard. A few days after, Nattie, who had quite paralyzed Miss Kling by refusing
to listen to what she boldly termed unfounded gossip about her new
friend, went to spend an evening with her. Miss Archer occupied a suite of rooms, consisting of a parlor and a very
small bed-room that had been Mrs. Simonson's own, but which on account
of the "ways and means" she had given up now, confining herself
exclusively to the kitchen, fitted up to look as much like a parlor as a
kitchen could. "And how is 'C'?" asked Miss Archer as she warmly welcomed her visitor. "Still as agreeable as ever," Nattie replied. "I told him I was coming
to see you this evening and he sent his regards, and wished he could be
of the party." "I wish he might. But that would spoil the mystery," rejoined Miss
Archer. "Do you know what the 'C' is for?" "'Clem,' he says. His other name I don't know. He would give me some
outlandish cognomen if I should ask. But it isn't of much consequence." "It might be if you should really fall in love with him," laughed Miss
Archer. "Fall in love! Over the wire! That is absurd, especially as I am not
susceptible," Nattie answered, coloring a trifle, however, as she
remembered how utterly disconsolate she had been all that morning,
because a "cross" on the wire had for several hours cut off
communication between her office and "X n."

"You think it would be too romantic for real life? Doubtless you are
right. And the funny incidents--have you anything new in your
note-book?" "Only that a man to-day, who had perhaps just dined, wanted to know the
tariff to the U--nited St--at--ates," answered Nattie, glancing at some
autumn leaves tastefully arranged on the walls and curtains. "But 'C'
was telling me about a mistake that was lately made--not by him, he
vehemently asserts, although I am inclined to think it message as
originally sent was, 'John is dead, be at home at three,' when it was
delivered it read, 'John is dead _beat_; home at three.'" "How was that possible?" asked Miss Archer, laughing,

"I suppose the sending operator did not leave space enough between the
words; we leave a small space between letters, and a longer one between
words," explained Nattie. "The operator who received it must have been rather stupid not to have
seen the mistake," Miss Archer said. "I have too good an opinion of your
'C' to believe it was he. But every profession has its comic side as
well as its tricks, I suppose; mine, I am sure, does. But I am learning
something every day, and I am determined," energetically, "to fight my
way up!" Stirred by Miss Archer's earnestness, there came to Nattie an uneasy
consciousness that she herself was making no progress towards her only
dreamed of ambition, and a shade crossed her face; but without observing
it, Miss Archer continued,

"I always had a passion for the lyric stage, and now there is nothing to
prevent--" did a slight shadow here darken also her sunny eyes, gone
instantly?-- "I shall make music my life's aim. Fortunately I have money
of my own to enable me to study, and--"

Miss Archer's speech was here interrupted in a somewhat startling
manner, by the door suddenly flying open, banging against the piano with
a prodigious crash, and disclosing Quimby, red and abashed, outside. Nattie jumped, Miss Archer gave a little scream, and the Duchess, Mrs.
Simonson's handsome tortoise-shell cat, so named from her extreme
dignity, who lay at full length upon a rug, drew herself up in haughty
displeasure. "I--I beg pardon, I am sure!" stammered the more agitated intruder. "Really, I--I am so ashamed I--I can hardly speak! I was unfortunate
enough to stumble--I'm used to it, you know,--and I give you my word of
honor I never saw such a--such an extremely lively door!" "It is of no consequence," Miss Archer assured him. "Will you come in?" "Thank you, I--I fear I intrude," answered Quimby, clutching his
watch-chain, and glancing at Nattie, guiltily conscious of the strong
desire to do so that had taken possession of him since the sound of her
voice had penetrated to his apartment, and in perfect agony lest she
should surmise it. However, upon Miss Archer's assuring him that they
would be very glad of his company, he ventured to enter. But the door
still weighed upon his mind, for after carefully closing it, he stood
and stared at it with a very perplexed face. "Never saw such a lively door, you know!" he repeated, finally sitting
down on the piano-stool, and folding both arms across one knee, letting
a hand droop dismally on either side, while he looked alternately at
Miss Archer, Nattie, and the part of the room mentioned, at which the
former laughed, and then, with the kind intention of drawing his mind
from the subject of his forced appearance, suggested a game of cards. "Then we shall have to have one more person, shall we not?" Nattie
asked, at this proposition. "It would be better," replied Miss Archer. "Let me see--Mrs. Simonson
does not play--"

"Mr. Norton does!" interrupted Quimby, forgetting the door, in his
eagerness to be of service. "I--I would willingly ask him to join us, if
you will allow me!" "That queer young artist who lodges here, you mean?" inquired Miss
Archer. "Oh! But he is a dreadful Bohemian!" commented Nattie, distrustfully,
before Quimby could reply. "Is he?" laughed Miss Archer. "Then ask him in by all means! I am
something of a Bohemian myself, and shall be delighted to meet a kindred
soul! I do not know as I have ever observed the gentleman particularly,
but if I remember rightly, he wears his hair very closely cropped, and
is not a model of beauty?" "But he is just as nice a fellow as if he was handsome outside!" said
Quimby earnestly, doubtless aware of his own shortcomings in the Adonis
line. "He is a little queer to be sure, doesn't believe in love or
sentiment or anything of that sort, you know, and he says he wears his
hair cropped close because people have a general idea that artists are
long-haired, lackadaisical fellows,--not to say untidy, you know,--and
he is determined that no one shall be able to say it of him!" Miss Archer was much amused at this description. "He certainly is an odd genius, and decidedly worth knowing. Bring him
in, I beg of you," she said. But Quimby hesitated and glanced at Nattie. "He is not very unconventional, I--I do not think he will shock you very
much if you do not get him at it, you know!" he said to her
apologetically. "Oh! I am not at all alarmed!" said Nattie, adding, as her thoughts
reverted to Miss Kling, "I think, after all, a Bohemian is better than a
perfect model of conventionalism!" Miss Archer heartily indorsed this sentiment, and Quimby went in quest
of Mr. Norton, with whom he soon returned. Unlike enough to the melancholy artist of romantic fame was Mr. Norton. Short, rather stout, inclined to be red in the face, large-nosed,
scrupulously neat in dress, clean shaven, and closely-cropped hair--all
this the observing Miss Archer saw at a glance as she bowed to him in
response to Quimby's introduction. But the second glance showed her that
the expression of his face was so jovial that its plainness vanished as
if by magic on his first smile. If Nattie, possibly a trifle prejudiced in his disfavor, expected him to
outrage common propriety in some way, such as keeping on his hat,
smoking a black pipe, or turning up his pantaloons leg, she was
utterly--shall we say disappointed? Truth to tell, before ten minutes
had elapsed from the time of his arrival, she was wishing she knew more
"Bohemians," and even hoping "C" was one! At home as soon as he entered the room, in a very short time the
strangers of a moment ago were his life-long friends. Full of anecdotes
and quaint remarks, he was the life of the little party. Miss Archer,
however, was a very able backer--Cyn, as they all found themselves
calling her soon after Jo Norton's advent, and forevermore. "Cyn was," as its owner said, "short" for the samewhat lofty name of
Cynthia. Doubtless, the fact of these two, who were partners, beating nearly
every game they played, was not without its effect in promoting their
most genial feelings. A result brought about, not so much by their
skill, as by Quimby's perpetually forgetting what was trumps,
confounding the right and left bowers, and disregarding the power of the
joker. And in truth Quimby's mind was more on his partner than on the game, and
he was becoming more and more awake to the fact that his heart was fast
filling with admiration and adoration of which she was the object, and
inevitably must soon overflow! For Nattie was really looking her very
best this evening. It was excitement and animation that her face
depended upon for its beauty. Miss Archer's companionship, too, was
doing much towards promoting the cheerfulness that brought so clear a
light to her eyes--the light that was now dazzling Quimby. For Cyn was
one of those people who live always in the sunshine, and seem to carry
its own brightness around with them, while Nattie, on the contrary,
oftentimes dwelt among the shadows, and a touch of their somberness hung
over her, and showed itself upon her face. But none of these lurking shadows were there to-night, and as a
consequence, Quimby was unable to keep his eyes off her, and sighed, and
made misdeals, and became generally mixed. His embarrassment was not
lessened when Cyn mischievously informed him he had certainly found
favor in the eyes of Miss Fishblate--who had called upon her the day
before. He dropped the pack of cards he happened to have in his hand at
the moment, all over the floor, and then dived so hastily to pick them
up that his head came in violent contact with the edge of the table, and
for a moment he was almost stunned. But in answer to Cyn's anxious inquiry if he was hurt, he replied,

"It's nothing! I--I am used to it, you know!" Notwithstanding which
assertion his forehead developed such a sudden and terrific bump of
benevolence, that Cyn insisted upon binding her handkerchief over it. Thus, with his head tied up, and secretly lamenting the unornamental
figure he now presented to the eyes of his partner and charmer, Quimby
resumed the game. But what with this cause of uneasiness, and a latent
fear that Cyn's jesting remark about Celeste might be true, a fear he
had privately been conscious of previously, although the least conceited
of mortals, Quimby played so badly--and indeed would undoubtedly have
answered "checkers," had he been asked suddenly what game he was
playing, on account of his meditations on a checkered existence--that
the cards were soon abandoned, and Cyn delighted them with several
songs, and a recitation of "Lady Clara Vere de Vere." While Cyn was singing, Nattie happened to glance at Mr. Norton, and
suddenly remembering a sentence in a lately-read novel about some one
looking with "his soul in his eyes," wondered if that was not exactly
what Mr. Norton was doing now? She did not notice, however, that it was
certainly what Quimby was trying not to do! She wondered too, if the
young artist was paying Cyn some private compliments, for they seemed to
be talking together apart, as all were bidding each other good-night. If
so, she could not understand why Cyn should look so mischievous over it. It was but a momentary thought, however, forgotten as they all mutually
agreed that the pleasant evening just passed should be but the beginning
of many. The circumstance was recalled to her mind, however, and
explained the next day, for on returning from the office she found under
her door a pen and ink sketch, of which she knew at once Cyn was the
designer, and Mr. Norton the executor. It represented two rooms, one on
each side of a partition; in one was a table, containing the ordinary
telegraphic apparatus, before which sat a young lady strangely
resembling Miss Nattie Rogers, with her face beaming with smiles, and
her hand grasping the key. In the other, a young man with a very
battered hat knelt before the sounder on his table, while behind him an
urchin with a message in his hand stared unnoticed, open-mouthed and
unheard; far above was Cupid, connecting the wires that ran from the
gentleman to the lady. "What nonsense!" murmured Nattie, laughing to herself; but' she put the
picture away in her writing desk as carefully as she might some
cherished memento. CHAPTER V.


QUIMBY BURSTS FORTH IN ELOQUENCE. "That young lady over there acts very strangely. She is not crazy, is
she?" inquired a gentleman who stood leaning against the counter over
the way, and looking across at Nattie. "I don't know what to make of her," the previously mentioned clerk, to
whom this question was addressed, answered, "I have been observing her
for some weeks; she sits half the time as you see her now, laughing to
herself and gesticulating. Sometimes she will lean back in her chair and
absolutely shake with laughter, and she smiles at vacancy continually. She seems all right enough with the ex-ception of these vagaries. But
she is a perfect conundrum to me." "A bit luny, I think," said the gentleman, who had asked the question. Just then, Nattie, who, of course, was talking to "C," and telling him
about that sketch--with the slight reservation of the Cupid,--happened
to look up, with her gaze seventy miles away; but becoming aware of the
curious stares of the two gentlemen opposite, her vision shortened
itself to near objects, and rightly surmising from their looks the tenor
of their thoughts, she colored, and straightway turned her back, at the
same time informing "C" of what she termed their impertinence. But "C"
answered, with a laugh,

"It cannot but look strange, you know, to outsiders, to see a person
making such an ado apparently over nothing. Put yourself, if you can, in
the place of the uninitiated; you come along, see an operator quietly
seated, reading the newspaper, with his feet elevated on a chair or
table, the picture of repose. Suddenly up he jumps, down goes the paper,
he seizes a pencil, hurriedly writes a few words, frowns violently,
pounds frantically on the table, stares savagely at nothing, bursts
suddenly into a broad smile, and then quietly resumes his first
position. Wouldn't these seem like rather eccentric gambols to you, if
you didn't know their solution?" "Ha! Doubtless," answered Nattie. "So I suppose I must forgive my
observers, and be more careful what I do in future. I have no doubt I
often make myself ridiculous to chance beholders, when I am talking with
you." "I wonder if that is complimentary to me?" queried "C."

"Certainly, as it is because you make me laugh so much," Nattie replied. "Then I am not such a disagreeable fellow as I might be?" demanded "C,"
evidently attempting to extort flattery. But before Nattie could answer, some one else opened their key, and
said,

"Oh, yes you are!" "That was not I," Nattie explained, as quickly as possible. "Some of
those unpleasant people that can't mind their own business. I was about
to say I should not know how to get through the days now, if I hadn't
you to talk with." "Do you really mean it?" questioned "C," delightedly, it is reasonable
to suppose. "Truly, I was thinking only last night how unbearable would
have been the solitude of my office, had I not been blessed with your
company. I was lonesome enough before I knew you, but I never am now." It was a pity that no telegraphic instrument had yet been invented that
could carry the blush on Nattie's cheeks for his eyes to see, because it
was so very becoming. She commenced a reply, expressing her pleasure,
but was unable to finish it, on account of that unknown and disagreeable
operator somewhere on the line, who kept breaking the circuit after
every letter she made. Nor was "C" allowed to write anything either. This was a trick by which they had often been annoyed of late. For, on the wire in the telegraphic world, as well as elsewhere, are
idle, mischief-making people, who cannot endure to see others enjoying
themselves, if they also have no share. Thus, unable to talk farther at present with her indefatigable
conversationalist, Nattie took up a pencil and began entering the day's
business in her books, when a shadow darkened the doorway, and she
looked up to see Quimby. Since the evening of the card party, when he had become so fully
conscious of the condition of things inside his heart, Quimby had been
in a really pitiable state of unrest. Too bashful, or too deficient in
self-confidence to seek the society of her who was the cause of all his
uneasiness, as his inclinations directed, and not knowing how to make
himself as charming to her as she was to him, he wandered past the
building containing her, two or three times a day, sometimes receiving
the pleasure of a bow as he passed her window, but never before to-day
being able to raise the necessary courage to go in and speak. Nattie, who could not but begin to surmise something of the state of his
feelings, but without dreaming of their intensity, now smiled on him,
and asked him inside the office. No man or woman can be quite
indifferent to one, whom they know has set them on a pedestal, apart
from the rest of the world. "I--really I--I beg pardon, I'm sure," the agitated Quimby, trembling at
his own daring, responded to her invitation. "I--I was passing--quite
accidentally, you know,--thought I would just step in, you know. Really,
I--I must ask pardon for the liberty." "We are too old acquaintances now for you to consider it a liberty,"
Nattie replied, and the words made his perturbed heart jump with joy. "Business being quite dull to-day, I shall be glad to be entertained. Of
course," archly, "you came to entertain me?" Poor Quimby was decidedly taken aback by this question. "I--I--yes certainly--no--that is--I mean I am afraid I am not much of
an entertainer," he stammered, his hands flying to his necktie and
nervously untying it as he spoke. Certainly, the wear and tear on his
neckties and watch chain while he was in his present condition of love
must have been terrific. "Aren't you?" queried Nattie without gainsaying his assertion. "No--really you know I--I'm always making mistakes--but I'm used to it,
you know--and I am not--possibly I might be a trifle better than
nobody--but that's all." And having given this honest, and certainly not conceited opinion of
himself, he entered the office, sat down, and proceeded to make
compasses of his legs. "Have you seen Cyn to-day? she paid me a flying visit yesterday, and
talked a little to 'C,' but I haven't seen her since." "She went away to sing out of town, let me see--I forget where, and she
will not return until to-morrow;" then, uneasily, "I--I beg pardon, but
you--you mentioned the Invisible. Do you--I beg pardon--but do you
converse as much as ever with him?" "Yes indeed!" Nattie replied with an ardor that did not produce exactly
an enlivening effect upon her caller; "we talk together nearly all the
time." "What--I beg pardon--but really--what do you find to talk about so
much?" he inquired jealously. "Oh, everything! of the books we read, and the good things in the
magazines and papers, and the adventures we have--telegraphically; in
short, of all the topics of the day. We agree very well too, except on
candy, that I like and he doesn't," replied Nattie. Quimby suppressed a groan, and hastened to assure her that he himself
possessed a great passion for sweetmeats. "But don't you--I beg pardon--but don't you find this sort of
thing--'C,' I mean--ghostly, you know?" "Ghostly!" echoed the astonished Nattie. "Yes," he replied, with a gesture of his arm that produced an impression
as if that member had leaped out of its socket. "Yes, talking with the
unseen, you know; I--I beg pardon, but it strikes me as ghostly." Nattie stared. "What a strange fancy!" she exclaimed. "'C' is very real, and of the
earth, earthy to me, I assure you!" Quimby's face lengthened some three inches. "Is he?" he said ruefully. "I--I beg pardon, but you haven't--you don't mean to say that--you have
not taken a--bless my soul! how warm it is here!" and he mopped his face
with a red silk handkerchief--a color very unbecoming to his complexion. "Warm!" repeated Nattie, her lips curving in an amused smile, for she
had a shawl over her shoulders, and was nevertheless slightly chilly. "I
don't perceive it, I am sure." "I--I beg pardon--but I've been walking, you know," Quimby said
nervously. "But I--I was about to ask--I--I beg pardon--but you have
not--not" desperately, "really fallen in love with him, have you?" Nattie's eyes danced with amusement, but her color deepened slightly
too, as she replied,

"How could one fall in love with an invisible? why, that would be even
less satisfactory than an ideal!" Quimby's face brightened, and he recovered himself sufficiently to put
away the red silk handkerchief. "I don't think--really, I should not think there could be much
satisfaction in it!" then stealing a bashful but adoring glance at her,
he added,

"I--I prefer a--a visible, as being something more substantial, you
know!" "Indeed?" said Nattie, demurely; then thinking perhaps he was drifting
on to grounds that had best be avoided, she changed the subject, by
saying,

"Do you not think Cyn a very charming young lady?" "Oh, yes! I--I--yes, very charming!" Quimby answered, but not so
enthusiastically as perhaps Mr. Norton might have done. For Quimby's
heart was of the old-fashioned kind, and his fancy was not fickle;
besides, being now, in a measure, launched upon the subject, of love, so
awful to approach, he was unwilling thus soon to leave a theme so sweet,
yet so formidable. Therefore, crossing his legs, and bracing up against
the chair-back; he determined, now or never, to give her an inkling of
his feelings, an intention so very palpable, that Nattie was glad indeed
to hear from the sounder,

"B m--B m--B m--." "Excuse me," she said, hastily. "They are calling me on the wire," and
immediately answered, and began taking a message. Meanwhile, to him had come a reaction, and he was in a state of total
collapse. Before she had finished receiving that message of only ten
words, he had drawn himself dejectedly to his feet, and was looking for
his hat. "I--I really--I must go, you know!" he faltered, blushing, as Nattie
glanced up at him. "I--I fear I have intruded now--but I--I--" he
stopped short, unable to find an ending to his sentence. "I'm always glad of company," Nattie said, but a little distantly, as
she gave "O. K." on the wire. "I--I--really, you are very kind, you know," stammered Quimby. "I--I
pass here on the way to dinner, you see--from the office, you know,"--he
eked out his meagre income by writing in a lawyer's office--"where, 'pon
my word, I ought to have been now. But it's--it's such a pleasure to see
you--you know that--where can my hat be?" All this time he had been looking around for his hat, and now Nattie
fished it out of the waste basket, into which he had unwittingly dropped
it. Taking it with many apologies, he bowed himself confusedly and
ungracefully out, and went away, wondering if he would ever be able to
get himself up to such a pitch again, and resolving, if it proved
possible, that it should not occur next time where there was one of
those aggravating "sounders." "Now, I hope," thought Nattie, as she watched his retreating form, "that
he is not going to make an idiot of himself! Not only because he is as
good a fellow as he is a blundering one, and I wouldn't for the world
hurt his feelings, but also because it would be dreadfully uncomfortable
to have a rejected lover wandering around in the same house with one!" And Nattie, judging from his late conduct that the contingency referred
to was likely to occur, resolved to be careful and not give him any
opportunity to express his feelings, and furthermore, to kindly and
cautiously teach him the meaning of the word Friendship, and
particularly to define the broad distinction between that and Love. But circumstances are mulish things, and not to be governed at will, as
Nattie was soon to discover. A few evenings after she called in to see Cyn, who happened to be out. But she was momentarily expected to return, as Mrs. Simonson said, so
Nattie concluded to wait, and sat down at the piano. Not noticing she
had left the door partly open, and never dreaming of approaching danger,
she began to play, when suddenly, the hesitating voice of Quimby broke
in upon the strains of the "First Kiss" waltz. "I--may I come in?" he asked. "I--I beg your pardon, but I knocked
several times, you know, and you didn't hear at all." Nattie would gladly have refused the invitation he asked, but could
think of no possible excuse for so doing, and was therefore compelled to
say,

"Yes--come in, I expect Cyn every moment." Availing himself of this permission, Quimby entered, balanced his hat on
the edge of an album, and seating himself in a chair, seized a round on
either side as if he was in danger of blowing away, and stared at her
without a word. "It has been a lovely day, hasn't it?" Nattie said at last, beginning to
find the silence embarrassing, and reverting to Mrs. Simonson's safe
topic. "Yes--exactly so!" Quimby answered, strengthening his grasp on the chair
in a vain endeavor to summon the requisite courage to avail himself of
this rare opportunity of pouring out his feelings. Nattie tried him again on another safe topic. "Cyn and I dined together to-day." "I--I can't eat!" burst forth Quimby in accents of despair. "Can't you?" said Nattie, devoutly wishing Cyn would come. "I am very
sorry, I hope you are not dyspeptic." "No, no!" he answered, his eyes almost starting from his head between
his determination to wind himself up to the point, and the tightness of
his grasp on the chair. "It's--it's my heart, you know!" "You don't mean to say you have heart disease?" said Nattie, seeing
danger fast approaching, and taking refuge in obtusity. "No; I--I beg pardon--not a--not a bodily heart disease, you know, but a
mental one!" and he relaxed his grasp on the chair with one hand to tug
at his necktie as if being hung, and disliking the sensation. "That is something I never heard of," Nattie said dryly; then thinking,
"I'll drown him in music," she asked hastily,

"Do you like the First Kiss?" The bounce of an India rubber ball is no comparison to the agility with
which Quimby jumped from his chair at this question. "Oh! Bless my soul! Wouldn't I?" he gasped. "I will play it to you," exclaimed Nattie instantly aware of the
indiscretion of her question, and she thundered as loud as she could on
the piano, while Quimby, with a very red face, subsided into the chair
again. But not long did he remain subsided; whether it was the music
that inspired im, or a desperate determination that nerved him, he
suddenly sprang up, and with one stride was beside her, exclaiming
excitedly,

"No! That is--I beg pardon--but please do not play any more just now. There is something I must say to you! Oh! I can't express myself! It all
comes upon me with a rush when I am alone, but now, at this supreme
moment, I cannot tell you how I a--"

"Excuse me, but I am afraid I cannot remain now," hastily interrupted
Nattie, feeling that something must be done to stop him, and adopting
the first expedient that suggested itself. "I just happened to recollect
I left my gas burning in close proximity to the lace curtains, and I
must go immediately and attend to it." With these words, Nattie rushed away, half amused and half annoyed,
leaving him to stare after her with a blank and rueful face, to ask
himself how any fellow could get on amid such drawbacks, to decide that
proposing was a dreadful strain on the nerves, but to resolve his next
attempt should be a success, if he had to inaugurate previously a series
of private rehearsals. For although abashed and discomfited by his
repeated failures to make his feelings understood, he was more in love
than ever. CHAPTER VI. COLLAPSE OF THE ROMANCE. "B m--B m--B m--N--N--N--Oh! where are you, N? Where is the little girl at
B m--B m--B m?" Such were the sounds that greeted Nattie's ears, as she entered the
office the morning after her adventure with the love-lorn Quimby; and
immediately she ceased to speculate on the probable embarrassment that
must necessarily attend their not-to-be-avoided next meeting, and
interrupted "C's" solitary conversation, by saying,

"What is the matter with you this morning? Here I am, N."

"G. M., my dear. I'm off, and wanted to say good-by before I went,"
responded "C."

"Off?" questioned Nattie, with a sudden fall in her mental temperature. "Yes, I am going to a station five miles below to substitute, to-day. The operator there is obliged to go away, and couldn't find any one
competent to do his work, and as there was a fellow that could do mine,
he comes here and I go there." "Oh, dear! what shall I do all day?" said Nattie, sinking into a chair,
very much aggrieved. "I am very sorry, but I couldn't well avoid accommodating him. But what
will you do when I leave entirely, if you can't get along without me one
day? happy I, to be so necessary to your existence!" "But there is no prospect of your leaving at present, is there?" asked
Nattie, forgetting in her alarm at such a possibility to challenge the
last of his remark. "There is some probability of it now," "C" responded. "I will tell you
all about it to-morrow. I may come nearer to you; near enough even for
you to see that twinkle." "You don't mean you have a prospect of an office here in the city?" questioned Nattie, not knowing whether she would be glad or sorry if
such were the case. "Not exactly," replied "C." "I haven't time to explain; train is coming,
so--"

"Where did you say you were going to-day?" broke in Nattie quickly. "B a--five miles down the line nearer you, but not on this wire. Used to
be, you know, but switched on wire number twenty-seven last week," "C"
responded so hurriedly, that Nattie could hardly read it, although so
accustomed to his style of making his dots and dashes; for, with the
key, as with the pen, all operators have their own peculiar manner of
writing. "Ah, yes! I remember," responded Nattie quickly. "That hateful operator
signing 'M' had it, that used to be fighting for the circuit always, and
breaking in when we were talking. I wouldn't have gone for him." "Couldn't well avoid it. Here is train. Good-by; shall miss you
terribly, but will be with you again to-morrow. Good-by." "Good-by. I am lonesome already," Nattie answered. As "C" made no reply, it was supposable he had gone, and probably had to
run for the train, thought Nattie, as she took off her hat rather
dejectedly. A broken companionship of any kind must ever leave a certain sense of
loneliness, and this was none the less true now on account of the unique
circumstances. Indeed, until to-day she had not fully realized how
necessary "C" had become to her telegraphic life. Naturally, she had
woven a sort of romance about him who was a friend "so near and yet so
far." Perhaps too, a certain yearning for tenderness in her lonely
heart, a feeling that every woman knows, found something, very pleasant
in being always greeted with "Good morning, my dear," and hearing the
last thing at night, "Good night, little girl at B m."

Miss Kling undoubtedly would have been shocked at being thus addressed
even on the wire, by a strange person--a person certainly, although
unseen; but Nattie, used to the license that distance gave, whether
wisely or unwisely, had never, thought it necessary to check the
familiarity. Pondering over what he had hinted about leaving permanently, in the
leisure usually devoted to chatting with him, but which that day she
hardly knew how to fill, Nattie wondered if, should they ever come face
to face, they would feel like the old friends they were, or if the
nearness would bring a constraint now unknown? Yet she was fain to
confess she would like to see him and ascertain the personal appearance
of one who occupied so much of her thoughts. But how strange it would
be, if, after all their friendly talks and gay confidences, he should
pass out of the way that was both their ways now, and they never know
anything more about each other than that one was "C" and one was "N!" something not impossible either, or even improbable; for fate is a sort
of switch-board, and a slight move will switch two lives onto wires far
asunder, even as the moving of a peg or two will alter everything on the
board that shows its power so little. With such thoughts in her mind, Nattie was rather among the shadows that
day, and presented no laughing face to the curious passers-by, much to
that opposite clerk's relief, who came to the conclusion that she had
once more recovered her senses. 