









COMEDIES OF COURTSHIP

By Anthony Hope



  "It is a familiar fact that the intensity of a passion varies
   with the proximity of the appropriate object." Mr. Leslie Stephen, 'Science of Ethics'

  "How the devil is it that fresh features
   Have such a charm for us poor human creatures?" Lord Byron, 'Don Juan'


Charles Scribner's Sons New York 1896

Copyright, 1896 Charles Scribner's Sons

Copyright, 1894, 1896, by Anthony Hope


NOTE

"The Wheel of Love," published in Scribner's Magazine during the past
year, and "The Lady of the Pool," both protected by American copyright,
are here printed for the first time in book form. The four other
stories appeared without their author's consent or knowledge, with
their titles changed beyond recognition, and combined with other
unauthorized material, in a small volume printed by an American firm. They are here given for the first time in their proper form and by my
authority. Anthony Hope. CONTENTS

The Wheel of Love The Lady of the Pool The Curate of Poltons A
Three-Volume Novel The Philosopher in the Apple Orchard The Decree of
Duke Deodonato



THE WHEEL OF LOVE



CHAPTER I

THE VIRTUOUS HYPOCRITES


AT first sight they had as little reason for being unhappy as it is
possible to have in a world half full of sorrow. They were young and
healthy; half a dozen times they had each declared the other more than
common good-looking; they both had, and never knew what it was not to
have, money enough for comfort and, in addition that divine little
superfluity wherefrom joys are born. The house was good to look at and
good to live in; there were horses to ride, the river to go a-rowing
on, and a big box from Mudie's every week. No one worried them; Miss
Bussey was generally visiting the poor; or, as was the case at this
moment, asleep in her arm-chair, with Paul, the terrier, in his basket
beside her, and the cat on her lap. Lastly, they were plighted lovers,
and John was staying with Miss Bussey for the express purpose of
delighting and being delighted by his fiancee, Mary Travers. For these
and all their mercies certainly they should have been truly thankful. However the heart of man is wicked. This fact alone can explain why
Mary sat sadly in the drawing-room, feeling a letter that was tucked
inside her waistband and John strode moodily up and down the gravel
walk, a cigar, badly bitten, between his teeth, and his hand over and
again covertly stealing toward his breast-pocket and pressing a scented
note that lay there. In the course of every turn John would pass the
window of the drawing-room; then Mary would look up with a smile and
blow him a kiss, and he nodded and laughed and returned the salute. But, the window passed, both sighed deeply and returned to lingering
those hidden missives. "Poor little girl! I must keep it up," said John. "Dear good John! He must never know," thought Mary. And the two fell to thinking just what was remarked a few lines back,
namely, that the human heart is very wicked; they were shocked at
themselves; the young often are. Miss Bussey awoke, sat up, evicted the cat, and found her spectacles. "Where are those children?" said she. "Billing and cooing somewhere, I
suppose. Bless me, why don't they get tired of it?" They had--not indeed of billing and cooing in general, for no one at
their age does or ought to get tired of that--but of billing and cooing
with one another. It will be observed that the situation promised well for a tragedy. Nevertheless this is not the story of an unhappy marriage. If there be one thing which Government should forbid, it is a secret
engagement. Engagements should be advertised as marriages are; but
unless we happen to be persons of social importance, or considerable
notoriety, no such precautions are taken. Of course there are
engagement rings; but a man never knows one when he sees it on a lady's
hand--it would indeed be impertinent to look too closely--and when he
goes out alone he generally puts his in his pocket, considering that
the evening will thus be rendered more enjoyable. The Ashforth--Travers
engagement was not a secret now, but it had been, and had been too
long. Hence, when Mary went to Scotland and met Charlie Ellerton, and
when John went to Switzerland and met Dora Bellairs-the truth is, they
ought never to have separated, and Miss Bussey (who was one of the
people in the secret) had been quite right when she remarked that it
seemed a curious arrangement. John and Mary had scoffed at the idea of
a few weeks' absence having any effect on their feelings except, if
indeed it were possible, that of intensifying them. "I really think I ought to go and find them," said Miss Bussey. "Come,
Paul!" She took a parasol, for the April sun was bright, and went into the
garden. "When she came to the drawing-room window John was away at the
end of the walk. She looked at him: he was reading a letter. She looked
in at the window: Mary was reading a letter. "Well!" exclaimed Miss Bussey. "Have they had a tiff?" And she slowly
waddled (truth imposes this word-she was very stout) toward the
unconscious John. He advanced toward her still reading; not only did he
not see her, but he failed to notice that Paul had got under his feet. He fell over Paul, and as he stumbled the letter fluttered out of his
hand. Paul seized it and began to toss it about in great glee. "Good doggie!" Cried Miss Bussey. "Come then! Bring it to me, dear. Good Paul!" John's face was distorted with agony. He darted toward Paul, fell on
him, and gripped him closely. Paul yelped and Miss Bussey observed, in
an indignant tone, that John need not throttle the dog. John muttered
something. "Is the letter so very precious?" asked his hostess ironically. "Precious!" cried John. "Yes!--No!--It's nothing at all." But he opened Paul's mouth and took out his treasure with wonderful
care. "And why," inquired Miss Bussey, "are you not with Mary, young man? You're very neglectful." "Neglectful! Surely, Miss Bussey, you haven't noticed anything--like
neglect? Don't say----"

"Bless the boy! I was only joking. You're a model lover." "Thank you, thank you. I'll go to her at once," and he sped towards the
window, opened it and walked up to Mary. Miss Bussey followed him and
arrived just in time to see the lovers locked in one another's arms,
their faces expressing all appropriate rapture. "There's nothing much wrong," said Miss Bussey; wherein Miss Bussey
herself was much wrong. "What a shame! I've left you alone for more than an hour!" said John. "Have you been very unhappy?" and he added, "darling." It sounded like
an afterthought. "I have been rather unhappy," answered Mary, and her answer was true. As she said it she tucked in a projecting edge of her letter. John had
hurriedly slipped his (it was rather the worse for its mauling) into
his trousers-pocket. "You--you didn't think me neglectful?" "Oh, no." "I was thinking of you all the time,"

"And I was thinking of you, dear." "Are you very happy?" "Yes, John; aren't you?" "Of course I am. Happy! I should think so," and he kissed her with
unimpeachable fervor. When a conscientious person makes up his mind that he ought, for good
reasons, to deceive somebody, there is no one like him for
thorough-paced hypocrisy. When two conscientious people resolve; to
deceive one another, on grounds of duty, the acme of duplicity is in a
fair way to be reached. John Ashforth and Mary Travers illustrated this
proposition. The former had been all his life a good son, and was now a
trustworthy partner, to his father, who justly relied no less on his
character than on his brains. The latter, since her parents' early
death had left her to her aunt's care, had been the comfort and prop of
Miss Bussey's life. It is difficult to describe good people without
making them seem dull; but luckily nature is defter than novelists, and
it is quite possible to be good without being dull. Neither Mary nor
John was dull; a trifle limited, perhaps, they were, a thought severe
in their judgments of others as well as of themselves; a little
exacting with their friends and more than a little with themselves. One description paints them both; doubtless their harmony of mind had
contributed more than Mary's sweet expression and finely cut features,
or John's upstanding six feet, and honest capable face, to produce that
attachment between them which had, six months before this story begins,
culminated in their engagement. Once arrived at, this ending seemed to
have been inevitable. Everybody discovered that they had foretold it
from the first, and modestly disclaimed any credit for anticipating a
union between a couple so obviously made for one another. The distress into which lovers such as these fell when they discovered
by personal experience that sincerely to vow eternal love is one thing,
and sincerely to give it quite another, may be well imagined, and may
well be left to be imagined. They both went through a terrible period
of temptation, wherein they listened longingly to the seductive
pleading of their hearts; but both emerged triumphant, resolved to
stifle their mad fancy, to prefer good faith to mere inclination, and
to avoid, at all costs, wounding one to whom they had sworn to be true. Thus far their steadfastness carried them, but not beyond. They could
part from their loved ones, and they did; but they could not leave them
without a word. Each wrote, after leaving Scotland and Switzerland
respectively, a few lines of adieu, confessing the love they felt, but
with resolute sadness saying farewell forever. They belonged to another. It was the answers that Mary and John were reading when Miss Bussey
discovered them. Mary's ran:


"MY DEAR MISS TRAVERS: I have received your letter. I can't tell you
what it means to me. You say all must be over between us. Don't be
offended--but I won't say that yet. It can't be your duty to marry a
man you don't love. You forbid me to write or come to you; and you ask
only for a word of good-by. I won't say good-by. I'll say _Au
revoir--au revoir_, my darling." "Charlie." "Burn this." This was John's:

"MY DEAR MR. ASHFORTH: What am I to say to you? Oh, why, why didn't you
tell me before? I oughtn't to say that, but it is too late to conceal
anything from you. Yes, you are right. It must be good-by. Yes, I will
try to forget you. But oh, John, it's very, very, very difficult. I
don't know how to sign this--so I won't. You'll know who it comes from,
won't you? Good-by. Burn this." These letters, no doubt, make it plain that there had been at least a
momentary weakness both in Mary and in John; but in a true and
charitable view their conduct in rising superior to temptation finally
was all the more remarkable and praiseworthy. They had indeed, for the
time, been carried away. Even now Mary found it hard not to make
allowances for herself, little as she was prone to weakness when she
thought of the impetuous _abandon_ and conquering whirl with which
Charlie Ellerton had wooed her; and John confessed that flight alone, a
hasty flight from Interlaken after a certain evening spent in gazing at
the Jungfrau, had saved him from casting everything to the winds and
yielding to the slavery of Dora Bellairs's sunny smiles and charming
coquetries. He had always thought that that sort of girl had no
attractions for him, just as Mary had despised 'butterfly-men' like
Charlie Ellerton. Well, they were wrong. The only comfort was that
shallow natures felt these sorrows less; it would have broken Mary's
heart (thought John), or John's (thought Mary), but Dora and Charlie
would soon find consolation in another. But here, oddly enough, John
generally swore heartily and Mary always began to search for her
handkerchief. "They're as affectionate as one could wish when they're
together," mused Miss Bussey, as she stroked the cat, "but at other
times they're gloomy company. I suppose they can't be happy apart. Dear! dear!" and the good old lady fell to wondering whether she had
ever been so foolish herself. CHAPTER II

SYMPATHY IN SORROW


"Give me," observed Sir Roger Deane, "Cannes, a fine day, a good set to
look at, a beehive chair, a good cigar, a cocktail on one side and a
nice girl on the other, and there I am! I don't want anything else." General Bellairs pulled his white mustache and examined Sir Roger's
figure and surroundings with a smile. "Then only Lady Deane is wanting to your complete happiness," said he. "Maud is certainly a nice girl, but when she deserts me----"

"Where is she?" "I don't know." "I do," interposed a young man, who wore an eye--glass and was in
charge of a large jug. "She's gone to Monte." "I might have known," said Sir Roger. "Being missed here always means
you've gone to Monte--like not being at church means you've gone to
Brighton." "Surely she doesn't play?" asked the General. "Not she! She's going to put it in a book. She writes books you know. She put me in the last--made me a dashed fool, too, by Jove!" "That was unkind," said the General, "from your wife." "Oh, Lord love you, she didn't mean it. I was the hero. That's how I
came to be such an ass. The dear girl meant everything that was kind. Who's taken her to Monte?" "Charlie Ellerton," said the young man with the eye-glass. "There! I told you she was a kind girl. She's trying to pull old
Charlie up a peg or two. He's had the deuce of a facer, you know." "I thought he seemed less cheerful than usual." "Oh, rather. He met a girl somewhere or other--I always forget
places--Miss--Miss--hang it, I can't remember names--and got awfully
smitten, and everything went pleasantly and she took to him like
anything--, and at last old Charlie spoke up like a man, and----" Sir
Roger paused dramatically. "Well?" asked the General. "She was engaged to another fellow. Rough, wasn't it? She told old
Charlie she liked him infernally, but promises were promises, don't you
know, and she'd thank him to take his hook. And he had to take it, by
Gad! Rough, don't you know? So Maud's been cheering him up. The devil!" "What's the matter now?" inquired the General. "Why, I've just remembered that I promised to say nothing about it. I
say, don't you repeat it, General, nor you either, Laing." The General laughed. "Well," said Sir Roger, "he oughtn't to have been such a fool as to
tell me. He knows I never remember to keep things dark. It's not my
fault." A girl came out of the hotel and strolled up to where the group was. She was dark, slight, and rather below middle height; her complexion at
this moment was a trifle sallow and her eyes listless, but it seemed
rather as though she had dressed her face into a tragic cast, the set
of the features being naturally mirthful. She acknowledged the men's
salutations and sat down with a sigh. "Not on to-day?" asked Sir Roger, waving his cigar toward the
lawn-tennis courts. "No," said Miss Bellairs. "Are you seedy, Dolly?" inquired the General. "No," said Miss Bellairs. Mr. Laing fixed his eye-glass and surveyed the young lady. "Are you taking any?" said he, indicating the jug. "I don't see any fun in vulgarity," observed Miss Bellairs. The General smiled. Sir Roger's lips assumed the shape for a whistle. "That's a nasty one for me," said Laing. "Ah, here you are, Roger," exclaimed a fresh clear voice from behind
the chairs. "I've been looking for you everywhere. We've seen
everything--Mr. Ellerton was most kind--and I do so want to tell you my
impressions." The new-comer was Lady Deane, a tall young woman, plainly dressed in a
serviceable cloth walking-gown. By her side stood Charlie Ellerton in a
flannel suit of pronounced striping; he wore a little yellow mustache,
had blue eyes and curly hair, and his face was tanned a wholesome
ruddy-brown. He looked very melancholy. "Letters from Hell," murmured Sir Roger. "But I was so distressed," continued his wife. "Mr. Ellerton would
gamble, and he lost ever so much money." "A fellow must amuse himself," remarked Charlie gloomily, and with
apparent unconsciousness he took a glass from Laing and drained it. "Gambling and drink--what does that mean?" asked Sir Roger. "Shut up, Deane," said Charlie. Miss Bellairs rose suddenly and walked away. Her movement expressed
impatience with her surroundings. After a moment Charlie Ellerton
slowly sauntered after her. She sat down on a garden-seat some way off. Charlie placed himself at the opposite end. A long pause ensued. "I'm afraid I'm precious poor company," said Charlie. "I didn't want you to be company at all," answered Miss Bellairs, and
she sloped her parasol until it obstructed his view of her face. "I'm awfully sorry, but I can't stand the sort of rot Deane and Laing
are talking." "Can't you? Neither can I." "They never seem to be serious about anything, you know," and Charlie
sighed deeply, and for three minutes there was silence. "Do you know Scotland at all?" asked Charlie at last. "Only a little." "There last year?" "No, I was in Switzerland." "Oh." "Do you know Interlaken?" "No." "Oh." "May I have a cigarette?" "Of course, if you like." Charlie lit his cigarette and smoked silently for a minute or two. "I call this a beastly place," said he. "Yes, horrid," she answered, and the force of sympathy made her move
the parasol and turn her face towards her companion. "But I thought,"
she continued, "you came here every spring?" "Oh, I don't mind the place so much. It's the people." "Yes, isn't it? I know what you mean." "You can't make a joke of everything, can you?" "Indeed no," sighed Dora. Charlie looked at his cigarette, and, his eyes carefully fixed on it,
said in a timid tone:

"What's the point, for instance, of talking as if love was all bosh?" Dora's parasol swept down again swiftly, but Charlie was still looking
at the cigarette and he did not notice its descent, nor could he see
that Miss Bellairs's cheek was no longer sallow. "It's such cheap rot," he continued, "and when a fellow's--I say, Miss
Bellairs, I'm not boring you?" The parasol wavered and finally moved. "No," said Miss Bellairs. "I don't know whether you--no, I mustn't say that; but I know what it
is to be in love, Miss Bellairs; but what's the good of talking about
it? Everybody laughs." Miss Bellairs put down her parasol. "I shouldn't laugh," she said softly. "It's horrid to laugh at people
when they're in trouble," and her eyes were very sympathetic. "You are kind. I don't mind talking about it to you. You know I'm not
the sort of fellow who falls in love with every girl he meets; so of
course it's worse when I do." "Was it just lately?" murmured Dora. "Last summer." "Ah! And--and didn't she----?" "Oh, I don't know. Yes, hang it, I believe she did. She was perfectly
straight, Miss Bellairs. I don't say a word against her. She-I think
she didn't know her own feelings until--until I spoke, you know--and
then----"

"Do go on, if--if it doesn't----"

"Why, then, the poor girl cried and said it couldn't be because
she--she was engaged to another fellow; and she sent me away." Miss Bellairs was listening attentively. "And," continued Charlie, "she wrote and said it must be good-by
and--and----"

"And you think she----?" "She told me so," whispered Charlie. "She said she couldn't part
without telling me. Oh, I say, Miss Bellairs, isn't it all damnable? I
beg your pardon." Dora was tracing little figures on the gravel with her parasol. "Now what would you do?" cried Charlie. "She loves me, I know she does,
and she's going to marry this other fellow because she promised him
first. I don't suppose she knew what love was then." "Oh, I'm sure she didn't," exclaimed Dora earnestly. "You can't blame her, you know. And it's absurd to--to--to--not
to--well, to marry a fellow you don't care for when you care for
another fellow, you know!" "Yes." "Of course you can hardly imagine yourself in that position, but
suppose a man liked you and-and was placed like that, you know, what
should you feel you ought to do?" "Oh, I don't know," exclaimed Dora, clasping her hands. "Oh, do tell me
what you think! I'd give the world to know!" Charlie's surprised glance warned her of her betrayal. "You mustn't ask
me." she exclaimed hastily. "I won't ask a word. I--I'm awfully sorry, Miss Bellairs." "Nobody knows," she murmured. "Nobody shall through me." "You're not very--? I'm very ashamed." "Why? And because of me! After what I've told you!" Charlie rose suddenly. "I'm not going to stand it," he announced. Dora looked up eagerly. "What? You're going to----?" "I'm going to have a shot at it. Am I to stand by and see her----? I'm
hanged if I do. Could that be right?" "I should like to know what one's _duty_ is?" "This talk with you has made me quite clear. We've reasoned it out, you
see. They're not to be married for two or three months. A lot can be
done in that time." "Ah, you're a man!" "I shall write first. If that doesn't do, I shall go to her." Dora shook her head mournfully. "Now, look here, Miss Bellairs you don't mind me advising you?" "I ought not to have let you see, but as it is--"

"You do as I do, you stick to it. Confound it, you know, when one's
life's happiness is at stake--"

"Oh, yes, yes!" "One mustn't be squeamish, must one?" And Dora Bellairs, in a very low whisper, answered, "No." "I shall write to-night." "Oh! To-night?" "Yes. Now promise me you will too." "It's harder for me than you." "Not if he really----." "Oh, indeed, he really does, Mr. Ellerton." "Then you'll write?" "Perhaps." "No. Promise!" "Well--it must be right. Yes, I will." "I feel the better for our talk, Miss Bellairs, don't you?" "I do a little." "We shall be friends now, you know; even if I bring it off I shan't be
content unless you do too. Won't you give me your good wishes?" "Indeed I will." "Shake hands on it." They shook hands and began to stroll back to the tennis-courts. "They look a little better," observed Sir Roger Deane, who had been
listening to an eloquent description of the gaming-tables. Dora and Charlie walked on towards the hotel. "Hi!" shouted Sir Roger. "Tea's coming out here." "I've got a letter to write," said Charlie. "Well, Miss Bellairs, you must come. Who's to pour it out?" "I must catch the post, Sir Roger," answered Dora. They went into the house together. In the hall they parted. "You'll let me know what happens, Mr. Ellerton, won't you? I'm so
interested." "And you?" "Oh--well, perhaps," and the sallow of her cheeks had turned to a fine
dusky red as she ran upstairs. Thus it happened that a second letter for John Ashforth and a second
letter for Mary Travers left Cannes that night. And if it seems a curious coincidence that Dora and Charlie should meet
at Cannes, it can only be answered that they were each of them just as
likely to be at Cannes as anywhere else. Besides, who knows that these
things are all coincidence? CHAPTER III

A PROVIDENTIAL DISCLOSURE


On Wednesday the eleventh of April, John Ashforth rose from his bed
full of a great and momentous resolution. There is nothing very strange
in that, perhaps it is just the time of day when such things come to a
man, and, in ordinary cases, they are very prone to disappear with the
relics of breakfast. But John was of sterner stuff. He had passed a
restless night, tossed to and fro by very disturbing gusts of emotion,
and he arose with the firm conviction that if he would escape shipwreck
he must secure his bark by immovable anchors while he was, though not
in honor, yet in law and fact, free; he could not trust himself. Sorrowfully admitting his weakness, he turned to the true, the right,
the heroic remedy. "I'll marry Mary to--day fortnight," said he. "When we are man and wife
I shall forget this madness and love her as I used to." He went down to breakfast, ate a bit of toast and drank a cup of very
strong tea. Presently Mary appeared and greeted him with remarkable
tenderness. His heart smote him, and his remorse strengthened his
determination. "I want to speak to you after breakfast," he told her. His manner was so significant that a sudden gleam of hope flashed into
her mind. Could it be that he had seen, that he would be generous? She
banished the shameful hope. She would not accept generosity at the
expense of pain to him. Miss Bussey, professing to find bed the best place in the world, was in
the habit of taking her breakfast there. The lovers were alone, and,
the meal ended, they passed together into the conservatory. Mary sat
down and John leant against the glass door opposite her. "Well?" said she, smiling at him. It suddenly struck John that, in a scene of this nature, it
ill-befitted him to stand three yards from the lady. He took a chair
and drew it close beside her. The thing had to be done and it should be
done properly. "We've made a mistake, Mary," he announced, taking her hand and
speaking in a rallying tone. "A mistake!" she cried; "oh, how?" "In fixing our marriage----." "So soon?" "My darling!" said John (and it was impossible to deny admiration to
the tone he said it in), "no. So late! What are we waiting for? Why are
we wasting all this precious time?" Mary could not speak, but consternation passed for an appropriate
confusion, and John pursued his passionate pleadings. As Mary felt his
grasp and looked into his honest eyes, her duty lay plain before her. She would not stoop to paltry excuses on the score of clothes,
invitations, or such trifles. She had made up her mind to the thing;
surely she ought to do it in the way most gracious and most pleasing to
her lover. "If Aunt consents," she murmured at last, "do as you like, John dear,"
and the embrace which each felt to be inevitable at such a crisis
passed between them. A discreet cough separated them. The butler stood in the doorway, with
two letters on a salver. One he handed to Mary, the other to John, and
walked away with a twinkle in his eye. However even our butlers do not
know everything that happens in our houses (to say nothing of our
hearts), although much they may think they do. John looked at his letter, started violently and crushed it into his
pocket. He glanced at Mary; her letter lay neglected on her lap. She
was looking steadily out of the window. "Well, that's settled," said John. "I--I think I'll have a cigar, dear." "Yes, do, darling," said Mary, and John went out. These second letters were unfortunately so long as to make it
impossible to reproduce them. They were also very affecting, Dora's
from its pathos, Charlie's from its passion. But the waves of emotion
beat fruitlessly on the rock-built walls of conscience. At almost the
same moment, Mary, brushing away a tear, and John, blowing his nose,
sat down to write a brief, a final answer. "We are to be married
today fortnight," they said. They closed the envelopes without a
moment's delay and went to drop their letters in the box. The servant
was already waiting to go to the post with them and a second later the
fateful documents were on their way to Cannes. "Now," said John, with a ghastly smile, "we can have a glorious long
day together!" Mary was determined to leave herself no loophole. "We must tell Aunt what--what we have decided upon this morning," she
reminded him. "It means that the wedding must be very quiet." "I shan't mind that. Shall you?" "I shall like it of all things." she answered. "Come and find Aunt
Sarah." Miss Bussey had always--or at least for a great many years
back--maintained the general proposition that young people do not know
their own minds. This morning's news confirmed her opinion. "Why the other day you both agreed that the middle of June would do
perfectly. Now you want it all done in a scramble." The pair stood before her, looking very guilty. "What is the meaning of this--this (she very nearly said 'indecent')
extraordinary haste?" Miss Bussey asked only one indulgence from her friends. Before she did
a kind thing she liked to be allowed to say one or two sharp ones. Her
niece was aware of this fancy of hers and took refuge in silence. John, less experienced in his hostess's ways, launched into the
protests appropriate to an impatient lover. "Well," said Miss Bussey, "I must say you look properly ashamed of
yourself [John certainly did], so I'll see what can be done. What a
fluster we shall live in! Upon my word you might as well have made it
tomorrow. The fuss would have been no worse and a good deal shorter." The next few days passed, as Miss Bussey had predicted, in a fluster. Mary was running after dress makers, John after licenses, Cook's
tickets, a best man, and all the impedimenta of a marriage. The
intercourse of the lovers was much interrupted, and to this Miss Bussey
attributed the low spirits that Mary sometimes displayed. "There, there, my dear," she would say impatiently--for the cheerful
old lady hated long faces--"you'll have enough of him and to spare by
and by." Curiously this point of view did not comfort Mary. She liked John very
much, she esteemed him even more than she liked him, he would, she
thought, have made an ideal brother. Ah, why had she not made a brother
of him while there was time? Then she would have enjoyed his constant
friendship all her life; for it was not with him as with that foolish
boy Charlie, all or nothing. John was reasonable; he would not have
threatened--well, reading--his letter one way, Charlie almost seemed to
be tampering with propriety. John would never have done that. And these
reflections, all of which should have pleaded for John, ended in
weeping over the lost charms of Charlie. One evening, just a week before the wedding, she roused herself from
some such sad meditations, and, duty-driven, sought John in the
smoking-room. The door was half open and she entered noiselessly. John
was sitting at the table; his arms were outspread on it, and his face
buried in his hands. Thinking he was asleep she approached on tiptoe
and leant over his shoulder. As she did so her eyes fell on a sheet of
note-paper; it was clutched in John's right hand, and the encircling
grasp covered it, save at the top. The top was visible, and Mary,
before she knew what she was doing, had read the embossed
heading--nothing else, just the embossed heading--Hotel de Luxe,
Cannes, Alpes Maritimes. The drama teaches us how often a guilty mind rushes, on some trifling
cause, to self-revelation. Like a flash came the conviction that
Charlie had written to John, that her secret was known, and John's
heartbroken. In a moment she fell on her knees crying, "Oh, how wicked
I've been! Forgive me, do forgive me! Oh, John, can you forgive me?" John was not asleep, he also was merely meditating; but if he had been
a very Rip Van Winkle this cry of agony would have roused him. He
started violently--as well he might--from his seat, looked at Mary, and
crumpled the letter into a shapeless ball. "You didn't see?" he asked hoarsely. "No, but I know. I mean I saw the heading, and knew it must be from
him. Oh, John!" "From him!" "Yes. He's--he's staying there. Oh, John! Really I'll never see or
speak to him again. Really I won't. Oh, you can trust me, John. See! I'll hide nothing. Here's his letter! You see I've sent him away?" And she took from her pocket Charlie's letter, and in her noble
fidelity (to John--the less we say about poor Charlie the better)
handed it to him. "What's this?" asked John, in bewilderment. "Who's it from?" "Charlie Ellerton," she stammered. "Who's Charlie Ellerton? I never heard--but am I to read it?" "Yes, please, I--I think you'd better." John read it; Mary followed his eyes, and the moment they reached the
end, without giving him time to speak, she exclaimed, "There, you see I
spoke the truth. I had sent him away. What does he say to you, John?" "I never heard of him in my life before." "John! Then who is your letter from?" He hesitated. He felt an impulse to imitate her candor, but prudence
suggested that he should be sure of his ground first. "Tell me all," he said, sitting down. "Who is this man, and what has he
to do with you?" "Why don't you show me his letter? I don't know what he's said about
me." "What could he say about you?" "Well he--he might say that--that I cared for him, John." "And do you?" demanded John, and his voice was anxious. Duty demanded a falsehood; Mary did her very best to satisfy its
imperious commands. It was no use. "Oh, John," she murmured, and then began to cry. For a moment wounded pride struggled with John's relief; but then a
glorious vision of what this admission of Mary's might mean to him
swept away his pique. "Read this," he said, giving her Dora Bellairs's letter, "and then
we'll have an explanation." Half an hour later Miss Bussey was roused from a pleasant snooze. John
and Mary stood beside her, hand in hand. They wore brother and sister
now--that was an integral part of the arrangement--and so they stood
hand in hand. Their faces were radiant. "We came to tell you, Auntie dear, that we have decided that we're not
suited to one another," began Mary. "Not at all," said John decisively. Miss Bussey stared helplessly from one to the other. "It's all right, Miss Bussey," remarked John cheerfully. "We've had an
explanation; we part by mutual consent." "John," said Mary, "is to be just my brother and I his sister. Oh, and
Auntie, I want to go with him to Cannes." This last suggestion, which naturally did not appear to any
well-regulated mind to harmonize with what had gone before, restored
voice to Miss Bussey. "What's the matter with you? Are you mad?" she demanded. John sat down beside her. His friends anticipated a distinguished
Parliamentary career for John; he could make anything sound reasonable. Miss Bussey was fascinated by his suave and fluent narrative of what
had befallen Mary and himself; she could not but admire his just
remarks on the providential disclosure of the true state of the case
before it was too late, and sympathized with the picture of suffering
nobly suppressed which grew under his skilful hand; she was inflamed
when he ardently declared his purpose of seeking out Dora; she was
touched when he kissed Mary's hand and declared that the world held no
nobler woman. Before John's eloquence even the stern facts of a public
engagement, of invited guests, of dresses ordered and presents
received, lost their force, and the romantic spirit, rekindled, held
undivided sway in Miss Bussey's heart. "But," she said, "why does Mary talk of going to Cannes with you?" "Mr. Ellerton is at Cannes, Aunt," murmured Mary, shyly. "But you can't travel with John." "Oh, but you must come too." "It looks as if you were running after him." "I'll chance Charlie thinking that," cried Mary, clasping her hands in
glee. Miss Bussey pretended to be reluctant to undertake the journey, but she
was really quite ready to yield, and soon everything was settled on the
new basis. "And now to write and tell people," said Miss Bussey. "That's the worst
part of it." "Poor dear! We'll help," cried Mary. "But I must write to Cannes." "Wire!" cried John. "Of course, wire!" echoed Mary. "The first thing tomorrow." "Before breakfast." "Mary, I shall never forget----." "No, John, it's you who----." and they went off in a torrent of mutual
laudation. Miss Bussey shook her head. "If they think all that of one another why don't they marry?" she said. CHAPTER IV

THE TALE OF A POSTMARK


"Yes," said Lady Deane, "we leave today week: Roger has to be back the
first week in May, and I want to stop at one or two places en route." "Let's see. To-day's the 19th, no, the 20th; there's nothing to remind
one of time here. That'll be the 27th. That's about my date; we might
go together if you and Deane have no objection." "Oh, I should be delighted, General; and shall you stay at all in
Paris?" "A few days--just to show Dolly the sights." "How charming! And you and I must have some expeditions together. Roger is so odd about not liking to take me." "We'll do the whole thing, Lady Deane," answered General Bellairs,
heartily. "Notre Dame, the Versailles, the Invalides, Eiffel Tower." Lady Deane's broad white brow showed a little pucker. "That wasn't quite what I meant," said she. "Oh, but Roger could take
Dora to those, couldn't he, while you and I made a point of seeing some
of the real life of the people? Of studying them in their ordinary
resorts, their places of recreation and amusement." "Oh, the Francais, and the opera, and so on, of course." "No, no, no," exclaimed Lady Deane, tapping her foot impatiently and
fixing her gray eyes on the General's now puzzled face. "Not the same
old treadmill in Paris as in London! Not that, General!" "What then, my dear lady?" asked he. "Your wish is law to me," and it
was true that he had become very fond of his earnest young friend. "What do you want to see? The Chamber of Deputies?" Sir Roger's voice struck in. "I'm not a puritanical husband, Bellairs, but I must make a stand
somewhere. Not the Chamber of Deputies." "Don't be silly, Roger dear," said Lady Deane, in her usual tone of
dispassionate reproof. "I can't find out where she does want to go to," remarked the General. "I can tell you," said Sir Roger, and he leant down and whispered a
name; in the General's ear. The General jumped. "Good heavens!" he exclaimed. "I haven't been there since the fifties. Is it still like what it used to be?" "How should I know?" inquired Sir Roger. "I'm not a student of social
phenomena. Maud is, so she wants to go." Lady Deane was looking on with a quiet smile. "She never mentioned it," protested the General. "Oh, of course if there's a worse place now!" conceded Sir Roger. "I'll make up my mind when we arrive," observed Lady Deane. "Anyhow I
shall rely on you, General." The General looked a little uncomfortable. "If Deane doesn't object----." "I shouldn't think of taking my wife to such places." Suddenly Dora Bellairs rushed up to them. "Have you seen Mr. Ellerton?" she cried. "Where is he?" "In the smoking-room," answered Sir Roger. "Do you want him?" "Would you mind? I can't go in there: it's full of men." "After all we must be somewhere," pleaded Sir Roger as he went on his
errand. "Dolly," said the General, "I've just made a charming arrangement. Lady Deane and Sir Roger start for Paris to-day week, and we're going
with them. You said you'd like another week here." "It's charming our being able to go together, isn't it?" said Lady
Deane. Dora's face did not express rapture, yet she liked the Deanes
very much. "Oh, but----" she began. "Well?" asked her father. "I rather want to go a little sooner." "I'm afraid," said Lady Deane, "we shan't get Roger to move before
then. He's bent on seeing the tennis tournament through. When did you
want to go, Dora?" "Well, in fact--to--night." "My dear Dolly, what a weathercock you are! It's impossible. I'm
dining with the Grand Duke on Monday. You must make up your mind to
stay, young woman." "Oh, please, papa----." "But why do you want to go?" asked the General, rather impatiently. Dora had absolutely no producible reason for her eagerness to go. And
yet--Oh, if they only knew what was at stake! "We're to be married in a
fortnight!" She could see the words dancing before her eyes. And she
must waste a precious week here! "Do you want me, Miss Bellairs?" asked Charlie Ellerton, coming up to
them. "Yes. I want--oh, I want to go to Rumpelmayer's." "All right. Come along. I'm delighted to go with you." They walked off in silence. Dora was in distress. She saw that the
General was immovable. Suddenly Charlie turned to her and remarked,

"Well, it's all over with me, Miss Bellairs." "What? How do you mean?" "My chance is gone. They're to be married in a fortnight. I had a
letter to say so this morning." Dora turned suddenly to him. "Oh, but it's too extraordinary," she cried. "So had I!" "What?" "Why, a letter to say they were to be married in a fortnight." "Nonsense!" "Yes. Mr. Ellerton--who--who is your friend?" "Her name's Mary Travers." "And who is she going--to marry?" "Ah! She hasn't told me that." A suspicion of the truth struck them both. Charlie produced his letter. "She writes," he said, showing the postmark, "from Dittington." "It is! It is!" she cried. "It must be Mary Travers that Mr. Ashforth
is going to marry!" "Is that your friend?" "Yes. Is she pretty, Mr. Ellerton?" "Oh, awfully. What sort of a fellow is he?" "Splendid!" "Isn't it a deuced queer thing?" "Most extraordinary. And when we told one another we never thought----." "How could we?" "Well, no, we couldn't, of course." A pause followed. Then Charlie observed: "I suppose there's nothing to
be done." "Nothing to be done, Mr. Ellerton! Why if I were a man I'd leave for
England tonight." "And why can't you?" "Papa won't. But you might." "Ye--es, I suppose I might. It would look rather odd, wouldn't it?" "Why, you yourself suggested it!" "Yes, but the marriage was a long way off then." "There's the more reason now for haste." "Of course, that's true, but----." "Oh, if papa would only take me!" A sudden idea seemed to strike
Charlie; he assumed an air of chivalrous sympathy. "When shall you go?" he asked. "Not till to-day week," she said. "We shan't get to England
till three or four days before it." Dora knew nothing of the proposed
stay in Paris. "Look here, Miss Bellairs," said Charlie, "we agreed to stand by one
another. I shall wait and go when you do." "But think----." "I've thought." "You're risking everything." "If she'll break it off ten days before, she'll do the same four days
before." "If she really loves you she will." "Anyhow we'll stand or fall together." "Oh, I oughtn't to let you, but I can't refuse. How kind you are!" "Then that's settled," said Charlie, "And we must try to console one
another till then." "The suspense is awful, isn't it?" "Of course. But we must appear cheerful. We mustn't betray ourselves." "Not for the world! I can never thank you enough. You'll come with us
all the way?" "Yes." "Thank you again." She gave him her hand, which he pressed gently. "Hullo!" said he. "We seem to have got up by the church somewhere. Where were we going to?" "Why, to Rumpelmayer's." "Oh, ah! Well, let's go back to the hotel." Wonderings on the extraordinary coincidence, with an occasional
reference to the tender tie of a common sorrow which bound them
together, beguiled the journey back, and when they reached the hotel
Dora was quite calm. Charlie seemed distinctly cheerful, and when his
companion left him he sat down by Deane and remarked in a careless way,
just as if he neither knew nor cared what the rest of them were going
to do, "Well, I shall light out of here in a few days. I suppose
you're staying some time longer?" "Off in a week," said Sir Roger. "Oh, by Jove, that's about my mark. Going back to England?" "Yes, I suppose--so--ultimately. We shall stay a few days in Paris en
route. The Bellairs' go with us." "Oh, do they?" Sir Roger smiled gently. "Surprised?" he asked. Charlie ignored the question. "And you aren't going to hurry?" he inquired. "Why should we?" Charlie sat silent. It was tolerably plain that, unless the few days
en route were very few indeed, John Ashforth and Mary Travers were in a
fair way to be prosperously and peacefully married before Dora Bellairs
set foot in England. And if he stayed with the Bellairs', before he
did, either! Charlie lit a cigarette and sat puffing and thinking. "Dashed nice girl, Dora Bellairs," observed Sir Roger. "Think so?" "I do. She's the only girl I ever saw that Laing was smitten with." "Laing!" said Charlie. "Well, what's the matter? He's an uncommon good chap, Laing--one of the
best chaps I know--and he's got lots of coin. I don't expect she'd
sneeze at Laing." It is, no doubt, taking a very serious responsibility to upset an
arrangement arrived at deliberately and carried almost to a conclusion. A man should be very sure that he can make a woman happy--happier than
any other man could-before he asks her to face the turmoil and the
scandal of breaking off her marriage only a week before its
celebration. Sure as he may be of his own affection, he must be equally
sure of hers, equally sure that their mutual love is deep and
permanent. He must consider his claims to demand such a sacrifice. What
remorse will be his if, afterwards, he discovers that what he did was
not, in truth, for her real happiness! He must be on his guard against
mere selfishness or mere vanity masquerading in the garb of a genuine
passion. As these thoughts occurred to Charlie Ellerton he felt that he was at a
crisis of his life. He also felt glad that he had still a quiet week at
Cannes in which to revolve these considerations in his mind. Above all,
he must do nothing hastily. Dora came out, a book in her hand. Her soft white frock fluttered in
the breeze, and she pushed back a loose lock of dark hair that caressed
her check. "A dashed nice girl, upon my honor," said Sir Roger Deane. "Oh, very." "I say, old chap, I suppose you're in no hurry. You'll put in a few
days in Paris? We might have a day out, mightn't we?" "I don't know yet," said Charlie, and, when Deane left him, he sat on
in solitude. Was it possible that in the space of a week--? No, it was impossible. And yet, with a girl like that----. "I did the right thing in waiting to go with her, anyhow," said
Charlie, comforting himself. CHAPTER V

A SECOND EDITION


"Don't you think it's an interesting sort of title?" inquired Lady
Deane of Mr. Laing. Laing was always a little uneasy in her presence. He felt not only that
she was analyzing him, but that the results of the analysis seemed to
her to be a very small residuum, of solid matter. Besides, he had been
told that she had described him as a "commonplace young man," a thing
nobody could be expected to like. "Capital!" he answered, nervously fingering his eye glass. "The
Transformation of Giles Brockleton! Capital!" "I think it will do," said Lady Deane complacently. "Er--what was he transformed into, Lady Deane?" "A man," replied the lady emphatically. "Of course. I see," murmured Laing apologetically, stifling a desire to
ask what Giles had been before. A moment later the author enlightened him. "Yes," said she, "into a man, from a useless, mischievous, contemptible
idler, a parasite, Mr. Laing, a creature to whom----"

"What did it, Lady Deane?" interrupted Laing hastily. He felt somehow
as if he were being catalogued. "Just a woman's influence." Laing's face displayed relief; he felt that he was in his depth again. "Oh, got married, you mean? Well, of course, he'd have to pull up a
bit, wouldn't he? Hang it, I think it's a fellow's duty. "You don't quite understand me," observed Lady Deane coldly. "He did
not marry the woman." "What, did she give him the--I mean, wouldn't she have him, Lady Deane?" "She would have married him; but beside her he saw himself in his true
colors. Knowing what he was, how could he dare? That was his
punishment, and punishment brought transformation." As Lady Deane sketched her idea, her eyes kindled and her tone became
animated. Laing admired both her and her idea, and he expressed his
feeling's by saying:

"Remarkable sort of chap, Lady Deane. I shall read it all right, you
know." "I think you ought," said she, rising, and leaving him to wonder
whether she had "meant anything." He gave himself a little shake, as though to escape from the atmosphere
of seriousness which she had diffused about him, and looked round. A
little way off he saw Dora Bellairs and Charlie Ellerton sitting side
by side. His brow clouded. Before Charlie came it had been his
privilege to be Miss Bellairs's cavalier, and although he never hoped,
nor, to tell the truth, desired more than a temporary favor in her
eyes, he did not quite like being ousted. "Pretty good for a fellow who's just had the bag!" he remarked
scornfully, referring to Roger Deane's unauthorized revelation. It was the day before the exodus to Paris. Dora's period of weary
waiting had worn itself away, and she was acknowledging to Charlie that
the last two or three days had passed quicker than she had ever thought
they could. "The first two days I was wretched, the next two gloomy, but these last
almost peaceful. In spite of--you know what--I think you've done me
good on the whole." "Don't mention it," said Charlie, flinging his arm over the back of the
seat and looking at his companion. "And now--in the end," pursued Dora, "I'm actually a little sorry to
leave all this; it's so beautiful," and she waved her parasol vaguely
at the hills and the islands, while with the other hand she took off
her hat and allowed the breeze to blow through her hair. "It is jolly, isn't it?" she asked. "I should rather think it was," said Charlie. "The jolliest I've ever
seen." It was evident that he did not refer to the scenery. "Oh, you promised you wouldn't," cried Dora reproachfully. "Well, then, I'll promise again," he replied, smiling amiably. "What must I think of you, when only a week or so ago----? Oh, and
what must you think of me to suppose I could? Oh, Mr. Ellerton!" "Like to know what I think of you?" inquired Charlie, quite unperturbed
by this passionate rebuke. "Certainly not," said she, with dignity, and turned away. A moment
later, however, she attacked him again. "And you've done nothing," she said indignantly, "but suggest to papa
interesting places to stop at on the way, and things he ought to see in
Paris. Yes, and you actually suggested going home by sea from
Marseilles. And all the time you knew it was vital to me to get home as
soon as possible. To me? Yes, and to you _last week_. Shall I tell you
something, Mr. Ellerton?" "Please," said Charlie. "Whisper it in my ear," and he offered his head
in fitting proximity. "I shouldn't mind who heard," she declared. "I despise you, Mr. Ellerton." Charlie was roused to a protest. "For downright unfairness give me a girl!" said he. "Here have I taken
the manly course! After a short period of weakness--I admit that--I
have conquered my feelings; I have determined not to distress Miss
Travers by intruding upon her; I have overcome the promptings of a
cowardly despair; I have turned my back resolutely on a past devoid of
hope. I am, after a sore struggle, myself again. And my reward, Miss
Bellairs, is to be told that you despise me. Upon my honor, you'll be
despising Simon Stylites next." "And you wrote and told Miss Travers you were coming!" "All right. I shall write and toll her I'm not coming. I shall say,
Miss Bellairs, that it seems to me to be an undignified thing----"

"To do what I'm going to do? Thank you, Mr. Ellerton." "Oh, I forgot." "The irony of it is that you persuaded me to do it yourself." "I was a fool; but I didn't know you so well then." "What's that got to do with it?" "Everything." "You didn't know yourself, I'm afraid," she remarked. "You thought you
were a man of some--some depth of feeling, some constancy, a man
whose--whose regard a girl would value, instead of being----"

"Just a poor devil who worships the ground you tread on." Dora laughed scornfully. "Second edition!" said she. "The first dedicated to Miss Travers." And then Charlie (and it is thing's like these which shake that faith
in human nature that we try to cling to) said in a low but quite
distinct voice:

"Oh, d----n Miss Travers!" Dora shot--it almost looked as if something had shot her, as it used,
in old days, Miss Zazel--up from her seat. "I thought I was talking to a _gentleman_," said she, "I suppose you'll
use that--expression--about me in a week." "In a good deal less, if you treat me like this," said Charlie, and his
air was one of hopeless misery. We all recollect that Anne ended by being tolerably kind to wicked King
Richard. After all, Charlie had the same excuse. "I don't want to be unkind," said Dora more gently. "I'll do anything in the world to please you." "Then make papa go straight to Paris, and straight on from Paris," said
Dora, using her power mercilessly. "Oh, I say, I didn't mean that, Miss Bellairs." "You said you'd do anything I liked." Charlie looked at her thoughtfully. "I suppose you've no pity?" he inquired. "For you? Not a bit,"

"You probably don't know how beautiful you are?" "Don't be foolish, and--and impertinent." She was standing opposite to him. With a sudden motion, he sprang
forward, fell on one knee, seized her ungloved hand, covered it with
kisses, sprang up, and hastened away, crying as he went:

"All right. I'll do it." Dora stood where he left her. First she looked at her hand, then at
Charlie's retreating back, then again at her hand. Her cheek was
flushed and she trembled a little. "John never did that," she said, "at least, not without asking. And
even then, not quite like that." She walked on slowly, then stopped and exclaimed:

"I wonder if he ever did that to Mary Travers." And her last reflection was:

"Poor boy. He must be--oh, dear me!" When Charlie reached the tennis-courts, he was, considering the moving
scene through which he had passed, wonderfully calm. In fact he was
smiling and whistling. Espying Sir Roger Deane, he went and sat down by
him. "Roger," said he, "I'm going with you and the Bellairs' to-morrow." "I know that." "Miss Bellairs wants to go straight through to England without stopping
anywhere." "She'll have to want, I expect." "And I've promised to try and get the General to do what she wants." "Have you though?" "I suppose, Roger, old fellow--you know you've great influence with
him--I suppose it's no use asking you to say a word to him?" "Not a bit." "Why?" "Because Maud particularly wants him to stay with us in Paris." "Oh, of course, if Lady Deane wishes it, I mustn't say a word. She's
quite made up her mind about it, has she?" "Well, I suppose so." "She's strong on it, I mean? Not likely to change?" "I think not, Charlie." "She'd ask him to stay, as a favor to her?" "I shouldn't at all wonder." "Oh, well then, my asking him won't make much difference." "Frankly, I don't see why it should." "Thanks. I only wanted to know. You're not in a hurry, Roger? I mean,
you won't ask your wife to go straight on?" "No, I shan't, Charlie. I want to stop myself." "Thanks, old chap! See you at dinner," and Charlie strolled off with a
reassured air. Sir Roger sat and thought. "I see his game," he said to himself at last, "but I'm hanged if I see
hers. Why does she want to get back to England? Perhaps if I delay her
as much as I can, she'll tell me. Hanged if I don't! Anyhow I'm glad
to see old Charlie getting convalescent." The next morning the whole party left Cannes by the early train. The
Bellairs, the Deanes, and Charlie Ellerton travelled together. Laing
announced his intention of following by the afternoon train. "Oh," said Lady Deane, "you'll get to Paris sooner than we do." Dora
looked gloomy; so did Charlie, after a momentary, hastily smothered
smile. The porter approached and asked for an address. They told him the Grand
Hotel, Paris. "If anything comes to-day, I'll bring it on," said Laing. "Yes, do; we shall have no address before Paris," answered General
Bellairs. They drove off, and Laing, feeling rather solitary, returned to his
cigar. An hour later the waiter brought him two telegrams, one for Dora
and one for Charlie, he looked at the addresses. "Just too late, by Jove! All right, garcon, I'll take 'em," and he
thrust them into the pocket of his flannel jacket. And when, after
lunch, he could not stand the dullness any longer and went to Monte
Carlo, he left the telegrams in the discarded flannels, where they lay
till--the time when they were discovered. For Mr. Laing clean forgot
all about them! CHAPTER VI

A MAN WITH A THEORY


Even Miss Bussey was inclined to think that all had happened for the
best. John's eloquence had shaken her first disapprobation; the visible
happiness of the persons chiefly concerned pleaded yet more
persuasively. What harm, after all, was done, except for a little
trouble and a little gossip? To these Mary and John were utterly
indifferent. At first they had been rather shy in referring, before one
another, to their loves, but custom taught them to mention the names
without confusion, and ere long they had exchanged confidences as to
their future plans. John's arrangement was obviously the more prudent
and becoming. He discountenanced Mary's suggestion of an unannounced
descent on Cannes, and persuaded her to follow his example and inform
her lover that she would await news from him in Paris. They were to put
up at the European, and telegrams there from Cannes would rind them on
and after April 28th. All this valuable information was contained in
the dispatches, which lay, with their priceless messages, on the said
April 28th, in Mr. Arthur Laing's flannel jacket, inside his
portmanteau, on the way to Paris. Paris claims to be the centre of the world, and if it be, the world has
a very good centre. Anyhow Paris becomes, from this moment, the centre
of this drama. Not only was Arthur Laing being whirled there by the
Nice express, and Miss Bussey's party proceeding thither by the eleven
o'clock train from Victoria--Mary laughed as she thought it might have
been her honeymoon she was starting on--but the Bellairs and their
friends were heading for the same point. Miss Bussey's party had the
pleasanter journey; they were all of one mind; Miss Bussey was eager to
reach Paris because it was the end of the journey; John and Mary
desired nothing but the moment when with trembling fingers they should
tear open their telegrams in the hall of the hotel. The expedition from
the south did not enjoy a like unanimity; but before following their
steps we may, in the interest of simplicity, land the first detachment
safely at its destination. When Mary and John, followed by Miss Bussey--they outstripped her in
their eagerness--entered the hotel, a young man with an eye-glass was
just engaging a bedroom. John took his place beside the stranger, and
asked in a voice, which he strove to render calm, if there were any
letters for----. "Beg pardon, sir. In one moment," said the clerk, and he added to
Laing, "Number 37, sir." Laing--Oh, the irony of things!--turned on
John and his companion just that one supercilious glance which we
bestow on other tourists, and followed his baggage upstairs. "Anything," resumed John, "for Miss Travers or Mr. Ashforth?" And he
succeeded in looking as if he did not care a straw whether there were
or not. After a search the porter answered, "Nothing, sir." "What?" exclaimed John, aghast? "Oh, nonsense, look again." Another search followed; it was without result. John saw Mary's appealing eyes fixed on him. "Nothing," he said tragically. "Oh, John!" "Have you taken the rooms, Mr. Ash forth?" inquired Miss Bussey. "No. I'm sorry. I forgot all about them." 