



Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 A Son
 of the Immortals

 By
 LOUIS TRACY

 Author of "The Stowaway," "The Message,"
 "The Wings of the Morning," etc. Illustrations by
 HOWARD CHANDLER CHRISTY

 New York
 Edward J. Clode
 Publisher




 Copyright, 1909, by
 EDWARD J. CLODE

 Entered at Stationers' Hall


 [Illustration: The sight of Alec and his fair burden brought a cheer
 from the crowd
     Frontispiece]




                     CONTENTS

 CHAPTER                                                     PAGE


    I. THE FORTUNE TELLER                                      1
   II. MONSEIGNEUR                                            22
  III. IN THE ORIENT EXPRESS                                  44
   IV. THE WHITE CITY                                         64
    V. FELIX SURMOUNTS A DIFFICULTY                           89
   VI. JOAN GOES INTO SOCIETY                                112
  VII. JOAN BECOMES THE VICTIM OF CIRCUMSTANCES              132
 VIII. SHOWING HOW THE KING KEPT HIS APPOINTMENT             154
   IX. MUTTERINGS OF STORM                                   176
    X. WHEREIN THE SHADOWS DEEPEN                            196
   XI. JOAN DECIDES                                          221
  XII. THE STORM BREAKS                                      241
 XIII. WHEREIN A REASON IS GIVEN FOR JOAN'S FLIGHT           263
  XIV. THE BROKEN TREATY                                     284
   XV. THE ENVOY                                             310




 LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


 The sight of Alec and his fair burden brought a
         cheer from the crowd                      _Frontispiece_

                                                             PAGE

 "Gentlemen, here stands Alexis Delgrado"                     75
 Beaumanoir and Felix fortified the position                 153
 Joan laughed at Alec's masterful methods                    199
 Stampoff saluted the King in silence                        268
 In a few minutes the three were securely bound              298
 He felt the thrill that ran through her veins               306




A SON OF THE IMMORTALS




CHAPTER I

THE FORTUNE TELLER


On a day in May, not so long ago, Joan Vernon, coming out into the
sunshine from her lodging in the Place de la Sorbonne, smiled a morning
greeting to the statue of Auguste Comte, founder of Positivism. It would
have puzzled her to explain what Positivism meant, or why it should be
merely positive and not stoutly comparative or grandly superlative. As a
teacher, therefore, Comte made no appeal. She just liked the bland look
of the man, was pleased by the sleekness of his white marble. He seemed
to be a friend, a counselor, strutting worthily on a pedestal labeled
"_Ordre et Progres_"; for Joan was an artist, not a philosopher. Perhaps there was an underthought that she and Comte were odd fish to be
at home together in that placid backwater of the Latin Quarter. Next
door to the old-fashioned house in which she rented three rooms was a
cabaret, a mere wreck of a wineshop, apparently cast there by the
torrent of the Boule Mich, which roared a few yards away. Its luminous
sign, a foaming tankard, showed gallantly by night, but was garish by
day, since gas is akin to froth, to which the sun is pitiless. But the
cabaret had its customers, quiet folk who gathered in the evening to
gossip and drink strange beverages, whereas its nearest neighbor on the
boulevard side was an empty tenement, a despondent ghost to-day, though
once it had rivaled the flaunting tankard. Its frayed finery told of gay
sparks extinguished. A flamboyant legend declared, "Ici on chante, on
boit, on s'amuse(?)" Joan always smirked a little at that suggestive
note of interrogation, which lent a world of meaning to the
half-obliterated statement that Madame Lucette would appear "tous les
soirs dans ses chansons d'actualites." Nodding to Leontine, the cabaret's amazingly small maid of all work, who
was always washing and never washed, Joan saw the query for the
hundredth time, and, as ever, found its answer in the blistered paint
and dust covered windows: Madame Lucette's last song of real life
pointed a moral. Joan's bright face did not cloud on that account. Paul Verlaine, taking
the air in the Boulevard Saint Michel, had he chanced to notice the dry
husk of that Cabaret Latin, might have composed a chanson on the vanity
of dead cafes; but this sprightly girl had chosen her residence there
chiefly because it marched with her purse. Moreover, it was admirably
suited to the needs of one who for the most part gave her days to the
Louvre and her evenings to the Sorbonne. She was rather late that morning. Lest that precious hour of white light
should be lost, she sped rapidly across the place, down the boulevard,
and along the busy Quai des Grands Augustins. On the Pont Neuf she
glanced up at another statuesque acquaintance, this time a kingly
personage on horseback. She could never quite dispel the notion that
Henri Quatre was ready to flirt with her. The roguish twinkle in his
bronze eye was very taking, and there were not many men in Paris who
could look at her in that way and win a smile in return. To be sure, it
was no new thing for a Vernon to be well disposed toward Henry of
Navarre; but that is ancient history, and our pretty Joan, blithely
unconscious, was hurrying that morning to take an active part in
redrafting the Berlin treaty. At the corner of the bridge, where it joins the Quai du Louvre, she met
a young man. Each pretended that the meeting was accidental, though,
after the first glance, the best-natured recording angel ever
commissioned from Paradise would have refused to believe either of them. "What a piece of luck!" cried the young man. "Are you going to the
Louvre?" "Yes. And you?" demanded Joan, flushing prettily. "I am killing time till the afternoon, when I play Number One for the
Wanderers. To-day's match is at Bagatelle." She laughed. "'Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech
betrayeth thee,'" she quoted. "I don't quite follow that, Miss Vernon." "No? Well, I'll explain another time. I must away to my copying." "Let me come and fix your easel. Really, I have nothing else to do." "Worse and worse! En route, _alors_! You can watch me at work. That must
be a real pleasure to an idler." "I am no idler," he protested. "What? Who spoke but now of 'killing time,' 'play,' 'Number One,' and
'Bagatelle'? Really, Mr. Delgrado!" "Oh, is that what you are driving at? But you misunderstood. Bagatelle
is near the polo ground in the Bois, and, as Number One in my team, I
shall have to hustle. Four stiff chukkers at polo are downright hard
work, Miss Vernon. By teatime I shall be a limp rag. I promised to play
nearly a month ago, and I cannot draw back now." "Polo is a man's game, at any rate," she admitted. "Would you care to see to-day's tie?" he asked eagerly. "We meet
Chantilly, and, if we put them out in the first round of the tournament,
with any ordinary luck we ought to run right into the semi-final." She shook her head. "You unhappy people who have to plan and scheme how
best to waste your hours have no notion of their value. I must work
steadily from two till five. That means a sixteenth of my picture. Divide two hundred and fifty by sixteen, and you have--dear me! I am no
good at figures." "Fifteen francs, sixty-two and a half centimes," said he promptly. She flashed a surprised look at him. "That is rather clever of you," she
said. "Well, fancy a poor artist sacrificing all that money in order to
watch eight men galloping after a white ball and whacking it and each
other's ponies unmercifully." "To hit an adversary's pony is the unforgivable sin," he cried, smiling
at her, and she hastily averted her eyes, having discovered an unnerving
similarity between his smile and--Henri Quatre's! They walked on in eloquent silence. The man was cudgeling his brains for
an excuse whereby he might carry her off in triumph to the Bois. The
girl was fighting down a new sensation that threatened her independence. Never before had she felt tonguetied in the presence of an admirer. She
had dismissed dozens of them. She refrained now from sending this
good-looking boy packing only because it would be cruel, and Joan Vernon
could not be cruel to anyone. Nevertheless, she had to justify herself
as a free lance, and it is the role of a lance to attack rather than
defend. "What do you occupy yourself with when you are not playing polo or
lounging about artists' studios?" she asked suddenly. "Not much, I am afraid. I like shooting and hunting; but these Frenchmen
have no backbone for sport. Will you believe it, one has the greatest
difficulty in getting a good knock at polo unless there is a crowd of
ladies on the lawn?" "Ah! I begin to see light." "That is not the reason I asked you to come. If you honored me so
greatly you would be the first woman, my mother excepted, I have ever
driven to the club. To-day's players are mostly Americans or English. Of
course there are some first-rate French teams; but you can take it from
me that they show their real form only before the ladies." "As in the tourneys of old?" "Perhaps. It is the same at the chateaux. Everyone wants his best girl
to watch his prowess with the gun." He stopped, wishing he had left the best girl out of it; but Joan was
kind hearted and did not hesitate an instant. "So you are what is known as a gentleman of leisure and independent
means?" she said suavely. "Something of the sort." "I am sorry for you, Mr. Delgrado." "I am rather sorry for myself at times," he admitted, and if Joan had
chanced to glance at him she would have seen a somewhat peculiar
expression on his face. "But why do you call me Mr. Delgrado?" She gazed at him now in blank bewilderment--just a second too late to
see that expression. "Isn't Delgrado your name?" she asked. "Yes, in a sense. People mostly call me Alec. Correctly speaking, Alec
isn't mother's darling for Alexis; but it goes, anyhow." "Sometimes I think you are an American," she vowed. "Half," he said. "My mother is an American, my father a Kosnovian--well,
just a Kosnovian." "And pray what is that?" she cried. "Haven't you heard of Kosnovia? It is a little Balkan State." "Is there some mystery, then, about your name?" "Oh, no; plain Alec." "Am I to call you plain Alec?" "Yes." "But it follows that you would call me plain Joan." "Let it go at Joan." "Very well. Good morning, Alec." "No, no, Miss Vernon. Don't be vexed. I really did not mean to be rude. And you promised, you know." "Promised what?" "That I might help carry your traps. Please don't send me away!" He was so contrite that Joan weakened again. "It is rather friendly to
hear one's Christian name occasionally," she declared. "I will compound
on the Alec if you will tell me why the Delgrado applies only in a
sense." "Done--Joan," said he, greatly daring. He waited the merest fraction of
time; but she gave no sign. "My stipulation is of the slightest," he
added, "that I discourse in the Louvre. Where are you working?" "In the Grande Galerie; on a subject that I enjoy, too. People have such
odd notions as to nice pictures. They choose them to match the
furniture. Now, this one is quite delightful to copy, and not very
difficult. But you shall see." They entered the Louvre from the Quai. Joan was undoubtedly flurried. Here, in very truth, was that
irrepressible Henri descended from his bronze horse and walking by her
side. That his later name happened to be Alec did not matter at all. She
knew that a spiteful Bourbon had melted down no less than two statues of
Napoleon in order to produce the fine cavalier who approved of her every
time she crossed the Pont Neuf, and it seemed as if some of the little
Corsican's dominance was allied with a touch of Bearnais swagger in the
stalwart youth whom she had met for the first time in Rudin's studio
about three weeks earlier. They were steel and magnet at once. Delgrado had none of the
boulevardier's abounding self-conceit, or Joan would never have given
him a second look, while Joan's frank comradeship was vastly more
alluring than the skilled coquetry that left him cold. Physically, too,
they were well mated, each obviously made for the other by a
discriminating Providence. They were just beginning to discover the
fact, and this alarmed Joan. She could not shake off the notion that he had waylaid her this morning
for a purpose wholly unconnected with the suggested visit to the polo
ground. So, tall and athletic though he was, she set such a pace up the
steps and through the lower galleries that further intimate talk became
impossible. Atalanta well knew what she was about when she ran her
suitors to death, and Meilanion showed a deep insight into human nature
when he arranged that she should loiter occasionally. Delgrado, however, had no golden apples to drop in Joan's path, could
not even produce a conversational plum; but he was young enough to
believe in luck, and he hoped that fortune might favor him, once the
painting was in hand. Each was so absorbed in the other that the Louvre might have been empty. Certainly, neither of them noticed that a man crossing the Pont du
Carrousel in an open cab seemed to be vastly surprised when he saw them
hastening through the side entrance. He carried his interest to the
point of stopping the cab and following them. Young, clear skinned,
black-haired, exceedingly well dressed, with the eyes and eyelashes of
an Italian tenor, he moved with an air of distinction, and showed that
he was no stranger to the Louvre by his rapid decision that the Salle
des Moulages, with its forbidding plaster casts, was no likely resting
place for Delgrado and his pretty companion. Making straight for the nearest stairs, he almost blundered upon Alec,
laden with Joan's easel and canvas; but this exquisite, having something
of the spy's skill, whisked into an alcove, scrutinized an old print,
and did not emerge until the chance of being recognized had passed. After that, he was safe. He appeared to be amused, even somewhat amazed,
when he learned why Delgrado was patronizing the arts. Yet the discovery
was evidently pleasing. He caressed a neat, black mustache with a
well-manicured hand, while taking note of Joan's lithe figure and well
poised head. The long, straight vista of the gallery did not permit of a
near view, and he could not linger in the narrow doorway, used chiefly
by artists and officials, whence he watched them for a minute or more. So he turned on his heel and descended to the street and his waiting
victoria, waving that delicate hand and smiling with the manner of one
who said, "Fancy that of Alec! The young scamp!" Joan was copying Caravaggio's "The Fortune Teller," a masterpiece that
speaks in every tongue, to every age. Its keynote is simplicity. A
gallant of Milan, clothed in buff-colored doublet slashed with brown
velvet, a plumed cavalier hat set rakishly on his head, and a lace
ruffle caught up with a string of seed pearls round his neck, is holding
out his right palm to a Gypsy woman, while the fingers of his left hand
rest on a swordhilt. The woman is young and pretty, her subject a mere
boy, and her smug aspect of divination is happily contrasted with the
youth's excitement at hearing what fate has in store. "There!" cried Joan. "What do you think of it?" She had almost completed the Gypsy, and there was already a suggestion
of the high lights in the youngster's face and his brightly colored
garb. "I like your copy more than the original," said Delgrado. "Your visits to Rudin have not taught you much about art, then," said
she tartly. "Not even that great master would wish me to be insincere." "No, indeed; but he demands knowledge at the back of truth. Now, mark
me! You see that speck of white fire in the corner of the woman's eye? It gives life, intelligence, subtle character. Just a little blob of
paint, put there two hundred years ago, yet it conveys the whole stock
in trade of the fortune teller. Countless numbers of men and women have
gazed at that picture, a multitude that must have covered the whole
range of human virtues and vices; but it has never failed to carry the
same message to every beholder. Do you think that my poor reproduction
will achieve that?" "You have chosen the only good bit in the painting," he declared
stoutly. "Look at the boy's lips. Caravaggio must have modeled them from
a girl's. What business has a fellow with pouting red lips like them to
wear a sword on his thigh?" Joan laughed with joyousness that was good to hear. "Pooh! Run away and smite that ball with a long stick!" she said. "Hum! More than the Italian could have done." He was ridiculously in earnest. Joan colored suddenly and busied herself
with tubes of paint. She believed he was jealous of the handsome
Lombard. She began to mix some pigments on the palette. Delgrado,
already regretting an inexplicable outburst, turned from the picture and
looked at Murillo's "woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her
feet, and upon her head a diadem of twelve stars." "Now, please help me to appreciate that and you will find me a willing
student," he murmured. But Joan had recovered her self-possession. "Suppose we come off the
high art ladder and talk of our uninteresting selves," she said. "What
of the mystery you hinted at on the Quai? Why shouldn't I call you Mr.
Delgrado? One cannot always say 'Alec,' it's too short." Then he reddened with confusion. "Delgrado is my name, right enough," he
said. "It is the prefix I object to. It implies that I am sailing under
false colors, and I don't like that." "I am not good at riddles, and I suspect prefix," she cried. "Ah, well, I suppose I must get through with it. Have you forgotten how
Rudin introduced me?" She knitted her brows for a moment. Pretty women should cultivate the
trick, unless they fear wrinkles. It gives them the semblance of looking
in on themselves, and the habit is commendable. "Rudin is fond of his
little joke," she announced at last. "But--what did he say?" "Oh, there was some absurdity. He addressed me as if I were a royal
personage, and asked to be allowed to present his Serene Highness Prince
Alexis Delgrado." The man smiled constrainedly. "It sounds rather nonsensical, doesn't
it?" he said. "Rudin often invents titles. I have heard efforts much more amusing." "That is when he is original. Unfortunately, in my case, he was merely
accurate." Joan whirled round on him. "Are you a Prince?" she gasped, each word
marking a crescendo of wonder. "Yes--Joan." "But what am I to do? What am I to say? Must I drop on one knee and kiss
your hand?" "I cannot help it," he growled. "And I was obliged to tell you. You
would have been angry with me if I had kept it hidden from you. Oh, dash
it all, Joan, don't laugh! That is irritating." "My poor Alec! Why did they make you a Prince?" "I was born that way. My father is one. Do you mean to say you have
lived in Paris a year and have never seen our names in the newspapers? My people gad about everywhere. The Prince and Princess Michael
Delgrado, you know." "I do not know," said Joan deliberately. Her alert brain was slowly assimilating this truly astonishing
discovery. She did not attempt to shirk its significance, and her first
thought was to frame some excuse to abandon work for the day; since, no
matter what the cost to herself, this friendship must go no farther. The
decision caused a twinge; but she did not flinch, for Joan would always
visit the dentist rather than endure toothache. She could not dismiss a
Serene Highness merely because he declared his identity, nor was she
minded to forget his rank because she had begun to call him Alec. But it
hurt. She was conscious of a longing to be alone. If not in love, she
was near it, and hard-working artists must not love Serene Highnesses. Delgrado was watching her with a glowering anxiety that itself carried a
warning. "You see, Joan, I had to tell you," he repeated. "People make
such a fuss about these empty honors----"

Joan caught at a straw. She hoped that a display of sarcastic humor
might rescue her. "Honors!" she broke in, and she laughed almost
shrilly, for her voice was naturally sweet and harmonious. "Is it an
honor, then, to be born a Prince?" "If a man is worth his salt, the fact that he is regarded as a Prince
should make him princely." "That is well said. Try and live up to it. You will find it a task,
though, to regulate your life by copybook maxims." "The princedom is worth nothing otherwise. In its way, it is a handicap. Most young fellows of my age have some sort of career before them, while
I--I really am what you said I was, an idler. I didn't like the taunt
from your lips; but it was true. Well, I am going to change all that. I
am tired of posturing as one of Daudet's 'Kings in Exile.' We expelled
potentates all live in Paris; that is the irony of it. I want to be
candid with you, Joan. I have seen you every day since we met at
Rudin's; but I did not dare to meet you too often lest you should send
me away. You have given me a purpose in life. You have created a sort of
hunger in me, and I refuse to be satisfied any longer with the easygoing
existence of the last few years. No, you must hear me out. No matter
what you say now, the new order of things is irrevocable. I almost
quarreled with my father last night; but I told him plainly that I meant
to make a place for myself in the world. At any rate, I refuse to live
the life he lives, and I am here to-day because the awakening is due to
you, Joan." A tremor ran through the girl's limbs; but she faced him bravely. Though
her lips quivered, she forced herself to utter words that sounded like a
jibe. "I am to play Pallas Athene to your Perseus," she said, and it
seemed to him for a moment that she was in a mood to jest at heroics. "If you mean that I regard you as my goddess, I am well content," he
answered quickly. "Ah, but wait. Pallas Athene came to Perseus in a dream, and let us make
believe that we are dreaming now. She had great gray eyes, clear and
piercing, and she knew all thoughts of men's hearts and the secrets of
their souls. My eyes are not gray, Alec, nor can they pierce as hers;
but I can borrow her beautiful words, and tell you that she turns her
face from the creatures of clay. They may 'fatten at ease like sheep in
the pasture, and eat what they did not sow, like oxen in the stall. They
grow and spread, like the gourd along the ground; but, like the gourd,
they give no shade to the traveler, and when they are ripe death gathers
them, and they go down unloved into hell, and their name vanishes out of
the land.' But to the souls of fire she gives more fire, and to those
who are manful she gives a power more than man's. These are her heroes,
the sons of the Immortals. They are blest, but not as the men who live
at ease. She drives them forth 'by strange paths ... through doubt and
need and danger and battle.... Some of them are slain in the flower of
their youth, no man knows when or where, and some of them win noble
names and a fair and green old age.' Not even the goddess herself can
tell the hap that shall befall them; for each man's lot is known only to
Zeus. Have you reflected well on these things, Alec? Be sure of
yourself! There may be Gorgons to encounter, and monsters of the deep." He came very near to her. Her eyes were glistening. For one glowing
second they looked into each other's hearts. "And perhaps a maiden chained to a rock to be rescued," he whispered. Then she drew herself up proudly. "Do not forget that I am Pallas
Athene," she said. "My shield of brass is an easel and my mighty spear a
mahl-stick; but--I keep to my role, Alec." He longed to clasp her in his arms; but it flashed upon him with an
inspiration from topmost Olympus that, all unwittingly, she had bound
herself to his fortunes. "Then I leave it at that," he said quietly. This sudden air of confidence was bewildering. She had been swept off
her feet by emotion, and the very considerations she thought she had
conquered were now tugging at her heart-strings. He must not go away as
her knight errant, eager and ready to slay dragons for her sake. "Do not misunderstand me," she faltered. "I was only quoting a passage
from one of Kingsley's Greek fairy tales that has always had a peculiar
fascination for me." "I'll get that story and read it. But I am interfering with your work,
and here comes your friend, the Humming Bee. If he said anything funny
to me just now, I should want to strangle him. So good-by, dear Joan. I
will turn up again to-morrow and tell you how I fared in each round." And he was gone, leaving her breathless and shaken; for well she knew
that he held her pledged to unspoken vows, that his eager confidences
would apply alike to the day's sport and his future life. With hands
that trembled she essayed a further mixing of colors; but she scarcely
realized what she was doing, until a queer, cracked voice that yet was
musical sang softly in German at her elbow:

          If the Song should chance to wander
          Forth the Minstrel too must go. It was passing strange that crooked little Felix Poluski, ex-Nihilist,
the wildest firebrand ever driven out of Warsaw, and the only living
artist who could put on canvas the gleam of heaven that lights the
Virgin's face in the "Immaculate Conception," should justify his
nickname of Le Bourdon by humming those two lines. "I hope you are not a prophet, Felix," said Joan with a catch in her
throat. "No, _ma belle_, no prophet, merely an avenger, a slayer of Kings. I see
you have just routed one." She turned and looked into the deepset eyes of the old hunchback, and
for the first time noted that they were gray and very bright and
piercing. At the same time the fancy crossed her mind that perhaps Henri
Quatre had had blue eyes, bold yet tender, like unto Alec's. "So you too are aware that Monsieur Delgrado is a Prince?" she said,
letting her thought bubble forth at random. "Some folk call him that, and it is the worst thing I know of him so
far. It may spoil him in time; but at present I find him a nice young
man." Joan swung round to her picture. "If Alec had the chance of becoming a
King, he would be a very good one," she said loyally. Poluski's wizened cheeks puckered into a grin. He glanced at the easel
and thence to the picture on the wall. "Perfectly, my dear Joan," he said. "And, by the bones of Kosciusko, you
have chosen a proper subject, The Fortune Teller! Were you filling our
warrior with dreams of empire? Well, well, I don't know which is more
potent with monarchs, woman or dynamite. In Alec's case I fancy I should
bet on the woman. Here, for example, is one that shook Heaven, and I
have always thought that Eve was not given fair treatment, or she would
surely have twisted the serpent's tail," and, humming the refrain of
"Les Demi-Vierges," he climbed the small platform he had erected in
front of the world famous Murillo. Back to back, separated by little more than half the width of the
gallery, Joan and Poluski worked steadily for twenty minutes. The Pole
sang to himself incessantly, now bassooning between his thin lips the
motif of some rhapsody of Lizst's, now murmuring the words of some
catchy refrain from the latest review. Anybody else who so transgressed
the rules would have been summarily turned out by the guards; but the
men knew him, and the Grande Galerie, despite its treasures, or perhaps
because of them, is the least popular part of the Louvre. Artists haunt
it; but the Parisian, the provincial, the globe trotter, gape once in
their lives at Andrea del Sarto, Titian, Salvator Rosa, Murillo of
course, and the rest of the mighty dead, and then ask with a yawn,
"Where are the Crown Jewels?" So the Humming Bee annoyed none by his humming; but he stopped short in
an improvised variation on the theme of Vulcan's song in "Philemon and
Baucis" when he heard a subdued but none the less poignant cry of
distress from Joan. In order to turn his head he was compelled to twist
his ungainly body, and Joan, who was standing well away from her canvas,
was aware of the movement. She too turned. "I am going," she announced. "I cannot do anything right to-day. Just
look at that white feather!" "Where?" "In the boy's hat, you tease! Where else would you look?" "In your face, _belle mignonne_," said the Pole. It was true. Joan was not ill; but she was undeniably low spirited, and
the artist's mood has a way of expressing itself on the palette. She
laughed, with a certain sense of effort. "I like you best when you sing, Felix. Sometimes, when you speak, you
are Infelix." "By all means go home," he grinned. "One cannot both joke and copy a
Caravaggio." He began to paint with feverish industry, did not look at her again, but
tossed an adieu over his humped shoulder when she hurried away. Then he
gazed reproachfully, almost vindictively, at the uplifted eyes of the
transfigured Virgin. "Now, you!" he growled. "Vous etes benie entre toutes les femmes! This
affair is in your line. Why don't you help? _Saperlotte!_ The girl is
worth it." CHAPTER II

MONSEIGNEUR


The Wanderers beat Chantilly. One minute before the close of the fourth
chukkur the score stood at four all. Both teams were playing with
desperation to avoid a decider on tired ponies, when the Wanderers'
third man extricated the ball from a tangle of prancing hoofs and
clattering sticks, and Alec Delgrado got away with it. He thought his
pony was good for one last run at top speed, that and no more. Risking
it, he sprinted across two hundred yards of green turf with the
Chantilly Number One in hot chase. His opponent was a stone lighter and
better mounted; so Alec's clear start would not save him from being
overhauled and ridden off ere he came within a reasonable striking
distance of the opposing goalposts. That was the Chantilly man's supreme
occupation,--some experts will have it that the ideal Number One should
not carry a polo stick,--and the pursuer knew his work. A hundred, eighty, sixty, yards in front Alec saw a goal keeping centaur
waiting to intercept him. In another couple of strides a lean, eager
head would be straining alongside his own pony's girths. So he struck
hard and clean and raced on, and the goalkeeper judged the flight of the
white wooden ball correctly, and smote it back again fair and straight. It traveled so truly that it would have passed Alec three feet from the
ground to drop almost exactly on the spot whence he had driven it. But
there was more in that last gallop along the smooth lawn than might be
realized by any one present save Alec himself. It was his farewell to
the game. From that day he would cease to be dependent on a begrudged
pittance for the upkeep of his stable, and that meant the end of his
polo playing. But he was not made of the stuff that yields before the
twelfth hour. His mallet whirled in the air, there was a crack like a
pistol shot, and the ball flew over the amazed goalkeeper's head and
between the posts. The yelling and handclapping of the few spectators almost drowned the
umpire's whistle. "By gad, that was a corker!" said he of Chantilly, as the ponies' wild
gallop eased to a canter. "I hope that flourish of mine did not come too close, Beaumanoir," said
Alec. "Don't give a tuppenny now," laughed Lord Adalbert Beaumanoir. "The
match is over, and you've won it, and if you play till Doomsday you'll
never score a better notch." "It was lucky, a sheer fluke." "Oh, that be jiggered for a yarn! A fellow flukes with his eyes shut. You meant it!" "Yes, that is right. So would you, Berty, if it was your last knock." "Well, time's up, anyhow," said Beaumanoir, not comprehending. They trotted off to the group of waiting grooms. Delgrado ran the
gauntlet of congratulations, for Paris likes to see Chantilly's flag
lowered, and escaped to the dressing room. He gave a letter, already
written and sealed, to an attendant, and drove away in his dogcart. Bowling quickly along the broad Allee de Longchamps, he turned into the
Route de l'Etoile, and so to the fine avenue where all Paris takes the
summer air. He found himself eying the parade of fashion in a curiously detached
mood. Yesterday he thought himself part and parcel of that gay throng. To-day he was a different being. All that had gone before was merged in
"yesterday's seven thousand years." His cob's pace did not slacken until he drew rein at the giant doorway
of a block of flats in the Rue Boissiere. It was then about five
o'clock, and he meant to appear at his mother's tea table. He was far
from looking the "limp rag" of his phrase to Joan. Indeed, it might have
taxed the resources of any crack regiment in Paris that day to produce
his equal in condition. Twenty-four years old, nearly six feet in
height, lean and wiry, square wristed, broad shouldered, and straight as
a spear, he met the physical requirements, at least, of those classic
youths beloved of Joan's favorite goddess. Usually his clean cut face, typically American in its high cheekbones,
firm chin, mobile mouth, and thoughtful eyes, wore a happy-go-lucky
expression that was the despair of matchmaking mamas; but to-day Alec
was serious. He was thinking of the promise that to the souls of fire
would be given more fire, to the manful a might more than man's. If he had not been so preoccupied, he would certainly have heard the
raucous shouts of newsboys running frantically along the boulevards. That is to say, he heard, but did not heed, else some shadow of a
strange destiny must have dimmed his bright dreams. Their nature might be guessed from his words to Joan. The question he
addressed to the concierge proved that his intent was fixed. "Is Monseigneur at home?" he asked. "_Oui, m'sieur._ His Excellency has mounted a little half-hour ago,"
said the man. Alec nodded. "Now for it!" he said to himself. His father, a born fop, a boulevardier by adoption, cultivated habits
that seemed to follow the mechanical laws of those clockwork manikins
that ingenious horologists contrive for the amusement of children, big
and little. Whether eating, sleeping, driving, strolling, chatting or
card playing, the whereabouts and occupation of Prince Michael Delgrado
could be correctly diagnosed at any given hour of the day and night. Fortune delights at times in tormenting such men with great
opportunities. Prince Michael, standing now with his back to the
fireplace in his wife's boudoir, was fated to be an early recipient of
that boon for which so many sigh in vain. Of course he knew nothing of that. His round, plump, rosy face, at first
sight absurdly disproportionate to his dapper and effeminate body, wore
a frown of annoyance. In fact, he had been obliged to think, and the
effort invariably distressed him. Apparently he had a big head, and big
headed men of diminutive frame usually possess brains and enjoy using
them. But closer inspection revealed that his Highness' skull resembled
an egg, with the narrow end uppermost. Thus, according to Lavater, he was richly endowed with all the baser
qualities that pander to self, and markedly deficient in the higher
attributes of humanity. The traits of the gourmand, the cynic, the
egoist, were there; but the physiognomist would look in vain for any
sign of genius or true nobility. Recognition of his undoubted rank had,
of course, given him the grand manner. That was unavoidable, and it was
his chief asset. He liked to be addressed as "Monseigneur"; he had a
certain reputation for wit; he carried himself with the ease that marks
his caste; and he had shown excellent taste in choosing a wife. The Princess did indeed look the great lady. Her undoubted beauty, aided
by a touch of Western piquancy, had captivated the Paris salons of an
earlier generation, and those same salons repaid their debt by
conferring the repose, the dignity, the subtle aura of distinction, that
constitute the aristocrat in outward bearing. For this reason, Princess
Delgrado was received in poverty stricken apartments where her husband
would be looked at askance, since the frayed Boulevard Saint Germain
still shelters the most exclusive circle in France. Here, then, was an amazing instance of a one-sided heredity. Alexis
Delgrado evidently owed both mind and body to his mother. Looking at the
Princess, one saw that such a son of such a father did not become
sheerly impossible. To-day, unhappily, neither Prince Michael nor his wife was in tune for a
family conclave. Monseigneur was ruffled, distinctly so, and Madame was
on the verge of tears. When Alec entered the room he was aware of a sudden silence, accentuated
by a half-repressed sob from his mother. Instantly he took the blame on
his own shoulders. He expected difficulties; but he was not prepared for
a scene. "Why, mother dear," he said, bending over her with a tenderness that
contrasted strongly with Prince Michael's affected indifference, "what
is the matter? Surely you and dad have not been worrying about me! You
can't keep me in the nest always, you know. And I only want to earn the
wherewithal to live. That is not so very terrible, is it?" The distressed woman looked up at him with a wan smile. She seemed to
have aged since the morning. There was a pathetic weakness in her mouth
and chin that was noticeably absent from her son's strong lineaments,
and it occurred to Alec with a pang that he had never before seen his
mother so deeply moved. "I suppose one must endure the world's changes," she murmured. "It was
foolish on my part to imagine that things could continue forever on the
same lines; but I shall not grieve, Alec, if no cloud comes between you
and me. It would break my heart----"

"Oh, come now!" he cried, simulating a lively good humor he was far from
feeling. "What has dad been saying? Clouds! Where are they? Not around
my head, at any rate. I have dispelled the only one that existed, the
silly halo of class that stops a fellow from working because he happens
to be born a Prince. It was different for dad, of course. My respected
grandfather, Ferdinand VII., was really a King, and dad was a grown man
when the pair of them were slung out of Kosnovia. Sorry, sir; but that
is the way they talk history nowadays. It has ceased to be decorous. I
am afraid Paris is largely responsible. You see, we have an Emperor in
the next block, two Kings in the Avenue Victor Hugo, and a fugitive
ex-President in the Hotel Metropole. I have seen the whole lot, even our
noble selves, burlesqued in a Montmartre review. And I laughed! That is
the worst part of it. I roared! We looked such a funny crew. And we were
all jolly hard up, borrowing five-franc pieces from one another, and
offering to sell scepters at a ridiculous sacrifice. That came rather
near home. We haven't got what the storybooks calls an embarrassment of
riches, have we? So, a cup of tea, please, mother, and I'll hear the
Czar's edict. It is pending. I can see it in his eye." Usually Prince Michael responded to that sort of airy nonsense. When
sure of his audience, he had spoken much more disrespectfully of the
Parisian band of Kings in exile. But to-day his chubby cheeks refused to
crease in a grin. He remained morose, oracular, heavy jowled. In fact,
he had set himself a very difficult task. Now that the moment had
arrived for its fulfilment, he shirked it. "May I ask, Alec, if you have any scheme in view?" he said, strutting on
the hearthrug in front of a grate filled with ferns. He always stood
there,--in winter because it was warm, and he was a martyr to
chilblains; in summer because of the habit contracted in winter. "Well, sir, candidly speaking, I have not. But I saw in a newspaper the
other day a paragraph of advice to a young man. 'No matter how small
your income may be, live within it: that is the beginning of wealth,' it
said. How profound! I applied it to myself. My income is nil. There I
encountered a serious obstacle at the very start of the Great Money
Stakes. But----"

"This is a grave discussion, Alec. I have that to say which may pain
you. Pray be serious." "Oh, I am--quite serious. My ponies and the dogcart are in Dumont's
catalogue for the next sale. I resigned my membership of the polo club
to-day. To-morrow, or eke to-night, I look for a job. As you, mother o'
mine, have heard men say in your beloved west, I'm going to butt in." "I--er--suppose you--er--look to me for some assistance?" coughed Prince
Michael. His wife rose. Her face was gray-white, her eyes blazed. "Alec knows we
are poor. Why torture him--and me? I refuse to allow it. I refuse!" Her
voice took a tragic note, thin and shrill; there was a pitiful quivering
of her lips that wrung her son's heart, and he was utterly at a loss to
understand why a discussion as to his future should lead to this display
of passion. "But, mother darling," he cried, "why are you grieving so? You and dad
must maintain a certain state,--one begins by assuming that,--and it is
no secret that the Delgrado side of the family was not blessed with
wealth. Very well. Let me try to adjust the balance--the bank balance,
eh? Really, why weep?" Alec's gallant attempt to avert the storm failed again. His Serene
Highness muttered words in a foreign tongue that sounded anything but
serene. The Princess did not understand; but her son did. His brows
wrinkled, and the good humored gleam died out of his eyes. "Perhaps, sir," he said stiffly, "this subject had better be discussed
when my mother is not present." Prince Michael looked at him fixedly. For some reason the little man was
very angry, and he seemed to resent the implied slur on his good taste. "I am determined to end this farce once and for all," he vowed. "Before
you joined us, I told the Princess----"

The door was flung open. The young man who had followed Joan and Alec
into the Louvre that morning rushed in. His pink and white face was
crimson now, and his manner that of unmeasured, almost uncontrollable
excitement. He gazed at them with a wildness that bordered on frenzy,
yet it was clear that their own marked agitation was only what he
expected to find. "Ah, you have heard?" he snapped, biting at each syllable. "Heard what, Julius?" demanded Monseigneur, with an instant lowering of
the princely mask, since Julius dabbled in stocks and was reputed well
to do. "The news! The news from Kosnovia!" Prince Michael affected to yawn. "Oh, is that all?" he asked. "All! _Grand Dieu_, what more would you have? It means--everything." "My good Julius, it is long since I was so disturbed. What, then, has
happened? The Danube in flood is no new thing." "The Danube!" and the newcomer's voice cracked. "So you do not
know--sire?" The little word seemed to have the explosive force of nitroglycerine. Its detonation rang through the room and left them all silent, as though
their ears were stunned and their tongues paralyzed. Alec was the first
to see that some event far out of the common had reduced his cousin,
Count Julius Marulitch, almost to a state of hysteria. "We are at cross purposes," he said quietly. "My father, like the rest
of us, read this morning's telegram about the overflowing of the
river----"

Count Marulitch waved his hands frantically. He was literally beside
himself. His full red lips, not at all unlike those of the youth in
Joan's picture, moved several times before sounds came. "It is at least my good fortune to be the first to congratulate my
King!" he cried at last. "Be calm, I pray you; but a tremendous change
has been affected at Delgratz. Last night, while Theodore and the Queen
were at dinner, the Seventh Regiment mutinied. It was on guard at the
Schwarzburg. Officers and men acted together. There was no resistance. It was impossible. Theodore and Helena were killed!" This man, who
appealed for calmness, was himself in a white heat of emotion. A stifled scream, a sob, almost a groan, broke from the Princess, and
she clung to her son as though she sought protection from that
bloodthirsty Seventh Regiment. Prince Michael, fumbling with an
eyeglass, dropped it in sheer nervousness. Alec, throwing an arm round
his mother, recalled the hoarse yelling of the newsboys on the
boulevards. Was it this latest doom of a monarchy that they were bawling
so lustily? He glanced at his father, and the dapper little man found it
incumbent on him to say something. "But, Julius--is this true? There are so many canards. You know our
proverb: 'A stone that falls in the Balkans causes an earthquake in St. Petersburg.'" "Oh, it is true, sire. And the telegrams declare that already you have
been proclaimed King." "I!" Prince Michael's exclamation was most unkingly. Rather was it the wail
of a criminal on being told that the executioner waited without. His
ruddy cheeks blanched, and his hands were outstretched as if in a
piteous plea for mercy. There was a tumult of objurgations in the outer
passage; but this King in spite of himself paid no heed. "I?" he gasped again, with relaxed jaws. "You, sire," cried Marulitch. "Our line is restored. There will be
fighting, of course; but what of that? One audacious week will see you
enthroned once more in the Schwarzburg. Ah! Here come Stampoff and
Beliani. You are quick on my heels, messieurs; but I promised my cabman
a double fare." A scared manservant, vainly endeavoring to protect his master's private
apartments, was rudely thrust aside, and a fierce looking old warrior
entered, followed by a man who was obviously more of a Levantine than a
Serb. The older man, small, slight, gray haired, and swarthy, but
surprisingly active in his movements for one of his apparent age, raced
up to Prince Michael. He fell on his knees, caught that nerveless right
hand, and pressed it to his lips. "Thank Heaven, sire, that I have been spared to see this day!" he
exclaimed. The Greek, less demonstrative, nevertheless knelt by Stampoff's side. "I
too am your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subject," said he. The Prince did then make a supreme effort to regain his self possession. "Thank you, General," he murmured, "and you also, Monsieur Beliani. I
have only just been told. Theodore and Helena both dead! What a thing! They were my enemies; but I am shocked, I may almost say grieved. And
what am I to do? I am practically powerless,--few friends, no money. One
does not merely pack a valise and go off by train to win a throne. You
say I am proclaimed King, Julius. By whom? Have the representatives met? Is there an invitation from the people?" Stampoff was on his feet instantly. A man of steel springs and volcanic
energy, his alertness waged constant war against his years. "The
people!" he shouted. "What of them? What do they know? There is talk of
a Republic. Think of that! Could folly go farther? A Republic in the
Balkans, with Russia growling at one door, Austria picking the lock of
another, and the Turk squatting before a third! No, Monseigneur. Start
from Paris to-night, cross the Danube, reveal yourself to your
supporters, and you will soon show these windbags that a man who means
to rule is worth a hundred demagogues who exist only to spout." His Serene Highness was slowly but surely recovering lost ground. He
grasped the eyeglass again, and this time gouged it into its accustomed
crease. "You, Beliani, you are not one to be carried away by emotion," he said. "Count Marulitch spoke of a proclamation. Who issued it? Was there any
authority behind it?" "God's bones! what better authority is there than your Majesty's?" roared Stampoff. But the Prince extended a protesting palm. "An excellent sentiment, my
friend; but let us hear Beliani," he said. The Greek, thus appealed to, seemed to find some slight difficulty in
choosing the right words. "At present, everything is vague,
Monseigneur," he said. "It is certain that a battalion of the Seventh
Regiment revolted and declared for the Delgrado dynasty. Two other
battalions of the same regiment in the capital followed their lead. But
the Chamber met this morning, and there was an expression of opinion in
favor of a democratic Government. No vote was taken; but the latest
reports speak of some disorder. The approaches to the Schwarzburg are
held by troops. There are barricades in the main streets." Prince Michael's hands went under his coattails. His face had not
regained its claret red color, and its present tint suggested that it
had been carved out of a Camembert cheese; but he was gradually taking
the measure of current events in Kosnovia. "Barricades seem to argue decided opinions," he said, and there was a
perceptible tinge of cynicism in the phrase that jarred on his hearers. "One must be bold at times," muttered Count Julius. General Stampoff was chewing an end of his long mustaches in impotent
wrath, and Beliani merely shrugged. "Of course, my father means that prudence must be allied with boldness,"
broke in Alec, who had placed his mother in a chair and was now gazing
sternly at Marulitch as if he would challenge the unspoken thought. "Exactly, my boy. Well said! One looks before one leaps, that is it! Now
I am not so young, not so young, and I have not forgotten the pleasant
ways of Kosnovia. Theodore thought all was well; but you see what has
happened after thirty years. Just think of it. A lifetime! Why, I came
to Paris twenty-four years ago, just after you were born, Alexis, and
even then the Obrenovitch line seemed to be well established. And here
you are, a grown man, and Theodore and his Queen are lying dead in the
Black Palace. It gives one to think. Now, our good Stampoff here would
have me rush off and buy a ticket for Delgratz to-night. As if Austria
had not closed every frontier station and was not waiting to pounce on
any Delgrado who turned up at this awkward moment on the left bank of
the Danube!" Beliani was stroking his nose; Stampoff evidently meant to shorten his
mustache by inches; and Julius Marulitch was waxen, and thereby rendered
more than ever like a clothier's model. Alec was a dutiful son. There were elements in the composition of the
senior Delgrado that he did not admire; but he had never before
suspected his father of cowardice. His cousin Julius, whom he thoroughly
disliked, was betraying a whole world of meaning in the scorn that
leaped from his eyes, and there was no mistaking the thoughts that
inspired the furious General and the impassive Greek. For the first time
in his life, Alec despised Prince Michael. There was a quickening in his
veins, a tingling at the roots of his hair, a tension of his muscles, at
the repulsive notion that a Serene Highness might, after all, be molded
of common clay. And in that spasm of sheer agony he remembered how
Joan's sweet voice had thrilled him with the message of Pallas Athene. Was he, indeed, one of those sons of the immortals whom the goddess
"drives forth by strange paths ... through doubt and need and danger
and battle?" Surely some such hazardous track was opening up now before
his feet! His whole nature was stirred in unknown depths. It seemed to
him that there was only one man in the room whose words had the ring of
truth and honest purpose. He strode forward and caught old Paul Stampoff
by the shoulder. "I'll tell you what," he said, unconsciously adopting the free and easy
style of speech that came naturally to him, "you and I must carry this
thing through, General! My father is glued to Paris, you know. He has
lost some of his enthusiasm, and one must be enthusiastic to the point
of death itself if he would snatch a Kingdom out of such a fire as is
raging now in Kosnovia. Austria has never seen me, probably has never
even heard of me. I can slip through her cordon, swim ten Danubes if
need be. What say you, General? Will I fill the bill? If I fail, what
does it matter? If I win--well, we must reverse the usual order of
things, and my respected parent can step into my shoes." "Alexis, I am proud of you----" began Prince Michael pompously; but a
sigh that was blended with a groan came again from his wife, and
Princess Delgrado drooped in a faint. Alec lifted her in his arms and carried her to a bedroom. A queer
silence fell on the four men in the boudoir. Even his Serene Highness
was discomfited, and abandoned his position on the hearthrug to gaze
out of the window. To his displeased surprise, a small crowd had
gathered. A man was pointing to the Delgrado apartments. Another man,
carrying a bundle of newspapers, bore one of the curious small Parisian
contents bills, but its heavy black type was legible enough:
"Assassination of the King and Queen of Kosnovia! King Michael in
Paris!" Alec, having given the Princess to the care of her maid, came back. He
found his father looking into the street, General Stampoff standing on
the hearthrug, and Count Julius whispering something in Beliani's ear. "My mother will soon be all right," he announced cheerily. "She was a
bit upset, I suppose, by our warlike talk; but we were so excited that
we forgot she was present. Well, father, what say you to my proposal?" Prince Michael turned. His face was no longer in the light. Perhaps that
was his notion when he first approached the window. "I think it is an
excellent one," he said. "Of course, there is a regrettable element of
risk----"

"But what are we to understand?" broke in Stampoff's gruff accents. "These things are not to be settled as a shopkeeper appoints an agent. Does your Highness renounce all claim to the throne of Kosnovia in favor
of your son?" Words have a peculiar value on such occasions. The substitution of
"Highness" for "Majesty" was not devoid of significance; for Stampoff,
though loyal to the backbone, was no courtier. "No!" cried Alec sharply. "Yes," said Prince Michael, after a pause. Count Julius Marulitch breathed heavily, and Constantine Beliani threw a
wary eye over Alec. "Good!" said Stampoff. "That clears the air. I shall be ready to
accompany your Majesty by the train that leaves the Gare de l'Est at
seven-thirty P.M."

Prince Michael laughed dryly. "You see," he said. "I was sure Stampoff
would interfere with my dinner hour." There was almost a touch of genius in the remark. Its very vacuity told
of the man's exceeding unfitness for the role thrust upon him by certain
desperadoes in the far off Balkans. "We must have money," growled Stampoff with a most unflattering lack of
recognition of the elder Delgrado's humor. "Ah!" said Prince Michael, plunging both hands into his trousers'
pockets and keeping them there. "How much?" inquired Beliani. "To begin with, fifty thousand francs. After that, all that can be
raised." "It is most unfortunate, but my--er--investments have been singularly
unremunerative of late," said his Serene Highness. "Why fifty thousand francs?" inquired Alec, half choked with wrath at
sight of his father's obvious relief when the terrifying phantom of the
Black Castle was replaced by this delectable Paris. Yet, with it all, he
was aware of a consuming desire to laugh. There was a sense of utter
farce in thus disposing of the affairs of nations in a flat in the Rue
Boissiere. He recalled the exiled potentates of the music hall review,
and the bitter wit of the dramatist was now justified. It was ludicrous,
too, of Stampoff to address him as "your Majesty." "Even Kings must give bribes occasionally," explained the impetuous
General. "Or promise them," said Count Julius. "Or take them," said Beliani. "If I am to be a King, I mean to dispense with these bad habits," said
Alec. "We need our railway fares only, General. Once at Delgratz, our
fickle Kosnovia must either maintain us or shoot us. In either event, we
are provided for." "Still, we must have sufficient funds to secure a foothold," urged
Stampoff. "I charge myself with providing ten thousand francs," said the Greek. Alec glanced at his watch. "Give the money to Stampoff. He may want it. I do not," he said. "Dumont, though a horse dealer, is fairly honest. My
four ponies are worth another ten, and he will surely pay me five, cash
down. We meet at the Gare de l'Est. Who goes? You, Julius?" "No," said the Count, "I shall follow when you have made a beginning. My
presence would hamper you now. I am too well known, and secrecy is
all-important until you are at the head of the army." Alec turned on him with an air that would have delighted Joan, could she
have been present. "The army!" he cried. "I know nothing of leading armies. I mean to place
myself at the head of the people." "Nonsense, Alexis! Make for the troops. They alone can make or mar you,"
said Prince Michael. "We shall settle those points at Delgratz," declared the brusk Stampoff. "You will bring the money, half in gold, to the station?" he added to
Beliani. "Yes. Gold is best. For the remainder, you will want Russian notes." Something seemed to be troubling the august mind of Prince Michael. "By
the way, my dear Beliani," he began; but the Greek awoke into a very
panic of action. "Pray forgive me, your Highness," he said. "If I have to raise such a
large sum before seven o'clock I cannot lose an instant." "I shall see you off from the Gare de l'Est," cried Marulitch hurriedly,
and the two quitted the room in company. Alec went to pay a brief visit
to his mother, and Prince Michael was left alone with the rugged old
General. Then, for a few seconds, he became a man. "You must forgive me, Paul," he said huskily. "I am not fitted for the
work. I am broken down, a trifler, a worn out old dandy. You have got
the right metal in Alexis. See to it that he does not follow my example,
but keeps unstained the family name." "God's bones! he will do that at least," muttered Stampoff. "If you or
your father had possessed half his spirit, there would never have been
an Obrenovitch on the throne of Kosnovia! Ferdinand VII., Michael V.,
Alexis III.! By the patriarch! somehow you Delgrados have managed at
last to breed a King!" CHAPTER III

IN THE ORIENT EXPRESS


After some haggling, Alec wrung four thousand five hundred francs out of
Dumont. Then, at five minutes past six, he jumped into a cab and was
driven to the Place de la Sorbonne. Of course he had ascertained Joan's address easily. He made no secret of
the fact that he had seen her on her way to the Louvre nearly every day
of the twenty that had elapsed since their first meeting. His knowledge
of the route she followed advanced quickly until he found out where she
lived. He would not have dared to call on her now, if it had not been
for the tremendous thing that had happened in his life; for he was sure
he would become King of Kosnovia. The art that conceals art is good; but
the art that is unconscious of artifice is better, and never had
soothsayer arranged more effective preliminaries for astounding
prediction than sibyl Joan herself. Paris, too, might well witness the rising of his star. What other city
stages such memorials to inspire ambition? Behind him, as his cab sped
down the Champs Elysees, rose the splendid pile of the Arch of Triumph;
in front, beyond the Place de la Concorde, the setting sun gilded a
smoke blackened fragment that marked the site of the Tuileries; while
near at hand the statue of France, grief stricken yet defiant, gazed
ever and longingly in the direction of her lost Provinces. Here, within
a short mile, stood the silent records of three Empires, founded, as
time counts, within a few years. Two were already crumbled to the dust. The survivor, consolidated on the ruins of France, flourished beyond the
Rhine. Perhaps, if read aright, these portents were not wholly favorable to one
about to try his luck in that imperial game. But Alec, though a good
deal of a democrat at heart, was cheered by the knowledge that so long
as the world recognizes the divine right of Kings, no monarch by descent
could lay better claim to a throne than he. And he was young, and in
love, and ready to believe that youth and love can level mountains, make
firm the morass, bridge the ocean. He wondered how Joan would take his great news. He thought he could
guess her attitude. At first she would urge him to forget that such a
person as Joan Vernon existed. Then he would plead that she was asking
that which was not only impossible but utterly unheroic. And the minutes
were flying. He would remind her that time does not wait even for Kings,
nor would the Orient Express delay its departure by a single second to
oblige such a fledgling potentate as he. "We must part now, my sweet," he would say. "I am going to demand my
birthright. When I am admittedly a King, I shall send for you. If you do
not answer, I shall become my own envoy. You will make a beautiful
Queen, Joan. You and I together will raise Kosnovia from the mire of
centuries." Somewhat stilted lovemaking this; but what was a poor fellow to do who
had been taken from the Rue Boissiere and plunged into empire making,
all in the course of a summer's evening? He crossed the Pont Neuf without ever a look at Henri Quatre. That was a
pity. The sarcastic Bearnais grin might have revealed some of the
pitfalls that lay ahead. At any rate, the King of Navarre could have
given him many instances of a woman's fickleness--and fickleness was the
ugly word that leaped into Alec's puzzled brain when an ancient dame at
Joan's lodgings told him that Mademoiselle and her maid had gone away
that afternoon. "Gone! Gone where?" he asked blankly. "It is necessary to write," said Madame, and shut the door in his face,
since it is forbidden in the Quartier for good looking and unknown young
men to make such urgent inquiries concerning the whereabouts of discreet
young women like Mademoiselle Joan. Leontine, still scrubbing, came to the rescue. Never had she seen any
one so distinguished as this Monsieur. _Mon Dieu!_ but it was a pity
that the belle Americaine should have packed her boxes that very day! And diminutive Leontine was romantic to the tips of her stubby fingers. "M'sieu'? wishes to know where he will find the young lady who lives
there?" said she archly, jerking her head and a broom handle toward the
neighboring house. "But yes, my pretty one," cried Alec. "Well, Pauline said--Pauline is her domestic, see you--said they were
going to the forest to paint." "To Fontainebleau?" "Perhaps, m'sieu'--to the forest, that was it." "No name? Barbizon?" "It might be. I have no head for those big words, m'sieu'." Alec gave her a five-franc piece. It was the first coin he found in his
pocket, and the sight of it caused a frown. Confound those Montmartre
playwrights! Why was their stupid travesty constantly recurring to his
mind? He frowned again, this time at Auguste Comte's smugness, and
looked at his watch. Twenty-five minutes to seven! It was too late now
to do other than write--if he succeeded. If not--ah, well! "Some of them
are slain in the flower of their youth." At least, she would remember,
and those glorious eyes of hers would glisten with tears, and the belief
helped to console him. Still, he was saddened, disappointed, almost
dulled. Doubt came darkly with the dispelling of the dream that he might
commence his Odyssey with Joan's first and farewell kiss on his lips. Love and ambition seemed to be at variance; but love had flown, whereas
ambition remained. Back, then, to the Rue Boissiere, to an uproar of visitors, sightseers,
journalists. Prince Michael had become Monseigneur again. He was holding
a reception. Alec, pressing through the throng, was waylaid by a
servant. "This way, monsieur," whispered the man, drawing him into a passage and
thence to the room of Princess Delgrado. Alec was soothing his mother's
grief when his father entered secretly on tiptoe with the hushed voice
and stealthy air of a conspirator. He carried a parcel, long and narrow,
wrapped in brown paper. "I have been consumed with anxiety," said he. "Julius came and warned me
that your departure from Paris ought to be incognito. This is wise; so I
remain King-elect till you reach Delgratz. The newspapers are pestering
me to declare a program. They all expect that I shall leave Paris
to-night or early to-morrow. Indeed, an impudent fellow representing
'_Le Soir_' says that if I don't bestir myself I shall be christened the
Sluggard King. But I shall humbug them finely. Leave that to me. Your
portmanteaus have been smuggled out by way of the servants' quarters,
and you must vanish unseen. Buy a ticket for Vienna, ignore Stampoff
during the journey, accept my blessing, and take this." He held out the
parcel. "What is it?" inquired Alec. "My father's sword, your grandfather's sword. I have kept it bright for
you." Alec squirmed. He knew the weapon, a curved simitar inlaid with gold,
and reposing in a scabbard of gilt metal and purple velvet. In its
wrapping of brown paper and twine it suspiciously resembled a child's
toy, and Prince Michael's grandiloquent manner added a touch of
buffoonery to a farewell scene made poignant by a woman's tears. "I shall use it only on the skulls of eminent personages," said Alec
gravely. In truth, this Parisian kingship was rapidly becoming farcical. What a line, what a situation, for that review! But there was worse to come. Checked in his outburst of family pride,
Monseigneur became practical. "What of Dumont?" said he. "He was touched; but he knocked off five hundred francs." "Ah, bah! I rather hoped--well, I must return to the salon and play my
part. Remember, you will see no one except a servant at the Gare de
l'Est. Julius has arranged passports, everything." "He is taking an extraordinary interest in me. Of course, if I pull
through, he becomes heir presumptive." "Parbleu! That is so. But--you will marry. Bide your time, though. Choose a Queen who--" his shifty eyes fell on the trembling form of his
wife, who had remained strangely silent during this somewhat strained
interview,--"who will be as good a wife to you as your mother has been
to me. Farewell! may God guard you!" Twice in one day had the pompous little man been betrayed into an avowal
of honest sentiment. But he soon recovered. Once reestablished on the
hearthrug, with his eyeglass properly adjusted, his hands tucked under
his coattails when they were not emphasizing some well turned phrase,
Prince Michael enjoyed himself hugely. And then Alec clasped his mother in his arms. She was almost incoherent
with terror. Bid him remain she dare not; she lacked the force of
character that such a step demanded. She had given too many years to
this chimera of royalty now suddenly grown into a monster to be sated
only by the sacrifice of her son! But she mourned as if he was already
dead, and a lump rose in Alec's throat. He had always loved his mother;
his father had ever been remote, a dignified trifler, a poser. The three
held nothing in common. It could hardly be doubted that every good
quality of mind and body the boy possessed was a debt to the
brokenhearted woman now clinging to him in a very frenzy of lamentation. Small wonder if his eyes were misty and his voice choked. Ah! if Joan
but knew of this sorrowing mother's plight, surely she would come to
her! At last he tore himself away. Grasping that ridiculous parcel, he
hurriedly descended a back staircase. Owing to the paternal watchfulness
that the French Government exercises over its subjects, he was obliged
to pass the concierge; but none paid heed to him. If it came to that,
all Paris would guffaw at the notion of dear Alec becoming a filibuster. He hailed a passing cab. If he would catch his train, they must drive
furiously, which is nothing new in Paris. Climbing the Rue La Fayette,
he passed Count Julius Marulitch and Constantine Beliani coming the
other way in an open victoria. They were so deeply engaged in
conversation that they did not see him. Julius was talking and the Greek
listening. It flashed into Alec's mind that the presence in Paris of the
Greek on the very day of the Delgratz regicide offered a most remarkable
coincidence. Beliani was no stranger to him, since he and General
Stampoff, the one as Finance Minister and the other as Commander in
Chief, were exiled from Kosnovia after an abortive revolution ten years
ago. But Beliani usually lived in Vienna, indeed, he was sometimes regarded
as an active agent in Austria's steady advance on Salonica,--whereas
dear old Paul Stampoff hated Austria, was a frequent visitor to the
Delgrado receptions, and it was largely to his constant urging and
tuition that Alec owed his familiarity with the Slav language. The
Greek, it was evident, heard of the murders at the earliest possible
moment; Julius too was singularly well informed, though his interest in
Kosnovian affairs had long seemed dormant; even the fiery Stampoff was
no laggard once the news was bruited. Alec went so far as to fix the
exact time at which Julius appeared in the Rue Boissiere. He knew
something of the ways of newspapers, and was well aware that no private
person could hope to obtain such important intelligence before the
press. He himself had unwittingly heard the first public announcement of
the tragedy, and the three men had certainly lost no time in hurrying to
greet their new sovereign. What a madly inconsequent jumble it all was! Little more than two hours
ago he was driving through the Bois with no other notion in his brain
than to seek a means of earning a livelihood; yet here he was at the
Gare de l'Est carrying a sword as a symbol of kingship. A sword, wrapped
in brown paper, tied with string! Suppose, by some lucky chance, Joan
met him now, would she sympathize, or laugh? He found his father's valet waiting with his luggage near the ticket
office. The man gave him an envelop. It contained a passport, vised by
the Turkish Embassy, and a few scribbled words:

     Note the name. It is the nearest to your initials B. could procure. I shall come to you on the train. Destroy this. S.

The name was that on the passport, "Alexandre George Delyanni;
nationality, Greek; business, carpet merchant; destination,
Constantinople." Alec smiled. The humor of it was steeling him against the canker of
Joan's untimely disappearance. "I don't look much like a Greek," he said
to himself; "but the 'Alexandre' sounds well as an omen. I'm not so
sorry now. This business would tickle Joan to death." So, on the whole, it was a resigned if not light-hearted adventurer who
disposed himself and his belongings in the Orient Express, after
experiencing the singular good luck of securing a section in the
sleeping car returned by a Viennese banker at the last moment. He went
about the business of buying his ticket and passing the barrier with a
careless ease that would have excited the envy of a Russian Terrorist. Sharp eyes attend the departure of every international train from Paris;
but never a spy gave more than casual scrutiny to this broad shouldered
youth strolling down the platform, the latest passenger to arrive, and
the least flurried. He neither saw nor looked for Stampoff. Having a minute to spare, he
obtained a newspaper, took a seat voucher for the first dinner, lighted
a cigarette, entered his reserved compartment, arranged his luggage, and
burnt General Stampoff's scrawl just as the train moved out of the
station. Then he read an account of the Delgratz crime,--for it was only a crime,
a brutal and callous murder, not worthy to be dignified by the mantle of
political hate. The unhappy King and Queen of Kosnovia were dining in
company with the Queen's brother and the Minister of Ways and
Communications when the regiment on duty in the palace burst in on them. King Theodore was shot down while endeavoring to protect the Queen. She
too fell riddled with bullets, and both corpses were flung into a
courtyard. The unhappy guests were wounded, and still remained prisoners
in the hands of the regicides, who vaunted that they had "saved" the
country, and meant to restore the ancient sovereignty. Beliani's summary of subsequent events was accurate; but it struck Alec
at once that he had said nothing of the minister nor of Sergius
Vottisch, Queen Helena's brother, who was mainly instrumental in
defeating Beliani's half-forgotten revolt. Did he know of their
presence? How peculiar that he should utter no word of triumph
concerning Vottisch! Alec threw aside the paper. He was sick at heart. He loathed the thought
that the first step toward his throne lay across the body of a woman. "Nice guards, the noble Seventh Regiment!" he muttered. "Now, when I am
King----"

Then he realized that during the few minutes that had elapsed since the
train started, the whole aspect of the adventure had changed completely. It was no longer a snatch of opera bouffe, a fantastic conceit
engendered in the brain of that elderly beau whom he had left in the Rue
Boissiere, a bit of stage trifling happily typified by the property
sword. It had become real, grim, menacing. It reeked of blood. Its first
battle was there, recorded in the newspaper. He pictured those brutal
soldiers mauling the warm bodies, thrusting them through an open window
and proclaiming their loyalty--to him! The train was rushing through an estate noted for its game, and he had
been one of a party of guns in its coverts last October. He remembered
shooting a pheasant of glorious plumage, and saying: "Ah! What a pity! I
ought to have spared him, if only on account of his coat of many
colors." "When birds are flying fast, even you, Alec, have to shoot _passim_,"
said a witty Hebrew, and Delgrado did not appreciate the _mot_ until
some one told him that _passeem_ in Hebrew meant "patchwork," and that
Jacob's offense to Joseph's brethren lay in the gift of a Prince's robe
to his favorite son. The quip came to mind now with sinister significance; he wished most
heartily he had missed that pheasant. It was quite a relief when dinner
was announced, and he made his way to the dining car, where a polyglot
gathering showed that although the Orient Express had not quitted Paris
fifteen minutes it had already crossed many frontiers. There were few
French or English on board, and not one American. A couple of Turks, a
Bulgarian, a sprinkling of Russians and Levantines, and a crowd of
Teutons, either German or Austrian, made up the company. Stampoff
remained invisible, and Alec shared a table with an Armenian, who
insisted on speaking execrable English, though he understood French far
better. Then this newest of all Kings felt very lonely, and he began to
understand something of the isolation that would surround him in that
Black Castle of his daydream, where, if all went well with him, he
alone would be the "foreigner." A longing for companionship came upon
him. He wanted some one who would laugh and talk airy nonsense, some one
whose mind would not be running everlastingly in the political groove,
and an irresistible impulse urged him to ask for a telegraph form and
write:

     BEAUMANOIR, Villa Turquoise, Chantilly. Come and join in the revel. ALEC. He gave the message to an attendant, bidding him despatch it from
Chalons. He reasoned that Beaumanoir would be puzzled, would call at the
Rue Boissiere, see his father, and solve the mystery. In all likelihood,
Lord Adalbert, who cheerfully answered to the obvious nickname--would
accept the invitation, and by the time he reached Delgratz the
succession to the throne of Kosnovia would be in a fair way toward
settlement. Moreover, by depriving the Chantilly team of their crack
Number One, Alec would equalize matters for the Wanderers, and the love
of sport is ever the ruling passion in healthy and vigorous youth. "By gad!" he said to himself, "I'm showing craft already. That is a
Machiavellian wire!" 