

E-text prepared by Delphine Lettau and Joseph E. Loewenstein, M.D. THE BERTRAMS. A Novel. by

ANTHONY TROLLOPE

Author of "Barchester Towers," "Doctor Thorne," etc. In Three Volumes

VOL. I.







London:
Chapman & Hall, 193 Piccadilly. 1859. [The right of Translation is reserved.] London: Printed by W. Clowes and Sons, Stamford Street. CONTENTS OF VOL. I.

      I. VAE VICTIS! II. BREAKFAST AND LUNCH. III. THE NEW VICAR. IV. OUR PRIMA DONNA. V. THE CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. VI. JERUSALEM. VII. THE MOUNT OF OLIVES. VIII. SIR LIONEL BERTRAM. IX. MISS TODD'S PICNIC. X. THE EFFECTS OF MISS TODD'S PICNIC. XI. VALE VALETE. XII. GEORGE BERTRAM DECIDES IN FAVOUR OF THE BAR. XIII. LITTLEBATH. XIV. WAYS AND MEANS. XV. MR. HARCOURT'S VISIT TO LITTLEBATH. THE BERTRAMS. CHAPTER I.

VAE VICTIS! This is undoubtedly the age of humanity--as far, at least, as England
is concerned. A man who beats his wife is shocking to us, and a
colonel who cannot manage his soldiers without having them beaten is
nearly equally so. We are not very fond of hanging; and some of us
go so far as to recoil under any circumstances from taking the blood
of life. We perform our operations under chloroform; and it has even
been suggested that those schoolmasters who insist on adhering in
some sort to the doctrines of Solomon should perform their operations
in the same guarded manner. If the disgrace be absolutely necessary,
let it be inflicted; but not the bodily pain. So far as regards the low externals of humanity, this is doubtless a
humane age. Let men, women, and children have bread; let them have if
possible no blows, or, at least, as few as may be; let them also be
decently clothed; and let the pestilence be kept out of their way. In venturing to call these low, I have done so in no contemptuous
spirit; they are comparatively low if the body be lower than the
mind. The humanity of the age is doubtless suited to its material
wants, and such wants are those which demand the promptest remedy. But in the inner feelings of men to men, and of one man's mind to
another man's mind, is it not an age of extremest cruelty? There is sympathy for the hungry man; but there is no sympathy for
the unsuccessful man who is not hungry. If a fellow mortal be ragged,
humanity will subscribe to mend his clothes; but humanity will
subscribe nothing to mend his ragged hopes so long as his outside
coat shall be whole and decent. To him that hath shall be given; and from him that hath not shall
be taken even that which he hath. This is the special text that we
delight to follow, and success is the god that we delight to worship. "Ah! pity me. I have struggled and fallen--struggled so manfully, yet
fallen so utterly--help me up this time that I may yet push forward
once again!" Who listens to such a plea as this? "Fallen! do you want
bread?" "Not bread, but a kind heart and a kind hand." "My friend, I
cannot stay by you; I myself am in a hurry; there is that fiend of
a rival there even now gaining a step on me. I beg your pardon; but
I will put my foot on your shoulder--only for one moment. _Occupet
extremum scabies._"

Yes. Let the devil take the hindmost; the three or four hindmost if
you will; nay, all but those strong-running horses who can force
themselves into noticeable places under the judge's eye. This is the
noble shibboleth with which the English youth are now spurred on
to deeds of--what shall we say?--money-making activity. Let every
place in which a man can hold up his head be the reward of some
antagonistic struggle, of some grand competitive examination. Let us
get rid of the fault of past ages. With us, let the race be ever to
the swift; the victory always to the strong. And let us always be
racing, so that the swift and strong shall ever be known among us. But what, then, for those who are not swift, not strong? _Vae victis!_
Let them go to the wall. They can hew wood probably; or, at any rate,
draw water. Were we to ask Lord Derby, or Lord Palmerston, or to consult the
shade of Lord George Bentinck--or to go to those greater authorities
on the subject, Mr. Scott, for instance, and the family of the
Days--we should, I believe, be informed that the race-horse requires
a very peculiar condition. It is not to be obtained quickly, and,
when obtained, will fit the beast for no other than that one purpose
of running races. Crucifix was never good at going in a cab; Ilione
never took her noble owner down to the house of Parliament; nor has
Toxopholite been useful in Leicestershire. But, nevertheless, let all our work be done by race-horses; all, at
least, that shall be considered honourable. Let us have strength and
speed. And how shall we know who are strong and swift if we do not
train our horses to run against each other? But this early racing
will hardly produce that humanity of spirit of which we now deplore
the want. "The devil take the hindmost" is the very essence of the
young man's book of proverbs. The devil assuredly will take all the
hindmost. None but the very foremost can enter the present heaven of
good things. Therefore, oh my brother, my friend, thou companion of
my youth! may the devil take thee; thee quickly, since it needs must
be thee or me. _Vae victis_--alas! for these hindmost ones; there are so many of
them! The skim-milk will always be so much more in quantity than the
cream. With us at present cream is required for everything; nothing
can be well done now unless it be done by cream of some sort. That
milk has been skimmed; the cream has been taken away. No matter; skim
it again. There shall be something yet which we will call cream. Competitive examination will produce something that shall look to
be strong; that shall be swift, if it be only for a start of twenty
yards. This is the experiment of the present day. Wise men say that when
nothing but cream is accepted, all mankind, all boykind rather, will
prepare itself for a skimming of some sort; and that the quantity of
cream produced will be immense. It is only done as an instigation to
education. Much may be said in opposition to this; but nothing shall
be said here. It is merely of the cruelty of spirit that is thus
engendered that we now speak. Success is the only test of merit. Words have lost their old significance, and to deserve only is not
meritorious. _Vae victis!_ there are so many of them! "Thompson," says Johnson, the young poet, when he has at last
succeeded in getting the bosomest of his friends alone into his
chamber with him, "have you happened to look at my Iphigenia yet?" Thompson can't say that he has. He has been busy; has had so many
water-parties; and then, somehow, he doesn't think that he is very
partial to modern poetry on subjects of old mythology. Of course,
however, he means to read it--some of these days. "I wish you would," says Johnson, tendering a copy of the thin
volume. "I really wish you would; and let me have your candid
opinion. The press certainly have not noticed it much, and what they
have said has been very luke-warm." "I am sorry for that," says Thompson, looking grave. "And I did my best with it too. You would hardly believe how hard
I worked at it. There is not a line that has not been weighed and
written, perhaps, three times over. I do not think I am conceited;
but I cannot but believe that there is something in it. The reviewers
are so jealous! if a man has not a name, they will give him credit
for nothing; and it is so hard to begin." "I am sure it is," says Thompson. "I don't expect fame; and as for money, of course I don't think of
that. But I should like to know that it had been read by one or two
persons who could understand it. I have given to it the best of
my time, the best of my labour. I cannot but think that there is
something in it." Thus pleads the unsuccessful one for mercy. And thus answers to him the successful one, with no grain of mercy in
his composition:--"My dear Johnson, my maxim is this, that in this
world every man gets in the long run exactly what he deserves--"

"Did Milton get what he deserved?" "These are not the days of Milton. I don't want to hurt your
feelings; but old friends as we are, I should not forgive myself if I
didn't tell you what I really think. Poetry is all very well; but you
can't create a taste for it if it doesn't exist. Nobody that I know
of cares a d---- for Iphigenia." "You think I should change my subject, then?" "To tell you the truth, I think you should change your trade. This is
the third attempt, you know. I dare say they are very good in their
way; but if the world liked them, the world would have found it out
by this time. '_Vox populi, vox Dei_'--that is my motto--I don't
trust my own judgment; I trust that of the public. If you will take
my advice, you will give up Iphigenia and the rest of them. You see
you are doing nothing whatever at the bar," &c., &c.

And thus Johnson is left, without a scrap of comfort, a word of
consolation, a spark of sympathy; and yet he had given to that
Iphigenia of his the best that was in him to give. Had his publisher
sold ten thousand copies of it, how Thompson would have admired it! how he would have pressed the poet in his arms, and have given him
champagne up at Richmond! But who now has sympathy for failure? To
fail is to be disgraced. _Vae victis!_

There is something very painful in these races, which we English are
always running, to one who has tenderness enough to think of the nine
beaten horses instead of the one who has conquered. Look at that
list which has just come out after our grand national struggle at
Cambridge. How many wranglers are there? Thirty, shall we say? and
it is always glorious to be a wrangler. Out of that thirty there is
probably but one who has not failed, who is not called on to submit
to the inward grief of having been beaten. The youth who is second,
who has thus shown himself to be possessed of a mass of erudition
sufficient to crush an ordinary mind to the earth, is ready to eat
his heart with true bitterness of spirit. After all his labour, his
midnight oil, his many sleepless nights, his deserted pleasures, his
racking headaches, Amaryllis abandoned, and Neaera seen in the arms of
another--! After all this, to be beaten by Jones! Had it been Green
or Smith he could have borne it. Would it not have been better to do
as others had done? he could have been contented to have gone out in
the crowd; but there is nothing so base as to be second--and then
second to Jones! Out of the whole lot, Jones alone is contented; and he is told by
his physician that he must spend his next two winters at Cairo. The
intensity of his application has put his lungs into very serious
jeopardy. It was at Oxford, in the year 184--, that a young man sat in
his college-rooms at Balliol a wretched victim to unsuccessful
competition. It had been everything to him to come out as a first in
classics, and he had dared to dream even of a double-first. But he
had failed in both. The lists had just appeared, and he was only a
second-class man. Now, a second-class man is not much thought of at
Balliol, and he had lost his chance of an immediate fellowship. But this was perhaps hardly the worst of it. Arthur Wilkinson, for
such was this gentleman's name, had hitherto run his race in life
alongside a friend and rival named George Bertram; and in almost
every phase of life had hitherto been beaten. The same moment that
had told Wilkinson of his failure had told him also that Bertram
had obtained the place he had so desired. Bertram was the only
double-first man of his year. As these two young men will play the foremost parts in the following
pages, I will endeavour to explain, in as few words as possible, who
each of them was. As Bertram seems to have been the favourite with
fortune, I will begin with him. His father at the time alluded to was still alive, but his son George
had seen but little of him. Sir Lionel Bertram had been a soldier
of fortune, which generally, I believe, means a soldier without a
fortune, and in that capacity he was still in some sort fighting his
country's battles. At the present moment he held a quasi-military
position in Persia, where he had been for the last five years, and
previously to that he had served in Canada, India, the Cape of Good
Hope, and on some special mission at Monte Video. He had, therefore,
seen a good deal of the world; but very little of his only child. Mrs. Bertram, George's mother, had died early in life, and Mr.
(afterwards Sir Lionel) Bertram had roamed the world free from all
encumbrances. The Rev. Arthur Wilkinson, vicar of Hurst Staple, on the borders
of Hampshire and Berkshire, had married a first-cousin of Mrs.
Bertram's; and when young George Bertram, at the age of nine, was
tossing about the world rather in want of a fixed home, Mr. Wilkinson
undertook to give him that home, and to educate him with his own
eldest child till they should both be sent to some school. For
three years George Bertram lived at Hurst Staple, and was educated
accordingly. During these years he used to go annually for one month
to the house of an uncle, who in due time will also be introduced to
the reader; and therefore, not unnaturally, this month was regarded
by the boy as his holidays. Now, it may as well be explained in this place that Sir Lionel
Bertram, though a very gallant man, and peculiarly well adapted to
do business with outlandish people, had never succumbed to a habit
of punctuality in pecuniary matters. An arrangement had been perhaps
rather named than made, that one hundred and thirty pounds per annum
should be paid for young Bertram's needs; and as this was to include
pocket-money, clothing, and washing, as well as such trifles as the
boy's maintenance and education, perhaps the bargain was not a very
hard one as regarded Sir Lionel. The first seventy-five pounds were
paid; but after that, up to the end of the second year, Mr. Wilkinson
had received no more. As he was a poor man, with six children of his
own, and little besides his living, he then thought it better to
mention the matter to Sir Lionel's brother in London. The balance
was instantly paid, and Mr. Wilkinson had no further trouble on that
head. Nor had he much trouble on any other head as regarded young
Bertram. The lad was perhaps not fit to be sainted, and gave Mrs.
Wilkinson the usual amount of trouble as regarded his jackets and
pantaloons; but, on the whole, he was a good boy, free and generous
in his temper, quick in his parts, affectionate in disposition, and
full of humour. Those who examined him most closely (among whom,
perhaps, Mr. Wilkinson was not included) might have observed that
he was hardly as steady as he might have been in his likings and
dislikings; that he made too little of the tasks which he learnt
without trouble; and that, in fact, he was not sufficiently
solicitous about anything. He was, however, undoubtedly a lad of
great promise, and one of whom any father might have been proud. He was not a handsome boy, nor did he become a handsome man. His face
was too solid, his cheeks too square, and his forehead too heavy; but
his eyes, though small, were bright, and his mouth was wonderfully
marked by intelligence. When he grew to be a man, he wore no beard,
not even the slightest apology for a whisker, and this perhaps
added to the apparent heaviness of his face; but he probably best
understood his own appearance, for in those days no face bore on it
more legible marks of an acute mind. At the age of twelve, he was sent to Winchester, and as his holidays
were still passed with his uncle, he then ceased to regard Hurst
Staple as his home. Twice a year, as he went up to town, he stayed
there for a couple of days; but he was soon looked on as a visitor,
and the little Wilkinsons no longer regarded him as half a brother in
reality and quite a brother in love. Arthur Wilkinson was very nearly of the same age. He was just older
than young Bertram--by three months or so; just sufficiently to
give to Wilkinson a feeling of seniority when they first met, and
a consciousness that as he was the senior in age, he should be the
senior in scholastic lore. But this consciousness Wilkinson was not
able to attain; and during all the early years of his life, he was
making a vain struggle to be as good a man as his cousin; that is,
as good in scholarship, as good in fighting, as good in play, and as
good in spirit. In looks, at any rate, Arthur was superior to George; and much
consolation did his mother receive from this conviction. Young
Wilkinson was a very handsome lad, and grew up to be a handsome man;
but his beauty was of that regular sort which is more pleasing in a
boy than in a man. He also was an excellent lad, and no parent could
be so thankless as to be other than proud of him. All men said all
good things of him, so that Mr. Wilkinson could not but be contented. Nevertheless, one would always wish to see one's own son not less
bright than one's friend's son. Arthur Wilkinson was also sent to Winchester. Perhaps it would have
been better for the cousins that they should have gone to different
schools. The matter, however, had been left to Mr. Wilkinson, and
as he thought Winchester good for his own son, he naturally thought
the same school good for Sir Lionel's son. But Bertram was entered
as a commoner, whereas Wilkinson was in the college. Those who know
Winchester will understand, that though, as regarded school business
and school hours, they were at the same establishment, they were not
together at the much more important hours of eating, sleeping, and
playing. They did not cease to be friends, but they did cease to
live together as friends generally do live when educated at the same
school. At Winchester they both did fairly well; but Bertram did much the
best. He got the prizes, whereas his cousin did but nearly get them. He went up from class to class above the other, and when the last
tussle for pride of place came on at the close of their boyish
career, Bertram was the victor. He stood forth to spout out Latin
hexameters, and to receive the golden medal, while Wilkinson had no
other privilege but to sit still and listen to them. I believe masters but seldom recognize the agony of spirit with which
boys endure being beaten in these contests. Boys on such subjects
are very reticent; they hardly understand their own feelings enough
to speak of them, and are too much accustomed both to ridicule and
censure to look anywhere for sympathy. A favourite sister may perhaps
be told of the hard struggle and the bitter failure, but not a word
is said to any one else. His father, so thinks the boy, is angry at
his failure; and even his mother's kisses will hardly be warmed by
such a subject. We are too apt to think that if our children eat
pudding and make a noise they require no sympathy. A boy may fail at
school, and afterwards eat much pudding, and make much noise; but,
ah! how his young heart may sigh for some one to grieve with him over
his failures! Wilkinson was unfortunate at school. It was a great object with his
father that he should get a scholarship at New College, to which, as
all the world knows, his path lay through the college of Winchester. When his time came, he was all but successful--but he was not
successful. The vacancies in his year were few in number, only three,
and of these two were preoccupied, according to the then rule of the
place, by those heaven-born Wykamists, called founder's kin He was
only the second best on the list, and lost the prize. Bertram, having been a commoner, had had no right to think of New
College; but at the time when he was to be removed to Oxford, his
uncle gave him to understand that money was a great object to him. His father's mind was still too fully absorbed in the affairs of his
country to enable him to think much of his son's expenditure, and his
uncle at this period took a fit of disgust on the subject. "Very well," said George, "I will give up Oxford if I cannot do
something for myself." He went up, however, to Trinity, and became a candidate for a
scholarship there. This he obtained to the great surprise of all the
Wilkinsons and of himself. In those days, a lad of eighteen who could
get a scholarship at Trinity was considered to be nearly safe in his
career. I do not know how far this may be altered now. The uncle,
when he heard of his nephew's success, immediately allowed him what
would have been amply sufficient for him had he been in possession of
no income from his scholarship. Bertram, therefore, had been almost a
rich man during his residence at Oxford. Young Wilkinson, though he lost New College, received a small
scholarship from Winchester, and he also was sent by his father to
Oxford. To enable him to do this, Mr. Wilkinson was forced to make a
great struggle. He had five other children--four daughters, and one
younger son, and it was with difficulty that he could make up the
necessary allowance to carry Arthur through the University. But he
did do so, and the disappointed Wykamist went up to Balliol with an
income amounting to about half that which his cousin enjoyed. We need not follow them very accurately through their college
careers. They both became prizemen--one by force of intellect, and
the other by force of industry. They both went through their little
goes and other goes with sufficient zeal, up to that important day
on which the great go of all was to be undergone. They both belonged
to the same debating society at Oxford, and though they thought very
differently on most important subjects, they remained, with some few
temporary interruptions, fast friends through their four years of
Oxford residence. There were periods when the Balliol man was considered by his friends
to run a better chance of academical success than his brighter cousin
at Trinity. Wilkinson worked hard during his three first years, and
Bertram did not. The style of mind, too, of the former was the more
adapted to win friends at Oxford. In those days the Tracts were new,
and read by everybody, and what has since been called Puseyism was in
its robust infancy. Wilkinson proclaimed himself, while yet little
more than a boy, to be an admirer of poor Froude and a follower of
Newman. Bertram, on the other hand, was unsparing in his ridicule
of the "Remains," set himself in full opposition to the Sewells,
and came out as a poet--successfully, as far as the Newdegate was
concerned--in direct opposition to Keble and Faber. For three years Wilkinson worked hard and regularly; but the _eclat_
attending on his success somewhat injured him. In his fourth year,
or, at any rate, in the earlier part of it, he talked more than he
read, and gave way too much to the delights of society--too much, at
least, for one who was so poor, and to whom work was so necessary. He
could not keep his position by dint of genius, as Bertram might do;
consequently, though he was held to have taken honours in taking his
degree, he missed the high position at which he had aimed; and on the
day which enabled him to write himself bachelor of arts, he was in
debt to the amount of a couple of hundred pounds, a sum which it was
of course utterly out of his power to pay, and nearly as far out of
the power of his father. It had always been Bertram's delight to study in such a manner that
men should think he did not study. There was an affectation in this,
perhaps not uncommon to men of genius, but which was deleterious to
his character--as all affectations are. It was, however, the fact,
that during the last year before his examination, he did study hard. There was a set round him at his college among whom he was esteemed
as a great man--a little sect of worshippers, who looked for their
idol to do great things; and it was a point of honour with them to
assist this pretence of his. They gloried in Bertram's idleness; told
stories, not quite veracious, of his doings at wine-parties; and
proved, to the satisfaction of admiring freshmen, that he thought of
nothing but his horse and his boating. He could do without study more
than any other man could do with it; and as for that plodding Balliol
hero, he might look to be beaten out of the field without an effort. The Balliol men had been very confident in their hero up to the last
half-year; but then they began to doubt. Poor Wilkinson was beaten by
his rival out of the field, though, probably, not without an effort. We may say that no man ever gets a double-first in anything without
an effort. But be that as it may, Wilkinson was sitting alone, a very
unhappy man, in his rooms at Balliol, while Bertram was being feted
to his heart's content at Trinity. It is a grievous thing to have to write home to one's father, and to
say that one has failed when that father has so anxiously longed for
success. Arthur Wilkinson would have been a made man for life--made
according to the making which both his father and himself at that
time thought the most desirable--if his name had but appeared in
that first-class list. A double-first his father had not hoped for;
but, in resolving not to hope for it, he had consoled himself with
thinking that the hopes which he did form were the more certain of
success;--and then there would always be that further chance of
happiness in store. But now Arthur Wilkinson had to tell his father
that he was neither first nor double-first. His degree was very
respectable for a man who had not looked for much, for one who had
not been talked of in high places; but it was not respectable for
Wilkinson of Balliol. Vae victis! He was indeed unhappy as he sat there alone, meditating
how he would frame his letter. There were no telegraphs or telegrams
in those days, and it behoved him to write. If he did not, his father
would be at Oxford before the next night was over. How should he
write? Would it not be better to write to his mother? And then what
should he do, or what should he say, about that accursed debt? His pen and ink and paper were on the table, and he had got into his
chair for the purpose. There he had been for some half-hour, but
still not a word was written; and his chair had somehow got itself
dragged round to the fire. He was thus sitting when he heard a loud
knock at his outer door. "Come; open the door," said Bertram's voice, "I know you are there." Wilkinson still sat silent. He had not seen Bertram since the lists
had come out, and he could hardly make up his mind whether he could
speak to him or no. "I know you're there, and I'll have the door down if you don't
open it. There's nobody with me," shouted the manly voice of his
triumphant friend. Slowly Wilkinson got up and undid the lock. He tried to smile as he
opened the door; but the attempt was a failure. However, he could
still speak a few words, heavy as his heart was. "I have to congratulate you," said he to Bertram, "and I do it with
all my heart." There was very little heart in the tone in which this was spoken; but
then, what could be expected? "Thank'ee, old fellow, I'm sure you do. Come, Wilkinson, give us your
hand. It's better to have it all out at once. I wish you'd had more
luck, and there's an end of it. It's all luck, you know." "No, it's not," said Wilkinson, barely able to suppress the tears. "Every bit of it. If a chap gets a headache, or a fit of the colic,
it's all up with him. Or if he happens to have been loose as to some
pet point of the examiners, it's all up with him. Or if he has taken
a fad into his head, and had a pet point of his own, it's all up with
him then, too, generally. But it will never do, Wilkinson, to boody
over these things. Come, let you and I be seen walking together;
you'll get over it best in that way. We'll go over to Parker's, and
I'll stand a lunch. We'll find Gerard, and Madden, and Twisleton
there. Twisleton's so disgusted at getting a fourth. He says he won't
take it, and swears he'll make them let him go out in the ruck." "He's got as much as he thought he'd get, at any rate, and therefore
he can't be unhappy." "Unhappy! who's unhappy? Nonsense, my dear fellow. Shy all that to
the dogs. Come, let's go over to Parker's; we shall find Harcourt
there. You know he's up, don't you?" "No; and I had rather not meet him just at present." "My dear fellow, you must get over that." "That's all very well for you, who have got nothing to get over." "And have I never had anything to get over? I'll tell you what it is;
I've come here to prevent you from moping, and I don't mean to leave
you. So, you see, you may as well come with me at first." With some little hesitation, Wilkinson made his friend understand
that he had not yet written home, and that he could not go out till
he had done so. "Then I'll give you ten minutes to write your letter; it can't
possibly take you more, not even if you put into it my love to my
aunt and cousins." "I cannot do it while you are here." "Nonsense! gammon! You shall do it while I'm here. I'll not allow you
to make yourself a miserable ass all for nothing. Come, write. If
it's not written in ten minutes, I'll write it;" and so saying, he
took up a play of Aristophanes wherewith to amuse himself, by way of
light reading, after the heavy work of the week. Poor Wilkinson again drew his chair to the table, but his heart was
very heavy. Vae victis! CHAPTER II. BREAKFAST AND LUNCH. Wilkinson took the pen in his hand and bent himself over the paper
as though he were going to write; but not an ink-mark fell upon the
paper. How should he write it? The task might have been comparatively
light to him but for that dreadful debt. Bertram in the meantime
tossed over the pages of his book, looking every now and then at his
watch; and then turning sharply round, he exclaimed, "Well!" "I wish you'd leave me," said Wilkinson; "I'd rather be alone." "May I be doomed to live and die a don if I do; which style of life,
next to that of an English bishop, I look on as the most contemptible
in the world. The Queen's royal beef-eaters come next; but that, I
think, I could endure, as their state of do-nothingness is not so
absolute a quantity. Come; how far have you got? Give me the paper,
and I'll write you a letter in no time." "Thank you; I'd rather write my own letter." "That's just what I want you to do, but you won't;" and then again
he turned for two minutes to the "Frogs." "Well--you see you don't
write. Come, we'll both have a try at it, and see who'll have done
first. I wonder whether my father is expecting a letter from me?" And, so saying, he seized hold of pen and paper and began to write. My dearest Father,

   This weary affair is over at last. You will be sorry to
   hear that the event is not quite as well as it might have
   been as far as I am concerned. I had intended to be a
   first, and, lo! I am only a second. If my ambition had
   been confined to the second class, probably I might have
   come out a first. I am very sorry for it, chiefly for your
   sake; but in these days no man can count on the highest
   honours as a certainty. As I shall be home on Tuesday, I
   won't say any more. I can't give you any tidings about the
   fellowships yet. Bertram has had his old luck again. He
   sends his love to mamma and the girls. Your very affectionate son,

   ARTHUR WILKINSON. "There, scribble that off; it will do just as well as anything else." Poor Wilkinson took the paper, and having read it, to see that it
contained no absurdity, mechanically copied the writing. He merely
added one phrase, to say that his friend's "better luck" consisted
in his being the only double-first of his year, and one short
postscript, which he took good care that Bertram should not see; and
then he fastened his letter and sent it to the post. "Tell mamma not to be very unhappy." That was the postscript which he
added. That letter was very anxiously expected at the vicarage of Hurst
Staple. The father was prepared to be proud of his successful son;
and the mother, who had over and over again cautioned him not to
overwork himself, was anxious to know that his health was good. She
had but little fear as to his success; her fear was that he should
come home thin, pale, and wan. Just at breakfast-time the postman brought the letter, and the
youngest girl running out on to the gravel brought it up to her
expectant father. "It is from Arthur," said she; "isn't it, papa? I'm sure I know his
handwriting." The vicar, with a little nervousness, opened it, and in half a minute
the mother knew that all was not right. "Is he ill?" said she; "do tell me at once." "Ill! no; he's not ill."

"Well, what is it? He has not lost his degree?" "He has not been plucked, papa, has he?" said Sophia. "Oh, no; he has got his degree--a second in classics!--that's all;"
and he threw the letter over to his wife as he went on buttering his
toast. "He'll be home on Tuesday," said Mary, the eldest girl, looking over
her mother's shoulder. "And so George is a double-first," said Mrs. Wilkinson. "Yes," said the vicar, with his mouth full of toast; not evincing any
great satisfaction at the success of his late pupil. When the mother read the short postscript her heart was touched, and
she put her handkerchief up to her face. "Poor Arthur! I am sure it has not been his own fault." "Mamma, has George done better than Arthur?" said one of the younger
girls. "George always does do better, I think; doesn't he?" "He has made himself too sure of it," said the father, in almost
an angry tone. Not that he was angry; he was vexed, rather, as he
would be if his wheat crop failed, or his potatoes did not come up
properly. But he felt no sympathy with his son. It never occurred to him to
think of the agony with which those few lines had been written; of
the wretchedness of the young heart which had hoped so much and
failed so greatly; of the misery which the son felt in disappointing
the father. He was a good, kind parent, who spent his long days and
longer nights in thinking of his family and their welfare; he would,
too, have greatly triumphed in the triumph of his son; but it went
beyond his power of heart to sympathize with him in his misery. "Do not seem to be vexed with him when he comes home," said the
mother. "Vexed with him! you mean angry. Of course, I'm not angry. He has
done his best, I suppose. It's unlucky, that's all." And then the breakfast was continued in silence. "I don't know what he's to do," said the father, after awhile; "he'll
have to take a curacy, I suppose." "I thought he meant to stop up at Oxford and take pupils," said Mary. "I don't know that he can get pupils now. Besides, he'll not have a
fellowship to help him." "Won't he get a fellowship at all, papa?" "Very probably not, I should think." And then the family finished
their meal in silence. It certainly is not pleasant to have one's hopes disappointed; but
Mr. Wilkinson was hardly just in allowing himself to be so extremely
put about by his son's failure in getting the highest honours. Did
he remember what other fathers feel when their sons are plucked? or,
did he reflect that Arthur had, at any rate, done much better than
nineteen out of every twenty young men that go up to Oxford? But then
Mr. Wilkinson had a double cause for grief. Had George Bertram failed
also, he might perhaps have borne it better. As soon as the letter had been written and made up, Wilkinson
suffered himself to be led out of the room. "And now for Parker's," said Bertram; "you will be glad to see
Harcourt." "Indeed, I shall not. Harcourt's all very well; but just at present,
I would much rather see nobody." "Well, then, he'll be glad to see you; and that will be quite the
same thing. Come along." Mr. Harcourt was a young barrister but lately called to the bar, who
had been at Oxford spending his last year when Bertram and Wilkinson
were freshmen; and having been at Bertram's college, he had been
intimate with both of them. He was now beginning to practise, and men
said that he was to rise in the world. In London he was still a very
young man; but at Oxford he was held to be one who, from his three
years' life in town, had become well versed in the world's ways. He
was much in the habit of coming to Oxford, and when there usually
spent a good deal of his time with George Bertram. And so Wilkinson walked forth into the street arm and arm with his
cousin. It was a grievous trial to him; but he had a feeling within
him that the sooner the sorrow was encountered the sooner it would
be over. They turned into the High Street, and as they went they met
crowds of men who knew them both. Of course it was to be expected
that Bertram's friends should congratulate him. But this was not the
worst; some of them were so ill advised as to condole with Wilkinson. "Get it over at once," whispered Bertram to him, "and then it will be
over, now and for ever." And then they arrived at Parker's, and there found all those whom
Bertram had named, and many others. Mr. Parker was, it is believed,
a pastrycook by trade; but he very commonly dabbled in more piquant
luxuries than jam tarts or Bath buns. Men who knew what was what, and
who were willing to pay--or to promise to pay--for their knowledge,
were in the habit of breakfasting there, and lunching. Now a
breakfast or a lunch at Parker's generally meant champagne. Harcourt was seated on the table when they got into the back room,
and the other men were standing. "Sound the timbrels, beat the drums;
    See the conqu'ring hero comes,"


he sung out as Bertram entered the room. "Make way for the
double-first--the hero of the age, gentlemen! I am told that they
mean to put up an alabaster statue to him in the Common Room at
Trinity. However, I will vote for nothing more expensive than
marble." "Make it in pie-crust," said Bertram, "and let Parker be the artist." "Yes; and we'll celebrate the installation with champagne and _pate
de foie gras_," said Twisleton. "And afterwards devour the object of our idolatry, to show how
short-lived is the fame for which we work so hard," said Madden. "I should be delighted at such tokens of your regard, gentlemen. Harcourt, you haven't seen Wilkinson." Harcourt turned round and shook hands warmly with his other friend. "Upon my word, I did not see you, Master Wilkinson. You have such a
habit of hiding yourself under a bushel that one always misses you. Well; so the great day is over, and the great deed done. It's a bore
out of the way, trampled under foot and got rid of; that's my idea of
a degree." Wilkinson merely smiled; but Harcourt saw at once that he was a
deeply-disappointed man. The barrister, however, was too much a man
of the world either to congratulate him or condole with him. "There are fewer firsts this year than there have been for the
last nine years," said Gerard, thinking to soften the asperity of
Wilkinson's position. "That may be because the examiners required more, or because the men
had less to give," said Madden, forgetting all about Wilkinson. "Why, what noodles you are," said Bertram, "not to know that it's all
settled by chance at roulette the night before the lists come down! If it's not, it ought to be. The average result would be just as
fair. Come, Harcourt, I know that you, with your Temple experiences,
won't drink Oxford wine; but your good nature will condescend to
see the children feeding. Wilkinson, sit opposite there and give
Twisleton some of that pie that he was talking of." And so they sat
down to their banquet; and Harcourt, in spite of the refinement which
London had doubtless given to his taste, seemed perfectly able to
appreciate the flavour of the University vintage. "Gentlemen, silence for one moment," said Harcourt, when the graver
work of eating began to lull, and men torpidly peeled their pears,
and then cut them up into shapes instead of eating them. "It is
always said at all the breakfasts I go to--"

"This is not a breakfast," said Bertram, "it's a lunch." "Well, all the lunches, then; and God bless you. It's always said at
these matutinal meals--which, by-the-by, would be the nicest things
in the world, only one doesn't know what on earth to do when they're
over." "It's time to go to dinner then," said Twisleton. "That may do for the '_dura ilia_' of a freshman, but now that you're
a B.A., you'll find that that power fails you greatly. But, for
heaven's sake, let me go on with my speech, or you'll not get away
either to dinner or to supper. It is commonly declared, I say,
that there should be no speaking at these delicious little morning
repasts." "Do you call that a little repast?" said Madden, who was lying back
in his chair with a cigar in his mouth, of which he hardly had
strength enough left to puff out the smoke. "I mean no offence to the feed, which, of its kind, has been only
too good. If I'm to be allowed to go on, I'll say, that this rule,
which is always laid down, is always broken; and therefore I feel
no hesitation in breaking it on this occasion. A long speech is a
long bore, and a little speech is a little bore; but bores must
be endured. We can't do very well without them. Now my bore shall
be a very short bore if I'm allowed to make an end of it without
interruption." "All right, Harcourt," said Bertram. "Go ahead; we're only too
delighted to hear you. It isn't every day we have a London barrister
here." "No; and it isn't every day that we have a double-first at old
Trinity. Gentlemen, there are, I think, five, six Trinity men here
including myself. It will be a point of honour with you to drink
health and prosperity to our friend Bertram with all the honours. We have many men of whom we can boast at Trinity; but if I have any
insight into character, any power of judging what a man will do"--it
must be remembered that Mr. Harcourt, though a very young man in
London, was by no means a young man at Oxford--"there have been very
few before him who have achieved a higher place than will fall to his
lot, or whose name will be more in men's mouths than his. There are
also here four gentlemen of other colleges; they will not, I am sure,
begrudge us our triumph; they are his old friends, and will be as
proud of the Oxford man as we are of the Trinity man. Gentlemen, here
is prosperity to our friend the double-first, and health to enjoy the
fruits of his labour." Whereupon the toast was drunk with a great deal of fervour. It was
astonishing that ten men should make so much uproar; even Wilkinson,
whose heart the wine had just touched sufficiently to raise it a
little from the depth to which it had fallen--even he cheered; and
Madden, overcoming by degrees his not unnatural repugnance to rise,
produced from certain vast depths a double-bass hurrah. "Bertram," said he, when the voices and glasses were once more
silent, "you're a credit to your college, and I've a regard for you;
so I don't mind running the risk for once. But I must beg that I may
not be asked to repeat it." Bertram of course returned thanks to his guests with all the mawkish
modesty which usually marks such speeches--or, rather, with modesty
which would be mawkish were it not so completely a matter of course. And then he sat down; and then, with a face rather heightened in
colour, he got upon his legs again. "In spite of Madden's difficulty of utterance," said he, "and his
very visible disinclination to move--"

"I'm not going to do any more shouting," said Madden, "even though
you propose the health of the chancellor, vice-chancellor, and two
members." "Not even though he throws the proctor's into the bargain," said
Twisleton. "You may shout or not as you like; but at the risk of giving some
temporary pain to as good a friend as I have in the world, I will ask
you to drink the health of one whom on this occasion fortune has not
favoured--I mean my cousin, Arthur Wilkinson. The lists as they come
down are, I dare say, made out with tolerable fairness. It is not at
any rate for me to grumble at them. But of this I am quite sure, that
did there exist some infallible test for finding out the best man,
no man's name in this year would have been placed before his. He is
not so jovial as the rest of us now, because he has partly failed;
but the time will come when he will not fail." And then Arthur
Wilkinson's health was toasted with a somewhat bated enthusiasm, but
still with sufficient _eclat_ to make every glass in Mr. Parker's
house ring on its shelf. Poor Wilkinson's ears tingled when he heard his name pronounced; and
he would at the moment have given anything to be allowed to be quiet. But it may be doubted whether he would not have been more hurt had he
been left there without any notice. It is very hard to tune oneself
aright to a disappointed man. "I'll break the ice for him, at any
rate," said Bertram to himself. "When he's used to talk about it, he
will suffer less." Wilkinson had been accounted a good hand at speaking in the debating
society, and though rather more prolix than Bertram, and not quite
so vivacious, had been considered almost more than a match for his
cousin on account of his superior erudition and more practised
delivery; but now his voluble gift of words deserted him. "He was
much obliged to them," he said; "though perhaps, on the whole, it was
better that men who placed themselves in a mediocre condition should
be left to their mediocrity. He had no doubt himself of the justness
of the lists. It would be useless for him to say that he had not
aspired; all the world"--it was all the world to him--"knew too
well that he had aspired. But he had received a lesson which might
probably be useful to him for the rest of his life. As for failing,
or not failing, that depended on the hopes which a man might form for
himself. He trusted that his would henceforth be so moderate in their
nature as to admit of a probability of their being realized." Having
uttered these very lugubrious words, and almost succeeded in throwing
a wet blanket over the party, he sat down. "Now, you're not going to do anybody else, are you?" said Madden. "Only Twisleton, and Gerard, and Hopgood," answered Bertram; "and
Fortescue looks as if he expected it. Perhaps, however, he'll let us
off till the day after to-morrow." And then, with a round of milk punch, another cigar apiece, and a
little more chat, the party broke up. Bertram and Harcourt remained together, and Bertram endeavoured to
induce Wilkinson to stay with them. He, however, wished to be alone,
and got home to his college by himself. "You always overrated that man," said Harcourt. "I think not; but time will show. After all, a good degree is not
everything in the world. Who in London cares about senior wranglers
and double-firsts? When all is done, I don't see the use of it." "Nobody cares much about wranglers and double-firsts; but these are
the men, nevertheless, who get the best of what's going. Wood that
will swim in one water will swim in all waters." "You'll find Wilkinson will swim yet." "That is, he won't sink. I don't say he will. Nine-tenths of the men
in the world neither swim nor sink; they just go along with their
bows above the wave, but dreadfully water-logged, barely able to
carry the burdens thrown on them; but yet not absolutely sinking;
fighting a hard fight for little more than mere bread, and forgetting
all other desires in their great desire to get that. When such a man
does get bread, he can't be said to sink." "Ah! Wilkinson will do more than that." "Something more, or something less, as the case may be. But, believe
me, he is not the man to make other men fall before him. Industry
alone never does that, and certainly not that sort of industry
which breaks down once in every six months. But come, Mr. Parker's
champagne makes my head buzz: let us take a walk up the river;
Twisleton's idea of going to dinner requires far too much pluck for
me." And so they walked out along the towing-path, discussing many things
of much importance to them. "There is a tide in the affairs of men
    Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune." In nine cases out of ten, this flood-tide comes _but_ once in life,
and then in early years. A man may have a second or a third chance
for decent maintenance, but hardly a second chance for fortune's
brighter favours. The horse that is to win the race needs not make
all his best running at once; but he that starts badly will rarely do
so. When a young man discusses what shall be his future walk in life,
he is talking of all that concerns his success as far as this world
is concerned. And it is so hard for a youth to know, to make even
a fair guess, as to what his own capacities are! The right man is
wanted in the right place; but how is a lad of two and twenty to
surmise what place will be right for him? And yet, if he surmises
wrong, he fails in taking his tide at its single flood. How many
lawyers are there who should have been soldiers! how many clergymen
who should have been lawyers! how many unsuccessful doctors who might
have done well on 'Change, or in Capel Court! Bertram had an inkling of this; and Harcourt had more than an
inkling. His path in life was chosen, and he had much self-confidence
that he had chosen it well. He had never doubted much, and since he
had once determined had never doubted at all. He had worked hard, and
was prepared to work hard; not trusting over much in his own talents,
but trusting greatly in his own industry. But Bertram, with double
his friend's genius, had, at any rate as yet, but little of his
friend's stability. To him the world was all before him where to
choose; but he was sadly in want of something that should guide his
choice. He had a high, but at the same time a vague ambition. The
law, the church, letters, art, and politics all enticed him; but
he could not decide of which mistress the blandishments were the
sweetest. "Well, when shall we have you up in London?" said Harcourt. "In London! I don't know that I shall go to London. I shall go down
to Hadley for a few weeks of course"--Bertram's uncle lived at the
village of that name, in the close vicinity of Barnet--"but what I
shall do then, I don't in the least know." "But I know you'll come to London and begin to keep your terms." "What, at the Middle Temple?" "At some Temple or some Inn: of course you won't go where anybody
else goes; so probably it will be Gray's Inn." "No, I shall probably do a much more commonplace thing; come back
here and take orders." "Take orders! You! You can no more swallow the thirty-nine articles
than I can eat Twisleton's dinner." "A man never knows what he can do till he tries. A great deal of
good may be done by a clergyman if he be in earnest and not too much
wedded to the Church of England. I should have no doubt about it if
the voluntary principle were in vogue." "A voluntary fiddlestick!" "Well, even a voluntary fiddlestick--if it be voluntary and well
used." "Of course you'll be a barrister. It is what you are cut out for, and
what you always intended." "It is the most alluring trade going, I own;--but then they are all
such rogues. Of course you will be an exception." "I shall do at Rome as Romans do--I hope always. My doctrine is, that
we have no immutable law of right and wrong." "A very comfortable code. I wish I could share it." "Well, you will some of these days; indeed, you do now practically. But the subject is too long to talk of here. But as I know you won't
go into the church, I expect to see you settled in London before
Christmas." "What am I to live on, my dear fellow?" "Like all good nephews, live on your uncle. Besides, you will have
your fellowship; live on that, as I do." "You have more than your fellowship; and as for my uncle, to tell you
the truth, I have no fancy for living on him. I am not quite sure
that he doesn't mean me to think that it's charity. However, I shall
have the matter out with him now." "Have the matter out with him!--and charity! What an ass you are! An
uncle is just the same as a father." "My uncle is not the same to me as my father." "No; and by all accounts it's lucky for you that he is not. Stick to
your uncle, my dear fellow, and come up to London. The ball will be
at your foot." "Did you ever read Marryat's novel, Harcourt?" "What, Peter Simple?" "No, that other one: I think of going out as another Japhet in search
of a father. I have a great anxiety to know what mine's like. It's
fourteen years now since I saw him." "He is at Teheran, isn't he?" "At Hong Kong, I think, just at present; but I might probably catch
him at Panama; he has something to do with the isthmus there." "You wouldn't have half the chance that Japhet had, and would only
lose a great deal of time. Besides, if you talk of means, that would
want money." They were now walking back towards Oxford, and had been talking about
fifty indifferent subjects, when Bertram again began. "After all, there's only one decent career for a man in England." "And what is the one decent career?" "Politics and Parliament. It's all very well belonging to a free
nation, and ruling oneself, if one can be one of the rulers. Otherwise, as far as I can see, a man will suffer less from the
stings of pride under an absolute monarch. There, only one man has
beaten you in life; here, some seven hundred and fifty do so,--not to
talk of the peers." "Yes, but then a fellow has some chance of being one of the seven
hundred and fifty." "I shall go in for that, I think; only who the deuce will return me? How does a man begin? Shall I send my compliments to the electors of
Marylebone, and tell them that I am a very clever fellow?" "Exactly; only do something first to show that you are so. I mean
also to look to that; but I shall be well contented if I find myself
in the house in twenty years' time,--or perhaps in thirty." "Ah, you mean as a lawyer." "How else should a man without property get into Parliament?" "That's just what I want to know. But I have no idea, Harcourt, of
waiting twenty years before I make my start in life. A man at any
rate may write a book without any electors." "Yes, but not have it read. The author who does any good must be
elected by suffrages at least as honestly obtained as those of a
member of Parliament." CHAPTER III. THE NEW VICAR. Poor Arthur Wilkinson was in a very unhappy frame of mind when he
left the party at Parker's, and, indeed, as he went to bed that night
he was in a state not to be envied; but, nevertheless, when the end
of the week came, he was able to enter the parsonage with a cheerful
step, and to receive his mother's embrace with a smiling face. God
is good to us, and heals those wounds with a rapidity which seems to
us impossible when we look forward, but which is regarded with very
insufficient wonder when we look backward. Before he left Oxford he had seen the head of his college and the
tutor; and had also felt himself bound to visit the tradesmen in
whose black books he was written down as a debtor. None of these
august persons made themselves so dreadful to him as he had expected. The master, indeed, was more than civil--was almost paternally kind,
and gave him all manner of hope, which came as balm poured into
his sick heart. Though he had failed, his reputation and known
acquirements would undoubtedly get him pupils; and then, if he
resided, he might probably even yet have a college fellowship,
though, no doubt, not quite immediately. The master advised him to
take orders, and to remain within the college as long as the rules
permitted. If he should get his fellowship, they would all be
delighted to have him as one of their body; there could--so thought
the master--be no doubt that he might in the meantime maintain
himself at the University by his pupils. The tutor was perhaps not
quite so encouraging. He was a working man himself, and of a harder
temperament than his head. He thought that Wilkinson should have
got a first, that he had owed it to his college to do so, and that,
having failed to pay his debt, he should not be received with open
arms--at any rate just at first. He was therefore cool, but not
generous. "Yes; I am sorry too; it is a pity," was all he said when
Wilkinson expressed his own grief. But even this was not so bad as
Arthur had expected, and on the whole he left his college with a
lightened heart. Nor were his creditors very obdurate. They did not smile so sweetly
on him as they would have done had his name been bruited down the
High Street as that of a successful University pet. Had such been his
condition, they would have begged him not to distress their ears by
anything so unnecessarily mundane as the mention of his very small
account. All that they would have wanted of him would have been the
continuation of his favours. As it was, they were very civil. Six
months would do very well. Oh! he could not quite undertake to pay it
in six months, but would certainly do so by instalments in two years. Two years was a long time, certainly; would not Mr. Wilkinson senior
prefer some quicker arrangement? Oh! Mr. Wilkinson senior could do
nothing! Ah! that was unfortunate! And so the arrangement for two
years--with interest, of course--was accepted. And thus Mr. Wilkinson
junior began the swimming-match of life, as so many others do, with a
slight millstone round his neck. Well; it may be questioned whether
even that is not better than an air-puffed swimming-belt. When he got home, his mother and sisters hung about him as they
always had done, and protected him in some measure from the cold
serenity of the vicar. To his father he said little on the subject,
and his father said as little to him. They talked, indeed, by the
hour as to the future; and Arthur, in spite of his having resolved
not to do so, told the whole story of his debts, and of his
arrangement for their payment. "Perhaps I could do something in the spring," said Mr. Wilkinson. "Indeed, father, you shall do nothing," said the son. "I had enough,
and should have lived on it; as I did not, I must live the closer
now." And so that matter was settled. In a very few days Arthur found himself going into society with quite
a gay heart. His sisters laughed at him because he would not dance;
but he had now made up his mind for the church, and it would, he
thought, be well for him to begin to look to those amusements which
would be befitting his future sacerdotal life. He practised singing,
therefore, fasted on Fridays, and learnt to make chessmen with a
lathe. But though his sisters laughed at him, Adela Gauntlet, the daughter
of the neighbouring vicar at West Putford, did not laugh. She so
far approved that by degrees she almost gave over dancing herself. Waltzes and polkas she utterly abandoned; and though she did
occasionally stand up for a quadrille, she did it in a very
lack-a-daisical way, as though she would have refused that also had
she dared to make herself so peculiar. And thus on the whole Arthur
Wilkinson enjoyed himself that winter, in spite of his blighted
prospects, almost as well as he had on any previous winter that he
remembered. Now and again, as he walked along the little river bank that ran with
so many turnings from Hurst Staple down to West Putford, he would
think of his past hopes, and lament that he could talk of them to
no one. His father was very good to him; but he was too cold for
sympathy. His mother was all affection, and kindly suggested that,
perhaps, what had happened was for the best: she kindly suggested
this more than once, but her imagination carried her no further. Had
she not four daughters, hitherto without husbands, and also, alas! without portions? Was it not enough for her to sympathize with them? As for his sisters--his sisters were well enough--excellent girls;
but they were so gay, so light-hearted, so full of fun and laughter,
that he could not talk to them of his sorrows. They were never
pensive, nor given to that sober sadness which is prone to sympathy. If, indeed, Adela Gauntlet had been his sister--! And so he walked
along the river to West Putford. He had now fully made up his mind to go into the church. While yet
thinking of high academical honours, and the brighter paths of
ambition, he also had dreamed of the bar. All young men I believe
do, who have high abilities, a taste for labour, and scanty fortune. Senior wranglers and double-firsts, when not possessed of means for
political life, usually find their way to the bar. It is on the bench
of judges, not on the bench of bishops, that we must look for them in
after life. Arthur, therefore, had thought of the joys of a Chancery
wig, and had looked forward eagerly to fourteen hours' daily labour
in the purlieus of Lincoln's Inn. But when, like many another, he
found himself disappointed in his earliest hopes, he consoled himself
by thinking that after all the church was the safer haven. And when
he walked down to West Putford there was one there who told him that
it was so. But we cannot follow him too closely in these early days. He did go
into the church. He did take pupils at Oxford, and went abroad with
two of them in the long vacation. After the lapse of the year, he did
get his fellowship; and had by that time, with great exertion, paid
half of that moiety of his debt which he had promised to liquidate. This lapse in his purposed performance sat heavy on his clerical
conscience; but now that he had his fellowship he would do better. And so somewhat more than a year passed away, during which he was but
little at Hurst Staple, and very little at West Putford. But still he
remembered the sweetly-pensive brow that had suited so well with his
own feelings; and ever and again, he heard from one of the girls at
home, that that little fool, Adela Gauntlet, was as bad as a parson
herself, and that now she had gone so far that nothing would induce
her to dance at all. So matters stood when young Wilkinson received at Oxford a letter
desiring his instant presence at home. His father had been stricken
by paralysis, and the house was in despair. He rushed off, of course,
and arrived only in time to see his father alive. Within twenty-four
hours after his return he found himself the head of a wailing family,
of whom it would be difficult to say whether their wants or their
griefs were most heartrending. Mr. Wilkinson's life had been insured
for six hundred pounds; and that, with one hundred a year which
had been settled on the widow, was now the sole means left for the
maintenance of her and her five children;--the sole means excepting
such aid as Arthur might give. "Let us thank God that I have got the fellowship," said he to his
mother. "It is not much, but it will keep us from starving." But it was not destined that the Wilkinsons should be reduced even to
such poverty as this. The vicarage of Hurst Staple was in the gift of
the noble family of Stapledean. The late vicar had been first tutor
and then chaplain to the marquis, and the vicarage had been conferred
on him by his patron. In late years none of the Wilkinsons had seen
anything of the Stapledean family. The marquis, though not an old
man, was reported to be very eccentric, and very cross. Though he had
a beautiful seat in the neighbourhood--not in the parish of Hurst
Staple, but in that of Deans Staple, which adjoins, and which was
chiefly his property--he never came to it, but lived at a much less
inviting mansion in the north of Yorkshire. Here he was said to
reside quite alone, having been separated from his wife; whereas,
his children had separated themselves from him. His daughters were
married, and his son, Lord Stanmore, might more probably be found
under any roof in the country than that of his father. The living had now to be given away by the marquis, and the Wilkinson
family, who of late years had had no communication with him, did
not even think of thinking of it. But a fortnight after the funeral,
Arthur received a letter with the postmark of Bowes on it, which, on
being opened, was found to be from Lord Stapledean, and which very
curtly requested his attendance at Bowes Lodge. Now Bowes Lodge was
some three hundred miles from Hurst Staple, and a journey thither
at the present moment would be both expensive and troublesome. But
marquises are usually obeyed; especially when they have livings to
give away, and when their orders are given to young clergymen. So
Arthur Wilkinson went off to the north of England. It was the middle
of March, and the east wind was blowing bitterly. But at twenty-four
the east wind does not penetrate deep, the trachea is all but
invulnerable, and the left shoulder knows no twinges. Arthur arrived at the cold, cheerless village of Bowes with a red
nose, but with eager hopes. He found a little inn there, but he
hardly knew whether to leave his bag or no. Lord Stapledean had said
nothing of entertaining him at the Lodge--had only begged him, if it
were not too much trouble, to do him the honour of calling on him. He, living on the northern borders of Westmoreland, had asked a man
in Hampshire to call on him, as though their houses were in adjacent
streets; but he had said nothing about a dinner, a bed, or given any
of those comfortable hints which seem to betoken hospitality. "It will do no harm if I put my bag into the gig," said Arthur; and
so, having wisely provided for contingencies, he started for Bowes
Lodge. Wisely, as regarded probabilities, but quite uselessly as regarded
the event! Hardy as he was, that drive in the gig from Bowes did
affect him unpleasantly. That Appleby road has few sheltered spots,
and when about three miles from Bowes he turned off to the right, the
country did not improve. Bowes Lodge he found to be six miles from
the village, and when he drove in at the gate he was colder than he
had been since he left Hurst Staple. There was very little that was attractive about the house or grounds. They were dark and sombre, and dull and dingy. The trees were all
stunted, and the house, of which half the windows were closed, was
green with the effects of damp. It was large enough for the residence
of a nobleman of moderate pretensions; but it had about it none of
that spruce, clean, well-cared-for appearance which is common to the
country-houses of the wealthy in England. When he descended from the gig he thought that he might as well leave
his bag there. The sombre-looking servant in black clothes who opened
the door made no inquiry on the subject; and, therefore, he merely
told his Jehu to drive into the yard and wait for further orders. His lordship was at home, said the sombre, dingy servant, and in
half a minute Arthur found himself in the marquis's study and in the
marquis's presence, with his nose all red and moist, his feet in an
agony of cold, his fingers benumbed, and his teeth chattering. He was
barely allowed time to take off his greatcoat, and, as he did so, he
felt almost disinclined to part with so good a friend. "How do you do, Mr. Wilkinson?" said the marquis, rising from his
chair behind the study table, and putting out the ends of his fingers
so as to touch the young clergyman's hand. "Pray take a seat." And
Arthur seated himself--as, indeed, he had no alternative--on a
straight-backed old horsehair-bottomed chair which stood immediately
under a tall black book-case. He was miles asunder from the fire; and
had he been nearer to it, it would have availed him but little; for
the grate was one of those which our grandfathers cleverly invented
for transmitting all the heat up the chimney. The marquis was tall, thin, and gray-haired. He was, in fact, about
fifty; but he looked to be at least fifteen years older. It was
evident from his face that he was a discontented, moody, unhappy
man. He was one who had not used the world over well; but who was
quite self-assured that the world had used him shamefully. He was
not without good instincts, and had been just and honest in his
dealings--except in those with his wife and children. But he believed
in the justness and honesty of no one else, and regarded all men as
his enemies--especially those of his own flesh and blood. For the
last ten years he had shut himself up, and rarely appeared in the
world, unless to make some statement, generally personal to himself,
in the House of Lords, or to proffer, in a plaintive whine to his
brother peers, some complaint as to his neighbour magistrates,
to which no one cared to listen, and which in latter years the
newspapers had declined to publish. Arthur, who had always heard of the marquis as his father's old
pupil, was astonished to see before him a man so aged. His father had
been only fifty-five when he died, and had appeared to be a hale,
strong man. The marquis seemed to be worn out with care and years,
and to be one whose death might be yearly expected. His father,
however, was gone; but the marquis was destined to undergo yet many
more days of misery. "I was very sorry to hear of your father's sudden death," said Lord
Stapledean, in his cold, thin voice. "It was very sudden, my lord," said Arthur, shuddering. "Ah--yes; he was not a prudent man;--always too fond of strong wine." "He was always a temperate man," said the son, rather disgusted. "That is, he never got drunk. I dare say not. As a parish clergyman,
it was not likely that he should. But he was an imprudent man in his
manner of living--very." Arthur remained silent, thinking it better to say nothing further on
the subject. "I suppose he has not left his family well provided for?" "Not very well, my lord. There is something--and I have a
fellowship." "Something!" said the marquis, with almost a sneer. "How much is this
something?" Whereupon Arthur told his lordship exactly the extent of
his mother's means. "Ah, I thought as much. That is beggary, you know. Your father was a
very imprudent man. And you have a fellowship? I thought you broke
down in your degree." Whereupon Arthur again had to explain the facts
of the case. "Well, well, well. Now, Mr. Wilkinson, you must be aware that your
family have not the slightest claim upon me." "Your lordship is also aware that we have made none." "Of course you have not. It would have been very improper on your
part, or on your mother's, had you done so--very. People make claims
upon me who have been my enemies through life, who have injured me
to the utmost of their power, who have never ceased striving to make
me wretched. Yes, these very people make claims on me. Here--here is
a clergyman asking for this living because he is a friend of Lord
Stanmore--because he went up the Pyramids with him, and encouraged
him in all manner of stupidity. I'd sooner--well, never mind. I
shan't trouble myself to answer this letter." Now, as it happened
that Lord Stanmore was a promising young nobleman, already much
thought of in Parliament, and as the clergyman alluded to was known
by Arthur to be a gentleman very highly reputed, he considered it
best to hold his tongue. "No one has a claim on me; I allow no one to have such claims. What I
want I pay for, and am indebted for nothing. But I must put some one
into this living." "Yes; your lordship must of course nominate some one." Wilkinson said
so much, as the marquis had stopped, expecting an answer. "I can only say this: if the clergymen in Hampshire do their duty
as badly as they do here, the parish would be better off without a
parson." "I think my father did his duty well." "Perhaps so. He had very little to do; and as it never suited me to
reside there, there was never any one to look after him. However,
I make no complaint. Here they are intolerable--intolerable,
self-sufficient, impertinent upstarts, full of crotchets of their
own; and the bishop is a weak, timid fool; as for me, I never go
inside a church. I can't; I should be insulted if I did. It has
however gone so far now that I shall take permission to bring the
matter before the House of Lords." What could Wilkinson say? Nothing. So he sat still and tried to drive
the cold out of his toes by pressing them against the floor. "Your father certainly ought to have made some better provision,"
continued Lord Stapledean. "But he has not done so; and it seems to
me, that unless something is arranged, your mother and her children
will starve. Now, you are a clergyman?" "Yes, I am in orders." "And can hold a living? You distinctly understand that your mother
has no claim on me." "Surely none has been put forward, Lord Stapledean?" "I don't say it has; but you may perhaps fancy by what I say that I
myself admit that there is a claim. Mind; I do no such thing. Not in
the least." "I quite understand what you mean." "It is well that you should. Under these circumstances, if I had the
power, I would put in a curate, and pay over the extra proceeds of
the living for your mother's maintenance. But I have no such power." Arthur could not but think that it was very well his lordship had no
such power. If patrons in general were so privileged there would be,
he thought, but little chance for clergymen. "As the law stands I cannot do that. But as you are luckily in
orders, I can put you in--on this understanding, that you shall
regard the income as belonging rather to your mother and to your
sisters than to yourself." "If your lordship shall see fit to present me to the living, my
mother and sisters will of course want nothing that I can give them." "Ah--h--h--h, my young friend! but that will not be sufficient for
me. I must have a pledge from you--your word as a gentleman and a
clergyman, that you take the living on an understanding that the
income is to go to your father's widow. Why should I give you five
hundred pounds a year? Eh? Tell me that. Why should I nominate a
young man like you to such a living? you, whom I never saw in my
life? Tell me that." Arthur Wilkinson was a man sufficiently meek in spirit, as ordinary
meekness goes--the ordinary meekness, that is, of a young clergyman
of the Church of England--but he was not quite inclined to put up
with this. "I am obliged, my lord, to say again that I have not asked for so
great a favour from you. Indeed, till I received your letter desiring
me to come here, I had no other thought of the living than that of
vacating the house whenever your nominee should present himself." "That's all very well," said Lord Stapledean; "but you must be a
very unnatural son if on that account you refuse to be the means of
providing for your unfortunate mother and sisters." "I refuse! why, my lord, I regard it as much my duty to keep my
mother and sisters from want as my father did. Whether I am to have
this living or no, we shall live together; and whatever I have will
be theirs." "That's all very well, Mr. Wilkinson; but the question I ask you is
this: if I make you vicar of Hurst Staple, will you, after deducting
a fair stipend for yourself as curate--say one hundred and fifty
pounds a year if you will--will you make over the rest of the income
to your mother as long as she lives?" This was a question to which Wilkinson found it very difficult to
give a direct answer. He hardly knew whether he would not be guilty
of simony in making such a promise, and he felt that at any rate the
arrangement would be an improper one. "If you knew," said he, at last, "the terms on which my mother and I
live together, you would perceive that such a promise is not needed." "I shall not the less think it necessary to exact it. I am putting
great trust in you as it is, very great trust; more so perhaps than
I am justified in doing." His lordship here alluded merely to the
disposition of the vicarial tithes, and not at all to the care of
souls which he was going to put into the young man's hands. Arthur Wilkinson again sat silent for awhile. "One would think," said his lordship, "that you would be glad to
have the means of securing your mother from beggary. I imagined that
you would have been in some measure gratified by my--my--my good
intentions towards your family." "So I am, my lord; so I am. But I doubt whether I should be justified
in giving such a pledge." "Justified! you will make me almost doubt, Mr. Wilkinson, whether I
shall be justified in putting the living into your hands; but, at any
rate, I must have an answer." "What time can you allow me to consider my answer?" "What time! It never struck me that you could require time. Well;
you can let me have your decision to-morrow morning. Send it me in
writing, so that I may have it before ten. The post goes out at
twelve. If I do not hear from you before ten, I shall conclude that
you have refused my offer." And so speaking the marquis got up from
his chair. Arthur also got up, and promised that he would send a letter over
from Bowes the first thing on the following morning. "And tell the messenger to wait for an answer," said his lordship;
"and pray express yourself definitely, so that there may be no
doubt." And then, muttering something as to his hope that the inn was
comfortable, and saying that the state of his health prohibited him
from entertaining visitors, the marquis again put out his fingers,
and Arthur soon found himself in the gig on his journey to Bowes. He intended returning to town on the following day by the
twelve-o'clock mail, of which Lord Stapledean had spoken. But before
that he had a difficult task to perform. He had no friend to consult,
no one of whom he could ask advice, nothing to rely on but his own
head and his own heart. That suggestion as to simony perplexed him. Had he the right, or could he have it, to appropriate the income of
the living according to terms laid down by the lay impropriator? At
one time he thought of calling on the old clergyman of the parish and
asking him; but then he remembered what the marquis had said of the
neighbouring parsons, and felt that he could not well consult one of
them on any matter in which his lordship was concerned. In the evening he considered the matter long and painfully, sitting
over a cup of some exquisitely detestable concoction called tea by
the Bowesian landlady. "If he had only left me to myself," thought
Arthur, "I should do at least as much as that for them. It is for
them that I want it; as for myself, I should be more comfortable at
Oxford." And then he thought of West Putford, and Adela Gauntlet. This arrangement of Lord Stapledean's would entirely prevent the
possibility of his marrying; but then, the burden of his mother and
sisters would prevent that equally under any circumstances. It would be a great thing for his mother to be left in her old house,
among her old friends, in possession of her old income. As regarded
money, they would all be sufficiently well provided for. For himself,
his fellowship and his prescribed stipend would be more than enough. But there was something in the proposition that was very distasteful
to him. He did not begrudge the money to his mother; but he did
begrudge her the right of having it from any one but himself. But yet the matter was of such vital moment. Where else was he to
look for a living? From his college in the course of years he might
get one; but he could get none that would be equal in value to this
of Hurst Staple, and to his fellowship combined. If he should refuse
it, all those whom he loved would in truth suffer great privation;
and that privation would not be rendered more endurable by the
knowledge that such an offer had been refused. Thus turning the matter over painfully in his mind, he resolved at
last to accept the offer of the marquis. The payment after all was
to be made to his own mother. The funds of the living were not to be
alienated--were not, in truth, to be appropriated otherwise than they
would have been had no such conditions as these been insisted on. And how would he be able to endure his mother's poverty if he should
throw away on her behalf so comfortable a provision? He determined,
therefore, to accept the goods the gods had provided him, clogged
though they were with alloy, like so many other gifts of fortune;
and accordingly he wrote a letter to Lord Stapledean, in which he
stated "that he would accept the living, subject to the stipulations
named--namely, the payment to his mother, during her life, of three
hundred and fifty pounds per annum out of the tithes." To this he
received an answer from the marquis, very short and very cold, but
nevertheless satisfactory. The presentation to the living was, in fact, made in his favour, and
he returned home to his family laden with good news. The dear old
vicarage would still be their own; the trees which they had planted,
the flower-beds which they had shaped, the hives which they had put
up, would not go into the hands of strangers. And more than this,
want no longer stared them in the face. Arthur was welcomed back
with a thousand fond caresses, as one is welcomed who bringeth glad
tidings. But yet his heart was sad. What should he now say to Adela
Gauntlet? CHAPTER IV. OUR PRIMA DONNA. When Arthur first explained to his mother the terms on which the
living had been given to him, she refused to receive the income. No such promise with reference to money matters between mother and
son could be binding. Were they not, moreover, one and the same
household? Would it not be in the end the same if Arthur should keep
the money himself? If it were paid to her, she should only pay it
back again; and so on. But the vicar declared that he would adhere
strictly to his promised engagement; and the mother soon fell into
the way of thinking the arrangement not altogether a bad one. She had
received intimation through the lord's man of business of the exact
steps which had been taken for the relief of her great pecuniary
distress--so the letter was worded--and it was not long before she
regarded the income as fairly her own. We are so apt to be generous in the hot moments of impulse; but so
equally apt to be only coldly just, even if coldly just, in the long
years of our ordinary existence. And so the family again settled down; the commenced packings were
again unpacked; the preliminary arrangements for living on a very
small income were thrown to the winds; the pony that was to have been
sold, and which with that object was being fattened up on boiled
barley, was put on his accustomed rations; the old housekeeper's
warning was revoked, as was also that of the old gardener. It was
astonishing how soon the new vicar seemed to fill the old vicar's
shoes in the eyes and minds of the people of Hurst Staple. Had Mr.
Wilkinson come up from his grave at the end of three months, he would
hardly have found that he was missed. A very elegant little tablet
had been placed to his memory; and there apparently was an end of
him. The widow's cap did make some change in the appearance of the
family circle; but it is astonishing how soon we get used even to a
widow's cap! There had of course been visits of condolence between West Putford
and Hurst Staple, and the Hurst Staple girls and Adela had been as
much, or perhaps more, together than usual. But Arthur's walks along
the river had not been frequent. This, however, was not thought of
by any one. He had had new duties to assume, and old duties to put
off. He had been a fortnight up at Oxford; and when at home, had
been calling on all his parishioners. He had been attending to the
dilapidations of the vicarage, and rearranging the books in the
book-room. The dingy volumes of thirty years since had been made to
give way to the new and brighter bindings which he had brought from
college. And therefore no one had remarked that he had but once been at West
Putford. But he thought of it himself. He often longed to go thither,
and as often feared to do so. When he next went, it must be to tell
Adela, not that he loved her, but that such love was forbidden to
him. The family at West Putford consisted only of the vicar and his
daughter. Mrs. Gauntlet had been long dead, and there had been no
other child. A maiden sister of Mr. Gauntlet's occasionally visited
them, and had, indeed, lived there altogether while Adela's education
had required it; but this lady preferred her own lodgings at
Littlebath, and Adela, therefore, was in general the sole mistress of
the parsonage. I beg my reader not to imagine that there had been love-passages
between Arthur Wilkinson and Adela Gauntlet: nothing of the sort had
occurred. They had known and loved each other as children together,
and now that they were no longer children, they still knew and loved
each other--that was all. It is true that Arthur, when he had wished
to talk of his own disappointments, had found a better listener at
West Putford than any that he could find at Hurst Staple. It is true
that Adela had always been glad to listen to him; that she had had
pleasure in cheering his fainting heart, and telling him that the
work of a soldier of Christ was worthier of a man than the bickerings
of a statesman or the quibbles of a lawyer; that she had gravely, yet
withal so sweetly, spoken to him of the comforts of a rural life, and
made him almost in love with his own failure. Such passages there had
been between them; but Arthur had never taken her hand and sworn that
it must be his own, nor had Adela ever blushed while half refusing to
give him all he asked. Why then need he trouble himself about West Putford? Why not let
matters rest as they were? Miss Gauntlet would still be his friend;
though seeing that she could never be more, it might not be well
for him to walk so often along that river. As there had been no
love-passages, one would say that nothing else was necessary. But he could not content himself that this should be so. Adela would
think him strange if he should say nothing to her of his future
prospects. True, he had spoken no word of love, but had he not
looked at her as though it was in his mind to speak such? Was it not
incumbent on him to make her understand why he threw from him such
golden hopes? And then, as to her, he did not flatter himself that
she loved him--at least, not much; but yet it might be well to let
her know that she was now at liberty to love any other swain. So at
last he once more went his way to West Putford. Adela Gauntlet was-- No; for once I will venture to have a heroine
without describing her. Let each reader make what he will of her;
fancy her of any outward shape and colour that he please, and endow
her with any amount of divine beauty. But for her inner character,
let him take that from me as I go on, if so be that I can succeed in
making clear to others that which is clear enough to my own mind's
eye. I have called her a heroine; it is the novelist's customary name
for his prima donna, and so I use it. But many opera companies have
more than one prima donna. There is the donna prima, and if one may
so say, the donna primissima. Now Adela Guantlet is no more than my
donna prima. My donna primissima will be another guess sort of lady
altogether. Arthur, as he walked along, communed with himself as to what he
was going to say. "At any rate, she shall know it all; we shall be
more comfortable when we meet afterwards. Not that it will make any
difference to her;" and then he sighed deeply, and cut at the river
rushes with his walking-stick. He found her as usual alone in the drawing-room, and, as usual, she
smiled sweetly when she saw him. Since the day on which he had first
gone up to Oxford, she had always called him "Mr. Wilkinson"--so
instructed by Aunt Penelope; but in other respects her manner to
him was almost that of a sister, only that it was softer, and more
gracious. "I declare, I thought we were never to see you again, Mr. Wilkinson." Ah, Adela! whom did the _we_ mean? But is it possible that any girl
should live fairly before the world without some little
insincerities? "I have been so occupied, Adela. There is so much to do in taking up
a parish. Even though I know all the people so well, there has been
so much to do." "Yes, yes, I am sure of it. But now that you are settled, I do so
hope that you will be comfortable. I saw Mary the other day, and she
told me that your mother was quite well again." "Yes, she is pretty well. We are all very well now, I think." "I do so love that old lord for giving you the living, though they
say he is such a Turk. It was such a good thing in him to do; so
considerate to everybody." "Yes; it has made my mother and the girls comfortable; that, of
course, is what I had first to think of." "As for yourself, I have no doubt you would have done better at
Oxford. But you could have got no home for them like their old home;
could you?" "No, of course not," said Arthur, answering almost at random, and
thinking how best he might explain the sacrifice which he had made
without taking too much credit to himself. "And then, if you had remained up there, you would only have become a
musty old don. I don't think you would have been happy, not so happy
as in a parish. And when a man is a clergyman"--this she said in
a lower and somewhat a solemn voice--"surely he cannot be so well
placed as in charge of a parish. Don't you think so, Mr. Wilkinson?" "Certainly. It is the life for which he is intended; for which he
should have intended himself." "And I am sure it is a happy life: look at papa; I do not know any
happier man--only that poor mamma died." And upon this hint he spake. "Yes, your father I am sure has been a
happy man, and he is an excellent clergyman." "Is he not? even still so active! And he is so glad now to have you
near him." "I wish I had received my living as he did his; not that it would
make any real difference." "He got his, you know, from the bishop. But do you dislike being Lord
Stapledean's nominee?" "It would be ungrateful to say that; but I certainly do not like
Lord Stapledean. However, I have taken his living, and should not
complain." "I did not know that there was anything disagreeable." "There is this, Adela. I had rather tell you; and I came over to-day
in part to do so: but you will see that the matter is one that should
not be talked about," and he looked down on the floor, poking about
on the carpet pattern with his stick, being unable any longer to meet
the clear gaze of her soft eye. "Oh, I am sorry if there is anything to distress you." "Not exactly to distress me, perhaps; but I will tell you. When the
marquis offered me the living, he did it on the stipulation that I
should pay over to my mother three hundred and fifty pounds a year
during her life. I doubt whether it was right to accept it on these
conditions; but I did so. The living, therefore, is rather hers than
mine." "Oh, Arthur, how good of you!" In spite of all Aunt Penelope's
lessons, old habits would sometimes get the better of her. "I don't know; I am afraid that it was not good." "Why? I can't understand? Surely it must be good to give up your
time, your labour, your hopes"--Adela did not say his heart--"for
your mother and sisters' good! Why, how can it be else than good? I
think it good, and shall think so." "At any rate, Adela, I could not withstand the offer when it was made
to me." "I am sure you could not." "So I am little more than a curate in the parish as far as the income
is concerned; with this difference, that I can't change my curacy for
a living should a chance offer." Adela had never before known him to be solicitous about money for
himself, and now she felt that she did not understand him. "But you
have got your fellowship," said she. "Yes, I have got my fellowship: oh, as far as that is concerned, I am
better off than I could ever have expected to be. But, nevertheless,
one feels--feels crippled by such an arrangement. It is quite
impossible, you know, for instance, that--that--that I should do a
great many things." His courage failed him as he was about to make
the fatal announcement. "What things?" said Adela, with all the boldness of innocence. It was necessary that he should say it. "Why, for instance," he
continued, "it is quite impossible, though perhaps that does not make
much matter; but it is quite impossible--that I should ever marry." And still looking down upon the ground, he poked sedulously among the
patterns with his stick. "Oh!" 