



Produced by Al Haines








JONAH AND CO.


BY

DORNFORD YATES




WARD, LOCK & CO., LIMITED

LONDON AND MELBOURNE




LIBRARY EDITIONS OF "JONAH AND CO."


  First Published        September 1922
  Reprinted      2,000   October   1922
  Reprinted      2,000   October   1923
  Reprinted      2,000   September 1924
  Reprinted      2,000   May       1925
  Reprinted      3,000   February  1926
  Reprinted     12,000   June      1927
  Reprinted      8,000   March     1928
  Reprinted      5,000   August    1929
  Reprinted     10,000   August    1930
  Reprinted     10,000   February  1933
  Reprinted      8,000   December  1935
  Reprinted      8,000   March     1939
  Reprinted      5,000   February  1942
  Reprinted      9,000   December  1943



  BOOK
  PRODUCTION
  WAR ECONOMY
  STANDARD

  THE TYPOGRAPHY OF THIS BOOK
  CONFORMS TO THE
  AUTHORIZED ECONOMY STANDARD. MADE IN ENGLAND

Printed in Great Britain by Butler & Tanner Ltd., Frome and London




To

ELM TREE ROAD


_MY LADY,_

_It is hard, sitting here, to believe that, if I would call for a cab,
I could be in St. James's Street in less than ten minutes of time. Nevertheless, it is true. I have proved it so many times. Soon I
shall prove it for the last time._

_Better men than I will sit in this study and pace the lawn in the
garden with the high walls. The lilies and laburnums and all the gay
fellowship of flowers will find a new waterman. The thrushes and
blackbirds and wood-pigeons will find a new victualler. The private
forecourt, so richly hung with creeper, will give back my footfalls no
more. Other eyes will dwell gratefully upon the sweet pretty house and
look proudly out of its leaded window-panes._

_The old order changeth, my lady. And so I am going, before I am
driven out._

_Nine years ago there was a farm upon the opposite side of the road--a
little old English farm. Going out of my door of a morning, I used to
meet ducks and geese that were taking the air. And horses came home at
even, and cows lowed. Now the farm is gone, and a garage has taken its
room. And other changes have come, and others still are coming._

_So, you see, my lady, it is high time I was gone._

_This quiet study has seen the making of my books. This--the last it
will see--I make bold to offer to you for many reasons, but mainly
because, for one thing, this house belongs to you and, for another, no
hostess was ever so charming to the stranger within her gates._

_I have the honour to be,_

  _Your ladyship's humble servant,
    DORNFORD YATES._

_Number Six._




CONTENTS


CHAP. I  HOW BERRY STEPPED INTO THE BREACH, AND JONAH
         CAME FIRST AND WAS FIRST SERVED

   II  HOW THREE WAGERS WERE MADE, AND ADELE
         KILLED TWO BIRDS WITH ONE STONE

  III  HOW A GOLDEN CALF WAS SET UP, AND NOBBY
         SHOWED HIMSELF A TRUE PROPHET

   IV  HOW BERRY MADE AN ENGAGEMENT, JILL A PICTURE,
         AND ADELE A SLIP OF SOME IMPORTANCE

    V  HOW LOVE CAME TO JILL, HERBERT TO THE RESCUE,
         AND A YOUNG MAN BY HIS RIGHT

   VI  HOW BERRY RAN CONTRABAND GOODS, AND THE
         DUKE OF PADUA PLIGHTED JILL HIS TROTH

  VII  HOW DAPHNE LOST HER BEDFELLOW, AND THE LINE
         OF LEAST RESISTANCE PROVED IRRESISTIBLE

 VIII  HOW ADELE BOUGHT A BOTTLE OF PERFUME WHICH
         HAD NO SMELL, AND I CUT EULALIE DEAD

   IX  HOW JONAH TOOK OFF HIS COAT, AND BERRY
         FLIRTED WITH FORTUNE FOR ALL HE WAS WORTH

    X  HOW BERRY SOUGHT COMFORT IN VAIN, AND NOBBY
         SLEPT UPON A QUEEN'S BED

   XI  HOW BERRY PUT OFF HIS MANHOOD, AND ADELE
         SHOWED A FAIR PAIR OF HEELS

  XII  HOW A TELEGRAM CAME FOR JILL, PIERS DEMANDED
         HIS SWEETHEART, AND I DROVE AFTER MY WIFE




  _All the characters in this story are imaginary and have
  no reference to any living person._




JONAH AND CO.


CHAPTER I

HOW BERRY STEPPED INTO THE BREACH, AND JONAH CAME FIRST AND WAS FIRST
SERVED. "Shall I massage it?" said Berry. The suggestion was loudly condemned. "Right," replied my brother-in-law. "That reduces us to faith-healing. On the command 'One,' make your mind a blank--that shouldn't be
difficult--realise that the agony you aren't suffering is imaginary,
and close both legs. One! On the command 'Two'----"

"You can go," I said wearily. "You can go. I'll write to you when I
want you. Don't bother to leave your address." "But how vulgar," said Berry. "How very vulgar." He paused to glance
at his watch. "Dear me! Half-past ten, and I haven't had my beer
yet." He stepped to the door. "Should the pain become excruciating,
turn upon the stomach and repeat Kipling's 'If.' Should----"

My sister and Jill fairly bundled him out of the doorway. Sitting by my side upon the bed, Adele laid her cheek against mine. "Is it any better, old chap?" "The pain's practically stopped," said I, "thank Heaven. Putting it
up's done that. But I'm in for a stiff leg, dear. I know that. Not
that that matters really, but it means I can't drive." It was unfortunate that, before I had been upon French soil for half an
hour, I should be kicked by a testy cab-horse of whose existence--much
less proximity--thanks to the poor lighting of Boulogne, I had been
totally unaware. I had been kicked upon the same knee in 1916. On
that occasion I had gone with a stiff leg for a fortnight. It seemed
unpleasantly probable that history would wholly repeat itself. "I can travel," I continued. "I shall be able to walk with a stick,
but I shan't be able to drive. And, as Jonah can't drive more than one
car at a time, Berry'll have to take the other." At my words Daphne started, and Jill gave a little cry. "B-but, Boy, he's only had three lessons." "I know, but he'll get through somehow. I'll sit by his side. It'll
shorten my life, of course, but what else can we do? Even if Fitch was
here, there's no room for a chauffeur. And you'd find towing tedious
after the first five hundred miles." With a white forefinger to her lips, my sister regarded me. "I know he's a disgrace," she said slowly, "but he's--he's the only
husband I've got, Boy, and--he has his points," she concluded softly
with the tenderest smile. I stretched out a hand and drew her towards me. "Isn't he my only brother, darling? Isn't he--Berry? I'll see he
comes to no harm." "You really think it's safe?" "Perfectly. For one thing, I shall be able to reach the hand-brake
rather more easily than he will...."

My sister kissed me. "I like the sound of that," she said cheerfully. It was the fifth day of November, and all six of us were for the
Pyrenees. A month ago Adele and I, new-wed, had visited Pau. We had found the
place good, conceived the idea of spending the winter there, and wired
for instructions. Within three days we had received four letters. The first was from Jill. _ADELE DARLING,_

_How sweet of you both to think of it! We're all simply thrilled. Try
and get one with a palm-tree and some wistaria. We miss you awfully. Tell Boy Nobby is splendid and sends his love. Oh, and he smells his
coat every day. Isn't it pathetic P My hair won't go like yours, but
I'm going to try again. All our love to you and your HUSBAND,_

_JILL._


Then came Jonah's. _DEAR BOY,_

_What about tobacco? You might examine the chances of smuggling. I'm
sending you a hundred cigarettes conspicuously labelled BENGER'S FOOD,
to see what happens. I suppose the roads are pretty bad. What about
fishing?_

  _Yours,
    JONAH._


(I subsequently received a curt communication to the effect that there
was a package, addressed to me and purporting to contain "Farine,"
lying at the local custom-house. Adele was horrified. I endeavoured
to reassure her, tore up the notice, and cursed my cousin savagely. When three days had passed, and I was still at liberty, Adele plucked
up heart, but, for the rest of our visit, upon sight of a gendarme she
was apt to become distrait and lose the thread of her discourse.) A letter from Daphne had arrived the next day. _DEAREST ADELE,_

_We're all delighted with the idea._

_I don't think six months would be too long. I agree that a villa
would be much the best, and we're perfectly content to leave the
selection to you. You know what room we must have. I suppose two
bathrooms would be too much to expect. About servants: we can bring
some, but I think we ought to have a French cook to do the marketing,
and perhaps one other to keep her company and help in the kitchen and
house. Will you see what you can do? Plate and linen, of course, we
can bring. By the way, Madge Willoughby tells me that last year in
France they had some difficulty about coal; so tell Boy to see if he
can order some now. All this, of course, if you can get a villa._

  _Your loving sister,
    DAPHNE._


Berry's came last. _DEAR BROTHER,_

_So we shall ourselves winter this year at Pau?_  Eh bien! _There are,
perhaps, worse places. At least, the sun will shine. Ma foi, to think
that upon you depend all the arrangements._  Tant pis! _My suite must
face itself south and adjoin the bathroom. Otherwise I cannot answer
for my health, or, for the matter of that, yours either._

_Kindly omit from your next letter any reference to the mountains. "Impressions of the Pyrenees" by a fool who has been married for less
than three weeks not only are valueless, but make my gorge rise--_une
elevation tres dangereuse. _Which brings me to your wife. How is the shrew? Tell her I have some
socks for her to darn on her return._

_It was thoughtful of you to emphasise the fact that the season of
green figs, to a surfeit of which I sincerely hope you will succumb,
will be over before I reach Pau. I am inclined to think that the five
hundred cigars George sent you will be over even earlier. Besides, I
shall at once console and distend myself with_ foie gras. _We must have a French cook, of course--a very priestess of
Gluttony--skilful to lure the timid appetite from the fastness of
satiety._  Enfin....

_I ask myself why I shall have made the trouble to write to you. You
have, of course, an opportunity unique of making a mess with a copper
bottom of my life for six months._  Mais, mon Dieu, que vous serez puni! Je t'embrasse, vieil haricot, sur les deux joues. _BERRY_

_P.S.--This here letter is a talisman, and should be worn upon the
exterior of the abdominal wall during a drought._


Considering the nature of our holiday, Adele and I did not do so badly. Before we left Pau, I had signed the lease of an attractive villa,
standing well in its own grounds and commanding a prospect of the
mountains as fine as could be. Adele had engaged a Frenchwoman and her
daughter, both of whom were well spoken of, and had been in the service
of English and American families before the War. A supply of fuel had
been reserved and various minor arrangements had been concluded. Ere
we were back at White Ladies, October was old. It had been Jonah's belated suggestion that our migration should be
accomplished by car. It was Jonah's enterprise that reduced the
upheaval of our plans, consequent upon the instant adoption of his
idea, to order and convenience. By the third of November everything
had been arranged. The heavier stuff had been embarked for Bordeaux;
the servants were ready to accompany the rest of the luggage by way of
Paris; the Rolls had been sold. In the latter's place we had purchased
two smaller cars--both new, both of the same make, both coupes, both
painted blue. Indeed, but for their numbers, which were consecutive,
we could not have told them apart. Each seated three
inside--comfortably, while a respectable quantity of baggage could be
easily bestowed in each of the capacious boots. Certainly my cousin's staff work had been superb. In the circumstances it seemed hardly fair that upon this, the first
night of our venture, he should be faced with the labour of shepherding
both cars, single-handed, first clear of the Customs, and then, one by
one, through the cold, dark streets which led from the quay to the
garage of the hotel. As if she had read my thought--

"Poor Jonah!" said Adele suddenly. "I wonder----"

A knock upon the door interrupted her. This, being opened, admitted Nobby, two porters, our luggage, two
waiters, a large dish of sandwiches, some beer, coffee and its
accessories, Jonah, and finally Berry. "You must be tired," said the latter. "Let's sit down, shall I?" He
sank into a chair. "And how's the comic _patella_? I well remember,
when I was in Plumbago, a somewhat similar accident. A large
cherry-coloured _gibus_, on its wrong side----"

"At the present moment," said I, wrestling with the Sealyham's
advances, "we're more concerned with your future than with your past. It's the Bank of England to a ha'p'orth of figs that to-morrow morning
I shall have a stiff leg. Very good." I paused. "Those three lessons
you've had," I added carelessly, "will come in useful." Jonah, who was filling a tumbler, started violently and spilled some
beer. Then he leaned against the wall and began to laugh helplessly. Coldly Berry regarded him. "I fail," he said stiffly, "to see the point of your mirth. I gather
that it is proposed to enjoy my services for the propulsion of one of
the automobiles--that, while you will be responsible for the 'shoving'
of Ping, these delicate hands will flick Pong across France. Very
good. Let the Press be informed; call forth the ballad-mongers. What
would have been a somewhat sordid drive will become a winged flight,
sublime and deathless." "I trust so," said Jonah. "Six hundred miles with a fool at the wheel
is a tall order, but, if your companions survive the first two days,
they ought to pull through. Try not to do more than five pounds' worth
of damage to the gallon, won't you?" "Sour grapes," said Berry. "The professional reviles the distinguished
amateur." "Seriously," said I, "it's no laughing matter." "I agree," said Daphne. "You'll have to just crawl along all the way. After all, we've got six months to get there in. Promise me you won't
try and pass anything." "I promise," replied her husband. "Should another vehicle approach,
I'll stop the engine and go and hide in a wood till it's gone." "Fool," said his wife. "I meant 'overtake anything' of course. You
know I did. Promise you won't try and rush past things just to get in
front of them." I took up the cudgels. "We've got to get along, darling, and he can't give a promise like
that. You wouldn't want to do fifty miles behind a traction-engine,
would you? Remember, I shall be by his side. He may be holding the
wheel, but I shall be driving the car. Make him promise to obey me
implicitly, if you like." "That's right," said Jill. "You will, won't you, Berry?" The latter looked at Adele. "Do you also subscribe to my humiliation?" he said. Adele smiled and nodded. "Unquestionably," she said. "By the time you get to Pau, you'll be an
expert. And then you can teach me." "The pill-gilder," said my brother-in-law. "Well, well. So far as in
me lies, I'll do as I'm told. But I insist upon plain English. I'm
not going to be suddenly yelled at to 'double-clutch,' or 'feel the
brake,' or 'close the throttle,' or something. It makes me want to
burst into tears. That fellow who was teaching me asked me, without
any warning and in the middle of some sheep, what I should do if one of
my 'big ends were to run out.' I said I should consult a specialist,
but the question upset me. Indirectly, it also upset the shepherd.... Which reminds me, I never knew a human being could jump so far. The
moment he felt the radiator...."

"You never told us this," said Daphne reproachfully. "If I'd known
you'd knocked somebody down----"

"I never knocked him down," said Berry. "I tell you he jumped....  We
stopped, of course, and explained. He was a little nettled at first,
but we parted on the best of terms." "It's all very well," said my sister, "but I'd no idea----"

"Every dog must have his bite," said I, laughing. "He won't do it
again. And now, since I'm tethered, will somebody give me some beer?" Then and there supper was consumed. A vigorous discussion of the turn events had taken, and the advancement
and scrutiny of a variety of high speculations regarding the probable
style of our progress to Pau, prevailed until past twelve o'clock, but
at length the others were evicted, and Adele, Nobby, and I were able to
prepare for the night. Out of the luxurious silence of a hot bath Adele's voice came floating
into the bedroom. "Boy!" "Yes, lady?" "I wish I was going with you to-morrow instead of Daphne." "So do I," I said heartily. Adele sighed. Then--

"It can't be helped," she said. "I think, on the whole, she would have
worried more than I shall." "Not a doubt of it," said I cheerfully. "As she said, Berry's the only
husband she's got." Adele choked. Presently--

"The real reason," she said, "is because she mistrusts her husband even
more than I trust mine." When I had worked this out--

"Aha," I said pleasedly. "But then, of course," said Adele, "she's been married much longer." *      *      *      *      *

With Rouen as our objective, we left Boulogne the next morning at ten
o'clock. To speak more accurately, we left the hotel at ten o'clock
and Boulogne itself some forty minutes later. The negotiation of an
up-gradient leading out of the town was responsible for the delay. My sister and I shall remember that hill so long as we live. So, I
imagine, will Berry. We were half-way up when he stopped the engine
for the first time. We were still half-way up when he stopped it for
the eighth time. Indeed, it was at this juncture that I suggested that
he should rest from his labours and smoke a cigarette. My brother-in-law shook his head. "Shall I slide down backwards and begin again?" he inquired. "No, thanks," said I. "I have a foolish preference for facing death." "D'you think we could push it up?" said Daphne. "Frankly," said I, "I don't. You see, she weighs over a ton without
the luggage." Berry cleared his throat. "I am not," he said, "going through the farce of asking what I do
wrong, because I know the answer. It's not the right one, but you seem
incapable of giving any other." "I am," said I. "Well, don't say it," said Berry, "because, if you do, I shall scream. No man born of woman could let in that clutch more slowly, and yet you
say it's too fast. The truth is, there's something wrong with the car." "There soon will be," I retorted. "The starter will fail. Then every
time you stop the engine you'll have to get out and crank. That'll
make you think." "'Make me think'?" yelled Berry. "D'you think I haven't been thinking? D'you think I'm not thinking now? Haven't I almost burst my brains
with thinking?" Daphne began to laugh helplessly. "That's right,"
added her husband savagely. "See the humorous side. I may go mad any
minute, but don't let that stop you." And, with that, he set his foot
upon the self-starter. When he had stopped the engine another three times, he applied the
hand-brake with unnecessary violence, sank back in his seat, and folded
his hands. My sister and I clung to one another in an agony of stifled mirth. Berry closed his eyes. "My work," he said quietly, "is over. I now see that it is ordained
that we shall not leave this spot. There's probably an angel in the
way with a drawn sword, and the car sees it, although we can't. Any
way, I'm not going to fight against Fate. And now don't speak to me. I'm going to dwell on bullock-carts and goat-chaises and other
horse-drawn vehicles. I shan't last many minutes, and I should like to
die in peace." With a swift rush, Ping drew up alongside. From its interior Adele,
Jill, Nobby and Jonah peered at us excitedly. "Hullo!" said the latter. "What's up?" "Go away," said Berry. "Drive on to your doom. An apparition has
appeared to us, warning us not to proceed. It was quite definite about
it. Good-bye." "Jonah, old chap," said I, "I'm afraid you're for it. Unless you take
us up, we shall be here till nightfall." With a groan my cousin opened his door and descended into the road....

One minute later we were at the top of the hill. "And now," said Daphne, with the _Michelin Guide_ open upon her knees,
"now for Montreuil." When five minutes had passed and my brother-in-law was breathing
through his nose less audibly, I lighted a cigarette and ventured to
look about me. It was certainly a fine highway that we were using. Broad, direct,
smooth beyond all expectation, it lay like a clean-cut sash upon the
countryside, rippling away into the distance as though it were indeed
that long, long lane that hath no turning. Presently a curve would
come to save the face of the proverb, but the bends were few in number,
and, as a general rule, did little more than switch the road a point or
two to east or west, as, the mood took them. There was little traffic,
and the surface was dry. Something had been said about the two cars keeping together, but I was
not surprised when Jonah passed us like a whirlwind before we were
half-way to Samer. He explained afterwards that he had stuck it as
long as he could, but that to hold a car down to twenty on a road like
a private racing-track was worse than "pulling." Fired by Jonah's example, Berry laid hold of the wheel, and we took the
next hill at twenty-five. It was a brilliant day, but the cold was intense, and I think we were
all glad that Pong was a closeable car. That Winter's reign had begun
was most apparent. There was a bleak look upon the country's face:
birch-rods that had been poplars made us gaunt avenues: here and there
the cold jewellery of frost was sparkling. I fell to wondering how far
south we must go to find it warmer. Presently we came to Montreuil. As we entered the little town--

"This," said I, "was the headquarters of the British Expeditionary
Force. From behind these walls----"

"Don't talk," said Daphne, "or I shall make a mistake. Round to the
left here. Wait a minute. No, that's right. And straight on. What a
blessing this _Michelin Guide_ is! Not too fast, Berry. Straight on. This ought to be _Grande Rue_." She peered out of the window. "Yes,
that's right. Now, in a minute you turn to the left...."

After all, I reflected, we had to get to Rouen, and it was past mid-day. We had sworn not to lunch before we had passed Abbeville, so, since we
had breakfasted betimes, I furtively encouraged my brother-in-law to
"put her along." His response was to overtake and pass a lorry upon
the wrong side, drive an unsuspecting bicyclist into a ditch and
swerve, like a drunken sea-gull, to avoid a dead fowl. As we were
going over forty it was all over before we knew where we were, but the
impression of impending death was vivid and lasting, and nearly a
minute had elapsed before I could trust my voice. "Are we still alive?" breathed Daphne. "I'm afraid to open my eyes." "I think we must be," said I. "At least, I'm still thirsty, if that's
anything to go by." "I consider," said Berry, "that the way in which I extricated us from
that _impasse_ was little short of masterly. That cyclist ought to
remember me in his prayers." "I don't want to discourage you," I said grimly, "but I shouldn't bank
on it." The plan of Abbeville, printed in the Guide, was as simple to read as
were my sister's directions to follow. At a critical moment, however,
Berry felt unable to turn to the right. "The trouble is," he explained, as we plunged into a maze of back
streets, "I've only got two hands and feet. To have got round that
corner, I should have had to take out the clutch, go into third,
release the brake, put out a hand, accelerate, sound the clarion and
put the wheel over simultaneously. Now, with seven limbs I could have
done it. With eight, I could also have scratched myself--an operation,
I may say, which can be no longer postponed." He drew up before a
_charcuterie_ and mopped his face. "What a beautiful bunch of
sausages!" he added. "Shall we get some? Or d'you think they'd be
dead before we get to Rouen?" In contemptuous silence Daphne lowered her window, accosted the first
passer-by, and asked the way. An admission that it was possible to
reach the Neufchatel road without actually retracing our steps was at
length extracted, and, after a prolonged study of the plan, my sister
gave the word to proceed. Save that we twice mounted the pavement,
grazed a waggon, and literally brushed an urchin out of the way, our
emergence from Abbeville was accomplished without further incident. With the knowledge that, barring accidents, we ought to reach Rouen by
half-past five, we ventured to devour a wayside lunch some ten minutes
later. It was after Neufchatel that the surface of the great grey road argued
neglect in no uncertain terms. For mile after mile, fat bulls of
Basan, in the shape of gigantic pot-holes, gaped threateningly upon us. Berry, who was driving much better, did all that he could, but only a
trick-cyclist could have picked his way between them. The car
hiccoughed along piteously....

With the approach of darkness, driving became a burden, being driven a
weariness of the flesh, and we were all thankful when we slid down a
paved hill into the Cathedral City and, presently, past the great
church and on to the very bank of the River Seine. The others had been awaiting us for nearly two hours. *      *      *      *      *

"With this sun," said Adele, "they ought to be glorious." Impiously I reflected that Berry was almost certainly enjoying his
breakfast in bed. "I expect they will," I said abstractedly. Adele slid an arm through mine. "It's very sweet of you to come with me, Boy." I stood still and looked at her. "You're a wonderful child," I said. "When you speak like that, I want
to kick myself and burst into song simultaneously. I suppose that's
Love." "I expect so," said Adele mischievously. Five minutes later we were standing beneath the shadow of Chartres
Cathedral. We had come, my wife and I, to see the windows. The day before had
been dull, and what light there was had been failing when we had
visited the shrine. To-day, however, was all glorious. If we had risen early, we had our reward. The place had become a gallery with jewels for pictures. Out of the
sombre depths the aged webs of magic glowed with the matchless flush of
precious stones. From every side colours we had not dreamed of
enriched our eyes. To make the great west rose, the world herself
might have been spoiled of her gems. Looking upon this mystery, no man
can wonder that the art is lost. Clearly it went the way of Babel. For of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Windows the sun was lighting
were at once more real and more magnificent. Crimsons and blues,
purples and greens, yellows and violets, blazed with that ancient
majesty which only lives to-day in the peal of a great organ, the call
of a silver trumpet, or the proud roll of drums. Out of the gorgeous
pageant mote-ridden rays issued like messengers, to badge the cold grey
stone with tender images and set a smile upon the face of stateliness. "Such old, old panes," says someone. "Six hundred years and more. How
wonderful!" Pardon me, but I have seen them, and it is not wonderful
at all. Beneath their spell, centuries shrink to afternoons. The
windows of Chartres are above Time. They are the peepholes of
Immortality. We returned to the hotel in time to contribute to a heated argument
upon the subject of tipping. "It's perfectly simple," said Berry. "You think of what you would hate
to have given before the War, double it, add forty per cent. for the
increased cost of living, halve it because of the Exchange, ask them
whether they'd like it in notes or gold, and pay them in
postage-stamps." "I want to know," said Daphne, "what to give the chambermaid." "Eight francs fifty. That's the equivalent of half-a-crown before the
War." "Nonsense," said his wife. "Five francs is heaps, and you know it." "I think it's too much," said Berry. "Give her one instead, and tell
her you've hidden the rest in the bathroom and that, when she touches
the towel-rail, she's warm." "As a matter of fact," said Jill uneasily, "it's all over. I've done
it." There was a dreadful silence. Then--

"Tell us the worst," said I, "and get it over." "I'm--I'm afraid I gave her rather a lot, but she had a nice face." "She had a nice step," said Berry. "I noticed that about five this
morning." "How much?" said I relentlessly. Jill looked round guiltily. "I gave her fifty," she said. There was a shriek of laughter. "Did she faint?" said Berry. "Or try to eat grass, or anything?" Gravely Jill shook her head. "She talked a great deal--very fast. I couldn't follow her. And then
she turned away and began to cry. I was so glad I'd done it." "So are we all," said Daphne. She was supported heartily. Jonah looked at his watch. "I suggest," he said, "that we start at eleven, then we shall fetch up
in time to see the cathedral." "How far is Tours?" said Daphne. "Eighty-six miles." "Let's keep together to-day," said Jill. "It's much more fun." Her brother shook his head. "I don't want," he said, "to be arrested for loitering." "Don't you worry," said Berry. "We wouldn't be seen with you." Jonah sighed. "Where there's a will there's a way," he murmured. "More," said Berry. "We regard you rather less than the dust beneath
our detachable wheels. You pollute the road with your hoghood. I
suppose it's no use asking you to keep behind us." "None whatever," replied our cousin. "Why should we?" "Well," said Berry, "supposing a tire discovers that I'm driving and
bursts with pride, who's going to change the wheel?" Jonah stifled a yawn. "You can't have it both ways," he said. "If we're to warn people not
to shoot at you, we must be in front." Berry regarded his finger-nails. "Perhaps you're right," he said. "Think of me when you get your third
puncture, won't you? And remember that my heart goes out to you in
your tire trouble and that you have all my love. Then you won't sweat
so much." Half an hour later Pong stormed out of the garage and into the _Place
des Epars_. Adele's wish had been granted, and she was travelling with Berry and me
instead of with Jonah. For this new order of battle Nobby was solely responsible. Upon the
first day's journey the terrier had whined all the way to Rouen because
he had wanted to be with me. As one of his audience, Jonah had been
offensively outspoken regarding this predilection. Upon the following
day the dog's desire had been gratified, whereupon he had whined all
the way to Chartres because he was apart from Adele. Commenting upon
this unsuspected devotion, Berry had been quite as outspoken as Jonah,
and much more offensive. Naturally, to withstand such importunity was
out of the question, and, since it was impossible for me to leave
Berry, the line of least resistance was followed, and Daphne and Adele
changed places. Our way out of Chartres was short and simple, and, with the exception
of temporarily obstructing two trams by the artless expedient of
remaining motionless upon the permanent way, Pong emerged from the city
without a stain upon his character. The Vendome road looked promising and proved excellent. Very soon we
were flying. For all that, Jonah overtook us as we were nearing
Bonneval.... It was some thirty minutes later, as we were leaving Chateaudun, that a
sour-faced _gendarme_ with a blue nose motioned to us to stop. Standing upon the near pavement, the fellow was at once conversing with
a postman and looking malevolently in our direction. I think we all
scented mischief. "What can he want?" growled Berry, as he brought the car to a
standstill. "He's probably being officious," said I, getting our papers ready. "We're strangers, and he's in a bad humour. Consequently, he's going
to scrutinise our _triptyque_, passports, passes and certificates, to
see if he can accuse us of anything. Happily they're all in order, so
he'll be disappointed. When he's thoroughly satisfied that he can
bring no charge against us, he'll order us to proceed." "He's taking his time about it," observed my brother-in-law. I looked up from the documents. My gentleman was still talking to the postman, while his pig's eyes
were still surveying the car. From his companion's demeanour, he
seemed to be whetting his wit at our expense. "This is intolerable," said I. "Ask him what he wants, lady." Adele leaned forward and put her head out of the window. "I think you wished us to stop, _Monsieur_?" The _gendarme_ waved his hand. "Wait," he said insolently. The postman sniggered shamefacedly. Adele sank back in her seat, her cheeks flaming. In a voice trembling with passion I conjured Berry to proceed. The moment the car moved, the official sprang forward, gesticulating
furiously. As we passed him, I put out my head. "Now it's our turn," I said warmly, "to make the postman laugh." From the hoarse yells which followed us, it was clear that we had left
the fellow beside himself with rage. Looking back through the little
window, I could see him dancing. Suddenly he stopped, peered after us,
and then swung about and ran ridiculously up the street. "Blast him, he's going to telephone!" said I. "Where's the map?" Together Adele and I pored over the sections. "If," said Berry, "you're going to direct me to turn off, for Heaven's
sake be quick about it. At the present moment I'm just blinding along
into the blue and, for all I know, an oversized hornets' nest. Of
course they mayn't sting when there's an 'r' in the month, but then
they mightn't know that. Or am I thinking of oysters?" "They'll stop us at Vendome," said I. "Not before. Right oh! We must
turn to the right at Cloyes and make for St. Calais. We can get round
to Tours that way. It'll take us about twenty miles out of our way,
but----"

"Yes, and when we don't show up at Vendome, they'll wire to Calais. Seriously, as Shakespeare says, I'm all of a doo-dah." That we should be stopped at St. Calais was not likely, and I said as
much. What did worry me, because it was far more probable, was that
when they drew blank at Vendome, the authorities would telephone to
Tours. Any apprehension, however, regarding our reception at that city
was soon mercifully, unmercifully, and somewhat paradoxically
overshadowed by a more instant anxiety lest we should never arrive
there at all. From the moment we left the main road, the obstacles in
the shape of uncharted roads and villages, pavements, cattle, goats, a
horse fair, and finally a series of appalling gradients, opposed our
passage. All things considered, my brother-in-law drove admirably. But it was a bad business, and, while my wife and Berry were very
staunch, I think we all regretted that I had been so high with Blue
Nose. Night had fallen ere we slunk into Tours. Fully expecting to find that the others had well-nigh given us up, we
were astounded to learn at the hotel that Ping had not yet arrived. Indeed, we had finished dinner, and were debating seriously whether we
should take a hired car and go to seek them, when there was a flurry of
steps in the corridor, Nobby rushed to the door, and the next moment
Daphne and Jill burst into the room. "My darling," said Berry, advancing, "where on earth have you been?" My sister put her arms about his neck and looked into his eyes. "Kiss me 'Good-bye,'" she said. "Jonah's just coming." Her husband stared at her. Then--

"Is it as bad as all that?" he said. "Dear, dear. And how did he get
the booze?" Somebody cleared his throat. I swung round, to see Jonah regarding us. "You three beauties," he said. "Four with Nobby." "But what do you mean?" said Adele. "What have we done?" "Done?" cried Jonah. "Done? Where d'you think we've been?" "It can't have been goats that stopped you," said Berry, "because I had
all the goats. There was a great rally of goats at St. Calais this
afternoon. It was a wonderful smell--I mean sight." "Guess again," said Jonah grimly. "You haven't been waiting for us on the road?" said I. "You're getting warmer," was the reply. Adele gave a sudden cry. "O-o-oh, Jonah," she gasped, "you've been at Vendome!" I started violently, and Berry, who was about to speak, choked. "That's right," said Jonah shortly. "Nice little place--what I saw of
it....  Lovely view from the police-station." He leaned against the
mantelpiece and lighted a cigarette. "It may amuse you to know," he
added, "that the expiation of your crime took us six and a half hours
and cost five hundred francs." In response to our thirsty enquiries, the tale came bubbling. My surmise that the blue-nosed _gendarme_ would telephone to Vendome
had been well-founded. He had forwarded an exact description of Pong,
together with the letters and the first three figures of the four
appearing upon the number-plate. Six minutes later Ping had sailed
innocently into Vendome--and up to her doom.... The Vendome police could hardly believe their eyes. Here was the
offending car, corresponding in every particular to the one described
to them, admittedly fresh from Chateaudun, yet having covered the
thirty-nine kilometres in eleven minutes. It was amazing ...  almost
incredible ... almost....  Of outlaws, however, all things were
credible--even a speed of one hundred and thirty-six miles an hour. For it was without doubt that outlaw which had flouted Authority at
Chateaudun. Oh, indubitably. And, having thus flouted Authority, what
was more natural than that it should endeavour to outstrip the
consequences of its deed? But, _mon Dieu_, what wickedness! In vain had Jonah protested and Daphne declared their innocence. The
telephone was again requisitioned, and the blue-nosed _gendarme_
summoned and cross-examined. As luck would have it, he could not speak
to the passengers, beyond affirming that they included one man and one
woman.... When he gratuitously added that the reason why he could not
swear to the whole of the number was because of the terrible pace at
which the car was moving, the game was up....

Finding that the accusation of travelling at a horrifying speed was
assuming a serious look, my sister and cousins at length decided that
they had no alternative but to give us away. They had, of course,
realised that Pong was implicated from the beginning. Consequently,
with the flourish of one who has hit upon the solution of a problem,
they divulged our existence. They were politely, but wholly
disbelieved. In reply, they had politely, but confidently, invited the
police to wait and see....

For over four hours they had anxiously awaited the arrival of Pong. When at last the humiliating truth began to dawn upon them, and it
became evident that we had ruled Vendome out of our itinerary, the
shock of realising, not only that they were to be denied an opportunity
of refuting the charges preferred, but that they were destined to leave
the town branded as three of the biggest and most unsuccessful liars
ever encountered, had well-nigh reduced Daphne and Jill to tears. And
when, upon the sickly resumption of negotiations, it appeared highly
probable that they would not be permitted to proceed, Jill had wept
openly....

France is nothing if not emotional. Visibly affected by her distress, the police had immediately become
less hostile. Observing this, Daphne had discreetly followed her
cousin's example. Before the sledge-hammer blows of their lamentation
two gendarmes began to sniff and a third broke down. The girls
redoubled their sobs. They were practically there. "You never saw anything like it," concluded Jonah. "Within three
minutes four of the police were crying, and the head bottle-washer was
beating his breast and imploring me in broken accents to explain away
my guilt. I threw five hundred francs on his desk and covered my eyes. With tears rolling down his cheeks, he pushed the notes under a
blotting-pad and wrote laboriously upon a buff sheet. Then a woman was
produced. Between explosions of distress she made us some tea. In
common decency we couldn't push off for a while. Besides, I wasn't
quite sure that it was all over. However, everybody seemed too
overcome to say anything, so, after a bit, we chanced it and made a
move for the car. To my relief, they actually helped us in, and two of
them fought as to who should start us up." He looked round coldly. "And now, perhaps, you'll be good enough to tell us what we've been
punished for." I told what there was to tell. As I came to the end. Berry nodded at Jonah. "Yes," he said unctuously, "and let this be a lesson to you, brother." Speechless with indignation, our cousin regarded him. At length--

"What d'you mean?" he demanded. Berry raised his eyebrows. "I hardly think," he said, "the penalty for--er--loitering would have
been so vindictive." CHAPTER II

HOW THREE WAGERS WERE MADE, AND ADELE KILLED TWO BIRDS WITH ONE STONE

We had slept, risen and breakfasted: we had visited Tours Cathedral:
finally, we had mustered in the lounge of the hotel. It was when we
had there been insulting one another for nearly an hour, that Jonah
looked at his watch. "We have now," he said, "wasted exactly forty-nine minutes in kicking
against the pricks. Short of a European war, you can't alter the
geography of France, and the laws of Mathematics take a lot of
upsetting. It's no good wishing that Bordeaux was Biarritz, or that
Pau was half the distance it is from Angouleme. If you don't want to
go right through, you must stay at Bordeaux. It's the only possible
place. If you don't want to stay at Bordeaux, you must go right
through. I don't care which we do, but I do want to see something of
Poitiers, and, if we don't get a move on, we shan't have time." All the way from Boulogne France had made an excellent host. So far
she had never failed to offer us a good night's lodging, with History
as a bedfellow, at the end of a respectable run. Indeed, from the
point of view of they that go down to the South in cars, her famous
capitals could hardly have been more conveniently disposed. This very
evening, by lodging us at Angouleme, she was to repeat such hospitality
for the last time. Upon the morrow we should be faced with a choice of
making a dash for the villa which was awaiting our arrival at Pau, or
breaking the journey asunder--but by no means in half--by sleeping at
Bordeaux. "I must confess," said Daphne, "that, for some reason or other,
Bordeaux doesn't attract me. Incidentally, I'm getting rather tired of
unpacking and packing up." "So far," said her husband, "as the bestowal and disinterment of my
effects are concerned, I can confirm that statement. Indeed, if we had
another week on the road, you'd both be exhausted. You left my sponge
and bedroom-slippers at Boulogne, my dressing-gown at Rouen, and my
pyjamas at Chartres. I wish you'd tell me what you've left here. I'm
simply dying to know." "No," said Daphne. "You must wait till Angouleme. I wouldn't spoil it
for anything." "Jade," said her husband. "And now, stand back, please, everybody. I
want to do a little stock-taking." With that, from every pocket he
produced French notes of all denominations, in all stages of decay, and
heaped them upon the table. "Now, this one," he added, gingerly
extracting a filthy and dilapidated rag, "is a particularly interesting
specimen. Apparently, upon close inspection, merely a valuable
security, worth, to be exact, a shade under twopence-half-penny, it is
in reality a talisman. Whosoever touches it, cannot fail to contract
at least two contagious diseases within the week. In view of the
temperature of my coffee this morning, I'm saving it for the
head-waiter." "When," said I, "do you expect to go down?" "The pure in heart," said Berry, "are proof against its malignity. Don't you come too near. And look at this sere and yellow leaf. Now,
that represents one franc. When I think that, upon offering that to a
bar-tender, I shall not only not be assaulted, but shall actually
receive a large bottle of beer and be lent a two-and-sixpenny glass
from which to imbibe the same, I feel the deepest reverence for the
French Government. No other authority in the world could possibly put
up such a bluff and get away with it." "They are awful," said Jill, peering. "They're perfectly beastly," said Berry, "and wholly ridiculous. However, since they're also legal tender, I suppose I may as well try
and sort them out. What I really need is some rubber gloves and a
box-respirator. Hullo! Just catch that one, will you? He's seen that
dog over there....  You know, I'm not at all sure that they get enough
air in my pocket. I suppose we couldn't get a hutch for the more
advanced ones. I mean, I don't want to be cruel." Again Jonah looked at his watch. "We have now," he said, "wasted fifty-six minutes in----"

"Excuse me," said Berry, "but isn't this touching? Here's affectionate
Albert." With the words, he laid a two-franc note tenderly upon my
sleeve. "Now, I bet you don't get him off without tearing him." Disgustedly I managed to detach Albert, who instantly adhered to my
fingers. There was a shriek of laughter. "Stick to him," said Berry. "I've lost the bet." The injunction was unnecessary. After Albert had clung once to Adele's--happily, gloved--fingers and
twice to each of my hands, I trod upon him. Some of Albert was still
upon my boot that evening at Angouleme. "For the last time," said Jonah, "I appeal to you all to let that
dog-eared mountebank rake over his muck-heap, and attend to me." My brother-in-law addressed Adele. "It is," he said, "a discreditable but incontrovertible fact that
saints have always been reviled. I suppose it's jealousy." He turned
to his wife. "By the way, did you pack my _aureola_? I left it
hanging on the towel-rail." "If," said Daphne, "you're referring to your body-belt, it's with your
bed-socks." "And why not between your flannel vests?" said her husband. "The grey
ones we found at Margate, I mean. With the imitation bone buttons. Ah, here we are. Now, if half a franc's no earthly, what'll who give
me for two-thirds of fifty centimes?" Jonah sank into a chair and closed his eyes. "Look here," said I desperately. "Once for all, are we going to stay
at Bordeaux, or are we going right through?" "I think we'd all rather go right through," said Jill. "I know I would," said her brother. "And if Boy's leg was all right, I
shouldn't hesitate. I'll answer for Ping. But, frankly, with Berry
driving, I doubt if Pong'll fetch up. I mean, two hundred and
twenty-two miles takes some biting off." There was a pregnant silence. Then--

"He'll never do it," said Daphne. Her husband, who was still busy with his paper, looked up defiantly. Then he took a thousand-franc note and laid it apart from its fellows
upon the table. "I will wager that shekel," he said deliberately, "that, with a start
of one hour to-morrow, Pong reaches Pau before Ping." There was a gasp of astonishment. "Done," said Jonah. "What's more, I'll bet you another you don't get
in before ten." Berry raised his eyes to heaven. "An insult," he said. "Never mind. Your dross shall wipe it out. I
take you." "And I," said I, not to be outdone, "will put another on Pong for the
double." I felt that my honour was involved. After all, if I had not trained
the mount, I was training the jockey. "Right," said Jonah. "Will you both pay me now, or wait till you're
out of hospital?" "I think," said I, "we'll have a run for our money." The bets were made, and there was an end of it. But when we were again
in the car, and my brother-in-law was threading his way out of Tours, I
began to repent my rashness. Considering that, when he took the wheel at Boulogne, Berry had had
only three lessons in the management of a car, he had done most
creditably. My brother-in-law was no fool. Moreover, on leaving
Rouen, he and I had joined forces. Sitting beside him in the coupe, I
had driven the car with his hands--after a little practice--with
astonishing results. In two days we had, we prided ourselves, raised
such collaboration from the ranks of the Mechanical to the society of
the Fine Arts. My part was comparatively easy. Sinking his initiative
he had more nearly converted himself into an intelligent piece of
mechanism than I would have believed possible. It would, of course, be
vain to suggest that Pong would not have gone faster if I had been able
to drive with my own hands, or Berry had had my experience. Still, we
had come very well, and with a start of a whole hour and a little
luck....  Another point in our favour was that Adele, who with Nobby
completed our crew, had a pronounced gift for map-reading. She had an
eye to country. She seemed to be able to scent the line we ought to
take. The frequent treachery of signposts she laughed to scorn. Upon
the morrow her confident assistance would be invaluable....

What, when I made my bet, I had entirely forgotten, was that we were
not always upon the open road. There was the rub. From Angouleme to
Pau towns would have to be penetrated--among them Bordeaux itself--and
in the towns our system had broken down. In a crowded street, though I
could still administer, Berry could not execute. When I endeavoured to
allow for his inexperience of traffic, I found it impossible accurately
to gauge his capabilities. After a failure or two, it had been agreed
that he should negotiate such streets as we encountered without my
interference....  Of my haste to support Pong's honour, I had forgotten
the towns. With years of practice behind us, Jonah and I could thrust through
traffic, happy enough with an odd inch to spare. Naturally enough,
Berry had no such confidence. An inch was of no use to him. He must
have a good ell, and more also, before he would enter a gap. In the
trough of a narrow street he laboured heavily.... There was no doubt
about it. The towns through which we should have to pass on Wednesday
would settle our chances. My money was as good as gone. It seemed equally probable that Berry would save his stake. Barring
accidents of the grosser sort, if we started betimes, we were bound to
reach Pau before ten. Such a protasis robbed the bet of its savour. With a thousand francs at stake, it would be foolish not to take
reasonable care. And the taking of reasonable care would all but
eliminate the element of uncertainty.... There was no getting away
from it. Of the two wagers, only the first was worth winning. To
reach Pau before Jonah would be a veritable triumph. Moodily I communicated my reflections to Adele. "I thought it was rather rash at the time," she replied. "But I think
there's a sporting chance." "That's right," said Berry. "Put your money on uncle. With enough
encouragement I can do anything." "Permit me to encourage you to blow your horn," said I. "That child in
front of you is too young to die." My brother-in-law obeyed. "All the
same, I'm afraid we're for it. It isn't so much a question of pace,
pure and simple, for Jonah's a careful driver. But his street work is
beautiful." Berry sighed. "I suppose he'd pass between those two waggons," he said sarcastically. "He would," said I. "I don't think you quite see where I mean," said Berry, pointing. "I
mean along that temporary passage, which would admit a small
perambulator." As he spoke, Ping brushed past us, slipped between the two wains, and
disappeared. Berry stared after it in silence. At length--

"I withdraw," he said. "I'm not a conjurer. If everybody stood well
back I used to be able to produce an egg, broken or unbroken according
to the temperature of my hands, from a handkerchief about six feet
square. People were very nice about it, very nice. But an inability
to introduce a quart into a pint pot has always been among my failings. Don't say I've got to turn to the left here, because I can't bear it." "No," said Adele, smiling. "Straight on." "What--past the steam roller? How very touching! Excuse me,
messieurs, but would you mind suspending your somewhat boisterous
_travail_? My little car is frightened....  No answer. I suppose I
must pass it. Or shall we turn back? You know, I didn't really half
see the cathedral!" "Go on," I said mercilessly. "Jam your foot on the accelerator and
shut your eyes. Oh, and you might hold Nobby a minute, will you? I
want to light a cigarette." Adele began to shake with laughter. "With pleasure," said Berry acidly. "And then I'll help you on with
your coat. I may say that, if you touch me with that mammal, I shall
press and pull everything I can see and burst into tears. I'm all
strung up, I am." There was not much room, and the roller was ponderously closing in, but
with a protruding tongue our luckless chauffeur crept slowly past the
monster in safety, and a moment later we were scudding up the Poitiers
road. Now that we were clear of the town, we set to work diligently. Adele
pored over the map and the Michelin Guide; Berry turned himself into a
mechanical doll; and I maintained a steady issue of orders until my
throat was sore. The weather was fair and the going was good. Her new-born stiffness
beginning to wear off, Pong went better than ever. Berry excelled
himself. With every kilometre we covered my spirits rose, and when we overtook
Jonah on the outskirts of Chatellerault, I could have flung up my cap. The latter was clearly immensely surprised to see us, and when we
stopped, as was our custom, at a _charcuterie_ to buy our lunch, and
Ping had followed our example, leaned out of his window and asked me
pointedly whether my leg was yet stiff. Concealing a smile, I regretted that it was. Jonah fingered his chin. "Of course," he said warily, "it's a condition precedent that you don't
drive to-morrow." "Of course," I agreed. The confession of uneasiness, however, did my heart good. It was plain
that my imperturbable cousin was getting nervous. As we moved off again--

"We must lunch soon," said Berry. "My mouth's watering so fast, I
can't keep up with it." I patted Adele's arm. "Now you know the way to his heart," I said. "Straight through the
stomach, and----"

"But how gross!" said Berry. "And how untrue! Naturally ascetic, but
for the insistence of my physicians, I should long ago have let my hair
grow and subsisted entirely on locusts and motionless lemonade. But a
harsh Fate ruled otherwise. Excuse me, but I think that that there
basket or ark in which the comfort is enshrined is rather near the
conduit through which flows that sparkling liquid which, when vapoured,
supplies our motive power. And _foie gras_ is notoriously susceptible
to the baneful influence of neighbouring perfumes. Thank you. If
those bits of heaven were to taste of petrol, it would shorten my life. And now, where was I?" I turned to Adele. "He's off," said I. "The prospect of gluttony always loosens his
tongue. There's really only one way to stop him. What about lunching
at the top of this hill? Or can you bear it till we've passed
Poitiers?" A mischievous look came into Adele's brown eyes. "It's not half-past twelve yet," she said slowly. My brother-in-law
groaned. "Still ... I don't know....  After all, we did have
breakfast rather early, didn't we?" Berry smacked his lips. "A sensible woman," he said, "is above boobies." As he spoke, Ping swept by stormily. There was a moment's silence. Then--

"Hurray," cried Adele excitedly; "we've got a rise!" It was patently true. Jonah was wishful to reassure himself upon a
point which an hour ago he had taken for granted. The reflection that
at the moment we had not been trying to outdistance him increased our
delight. All the same, his ability to out-drive us was unquestionable. But whether he could give us the start he had agreed to was another
matter. We ate a festive lunch....

An hour with Poitiers is like a sip of old wine. The absence of the stir and bustle which fret her sister capitals is
notable. So reverend and thoughtful is the old grey-muzzled town that
it is hard to recognise the bristling war-dog that bestrode the
toughest centuries, snarled in the face of Fate, and pulled down Time. The old soldier has got him a cassock and become a gentle-faced
dominie. The sleepy music of bells calling, the pensive air of study,
the odour of simple piety, the sober confidence of great possessions,
are most impressive. Poitiers has beaten her swords into crosiers and
her spears into tuning-forks. Never was there an old age so ripe, so
mellow, so becoming. With this for evidence, you may look History in
the eyes and swear that you have seen Poitiers in the prime of her full
life. The dead will turn in their graves to hear you; children unborn
will say you knew no better. And Poitiers will take the threefold
compliment with a grave smile. She has heard it so often. Celt, Roman, Visigoth, Moor, Englishman--all these have held Poitiers
in turn. Proud of their tenure, lest History should forget, three at
least of them have set up their boasts in stone. The place was, I
imagine, a favourite. Kings used her, certainly. Dread Harry
Plantagenet gave her a proud cathedral. Among her orchards Coeur de
Lion worshipped Jehane, jousted, sang of a summer evening, and spent
his happiest days. Beneath her shadow the Black Prince lighted such a
candle of Chivalry as has never yet been put out. Not without honour
of her own countrymen, for thirteen years the High Court of Parliament
preferred her to Paris. Within her walls the sainted Joan argued her
inspiration. I have dived at random into her wallet, yet see what I have brought
forth. If memories are precious, Poitiers is uncommon rich. As if to console us for our departure, the road to Sister Angouleme was
superb. Broad, straight, smooth as any floor, the great highway
stretched like a strip of marquetry inlaid upon the countryside. Its
invitation was irresistible....

We reached the windy town in time for a late tea. As soon as this was over, Berry and I escaped and carried Pong off to a
garage, there to be oiled and greased against the morrow's race. Somewhat to our amusement, before we had been there ten minutes, our
cousin arrived with Ping and the same object. Had the incident
occurred at Poitiers, I should have been encouraged as well. It was
another sign that Jonah did not despise his opponents, and his opinion
was worth having. As it was, the compliment left me unmoved.... The truth was, Berry had that afternoon contracted two habits. Again
and again on the way from Poitiers he had shown a marked tendency to
choke his engine, and five times he had failed to mesh the gears when
changing speed. Twice we had had to stop altogether and start again. He had, of course, reproached himself violently, and I had made light
of the matter. But, for all the comfort I offered him, I was seriously
alarmed. In a word, his sudden lapse suggested that my brother-in-law
was entering that most unpleasant stage which must be traversed by all
who will become chauffeurs and are taught, so to speak, to run before
they can walk. It was after we had dined, and when my wife and I were seated--myself,
by virtue of my injury, upon a couch, and she upon a cushion beside
me--before the comfort of a glowing log-fire, that Adele laid down the
Guide and leaned her head against my knee. "I'm glad I married you," she said. I looked at Nobby. "So are we both," said I. "I wonder," said Adele, "whether you are really, or whether you're just
being nice." "Personally, I'm just being nice. Nobby is really. Of course, he may
be making the best of a bad job. As a worldly good of mine, I just
endowed you with him, and that was that." "You were both very happy before--before I came." "We thought we were." "O-o-oh," said Adele, twisting her head around, to see my face. "You
were. You know you were." The gleeful accusation of the soft brown eyes was irresistible. To
gain time, I swallowed. Then--

"So were you," I said desperately. "I know I was," was the disconcerting reply. "Well, then, why shouldn't we----"

"But you said you weren't." I called the Sealyham. "Nobby," said I, "I'm being bullied. The woman we love is turning my
words against me." For a moment the dog looked at us. Then he sat up and begged. "And what," said Adele, caressing him, "does that mean?" "He's pleading my cause--obviously." "I'm not so sure," said Adele. "I wish he could talk." "You're a wicked, suspicious girl. Here are two miserable males, all
pale and trembling for love of you--you've only got to smile to make
them rich--and you set your small pink heel upon their devotion. I
admit it's a soft heel--one of the very softest----"

"----I ever remember," flashed Adele. "How very interesting! 'Heels I
have Held,' by Wild Oats. Were the others pink, too?" Solemnly I regarded her. "A little more," said I, "and I shan't teach her to drive." Adele tossed her head. "Berry's going to do that," she said. "Directly we get to Pau." I laughed savagely. "I'm talking of automobiles," I said, "not golf balls." "I know," said my wife. "And Berry's going to----"

"Well, he's not!" I shouted. "For one thing, he can't, and, for
another, it's my right, and I won't give it up. I've been looking
forward to it ever since I knew you. I've dreamed about it. You're
miles cleverer than I am, you're wise, you're quick-witted, you can
play, you can sing like a nightingale, you can take me on at tennis,
you can ride--driving a car's about the only thing I can teach you,
and----"

Adele laid a smooth hand upon my mouth. "Nobby and I," she said, "are very proud of you. They're not in the
same street with their master, they know, but they're awfully proud to
be his wife and dog." To such preposterous generosity there was but one answer. As I made it--

"May I teach you to drive, lady?" A far-away look came into the soft brown eyes. "If you don't," said Adele, "nobody shall." *      *      *      *      *

The day of the race dawned, clear and jubilant. By eight o'clock the
sun was high in a blue heaven, new-swept by a steady breeze. Limping
into the courtyard before breakfast, I rejoiced to notice that the air
was appreciably warmer than any I had breathed for a month. We had hoped to leave Angouleme at nine o'clock. Actually it was a
quarter to ten before the luggage was finally strapped into place and
my brother-in-law climbed into the car. With a sigh for a bad
beginning, I reflected that if we could not cover the two-hundred and
twenty odd miles in twelve and a quarter hours, we ought to be shot. Jonah stood by, watch in hand. "Are you ready?" he said. I nodded. "Right," said my cousin. "I'm not sure we've picked the best route,
but it's too late now. No divergence allowed." "I agree." "And you don't drive." "It's out of the question." "Right. Like to double the bets?" "No," said Adele, "they wouldn't. I won't allow it. But I'll bet with
you. I can't afford much, but I'll bet you a hundred francs we're
there before you." "I'll give you tens," said my cousin. "And I start in one hour from
_Now_!" When I say that, upon the word being given, Pong, whose manners had
been hitherto above reproach, utterly refused to start or be started,
it will be seen that Fate was against us.... It took us exactly two minutes to locate the trouble--which was in the
magneto--and just over two hours to put it right. As we slid out of Angouleme, an impatient clock announced that it was
mid-day. At least the delay had done something. So far as the second wager was
concerned, it had altered the whole complexion of the case. We were no
longer betting upon anything approaching a certainty. Indeed, unless
we could break the back of the distance before daylight failed, our
chances of reaching Pau before ten were worth little. If the road to
Bordeaux were as fine as that from Poitiers, and Berry could find his
form, we should probably run to time. We could not afford, however, to
give a minute away. As luck would have it, the state of the road was, on the whole, rather
worse than any we had used since we left Boulogne. Presumably
untouched for over six years, the wear and tear to which, as one of the
arteries springing from a great port, it had been subjected, had turned
a sleek highway into a shadow of itself. There was no flesh; the skin
was broken; the very bones were staring. For the first half hour we told one another that we had struck a bad
patch. For the second we expressed nervous hopes that the going would
grow no worse. After that, Berry and I lost interest and suffered in
silence. Indeed, but for Adele, I think we should have thrown up the
sponge and spent the night at Bordeaux. My lady, however, kept us both going. She had studied our route until she knew it by heart, and was just
burning to pilot us through Bordeaux and thence across Gascony. "They're sure to make mistakes after Bordeaux. You know what the
sign-posts are like. And the road's really tricky. But I spent two
hours looking it up yesterday evening. I took you through Barbezieux
all right, didn't I?" "Like a book, darling." "Well, I can do that every time. And I daresay they'll have tire
trouble. Besides, the road's no worse for us than it is for them, and
after Bordeaux it'll probably be splendid. Of course we'll be there
before ten--we can't help it. I want to be there before Jonah. I've
got a hundred----"

"My dear," I expostulated, "I don't want to----"

"We've got a jolly good chance, any way. While you were getting her
right, I got the lunch, and we can eat that without stopping. You can
feed Berry. We'll gain half an hour like that." Before such optimism I had not the face to point out that, if our
opponents had any sense at all, they had lunched before leaving
Angouleme. "Here's a nice patch," added Adele. "Put her along, you two." Spurred by her enthusiasm, we bent again to the oars. Contrary to my expectation, my brother-in-law, if unusually silent, was
driving well. But the road was against him. He had not sufficient
experience to be able to keep his foot steady upon the accelerator when
a high speed and a rude surface conspired to dislodge it--a shortcoming
which caused us all three much discomfort and lost a lot of mileage. Then, again, I dared not let him drive too close to the side of the
road. Right at the edge the surface was well preserved, and I knew
that Jonah's off wheels would make good use of it. Such finesse,
however, was out of Berry's reach. We pelted along upon what remained
of the crown painfully. Seventy-three miles separate Bordeaux from Angouleme, and at the end of
two hours fifty-four of them lay behind us. All things considered,
this was extremely good, and when Adele suggested that we should eat
our lunch, I agreed quite cheerfully. The suggestion, however, that I should feed Berry proved impracticable. After four endeavours to introduce one end of a _petit pain_ into his
mouth--

"Would it be asking too much," said my brother-in-law, "if I suggested
that you should suspend this assault? I don't know what part of your
face you eat with, but I usually use my mouth. I admit it's a bit of a
rosebud, but that's no excuse for all these 'outers.' Yes, I know it's
a scream, but I was once told never to put _foie gras_ upon the nose or
cheeks. They say it draws the skin. Oh, and don't let's have any
comic nonsense about the beer," he added shortly. "Pour it straight
into my breast-pocket and have done with it. Then I can suck my
handkerchief." As he spoke, Nobby leaned forward and took the dishevelled sandwich out
of my unready fingers. "That's right," added Berry, with the laugh of a maniac. "Cast my
portion to the dogs." He dabbed his face with a handkerchief. "Never
mind. When his hour comes, you'll have to hold him out of the window. I'm not going to stop every time he wants to be sick." Eventually it was decided that, since we should have to stop for
petrol, Berry must seize that opportunity to devour some food. "Besides," I concluded, "a rest of a quarter of an hour will do you
good." As the words left my mouth, I noticed for the first time that my
brother-in-law was tiring. For the moment I thought I was mistaken, for upon our previous runs he
had never turned a hair. Now, however, he seemed to be driving with an
effort. As if to confirm my suspicions, at the very next hill he
missed his change. "I think," I said quickly, "you ought to have your lunch right away. It's no good getting done in for want of food." Berry shot me a pathetic glance. "It isn't that, old chap. It's----  Hang it all, it's my shoulder! That cursed muscular rheumatism cropped up again yesterday...."

The murder was out. After a little he admitted that, ever since we had left Poitiers, any
quick movement of his left arm had caused him intense pain. Of course both Adele and I besought him to stop there and then and let
the race go to blazes. Of this he would not hear, declaring that, so
long as Jonah was behind, victory was not out of sight, and that
nothing short of paralysis would induce him to jilt the jade. After a
little argument, we let him have his way ... The road continued to offer an abominable passage, and when we stopped
at a garage in Bordeaux, it was five minutes to three of a beautiful
afternoon. The third bidon was discharging its contents into Pong's tank, and
Berry was sitting wearily upon the running-board, with his mouth full
and a glass of beer in his hand, when, with an apologetic cough, Ping
emerged from behind an approaching tram and slid past us over the
cobbles with a smooth rush. The off-side window was open, and, as the
car went by, Jonah waved to us. There was no doubt about it, my cousin was out to win. It was also
transparently clear that Adele and I, at any rate, had lost our money. We could not compete with an average of thirty-six miles an hour. "Boy!" "Yes, darling?" 