



Produced by James Adcock. Special thanks to The Internet
Archive: American Libraries, and Project Gutenberg Australia










JENNIE GERHARDT

A NOVEL

BY

THEODORE DREISER

AUTHOR OF

"SISTER CARRIE"


BONI and LIVERIGHT

PUBLISHERS :: :: NEW YORK


Copyright, 1911, by
Harper & Brothers


Copyright, 1911, by
Boni & Liveright, Inc. Printed in the United States of America






JENNIE GERHARDT




CHAPTER I


One morning, in the fall of 1880, a middle-aged woman, accompanied
by a young girl of eighteen, presented herself at the clerk's desk of
the principal hotel in Columbus, Ohio, and made inquiry as to whether
there was anything about the place that she could do. She was of a
helpless, fleshy build, with a frank, open countenance and an
innocent, diffident manner. Her eyes were large and patient, and in
them dwelt such a shadow of distress as only those who have looked
sympathetically into the countenances of the distraught and helpless
poor know anything about. Any one could see where the daughter behind
her got the timidity and shamefacedness which now caused her to stand
back and look indifferently away. She was a product of the fancy, the
feeling, the innate affection of the untutored but poetic mind of her
mother combined with the gravity and poise which were characteristic
of her father. Poverty was driving them. Together they presented so
appealing a picture of honest necessity that even the clerk was
affected. "What is it you would like to do?" he said. "Maybe you have some cleaning or scrubbing," she replied, timidly. "I could wash the floors." The daughter, hearing the statement, turned uneasily, not because
it irritated her to work, but because she hated people to guess at the
poverty that made it necessary. The clerk, manlike, was affected by
the evidence of beauty in distress. The innocent helplessness of the
daughter made their lot seem hard indeed. "Wait a moment," he said; and, stepping into a back office, he
called the head housekeeper. There was work to be done. The main staircase and parlor hall were
unswept because of the absence of the regular scrub-woman. "Is that her daughter with her?" asked the housekeeper, who could
see them from where she was standing. "Yes, I believe so." "She might come this afternoon if she wants to. The girl helps her,
I suppose?" "You go see the housekeeper," said the clerk, pleasantly, as he
came back to the desk. "Right through there"--pointing to a
near-by door. "She'll arrange with you about it." A succession of misfortunes, of which this little scene might have
been called the tragic culmination, had taken place in the life and
family of William Gerhardt, a glass-blower by trade. Having suffered
the reverses so common in the lower walks of life, this man was forced
to see his wife, his six children, and himself dependent for the
necessaries of life upon whatever windfall of fortune the morning of
each recurring day might bring. He himself was sick in bed. His oldest
boy, Sebastian, or "Bass," as his associates transformed it, worked as
an apprentice to a local freight-car builder, but received only four
dollars a week. Genevieve, the oldest of the girls, was past eighteen,
but had not as yet been trained to any special work. The other
children, George, aged fourteen; Martha, twelve; William ten, and
Veronica, eight, were too young to do anything, and only made the
problem of existence the more complicated. Their one mainstay was the
home, which, barring a six-hundred-dollar mortgage, the father owned. He had borrowed this money at a time when, having saved enough to buy
the house, he desired to add three rooms and a porch, and so make it
large enough for them to live in. A few years were still to run on the
mortgage, but times had been so bad that he had been forced to use up
not only the little he had saved to pay off the principal, but the
annual interest also. Gerhardt was helpless, and the consciousness of
his precarious situation--the doctor's bill, the interest due
upon the mortgage, together with the sums owed butcher and baker, who,
through knowing him to be absolutely honest, had trusted him until
they could trust no longer--all these perplexities weighed upon
his mind and racked him so nervously as to delay his recovery. Mrs. Gerhardt was no weakling. For a time she took in washing, what
little she could get, devoting the intermediate hours to dressing the
children, cooking, seeing that they got off to school, mending their
clothes, waiting on her husband, and occasionally weeping. Not
infrequently she went personally to some new grocer, each time farther
and farther away, and, starting an account with a little cash, would
receive credit until other grocers warned the philanthropist of his
folly. Corn was cheap. Sometimes she would make a kettle of lye
hominy, and this would last, with scarcely anything else, for an
entire week. Corn-meal also, when made into mush, was better than
nothing, and this, with a little milk, made almost a feast. Potatoes
fried was the nearest they ever came to luxurious food, and coffee was
an infrequent treat. Coal was got by picking it up in buckets and
baskets along the maze of tracks in the near-by railroad yard. Wood,
by similar journeys to surrounding lumber-yards. Thus they lived from
day to day, each hour hoping that the father would get well and that
the glass-works would soon start up. But as the winter approached
Gerhardt began to feel desperate. "I must get out of this now pretty soon," was the sturdy German's
regular comment, and his anxiety found but weak expression in the
modest quality of his voice. To add to all this trouble little Veronica took the measles, and,
for a few days, it was thought that she would die. The mother
neglected everything else to hover over her and pray for the best. Doctor Ellwanger came every day, out of purely human sympathy, and
gravely examined the child. The Lutheran minister, Pastor Wundt,
called to offer the consolation of the Church. Both of these men
brought an atmosphere of grim ecclesiasticism into the house. They
were the black-garbed, sanctimonious emissaries of superior forces. Mrs. Gerhardt felt as if she were going to lose her child, and watched
sorrowfully by the cot-side. After three days the worst was over, but
there was no bread in the house. Sebastian's wages had been spent for
medicine. Only coal was free for the picking, and several times the
children had been scared from the railroad yards. Mrs. Gerhardt
thought of all the places to which she might apply, and despairingly
hit upon the hotel. Now, by a miracle, she had her chance. "How much do you charge?" the housekeeper asked her. Mrs. Gerhardt had not thought this would be left to her, but need
emboldened her. "Would a dollar a day be too much?" "No," said the housekeeper; "there is only about three days' work
to do every week. If you would come every afternoon you could do
it." "Very well," said the applicant. "Shall we start to-day?" "Yes; if you'll come with me now I'll show you where the cleaning
things are." The hotel, into which they were thus summarily introduced, was a
rather remarkable specimen for the time and place. Columbus, being the
State capital, and having a population of fifty thousand and a fair
passenger traffic, was a good field for the hotel business, and the
opportunity had been improved; so at least the Columbus people proudly
thought. The structure, five stories in height, and of imposing
proportions, stood at one corner of the central public square, where
were the Capitol building and principal stores. The lobby was large
and had been recently redecorated. Both floor and wainscot were of
white marble, kept shiny by frequent polishing. There was an imposing
staircase with hand-rails of walnut and toe-strips of brass. An
inviting corner was devoted to a news and cigar-stand. Where the
staircase curved upward the clerk's desk and offices had been located,
all done in hardwood and ornamented by novel gas-fixtures. One could
see through a door at one end of the lobby to the barbershop, with its
chairs and array of shaving-mugs. Outside were usually two or three
buses, arriving or departing, in accordance with the movement of the
trains. To this caravanserai came the best of the political and social
patronage of the State. Several Governors had made it their permanent
abiding place during their terms of office. The two United States
Senators, whenever business called them to Columbus, invariably
maintained parlor chambers at the hotel. One of them, Senator Brander,
was looked upon by the proprietor as more or less of a permanent
guest, because he was not only a resident of the city, but an
otherwise homeless bachelor. Other and more transient guests included
Congressmen, State legislators and lobbyists, merchants, professional
men, and, after them, the whole raft of indescribables who, coming and
going, make up the glow and stir of this kaleidoscopic world. Mother and daughter, suddenly flung into this realm of superior
brightness, felt immeasurably overawed. They went about too timid to
touch anything for fear of giving offense. The great red-carpeted
hallway, which they were set to sweep, had for them all the
magnificence of a palace; they kept their eyes down and spoke in their
lowest tones. When it came to scrubbing the steps and polishing the
brass-work of the splendid stairs both needed to steel themselves, the
mother against her timidity, the daughter against the shame at so
public an exposure. Wide beneath lay the imposing lobby, and men,
lounging, smoking, passing constantly in and out, could see them
both. "Isn't it fine?" whispered Genevieve, and started nervously at the
sound of her own voice. "Yes," returned her mother, who, upon her knees, was wringing out
her cloth with earnest but clumsy hands. "It must cost a good deal to live here, don't you think?" "Yes," said her mother. "Don't forget to rub into these little
corners. Look here what you've left." Jennie, mortified by this correction, fell earnestly to her task,
and polished vigorously, without again daring to lift her eyes. With painstaking diligence they worked downward until about five
o'clock; it was dark outside, and all the lobby was brightly lighted. Now they were very near the bottom of the stairway. Through the big swinging doors there entered from the chilly world
without a tall, distinguished, middle-aged gentleman, whose silk hat
and loose military cape-coat marked him at once, among the crowd of
general idlers, as some one of importance. His face was of a dark and
solemn cast, but broad and sympathetic in its lines, and his bright
eyes were heavily shaded with thick, bushy, black eyebrows. Passing to
the desk he picked up the key that had already been laid out for him,
and coming to the staircase, started up. The middle-aged woman, scrubbing at his feet, he acknowledged not
only by walking around her, but by graciously waving his hand, as much
as to say, "Don't move for me." The daughter, however, caught his eye by standing up, her troubled
glance showing that she feared she was in his way. He bowed and smiled pleasantly. "You shouldn't have troubled yourself," he said. Jennie only smiled. When he had reached the upper landing an impulsive sidewise glance
assured him, more clearly than before, of her uncommonly prepossessing
appearance. He noted the high, white forehead, with its smoothly
parted and plaited hair. The eyes he saw were blue and the complexion
fair. He had even time to admire the mouth and the full
cheeks--above all, the well-rounded, graceful form, full of
youth, health, and that hopeful expectancy which to the middle-aged is
so suggestive of all that is worth begging of Providence. Without
another look he went dignifiedly upon his way, but the impression of
her charming personality went with him. This was the Hon. George
Sylvester Brander, junior Senator. "Wasn't that a fine-looking man who went up just now?" observed
Jennie a few moments later. "Yes, he was," said her mother. "He had a gold-headed cane." "You mustn't stare at people when they pass," cautioned her mother,
wisely. "It isn't nice." "I didn't stare at him," returned Jennie, innocently. "He bowed to
me." "Well, don't you pay any attention to anybody," said her mother. "They may not like it." Jennie fell to her task in silence, but the glamor of the great
world was having its effect upon her senses. She could not help giving
ear to the sounds, the brightness, the buzz of conversation and
laughter surrounding her. In one section of the parlor floor was the
dining-room, and from the clink of dishes one could tell that supper
was being prepared. In another was the parlor proper, and there some
one came to play on the piano. That feeling of rest and relaxation
which comes before the evening meal pervaded the place. It touched the
heart of the innocent working-girl with hope, for hers were the years,
and poverty could not as yet fill her young mind with cares. She
rubbed diligently always, and sometimes forgot the troubled mother at
her side, whose kindly eyes were becoming invested with crows' feet,
and whose lips half repeated the hundred cares of the day. She could
only think that all of this was very fascinating, and wish that a
portion of it might come to her. At half-past five the housekeeper, remembering them, came and told
them that they might go. The fully finished stairway was relinquished
by both with a sigh of relief, and, after putting their implements
away, they hastened homeward, the mother, at least, pleased to think
that at last she had something to do. As they passed several fine houses Jennie was again touched by that
half-defined emotion which the unwonted novelty of the hotel life had
engendered in her consciousness. "Isn't it fine to be rich?" she said. "Yes," answered her mother, who was thinking of the suffering
Veronica. "Did you see what a big dining-room they had there?" "Yes." They went on past the low cottages and among the dead leaves of the
year. "I wish we were rich," murmured Jennie, half to herself. "I don't know just what to do," confided her mother with a
long-drawn sigh. "I don't believe there's a thing to eat in the
house." "Let's stop and see Mr. Bauman again," exclaimed Jennie, her
natural sympathies restored by the hopeless note in her mother's
voice. "Do you think he would trust us any more?" "Let's tell him where we're working. I will." "Well," said her mother, wearily. Into the small, dimly lighted grocery store, which was two blocks
from their house, they ventured nervously. Mrs. Gerhardt was about to
begin, but Jennie spoke first. "Will you let us have some bread to-night, and a little bacon? We're working now at the Columbus House, and we'll be sure to pay you
Saturday." "Yes," added Mrs. Gerhardt, "I have something to do." Bauman, who had long supplied them before illness and trouble
began, knew that they told the truth. "How long have you been working there?" he asked. "Just this afternoon." "You know, Mrs. Gerhardt," he said, "how it is with me. I don't
want to refuse you. Mr. Gerhardt is good for it, but I am poor, too. Times are hard," he explained further, "I have my family to keep." "Yes, I know," said Mrs. Gerhardt, weakly. Her old shoddy shawl hid her rough hands, red from the day's work,
but they were working nervously. Jennie stood by in strained
silence. "Well," concluded Mr. Bauman, "I guess it's all right this time. Do
what you can for me Saturday." He wrapped up the bread and bacon, and, handing Jennie the parcel,
he added, with a touch of cynicism:

"When you get money again I guess you'll go and trade somewhere
else." "No," returned Mrs. Gerhardt; "you know better than that." But she
was too nervous to parley long. They went out into the shadowy street, and on past the low cottages
to their own home. "I wonder," said the mother, wearily, when they neared the door,
"if they've got any coal?" "Don't worry," said Jennie. "If they haven't I'll go." "A man run us away," was almost the first greeting that the
perturbed George offered when the mother made her inquiry about the
coal. "I got a little, though." he added. "I threw it off a car." Mrs. Gerhardt only smiled, but Jennie laughed. "How is Veronica?" she inquired. "She seems to be sleeping," said the father. "I gave her medicine
again at five." While the scanty meal was being prepared the mother went to the
sick child's bedside, taking up another long night's vigil quite as a
matter of course. While the supper was being eaten Sebastian offered a suggestion,
and his larger experience in social and commercial matters made his
proposition worth considering. Though only a car-builder's apprentice,
without any education except such as pertained to Lutheran doctrine,
to which he objected very strongly, he was imbued with American color
and energy. His transformed name of Bass suited him exactly. Tall,
athletic, and well-featured for his age, he was a typical stripling of
the town. Already he had formulated a philosophy of life. To succeed
one must do something--one must associate, or at least seem to
associate, with those who were foremost in the world of
appearances. For this reason the young boy loved to hang about the Columbus
House. It seemed to him that this hotel was the center and
circumference of all that was worth while in the social sense. He
would go down-town evenings, when he first secured money enough to buy
a decent suit of clothes, and stand around the hotel entrance with his
friends, kicking his heels, smoking a two-for-five-cent cigar,
preening himself on his stylish appearance, and looking after the
girls. Others were there with him--town dandies and nobodies,
young men who came there to get shaved or to drink a glass of whisky. And all of these he admired and sought to emulate. Clothes were the
main touchstone. If men wore nice clothes and had rings and pins,
whatever they did seemed appropriate. He wanted to be like them and to
act like them, and so his experience of the more pointless forms of
life rapidly broadened. "Why don't you get some of those hotel fellows to give you their
laundry?" he asked of Jennie after she had related the afternoon's
experiences. "It would be better than scrubbing the stairs." "How do you get it?" she replied. "Why, ask the clerk, of course." This plan struck Jennie as very much worth while. "Don't you ever speak to me if you meet me around there," he
cautioned her a little later, privately. "Don't you let on that you
know me." "Why?" she asked, innocently. "Well, you know why," he answered, having indicated before that
when they looked so poor he did not want to be disgraced by having to
own them as relatives. "Just you go on by. Do you hear?" "All right," she returned, meekly, for although this youth was not
much over a year her senior, his superior will dominated. The next day on their way to the hotel she spoke of it to her
mother. "Bass said we might get some of the laundry of the men at the hotel
to do." Mrs. Gerhardt, whose mind had been straining all night at the
problem of adding something to the three dollars which her six
afternoons would bring her, approved of the idea. "So we might," she said. "I'll ask that clerk." When they reached the hotel, however, no immediate opportunity
presented itself. They worked on until late in the afternoon. Then, as
fortune would have it, the housekeeper sent them in to scrub up the
floor behind the clerk's desk. That important individual felt very
kindly toward mother and daughter. He liked the former's sweetly
troubled countenance and the latter's pretty face. So he listened
graciously when Mrs. Gerhardt ventured meekly to put the question
which she had been revolving in her mind all the afternoon. "Is there any gentleman here," she said, "who would give me his
washing to do? I'd be so very much obliged for it." The clerk looked at her, and again recognized that absolute want
was written all over her anxious face. "Let's see," he answered, thinking of Senator Brander and Marshall
Hopkins. Both were charitable men, who would be more than glad to aid
a poor woman. "You go up and see Senator Brander," he continued. "He's
in twenty-two. Here," he added, writing out the number, "you go up and
tell him I sent you." Mrs. Gerhardt took the card with a tremor of gratefulness. Her eyes
looked the words she could not say. "That's all right," said the clerk, observing her emotion. "You go
right up. You'll find him in his room now." With the greatest diffidence Mrs. Gerhardt knocked at number
twenty-two. Jennie stood silently at her side. After a moment the door was opened, and in the full radiance of the
bright room stood the Senator. Attired in a handsome smoking-coat, he
looked younger than at their first meeting. "Well, madam," he said, recognizing the couple, and particularly
the daughter, "what can I do for you?" Very much abashed, the mother hesitated in her reply. "We would like to know if you have any washing you could let us
have to do?" "Washing?" he repeated after her, in a voice which had a peculiarly
resonant quality. "Washing? Come right in. Let me see." He stepped aside with much grace, waved them in and closed the
door. "Let me see," he repeated, opening and closing drawer after
drawer of the massive black-walnut bureau. Jennie studied the room
with interest. Such an array of nicknacks and pretty things on mantel
and dressing-case she had never seen before. The Senator's easy-chair,
with a green-shaded lamp beside it, the rich heavy carpet and the fine
rugs upon the floor--what comfort, what luxury! "Sit down; take those two chairs there," said the Senator,
graciously, disappearing into a closet. Still overawed, mother and daughter thought it more polite to
decline, but now the Senator had completed his researches and he
reiterated his invitation. Very uncomfortably they yielded and took
chairs. "Is this your daughter?" he continued, with a smile at Jennie. "Yes, sir," said the mother; "she's my oldest girl." "Is your husband alive?" "What is his name?" "Where does he live?" To all of these questions Mrs. Gerhardt very humbly answered. "How many children have you?" he went on. "Six," said Mrs. Gerhardt. "Well," he returned, "that's quite a family. You've certainly done
your duty to the nation." "Yes, sir," returned Mrs. Gerhardt, who was touched by his genial
and interesting manner. "And you say this is your oldest daughter?" "Yes, sir." "What does your husband do?" "He's a glass-blower. But he's sick now." During the colloquy Jennie's large blue eyes were wide with
interest. Whenever he looked at her she turned upon him such a frank,
unsophisticated gaze, and smiled in such a vague, sweet way, that he
could not keep his eyes off of her for more than a minute of the
time. "Well," he continued, sympathetically, "that is too bad! I have
some washing here not very much but you are welcome to it. Next week
there may be more." He went about now, stuffing articles of apparel into a blue cotton
bag with a pretty design on the side. "Do you want these any certain day?" questioned Mrs. Gerhardt. "No," he said, reflectively; "any day next week will do." She thanked him with a simple phrase, and started to go. "Let me see," he said, stepping ahead of them and opening the door,
"you may bring them back Monday." "Yes, sir," said Mrs. Gerhardt. "Thank you." They went out and the Senator returned to his reading, but it was
with a peculiarly disturbed mind. "Too bad," he said, closing his volume. "There's something very
pathetic about those people." Jennie's spirit of wonder and
appreciation was abroad in the room. Mrs. Gerhardt and Jennie made their way anew through the shadowy
streets. They felt immeasurably encouraged by this fortunate
venture. "Didn't he have a fine room?" whispered Jennie. "Yes," answered the mother; "he's a great man." "He's a senator, isn't he?" continued the daughter. "Yes." "It must be nice to be famous," said the girl, softly. CHAPTER II


The spirit of Jennie--who shall express it? This daughter of
poverty, who was now to fetch and carry the laundry of this
distinguished citizen of Columbus, was a creature of a mellowness of
temperament which words can but vaguely suggest. There are natures
born to the inheritance of flesh that come without understanding, and
that go again without seeming to have wondered why. Life, so long as
they endure it, is a true wonderland, a thing of infinite beauty,
which could they but wander into it wonderingly, would be heaven
enough. Opening their eyes, they see a conformable and perfect world. Trees, flowers, the world of sound and the world of color. These are
the valued inheritance of their state. If no one said to them "Mine,"
they would wander radiantly forth, singing the song which all the
earth may some day hope to hear. It is the song of goodness. Caged in the world of the material, however, such a nature is
almost invariably an anomaly. That other world of flesh into which has
been woven pride and greed looks askance at the idealist, the dreamer. If one says it is sweet to look at the clouds, the answer is a warning
against idleness. If one seeks to give ear to the winds, it shall be
well with his soul, but they will seize upon his possessions. If all
the world of the so-called inanimate delay one, calling with
tenderness in sounds that seem to be too perfect to be less than
understanding, it shall be ill with the body. The hands of the actual
are forever reaching toward such as these--forever seizing
greedily upon them. It is of such that the bond servants are made. In the world of the actual, Jennie was such a spirit. From her
earliest youth goodness and mercy had molded her every impulse. Did
Sebastian fall and injure himself, it was she who struggled with
straining anxiety, carried him safely to his mother. Did George
complain that he was hungry, she gave him all of her bread. Many were
the hours in which she had rocked her younger brothers and sisters to
sleep, singing whole-heartedly betimes and dreaming far dreams. Since
her earliest walking period she had been as the right hand of her
mother. What scrubbing, baking, errand-running, and nursing there had
been to do she did. No one had ever heard her rudely complain, though
she often thought of the hardness of her lot. She knew that there were
other girls whose lives were infinitely freer and fuller, but, it
never occurred to her to be meanly envious; her heart might be lonely,
but her lips continued to sing. When the days were fair she looked out
of her kitchen window and longed to go where the meadows were. Nature's fine curves and shadows touched her as a song itself. There
were times when she had gone with George and the others, leading them
away to where a patch of hickory-trees flourished, because there were
open fields, with shade for comfort and a brook of living water. No
artist in the formulating of conceptions, her soul still responded to
these things, and every sound and every sigh were welcome to her
because of their beauty. When the soft, low call or the wood-doves, those spirits of the
summer, came out of the distance, she would incline her head and
listen, the whole spiritual quality of it dropping like silver bubbles
into her own great heart. Where the sunlight was warm and the shadows flecked with its
splendid radiance she delighted to wonder at the pattern of it, to
walk where it was most golden, and follow with instinctive
appreciation the holy corridors of the trees. Color was not lost upon her. That wonderful radiance which fills
the western sky at evening touched and unburdened her heart. "I wonder," she said once with girlish simplicity, "how it would
feel to float away off there among those clouds." She had discovered a natural swing of a wild grape-vine, and was
sitting in it with Martha and George. "Oh, wouldn't it be nice if you had a boat up there," said
George. She was looking with uplifted face at a far-off cloud, a red island
in a sea of silver. "Just supposing," she said, "people could live on an island like
that." Her soul was already up there, and its elysian paths knew the
lightness of her feet. "There goes a bee," said George, noting a bumbler winging by. "Yes," she said, dreamily, "it's going home." "Does everything have a home?" asked Martha. "Nearly everything," she answered. "Do the birds go home?" questioned George. "Yes," she said, deeply feeling the poetry of it herself, "the
birds go home." "Do the bees go home?" urged Martha. "Yes, the bees go home." "Do the dogs go home?" said George, who saw one traveling
lonesomely along the nearby road. "Why, of course," she said, "you know that dogs go home." "Do the gnats?" he persisted, seeing one of those curious spirals
of minute insects turning energetically in the waning light. "Yes," she said, half believing her remark. "Listen!" "Oho," exclaimed George, incredulously, "I wonder what kind of
houses they live in." "Listen!" she gently persisted, putting out her hand to still
him. It was that halcyon hour when the Angelus falls like a benediction
upon the waning day. Far off the notes were sounding gently, and
nature, now that she listened, seemed to have paused also. A
scarlet-breasted robin was hopping in short spaces upon the grass
before her. A humming bee hummed, a cow-bell tinkled, while some
suspicious cracklings told of a secretly reconnoitering squirrel. Keeping her pretty hand weighed in the air, she listened until the
long, soft notes spread and faded and her heart could hold no more. Then she arose. "Oh," she said, clenching her fingers in an agony of poetic
feeling. There were crystal tears overflowing in her eyes. The
wondrous sea of feeling in her had stormed its banks. Of such was the
spirit of Jennie. CHAPTER III


The junior Senator, George Sylvester Brander, was a man of peculiar
mold. In him there were joined, to a remarkable degree, the wisdom of
the opportunist and the sympathetic nature of the true representative
of the people. Born a native of southern Ohio, he had been raised and
educated there, if one might except the two years in which he had
studied law at Columbia University. He knew common and criminal law,
perhaps, as well as any citizen of his State, but he had never
practised with that assiduity which makes for pre-eminent success at
the bar. He had made money, and had had splendid opportunities to make
a great deal more if he had been willing to stultify his conscience,
but that he had never been able to do. And yet his integrity had not
been at all times proof against the claims of friendship. Only in the
last presidential election he had thrown his support to a man for
Governor who, he well knew, had no claim which a strictly honorable
conscience could have recognized. In the same way, he had been guilty of some very questionable, and
one or two actually unsavory, appointments. Whenever his conscience
pricked him too keenly he would endeavor to hearten himself with his
pet phrase, "All in a lifetime." Thinking over things quite alone in
his easy-chair, he would sometimes rise up with these words on his
lips, and smile sheepishly as he did so. Conscience was not by any
means dead in him. His sympathies, if anything, were keener than
ever. This man, three times Congressman from the district of which
Columbus was a part, and twice United States Senator, had never
married. In his youth he had had a serious love affair, but there was
nothing discreditable to him in the fact that it came to nothing. The
lady found it inconvenient to wait for him. He was too long in earning
a competence upon which they might subsist. Tall, straight-shouldered, neither lean nor stout, he was to-day an
imposing figure. Having received his hard knocks and endured his
losses, there was that about him which touched and awakened the
sympathies of the imaginative. People thought him naturally agreeable,
and his senatorial peers looked upon him as not any too heavy
mentally, but personally a fine man. His presence in Columbus at this particular time was due to the
fact that his political fences needed careful repairing. The general
election had weakened his party in the State Legislature. There were
enough votes to re-elect him, but it would require the most careful
political manipulation to hold them together. Other men were
ambitious. There were a half-dozen available candidates, any one of
whom would have rejoiced to step into his shoes. He realized the
exigencies of the occasion. They could not well beat him, he thought;
but even if this should happen, surely the President could be induced
to give him a ministry abroad. Yes, he might be called a successful man, but for all that Senator
Brander felt that he had missed something. He had wanted to do so many
things. Here he was, fifty-two years of age, clean, honorable, highly
distinguished, as the world takes it, but single. He could not help
looking about him now and then and speculating upon the fact that he
had no one to care for him. His chamber seemed strangely hollow at
times--his own personality exceedingly disagreeable. "Fifty!" he often thought to himself. "Alone--absolutely
alone." Sitting in his chamber that Saturday afternoon, a rap at his door
aroused him. He had been speculating upon the futility of his
political energy in the light of the impermanence of life and
fame. "What a great fight we make to sustain ourselves!" he thought. "How
little difference it will make to me a few years hence!" He arose, and opening wide his door, perceived Jennie. She had
come, as she had suggested to her mother, at this time, instead of on
Monday, in order to give a more favorable impression of
promptness. "Come right in," said the Senator; and, as on the first occasion,
he graciously made way for her. Jennie passed in, momentarily expecting some compliment upon the
promptitude with which the washing had been done. The Senator never
noticed it at all. "Well, my young lady," he said when she had put the bundle down,
"how do you find yourself this evening?" "Very well," replied Jennie. "We thought we'd better bring your
clothes to-day instead of Monday." "Oh, that would not have made any difference," replied Brander
lightly. "Just leave them on the chair." Jennie, without considering the fact that she had been offered no
payment for the service rendered, was about to retire, had not the
Senator detained her. "How is your mother?" he asked pleasantly. "She's very well," said Jennie simply. "And your little sister? Is she any better?" "The doctor thinks so," she replied. "Sit down," he continued graciously. "I want to talk to you." Moving to a near-by chair, the young girl seated herself. "Hem!" he went on, clearing his throat lightly, "What seems to be
the matter with her?" "She has the measles," returned Jennie. "We thought once that she
was going to die." Brander studied her face as she said this, and he thought he saw
something exceedingly pathetic there. The girl's poor clothes and her
wondering admiration for his exalted station in life affected him. It
made him feel almost ashamed of the comfort and luxury that surrounded
him. How high up he was in the world, indeed! "I am glad she is better now," he said kindly. "How old is your
father?" "Fifty-seven." "And is he any better?" "Oh yes, sir; he's around now, although he can't go out just
yet." "I believe your mother said he was a glass-blower by trade?" "Yes, sir." Brander well knew the depressed local conditions in this branch of
manufacture. It had been part of the political issue in the last
campaign. They must be in a bad way truly. "Do all of the children go to school?" he inquired. "Why yes, sir," returned Jennie, stammering. She was too shamefaced
to own that one of the children had been obliged to leave school for
the lack of shoes. The utterance of the falsehood troubled her. He reflected awhile; then realizing that he had no good excuse for
further detaining her, he arose and came over to her. From his pocket
he took a thin layer of bills, and removing one, handed it to her. "You take that," he said, "and tell your mother that I said she
should use it for whatever she wants." Jennie accepted the money with mingled feelings; it did not occur
to her to look and see how much it was. The great man was so near her,
the wonderful chamber in which he dwelt so impressive, that she
scarcely realized what she was doing. "Thank you," she said. "Is there any day you want your washing
called for?" she added. "Oh yes," he answered; "Monday--Monday evenings." She went away, and in a half reverie he closed the door behind her. The interest that he felt in these people was unusual. Poverty and
beauty certainly made up an affecting combination. He sat down in his
chair and gave himself over to the pleasant speculations which her
coming had aroused. Why should he not help them? "I'll find out where they live," he finally resolved. In the days that followed Jennie regularly came for the clothes. Senator Brander found himself more and more interested in her, and in
time he managed to remove from her mind that timidity and fear which
had made her feel uncomfortable in his presence. One thing which
helped toward this was his calling her by her first name. This began
with her third visit, and thereafter he used it with almost
unconscious frequency. It could scarcely be said that he did this in a fatherly spirit,
for he had little of that attitude toward any one. He felt exceedingly
young as he talked to this girl, and he often wondered whether it were
not possible for her to perceive and appreciate him on his youthful
side. As for Jennie, she was immensely taken with the comfort and luxury
surrounding this man, and subconsciously with the man himself, the
most attractive she had ever known. Everything he had was fine,
everything he did was gentle, distinguished, and considerate. From
some far source, perhaps some old German ancestors, she had inherited
an understanding and appreciation of all this. Life ought to be lived
as he lived it; the privilege of being generous particularly appealed
to her. Part of her attitude was due to that of her mother, in whose mind
sympathy was always a more potent factor than reason. For instance,
when she brought to her the ten dollars Mrs. Gerhardt was transported
with joy. "Oh," said Jennie, "I didn't know until I got outside that it was
so much. He said I should give it to you." Mrs. Gerhardt took it, and holding it loosely in her folded hands,
saw distinctly before her the tall Senator with his fine manners. "What a fine man he is!" she said. "He has a good heart." Frequently throughout the evening and the next day Mrs. Gerhardt
commented upon this wonderful treasure-trove, repeating again and
again how good he must be or how large must be his heart. When it came
to washing his clothes she almost rubbed them to pieces, feeling that
whatever she did she could scarcely do enough. Gerhardt was not to
know. He had such stern views about accepting money without earning it
that even in their distress, she would have experienced some
difficulty in getting him to take it. Consequently she said nothing,
but used it to buy bread and meat, and going as it did such a little
way, the sudden windfall was never noticed. Jennie, from now on, reflected this attitude toward the Senator,
and, feeling so grateful toward him, she began to talk more freely. They came to be on such good terms that he gave her a little leather
picture-case from his dresser which he had observed her admiring. Every time she came he found excuse to detain her, and soon discovered
that, for all her soft girlishness, there lay deep-seated in her a
conscious deprecation of poverty and a shame of having to own any
need. He honestly admired her for this, and, seeing that her clothes
were poor and her shoes worn, he began to wonder how he could help her
without offending. Not infrequently he thought to follow her some evening, and see for
himself what the condition of the family might be. He was a United
States Senator, however. The neighborhood they lived in must be very
poor. He stopped to consider, and for the time the counsels of
prudence prevailed. Consequently the contemplated visit was put
off. Early in December Senator Brander returned to Washington for three
weeks, and both Mrs. Gerhardt and Jennie were surprised to learn one
day that he had gone. Never had he given them less than two dollars a
week for his washing, and several times it had been five. He had not
realized, perhaps, what a breach his absence would make in their
finances. But there was nothing to do about it; they managed to pinch
along. Gerhardt, now better, searched for work at the various mills,
and finding nothing, procured a saw-buck and saw, and going from door
to door, sought for the privilege of sawing wood. There was not a
great deal of this to do, but he managed, by the most earnest labor to
earn two, and sometimes three, dollars a week. This added to what his
wife earned and what Sebastian gave was enough to keep bread in their
mouths, but scarcely more. It was at the opening of the joyous Christmas-time that the
bitterness of their poverty affected them most. The Germans love to
make a great display at Christmas. It is the one season of the year
when the fullness of their large family affection manifests itself. Warm in the appreciation of the joys of childhood, they love to see
the little ones enjoy their toys and games. Father Gerhardt at his
saw-buck during the weeks before Christmas thought of this very often. What would little Veronica not deserve after her long illness! How he
would have liked to give each of the children a stout pair of shoes,
the boys a warm cap, the girls a pretty hood. Toys and games and candy
they always had had before. He hated to think of the snow-covered
Christmas morning and no table richly piled with what their young
hearts would most desire. As for Mrs. Gerhardt, one could better imagine than describe her
feelings. She felt so keenly about it that she could hardly bring
herself to speak of the dreaded hour to her husband. She had managed
to lay aside three dollars in the hope of getting enough to buy a ton
of coal, and so put an end to poor George's daily pilgrimage to the
coal yard, but now as the Christmas week drew near she decided to use
it for gifts. Father Gerhardt was also secreting two dollars without
the knowledge of his wife, thinking that on Christmas Eve he could
produce it at a critical moment, and so relieve her maternal
anxiety. When the actual time arrived, however, there was very little to be
said for the comfort that they got out of the occasion. The whole city
was rife with Christmas atmosphere. Grocery stores and meat markets
were strung with holly. The toy shops and candy stores were radiant
with fine displays of everything that a self-respecting Santa Claus
should have about him. Both parents and children observed it
all--the former with serious thoughts of need and anxiety, the
latter with wild fancy and only partially suppressed longings. Frequently had Gerhardt said in their presence:

"Kriss Kringle is very poor this year. He hasn't so very much to
give." But no child, however poverty-stricken, could be made to believe
this. Every time after so saying he looked into their eyes, but in
spite of the warning, expectation flamed in them undiminished. Christmas coming on Tuesday, the Monday before there was no school. Before going to the hotel Mrs. Gerhardt had cautioned George that he
must bring enough coal from the yards to last over Christmas day. The
latter went at once with his two younger sisters, but there being a
dearth of good picking, it took them a long time to fill their
baskets, and by night they had gathered only a scanty supply. "Did you go for the coal?" asked Mrs. Gerhardt the first thing when
she returned from the hotel that evening. "Yes," said George. "Did you get enough for to-morrow?" "Yes," he replied, "I guess so." "Well, now, I'll go and look," she replied. Taking the lamp, they
went out into the woodshed where the coal was deposited. "Oh, my!" she exclaimed when she saw it; "why, that isn't near
enough. You must go right off and get some more." "Oh," said George, pouting his lips, "I don't want to go. Let Bass
go." Bass, who had returned promptly at a quarter-past six, was already
busy in the back bedroom washing and dressing preparatory to going
down-town. "No," said Mrs. Gerhardt. "Bass has worked hard all day. You must
go." "I don't want to," pouted George. "All right," said Mrs. Gerhardt, "maybe to-morrow you'll be without
a fire, and then what?" They went back to the house, but George's conscience was too
troubled to allow him to consider the case as closed. "Bass, you come, too," he called to his elder brother when he was
inside. "Go where?" said Bass. "To get some coal." "No," said the former, "I guess not. What do you take me for?" "Well, then, I'll not," said George, with an obstinate jerk of his
head. "Why didn't you get it up this afternoon?" questioned his brother
sharply; "you've had all day to do it." "Aw, I did try," said George. "We couldn't find enough. I can't get
any when there ain't any, can I?" "I guess you didn't try very hard," said the dandy. "What's the matter now?" asked Jennie, who, coming in after having
stopped at the grocer's for her mother, saw George with a solemn pout
on his face. "Oh, Bass won't go with me to get any coal?" "Didn't you get any this afternoon?" "Yes," said George, "but ma says I didn't get enough." "I'll go with you," said his sister. "Bass, will you come
along?" "No," said the young man, indifferently, "I won't." He was
adjusting his necktie and felt irritated. "There ain't any," said George, "unless we get it off the cars. There wasn't any cars where I was." "There are, too," exclaimed Bass. "There ain't," said George. "Oh, don't quarrel," said Jennie. "Get the baskets and let's go
right now before it gets too late." The other children, who had a fondness for their big sister, got
out the implements of supply--Veronica a basket, Martha and
William buckets, and George, a big clothes-basket, which he and Jennie
were to fill and carry between them. Bass, moved by his sister's
willingness and the little regard he still maintained for her, now
made a suggestion. "I'll tell you what you do, Jen," he said. "You go over there with
the kids to Eighth Street and wait around those cars. I'll be along in
a minute. When I come by don't any of you pretend to know me. Just you
say, 'Mister, won't you please throw us some coal down?' and then I'll
get up on the cars and pitch off enough to fill the baskets. D'ye
understand?" "All right," said Jennie, very much pleased. Out into the snowy night they went, and made their way to the
railroad tracks. At the intersection of the street and the broad
railroad yard were many heavily laden cars of bituminous coal newly
backed in. All of the children gathered within the shadow of one. While they were standing there, waiting the arrival of their brother,
the Washington Special arrived, a long, fine train with several of the
new style drawing-room cars, the big plate-glass windows shining and
the passengers looking out from the depths of their comfortable
chairs. The children instinctively drew back as it thundered past. "Oh, wasn't it long?" said George. "Wouldn't I like to be a brakeman, though," sighed William. Jennie, alone, kept silent, but to her particularly the suggestion
of travel and comfort had appealed. How beautiful life must be for the
rich! Sebastian now appeared in the distance, a mannish spring in his
stride, and with every evidence that he took himself seriously. He was
of that peculiar stubbornness and determination that had the children
failed to carry out his plan of procedure he would have gone
deliberately by and refused to help them at all. Martha, however, took the situation as it needed to be taken, and
piped out childishly, "Mister, won't you please throw us down some
coal?" Sebastian stopped abruptly, and looking sharply at them as though
he were really a stranger, exclaimed, "Why, certainly," and proceeded
to climb up on the car, from whence he cast down with remarkable
celerity more than enough chunks to fill their baskets. Then as though
not caring to linger any longer amid such plebeian company, he
hastened across the network of tracks and was lost to view. On their way home they encountered another gentleman, this time a
real one, with high hat and distinguished cape coat, whom Jennie
immediately recognized. This was the honorable Senator himself, newly
returned from Washington, and anticipating a very unprofitable
Christmas. He had arrived upon the express which had enlisted the
attention of the children, and was carrying his light grip for the
pleasure of it to the hotel. As he passed he thought that he
recognized Jennie. "Is that you, Jennie?" he said, and paused to be more certain. The latter, who had discovered him even more quickly than he had
her, exclaimed, "Oh, there is Mr. Brander!" Then, dropping her end of
the basket, with a caution to the children to take it right home, she
hurried away in the opposite direction. The Senator followed, vainly calling three or four times "Jennie! Jennie!" Losing hope of overtaking her, and suddenly recognizing, and
thereupon respecting, her simple, girlish shame, he stopped, and
turning back, decided to follow the children. Again he felt that same
sensation which he seemed always to get from this girl--the far
cry between her estate and his. It was something to be a Senator
to-night, here where these children were picking coal. What could the
joyous holiday of the morrow hold for them? He tramped along
sympathetically, an honest lightness coming into his step, and soon he
saw them enter the gateway of the low cottage. Crossing the street, he
stood in the weak shade of the snow-laden trees. The light was burning
with a yellow glow in a rear window. All about was the white snow. In
the woodshed he could hear the voices of the children, and once he
thought he detected the form of Mrs. Gerhardt. After a time another
form came shadow-like through the side gate. He knew who it was. It
touched him to the quick, and he bit his lip sharply to suppress any
further show of emotion. Then he turned vigorously on his heel and
walked away. The chief grocery of the city was conducted by one Manning, a
stanch adherent of Brander, and one who felt honored by the Senator's
acquaintance. To him at his busy desk came the Senator this same
night. "Manning," he said, "could I get you to undertake a little work for
me this evening?" "Why, certainly, Senator, certainly," said the grocery-man. "When
did you get back? Glad to see you. Certainly." "I want you to get everything together that would make a nice
Christmas for a family of eight--father and mother and six
children--Christmas tree, groceries, toys--you know what I
mean." "Certainly, certainly, Senator." "Never mind the cost now. Send plenty of everything. I'll give you
the address," and he picked up a note-book to write it. "Why, I'll be delighted, Senator," went on Mr. Manning, rather
affected himself. "I'll be delighted. You always were generous." "Here you are, Manning," said the Senator, grimly, from the mere
necessity of preserving his senatorial dignity. "Send everything at
once, and the bill to me." "I'll be delighted," was all the astonished and approving
grocery-man could say. The Senator passed out, but remembering the old people, visited a
clothier and shoe man, and, finding that he could only guess at what
sizes might be required, ordered the several articles with the
privilege of exchange. When his labors were over, he returned to his
room. "Carrying coal," he thought, over and over. "Really, it was very
thoughtless in me. I mustn't forget them any more." CHAPTER IV


The desire to flee which Jennie experienced upon seeing the Senator
again was attributable to what she considered the disgrace of her
position. She was ashamed to think that he, who thought so well of
her, should discover her doing so common a thing. Girl-like, she was
inclined to imagine that his interest in her depended upon something
else than her mere personality. When she reached home Mrs. Gerhardt had heard of her flight from
the other children. "What was the matter with you, anyhow?" asked George, when she came
in. "Oh, nothing," she answered, but immediately turned to her mother
and said, "Mr. Brander came by and saw us." "Oh, did he?" softly exclaimed her mother. "He's back then. What
made you run, though, you foolish girl?" "Well, I didn't want him to see me." "Well, maybe he didn't know you, anyhow," she said, with a certain
sympathy for her daughter's predicament. "Oh yes, he did, too," whispered Jennie. "He called after me three
or four times." Mrs. Gerhardt shook her head. "What is it?" said Gerhardt, who had been hearing the conversation
from the adjoining room, and now came out. "Oh, nothing," said the mother, who hated to explain the
significance which the Senator's personality had come to have in their
lives. "A man frightened them when they were bringing the coal." The arrival of the Christmas presents later in the evening threw
the household into an uproar of excitement. Neither Gerhardt nor the
mother could believe their eyes when a grocery wagon halted in front
of their cottage and a lusty clerk began to carry in the gifts. After
failing to persuade the clerk that he had made a mistake, the large
assortment of good things was looked over with very human glee. "Just you never mind," was the clerk's authoritative words. "I know
what I'm about. Gerhardt, isn't it? Well, you're the people." Mrs. Gerhardt moved about, rubbing her hands in her excitement, and
giving vent to an occasional "Well, isn't that nice now!" Gerhardt himself was melted at the thought of the generosity of the
unknown benefactor, and was inclined to lay it all to the goodness of
a great local mill owner, who knew him and wished him well. Mrs.
Gerhardt tearfully suspected the source, but said nothing. Jennie
knew, by instinct, the author of it all. The afternoon of the day after Christmas Brander encountered the
mother in the hotel, Jennie having been left at home to look after the
house. "How do you do, Mrs. Gerhardt," he exclaimed genially extending his
hand. "How did you enjoy your Christmas?" Poor Mrs. Gerhardt took it nervously; her eyes filled rapidly with
tears. "There, there," he said, patting her on the shoulder. "Don't cry. You mustn't forget to get my laundry to-day." "Oh no, sir," she returned, and would have said more had he not
walked away. From this on, Gerhardt heard continually of the fine Senator at the
hotel, how pleasant he was, and how much he paid for his washing. With
the simplicity of a German workingman, he was easily persuaded that
Mr. Brander must be a very great and a very good man. Jennie, whose feelings needed no encouragement in this direction,
was more than ever prejudiced in his favor. There was developing in her that perfection of womanhood, the full
mold of form, which could not help but attract any man. Already she
was well built, and tall for a girl. Had she been dressed in the
trailing skirts of a woman of fashion she would have made a fitting
companion for a man the height of the Senator. Her eyes were
wondrously clear and bright, her skin fair, and her teeth white and
even. She was clever, too, in a sensible way, and by no means
deficient in observation. All that she lacked was training and the
assurance of which the knowledge of utter dependency despoils one. But
the carrying of washing and the compulsion to acknowledge almost
anything as a favor put her at a disadvantage. Nowadays when she came to the hotel upon her semi-weekly errand
Senator Brander took her presence with easy grace, and to this she
responded. He often gave her little presents for herself, or for her
brothers and sisters, and he talked to her so unaffectedly that
finally the overawing sense of the great difference between them was
brushed away, and she looked upon him more as a generous friend than
as a distinguished Senator. He asked her once how she would like to go
to a seminary, thinking all the while how attractive she would be when
she came out. Finally, one evening, he called her to his side. "Come over here, Jennie," he said, "and stand by me." She came, and, moved by a sudden impulse, he took her hand. "Well, Jennie," he said, studying her face in a quizzical,
interrogative way, "what do you think of me, anyhow?" "Oh," she answered, looking consciously away, "I don't know. What
makes you ask me that?" "Oh yes, you do," he returned. "You have some opinion of me. Tell
me now, what is it?" "No, I haven't," she said, innocently. "Oh yes, you have," he went on, pleasantly, interested by her
transparent evasiveness. "You must think something of me. Now, what is
it?" "Do you mean do I like you?" she asked, frankly, looking down at
the big mop of black hair well streaked with gray which hung about his
forehead, and gave an almost lionine cast to his fine face. "Well, yes," he said, with a sense of disappointment. She was
barren of the art of the coquette. "Why, of course I like you," she replied, prettily. "Haven't you ever thought anything else about me?" he went on. "I think you're very kind," she went on, even more bashfully; she
realized now that he was still holding her hand. "Is that all?" he asked. "Well," she said, with fluttering eyelids, "isn't that enough?" He looked at her, and the playful, companionable directness of her
answering gaze thrilled him through and through. He studied her face
in silence while she turned and twisted, feeling, but scarcely
understanding, the deep import of his scrutiny. "Well," he said at last, "I think you're a fine girl. Don't you
think I'm a pretty nice man?" "Yes," said Jennie, promptly. He leaned back in his chair and laughed at the unconscious drollery
of her reply. She looked at him curiously, and smiled. "What made you laugh?" she inquired. "Oh, your answer" he returned. "I really ought not to laugh,
though. You don't appreciate me in the least. I don't believe you like
me at all." "But I do, though," she replied, earnestly. "I think you're so
good." Her eyes showed very plainly that she felt what she was
saying. "Well," he said, drawing her gently down to him; then, at the same
instant, he pressed his lips to her cheek. "Oh!" she cried, straightening up, at once startled and
frightened. It was a new note in their relationship. The senatorial quality
vanished in an instant. She recognized in him something that she had
not felt before. He seemed younger, too. She was a woman to him, and
he was playing the part of a lover. She hesitated, but not knowing
just what to do, did nothing at all. "Well," he said, "did I frighten you?" She looked at him, but moved by her underlying respect for this
great man, she said, with a smile, "Yes, you did." "I did it because I like you so much." She meditated upon this a moment, and then said, "I think I'd
better be going." "Now then," he pleaded, "are you going to run away because of
that?" "No," she said, moved by a curious feeling of ingratitude; "but I
ought to be going. They'll be wondering where I am." "You're sure you're not angry about it?" "No," she replied, and with more of a womanly air than she had ever
shown before. It was a novel experience to be in so authoritative a
position. It was so remarkable that it was somewhat confusing to both
of them. "You're my girl, anyhow," the Senator said, rising. "I'm going to
take care of you in the future." Jennie heard this, and it pleased her. He was so well fitted, she
thought, to do wondrous things; he was nothing less than a veritable
magician. She looked about her and the thought of coming into such a
life and such an atmosphere was heavenly. Not that she fully
understood his meaning, however. He meant to be good and generous, and
to give her fine things. Naturally she was happy. She took up the
package that she had come for, not seeing or feeling the incongruity
of her position, while he felt it as a direct reproof. "She ought not to carry that," he thought. A great wave of sympathy
swept over him. He took her cheeks between his hands, this time in a
superior and more generous way. "Never mind, little girl," he said. "You won't have to do this always. I'll see what I can do." The outcome of this was simply a more sympathetic relationship
between them. He did not hesitate to ask her to sit beside him on the
arm of his chair the next time she came, and to question her
intimately about the family's condition and her own desires. Several
times he noticed that she was evading his questions, particularly in
regard to what her father was doing. She was ashamed to own that he
was sawing wood. Fearing lest something more serious was impending, he
decided to go out some day and see for himself. This he did when a convenient morning presented itself and his
other duties did not press upon him. It was three days before the
great fight in the Legislature began which ended in his defeat. Nothing could be done in these few remaining days. So he took his cane
and strolled forth, coming to the cottage in the course of a half
hour, and knocked boldly at the door. Mrs. Gerhardt opened it. "Good-morning," he said, cheerily; then, seeing her hesitate, he
added, "May I come in?" The good mother, who was all but overcome by his astonishing
presence, wiped her hands furtively upon her much-mended apron, and,
seeing that he waited for a reply, said:

"Oh yes. Come right in." She hurried forward, forgetting to close the door, and, offering
him a chair, asked him to be seated. Brander, feeling sorry that he was the occasion of so much
confusion, said: "Don't trouble yourself, Mrs. Gerhardt. I was passing
and thought I'd come in. How is your husband?" "He's well, thank you," returned the mother. "He's out working
to-day." "Then he has found employment?" "Yes, sir," said Mrs. Gerhardt, who hesitated, like Jennie, to say
what it was. "The children are all well now, and in school, I hope?" "Yes," replied Mrs. Gerhardt. She had now unfastened her apron, and
was nervously turning it in her lap. "That's good, and where is Jennie?" The latter, who had been ironing, had abandoned the board and had
concealed herself in the bedroom, where she was busy tidying herself
in the fear that her mother would not have the forethought to say that
she was out, and so let her have a chance for escape. "She's here," returned the mother. "I'll call her." "What did you tell him I was here for?" said Jennie, weakly. "What could I do?" asked the mother. Together they hesitated while the Senator surveyed the room. He
felt sorry to think that such deserving people must suffer so; he
intended, in a vague way, to ameliorate their condition if
possible. "Good-morning," the Senator said to Jennie, when finally she came
hesitatingly into the room. "How do you do to-day?" Jennie came forward, extending her hand and blushing. She found
herself so much disturbed by this visit that she could hardly find
tongue to answer his questions. "I thought," he said, "I'd come out and find where you live. This
is a quite comfortable house. How many rooms have you?" "Five," said Jennie. "You'll have to excuse the looks this morning. We've been ironing, and it's all upset." "I know," said Brander, gently. "Don't you think I understand,
Jennie? You mustn't feel nervous about me." She noticed the comforting, personal tone he always used with her
when she was at his room, and it helped to subdue her flustered
senses. "You mustn't think it anything if I come here occasionally. I
intend to come. I want to meet your father." "Oh," said Jennie, "he's out to-day." While they were talking, however, the honest woodcutter was coming
in at the gate with his buck and saw. Brander saw him, and at once
recognized him by a slight resemblance to his daughter. "There he is now, I believe," he said. "Oh, is he?" said Jennie, looking out. Gerhardt, who was given to speculation these days, passed by the
window without looking up. He put his wooden buck down, and, hanging
his saw on a nail on the side of the house, came in. "Mother," he called, in German, and, then not seeing her, he came
to the door of the front room and looked in. Brander arose and extended his hand. The knotted and weather-beaten
German came forward, and took it with a very questioning expression of
countenance. "This is my father, Mr. Brander," said Jennie, all her diffidence
dissolved by sympathy. "This is the gentleman from the hotel, papa,
Mr. Brander." "What's the name?" said the German, turning his head. "Brander," said the Senator. "Oh yes," he said, with a considerable German accent. "Since I had the fever I don't hear good. My wife, she spoke to me
of you." "Yes," said the Senator, "I thought I'd come out and make your
acquaintance. You have quite a family." "Yes," said the father, who was conscious of his very poor garments
and anxious to get away. "I have six children--all young. She's
the oldest girl." Mrs. Gerhardt now came back, and Gerhardt, seeing his chance, said
hurriedly:

"Well, if you'll excuse me, I'll go. I broke my saw, and so I had
to stop work." "Certainly," said Brander, graciously, realizing now why Jennie had
never wanted to explain. He half wished that she were courageous
enough not to conceal anything. "Well, Mrs. Gerhardt," he said, when the mother was stiffly seated,
"I want to tell you that you mustn't look on me as a stranger. Hereafter I want you to keep me informed of how things are going with
you. Jennie won't always do it." Jennie smiled quietly. Mrs. Gerhardt only rubbed her hands. "Yes," she answered, humbly grateful. They talked for a few minutes, and then the Senator rose. "Tell your husband," he said, "to come and see me next Monday at my
office in the hotel. I want to do something for him." "Thank you," faltered Mrs. Gerhardt. "I'll not stay any longer now," he added. "Don't forget to have him
come." "Oh, he'll come," she returned. Adjusting a glove on one hand, he extended the other to Jennie. "Here is your finest treasure, Mrs. Gerhardt," he said. "I think
I'll take her." "Well, I don't know," said her mother, "whether I could spare her
or not." "Well," said the Senator, going toward the door, and giving Mrs.
Gerhardt his hand, "good-morning." He nodded and walked out, while a half-dozen neighbors, who had
observed his entrance, peeked from behind curtains and drawn blinds at
the astonishing sight. "Who can that be, anyhow?" was the general query. "See what he gave me," said the innocent mother to her daughter the
moment he had closed the door. It was a ten-dollar bill. He had placed it softly in her hand as he
said good-by. CHAPTER V


Having been led by circumstances into an attitude of obligation
toward the Senator, it was not unnatural that Jennie should become
imbued with a most generous spirit of appreciation for everything he
had done and now continued to do. The Senator gave her father a letter
to a local mill owner, who saw that he received something to do. It
was not much, to be sure, a mere job as night-watchman, but it helped,
and old Gerhardt's gratitude was extravagant. Never was there such a
great, such a good man! Nor was Mrs. Gerhardt overlooked. Once Brander sent her a dress,
and at another time a shawl. All these benefactions were made in a
spirit of mingled charity and self-gratification, but to Mrs. Gerhardt
they glowed with but one motive. Senator Brander was good-hearted. As for Jennie, he drew nearer to her in every possible way, so that
at last she came to see him in a light which would require
considerable analysis to make clear. This fresh, young soul, however,
had too much innocence and buoyancy to consider for a moment the
world's point of view. Since that one notable and halcyon visit upon
which he had robbed her her original shyness, and implanted a tender
kiss upon her cheek, they had lived in a different atmosphere. Jennie
was his companion now, and as he more and more unbended, and even
joyously flung aside the habiliments of his dignity, her perception of
him grew clearer. They laughed and chatted in a natural way, and he
keenly enjoyed this new entrance into the radiant world of youthful
happiness. One thing that disturbed him, however, was the occasional thought,
which he could not repress, that he was not doing right. Other people
must soon discover that he was not confining himself strictly to
conventional relations with this washer-woman's daughter. He suspected
that the housekeeper was not without knowledge that Jennie almost
invariably lingered from a quarter to three-quarters of an hour
whenever she came for or returned his laundry. He knew that it might
come to the ears of the hotel clerks, and so, in a general way, get
about town and work serious injury, but the reflection did not cause
him to modify his conduct. Sometimes he consoled himself with the
thought that he was not doing her any actual harm, and at other times
he would argue that he could not put this one delightful tenderness
out of his life. Did he not wish honestly to do her much good? He thought of these things occasionally, and decided that he could
not stop. The self-approval which such a resolution might bring him
was hardly worth the inevitable pain of the abnegation. He had not so
very many more years to live. Why die unsatisfied? One evening he put his arm around her and strained her to his
breast. Another time he drew her to his knee, and told her of his life
at Washington. Always now he had a caress and a kiss for her, but it
was still in a tentative, uncertain way. He did not want to reach for
her soul too deeply. Jennie enjoyed it all innocently. Elements of fancy and novelty
entered into her life. She was an unsophisticated creature, emotional,
totally inexperienced in the matter of the affections, and yet mature
enough mentally to enjoy the attentions of this great man who had thus
bowed from his high position to make friends with her. One evening she pushed his hair back from his forehead as she stood
by his chair, and, finding nothing else to do, took out his watch. The
great man thrilled as he looked at her pretty innocence. "Would you like to have a watch, too?" he asked. "Yes, indeed, I would," said Jennie, with a deep breath. The next day he stopped as he was passing a jewelry store and
bought one. It was gold, and had pretty ornamented hands. "Jennie," he said, when she came the next time, "I want to show you
something. See what time it is by my watch." Jennie drew out the watch from his waistcoat pocket and started in
surprise. "This isn't your watch!" she exclaimed, her face full of innocent
wonder. "No," he said, delighted with his little deception. "It's
yours." "Mine!" exclaimed Jennie. "Mine! Oh, isn't it lovely!" "Do you think so?" he said. Her delight touched and pleased him immensely. Her face shone with
light and her eyes fairly danced. "That's yours," he said. "See that you wear it now, and don't lose
it." "You're so good!" she exclaimed. "No," he said, but he held her at arm's length by the waist, to
make up his mind what his reward should be. Slowly he drew her toward
him until, when very close, she put her arms about his neck, and laid
her cheek in gratitude against his own. This was the quintessence of
pleasure for him. He felt as he had been longing to feel for
years. The progress of his idyl suffered a check when the great senatorial
fight came on in the Legislature. Attacked by a combination of rivals,
Brander was given the fight of his life. To his amazement he
discovered that a great railroad corporation, which had always been
friendly, was secretly throwing its strength in behalf of an already
too powerful candidate. Shocked by this defection, he was thrown
alternately into the deepest gloom and into paroxysms of wrath. These
slings of fortune, however lightly he pretended to receive them, never
failed to lacerate him. It had been long since he had suffered a
defeat--too long. During this period Jennie received her earliest lesson in the
vagaries of men. For two weeks she did not even see him, and one
evening, after an extremely comfortless conference with his leader, he
met her with the most chilling formality. When she knocked at his door
he only troubled to open it a foot, exclaiming almost harshly: "I
can't bother about the clothes to-night. Come tomorrow." Jennie retreated, shocked and surprised by this reception. She did
not know what to think of it. He was restored on the instant to his
far-off, mighty throne, and left to rule in peace. Why should he not
withdraw the light of his countenance if it pleased him. But
why--

A day or two later he repented mildly, but had no time to readjust
matters. His washing was taken and delivered with considerable
formality, and he went on toiling forgetfully, until at last he was
miserably defeated by two votes. Astounded by this result, he lapsed
into gloomy dejection of soul. What was he to do now? Into this atmosphere came Jennie, bringing with her the lightness
and comfort of her own hopeful disposition. Nagged to desperation by
his thoughts, Brander first talked to her to amuse himself; but soon
his distress imperceptibly took flight; he found himself actually
smiling. "Ah, Jennie," he said, speaking to her as he might have done to a
child, "youth is on your side. You possess the most valuable thing in
life." "Do I?" "Yes, but you don't realize it. You never will until it is too
late." "I love that girl," he thought to himself that night. "I wish I
could have her with me always." But fortune had another fling for him to endure. It got about the
hotel that Jennie was, to use the mildest expression, conducting
herself strangely. A girl who carries washing must expect criticism if
anything not befitting her station is observed in her apparel. Jennie
was seen wearing the gold watch. Her mother was informed by the
housekeeper of the state of things. "I thought I'd speak to you about it," she said. "People are
talking. You'd better not let your daughter go to his room for the
laundry." Mrs. Gerhardt was too astonished and hurt for utterance. Jennie had
told her nothing, but even now she did not believe there was anything
to tell. The watch had been both approved of and admired by her. She
had not thought that it was endangering her daughter's reputation. Going home she worried almost incessantly, and talked with Jennie
about it. The latter did not admit the implication that things had
gone too far. In fact, she did not look at it in that light. She did
not own, it is true, what really had happened while she was visiting
the Senator. "It's so terrible that people should begin to talk!" said her
mother. "Did you really stay so long in the room?" "I don't know," returned Jennie, compelled by her conscience to
admit at least part of the truth. "Perhaps I did." "He has never said anything out of the way to you, has he?" "No," answered her daughter, who did not attach any suspicion of
evil to what had passed between them. If the mother had only gone a little bit further she might have
learned more, but she was only too glad, for her own peace of mind, to
hush the matter up. People were slandering a good man, that she knew. Jennie had been the least bit indiscreet. People were always so ready
to talk. How could the poor girl, amid such unfortunate circumstances,
do otherwise than she did. It made her cry to think of it. The result of it all was that she decided to get the washing
herself. 