

E-text prepared by Kenneth David Cooper
and revised by Joseph E. Loewenstein, M.D. Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this file
      which includes the 64 illustrations by George Housman Thomas
      from the First Edition (Smith, Elder and Co., 1867). See 3045-h.htm or 3045-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/3045/3045-h/3045-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/3045/3045-h.zip)





THE LAST CHRONICLE OF BARSET

by

ANTHONY TROLLOPE

First published in monthly installments from December 1, 1866, to
July 6, 1867, and in book form in 1867


[Illustration: Mr. Crawley before the Magistrates. (Frontispiece)]






CONTENTS

         I. How Did He Get It? II. By Heavens He Had Better Not! III. The Archdeacon's Threat
        IV. The Clergyman's House at Hogglestock
         V. What the World Thought About It
        VI. Grace Crawley
       VII. Miss Prettyman's Private Room
      VIII. Mr. Crawley Is Taken to Silverbridge
        IX. Grace Crawley Goes to Allington
         X. Dinner at Framley Court
        XI. The Bishop Sends His Inhibition
       XII. Mr. Crawley Seeks for Sympathy
      XIII. The Bishop's Angel
       XIV. Major Grantly Consults a Friend
        XV. Up in London
       XVI. Down at Allington
      XVII. Mr. Crawley Is Summoned to Barchester
     XVIII. The Bishop of Barchester Is Crushed
       XIX. Where Did It Come From? XX. What Mr. Walker Thought About It
       XXI. Mr. Robarts on His Embassy
      XXII. Major Grantly at Home
     XXIII. Miss Lily Dale's Resolution
      XXIV. Mrs. Dobbs Broughton's Dinner-party
       XXV. Miss Madalina Demolines
      XXVI. The Picture
     XXVII. A Hero at Home
    XXVIII. Showing How Major Grantly Took a Walk
      XXIX. Miss Lily Dale's Logic
       XXX. Showing What Major Grantly Did After His Walk
      XXXI. Showing How Major Grantly Returned to Guestwick
     XXXII. Mr. Toogood
    XXXIII. The Plumstead Foxes
     XXXIV. Mrs. Proudie Sends for Her Lawyer
      XXXV. Lily Dale Writes Two Words in Her Book
     XXXVI. Grace Crawley Returns Home
    XXXVII. Hook Court
   XXXVIII. Jael
     XXXIX. A New Flirtation
        XL. Mr. Toogood's Ideas About Society
       XLI. Grace Crawley at Home
      XLII. Mr. Toogood Travels Professionally
     XLIII. Mr. Crosbie Goes into the City
      XLIV. "I Suppose I Must Let You Have It"
       XLV. Lily Dale Goes to London
      XLVI. The Bayswater Romance
     XLVII. Dr. Tempest at the Palace
    XLVIII. The Softness of Sir Raffle Buffle
      XLIX. Near the Close
         L. Lady Lufton's Proposition
        LI. Mrs. Dobbs Broughton Piles Her Fagots
       LII. Why Don't You Have an "It" for Yourself? LIII. Rotten Row
       LIV. The Clerical Commission
        LV. Framley Parsonage
       LVI. The Archdeacon Goes to Framley
      LVII. A Double Pledge
     LVIII. The Cross-grainedness of Men
       LIX. A Lady Presents Her Compliments to Miss L. D.
        LX. The End of Jael and Sisera
       LXI. "It's Dogged as Does It"
      LXII. Mr. Crawley's Letter to the Dean
     LXIII. Two Visitors to Hogglestock
      LXIV. The Tragedy in Hook Court
       LXV. Miss Van Siever Makes Her Choice
      LXVI. Requiescat in Pace
     LXVII. In Memoriam
    LXVIII. The Obstinacy of Mr. Crawley
      LXIX. Mr. Crawley's Last Appearance in His Own Pulpit
       LXX. Mrs. Arabin Is Caught
      LXXI. Mr. Toogood at Silverbridge
     LXXII. Mr. Toogood at "The Dragon of Wantly"
    LXXIII. There Is Comfort at Plumstead
     LXXIV. The Crawleys Are Informed
      LXXV. Madalina's Heart Is Bleeding
     LXXVI. I Think He Is Light of Heart
    LXXVII. The Shattered Tree
   LXXVIII. The Arabins Return to Barchester
     LXXIX. Mr. Crawley Speaks of His Coat
      LXXX. Miss Demolines Desires to Become a Finger-post
     LXXXI. Barchester Cloisters
    LXXXII. The Last Scene at Hogglestock
   LXXXIII. Mr. Crawley Is Conquered
    LXXXIV. Conclusion



TITLED ILLUSTRATIONS

   Mr. Crawley before the Magistrates. Frontispiece
   Mr. and Mrs. Crawley. Chapter I
   "I love you as though you were my own,"
      said the Schoolmistress. Chapter VI
   "A convicted thief," repeated Mrs. Proudie. Chapter XI
   "Speak out, Dan." Chapter XII
   Grace Crawley is introduced to Squire Dale. Chapter XVI
   Farmer Mangle and Mr. Crawley. Chapter XVII
   "She's more like Eleanor than any one else." Chapter XXII
   "I am very glad to have the opportunity
      of shaking hands with you." Chapter XXIV
   "What do you think of it, Mrs. Broughton?" Chapter XXVI
   Squire Dale and Major Grantly. Chapter XXVIII
   "Never mind Mr. Henry." Chapter XXXIII
   Lily wishes that they might swear
      to be Brother and Sister. Chapter XXXV
   She read the beginning--"Dearest Grace." Chapter XXXVI
   "Mamma, I've got something to tell you." Chapter XLI
   Mr. Toogood and the old Waiter. Chapter XLII
   They pronounced her to be very much
      like a Lady. Chapter XLV
   "As right as a trivet, Uncle." Chapter XLVIII
   Posy and her Grandpapa. Chapter XLIX
   Mrs. Dobbs Broughton piles her Fagots. Chapter LI
   "Because of Papa's disgrace." Chapter LV
   "But it will never pass away," said Grace. Chapter LVII
   "Honour thy Father,--that thy days
      may be long in the Land." Chapter LVIII
   "It's dogged as does it." Chapter LXI
   Mrs. Proudie's Emissary. Chapter LXIII
   "You do not know what starving is, my dear." Chapter LXV
   "They will come to hear a ruined man
      declare his own ruin." Chapter LXIX
   "No sale after all?" Chapter LXXI
   "These are the young Hogglestockians,
      are they?" Chapter LXXIV
   The last Denial. Chapter LXXVII
   "What is it that I behold?" Chapter LXXX
   "Peradventure he signifies his Consent." Chapter LXXXII




CHAPTER I. HOW DID HE GET IT? [Illustration]

"I can never bring myself to believe it, John," said Mary Walker,
the pretty daughter of Mr. George Walker, attorney of Silverbridge. Walker and Winthrop was the name of the firm, and they were
respectable people, who did all the solicitors' business that had
to be done in that part of Barsetshire on behalf of the Crown, were
employed on the local business of the Duke of Omnium who is great in
those parts, and altogether held their heads up high, as provincial
lawyers often do. They,--the Walkers,--lived in a great brick
house in the middle of the town, gave dinners, to which the county
gentlemen not unfrequently condescended to come, and in a mild way
led the fashion in Silverbridge. "I can never bring myself to believe
it, John," said Miss Walker. "You'll have to bring yourself to believe it," said John, without
taking his eyes from his book. "A clergyman,--and such a clergyman too!" "I don't see that that has anything to do with it." And as he now
spoke, John did take his eyes off his book. "Why should not a
clergyman turn thief as well as anybody else? You girls always seem
to forget that clergymen are only men after all." "Their conduct is likely to be better than that of other men, I
think." "I deny it utterly," said John Walker. "I'll undertake to say that
at this moment there are more clergymen in debt in Barsetshire than
there are either lawyers or doctors. This man has always been in
debt. Since he has been in the county I don't think he has ever been
able to show his face in the High Street of Silverbridge." "John, that is saying more than you have a right to say," said Mrs.
Walker. "Why, mother, this very cheque was given to a butcher who had
threatened a few days before to post bills all about the county,
giving an account of the debt that was due to him, if the money was
not paid at once." "More shame for Mr. Fletcher," said Mary. "He has made a fortune as
butcher in Silverbridge." "What has that to do with it? Of course a man likes to have his
money. He had written three times to the bishop, and he had sent
a man over to Hogglestock to get his little bill settled six days
running. You see he got it at last. Of course, a tradesman must look
for his money." "Mamma, do you think that Mr. Crawley stole the cheque?" Mary, as she
asked the question, came and stood over her mother, looking at her
with anxious eyes. "I would rather give no opinion, my dear." "But you must think something when everybody is talking about it,
mamma." "Of course my mother thinks he did," said John, going back to his
book. "It is impossible that she should think otherwise." "That is not fair, John," said Mrs. Walker; "and I won't have you
fabricate thoughts for me, or put the expression of them into my
mouth. The whole affair is very painful, and as your father is
engaged in the inquiry, I think that the less said about the matter
in this house the better. I am sure that that would be your father's
feeling." "Of course I should say nothing about it before him," said Mary. "I
know that papa does not wish to have it talked about. But how is one
to help thinking about such a thing? It would be so terrible for all
of us who belong to the Church." "I do not see that at all," said John. "Mr. Crawley is not more than
any other man just because he's a clergyman. I hate all that kind of
clap-trap. There are a lot of people here in Silverbridge who think
the matter shouldn't be followed up, just because the man is in a
position which makes the crime more criminal in him than it would be
in another." "But I feel sure that Mr. Crawley has committed no crime at all,"
said Mary. "My dear," said Mrs. Walker, "I have just said that I would rather
you would not talk about it. Papa will be in directly." "I won't, mamma;--only--"

"Only! yes; just only!" said John. "She'd go on till dinner if any
one would stay to hear her." "You've said twice as much as I have, John." But John had left the
room before his sister's last words could reach him. "You know, mamma, it is quite impossible not to help thinking of it,"
said Mary. "I dare say it is, my dear." "And when one knows the people it does make it so dreadful." "But do you know them? I never spoke to Mr. Crawley in my life, and
I do not think I ever saw her." "I knew Grace very well,--when she used to come first to Miss
Prettyman's school." "Poor girl. I pity her." "Pity her! Pity is no word for it, mamma. My heart bleeds for them. And yet I do not believe for a moment that he stole the cheque. How
can it be possible? For though he may have been in debt because they
have been so very, very poor; yet we all know that he has been an
excellent clergyman. When the Robartses were dining here last, I
heard Mrs. Robarts say that for piety and devotion to his duties she
had hardly ever seen any one equal to him. And the Robartses know
more of them than anybody." "They say that the dean is his great friend." "What a pity it is that the Arabins should be away just now when he
is in such trouble." And in this way the mother and daughter went
on discussing the question of the clergyman's guilt in spite of Mrs.
Walker's previously expressed desire that nothing more might be said
about it. But Mrs. Walker, like many other mothers, was apt to be
more free in converse with her daughter than she was with her son. While they were thus talking the father came in from his office, and
then the subject was dropped. He was a man between fifty and sixty
years of age, with grey hair, rather short, and somewhat corpulent,
but still gifted with that amount of personal comeliness which
comfortable position and the respect of others will generally seem to
give. A man rarely carries himself meanly, whom the world holds high
in esteem. "I am very tired, my dear," said Mr. Walker. "You look tired. Come and sit down for a few minutes before you
dress. Mary, get your father's slippers." Mary instantly ran to the
door. "Thanks, my darling," said the father. And then he whispered to his
wife, as soon as Mary was out of hearing, "I fear that unfortunate
man is guilty. I fear he is! I fear he is!" "Oh, heavens! what will become of them?" "What indeed? She has been with me to-day." "Has she? And what could you say to her?" "I told her at first that I could not see her, and begged her not to
speak to me about it. I tried to make her understand that she should
go to some one else. But it was of no use." "And how did it end?" "I asked her to go in to you, but she declined. She said you could do
nothing for her." "And does she think her husband guilty?" "No, indeed. She think him guilty! Nothing on earth,--or from heaven
either, as I take it, would make her suppose it to be possible. She
came to me simply to tell me how good he was." "I love her for that," said Mrs. Walker. "So did I. But what is the good of loving her? Thank you, dearest. I'll get your slippers for you some day, perhaps." The whole county was astir in this matter of this alleged guilt of
the Reverend Josiah Crawley,--the whole county, almost as keenly as
the family of Mr. Walker, of Silverbridge. The crime laid to his
charge was the theft of a cheque for twenty pounds, which he was said
to have stolen out of a pocket-book left or dropped in his house, and
to have passed as money into the hands of one Fletcher, a butcher
of Silverbridge, to whom he was indebted. Mr. Crawley was in those
days the perpetual curate of Hogglestock, a parish in the northern
extremity of East Barsetshire; a man known by all who knew anything
of him to be very poor,--an unhappy, moody, disappointed man, upon
whom the troubles of the world always seemed to come with a double
weight. But he had ever been respected as a clergyman, since his
old friend Mr. Arabin, the dean of Barchester, had given him the
small incumbency which he now held. Though moody, unhappy, and
disappointed, he was a hard-working, conscientious pastor among
the poor people with whom his lot was cast; for in the parish of
Hogglestock there resided only a few farmers higher in degree than
field labourers, brickmakers, and such like. Mr. Crawley had now
passed some ten years of his life at Hogglestock; and during those
years he had worked very hard to do his duty, struggling to teach the
people around him perhaps too much of the mystery, but something also
of the comfort, of religion. That he had become popular in his parish
cannot be said of him. He was not a man to make himself popular in
any position. I have said that he was moody and disappointed. He was
even worse than this; he was morose, sometimes almost to insanity. There had been days in which even his wife had found it impossible
to deal with him otherwise than as with an acknowledged lunatic. And
this was known among the farmers, who talked about their clergyman
among themselves as though he were a madman. But among the very poor,
among the brickmakers of Hoggle End,--a lawless, drunken, terribly
rough lot of humanity,--he was held in high respect; for they knew
that he lived hardly, as they lived; that he worked hard, as they
worked; and that the outside world was hard to him, as it was to
them; and there had been an apparent sincerity of godliness about the
man, and a manifest struggle to do his duty in spite of the world's
ill-usage, which had won its way even with the rough; so that Mr.
Crawley's name had stood high with many in his parish, in spite of
the unfortunate peculiarity of his disposition. This was the man who
was now accused of stealing a cheque for twenty pounds. But before the circumstances of the alleged theft are stated, a word
or two must be said as to Mr. Crawley's family. It is declared that a
good wife is a crown to her husband, but Mrs. Crawley had been much
more than a crown to him. As had regarded all the inner life of the
man,--all that portion of his life which had not been passed in the
pulpit or in pastoral teaching,--she had been crown, throne, and
sceptre all in one. That she had endured with him and on his behalf
the miseries of poverty, and the troubles of a life which had known
no smiles, is perhaps not to be alleged as much to her honour. She had joined herself to him for better or worse, and it was her
manifest duty to bear such things; wives always have to bear them,
knowing when they marry that they must take their chance. Mr. Crawley
might have been a bishop, and Mrs. Crawley, when she married him,
perhaps thought it probable that such would be his fortune. Instead
of that he was now, just as he was approaching his fiftieth year, a
perpetual curate, with an income of one hundred and thirty pounds
per annum,--and a family. That had been Mrs. Crawley's luck in life,
and of course she bore it. But she had also done much more than
this. She had striven hard to be contented, or, rather, to appear
to be contented, when he had been most wretched and most moody. She had struggled to conceal from him her own conviction as to his
half-insanity, treating him at the same time with the respect due
to an honoured father of a family, and with the careful measured
indulgence fit for a sick and wayward child. In all the terrible
troubles of their life her courage had been higher than his. The
metal of which she was made had been tempered to a steel which was
very rare and fine, but the rareness and fineness of which he had
failed to appreciate. He had often told her that she was without
pride, because she had stooped to receive from others, on his behalf
and on behalf of her children, things which were very needful, but
which she could not buy. He had told her that she was a beggar, and
that it was better to starve than to beg. She had borne the rebuke
without a word in reply, and had then begged again for him, and had
endured the starvation herself. Nothing in their poverty had, for
years past, been a shame to her; but every accident of their poverty
was still, and ever had been, a living disgrace to him. [Illustration: Mr. and Mrs. Crawley.] They had had many children, and three were still alive. Of the
eldest, Grace Crawley, we shall hear much in the coming story. She
was at this time nineteen years old, and there were those who said
that, in spite of her poverty, her shabby outward apparel, and a
certain thin, unfledged, unrounded form of person, a want of fulness
in the lines of her figure, she was the prettiest girl in that part
of the world. She was living now at a school in Silverbridge, where
for the last year she had been a teacher; and there were many in
Silverbridge who declared that very bright prospects were opening to
her,--that young Major Grantly of Cosby Lodge, who, though a widower
with a young child, was the cynosure of all female eyes in and
round Silverbridge, had found beauty in her thin face, and that
Grace Crawley's fortune was made in the teeth, as it were, of the
prevailing ill-fortune of her family. Bob Crawley, who was two years
younger, was now at Marlbro' School, from whence it was intended that
he should proceed to Cambridge, and be educated there at the expense
of his godfather, Dean Arabin. In this also the world saw a stroke
of good luck. But then nothing was lucky to Mr. Crawley. Bob, indeed,
who had done very well at school, might do well at Cambridge,--might
do great things there. But Mr. Crawley would almost have preferred
that the boy should work in the fields, than that he should be
educated in a manner so manifestly eleemosynary. And then his
clothes! How was he to be provided with clothes fit either for school
or for college? But the dean and Mrs. Crawley between them managed
this, leaving Mr. Crawley very much in the dark, as Mrs. Crawley was
in the habit of leaving him. Then there was a younger daughter, Jane,
still at home, who passed her life between her mother's work-table
and her father's Greek, mending linen and learning to scan
iambics,--for Mr. Crawley in his early days had been a ripe scholar. And now there had come upon them all this terribly-crushing disaster. That poor Mr. Crawley had gradually got himself into a mess of debt
at Silverbridge, from which he was quite unable to extricate himself,
was generally known by all the world both of Silverbridge and
Hogglestock. To a great many it was known that Dean Arabin had
paid money for him, very much contrary to his own consent, and
that he had quarrelled, or attempted to quarrel, with the dean in
consequence,--had so attempted, although the money had in part passed
through his own hands. There had been one creditor, Fletcher, the
butcher of Silverbridge, who had of late been specially hard upon
poor Crawley. This man, who had not been without good nature in his
dealings, had heard stories of the dean's good-will and such like,
and had loudly expressed his opinion that the perpetual curate of
Hogglestock would show a higher pride in allowing himself to be
indebted to a rich brother clergyman, than in remaining under thrall
to a butcher. And thus a rumour had grown up. And then the butcher
had written repeated letters to the bishop,--to Bishop Proudie of
Barchester, who had at first caused his chaplain to answer them,
and had told Mr. Crawley somewhat roundly what was his opinion of a
clergyman who eat meat and did not pay for it. But nothing that the
bishop could say or do enabled Mr. Crawley to pay the butcher. It was
very grievous to such a man as Mr. Crawley to receive these letters
from such a man as Bishop Proudie; but the letters came, and made
festering wounds, but then there was an end of them. And at last
there had come forth from the butcher's shop a threat that if the
money were not paid by a certain date, printed bills should be posted
about the county. All who heard of this in Silverbridge were very
angry with Mr. Fletcher, for no one there had ever known a tradesman
to take such a step before; but Fletcher swore that he would
persevere, and defended himself by showing that six or seven months
since, in the spring of the year, Mr. Crawley had been paying money
in Silverbridge, but had paid none to him,--to him who had been not
only his earliest, but his most enduring creditor. "He got money
from the dean in March," said Mr. Fletcher to Mr. Walker, "and he
paid twelve pounds ten to Green, and seventeen pounds to Grobury,
the baker." It was that seventeen pounds to Grobury, the baker, for
flour, which made the butcher so fixedly determined to smite the
poor clergyman hip and thigh. "And he paid money to Hall, and to Mrs.
Holt, and to a deal more; but he never came near my shop. If he had
even shown himself, I would not have said so much about it." And then
a day before the date named, Mrs. Crawley had come to Silverbridge,
and had paid the butcher twenty pounds in four five-pound notes. So
far Fletcher the butcher had been successful. Some six weeks after this, inquiry began to be made as to a certain
cheque for twenty pounds drawn by Lord Lufton on his bankers in
London, which cheque had been lost early in the spring by Mr. Soames,
Lord Lufton's man of business in Barsetshire, together with a
pocket-book in which it had been folded. This pocket-book Soames had
believed himself to have left at Mr. Crawley's house, and had gone
so far, even at the time of the loss, as to express his absolute
conviction that he had so left it. He was in the habit of paying a
rentcharge to Mr. Crawley on behalf of Lord Lufton, amounting to
twenty pounds four shillings, every half-year. Lord Lufton held
the large tithes of Hogglestock, and paid annually a sum of forty
pounds eight shillings to the incumbent. This amount was, as a rule,
remitted punctually by Mr. Soames through the post. On the occasion
now spoken of, he had had some reason for visiting Hogglestock, and
had paid the money personally to Mr. Crawley. Of so much there was
no doubt. But he had paid it by a cheque drawn by himself on his
own bankers at Barchester, and that cheque had been cashed in the
ordinary way on the next morning. On returning to his own house in
Barchester he had missed his pocket-book, and had written to Mr.
Crawley to make inquiry. There had been no money in it, beyond the
cheque drawn by Lord Lufton for twenty pounds. Mr. Crawley had
answered this letter by another, saying that no pocket-book had been
found in his house. All this had happened in March. In October, Mrs. Crawley paid the twenty pounds to Fletcher, the
butcher, and in November Lord Lufton's cheque was traced back through
the Barchester bank to Mr. Crawley's hands. A brickmaker of Hoggle
End, much favoured by Mr. Crawley, had asked for change over the
counter of this Barchester bank,--not, as will be understood,
the bank on which the cheque was drawn--and had received it. The
accommodation had been refused to the man at first, but when he
presented the cheque the second day, bearing Mr. Crawley's name on
the back of it, together with a note from Mr. Crawley himself, the
money had been given for it; and the identical notes so paid had been
given to Fletcher, the butcher, on the next day by Mrs. Crawley. When
inquiry was made, Mr. Crawley stated that the cheque had been paid
to him by Mr. Soames, on behalf of the rentcharge due to him by Lord
Lufton. But the error of this statement was at once made manifest. There was the cheque, signed by Mr. Soames himself, for the exact
amount,--twenty pounds four shillings. As he himself declared, he had
never in his life paid money on behalf of Lord Lufton by a cheque
drawn by his lordship. The cheque given by Lord Lufton, and which had
been lost, had been a private matter between them. His lordship had
simply wanted change in his pocket, and his agent had given it to
him. Mr. Crawley was speedily shown to be altogether wrong in the
statement made to account for possession of the cheque. Then he became very moody and would say nothing further. But his
wife, who had known nothing of his first statement when made, came
forward and declared that she believed the cheque for twenty pounds
to be a part of a present given by Dean Arabin to her husband in
April last. There had been, she said, great heartburnings about
this gift, and she had hardly dared to speak to her husband on the
subject. An execution had been threatened in the house by Grobury,
the baker, of which the dean had heard. Then there had been some
scenes at the deanery between her husband and the dean and Mrs.
Arabin, as to which she had subsequently heard much from Mrs. Arabin. Mrs. Arabin had told her that money had been given,--and at last
taken. Indeed, so much had been very apparent, as bills had been paid
to the amount of at least fifty pounds. When the threat made by the
butcher had reached her husband's ears, the effect upon him had been
very grievous. All this was the story told by Mrs. Crawley to Mr.
Walker, the lawyer, when he was pushing his inquiries. She, poor
woman, at any rate told all that she knew. Her husband had told her
one morning, when the butcher's threat was weighing heavily on his
mind, speaking to her in such a humour that she found it impossible
to cross-question him, that he had still money left, though it was
money which he had hoped that he would not be driven to use; and he
had given her the four five-pound notes, and had told her to go to
Silverbridge and satisfy the man who was so eager for his money. She
had done so, and had felt no doubt that the money so forthcoming had
been given by the dean. That was the story as told by Mrs. Crawley. But how could she explain her husband's statement as to the cheque,
which had been shown to be altogether false? All this passed between
Mr. Walker and Mrs. Crawley, and the lawyer was very gentle with her. In the first stages of the inquiry he had simply desired to learn the
truth, and place the clergyman above suspicion. Latterly, being bound
as he was to follow the matter up officially, he would not have seen
Mrs. Crawley, had he been able to escape that lady's importunity. "Mr. Walker," she had said, at last, "you do not know my husband. No one knows him but I. It is hard to have to tell you of all our
troubles." "If I can lessen them, trust me that I will do so," said
the lawyer. "No one, I think, can lessen them in this world," said
the lady. "The truth is, sir, that my husband often knows not what
he says. When he declared that the money had been paid to him by Mr.
Soames, most certainly he thought so. There are times when in his
misery he knows not what he says,--when he forgets everything." Up to this period Mr. Walker had not suspected Mr. Crawley of
anything dishonest, nor did he suspect him as yet. The poor man had
probably received the money from the dean, and had told the lie about
it, not choosing to own that he had taken money from his rich friend,
and thinking that there would be no further inquiry. He had been very
foolish, and that would be the end of it. Mr. Soames was by no means
so good-natured in his belief. "How should my pocket-book have got
into Dean Arabin's hands?" said Mr. Soames, almost triumphantly. "And
then I felt sure at the time that I had left it at Crawley's house!" Mr. Walker wrote a letter to the dean, who at that moment was in
Florence, on his way to Rome, from whence he was going on to the Holy
Land. There came back a letter from Mr. Arabin, saying that on the
17th of March he had given to Mr. Crawley a sum of fifty pounds, and
that the payment had been made with five Bank of England notes of
ten pounds each, which had been handed by him to his friend in the
library at the deanery. The letter was very short, and may, perhaps,
be described as having been almost curt. Mr. Walker, in his anxiety
to do the best he could for Mr. Crawley, had simply asked a question
as to the nature of the transaction between the two gentlemen, saying
that no doubt the dean's answer would clear up a little mystery which
existed at present respecting a cheque for twenty pounds. The dean
in answer simply stated the fact as it has been given above; but
he wrote to Mr. Crawley begging to know what was in truth this new
difficulty, and offering any assistance in his power. He explained
all the circumstances of the money, as he remembered them. The sum
advanced had certainly consisted of fifty pounds, and there had
certainly been five Bank of England notes. He had put the notes
into an envelope, which he had not closed, but had addressed to Mr.
Crawley, and had placed this envelope in his friend's hands. He went
on to say that Mrs. Arabin would have written, but that she was in
Paris with her son. Mrs. Arabin was to remain in Paris during his
absence in the Holy Land, and meet him in Italy on his return. As
she was so much nearer at hand, the dean expressed a hope that Mrs.
Crawley would apply to her if there was any trouble. The letter to Mr. Walker was conclusive as to the dean's money. Mr.
Crawley had not received Lord Lufton's cheque from the dean. Then
whence had he received it? The poor wife was left by the lawyer to
obtain further information from her husband. Ah, who can tell how
terrible were the scenes between that poor pair of wretches, as the
wife endeavoured to learn the truth from her miserable, half-maddened
husband! That her husband had been honest throughout, she had not
any shadow of doubt. She did not doubt that to her at least he
endeavoured to tell the truth, as far as his poor racked imperfect
memory would allow him to remember what was true and what was not
true. The upshot of it all was that the husband declared that he
still believed that the money had come to him from the dean. He had
kept it by him, not wishing to use it if he could help it. He had
forgotten it,--so he said at times,--having understood from Arabin
that he was to have fifty pounds, and having received more. If it had
not come to him from the dean, then it had been sent to him by the
Prince of Evil for his utter undoing; and there were times in which
he seemed to think that such had been the manner in which the fatal
cheque had reached him. In all that he said he was terribly confused,
contradictory, unintelligible,--speaking almost as a madman might
speak,--ending always by declaring that the cruelty of the world had
been too much for him, that the waters were meeting over his head,
and praying for God's mercy to remove him from the world. It need
hardly be said that his poor wife in these days had a burden on her
shoulders that was more than enough to crush any woman. She at last acknowledged to Mr. Walker that she could not account
for the twenty pounds. She herself would write again to the dean
about it, but she hardly hoped for any further assistance there. "The
dean's answer is very plain," said Mr. Walker. "He says that he gave
Mr. Crawley five ten-pound notes, and those five notes we have traced
to Mr. Crawley's hands." Then Mrs. Crawley could say nothing further
beyond making protestations of her husband's innocence. CHAPTER II. BY HEAVENS HE HAD BETTER NOT! I must ask the reader to make the acquaintance of Major Grantly of
Cosby Lodge, before he is introduced to the family of Mr. Crawley, at
their parsonage in Hogglestock. It has been said that Major Grantly
had thrown a favourable eye on Grace Crawley,--by which report
occasion was given to all men and women in those parts to hint that
the Crawleys, with all their piety and humility, were very cunning,
and that one of the Grantlys was,--to say the least of it,--very
soft, admitted as it was throughout the county of Barsetshire,
that there was no family therein more widely awake to the affairs
generally of this world and the next combined, than the family of
which Archdeacon Grantly was the respected head and patriarch. Mrs.
Walker, the most good-natured woman in Silverbridge, had acknowledged
to her daughter that she could not understand it,--that she could not
see anything at all in Grace Crawley. Mr. Walker had shrugged his
shoulders and expressed a confident belief that Major Grantly had
not a shilling of his own beyond his half-pay and his late wife's
fortune, which was only six thousand pounds. Others, who were
ill-natured, had declared that Grace Crawley was little better than a
beggar, and that she could not possibly have acquired the manners of
a gentlewoman. Fletcher the butcher had wondered whether the major
would pay his future father-in-law's debts; and Dr. Tempest, the
old rector of Silverbridge, whose four daughters were all as yet
unmarried, had turned up his old nose, and had hinted that half-pay
majors did not get caught in marriage so easily as that. Such and such like had been the expressions of the opinion of
men and women in Silverbridge. But the matter had been discussed
further afield than at Silverbridge, and had been allowed to intrude
itself as a most unwelcome subject into the family conclave of the
archdeacon's rectory. To those who have not as yet learned the fact
from the public character and well-appreciated reputation of the
man, let it be known that Archdeacon Grantly was at this time, as
he had been for many years previously, Archdeacon of Barchester and
Rector of Plumstead Episcopi. A rich and prosperous man he had ever
been,--though he also had had his sore troubles, as we all have,--his
having arisen chiefly from want of that higher ecclesiastical
promotion which his soul had coveted, and for which the whole tenour
of his life had especially fitted him. Now, in his green old age, he
had ceased to covet, but had not ceased to repine. He had ceased to
covet aught for himself, but still coveted much for his children; and
for him such a marriage as this which was now suggested for his son
was encompassed almost with the bitterness of death. "I think it
would kill me," he had said to his wife; "by heavens, I think it
would be my death!" A daughter of the archdeacon had made a splendid matrimonial
alliance,--so splendid that its history was at the time known to all
the aristocracy of the county, and had not been altogether forgotten
by any of those who keep themselves well instructed in the details of
the peerage. Griselda Grantly had married Lord Dumbello, the eldest
son of the Marquis of Hartletop,--than whom no English nobleman was
more puissant, if broad acres, many castles, high title, and stars
and ribbons are any signs of puissance,--and she was now, herself,
Marchioness of Hartletop, with a little Lord Dumbello of her own. The
daughter's visits to the parsonage of her father were of necessity
rare, such necessity having come from her own altered sphere of life. A Marchioness of Hartletop has special duties which will hardly
permit her to devote herself frequently to the humdrum society of a
clerical father and mother. That it would be so, father and mother
had understood when they sent the fortunate girl forth to a higher
world. But, now and again, since her August marriage, she had laid
her coroneted head upon one of the old rectory pillows for a night
or so, and on such occasions all the Plumsteadians had been loud in
praise of her condescension. Now it happened that when this second
and more aggravated blast of the evil wind reached the rectory,--the
renewed waft of the tidings as to Major Grantly's infatuation
regarding Miss Grace Crawley, which, on its renewal, seemed to bring
with it something of confirmation,--it chanced, I say, that at that
moment Griselda, Marchioness of Hartletop, was gracing the paternal
mansion. It need hardly be said that the father was not slow to
invoke such a daughter's counsel, and such a sister's aid. I am not quite sure that the mother would have been equally quick to
ask her daughter's advice, had she been left in the matter entirely
to her own propensities. Mrs. Grantly had ever loved her daughter
dearly, and had been very proud of that great success in life which
Griselda had achieved; but in late years, the child had become,
as a woman, separate from the mother, and there had arisen, not
unnaturally, a break of that close confidence which in early years
had existed between them. Griselda, Marchioness of Hartletop,
was more than ever a daughter to the archdeacon, even though he
might never see her. Nothing could rob him of the honour of such a
progeny,--nothing, even though there had been actual estrangement
between them. But it was not so with Mrs. Grantly. Griselda had
done very well, and Mrs. Grantly had rejoiced; but she had lost her
child. Now the major, who had done well also, though in a much lesser
degree, was still her child, moving in the same sphere of life with
her, still dependent in a great degree upon his father's bounty, a
neighbour in the county, a frequent visitor at the parsonage, and
a visitor who could be received without any of that trouble which
attended the unfrequent comings of Griselda, the marchioness, to the
home of her youth. And for this reason Mrs. Grantly, terribly put out
as she was at the idea of a marriage between her son and one standing
so poorly in the world's esteem as Grace Crawley, would not have
brought forward the matter before her daughter, had she been left
to her own desires. A marchioness in one's family is a tower of
strength, no doubt; but there are counsellors so strong that we
do not wish to trust them, lest in the trusting we ourselves be
overwhelmed by their strength. Now Mrs. Grantly was by no means
willing to throw her influence into the hands of her titled daughter. But the titled daughter was consulted and gave her advice. On the
occasion of the present visit to Plumstead she had consented to lay
her head for two nights on the parsonage pillows, and on the second
evening her brother the major was to come over from Cosby Lodge
to meet her. Before his coming the affair of Grace Crawley was
discussed. "It would break my heart, Griselda," said the archdeacon,
piteously--"and your mother's." "There is nothing against the girl's character," said Mrs. Grantly,
"and the father and mother are gentlefolks by birth; but such a
marriage for Henry would be very unseemly." "To make it worse, there is this terrible story about him," said the
archdeacon. "I don't suppose there is much in that," said Mrs. Grantly. "I can't say. There is no knowing. They told me to-day in Barchester
that Soames is pressing the case against him." "Who is Soames, papa?" asked the marchioness. "He is Lord Lufton's man of business, my dear." "Oh, Lord Lufton's man of business!" There was something of a sneer
in the tone of the lady's voice as she mentioned Lord Lufton's name. "I am told," continued the archdeacon, "that Soames declares the
cheque was taken from a pocket-book which he left by accident in
Crawley's house." "You don't mean to say, archdeacon, that you think that Mr.
Crawley--a clergyman--stole it!" said Mrs. Grantly. "I don't say anything of the kind, my dear. But supposing Mr. Crawley
to be as honest as the sun, you wouldn't wish Henry to marry his
daughter." "Certainly not," said the mother. "It would be an unfitting marriage. The poor girl has had no advantages." "He is not able even to pay his baker's bill. I always thought Arabin
was very wrong to place such a man in such a parish as Hogglestock. Of course the family could not live there." The Arabin here spoken of
was Dr. Arabin, dean of Barchester. The dean and the archdeacon had
married sisters, and there was much intimacy between the families. "After all it is only a rumour as yet," said Mrs. Grantly. "Fothergill told me only yesterday, that he sees her almost every
day," said the father. "What are we to do, Griselda? You know how
headstrong Henry is." The marchioness sat quite still, looking at the
fire, and made no immediate answer to this address. "There is nothing for it, but that you should tell him what you
think," said the mother. "If his sister were to speak to him, it might do much," said the
archdeacon. To this Mrs. Grantly said nothing; but Mrs. Grantly's
daughter understood very well that her mother's confidence in her was
not equal to her father's. Lady Hartletop said nothing, but still
sat, with impassive face, and eyes fixed upon the fire. "I think
that if you were to speak to him, Griselda, and tell him that he
would disgrace his family, he would be ashamed to go on with such a
marriage," said the father. "He would feel, connected as he is with
Lord Hartletop--"

"I don't think he would feel anything about that," said Mrs. Grantly. "I dare say not," said Lady Hartletop. "I am sure he ought to feel it," said the father. They were all
silent, and sat looking at the fire. "I suppose, papa, you allow Henry an income," said Lady Hartletop,
after a while. "Indeed I do,--eight hundred a year." "Then I think I should tell him that that must depend upon his
conduct. Mamma, if you won't mind ringing the bell, I will send
for Cecile, and go upstairs and dress." Then the marchioness went
upstairs to dress, and in about an hour the major arrived in his
dog-cart. He also was allowed to go upstairs to dress before anything
was said to him about his great offence. "Griselda is right," said the archdeacon, speaking to his wife out of
his dressing-room. "She always was right. I never knew a young woman
with more sense than Griselda." "But you do not mean to say that in any event you would stop Henry's
income?" Mrs. Grantly also was dressing, and made reply out of her
bedroom. "Upon my word, I don't know. As a father I would do anything to
prevent such a marriage as that." "But if he did marry her in spite of the threat? And he would if he
had once said so." "Is a father's word, then, to go for nothing; and a father who allows
his son eight hundred a year? If he told the girl that he would be
ruined she couldn't hold him to it." "My dear, they'd know as well as I do, that you would give way after
three months." "But why should I give way? Good heavens--!" "Of course you'd give way, and of course we should have the young
woman here, and of course we should make the best of it." The idea of having Grace Crawley as a daughter at the Plumstead
Rectory was too much for the archdeacon, and he resented it by
additional vehemence in the tone of his voice, and a nearer personal
approach to the wife of his bosom. All unaccoutred as he was, he
stood in the doorway between the two rooms, and thence fulminated
at his wife his assurances that he would never allow himself to be
immersed in such a depth of humility as that she had suggested. "I
can tell you this, then, that if ever she comes here, I shall take
care to be away. I will never receive her here. You can do as you
please." "That is just what I cannot do. If I could do as I pleased, I would
put a stop to it at once." "It seems to me that you want to encourage him. A child about sixteen
years of age!" "I am told she is nineteen." "What does it matter if she was fifty-nine? Think of what her
bringing up has been. Think what it would be to have all the Crawleys
in our house for ever, and all their debts, and all their disgrace!" "I do not know that they have ever been disgraced." "You'll see. The whole county has heard of the affair of this twenty
pounds. Look at that dear girl upstairs, who has been such a comfort
to us. Do you think it would be fit that she and her husband should
meet such a one as Grace Crawley at our table?" "I don't think it would do them a bit of harm," said Mrs. Grantly. "But there would be no chance of that, seeing that Griselda's husband
never comes to us." "He was here the year before last." "And I never was so tired of a man in all my life." "Then you prefer the Crawleys, I suppose. This is what you get from
Eleanor's teaching." Eleanor was the dean's wife, and Mrs. Grantly's
younger sister. "It has always been a sorrow to me that I ever
brought Arabin into the diocese." "I never asked you to bring him, archdeacon. But nobody was so glad
as you when he proposed to Eleanor." "Well, the long and the short of it is this, I shall tell Henry
to-night that if he makes a fool of himself with this girl, he must
not look to me any longer for an income. He has about six hundred
a year of his own, and if he chooses to throw himself away, he had
better go and live in the south of France, or in Canada, or where he
pleases. He shan't come here." "I hope he won't marry the girl, with all my heart," said Mrs.
Grantly. "He had better not. By heavens, he had better not!" "But if he does, you'll be the first to forgive him." On hearing this the archdeacon slammed the door, and retired to his
washing apparatus. At the present moment he was very angry with his
wife, but then he was so accustomed to such anger, and was so well
aware that it in truth meant nothing, that it did not make him
unhappy. The archdeacon and Mrs. Grantly had now been man and
wife for more than a quarter of a century, and had never in truth
quarrelled. He had the most profound respect for her judgment, and
the most implicit reliance on her conduct. She had never yet offended
him, or caused him to repent the hour in which he had made her Mrs.
Grantly. But she had come to understand that she might use a woman's
privilege with her tongue; and she used it,--not altogether to his
comfort. On the present occasion he was the more annoyed because he
felt that she might be right. "It would be a positive disgrace, and
I never would see him again," he said to himself. And yet as he said
it, he knew that he would not have the strength of character to carry
him through a prolonged quarrel with his son. "I never would see
her,--never, never!" he said to himself. "And then such an opening as
he might have at his sister's house." Major Grantly had been a successful man in life,--with the one
exception of having lost the mother of his child within a twelvemonth
of his marriage and within a few hours of that child's birth. He had
served in India as a very young man, and had been decorated with the
Victoria Cross. Then he had married a lady with some money, and had
left the active service of the army, with the concurring advice of
his own family and that of his wife. He had taken a small place in
his father's county, but the wife for whose comfort he had taken it
had died before she was permitted to see it. Nevertheless he had gone
to reside there, hunting a good deal and farming a little, making
himself popular in the district, and keeping up the good name of
Grantly in a successful way, till--alas,--it had seemed good to him
to throw those favouring eyes on poor Grace Crawley. His wife had
now been dead just two years, and as he was still under thirty,
no one could deny it would be right that he should marry again. No one did deny it. His father had hinted that he ought to do so,
and had generously whispered that if some little increase to the
major's present income were needed, he might possibly be able to do
something. "What is the good of keeping it?" the archdeacon had said
in liberal after-dinner warmth; "I only want it for your brother and
yourself." The brother was a clergyman. And the major's mother had strongly advised him to marry again
without loss of time. "My dear Henry," she had said, "you'll never be
younger, and youth does go for something. As for dear little Edith,
being a girl, she is almost no impediment. Do you know those two
girls at Chaldicotes?" "What, Mrs. Thorne's nieces?" "No; they are not her nieces but her cousins. Emily Dunstable is very
handsome;--and as for money--!" "But what about birth, mother?" "One can't have everything, my dear." "As far as I am concerned, I should like to have everything or
nothing," the major had said laughing. Now for him to think of Grace
Crawley after that,--of Grace Crawley who had no money, and no
particular birth, and not even beauty itself,--so at least Mrs.
Grantly said,--who had not even enjoyed the ordinary education of
a lady, was too bad. Nothing had been wanting to Emily Dunstable's
education, and it was calculated that she would have at least twenty
thousand pounds on the day of her marriage. The disappointment to the mother would be the more sore because
she had gone to work upon her little scheme with reference to Miss
Emily Dunstable, and had at first, as she thought, seen her way to
success,--to success in spite of the disparaging words which her
son had spoken to her. Mrs. Thorne's house at Chaldicotes,--or Dr.
Thorne's house as it should, perhaps, be more properly called, for
Dr. Thorne was the husband of Mrs. Thorne,--was in these days the
pleasantest house in Barsetshire. No one saw so much company as the
Thornes, or spent so much money in so pleasant a way. The great
county families, the Pallisers and the De Courcys, the Luftons
and the Greshams, were no doubt grander, and some of them were
perhaps richer than the Chaldicote Thornes,--as they were called to
distinguish them from the Thornes of Ullathorne; but none of these
people were so pleasant in their ways, so free in their hospitality,
or so easy in their modes of living, as the doctor and his wife. When first Chaldicotes, a very old country seat, had by the chances
of war fallen into their hands and been newly furnished, and newly
decorated, and newly gardened, and newly greenhoused and hot-watered
by them, many of the county people had turned up their noses at
them. Dear old Lady Lufton had done so, and had been greatly
grieved,--saying nothing, however, of her grief, when her son and
daughter-in-law had broken away from her, and submitted themselves to
the blandishments of the doctor's wife. And the Grantlys had stood
aloof, partly influenced, no doubt, by their dear and intimate old
friend Miss Monica Thorne of Ullathorne, a lady of the very old
school, who, though good as gold and kind as charity, could not
endure that an interloping Mrs. Thorne, who never had a grandfather,
should come to honour and glory in the county, simply because of her
riches. Miss Monica Thorne stood out, but Mrs. Grantly gave way, and
having once given way found that Dr. Thorne, and Mrs. Thorne, and
Emily Dunstable, and Chaldicote House together, were very charming. And the major had been once there with her, and had made himself
very pleasant, and there had certainly been some little passage
of incipient love between him and Miss Dunstable, as to which Mrs.
Thorne, who managed everything, seemed to be well pleased. This had
been after the first mention made by Mrs. Grantly to her son of Emily
Dunstable's name, but before she had heard any faintest whispers of
his fancy for Grace Crawley; and she had therefore been justified
in hoping,--almost in expecting, that Emily Dunstable would be her
daughter-in-law, and was therefore the more aggrieved when this
terrible Crawley peril first opened itself before her eyes. CHAPTER III. THE ARCHDEACON'S THREAT. The dinner-party at the rectory comprised none but the Grantly
family. The marchioness had written to say that she preferred to have
it so. The father had suggested that the Thornes of Ullathorne, very
old friends, might be asked, and the Greshams from Boxall Hill, and
had even promised to endeavour to get old Lady Lufton over to the
rectory, Lady Lufton having in former years been Griselda's warm
friend. But Lady Hartletop had preferred to see her dear father
and mother in privacy. Her brother Henry she would be glad to meet,
and hoped to make some arrangement with him for a short visit to
Hartlebury, her husband's place in Shropshire,--as to which latter
hint, it may, however, be at once said, that nothing further was
spoken after the Crawley alliance had been suggested. And there had
been a very sore point mooted by the daughter in a request made
by her to her father that she might not be called upon to meet
her grandfather, her mother's father, Mr. Harding, a clergyman of
Barchester, who was now stricken in years.--"Papa would not have
come," said Mrs. Grantly, "but I think,--I do think--" Then she
stopped herself. "Your father has odd ways sometimes, my dear. You know how fond I am
of having him here myself." "It does not signify," said Mrs. Grantly. "Do not let us say anything
more about it. Of course we cannot have everything. I am told the
child does her duty in her sphere of life, and I suppose we ought to
be contented." Then Mrs. Grantly went up to her own room, and there
she cried. Nothing was said to the major on the unpleasant subject
of the Crawleys before dinner. He met his sister in the drawing-room,
and was allowed to kiss her noble cheek. "I hope Edith is well,
Henry," said the sister. "Quite well; and little Dumbello is the
same, I hope?" "Thank you, yes; quite well." Then there seemed to
be nothing more to be said between the two. The major never made
inquiries after the august family, or would allow it to appear that
he was conscious of being shone upon by the wife of a marquis. Any
adulation which Griselda received of that kind came from her father,
and, therefore, unconsciously she had learned to think that her
father was better bred than the other members of her family, and more
fitted by nature to move in that sacred circle to which she herself
had been exalted. We need not dwell upon the dinner, which was but a
dull affair. Mrs. Grantly strove to carry on the family party exactly
as it would have been carried on had her daughter married the son
of some neighbouring squire; but she herself was conscious of the
struggle, and the fact of there being a struggle produced failure. The rector's servants treated the daughter of the house with special
awe, and the marchioness herself moved, and spoke, and ate, and drank
with a cold magnificence, which I think had become a second nature
with her, but which was not on that account the less oppressive. Even the archdeacon, who enjoyed something in that which was so
disagreeable to his wife, felt a relief when he was left alone after
dinner with his son. He felt relieved as his son got up to open the
door for his mother and sister, but was aware at the same time that
he had before him a most difficult and possibly a most disastrous
task. His dear son Henry was not a man to be talked smoothly out of,
or into, any propriety. He had a will of his own, and having hitherto
been a successful man, who in youth had fallen into few youthful
troubles,--who had never justified his father in using stern parental
authority,--was not now inclined to bend his neck. "Henry," said the
archdeacon, "what are you drinking? That's '34 port, but it's not
just what it should be. Shall I send for another bottle?" "It will do for me, sir. I shall only take a glass." "I shall drink two or three glasses of claret. But you young fellows
have become so desperately temperate." "We take our wine at dinner, sir." "By-the-by, how well Griselda is looking." "Yes, she is. It's always easy for women to look well when they're
rich." How would Grace Crawley look, then, who was poor as poverty
itself, and who should remain poor, if his son was fool enough to
marry her? That was the train of thought which ran through the
archdeacon's mind. "I do not think much of riches," said he, "but
it is always well that a gentleman's wife or a gentleman's daughter
should have a sufficiency to maintain her position in life." "You may say the same, sir, of everybody's wife and everybody's
daughter." "You know what I mean, Henry." "I am not quite sure that I do, sir." "Perhaps I had better speak out at once. A rumour has reached your
mother and me, which we don't believe for a moment, but which,
nevertheless, makes us unhappy even as a report. They say that there
is a young woman living in Silverbridge to whom you are becoming
attached." "Is there any reason why I should not become attached to a young
woman in Silverbridge?--though I hope any young woman to whom I may
become attached will be worthy at any rate of being called a young
lady." "I hope so, Henry; I hope so. I do hope so." "So much I will promise, sir; but I will promise nothing more." The archdeacon looked across into his son's face, and his heart sank
within him. His son's voice and his son's eyes seemed to tell him two
things. They seemed to tell him, firstly, that the rumour about Grace
Crawley was true; and, secondly, that the major was resolved not to
be talked out of his folly. "But you are not engaged to any one, are
you?" said the archdeacon. The son did not at first make any answer,
and then the father repeated the question. "Considering our mutual
positions, Henry, I think you ought to tell me if you are engaged." "I am not engaged. Had I become so, I should have taken the first
opportunity of telling either you or my mother." "Thank God. Now, my dear boy, I can speak out more plainly. The young
woman whose name I have heard is daughter to that Mr. Crawley who is
perpetual curate at Hogglestock. I knew that there could be nothing
in it." "But there is something in it, sir." "What is there in it? Do not keep me in suspense, Henry. What is it
you mean?" "It is rather hard to be cross-questioned in this way on such a
subject. When you express yourself as thankful that there is nothing
in the rumour, I am forced to stop you, as otherwise it is possible
that hereafter you may say that I have deceived you." "But you don't mean to marry her?" "I certainly do not mean to pledge myself not to do so." "Do you mean to tell me, Henry, that you are in love with Miss
Crawley?" Then there was another pause, during which the archdeacon
sat looking for an answer; but the major said never a word. "Am I to
suppose that you intend to lower yourself by marrying a young woman
who cannot possibly have enjoyed any of the advantages of a lady's
education? I say nothing of the imprudence of the thing; nothing of
her own want of fortune; nothing of your having to maintain a whole
family steeped in poverty; nothing of the debts and character of the
father, upon whom, as I understand, at this moment there rests a very
grave suspicion of--of--of--what I'm afraid I must call downright
theft." "Downright theft, certainly, if he were guilty." "I say nothing of all that; but looking at the young woman herself--"

"She is simply the best educated girl whom it has ever been my lot to
meet." "Henry, I have a right to expect that you will be honest with me." "I am honest with you." "Do you mean to ask this girl to marry you?" "I do not think that you have any right to ask me that question,
sir." "I have a right at any rate to tell you this, that if you so far
disgrace yourself and me, I shall consider myself bound to withdraw
from you all the sanction which would be conveyed by my--my--my
continued assistance." "Do you intend me to understand that you will stop my income?" "Certainly I should." "Then, sir, I think you would behave to me most cruelly. You advised
me to give up my profession." "Not in order that you might marry Grace Crawley." "I claim the privilege of a man of my age to do as I please in
such a matter as marriage. Miss Crawley is a lady. Her father is a
clergyman, as is mine. Her father's oldest friend is my uncle. There
is nothing on earth against her except her poverty. I do not think I
ever heard of such cruelty on a father's part." "Very well, Henry." "I have endeavoured to do my duty by you, sir, always; and by my
mother. You can treat me in this way, if you please, but it will not
have any effect on my conduct. You can stop my allowance to-morrow,
if you like it. I had not as yet made up my mind to make an offer to
Miss Crawley, but I shall now do so to-morrow morning." This was very bad indeed, and the archdeacon was extremely unhappy. He was by no means at heart a cruel man. He loved his children
dearly. If this disagreeable marriage were to take place, he would
doubtless do exactly as his wife had predicted. He would not stop his
son's income for a single quarter; and, though he went on telling
himself that he would stop it, he knew in his own heart that any
such severity was beyond his power. He was a generous man in money
matters,--having a dislike for poverty which was not generous,--and
for his own sake could not have endured to see a son of his in want. But he was terribly anxious to exercise the power which the use of
the threat might give him. "Henry," he said, "you are treating me
badly, very badly. My anxiety has always been for the welfare of
my children. Do you think that Miss Crawley would be a fitting
sister-in-law for that dear girl upstairs?" "Certainly I do, or for any other dear girl in the world; excepting
that Griselda, who is not clever, would hardly be able to appreciate
Miss Crawley, who is clever." "Griselda not clever! Good heavens!" Then there was another pause,
and as the major said nothing, the father continued his entreaties. "Pray, pray think of what my wishes are, and your mother's. You are
not committed as yet. Pray think of us while there is time. I would
rather double your income if I saw you marry any one that we could
name here." "I have enough as it is, if I may only be allowed to know that it
will not be capriciously withdrawn." The archdeacon filled his glass
unconsciously, and sipped his wine, while he thought what further
he might say. Perhaps it might be better that he should say nothing
further at the present moment. The major, however, was indiscreet,
and pushed the question. "May I understand, sir, that your threat is
withdrawn, and that my income is secure?" "What, if you marry this girl?" "Yes, sir; will my income be continued to me if I marry Miss
Crawley?" "No, it will not." Then the father got up hastily, pushed the
decanter back angrily from his hand, and without saying another word
walked away into the drawing-room. That evening at the rectory was
very gloomy. The archdeacon now and again said a word or two to his
daughter, and his daughter answered him in monosyllables. The major
sat apart moodily, and spoke to no one. Mrs. Grantly, understanding
well what had passed, knew that nothing could be done at the present
moment to restore family comfort; so she sat by the fire and knitted. Exactly at ten they all went to bed. "Dear Henry," said the mother to her son the next morning; "think
much of yourself, and of your child, and of us, before you take any
great step in life." "I will, mother," said he. Then he went out and put on his wrapper,
and got into his dog-cart, and drove himself off to Silverbridge. He
had not spoken to his father since they were in the dining-room on
the previous evening. When he started, the marchioness had not yet
come downstairs; but at eleven she breakfasted, and at twelve she
also was taken away. Poor Mrs. Grantly had not had much comfort from
her children's visits. CHAPTER IV. THE CLERGYMAN'S HOUSE AT HOGGLESTOCK. [Illustration]

Mrs. Crawley had walked from Hogglestock to Silverbridge on the
occasion of her visit to Mr. Walker, the attorney, and had been
kindly sent back by that gentleman in his wife's little open
carriage. The tidings she brought home with her to her husband were
very grievous. The magistrates would sit on the next Thursday,--it
was then Friday,--and Mr. Crawley had better appear before them to
answer the charge made by Mr. Soames. He would be served with a
summons, which he could obey of his own accord. There had been many
points very closely discussed between Walker and Mrs. Crawley, as to
which there had been great difficulty in the choice of words which
should be tender enough in regard to the feelings of the poor lady,
and yet strong enough to convey to her the very facts as they stood. Would Mr. Crawley come, or must a policeman be sent to fetch him? The
magistrates had already issued a warrant for his apprehension. Such
in truth was the fact, but they had agreed with Mr. Walker, that as
there was no reasonable ground for anticipating any attempt at escape
on the part of the reverend gentleman, the lawyer might use what
gentle means he could for ensuring the clergyman's attendance. Could
Mrs. Crawley undertake to say that he would appear? Mrs. Crawley
did undertake either that her husband should appear on the Thursday,
or else that she would send over in the early part of the week and
declare her inability to ensure his appearance. In that case it was
understood the policeman must come. Then Mr. Walker had suggested
that Mr. Crawley had better employ a lawyer. Upon this Mrs. Crawley
had looked beseechingly up into Mr. Walker's face, and had asked
him to undertake the duty. He was of course obliged to explain that
he was already employed on the other side. Mr. Soames had secured
his services, and though he was willing to do all in his power to
mitigate the sufferings of the family, he could not abandon the duty
he had undertaken. He named another attorney, however, and then sent
the poor woman home in his wife's carriage. "I fear that unfortunate
man is guilty. I fear he is," Mr. Walker had said to his wife within
ten minutes of the departure of the visitor. Mrs. Crawley would not allow herself to be driven up to the garden
gate before her own house, but had left the carriage some three
hundred yards off down the road, and from thence she walked home. It was now quite dark. It was nearly six in the evening on a wet
December night, and although cloaks and shawls had been supplied to
her, she was wet and cold when she reached her home. But at such a
moment, anxious as she was to prevent the additional evil which would
come to them all from illness to herself, she could not pass through
to her room till she had spoken to her husband. He was sitting in
the one sitting-room on the left side of the passage as the house
was entered, and with him was their daughter Jane, a girl now nearly
sixteen years of age. There was no light in the room, and hardly
more than a spark of fire showed itself in the grate. The father was
sitting on one side of the hearth, in an old arm-chair, and there he
had sat for the last hour without speaking. His daughter had been in
and out of the room, and had endeavoured to gain his attention now
and again by a word, but he had never answered her, and had not even
noticed her presence. At the moment when Mrs. Crawley's step was
heard upon the gravel which led to the door, Jane was kneeling before
the fire with a hand upon her father's arm. She had tried to get her
hand into his, but he had either been unaware of the attempt, or had
rejected it. "Here is mamma, at last," said Jane, rising to her feet as her mother
entered the house. "Are you all in the dark?" said Mrs. Crawley, striving to speak in a
voice that should not be sorrowful. "Yes, mamma; we are in the dark. Papa is here. Oh, mamma, how wet you
are!" "Yes, dear. It is raining. Get a light out of the kitchen, Jane, and
I will go upstairs in two minutes." Then, when Jane was gone, the
wife made her way in the dark over to her husband's side, and spoke a
word to him. "Josiah," she said, "will you not speak to me?" "What should I speak about? Where have you been?" "I have been to Silverbridge. I have been to Mr. Walker. He, at any
rate, is very kind." "I don't want his kindness. I want no man's kindness. Mr. Walker is
the attorney, I believe. Kind, indeed!" "I mean considerate. Josiah, let us do the best we can in this
trouble. We have had others as heavy before." "But none to crush me as this will crush me. Well; what am I to do? Am I to go to prison--to-night?" At this moment his daughter returned
with a candle, and the mother could not make her answer at once. It
was a wretched, poverty-stricken room. By degrees the carpet had
disappeared, which had been laid down some nine or ten years since,
when they had first come to Hogglestock, and which even then had not
been new. Now nothing but a poor fragment of it remained in front of
the fire-place. In the middle of the room there was a table which
had once been large; but one flap of it was gone altogether, and the
other flap sloped grievously towards the floor, the weakness of old
age having fallen into its legs. There were two or three smaller
tables about, but they stood propped against walls, thence obtaining
a security which their own strength would not give them. At the
further end of the room there was an ancient piece of furniture,
which was always called "papa's secretary," at which Mr. Crawley
customarily sat and wrote his sermons, and did all work that was done
by him within his house. The man who had made it, some time in the
last century, had intended it to be a locked guardian for domestic
documents, and the receptacle for all that was most private in the
house of some paterfamilias. But beneath the hands of Mr. Crawley it
always stood open; and with the exception of the small space at which
he wrote, was covered with dog's-eared books, from nearly all of
which the covers had disappeared. There were there two odd volumes of
Euripides, a Greek Testament, an Odyssey, a duodecimo Pindar, and a
miniature Anacreon. There was half a Horace,--the two first books of
the Odes at the beginning, and the De Arte Poetica at the end having
disappeared. There was a little bit of a volume of Cicero, and there
were Caesar's Commentaries, in two volumes, so stoutly bound that they
had defied the combined ill-usage of time and the Crawley family. All
these were piled upon the secretary, with many others,--odd volumes
of sermons and the like; but the Greek and Latin lay at the top, and
showed signs of most frequent use. There was one arm-chair in the
room,--a Windsor-chair, as such used to be called, made soft by an
old cushion in the back, in which Mr. Crawley sat when both he and
his wife were in the room, and Mrs. Crawley when he was absent. And there was an old horsehair sofa,--now almost denuded of its
horsehair,--but that, like the tables, required the assistance of a
friendly wall. Then there was half a dozen of other chairs,--all of
different sorts,--and they completed the furniture of the room. It
was not such a room as one would wish to see inhabited by a beneficed
clergyman of the Church of England; but they who know what money will
do and what it will not, will understand how easily a man with a
family, and with a hundred and thirty pounds a year, may be brought
to the need of inhabiting such a chamber. When it is remembered that
three pounds of meat a day, at ninepence a pound, will cost over
forty pounds a year, there need be no difficulty in understanding
that it may be so. Bread for such a family must cost at least
twenty-five pounds. Clothes for five persons, of whom one must at any
rate wear the raiment of a gentleman, can hardly be found for less
than ten pounds a year a head. Then there remains fifteen pounds for
tea, sugar, beer, wages, education, amusements, and the like. In such
circumstances a gentleman can hardly pay much for the renewal of his
furniture! Mrs. Crawley could not answer her husband's question before her
daughter, and was therefore obliged to make another excuse for again
sending her out of the room. "Jane, dear," she said, "bring my things
down to the kitchen and I will change them by the fire. I will be
there in two minutes, when I have had a word with your papa." The
girl went immediately and then Mrs. Crawley answered her husband's
question. "No, my dear; there is no question of your going to
prison." "But there will be." "I have undertaken that you shall attend before the magistrates at
Silverbridge on Thursday next, at twelve o'clock. You will do that?" "Do it! You mean, I suppose, to say that I must go there. Is anybody
to come and fetch me?" "Nobody will come. Only you must promise that you will be there. I
have promised for you. You will go; will you not?" She stood leaning
over him, half embracing him, waiting for an answer; but for a
while he gave none. "You will tell me that you will do what I have
undertaken for you, Josiah?" "I think I would rather that they fetched me. I think that I will not
go myself." "And have policemen come for you into the parish! Mr. Walker has
promised that he will send over his phaeton. He sent me home in it
to-day." "I want nobody's phaeton. If I go I will walk. If it were ten times
the distance, and though I had not a shoe left to my feet I would
walk. If I go there at all, of my own accord, I will walk there." "But you will go?" "What do I care for the parish? What matters it who sees me now? I
cannot be degraded worse than I am. Everybody knows it." "There is no disgrace without guilt," said his wife. "Everybody thinks me guilty. I see it in their eyes. The children
know of it, and I hear their whispers in the school, 'Mr. Crawley has
taken some money.' I heard the girl say it myself." "What matters what the girl says?" "And yet you would have me go in a fine carriage to Silverbridge, as
though to a wedding. If I am wanted there let them take me as they
would another. I shall be here for them,--unless I am dead." At this moment Jane reappeared, pressing her mother to take off her
wet clothes, and Mrs. Crawley went with her daughter to the kitchen. The one red-armed young girl who was their only servant was sent
away, and then the mother and child discussed how best they might
prevail with the head of the family. "But, mamma, it must come right;
must it not?" "I trust it will. I think it will. But I cannot see my way as yet." "Papa cannot have done anything wrong." "No, my dear; he has done nothing wrong. He has made great
mistakes, and it is hard to make people understand that he has not
intentionally spoken untruths. He is ever thinking of other things,
about the school, and his sermons, and he does not remember." "And about how poor we are, mamma." "He has much to occupy his mind, and he forgets things which dwell in
the memory with other people. He said that he had got this money from
Mr. Soames, and of course he thought that it was so." "And where did he get it, mamma?" "Ah,--I wish I knew. I should have said that I had seen every
shilling that came into the house; but I know nothing of this
cheque,--whence it came." "But will not papa tell you?" "He would tell me if he knew. He thinks it came from the dean." "And are you sure it did not?" "Yes; quite sure; as sure as I can be of anything. The dean told me
he would give him fifty pounds, and the fifty pounds came. I had them
in my own hands. And he has written to say that it was so." "But couldn't this be part of the fifty pounds?" "No, dear, no." "Then where did papa get it? Perhaps he picked it up, and has
forgotten?" To this Mrs. Crawley made no reply. The idea that the cheque had been
found by her husband,--had been picked up as Jane had said,--had
occurred also to Jane's mother. Mr. Soames was confident that he had
dropped the pocket-book at the parsonage. Mrs. Crawley had always
disliked Mr. Soames, thinking him to be hard, cruel, and vulgar. She
would not have hesitated to believe him guilty of a falsehood, or
even of direct dishonesty, if by so believing she could in her own
mind have found the means of reconciling her husband's possession of
the cheque with absolute truth on his part. But she could not do so. Even though Soames had, with devilish premeditated malice, slipped
the cheque into her husband's pocket, his having done so would not
account for her husband's having used the cheque when he found it
there. She was driven to make excuses for him which, valid as they
might be with herself, could not be valid with others. He had said
that Mr. Soames had paid the cheque to him. That was clearly a
mistake. He had said that the cheque had been given to him by the
dean. That was clearly another mistake. She knew, or thought she
knew, that he, being such as he was, might make such blunders as
these, and yet be true. She believed that such statements might be
blunders and not falsehoods,--so convinced was she that her husband's
mind would not act at all times as do the minds of other men. But
having such a conviction she was driven to believe also that almost
anything might be possible. Soames may have been right, or he might
have dropped, not the book, but the cheque. She had no difficulty
in presuming Soames to be wrong in any detail, if by so supposing
she could make the exculpation of her husband easier to herself. If
villany on the part of Soames was needful to her theory, Soames would
become to her a villain at once,--of the blackest dye. Might it not
be possible that the cheque having thus fallen into her husband's
hands, he had come, after a while, to think that it had been sent to
him by his friend, the dean? And if it were so, would it be possible
to make others so believe? That there was some mistake which would
be easily explained were her husband's mind lucid at all points, but
which she could not explain because of the darkness of his mind, she
was thoroughly convinced. But were she herself to put forward such
a defence on her husband's part, she would in doing so be driven to
say that he was a lunatic,--that he was incapable of managing the
affairs of himself or his family. It seemed to her that she would be
compelled to have him proved to be either a thief or a madman. And
yet she knew that he was neither. That he was not a thief was as
clear to her as the sun at noonday. Could she have lain on the man's
bosom for twenty years, and not yet have learned the secrets of the
heart beneath? The whole mind of the man was, as she told herself,
within her grasp. He might have taken the twenty pounds; he might
have taken it and spent it, though it was not his own; but yet he
was no thief. Nor was he a madman. No man more sane in preaching
the gospel of his Lord, in making intelligible to the ignorant the
promises of his Saviour, ever got into a parish pulpit, or taught in
a parish school. The intellect of the man was as clear as running
water in all things not appertaining to his daily life and its
difficulties. He could be logical with a vengeance,--so logical as to
cause infinite trouble to his wife, who, with all her good sense, was
not logical. And he had Greek at his fingers' ends,--as his daughter
knew very well. And even to this day he would sometimes recite to
them English poetry, lines after lines, stanzas upon stanzas, in a
sweet low melancholy voice, on long winter evenings when occasionally
the burden of his troubles would be lighter to him than was usual. Books in Latin and in French he read with as much ease as in English,
and took delight in such as came to him, when he would condescend
to accept such loans from the deanery. And there was at times a
lightness of heart about the man. In the course of the last winter he
had translated into Greek irregular verse the very noble ballad of
Lord Bateman, maintaining the rhythm and the rhyme, and had repeated
it with uncouth glee till his daughter knew it all by heart. And when
there had come to him a five-pound note from some admiring magazine
editor as the price of the same,--still through the dean's hands,--he
had brightened up his heart and had thought for an hour or two that
even yet the world would smile upon him. His wife knew well that he
was not mad; but yet she knew that there were dark moments with him,
in which his mind was so much astray that he could not justly be
called to account as to what he might remember and what he might
forget. How would it be possible to explain all this to a judge and
jury, so that they might neither say that he was dishonest, nor yet
that he was mad? "Perhaps he picked it up, and had forgotten," her
daughter said to her. Perhaps it was so, but she might not as yet
admit as much even to her child. "It is a mystery, dear, as yet, which, with God's aid, will be
unravelled. Of one thing we at least may be sure; that your papa has
not wilfully done anything wrong." "Of course we are sure of that, mamma." Mrs. Crawley had many troubles during the next four or five days, of
which the worst, perhaps, had reference to the services of the Sunday
which intervened between the day of her visit to Silverbridge, and
the sitting of the magistrates. On the Saturday it was necessary
that he should prepare his sermons, of which he preached two on
every Sunday, though his congregation consisted only of farmers,
brickmakers, and agricultural labourers, who would willingly have
dispensed with the second. Mrs. Crawley proposed to send over to
Mr. Robarts, a neighbouring clergyman, for the loan of a curate. Mr.
Robarts was a warm friend to the Crawleys, and in such an emergency
would probably have come himself; but Mr. Crawley would not hear of
it. The discussion took place early on the Saturday morning, before
it was as yet daylight, for the poor woman was thinking day and
night of her husband's troubles, and it had this good effect, that
immediately after breakfast he seated himself at his desk, and worked
at his task as though he had forgotten all else in the world. And on the Sunday morning he went into his school before the hour of
the church service, as had been his wont, and taught there as though
everything with him was as usual. Some of the children were absent,
having heard of their teacher's tribulation, and having been told
probably that he would remit his work; and for these absent ones he
sent in great anger. The poor bairns came creeping in, for he was a
man who by his manners had been able to secure their obedience in
spite of his poverty. And he preached to the people of his parish on
that Sunday, as he had always preached; eagerly, clearly, with an
eloquence fitted for the hearts of such an audience. No one would
have guessed from his tones and gestures and appearance on that
occasion, that there was aught wrong with him,--unless there had been
there some observer keen enough to perceive that the greater care
which he used, and the special eagerness of his words, denoted a
special frame of mind. After that, after those church services were over, he sank again and
never roused himself till the dreaded day had come. CHAPTER V.

WHAT THE WORLD THOUGHT ABOUT IT. Opinion in Silverbridge, at Barchester, and throughout the county,
was very much divided as to the guilt or innocence of Mr. Crawley. Up
to the time of Mrs. Crawley's visit to Silverbridge, the affair had
not been much discussed. To give Mr. Soames his due, he had been by
no means anxious to press the matter against the clergyman; but he
had been forced to go on with it. While the first cheque was missing,
Lord Lufton had sent him a second cheque for the money, and the loss
had thus fallen upon his lordship. The cheque had of course been
traced, and inquiry had of course been made as to Mr. Crawley's
possession of it. When that gentleman declared that he had received
it from Mr. Soames, Mr. Soames had been forced to contradict and to
resent such an assertion. When Mr. Crawley had afterwards said that
the money had come to him from the dean, and when the dean had shown
that this also was untrue, Mr. Soames, confident as he was that he
had dropped the pocket-book at Mr. Crawley's house, could not but
continue the investigation. He had done so with as much silence as
the nature of the work admitted. But by the day of the magistrates'
meeting at Silverbridge the subject had become common through the
county, and men's minds were very much divided. All Hogglestock believed their parson to be innocent; but then all
Hogglestock believed him to be mad. At Silverbridge the tradesmen
with whom he had dealt, and to whom he had owed, and still owed,
money, all declared him to be innocent. They knew something of the
man personally, and could not believe him to be a thief. All the
ladies in Silverbridge, too, were sure of his innocence. It was to
them impossible that such a man should have stolen twenty pounds. "My dear," said the eldest Miss Prettyman to poor Grace Crawley, "in
England, where the laws are good, no gentleman is ever made out to
be guilty when he is innocent; and your papa, of course, is innocent. Therefore you should not trouble yourself." "It will break papa's
heart," Grace had said, and she did trouble herself. But the
gentlemen in Silverbridge were made of sterner stuff, and believed
the man to be guilty, clergyman and gentleman though he was. Mr.
Walker, who among the lights in Silverbridge was the leading light,
would not speak a word upon the subject to anybody; and then
everybody, who was anybody, knew that Mr. Walker was convinced of the
man's guilt. Had Mr. Walker believed him to be innocent, his tongue
would have been ready enough. John Walker, who was in the habit of
laughing at his father's good nature, had no doubt upon the subject. Mr. Winthrop, Mr. Walker's partner, shook his head. People did not
think much of Mr. Winthrop, excepting certain unmarried ladies; for
Mr. Winthrop was a bachelor, and had plenty of money. People did not
think much of Mr. Winthrop; but still on this subject he might know
something, and when he shook his head he manifestly intended to
indicate guilt. And Dr. Tempest, the rector of Silverbridge, did
not hesitate to declare his belief in the guilt of the incumbent
of Hogglestock. No man reverences a clergyman, as a clergyman, so
slightly as a brother clergyman. To Dr. Tempest it appeared to be
neither very strange nor very terrible that Mr. Crawley should have
stolen twenty pounds. "What is a man to do," he said, "when he
sees his children starving? He should not have married on such a
preferment as that." Mr. Crawley had married, however, long before he
got the living of Hogglestock. There were two Lady Luftons,--mother-in-law and daughter-in-law,--who
at this time were living together at Framley Hall, Lord Lufton's seat
in the county of Barset, and they were both thoroughly convinced
of Mr. Crawley's innocence. The elder lady had lived much among
clergymen, and could hardly, I think, by any means have been brought
to believe in the guilt of any man who had taken upon himself the
orders of the Church of England. She had also known Mr. Crawley
personally for some years, and was one of those who could not admit
to herself that any one was vile who had been near to herself. She
believed intensely in the wickedness of the outside world, of the
world which was far away from herself, and of which she never saw
anything; but they who were near to her, and who had even become dear
to her, or who even had been respected by her, were made, as it were,
saints in her imagination. They were brought into the inner circle,
and could hardly be expelled. She was an old woman who thought all
evil of those she did not know, and all good of those whom she did
know; and as she did know Mr. Crawley, she was quite sure he had not
stolen Mr. Soames's twenty pounds. She did know Mr. Soames also; and
thus there was a mystery for the unravelling of which she was very
anxious. And the young Lady Lufton was equally sure, and perhaps with
better reason for such certainty. She had, in truth, known more of
Mr. Crawley personally, than had any one in the county, unless it was
the dean. The younger Lady Lufton, the present Lord Lufton's wife,
had sojourned at one time in Mr. Crawley's house, amidst the Crawley
poverty, living as they lived, and nursing Mrs. Crawley through an
illness which had well nigh been fatal to her; and the younger Lady
Lufton believed in Mr. Crawley,--as Mr. Crawley also believed in her. "It is quite impossible, my dear," the old woman said to her
daughter-in-law. "Quite impossible, my lady." The dowager was always called "my
lady," both by her own daughter and by her son's wife, except in the
presence of their children, when she was addressed as "grandmamma." "Think how well I knew him. It's no use talking of evidence. No
evidence would make me believe it." "Nor me; and I think it a great shame that such a report should be
spread about." "I suppose Mr. Soames could not help himself?" said the younger lady,
who was not herself very fond of Mr. Soames. "Ludovic says that he has only done what he was obliged to do." The
Ludovic spoken of was Lord Lufton. This took place in the morning, but in the evening the affair was
again discussed at Framley Hall. Indeed, for some days, there was
hardly any other subject held to be worthy of discussion in the
county. Mr. Robarts, the clergyman of the parish and the brother of
the younger Lady Lufton, was dining at the hall with his wife, and
the three ladies had together expressed their perfect conviction of
the falseness of the accusation. But when Lord Lufton and Mr. Robarts
were together after the ladies had left them there was much less of
this certainty expressed. "By Jove," said Lord Lufton, "I don't know
what to think of it. I wish with all my heart that Soames had said
nothing about it, and that the cheque had passed without remark." "That was impossible. When the banker sent to Soames, he was obliged
to take the matter up." "Of course he was. But I'm sorry that it was so. For the life of me I
can't conceive how the cheque got into Crawley's hands." "I imagine that it had been lying in the house, and that Crawley had
come to think that it was his own." "But, my dear Mark," said Lord Lufton, "excuse me if I say that
that's nonsense. What do we do when a poor man has come to think that
another man's property is his own? We send him to prison for making
the mistake." "I hope they won't send Crawley to prison." "I hope so too; but what is a jury to do?" "You think it will go to a jury, then?" "I do," said Lord Lufton. "I don't see how the magistrates can save
themselves from committing him. It is one of those cases in which
every one concerned would wish to drop it if it were only possible. But it is not possible. On the evidence, as one sees it at present,
one is bound to say that it is a case for a jury." "I believe that he is mad," said the brother parson. "He always was, as far as I could learn," said the lord. "I never
knew him, myself. You do, I think?" "Oh, yes. I know him." And the vicar of Framley became silent and
thoughtful as the memory of a certain interview between himself and
Mr. Crawley came back upon his mind. At that time the waters had
nearly closed over his head and Mr. Crawley had given him some
assistance. When the gentlemen had again found the ladies, they kept
their own doubts to themselves; for at Framley Hall, as at present
tenanted, female voices and female influences predominated over those
which came from the other sex. At Barchester, the cathedral city of the county in which the Crawleys
lived, opinion was violently against Mr. Crawley. In the city Mrs.
Proudie, the wife of the bishop, was the leader of opinion in
general, and she was very strong in her belief of the man's guilt. She had known much of clergymen all her life, as it behoved a
bishop's wife to do, and she had none of that mingled weakness and
ignorance which taught so many ladies in Barsetshire to suppose that
an ordained clergyman could not become a thief. She hated old Lady
Lufton with all her heart, and old Lady Lufton hated her as warmly. Mrs. Proudie would say frequently that Lady Lufton was a conceited
old idiot, and Lady Lufton would declare as frequently that
Mrs. Proudie was a vulgar virago. It was known at the palace in
Barchester, that kindness had been shown to the Crawleys by the
family at Framley Hall, and this alone would have been sufficient to
make Mrs. Proudie believe that Mr. Crawley could have been guilty of
any crime. And as Mrs. Proudie believed, so did the bishop believe. "It is a terrible disgrace to the diocese," said the bishop, shaking
his head, and patting his apron as he sat by his study fire. "Fiddlestick!" said Mrs. Proudie. "But, my dear,--a beneficed clergyman!" "You must get rid of him; that's all. You must be firm whether he be
acquitted or convicted." "But if he be acquitted, I cannot get rid of him, my dear." "Yes, you can, if you are firm. And you must be firm. Is it not true
that he has been disgracefully involved in debt ever since he has
been there; that you have been pestered by letters from unfortunate
tradesmen who cannot get their money from him?" "That is true, my dear, certainly." "And is that kind of thing to go on? He cannot come to the palace as
all clergymen should do, because he has got no clothes to come in. I
saw him once about the lanes, and I never set my eyes on such an
object in my life! I would not believe that the man was a clergyman
till John told me. 