



This etext was prepared from the 1923 Macmillan edition by Les Bowler. TWO ON A TOWER


BY
THOMAS HARDY. 'Ah, my heart! her eyes and she
   Have taught thee new astrology. Howe'er Love's native hours were set,
   Whatever starry synod met,
   'Tis in the mercy of her eye,
   If poor Love shall live or die.' CRASHAW: _Love's Horoscope_. WITH A MAP OF WESSEX. MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON
1923

COPYRIGHT

_First published by Macmillan and Co._, _Crown_ 8_vo,_ 1902

_Reprinted_ 1907, 1911, 1916, 1923

_Pocket Edition_ 1906. _Reprinted_ 1909, 1912, 1915, 1918 1919, 1920,
1922, 1923

_Wessex Edition_ (_8vo_) 1912

_Reprinted_ 1920

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN




PREFACE. This slightly-built romance was the outcome of a wish to set the
emotional history of two infinitesimal lives against the stupendous
background of the stellar universe, and to impart to readers the
sentiment that of these contrasting magnitudes the smaller might be the
greater to them as men. But, on the publication of the book people seemed to be less struck with
these high aims of the author than with their own opinion, first, that
the novel was an 'improper' one in its morals, and, secondly, that it was
intended to be a satire on the Established Church of this country. I was
made to suffer in consequence from several eminent pens. That, however, was thirteen years ago, and, in respect of the first
opinion, I venture to think that those who care to read the story now
will be quite astonished at the scrupulous propriety observed therein on
the relations of the sexes; for though there may be frivolous, and even
grotesque touches on occasion, there is hardly a single caress in the
book outside legal matrimony, or what was intended so to be. As for the second opinion, it is sufficient to draw attention, as I did
at the time, to the fact that the Bishop is every inch a gentleman, and
that the parish priest who figures in the narrative is one of its most
estimable characters. However, the pages must speak for themselves. Some few readers, I
trust--to take a serious view--will be reminded by this imperfect story,
in a manner not unprofitable to the growth of the social sympathies, of
the pathos, misery, long-suffering, and divine tenderness which in real
life frequently accompany the passion of such a woman as Viviette for a
lover several years her junior. The scene of the action was suggested by two real spots in the part of
the country specified, each of which has a column standing upon it. Certain surrounding peculiarities have been imported into the narrative
from both sites. T. H.

_July_ 1895. TWO ON A TOWER. I


On an early winter afternoon, clear but not cold, when the vegetable
world was a weird multitude of skeletons through whose ribs the sun shone
freely, a gleaming landau came to a pause on the crest of a hill in
Wessex. The spot was where the old Melchester Road, which the carriage
had hitherto followed, was joined by a drive that led round into a park
at no great distance off. The footman alighted, and went to the occupant of the carriage, a lady
about eight- or nine-and-twenty. She was looking through the opening
afforded by a field-gate at the undulating stretch of country beyond. In
pursuance of some remark from her the servant looked in the same
direction. The central feature of the middle distance, as they beheld it, was a
circular isolated hill, of no great elevation, which placed itself in
strong chromatic contrast with a wide acreage of surrounding arable by
being covered with fir-trees. The trees were all of one size and age, so
that their tips assumed the precise curve of the hill they grew upon. This pine-clad protuberance was yet further marked out from the general
landscape by having on its summit a tower in the form of a classical
column, which, though partly immersed in the plantation, rose above the
tree-tops to a considerable height. Upon this object the eyes of lady
and servant were bent. 'Then there is no road leading near it?' she asked. 'Nothing nearer than where we are now, my lady.' 'Then drive home,' she said after a moment. And the carriage rolled on
its way. A few days later, the same lady, in the same carriage, passed that spot
again. Her eyes, as before, turned to the distant tower. 'Nobbs,' she said to the coachman, 'could you find your way home through
that field, so as to get near the outskirts of the plantation where the
column is?' The coachman regarded the field. 'Well, my lady,' he observed, 'in dry
weather we might drive in there by inching and pinching, and so get
across by Five-and-Twenty Acres, all being well. But the ground is so
heavy after these rains that perhaps it would hardly be safe to try it
now.' 'Perhaps not,' she assented indifferently. 'Remember it, will you, at a
drier time?' And again the carriage sped along the road, the lady's eyes resting on
the segmental hill, the blue trees that muffled it, and the column that
formed its apex, till they were out of sight. A long time elapsed before that lady drove over the hill again. It was
February; the soil was now unquestionably dry, the weather and scene
being in other respects much as they had been before. The familiar shape
of the column seemed to remind her that at last an opportunity for a
close inspection had arrived. Giving her directions she saw the gate
opened, and after a little manoeuvring the carriage swayed slowly into
the uneven field. Although the pillar stood upon the hereditary estate of her husband the
lady had never visited it, owing to its insulation by this well-nigh
impracticable ground. The drive to the base of the hill was tedious and
jerky, and on reaching it she alighted, directing that the carriage
should be driven back empty over the clods, to wait for her on the
nearest edge of the field. She then ascended beneath the trees on foot. The column now showed itself as a much more important erection than it
had appeared from the road, or the park, or the windows of Welland House,
her residence hard by, whence she had surveyed it hundreds of times
without ever feeling a sufficient interest in its details to investigate
them. The column had been erected in the last century, as a substantial
memorial of her husband's great-grandfather, a respectable officer who
had fallen in the American war, and the reason of her lack of interest
was partly owing to her relations with this husband, of which more anon. It was little beyond the sheer desire for something to do--the chronic
desire of her curiously lonely life--that had brought her here now. She
was in a mood to welcome anything that would in some measure disperse an
almost killing _ennui_. She would have welcomed even a misfortune. She
had heard that from the summit of the pillar four counties could be seen. Whatever pleasurable effect was to be derived from looking into four
counties she resolved to enjoy to-day. The fir-shrouded hill-top was (according to some antiquaries) an old
Roman camp,--if it were not (as others insisted) an old British castle,
or (as the rest swore) an old Saxon field of Witenagemote,--with remains
of an outer and an inner vallum, a winding path leading up between their
overlapping ends by an easy ascent. The spikelets from the trees formed
a soft carpet over the route, and occasionally a brake of brambles barred
the interspaces of the trunks. Soon she stood immediately at the foot of
the column. It had been built in the Tuscan order of classic architecture, and was
really a tower, being hollow with steps inside. The gloom and solitude
which prevailed round the base were remarkable. The sob of the
environing trees was here expressively manifest; and moved by the light
breeze their thin straight stems rocked in seconds, like inverted
pendulums; while some boughs and twigs rubbed the pillar's sides, or
occasionally clicked in catching each other. Below the level of their
summits the masonry was lichen-stained and mildewed, for the sun never
pierced that moaning cloud of blue-black vegetation. Pads of moss grew
in the joints of the stone-work, and here and there shade-loving insects
had engraved on the mortar patterns of no human style or meaning; but
curious and suggestive. Above the trees the case was different: the
pillar rose into the sky a bright and cheerful thing, unimpeded, clean,
and flushed with the sunlight. The spot was seldom visited by a pedestrian, except perhaps in the
shooting season. The rarity of human intrusion was evidenced by the
mazes of rabbit-runs, the feathers of shy birds, the exuviae of reptiles;
as also by the well-worn paths of squirrels down the sides of trunks, and
thence horizontally away. The fact of the plantation being an island in
the midst of an arable plain sufficiently accounted for this lack of
visitors. Few unaccustomed to such places can be aware of the insulating
effect of ploughed ground, when no necessity compels people to traverse
it. This rotund hill of trees and brambles, standing in the centre of a
ploughed field of some ninety or a hundred acres, was probably visited
less frequently than a rock would have been visited in a lake of equal
extent. She walked round the column to the other side, where she found the door
through which the interior was reached. The paint, if it had ever had
any, was all washed from the wood, and down the decaying surface of the
boards liquid rust from the nails and hinges had run in red stains. Over
the door was a stone tablet, bearing, apparently, letters or words; but
the inscription, whatever it was, had been smoothed over with a plaster
of lichen. Here stood this aspiring piece of masonry, erected as the most
conspicuous and ineffaceable reminder of a man that could be thought of;
and yet the whole aspect of the memorial betokened forgetfulness. Probably not a dozen people within the district knew the name of the
person commemorated, while perhaps not a soul remembered whether the
column were hollow or solid, whether with or without a tablet explaining
its date and purpose. She herself had lived within a mile of it for the
last five years, and had never come near it till now. She hesitated to ascend alone, but finding that the door was not fastened
she pushed it open with her foot, and entered. A scrap of writing-paper
lay within, and arrested her attention by its freshness. Some human
being, then, knew the spot, despite her surmises. But as the paper had
nothing on it no clue was afforded; yet feeling herself the proprietor of
the column and of all around it her self-assertiveness was sufficient to
lead her on. The staircase was lighted by slits in the wall, and there
was no difficulty in reaching the top, the steps being quite unworn. The
trap-door leading on to the roof was open, and on looking through it an
interesting spectacle met her eye. A youth was sitting on a stool in the centre of the lead flat which
formed the summit of the column, his eye being applied to the end of a
large telescope that stood before him on a tripod. This sort of presence
was unexpected, and the lady started back into the shade of the opening. The only effect produced upon him by her footfall was an impatient wave
of the hand, which he did without removing his eye from the instrument,
as if to forbid her to interrupt him. Pausing where she stood the lady examined the aspect of the individual
who thus made himself so completely at home on a building which she
deemed her unquestioned property. He was a youth who might properly have
been characterized by a word the judicious chronicler would not readily
use in such a connexion, preferring to reserve it for raising images of
the opposite sex. Whether because no deep felicity is likely to arise
from the condition, or from any other reason, to say in these days that a
youth is beautiful is not to award him that amount of credit which the
expression would have carried with it if he had lived in the times of the
Classical Dictionary. So much, indeed, is the reverse the case that the
assertion creates an awkwardness in saying anything more about him. The
beautiful youth usually verges so perilously on the incipient coxcomb,
who is about to become the Lothario or Juan among the neighbouring
maidens, that, for the due understanding of our present young man, his
sublime innocence of any thought concerning his own material aspect, or
that of others, is most fervently asserted, and must be as fervently
believed. Such as he was, there the lad sat. The sun shone full in his face, and
on his head he wore a black velvet skull-cap, leaving to view below it a
curly margin of very light shining hair, which accorded well with the
flush upon his cheek. He had such a complexion as that with which Raffaelle enriches the
countenance of the youthful son of Zacharias,--a complexion which, though
clear, is far enough removed from virgin delicacy, and suggests plenty of
sun and wind as its accompaniment. His features were sufficiently
straight in the contours to correct the beholder's first impression that
the head was the head of a girl. Beside him stood a little oak table,
and in front was the telescope. His visitor had ample time to make these observations; and she may have
done so all the more keenly through being herself of a totally opposite
type. Her hair was black as midnight, her eyes had no less deep a shade,
and her complexion showed the richness demanded as a support to these
decided features. As she continued to look at the pretty fellow before
her, apparently so far abstracted into some speculative world as scarcely
to know a real one, a warmer wave of her warm temperament glowed visibly
through her, and a qualified observer might from this have hazarded a
guess that there was Romance blood in her veins. But even the interest attaching to the youth could not arrest her
attention for ever, and as he made no further signs of moving his eye
from the instrument she broke the silence with--

'What do you see?--something happening somewhere?' 'Yes, quite a catastrophe!' he automatically murmured, without moving
round. 'What?' 'A cyclone in the sun.' The lady paused, as if to consider the weight of that event in the scale
of terrene life. 'Will it make any difference to us here?' she asked. The young man by this time seemed to be awakened to the consciousness
that somebody unusual was talking to him; he turned, and started. 'I beg your pardon,' he said. 'I thought it was my relative come to look
after me! She often comes about this time.' He continued to look at her and forget the sun, just such a reciprocity
of influence as might have been expected between a dark lady and a flaxen-
haired youth making itself apparent in the faces of each. 'Don't let me interrupt your observations,' said she. 'Ah, no,' said he, again applying his eye; whereupon his face lost the
animation which her presence had lent it, and became immutable as that of
a bust, though superadding to the serenity of repose the sensitiveness of
life. The expression that settled on him was one of awe. Not unaptly
might it have been said that he was worshipping the sun. Among the
various intensities of that worship which have prevailed since the first
intelligent being saw the luminary decline westward, as the young man now
beheld it doing, his was not the weakest. He was engaged in what may be
called a very chastened or schooled form of that first and most natural
of adorations. 'But would you like to see it?' he recommenced. 'It is an event that is
witnessed only about once in two or three years, though it may occur
often enough.' She assented, and looked through the shaded eyepiece, and saw a whirling
mass, in the centre of which the blazing globe seemed to be laid bare to
its core. It was a peep into a maelstrom of fire, taking place where
nobody had ever been or ever would be. 'It is the strangest thing I ever beheld,' she said. Then he looked
again; till wondering who her companion could be she asked, 'Are you
often here?' 'Every night when it is not cloudy, and often in the day.' 'Ah, night, of course. The heavens must be beautiful from this point.' 'They are rather more than that.' 'Indeed! Have you entirely taken possession of this column?' 'Entirely.' 'But it is my column,' she said, with smiling asperity. 'Then are you Lady Constantine, wife of the absent Sir Blount
Constantine?' 'I am Lady Constantine.' 'Ah, then I agree that it is your ladyship's. But will you allow me to
rent it of you for a time, Lady Constantine?' 'You have taken it, whether I allow it or not. However, in the interests
of science it is advisable that you continue your tenancy. Nobody knows
you are here, I suppose?' 'Hardly anybody.' He then took her down a few steps into the interior, and showed her some
ingenious contrivances for stowing articles away. 'Nobody ever comes near the column,--or, as it's called here, Rings-Hill
Speer,' he continued; 'and when I first came up it nobody had been here
for thirty or forty years. The staircase was choked with daws' nests and
feathers, but I cleared them out.' 'I understood the column was always kept locked?' 'Yes, it has been so. When it was built, in 1782, the key was given to
my great-grandfather, to keep by him in case visitors should happen to
want it. He lived just down there where I live now.' He denoted by a nod a little dell lying immediately beyond the ploughed
land which environed them. 'He kept it in his bureau, and as the bureau descended to my grandfather,
my mother, and myself, the key descended with it. After the first thirty
or forty years, nobody ever asked for it. One day I saw it, lying rusty
in its niche, and, finding that it belonged to this column, I took it and
came up. I stayed here till it was dark, and the stars came out, and
that night I resolved to be an astronomer. I came back here from school
several months ago, and I mean to be an astronomer still.' He lowered his voice, and added:

'I aim at nothing less than the dignity and office of Astronomer Royal,
if I live. Perhaps I shall not live.' 'I don't see why you should suppose that,' said she. 'How long are you
going to make this your observatory?' 'About a year longer--till I have obtained a practical familiarity with
the heavens. Ah, if I only had a good equatorial!' 'What is that?' 'A proper instrument for my pursuit. But time is short, and science is
infinite,--how infinite only those who study astronomy fully realize,--and
perhaps I shall be worn out before I make my mark.' She seemed to be greatly struck by the odd mixture in him of scientific
earnestness and melancholy mistrust of all things human. Perhaps it was
owing to the nature of his studies. 'You are often on this tower alone at night?' she said. 'Yes; at this time of the year particularly, and while there is no moon. I observe from seven or eight till about two in the morning, with a view
to my great work on variable stars. But with such a telescope as
this--well, I must put up with it!' 'Can you see Saturn's ring and Jupiter's moons?' He said drily that he could manage to do that, not without some contempt
for the state of her knowledge. 'I have never seen any planet or star through a telescope.' 'If you will come the first clear night, Lady Constantine, I will show
you any number. I mean, at your express wish; not otherwise.' 'I should like to come, and possibly may at some time. These stars that
vary so much--sometimes evening stars, sometimes morning stars, sometimes
in the east, and sometimes in the west--have always interested me.' 'Ah--now there is a reason for your not coming. Your ignorance of the
realities of astronomy is so satisfactory that I will not disturb it
except at your serious request.' 'But I wish to be enlightened.' 'Let me caution you against it.' 'Is enlightenment on the subject, then, so terrible?' 'Yes, indeed.' She laughingly declared that nothing could have so piqued her curiosity
as his statement, and turned to descend. He helped her down the stairs
and through the briers. He would have gone further and crossed the open
corn-land with her, but she preferred to go alone. He then retraced his
way to the top of the column, but, instead of looking longer at the sun,
watched her diminishing towards the distant fence, behind which waited
the carriage. When in the midst of the field, a dark spot on an area of
brown, there crossed her path a moving figure, whom it was as difficult
to distinguish from the earth he trod as the caterpillar from its leaf,
by reason of the excellent match between his clothes and the clods. He
was one of a dying-out generation who retained the principle, nearly
unlearnt now, that a man's habiliments should be in harmony with his
environment. Lady Constantine and this figure halted beside each other
for some minutes; then they went on their several ways. The brown person was a labouring man known to the world of Welland as
Haymoss (the encrusted form of the word Amos, to adopt the phrase of
philologists). The reason of the halt had been some inquiries addressed
to him by Lady Constantine. 'Who is that--Amos Fry, I think?' she had asked. 'Yes my lady,' said Haymoss; 'a homely barley driller, born under the
eaves of your ladyship's outbuildings, in a manner of speaking,--though
your ladyship was neither born nor 'tempted at that time.' 'Who lives in the old house behind the plantation?' 'Old Gammer Martin, my lady, and her grandson.' 'He has neither father nor mother, then?' 'Not a single one, my lady.' 'Where was he educated?' 'At Warborne,--a place where they draw up young gam'sters' brains like
rhubarb under a ninepenny pan, my lady, excusing my common way. They hit
so much larning into en that 'a could talk like the day of Pentecost;
which is a wonderful thing for a simple boy, and his mother only the
plainest ciphering woman in the world. Warborne Grammar School--that's
where 'twas 'a went to. His father, the reverent Pa'son St. Cleeve, made
a terrible bruckle hit in 's marrying, in the sight of the high. He were
the curate here, my lady, for a length o' time.' 'Oh, curate,' said Lady Constantine. 'It was before I knew the village.' 'Ay, long and merry ago! And he married Farmer Martin's daughter--Giles
Martin, a limberish man, who used to go rather bad upon his lags, if you
can mind. I knowed the man well enough; who should know en better! The
maid was a poor windling thing, and, though a playward piece o' flesh
when he married her, 'a socked and sighed, and went out like a snoff! Yes, my lady. Well, when Pa'son St. Cleeve married this homespun woman
the toppermost folk wouldn't speak to his wife. Then he dropped a cuss
or two, and said he'd no longer get his living by curing their twopenny
souls o' such d--- nonsense as that (excusing my common way), and he took
to farming straightway, and then 'a dropped down dead in a nor'-west
thunderstorm; it being said--hee-hee!--that Master God was in tantrums
wi'en for leaving his service,--hee-hee! I give the story as I heard it,
my lady, but be dazed if I believe in such trumpery about folks in the
sky, nor anything else that's said on 'em, good or bad. Well, Swithin,
the boy, was sent to the grammar school, as I say for; but what with
having two stations of life in his blood he's good for nothing, my lady. He mopes about--sometimes here, and sometimes there; nobody troubles
about en.' Lady Constantine thanked her informant, and proceeded onward. To her, as
a woman, the most curious feature in the afternoon's incident was that
this lad, of striking beauty, scientific attainments, and cultivated
bearing, should be linked, on the maternal side, with a local
agricultural family through his father's matrimonial eccentricity. A
more attractive feature in the case was that the same youth, so capable
of being ruined by flattery, blandishment, pleasure, even gross
prosperity, should be at present living on in a primitive Eden of
unconsciousness, with aims towards whose accomplishment a Caliban shape
would have been as effective as his own. II


Swithin St. Cleeve lingered on at his post, until the more sanguine birds
of the plantation, already recovering from their midwinter anxieties,
piped a short evening hymn to the vanishing sun. The landscape was gently concave; with the exception of tower and hill
there were no points on which late rays might linger; and hence the dish-
shaped ninety acres of tilled land assumed a uniform hue of shade quite
suddenly. The one or two stars that appeared were quickly clouded over,
and it was soon obvious that there would be no sweeping the heavens that
night. After tying a piece of tarpaulin, which had once seen service on
his maternal grandfather's farm, over all the apparatus around him, he
went down the stairs in the dark, and locked the door. With the key in his pocket he descended through the underwood on the side
of the slope opposite to that trodden by Lady Constantine, and crossed
the field in a line mathematically straight, and in a manner that left no
traces, by keeping in the same furrow all the way on tiptoe. In a few
minutes he reached a little dell, which occurred quite unexpectedly on
the other side of the field-fence, and descended to a venerable thatched
house, whose enormous roof, broken up by dormers as big as haycocks,
could be seen even in the twilight. Over the white walls, built of chalk
in the lump, outlines of creepers formed dark patterns, as if drawn in
charcoal. Inside the house his maternal grandmother was sitting by a wood fire. Before it stood a pipkin, in which something was evidently kept warm. An
eight-legged oak table in the middle of the room was laid for a meal. This woman of eighty, in a large mob cap, under which she wore a little
cap to keep the other clean, retained faculties but little blunted. She
was gazing into the flames, with her hands upon her knees, quietly re-
enacting in her brain certain of the long chain of episodes, pathetic,
tragical, and humorous, which had constituted the parish history for the
last sixty years. On Swithin's entry she looked up at him in a sideway
direction. 'You should not have waited for me, granny,' he said. ''Tis of no account, my child. I've had a nap while sitting here. Yes,
I've had a nap, and went straight up into my old country again, as usual. The place was as natural as when I left it,--e'en just threescore years
ago! All the folks and my old aunt were there, as when I was a
child,--yet I suppose if I were really to set out and go there, hardly a
soul would be left alive to say to me, dog how art! But tell Hannah to
stir her stumps and serve supper--though I'd fain do it myself, the poor
old soul is getting so unhandy!' Hannah revealed herself to be much nimbler and several years younger than
granny, though of this the latter seemed to be oblivious. When the meal
was nearly over Mrs. Martin produced the contents of the mysterious
vessel by the fire, saying that she had caused it to be brought in from
the back kitchen, because Hannah was hardly to be trusted with such
things, she was becoming so childish. 'What is it, then?' said Swithin. 'Oh, one of your special puddings.' At
sight of it, however, he added reproachfully, 'Now, granny!' Instead of being round, it was in shape an irregular boulder that had
been exposed to the weather for centuries--a little scrap pared off here,
and a little piece broken away there; the general aim being,
nevertheless, to avoid destroying the symmetry of the pudding while
taking as much as possible of its substance. 'The fact is,' added Swithin, 'the pudding is half gone!' 'I've only sliced off the merest paring once or twice, to taste if it was
well done!' pleaded granny Martin, with wounded feelings. 'I said to
Hannah when she took it up, "Put it here to keep it warm, as there's a
better fire than in the back kitchen."' 'Well, I am not going to eat any of it!' said Swithin decisively, as he
rose from the table, pushed away his chair, and went up-stairs; the
'other station of life that was in his blood,' and which had been brought
out by the grammar school, probably stimulating him. 'Ah, the world is an ungrateful place! 'Twas a pity I didn't take my
poor name off this earthly calendar and creep under ground sixty long
years ago, instead of leaving my own county to come here!' mourned old
Mrs. Martin. 'But I told his mother how 'twould be--marrying so many
notches above her. The child was sure to chaw high, like his father!' When Swithin had been up-stairs a minute or two however, he altered his
mind, and coming down again ate all the pudding, with the aspect of a
person undertaking a deed of great magnanimity. The relish with which he
did so restored the unison that knew no more serious interruptions than
such as this. 'Mr. Torkingham has been here this afternoon,' said his grandmother; 'and
he wants me to let him meet some of the choir here to-night for practice. They who live at this end of the parish won't go to his house to try over
the tunes, because 'tis so far, they say, and so 'tis, poor men. So he's
going to see what coming to them will do. He asks if you would like to
join.' 'I would if I had not so much to do.' 'But it is cloudy to-night.' 'Yes; but I have calculations without end, granny. Now, don't you tell
him I'm in the house, will you? and then he'll not ask for me.' 'But if he should, must I then tell a lie, Lord forgive me?' 'No, you can say I'm up-stairs; he must think what he likes. Not a word
about the astronomy to any of them, whatever you do. I should be called
a visionary, and all sorts.' 'So thou beest, child. Why can't ye do something that's of use?' At the sound of footsteps Swithin beat a hasty retreat up-stairs, where
he struck a light, and revealed a table covered with books and papers,
while round the walls hung star-maps, and other diagrams illustrative of
celestial phenomena. In a corner stood a huge pasteboard tube, which a
close inspection would have shown to be intended for a telescope. Swithin
hung a thick cloth over the window, in addition to the curtains, and sat
down to his papers. On the ceiling was a black stain of smoke, and under
this he placed his lamp, evidencing that the midnight oil was consumed on
that precise spot very often. Meanwhile there had entered to the room below a personage who, to judge
from her voice and the quick pit-pat of her feet, was a maiden young and
blithe. Mrs. Martin welcomed her by the title of Miss Tabitha Lark, and
inquired what wind had brought her that way; to which the visitor replied
that she had come for the singing. 'Sit ye down, then,' said granny. 'And do you still go to the House to
read to my lady?' 'Yes, I go and read, Mrs. Martin; but as to getting my lady to hearken,
that's more than a team of six horses could force her to do.' The girl had a remarkably smart and fluent utterance, which was probably
a cause, or a consequence, of her vocation. ''Tis the same story, then?' said grandmother Martin. 'Yes. Eaten out with listlessness. She's neither sick nor sorry, but
how dull and dreary she is, only herself can tell. When I get there in
the morning, there she is sitting up in bed, for my lady don't care to
get up; and then she makes me bring this book and that book, till the bed
is heaped up with immense volumes that half bury her, making her look, as
she leans upon her elbow, like the stoning of Stephen. She yawns; then
she looks towards the tall glass; then she looks out at the weather,
mooning her great black eyes, and fixing them on the sky as if they stuck
there, while my tongue goes flick-flack along, a hundred and fifty words
a minute; then she looks at the clock; then she asks me what I've been
reading.' 'Ah, poor soul!' said granny. 'No doubt she says in the morning, "Would
God it were evening," and in the evening, "Would God it were morning,"
like the disobedient woman in Deuteronomy.' Swithin, in the room overhead, had suspended his calculations, for the
duologue interested him. There now crunched heavier steps outside the
door, and his grandmother could be heard greeting sundry local
representatives of the bass and tenor voice, who lent a cheerful and well-
known personality to the names Sammy Blore, Nat Chapman, Hezekiah Biles,
and Haymoss Fry (the latter being one with whom the reader has already a
distant acquaintance); besides these came small producers of treble, who
had not yet developed into such distinctive units of society as to
require particularizing. 'Is the good man come?' asked Nat Chapman. 'No,--I see we be here afore
him. And how is it with aged women to-night, Mrs. Martin?' 'Tedious traipsing enough with this one, Nat. Sit ye down. Well, little
Freddy, you don't wish in the morning that 'twere evening, and at evening
that 'twere morning again, do you, Freddy, trust ye for it?' 'Now, who might wish such a thing as that, Mrs Martin?--nobody in this
parish?' asked Sammy Blore curiously. 'My lady is always wishing it,' spoke up Miss Tabitha Lark. 'Oh, she! Nobody can be answerable for the wishes of that onnatural
tribe of mankind. Not but that the woman's heart-strings is tried in
many aggravating ways.' 'Ah, poor woman!' said granny. 'The state she finds herself in--neither
maid, wife, nor widow, as you may say--is not the primest form of life
for keeping in good spirits. How long is it since she has heard from Sir
Blount, Tabitha?' 'Two years and more,' said the young woman. 'He went into one side of
Africa, as it might be, three St. Martin's days back. I can mind it,
because 'twas my birthday. And he meant to come out the other side. But
he didn't. He has never come out at all.' 'For all the world like losing a rat in a barley-mow,' said Hezekiah. 'He's lost, though you know where he is.' His comrades nodded. 'Ay, my lady is a walking weariness. I seed her yawn just at the very
moment when the fox was halloaed away by Lornton Copse, and the hounds
runned en all but past her carriage wheels. If I were she I'd see a
little life; though there's no fair, club-walking, nor feast to speak of,
till Easter week,--that's true.' 'She dares not. She's under solemn oath to do no such thing.' 'Be cust if I would keep any such oath! But here's the pa'son, if my
ears don't deceive me.' There was a noise of horse's hoofs without, a stumbling against the door-
scraper, a tethering to the window-shutter, a creaking of the door on its
hinges, and a voice which Swithin recognized as Mr. Torkingham's. He
greeted each of the previous arrivals by name, and stated that he was
glad to see them all so punctually assembled. 'Ay, sir,' said Haymoss Fry. ''Tis only my jints that have kept me from
assembling myself long ago. I'd assemble upon the top of Welland
Steeple, if 'tweren't for my jints. I assure ye, Pa'son Tarkenham, that
in the clitch o' my knees, where the rain used to come through when I was
cutting clots for the new lawn, in old my lady's time, 'tis as if rats
wez gnawing, every now and then. When a feller's young he's too small in
the brain to see how soon a constitution can be squandered, worse luck!' 'True,' said Biles, to fill the time while the parson was engaged in
finding the Psalms. 'A man's a fool till he's forty. Often have I
thought, when hay-pitching, and the small of my back seeming no stouter
than a harnet's, "The devil send that I had but the making of labouring
men for a twelvemonth!" I'd gie every man jack two good backbones, even
if the alteration was as wrong as forgery.' 'Four,--four backbones,' said Haymoss, decisively. 'Yes, four,' threw in Sammy Blore, with additional weight of experience. 'For you want one in front for breast-ploughing and such like, one at the
right side for ground-dressing, and one at the left side for turning
mixens.' 'Well; then next I'd move every man's wyndpipe a good span away from his
glutchpipe, so that at harvest time he could fetch breath in 's drinking,
without being choked and strangled as he is now. Thinks I, when I feel
the victuals going--'

'Now, we'll begin,' interrupted Mr. Torkingham, his mind returning to
this world again on concluding his search for a hymn. Thereupon the racket of chair-legs on the floor signified that they were
settling into their seats,--a disturbance which Swithin took advantage of
by going on tiptoe across the floor above, and putting sheets of paper
over knot-holes in the boarding at points where carpet was lacking, that
his lamp-light might not shine down. The absence of a ceiling beneath
rendered his position virtually that of one suspended in the same
apartment. The parson announced the tune, and his voice burst forth with 'Onward,
Christian soldiers!' in notes of rigid cheerfulness. In this start, however, he was joined only by the girls and boys, the men
furnishing but an accompaniment of ahas and hems. Mr. Torkingham
stopped, and Sammy Blore spoke,--

'Beg your pardon, sir,--if you'll deal mild with us a moment. What with
the wind and walking, my throat's as rough as a grater; and not knowing
you were going to hit up that minute, I hadn't hawked, and I don't think
Hezzy and Nat had, either,--had ye, souls?' 'I hadn't got thorough ready, that's true,' said Hezekiah. 'Quite right of you, then, to speak,' said Mr. Torkingham. 'Don't mind
explaining; we are here for practice. Now clear your throats, then, and
at it again.' There was a noise as of atmospheric hoes and scrapers, and the bass
contingent at last got under way with a time of its own:

'Honwerd, Christen sojers!' 'Ah, that's where we are so defective--the pronunciation,' interrupted
the parson. 'Now repeat after me: "On-ward, Christ-ian, sol-diers."' The choir repeated like an exaggerative echo: 'On-wed, Chris-ting, sol-
jaws!' 'Better!' said the parson, in the strenuously sanguine tones of a man who
got his living by discovering a bright side in things where it was not
very perceptible to other people. 'But it should not be given with quite
so extreme an accent; or we may be called affected by other parishes. And, Nathaniel Chapman, there's a jauntiness in your manner of singing
which is not quite becoming. Why don't you sing more earnestly?' 'My conscience won't let me, sir. They say every man for himself: but,
thank God, I'm not so mean as to lessen old fokes' chances by being
earnest at my time o' life, and they so much nearer the need o't.' 'It's bad reasoning, Nat, I fear. Now, perhaps we had better sol-fa the
tune. Eyes on your books, please. Sol-sol! fa-fa! mi--'

'I can't sing like that, not I!' said Sammy Blore, with condemnatory
astonishment. 'I can sing genuine music, like F and G; but not anything
so much out of the order of nater as that.' 'Perhaps you've brought the wrong book, sir?' chimed in Haymoss, kindly. 'I've knowed music early in life and late,--in short, ever since Luke
Sneap broke his new fiddle-bow in the wedding psalm, when Pa'son Wilton
brought home his bride (you can mind the time, Sammy?--when we sung "His
wife, like a fair fertile vine, her lovely fruit shall bring," when the
young woman turned as red as a rose, not knowing 'twas coming). I've
knowed music ever since then, I say, sir, and never heard the like o'
that. Every martel note had his name of A, B, C, at that time.' 'Yes, yes, men; but this is a more recent system!' 'Still, you can't alter a old-established note that's A or B by nater,'
rejoined Haymoss, with yet deeper conviction that Mr. Torkingham was
getting off his head. 'Now sound A, neighbour Sammy, and let's have a
slap at Christen sojers again, and show the Pa'son the true way!' Sammy produced a private tuning-fork, black and grimy, which, being about
seventy years of age, and wrought before pianoforte builders had sent up
the pitch to make their instruments brilliant, was nearly a note flatter
than the parson's. While an argument as to the true pitch was in
progress, there came a knocking without. 'Somebody's at the door!' said a little treble girl. 'Thought I heard a knock before!' said the relieved choir. The latch was lifted, and a man asked from the darkness, 'Is Mr.
Torkingham here?' 'Yes, Mills. What do you want?' It was the parson's man. 'Oh, if you please,' said Mills, showing an advanced margin of himself
round the door, 'Lady Constantine wants to see you very particular, sir,
and could you call on her after dinner, if you ben't engaged with poor
fokes? She's just had a letter,--so they say,--and it's about that, I
believe.' Finding, on looking at his watch, that it was necessary to start at once
if he meant to see her that night, the parson cut short the practising,
and, naming another night for meeting, he withdrew. All the singers
assisted him on to his cob, and watched him till he disappeared over the
edge of the Bottom. III


Mr. Torkingham trotted briskly onward to his house, a distance of about a
mile, each cottage, as it revealed its half-buried position by its single
light, appearing like a one-eyed night creature watching him from an
ambush. Leaving his horse at the parsonage he performed the remainder of
the journey on foot, crossing the park towards Welland House by a stile
and path, till he struck into the drive near the north door of the
mansion. This drive, it may be remarked, was also the common highway to the lower
village, and hence Lady Constantine's residence and park, as is
occasionally the case with old-fashioned manors, possessed none of the
exclusiveness found in some aristocratic settlements. The parishioners
looked upon the park avenue as their natural thoroughfare, particularly
for christenings, weddings, and funerals, which passed the squire's
mansion with due considerations as to the scenic effect of the same from
the manor windows. Hence the house of Constantine, when going out from
its breakfast, had been continually crossed on the doorstep for the last
two hundred years by the houses of Hodge and Giles in full cry to dinner. At present these collisions were but too infrequent, for though the
villagers passed the north front door as regularly as ever, they seldom
met a Constantine. Only one was there to be met, and she had no zest for
outings before noon. The long, low front of the Great House, as it was called by the parish,
stretching from end to end of the terrace, was in darkness as the vicar
slackened his pace before it, and only the distant fall of water
disturbed the stillness of the manorial precincts. On gaining admittance he found Lady Constantine waiting to receive him. She wore a heavy dress of velvet and lace, and being the only person in
the spacious apartment she looked small and isolated. In her left hand
she held a letter and a couple of at-home cards. The soft dark eyes
which she raised to him as he entered--large, and melancholy by
circumstance far more than by quality--were the natural indices of a warm
and affectionate, perhaps slightly voluptuous temperament, languishing
for want of something to do, cherish, or suffer for. Mr. Torkingham seated himself. His boots, which had seemed elegant in
the farm-house, appeared rather clumsy here, and his coat, that was a
model of tailoring when he stood amid the choir, now exhibited decidedly
strained relations with his limbs. Three years had passed since his
induction to the living of Welland, but he had never as yet found means
to establish that reciprocity with Lady Constantine which usually grows
up, in the course of time, between parsonage and manor-house,--unless,
indeed, either side should surprise the other by showing respectively a
weakness for awkward modern ideas on landownership, or on church
formulas, which had not been the case here. The present meeting,
however, seemed likely to initiate such a reciprocity. There was an appearance of confidence on Lady Constantine's face; she
said she was so very glad that he had come, and looking down at the
letter in her hand was on the point of pulling it from its envelope; but
she did not. After a moment she went on more quickly: 'I wanted your
advice, or rather your opinion, on a serious matter,--on a point of
conscience.' Saying which she laid down the letter and looked at the
cards. It might have been apparent to a more penetrating eye than the vicar's
that Lady Constantine, either from timidity, misgiving, or reconviction,
had swerved from her intended communication, or perhaps decided to begin
at the other end. The parson, who had been expecting a question on some local business or
intelligence, at the tenor of her words altered his face to the higher
branch of his profession. 'I hope I may find myself of service, on that or any other question,' he
said gently. 'I hope so. You may possibly be aware, Mr. Torkingham, that my husband,
Sir Blount Constantine, was, not to mince matters, a mistaken--somewhat
jealous man. Yet you may hardly have discerned it in the short time you
knew him.' 'I had some little knowledge of Sir Blount's character in that respect.' 'Well, on this account my married life with him was not of the most
comfortable kind.' (Lady Constantine's voice dropped to a more pathetic
note.) 'I am sure I gave him no cause for suspicion; though had I known
his disposition sooner I should hardly have dared to marry him. But his
jealousy and doubt of me were not so strong as to divert him from a
purpose of his,--a mania for African lion-hunting, which he dignified by
calling it a scheme of geographical discovery; for he was inordinately
anxious to make a name for himself in that field. It was the one passion
that was stronger than his mistrust of me. Before going away he sat down
with me in this room, and read me a lecture, which resulted in a very
rash offer on my part. When I tell it to you, you will find that it
provides a key to all that is unusual in my life here. He bade me
consider what my position would be when he was gone; hoped that I should
remember what was due to him,--that I would not so behave towards other
men as to bring the name of Constantine into suspicion; and charged me to
avoid levity of conduct in attending any ball, rout, or dinner to which I
might be invited. I, in some contempt for his low opinion of me,
volunteered, there and then, to live like a cloistered nun during his
absence; to go into no society whatever,--scarce even to a neighbour's
dinner-party; and demanded bitterly if that would satisfy him. He said
yes, held me to my word, and gave me no loophole for retracting it. The
inevitable fruits of precipitancy have resulted to me: my life has become
a burden. I get such invitations as these' (holding up the cards), 'but
I so invariably refuse them that they are getting very rare. . . . I ask
you, can I honestly break that promise to my husband?' Mr. Torkingham seemed embarrassed. 'If you promised Sir Blount
Constantine to live in solitude till he comes back, you are, it seems to
me, bound by that promise. I fear that the wish to be released from your
engagement is to some extent a reason why it should be kept. But your
own conscience would surely be the best guide, Lady Constantine?' 'My conscience is quite bewildered with its responsibilities,' she
continued, with a sigh. 'Yet it certainly does sometimes say to me
that--that I ought to keep my word. Very well; I must go on as I am
going, I suppose.' 'If you respect a vow, I think you must respect your own,' said the
parson, acquiring some further firmness. 'Had it been wrung from you by
compulsion, moral or physical, it would have been open to you to break
it. But as you proposed a vow when your husband only required a good
intention, I think you ought to adhere to it; or what is the pride worth
that led you to offer it?' 'Very well,' she said, with resignation. 'But it was quite a work of
supererogation on my part.' 'That you proposed it in a supererogatory spirit does not lessen your
obligation, having once put yourself under that obligation. St. Paul, in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, says, "An oath for confirmation is an end of
all strife." And you will readily recall the words of Ecclesiastes, "Pay
that which thou hast vowed. Better is it that thou shouldest not vow
than that thou shouldest vow and not pay." Why not write to Sir Blount,
tell him the inconvenience of such a bond, and ask him to release you?' 'No; never will I. The expression of such a desire would, in his mind,
be a sufficient reason for disallowing it. I'll keep my word.' Mr. Torkingham rose to leave. After she had held out her hand to him,
when he had crossed the room, and was within two steps of the door, she
said, 'Mr. Torkingham.' He stopped. 'What I have told you is only the
least part of what I sent for you to tell you.' Mr. Torkingham walked back to her side. 'What is the rest of it, then?' he asked, with grave surprise. 'It is a true revelation, as far as it goes; but there is something more. I have received this letter, and I wanted to say--something.' 'Then say it now, my dear lady.' 'No,' she answered, with a look of utter inability. 'I cannot speak of
it now! Some other time. Don't stay. Please consider this conversation
as private. Good-night.' IV


It was a bright starlight night, a week or ten days later. There had
been several such nights since the occasion of Lady Constantine's promise
to Swithin St. Cleeve to come and study astronomical phenomena on the
Rings-Hill column; but she had not gone there. This evening she sat at a
window, the blind of which had not been drawn down. Her elbow rested on
a little table, and her cheek on her hand. Her eyes were attracted by
the brightness of the planet Jupiter, as he rode in the ecliptic
opposite, beaming down upon her as if desirous of notice. Beneath the planet could be still discerned the dark edges of the park
landscape against the sky. As one of its features, though nearly
screened by the trees which had been planted to shut out the fallow
tracts of the estate, rose the upper part of the column. It was hardly
visible now, even if visible at all; yet Lady Constantine knew from
daytime experience its exact bearing from the window at which she leaned. The knowledge that there it still was, despite its rapid envelopment by
the shades, led her lonely mind to her late meeting on its summit with
the young astronomer, and to her promise to honour him with a visit for
learning some secrets about the scintillating bodies overhead. The
curious juxtaposition of youthful ardour and old despair that she had
found in the lad would have made him interesting to a woman of
perception, apart from his fair hair and early-Christian face. But such
is the heightening touch of memory that his beauty was probably richer in
her imagination than in the real. It was a moot point to consider
whether the temptations that would be brought to bear upon him in his
course would exceed the staying power of his nature. Had he been a
wealthy youth he would have seemed one to tremble for. In spite of his
attractive ambitions and gentlemanly bearing, she thought it would
possibly be better for him if he never became known outside his lonely
tower,--forgetting that he had received such intellectual enlargement as
would probably make his continuance in Welland seem, in his own eye, a
slight upon his father's branch of his family, whose social standing had
been, only a few years earlier, but little removed from her own. Suddenly she flung a cloak about her and went out on the terrace. She
passed down the steps to the lower lawn, through the door to the open
park, and there stood still. The tower was now discernible. As the
words in which a thought is expressed develop a further thought, so did
the fact of her having got so far influence her to go further. A person
who had casually observed her gait would have thought it irregular; and
the lessenings and increasings of speed with which she proceeded in the
direction of the pillar could be accounted for only by a motive much more
disturbing than an intention to look through a telescope. Thus she went
on, till, leaving the park, she crossed the turnpike-road, and entered
the large field, in the middle of which the fir-clad hill stood like Mont
St. Michel in its bay. The stars were so bright as distinctly to show her the place, and now she
could see a faint light at the top of the column, which rose like a
shadowy finger pointing to the upper constellations. There was no wind,
in a human sense; but a steady stertorous breathing from the fir-trees
showed that, now as always, there was movement in apparent stagnation. Nothing but an absolute vacuum could paralyze their utterance. The door of the tower was shut. It was something more than the
freakishness which is engendered by a sickening monotony that had led
Lady Constantine thus far, and hence she made no ado about admitting
herself. Three years ago, when her every action was a thing of
propriety, she had known of no possible purpose which could have led her
abroad in a manner such as this. She ascended the tower noiselessly. On raising her head above the
hatchway she beheld Swithin bending over a scroll of paper which lay on
the little table beside him. The small lantern that illuminated it
showed also that he was warmly wrapped up in a coat and thick cap, behind
him standing the telescope on its frame. What was he doing? She looked over his shoulder upon the paper, and saw
figures and signs. When he had jotted down something he went to the
telescope again. 'What are you doing to-night?' she said in a low voice. Swithin started, and turned. The faint lamp-light was sufficient to
reveal her face to him. 'Tedious work, Lady Constantine,' he answered, without betraying much
surprise. 'Doing my best to watch phenomenal stars, as I may call them.' 'You said you would show me the heavens if I could come on a starlight
night. I have come.' Swithin, as a preliminary, swept round the telescope to Jupiter, and
exhibited to her the glory of that orb. Then he directed the instrument
to the less bright shape of Saturn. 'Here,' he said, warming up to the subject, 'we see a world which is to
my mind by far the most wonderful in the solar system. Think of streams
of satellites or meteors racing round and round the planet like a fly-
wheel, so close together as to seem solid matter!' He entered further
and further into the subject, his ideas gathering momentum as he went on,
like his pet heavenly bodies. When he paused for breath she said, in tones very different from his own,
'I ought now to tell you that, though I am interested in the stars, they
were not what I came to see you about. . . . I first thought of
disclosing the matter to Mr. Torkingham; but I altered my mind, and
decided on you.' She spoke in so low a voice that he might not have heard her. At all
events, abstracted by his grand theme, he did not heed her. He
continued,--

'Well, we will get outside the solar system altogether,--leave the whole
group of sun, primary and secondary planets quite behind us in our
flight, as a bird might leave its bush and sweep into the whole forest. Now what do you see, Lady Constantine?' He levelled the achromatic at
Sirius. She said that she saw a bright star, though it only seemed a point of
light now as before. 'That's because it is so distant that no magnifying will bring its size
up to zero. Though called a fixed star, it is, like all fixed stars,
moving with inconceivable velocity; but no magnifying will show that
velocity as anything but rest.' And thus they talked on about Sirius, and then about other stars

      . . . in the scrowl
   Of all those beasts, and fish, and fowl,
   With which, like Indian plantations,
   The learned stock the constellations,

till he asked her how many stars she thought were visible to them at that
moment. She looked around over the magnificent stretch of sky that their high
position unfolded. 'Oh, thousands, hundreds of thousands,' she said
absently. 'No. There are only about three thousand. Now, how many do you think
are brought within sight by the help of a powerful telescope?' 'I won't guess.' 'Twenty millions. So that, whatever the stars were made for, they were
not made to please our eyes. It is just the same in everything; nothing
is made for man.' 'Is it that notion which makes you so sad for your age?' she asked, with
almost maternal solicitude. 'I think astronomy is a bad study for you. It makes you feel human insignificance too plainly.' 'Perhaps it does. However,' he added more cheerfully, 'though I feel the
study to be one almost tragic in its quality, I hope to be the new
Copernicus. What he was to the solar system I aim to be to the systems
beyond.' Then, by means of the instrument at hand, they travelled together from
the earth to Uranus and the mysterious outskirts of the solar system;
from the solar system to a star in the Swan, the nearest fixed star in
the northern sky; from the star in the Swan to remoter stars; thence to
the remotest visible; till the ghastly chasm which they had bridged by a
fragile line of sight was realized by Lady Constantine. 'We are now traversing distances beside which the immense line stretching
from the earth to the sun is but an invisible point,' said the youth. 'When, just now, we had reached a planet whose remoteness is a hundred
times the remoteness of the sun from the earth, we were only a two
thousandth part of the journey to the spot at which we have optically
arrived now.' 'Oh, pray don't; it overpowers me!' she replied, not without seriousness. 'It makes me feel that it is not worth while to live; it quite
annihilates me.' 'If it annihilates your ladyship to roam over these yawning spaces just
once, think how it must annihilate me to be, as it were, in constant
suspension amid them night after night.' 'Yes. . . . It was not really this subject that I came to see you upon,
Mr. St. Cleeve,' she began a second time. 'It was a personal matter.' 'I am listening, Lady Constantine.' 'I will tell it you. Yet no,--not this moment. Let us finish this grand
subject first; it dwarfs mine.' It would have been difficult to judge from her accents whether she were
afraid to broach her own matter, or really interested in his. Or a
certain youthful pride that he evidenced at being the elucidator of such
a large theme, and at having drawn her there to hear and observe it, may
have inclined her to indulge him for kindness' sake. Thereupon he took exception to her use of the word 'grand' as descriptive
of the actual universe:

'The imaginary picture of the sky as the concavity of a dome whose base
extends from horizon to horizon of our earth is grand, simply grand, and
I wish I had never got beyond looking at it in that way. But the actual
sky is a horror.' 'A new view of our old friends, the stars,' she said, smiling up at them. 'But such an obviously true one!' said the young man. 'You would hardly
think, at first, that horrid monsters lie up there waiting to be
discovered by any moderately penetrating mind--monsters to which those of
the oceans bear no sort of comparison.' 'What monsters may they be?' 'Impersonal monsters, namely, Immensities. Until a person has thought
out the stars and their inter-spaces, he has hardly learnt that there are
things much more terrible than monsters of shape, namely, monsters of
magnitude without known shape. Such monsters are the voids and waste
places of the sky. Look, for instance, at those pieces of darkness in
the Milky Way,' he went on, pointing with his finger to where the galaxy
stretched across over their heads with the luminousness of a frosted web. 'You see that dark opening in it near the Swan? There is a still more
remarkable one south of the equator, called the Coal Sack, as a sort of
nickname that has a farcical force from its very inadequacy. In these
our sight plunges quite beyond any twinkler we have yet visited. Those
are deep wells for the human mind to let itself down into, leave alone
the human body! and think of the side caverns and secondary abysses to
right and left as you pass on!' Lady Constantine was heedful and silent. He tried to give her yet another idea of the size of the universe; never
was there a more ardent endeavour to bring down the immeasurable to human
comprehension! By figures of speech and apt comparisons he took her mind
into leading-strings, compelling her to follow him into wildernesses of
which she had never in her life even realized the existence. 'There is a size at which dignity begins,' he exclaimed; 'further on
there is a size at which grandeur begins; further on there is a size at
which solemnity begins; further on, a size at which awfulness begins;
further on, a size at which ghastliness begins. That size faintly
approaches the size of the stellar universe. So am I not right in saying
that those minds who exert their imaginative powers to bury themselves in
the depths of that universe merely strain their faculties to gain a new
horror?' Standing, as she stood, in the presence of the stellar universe, under
the very eyes of the constellations, Lady Constantine apprehended
something of the earnest youth's argument. 'And to add a new weirdness to what the sky possesses in its size and
formlessness, there is involved the quality of decay. For all the wonder
of these everlasting stars, eternal spheres, and what not, they are not
everlasting, they are not eternal; they burn out like candles. You see
that dying one in the body of the Greater Bear? Two centuries ago it was
as bright as the others. The senses may become terrified by plunging
among them as they are, but there is a pitifulness even in their glory. Imagine them all extinguished, and your mind feeling its way through a
heaven of total darkness, occasionally striking against the black,
invisible cinders of those stars. . . . If you are cheerful, and wish to
remain so, leave the study of astronomy alone. Of all the sciences, it
alone deserves the character of the terrible.' 'I am not altogether cheerful.' 'Then if, on the other hand, you are restless and anxious about the
future, study astronomy at once. Your troubles will be reduced
amazingly. But your study will reduce them in a singular way, by
reducing the importance of everything. So that the science is still
terrible, even as a panacea. It is quite impossible to think at all
adequately of the sky--of what the sky substantially is, without feeling
it as a juxtaposed nightmare. It is better--far better--for men to
forget the universe than to bear it clearly in mind! . . . But you say
the universe was not really what you came to see me about. What was it,
may I ask, Lady Constantine?' She mused, and sighed, and turned to him with something pathetic in her. 'The immensity of the subject you have engaged me on has completely
crushed my subject out of me! Yours is celestial; mine lamentably human! And the less must give way to the greater.' 'But is it, in a human sense, and apart from macrocosmic magnitudes,
important?' he inquired, at last attracted by her manner; for he began to
perceive, in spite of his prepossession, that she had really something on
her mind. 'It is as important as personal troubles usually are.' Notwithstanding her preconceived notion of coming to Swithin as employer
to dependant, as _chatelaine_ to page, she was falling into confidential
intercourse with him. His vast and romantic endeavours lent him a
personal force and charm which she could not but apprehend. In the
presence of the immensities that his young mind had, as it were, brought
down from above to hers, they became unconsciously equal. There was,
moreover, an inborn liking in Lady Constantine to dwell less on her
permanent position as a county lady than on her passing emotions as a
woman. 'I will postpone the matter I came to charge you with,' she resumed,
smiling. 'I must reconsider it. Now I will return.' 'Allow me to show you out through the trees and across the fields?' She said neither a distinct yes nor no; and, descending the tower, they
threaded the firs and crossed the ploughed field. By an odd coincidence
he remarked, when they drew near the Great House--

'You may possibly be interested in knowing, Lady Constantine, that that
medium-sized star you see over there, low down in the south, is precisely
over Sir Blount Constantine's head in the middle of Africa.' 'How very strange that you should have said so!' she answered. 'You have
broached for me the very subject I had come to speak of.' 'On a domestic matter?' he said, with surprise. 'Yes. What a small matter it seems now, after our astronomical
stupendousness! and yet on my way to you it so far transcended the
ordinary matters of my life as the subject you have led me up to
transcends this. But,' with a little laugh, 'I will endeavour to sink
down to such ephemeral trivialities as human tragedy, and explain, since
I have come. The point is, I want a helper: no woman ever wanted one
more. For days I have wanted a trusty friend who could go on a secret
errand for me. It is necessary that my messenger should be educated,
should be intelligent, should be silent as the grave. Do you give me
your solemn promise as to the last point, if I confide in you?' 'Most emphatically, Lady Constantine.' 'Your right hand upon the compact.' He gave his hand, and raised hers to his lips. In addition to his
respect for her as the lady of the manor, there was the admiration of
twenty years for twenty-eight or nine in such relations. 'I trust you,' she said. 'Now, beyond the above conditions, it was
specially necessary that my agent should have known Sir Blount
Constantine well by sight when he was at home. For the errand is
concerning my husband; I am much disturbed at what I have heard about
him.' 'I am indeed sorry to know it.' 'There are only two people in the parish who fulfil all the
conditions,--Mr. Torkingham, and yourself. I sent for Mr. Torkingham,
and he came. I could not tell him. I felt at the last moment that he
wouldn't do. I have come to you because I think you will do. This is
it: my husband has led me and all the world to believe that he is in
Africa, hunting lions. I have had a mysterious letter informing me that
he has been seen in London, in very peculiar circumstances. The truth of
this I want ascertained. Will you go on the journey?' 'Personally, I would go to the end of the world for you, Lady
Constantine; but--'

'No buts!' 'How can I leave?' 'Why not?' 'I am preparing a work on variable stars. There is one of these which I
have exceptionally observed for several months, and on this my great
theory is mainly based. It has been hitherto called irregular; but I
have detected a periodicity in its so-called irregularities which, if
proved, would add some very valuable facts to those known on this
subject, one of the most interesting, perplexing, and suggestive in the
whole field of astronomy. Now, to clinch my theory, there should be a
sudden variation this week,--or at latest next week,--and I have to watch
every night not to let it pass. You see my reason for declining, Lady
Constantine.' 'Young men are always so selfish!' she said. 'It might ruin the whole of my year's labour if I leave now!' returned
the youth, greatly hurt. 'Could you not wait a fortnight longer?' 'No,--no. Don't think that I have asked you, pray. I have no wish to
inconvenience you.' 'Lady Constantine, don't be angry with me! Will you do this,--watch the
star for me while I am gone? If you are prepared to do it effectually, I
will go.' 'Will it be much trouble?' 'It will be some trouble. You would have to come here every clear
evening about nine. If the sky were not clear, then you would have to
come at four in the morning, should the clouds have dispersed.' 'Could not the telescope be brought to my house?' Swithin shook his head. 'Perhaps you did not observe its real size,--that it was fixed to a frame-
work? I could not afford to buy an equatorial, and I have been obliged
to rig up an apparatus of my own devising, so as to make it in some
measure answer the purpose of an equatorial. It _could_ be moved, but I
would rather not touch it.' 'Well, I'll go to the telescope,' she went on, with an emphasis that was
not wholly playful. 'You are the most ungallant youth I ever met with;
but I suppose I must set that down to science. Yes, I'll go to the tower
at nine every night.' 'And alone? I should prefer to keep my pursuits there unknown.' 'And alone,' she answered, quite overborne by his inflexibility. 'You will not miss the morning observation, if it should be necessary?' 'I have given my word.' 'And I give mine. I suppose I ought not to have been so exacting!' He
spoke with that sudden emotional sense of his own insignificance which
made these alternations of mood possible. 'I will go anywhere--do
anything for you--this moment--to-morrow or at any time. But you must
return with me to the tower, and let me show you the observing process.' They retraced their steps, the tender hoar-frost taking the imprint of
their feet, while two stars in the Twins looked down upon their two
persons through the trees, as if those two persons could bear some sort
of comparison with them. On the tower the instructions were given. When
all was over, and he was again conducting her to the Great House she
said--

'When can you start?' 'Now,' said Swithin. 'So much the better. You shall go up by the night mail.' V


On the third morning after the young man's departure Lady Constantine
opened the post-bag anxiously. Though she had risen before four o'clock,
and crossed to the tower through the gray half-light when every blade and
twig were furred with rime, she felt no languor. Expectation could
banish at cock-crow the eye-heaviness which apathy had been unable to
disperse all the day long. There was, as she had hoped, a letter from Swithin St. Cleeve. 'DEAR LADY CONSTANTINE,--I have quite succeeded in my mission, and
   shall return to-morrow at 10 p.m. I hope you have not failed in the
   observations. Watching the star through an opera-glass Sunday night,
   I fancied some change had taken place, but I could not make myself
   sure. Your memoranda for that night I await with impatience. Please
   don't neglect to write down _at the moment_, all remarkable
   appearances both as to colour and intensity; and be very exact as to
   time, which correct in the way I showed you.--I am, dear Lady
   Constantine, yours most faithfully,

   SWITHIN ST. CLEEVE.' Not another word in the letter about his errand; his mind ran on nothing
but this astronomical subject. He had succeeded in his mission, and yet
he did not even say yes or no to the great question,--whether or not her
husband was masquerading in London at the address she had given. 'Was ever anything so provoking!' she cried. However, the time was not long to wait. His way homeward would lie
within a stone's-throw of the manor-house, and though for certain reasons
she had forbidden him to call at the late hour of his arrival, she could
easily intercept him in the avenue. At twenty minutes past ten she went
out into the drive, and stood in the dark. Seven minutes later she heard
his footstep, and saw his outline in the slit of light between the avenue-
trees. He had a valise in one hand, a great-coat on his arm, and under
his arm a parcel which seemed to be very precious, from the manner in
which he held it. 'Lady Constantine?' he asked softly. 'Yes,' she said, in her excitement holding out both her hands, though he
had plainly not expected her to offer one. 'Did you watch the star?' 'I'll tell you everything in detail; but, pray, your errand first!' 'Yes, it's all right. Did you watch every night, not missing one?' 'I forgot to go--twice,' she murmured contritely. 'Oh, Lady Constantine!' he cried in dismay. 'How could you serve me so! what shall I do?' 'Please forgive me! Indeed, I could not help it. I had watched and
watched, and nothing happened; and somehow my vigilance relaxed when I
found nothing was likely to take place in the star.' 'But the very circumstance of it not having happened, made it all the
more likely every day.' 'Have you--seen--' she began imploringly. Swithin sighed, lowered his thoughts to sublunary things, and told
briefly the story of his journey. Sir Blount Constantine was not in
London at the address which had been anonymously sent her. It was a
mistake of identity. The person who had been seen there Swithin had
sought out. He resembled Sir Blount strongly; but he was a stranger. 'How can I reward you!' she exclaimed, when he had done. 'In no way but by giving me your good wishes in what I am going to tell
you on my own account.' He spoke in tones of mysterious exultation. 'This parcel is going to make my fame!' 'What is it?' 'A huge object-glass for the great telescope I am so busy about! Such a
magnificent aid to science has never entered this county before, you may
depend.' He produced from under his arm the carefully cuddled-up package, which
was in shape a round flat disk, like a dinner-plate, tied in paper. Proceeding to explain his plans to her more fully, he walked with her
towards the door by which she had emerged. It was a little side wicket
through a wall dividing the open park from the garden terraces. Here for
a moment he placed his valise and parcel on the coping of the stone
balustrade, till he had bidden her farewell. Then he turned, and in
laying hold of his bag by the dim light pushed the parcel over the
parapet. It fell smash upon the paved walk ten or a dozen feet beneath. 'Oh, good heavens!' he cried in anguish. 'What?' 'My object-glass broken!' 'Is it of much value?' 'It cost all I possess!' He ran round by the steps to the lower lawn, Lady Constantine following,
as he continued, 'It is a magnificent eight-inch first quality object
lens! I took advantage of my journey to London to get it! I have been
six weeks making the tube of milled board; and as I had not enough money
by twelve pounds for the lens, I borrowed it of my grandmother out of her
last annuity payment. What can be, can be done!' 'Perhaps it is not broken.' He felt on the ground, found the parcel, and shook it. A clicking noise
issued from inside. Swithin smote his forehead with his hand, and walked
up and down like a mad fellow. 'My telescope! I have waited nine months for this lens. Now the
possibility of setting up a really powerful instrument is over! It is
too cruel--how could it happen! . . . Lady Constantine, I am ashamed of
myself,--before you. Oh, but, Lady Constantine, if you only knew what it
is to a person engaged in science to have the means of clinching a theory
snatched away at the last moment! It is I against the world; and when
the world has accidents on its side in addition to its natural strength,
what chance for me!' The young astronomer leant against the wall, and was silent. His misery
was of an intensity and kind with that of Palissy, in these struggles
with an adverse fate. 'Don't mind it,--pray don't!' said Lady Constantine. 'It is dreadfully
unfortunate! You have my whole sympathy. Can it be mended?' 'Mended,--no, no!' 'Cannot you do with your present one a little longer?' 'It is altogether inferior, cheap, and bad!' 'I'll get you another,--yes, indeed, I will! Allow me to get you another
as soon as possible. I'll do anything to assist you out of your trouble;
for I am most anxious to see you famous. I know you will be a great
astronomer, in spite of this mishap! Come, say I may get a new one.' Swithin took her hand. He could not trust himself to speak. * * * * *

Some days later a little box of peculiar kind came to the Great House. It
was addressed to Lady Constantine, 'with great care.' She had it partly
opened and taken to her own little writing-room; and after lunch, when
she had dressed for walking, she took from the box a paper parcel like
the one which had met with the accident. This she hid under her mantle,
as if she had stolen it; and, going out slowly across the lawn, passed
through the little door before spoken of, and was soon hastening in the
direction of the Rings-Hill column. There was a bright sun overhead on that afternoon of early spring, and
its rays shed an unusual warmth on south-west aspects, though shady
places still retained the look and feel of winter. Rooks were already
beginning to build new nests or to mend up old ones, and clamorously
called in neighbours to give opinions on difficulties in their
architecture. Lady Constantine swerved once from her path, as if she had
decided to go to the homestead where Swithin lived; but on second
thoughts she bent her steps to the column. Drawing near it she looked up; but by reason of the height of the parapet
nobody could be seen thereon who did not stand on tiptoe. She thought,
however, that her young friend might possibly see her, if he were there,
and come down; and that he was there she soon ascertained by finding the
door unlocked, and the key inside. No movement, however, reached her
ears from above, and she began to ascend. Meanwhile affairs at the top of the column had progressed as follows. The
afternoon being exceptionally fine, Swithin had ascended about two
o'clock, and, seating himself at the little table which he had
constructed on the spot, he began reading over his notes and examining
some astronomical journals that had reached him in the morning. The sun
blazed into the hollow roof-space as into a tub, and the sides kept out
every breeze. Though the month was February below it was May in the
abacus of the column. This state of the atmosphere, and the fact that on
the previous night he had pursued his observations till past two o'clock,
produced in him at the end of half an hour an overpowering inclination to
sleep. Spreading on the lead-work a thick rug which he kept up there, he
flung himself down against the parapet, and was soon in a state of
unconsciousness. It was about ten minutes afterwards that a soft rustle of silken clothes
came up the spiral staircase, and, hesitating onwards, reached the
orifice, where appeared the form of Lady Constantine. She did not at
first perceive that he was present, and stood still to reconnoitre. Her
eye glanced over his telescope, now wrapped up, his table and papers, his
observing-chair, and his contrivances for making the best of a deficiency
of instruments. All was warm, sunny, and silent, except that a solitary
bee, which had somehow got within the hollow of the abacus, was singing
round inquiringly, unable to discern that ascent was the only mode of
escape. In another moment she beheld the astronomer, lying in the sun
like a sailor in the main-top. Lady Constantine coughed slightly; he did not awake. She then entered,
and, drawing the parcel from beneath her cloak, placed it on the table. After this she waited, looking for a long time at his sleeping face,
which had a very interesting appearance. She seemed reluctant to leave,
yet wanted resolution to wake him; and, pencilling his name on the
parcel, she withdrew to the staircase, where the brushing of her dress
decreased to silence as she receded round and round on her way to the
base. Swithin still slept on, and presently the rustle began again in the far-
down interior of the column. The door could be heard closing, and the
rustle came nearer, showing that she had shut herself in,--no doubt to
lessen the risk of an accidental surprise by any roaming villager. When
Lady Constantine reappeared at the top, and saw the parcel still
untouched and Swithin asleep as before, she exhibited some
disappointment; but she did not retreat. Looking again at him, her eyes became so sentimentally fixed on his face
that it seemed as if she could not withdraw them. There lay, in the
shape of an Antinous, no _amoroso_, no gallant, but a guileless
philosopher. His parted lips were lips which spoke, not of love, but of
millions of miles; those were eyes which habitually gazed, not into the
depths of other eyes, but into other worlds. Within his temples dwelt
thoughts, not of woman's looks, but of stellar aspects and the
configuration of constellations. Thus, to his physical attractiveness was added the attractiveness of
mental inaccessibility. The ennobling influence of scientific pursuits
was demonstrated by the speculative purity which expressed itself in his
eyes whenever he looked at her in speaking, and in the childlike faults
of manner which arose from his obtuseness to their difference of sex. He
had never, since becoming a man, looked even so low as to the level of a
Lady Constantine. His heaven at present was truly in the skies, and not
in that only other place where they say it can be found, in the eyes of
some daughter of Eve. Would any Circe or Calypso--and if so, what
one?--ever check this pale-haired scientist's nocturnal sailings into the
interminable spaces overhead, and hurl all his mighty calculations on
cosmic force and stellar fire into Limbo? Oh, the pity of it, if such
should be the case! She became much absorbed in these very womanly reflections; and at last
Lady Constantine sighed, perhaps she herself did not exactly know why. Then a very soft expression lighted on her lips and eyes, and she looked
at one jump ten years more youthful than before--quite a girl in aspect,
younger than he. On the table lay his implements; among them a pair of
scissors, which, to judge from the shreds around, had been used in
cutting curves in thick paper for some calculating process. What whim, agitation, or attraction prompted the impulse, nobody knows;
but she took the scissors, and, bending over the sleeping youth, cut off
one of the curls, or rather crooks,--for they hardly reached a curl,--into
which each lock of his hair chose to twist itself in the last inch of its
length. The hair fell upon the rug. She picked it up quickly, returned
the scissors to the table, and, as if her dignity had suddenly become
ashamed of her fantasies, hastened through the door, and descended the
staircase. VI


When his nap had naturally exhausted itself Swithin awoke. He awoke
without any surprise, for he not unfrequently gave to sleep in the day-
time what he had stolen from it in the night watches. The first object
that met his eyes was the parcel on the table, and, seeing his name
inscribed thereon, he made no scruple to open it. The sun flashed upon a lens of surprising magnitude, polished to such a
smoothness that the eye could scarcely meet its reflections. Here was a
crystal in whose depths were to be seen more wonders than had been
revealed by the crystals of all the Cagliostros. Swithin, hot with joyousness, took this treasure to his telescope
manufactory at the homestead; then he started off for the Great House. On gaining its precincts he felt shy of calling, never having received
any hint or permission to do so; while Lady Constantine's mysterious
manner of leaving the parcel seemed to demand a like mysteriousness in
his approaches to her. All the afternoon he lingered about uncertainly,
in the hope of intercepting her on her return from a drive, occasionally
walking with an indifferent lounge across glades commanded by the
windows, that if she were in-doors she might know he was near. But she
did not show herself during the daylight. Still impressed by her playful
secrecy he carried on the same idea after dark, by returning to the house
and passing through the garden door on to the lawn front, where he sat on
the parapet that breasted the terrace. Now she frequently came out here for a melancholy saunter after dinner,
and to-night was such an occasion. Swithin went forward, and met her at
nearly the spot where he had dropped the lens some nights earlier. 'I have come to see you, Lady Constantine. How did the glass get on my
table?' She laughed as lightly as a girl; that he had come to her in this way was
plainly no offence thus far. 'Perhaps it was dropped from the clouds by a bird,' she said. 'Why should you be so good to me?' he cried. 'One good turn deserves another,' answered she. 'Dear Lady Constantine! Whatever discoveries result from this shall be
ascribed to you as much as to me. Where should I have been without your
gift?' 'You would possibly have accomplished your purpose just the same, and
have been so much the nobler for your struggle against ill-luck. I hope
that now you will be able to proceed with your large telescope as if
nothing had happened.' 'O yes, I will, certainly. I am afraid I showed too much feeling, the
reverse of stoical, when the accident occurred. That was not very noble
of me.' 'There is nothing unnatural in such feeling at your age. When you are
older you will smile at such moods, and at the mishaps that gave rise to
them.' 'Ah, I perceive you think me weak in the extreme,' he said, with just a
shade of pique. 'But you will never realize that an incident which
filled but a degree in the circle of your thoughts covered the whole
circumference of mine. No person can see exactly what and where
another's horizon is.' They soon parted, and she re-entered the house, where she sat reflecting
for some time, till she seemed to fear that she had wounded his feelings. She awoke in the night, and thought and thought on the same thing, till
she had worked herself into a feverish fret about it. When it was
morning she looked across at the tower, and sitting down, impulsively
wrote the following note:--

   'DEAR MR. ST. CLEEVE,--I cannot allow you to remain under the
   impression that I despised your scientific endeavours in speaking as I
   did last night. I think you were too sensitive to my remark. But
   perhaps you were agitated with the labours of the day, and I fear that
   watching so late at night must make you very weary. If I can help you
   again, please let me know. I never realized the grandeur of astronomy
   till you showed me how to do so. Also let me know about the new
   telescope. Come and see me at any time. After your great kindness in
   being my messenger I can never do enough for you. I wish you had a
   mother or sister, and pity your loneliness! I am lonely too.--Yours
   truly,

   VIVIETTE CONSTANTINE.' She was so anxious that he should get this letter the same day that she
ran across to the column with it during the morning, preferring to be her
own emissary in so curious a case. The door, as she had expected, was
locked; and, slipping the letter under it, she went home again. During
lunch her ardour in the cause of Swithin's hurt feelings cooled down,
till she exclaimed to herself, as she sat at her lonely table, 'What
could have possessed me to write in that way!' After lunch she went faster to the tower than she had gone in the early
morning, and peeped eagerly into the chink under the door. She could
discern no letter, and, on trying the latch, found that the door would
open. The letter was gone, Swithin having obviously arrived in the
interval. She blushed a blush which seemed to say, 'I am getting foolishly
interested in this young man.' She had, in short, in her own opinion,
somewhat overstepped the bounds of dignity. Her instincts did not square
well with the formalities of her existence, and she walked home
despondently. Had a concert, bazaar, lecture, or Dorcas meeting required the patronage
and support of Lady Constantine at this juncture, the circumstance would
probably have been sufficient to divert her mind from Swithin St. Cleeve
and astronomy for some little time. But as none of these incidents were
within the range of expectation--Welland House and parish lying far from
large towns and watering-places--the void in her outer life continued,
and with it the void in her life within. The youth had not answered her letter; neither had he called upon her in
response to the invitation she had regretted, with the rest of the
epistle, as being somewhat too warmly informal for black and white. To
speak tenderly to him was one thing, to write another--that was her
feeling immediately after the event; but his counter-move of silence and
avoidance, though probably the result of pure unconsciousness on his
part, completely dispersed such self-considerations now. Her eyes never
fell upon the Rings-Hill column without a solicitous wonder arising as to
what he was doing. A true woman, she would assume the remotest
possibility to be the most likely contingency, if the possibility had the
recommendation of being tragical; and she now feared that something was
wrong with Swithin St. Cleeve. Yet there was not the least doubt that he
had become so immersed in the business of the new telescope as to forget
everything else. On Sunday, between the services, she walked to Little Welland, chiefly
for the sake of giving a run to a house-dog, a large St. Bernard, of whom
she was fond. The distance was but short; and she returned along a
narrow lane, divided from the river by a hedge, through whose leafless
twigs the ripples flashed silver lights into her eyes. Here she
discovered Swithin, leaning over a gate, his eyes bent upon the stream. The dog first attracted his attention; then he heard her, and turned
round. She had never seen him looking so despondent. 'You have never called, though I invited you,' said Lady Constantine. 'My great telescope won't work!' he replied lugubriously. 'I am sorry for that. So it has made you quite forget me?' 'Ah, yes; you wrote me a very kind letter, which I ought to have
answered. Well, I _did_ forget, Lady Constantine. My new telescope
won't work, and I don't know what to do about it at all!' 'Can I assist you any further?' 'No, I fear not. Besides, you have assisted me already.' 'What would really help you out of all your difficulties? Something
would, surely?' He shook his head. 'There must be some solution to them?' 'O yes,' he replied, with a hypothetical gaze into the stream; '_some_
solution of course--an equatorial, for instance.' 'What's that?' 'Briefly, an impossibility. It is a splendid instrument, with an object
lens of, say, eight or nine inches aperture, mounted with its axis
parallel to the earth's axis, and fitted up with graduated circles for
denoting right ascensions and declinations; besides having special eye-
pieces, a finder, and all sorts of appliances--clock-work to make the
telescope follow the motion in right ascension--I cannot tell you half
the conveniences. Ah, an equatorial is a thing indeed!' 'An equatorial is the one instrument required to make you quite happy?' 'Well, yes.' 'I'll see what I can do.' 'But, Lady Constantine,' cried the amazed astronomer, 'an equatorial such
as I describe costs as much as two grand pianos!' She was rather staggered at this news; but she rallied gallantly, and
said, 'Never mind. I'll make inquiries.' 'But it could not be put on the tower without people seeing it! It would
have to be fixed to the masonry. And there must be a dome of some kind
to keep off the rain. A tarpaulin might do.' Lady Constantine reflected. 'It would be a great business, I see,' she
said. 'Though as far as the fixing and roofing go, I would of course
consent to your doing what you liked with the old column. My workmen
could fix it, could they not?' 'O yes. But what would Sir Blount say, if he came home and saw the
goings on?' Lady Constantine turned aside to hide a sudden displacement of blood from
her cheek. 'Ah--my husband!' she whispered. . . . 'I am just now going
to church,' she added in a repressed and hurried tone. 'I will think of
this matter.' In church it was with Lady Constantine as with the Lord Angelo of Vienna
in a similar situation--Heaven had her empty words only, and her
invention heard not her tongue. She soon recovered from the momentary
consternation into which she had fallen at Swithin's abrupt query. The
possibility of that young astronomer becoming a renowned scientist by her
aid was a thought which gave her secret pleasure. The course of
rendering him instant material help began to have a great fascination for
her; it was a new and unexpected channel for her cribbed and confined
emotions. With experiences so much wider than his, Lady Constantine saw
that the chances were perhaps a million to one against Swithin St. Cleeve
ever being Astronomer Royal, or Astronomer Extraordinary of any sort; yet
the remaining chance in his favour was one of those possibilities which,
to a woman of bounding intellect and venturesome fancy, are pleasanter to
dwell on than likely issues that have no savour of high speculation in
them. The equatorial question was a great one; and she had caught such a
large spark from his enthusiasm that she could think of nothing so
piquant as how to obtain the important instrument. When Tabitha Lark arrived at the Great House next day, instead of finding
Lady Constantine in bed, as formerly, she discovered her in the library,
poring over what astronomical works she had been able to unearth from the
worm-eaten shelves. As these publications were, for a science of such
rapid development, somewhat venerable, there was not much help of a
practical kind to be gained from them. Nevertheless, the equatorial
retained a hold upon her fancy, till she became as eager to see one on
the Rings-Hill column as Swithin himself. The upshot of it was that Lady Constantine sent a messenger that evening
to Welland Bottom, where the homestead of Swithin's grandmother was
situated, requesting the young man's presence at the house at twelve
o'clock next day. He hurriedly returned an obedient reply, and the promise was enough to
lend great freshness to her manner next morning, instead of the leaden
air which was too frequent with her before the sun reached the meridian,
and sometimes after. Swithin had, in fact, arisen as an attractive
little intervention between herself and despair. VII


A fog defaced all the trees of the park that morning, the white
atmosphere adhered to the ground like a fungoid growth from it, and made
the turfed undulations look slimy and raw. But Lady Constantine settled
down in her chair to await the coming of the late curate's son with a
serenity which the vast blanks outside could neither baffle nor destroy. At two minutes to twelve the door-bell rang, and a look overspread the
lady's face that was neither maternal, sisterly, nor amorous; but partook
in an indescribable manner of all three kinds. The door was flung open
and the young man was ushered in, the fog still clinging to his hair, in
which she could discern a little notch where she had nipped off the curl. A speechlessness that socially was a defect in him was to her view a
piquant attribute just now. He looked somewhat alarmed. 'Lady Constantine, have I done anything, that you have sent--?' he began
breathlessly, as he gazed in her face, with parted lips. 'O no, of course not! I have decided to do something,--nothing more,'
she smilingly said, holding out her hand, which he rather gingerly
touched. 'Don't look so concerned. Who makes equatorials?' This remark was like the drawing of a weir-hatch and she was speedily
inundated with all she wished to know concerning astronomical opticians. When he had imparted the particulars he waited, manifestly burning to
know whither these inquiries tended. 'I am not going to buy you one,' she said gently. He looked as if he would faint. 'Certainly not. I do not wish it. I--could not have accepted it,'
faltered the young man. 'But I am going to buy one for _myself_. I lack a hobby, and I shall
choose astronomy. I shall fix my equatorial on the column.' Swithin brightened up. 