



Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.) THAT AFFAIR AT ELIZABETH

                       BY BURTON E. STEVENSON

    AUTHOR OF "THE MARATHON MYSTERY," "THE HOLLADAY CASE," ETC. NEW YORK
    HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY
    1907

    COPYRIGHT, 1907,
    BY HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

    _Published October, 1907_

    THE QUINN & BODEN CO. PRESS
    RAHWAY, N. J. CONTENTS


I. AN URGENT SUMMONS

II. A BRIDE'S VAGARY

III. THE LOVER'S STORY

IV. A STRANGE MESSAGE

V. DEEPER IN THE MAZE

VI. AN ASTONISHING REQUEST

VII. TANGLED THREADS

VIII. THE PATH THROUGH THE GROVE

IX. THE OLD SORROW

X. THE MYSTERIOUS LIGHT

XI. AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE

XII. WORD FROM THE FUGITIVE

XIII. PURSUIT

XIV. RECALLED TO THE FRONT

XV. A BATTLE OF WITS

XVI. THE SECRET OF THE CELLAR

XVII. A TRAGEDY UNFORESEEN

XVIII. A NEW TURN TO THE PUZZLE

XIX. UNDER SUSPICION

XX. AN APPEAL FOR ADVICE

XXI. CROSS-PURPOSES

XXII. LIGHT AT LAST! XXIII. THE STORY

XXIV. THE SECRET

XXV. THE REVELATION

XXVI. THE RETURN

XXVII. THE CURTAIN LIFTS




THAT AFFAIR AT ELIZABETH




CHAPTER I

An Urgent Summons


"That seems to be all right, Lester," said Mr. Royce, and handed the
papers back to me. "I'll be mighty glad when we get that off our hands." So, I knew, would the whole force of the office, for the case had been
an unusually irritating one, tangling itself up in the most unexpected
ways, until, with petitions and counter-petitions and answers and
demurrers and what not, we were all heartily tired of it. I slipped the
papers into an envelope and shot them into a pigeon-hole with a sigh of
relief. "I think that'll end it," I said. "I don't see how there can be any
further delay." "No," agreed our junior, "neither do I. Are the papers in the Griffin
case ready?" "Not yet; I doubt if they will be ready before this afternoon." "Well, they can wait," he said, and glanced at his watch. "I want to
catch the ten-ten for Elizabeth." "For Elizabeth?" "Yes. I know it's a mighty awkward time for me to leave, but it's an
engagement I've got to keep. You've heard me speak of Burr Curtiss?" "Yes," I said; "I seem to remember the name." "He's been one of my best friends for the past ten years. I met him
first at Yale, and a liking sprang up between us, which grew stronger as
time went on. I played a sort of second fiddle to him, then, for he was
president of the class in his senior year and was voted the most popular
man in it. He came to New York, as soon as he was graduated, and got a
place on the construction staff of the Pennsylvania road. He was
assigned to one of the western divisions, and I didn't see anything of
him for two or three years, but finally he was recalled, and we used to
hobnob at the University Club. Since my marriage, he comes around to
smoke a pipe with me occasionally and talk over old times. He's a social
fellow, likes companionship, and, my wife says, is just the man to make
a woman happy; so when he wrote me a note, two months ago, announcing
his engagement, we were naturally curious concerning the woman in the
case--for his ideals were high--too high, I always told him." Mr. Royce paused and sat for a moment smiling out the window at the grey
wall of the building opposite. "I remember it was one evening early last winter," he went on at last,
"that Curtiss happened in and, as we sat smoking together, our talk
somehow turned to women. It was then I learned what an idealist he was. The woman to win his heart must be accomplished, of course; witty,
knowing the world, and yet unsoiled by it, capable of original thought,
of being her husband's intellectual companion--so much for the mental
side. Physically--well, physically he wanted a Venus de Milo or Helen of
Troy, nothing less. I laughed at him. I pointed out that beautiful women
are seldom intellectual. But he was obdurate. He protested that he would
capitulate on no other terms. I retorted that, in that case, he would
probably remain a bachelor." "But," I remarked, "it seems to me that this friend of yours is a trifle
egotistical. What has he to offer in exchange for such perfection?" "Well," said Mr. Royce slowly, "it would be a good bargain on both
sides. Given such a woman, I could fancy her longing for such a man as
Curtiss, just as he would long for her. I've told you something of his
mental calibre--physically, he's the handsomest man I ever saw. And it
seems to me he gets handsomer every year. In our college days, he was
rather too stout, too girlish-looking, but hard work and contact with
the world have rubbed all that away. George!" he added, "the children of
such a pair would be fit for Olympus!" "And did he find her?" I asked, curious for the rest of the story. "After I got his note," said my companion, "I hunted him up at his
apartments as soon as I could. He let me in himself, got out his cigars,
and sat down opposite me fairly beaming. I looked him over--I had never
before seen a man who seemed so supremely happy. "'So,' I asked at last, 'you've found her?' "'Yes,' he said; 'yes.' "'The woman you were looking for?' "'The very woman.' "'That impossible ideal?' "'An ideal, yes; but not impossible, since she exists in the flesh and I
have found her.' "'Well, you're a lucky dog,' I said. 'Tell me about her.' "So he told me--quite a Laura Jean Libbey story. She was everything, it
seemed, that could be desired in a woman. "'And beautiful?' I asked him. "For reply, he brought out a photograph from his desk. I tell you,
Lester, it fairly took my breath away. I felt as though I were looking
at a masterpiece--say Andrea del Sarto's Madonna. And I would as soon
have thought of marrying the one as the other. It was like snatching a
star down out of heaven. "Curtiss was leaning back in his chair watching me, and he smiled as I
looked up. "'Well?' he asked. "I went over and shook hands with him--I couldn't find words to tell him
what I felt. "'But where has she been?' I demanded. 'How does it happen she was left
for you?' "'She's been abroad for five or six years,' he explained. "'That's no answer,' I said. 'Why isn't she a queen, then; or a duchess,
at least?' "'She's had chances enough, I dare say,' and he smiled at my enthusiasm. 'I agree with you that she's worthy to wear a crown; but then, you see,
she has ideals, too. Perhaps none of the kings she met measured up to
them.' "'And you did?' "'She's good enough to think so.' "I had been idling over the photograph, and my eyes happened to fall
upon some lines written across the back--I didn't know them, then, but
I've looked them up, since:--

          'My days were sunless and my nights were moonless,
    Parched the pleasant April herbage and the lark's heart's outbreak
      tuneless,
    If you loved me not!' "I tell you, Lester," and there was a little break in our junior's
voice, "I was overwhelmed. You know, love--passion--the real thing the
poets write about--has grown mighty rare in this world. We're too
commercial for it, I suppose; too much given to calculating chances. But
here I was, face to face with it. Well, I was unequal to the
situation--I didn't know what to say, but he helped me. "'The date hasn't been set, yet,' he said, 'but it will be some time in
June; and the reason I'm telling you all this is that I'm going to ask a
favour of you. It's to be a church wedding and I want you to be best
man. I hope you won't refuse.' "I was glad of the chance to be of service and told him so," concluded
Mr. Royce, glancing again at his watch and rising hastily. "The
wedding's to be at noon to-day. You see I'm cutting it rather fine. I'd
intended to go down yesterday afternoon, but that Barnaby petition upset
my plans. I'll be back to-night or in the morning at the latest. In the
meantime, if anything imperative turns up, a telegram to the Sheridan
House at Elizabeth will catch me." "Very well," I replied and made a note of the address. "But don't worry
about the work here. I'll get along all right." "Of course you will," he agreed, and an instant later, the door closed
behind him. But more than once in the course of the morning, I was inclined to think
that I had spoken too confidently. Mr. Graham, our senior partner, had
broken down about a month before, under a stress of work which had been
unusual, even for our office, and had been ordered away for a long
vacation; one or two members of the office force had resigned to accept
other positions, and the task of filling their places was one which
required thought and care; so for the time being, we were extremely
short-handed. That morning, perversely enough, it seemed to me that the work piled up
even more rapidly than usual, and it was not until the mellow chimes of
Trinity, marking the noon hour, floated through the open window, that I
succeeded in clearing away the most pressing portion of the morning's
business, and leaned back in my chair with a sigh of satisfaction. That
Marjoribanks case was now ours; Mr. Royce would approve....

No doubt, at this very moment, he was before the altar of the Elizabeth
church, listening to the low responses. I had only to close my eyes to
picture the scene--the dim, flower-decked interior; the
handsomely-gowned, sympathetically-expectant audience; the bride,
supremely beautiful in her veil and orange blossoms, her eyes downcast,
the warm colour coming and going in her cheeks....

"Telegram, sir," said a voice, and I swung around to find the office-boy
at my elbow. "For you, sir," he added. I took the yellow envelope and tore it open absently, my mind still on
the vision my fancy had conjured up. Then, as my eyes caught the words
of the message, I sat bolt upright with a start. It read:

     "Come to Elizabeth by first train. Don't fail us." "ROYCE." CHAPTER II

A Bride's Vagary


Two minutes later, I was speeding downward in the elevator, having
paused only long enough to give a word of instruction to the head clerk. A glance at my watch showed me that if I would catch the 12.38, I had no
time to lose; but luckily a cab was passing at the moment, and I jumped
aboard the boat for Jersey City just as the gates were closing. Not until I was safely aboard the train did I give myself time to
conjecture what this imperative summons meant, but during the half-hour
run to the little New Jersey city, I had ample time to try to puzzle it
out. One thing was quite certain--it was no ordinary emergency which had
moved Mr. Royce to summon me from the office at a time when I was so
badly needed there. I got out the telegram again, and read it, word by
word. It affected me as a wild cry for help would have done, at
midnight, in some lonely place--and it was just that--a wild cry for
help! But why had he needed aid, when he himself was so clear-sighted,
so ready-witted, so fertile of resource? What was this astounding
occurrence which confronted him, this crisis so urgent and over-whelming
that it had shaken and startled him out of his self-control? The message
itself was proof of his deep excitement. Apparently he had wired for me
instinctively, finding himself suddenly in the toils of some dilemma,
which left him dazed and nerveless. Ever since the time when I had succeeded, more by luck than anything
else, in discovering the whereabouts of Frances Holladay, and solving
the mystery of her father's death, our junior partner had conceived a
tremendously exalted opinion of my abilities as an untangler of abstruse
problems, and never lost an opportunity of referring to me such as came
in his way. Every firm of practising lawyers knows how frequently a case
hinges upon some puzzling point of evidence--how witnesses have a way of
disappearing--and Graham & Royce had their full share of such perplexing
tangles. It had come to be one of the unwritten rules of the office that
such points should be referred to me, and while I was by no means
uniformly successful in solving them, I always took a lively pleasure in
the work. It was no doubt that habit which had caused our junior to turn
to me in this emergency. I could guess how terrifying it must have been
to overwhelm so completely a man so well-balanced and self-controlled--I
could almost see the trembling hand with which he had penned the
message. So it was with a certain quickening of the pulse that I stepped from the
train at the triangular Elizabeth station, and an instant later, Mr.
Royce had me by the hand. "I've a carriage over here, Lester," he said, drawing me toward it, and
I noticed that he was fairly quivering with excitement. "I thought you
could make this train," he added, as we took our seats and the driver
whipped up smartly. "I knew you wouldn't lose any time, and I can't tell
you how glad I am to have you here. Curtiss is all broken up--doesn't
know which way to turn. Neither do I. I had just sense enough to send
you that wire." "I thought it was a mystery of some sort," I said, beginning to tingle
in sympathy with him. "What has happened?" "The bride-to-be has disappeared," answered Mr. Royce simply;
"vanished--skipped out!" For a moment, I scarcely understood. It seemed preposterous to suppose
that I had heard aright. "Disappeared!" I echoed helplessly. "Skipped out!" "Yes, skipped out!" and Mr. Royce crushed his unlighted cigar savagely
in his fingers and hurled it through the carriage window. "I haven't the
slightest doubt that she deliberately ran away." The sight of his emotion calmed me a little. "At the last moment?" I questioned. "Practically at the last moment--less than an hour before the time set
for the ceremony. She was getting ready for it--was in her
wedding-dress, in fact. I tell you, Lester----"

"Wait," I said, putting out a restraining hand. "Begin at the beginning. What's her name?" "Marcia Lawrence." "And she's the 'ideal' Curtiss imagined he'd found?" "Yes," said Mr. Royce slowly, "and so far as I can judge from what I've
seen and heard, she really was as nearly perfect as any woman can be." "Yet she 'skipped out'!" "That's why I'm so upset--she was the last woman in the world to do such
a thing!" "Tell me about her," I said. "I don't know very much; but I do know that she wasn't a mere
empty-headed chit. She was an accomplished and cultured woman. I've
already told you how her beauty affected me." I paused a moment to consider it--I was fairly nonplussed. It seemed
incredible that such a woman should, under any conceivable
circumstances, deliberately desert her lover at the altar! "And in her wedding-gown!" I murmured, half to myself. "Yes, in her wedding-gown!" repeated our junior, passing his hand
feverishly across his eyes. "It's unbelievable! It's--I can't find any
word to describe it. I can scarcely believe I'm awake." "Perhaps she found she didn't love him," I suggested. "At the last moment?" "Stranger things have happened." "I don't believe it!' A woman like Marcia Lawrence knows her own heart
before she goes that far!" "Suppose we say sudden insanity?" "Well-balanced women don't go mad merely because they're going to get
married." "Then she didn't run away," I said. Mr. Royce looked at me quickly. "You mean----"

But the carriage stopped with a jolt and the driver jerked open the
door. CHAPTER III

The Lover's Story


I paused, as soon as we reached the pavement, for a look about me. We
were evidently in the fashionable quarter of the town. The street was
wide, well-kept, and shaded by stately elms. The houses which stretched
away on either hand had that spaciousness, that air of dignity and
quiet, which bespeaks wealth and leisure. Here was no gaudy
architecture, no flamboyant flourish of the newly-rich; rather the
evidence of families long-settled in their present surroundings and
long-accustomed to the luxuries of a cultured and generous existence. But it was to the house directly before us that I gave the closest
scrutiny. It was a large one, two-storied, with a wide veranda running
across the entire front. It stood well back from the street, and was
sheltered on each side by magnificent trees. The grounds seemed to be
very extensive and were beautifully kept. Along the pavement, a curious
crowd was loitering, kept in motion by a policeman, but staring at the
house as though they expected to read the solution of the mystery in its
inexpressive front. Mr. Royce nodded to the officer, and we passed through the gate. As we
went up the walk, I noticed that the blinds were closely drawn, as
though it were a house of mourning--and, indeed, dead hopes enough lay
there! A maid admitted us, and when my companion inquired for Mr. Curtiss, led
the way silently along the hall. In the dim light, I could see the
decorations of palms and wreaths of smilax, relieved here and there by a
mass of gorgeous bloom, and through a door to the right I caught a
glimpse of many tables, set ready for the luncheon which was never to be
eaten. There was something ghostly about the deserted rooms--something
chilling in the thought of this arrested gaiety, these hopes for
happiness so rudely shattered. It recalled that vision which had so
astonished poor Pip--the vision of Miss Havisham, decked in her yellow
wedding finery, sitting at her gilded dressing-table in the darkened
room, with the bride-cake cobwebbed and mouldy, and the chairs set ready
for the guests who were never to arrive. Only here, I reflected, the
clocks should be stopped at noon, not at twenty minutes to nine! We turned into a room which I saw to be the library, and a man sprang up
as we entered. "Royce!" he cried, and there was in his tone such an agony of entreaty
that I knew instantly who he was. "No; no news, Burr," said our junior; "but here's Mr. Lester, and if any
one can suggest a solution of this mystery, I'm sure he can. Lester,
this is Burr Curtiss." As I shook hands with him, I told myself that Mr. Royce's description
had been well within the truth. I could join with him in saying that I
had never seen a handsomer man or a more attractive one, though in his
eyes, as I met them, misery and anxiety were only too apparent. "It was very kind of you to come, Mr. Lester," he said. "Not at all," I protested. "I only hope I can be of some service." "Royce has told you----"

"Only the bare facts," I said. "I'd like to have all the details of the
story, if you'll be so kind as to give me them." "Certainly," he assented instantly, as we sat down. "That's what I wish
to do--I know how important details are." He paused for a moment, to be sure of his self-control, and I had the
chance to look at him more closely. His face was not only comely, it was
strong, magnetic. The black hair and eyes bespoke a vigorous
temperament; the full beard, closely cropped, served rather to
accentuate the fine lines of mouth and chin. There was no superfluous
flesh about the face--no puffiness; it was thin with the healthy
thinness which tells of a busy life, and browned by exposure to wind and
sun. It was, altogether, a manly face, not the merely handsome one which
I had rather expected. My eyes were drawn especially to his hand as he
passed it hastily across his forehead--a hand firm, white, with slightly
tapering fingers--an artist's hand which one would scarcely connect with
an engineer of construction. "There's really very little I can tell you," he said, at last. "When I
saw Marcia this morning----"

His voice choked, and he paused, unable, for the moment, to go on. "Let us begin farther back than that, Mr. Curtiss," I suggested, knowing
that the beginning was the hardest part. "Mr. Royce tells me you were
classmates. When did you graduate from college?" "Seven years ago." "And you came at once to New York?" "Yes, to take the examination for the Pennsylvania road." "You were given a place on the road at once?" "Yes--not a very important place, but one with a chance for promotion,
which was all I asked. I was stationed at Pittsburg for three years and
then called east to work on the division between New York and
Philadelphia. A year ago, I was made assistant at the headquarters
office." "Rather a remarkable career," I commented, smiling. "Not at all," he protested quickly. "I liked the work, and I was well
equipped." I saw that I should have to revise my opinion of him--certainly he was
not conceited. "When did you meet Miss Lawrence?" I asked. "Last December--the tenth, to be quite accurate--just six months ago
to-day----"

Again his voice trailed away into a sort of hoarse whisper, though he
tried desperately to control it. "Won't you tell me about it?" "Is it necessary?" he questioned miserably. "I--I don't want to talk." "I know you don't, and I don't want to make you. But if I'm to help, I
must know the whole story." "Pardon me, Mr. Lester," he said, pulling himself together by a mighty
effort. "Of course you must. Only give me time. I'm--I'm----"

"All the time in the world," I assured him, and settled back in my chair
to listen. "We had a bad grade-crossing just east of Elizabeth," he began, after a
moment, in a steadier tone. "It was an ugly place, with the driveway
coming down a stiff hill and meeting our tracks at an angle which
prevented a clear view of them. We kept a flagman there, of course, but
nevertheless accidents happened right along. A skittish horse, once
started down the hill and frightened perhaps by the whistle and rumble
of the approaching train, would be pretty hard to stop." I nodded. I had seen just such murderous crossings. "So the company determined to build a viaduct there, and last December
sent me out to look over the ground. I reached there about nine o'clock
in the morning, and by noon had all my data and was ready to come back
to the city. "'Can you flag this train for me, John?' I asked the flagman, as I heard
a whistle down the line. "'No, sir,' he answered; 'can't do it, sir. That's the limited, but
there'll be a local along ten minutes after it.' "'All right,' I said, and went up the bank a bit to sit down and wait
for it. "The limited whistled again, just around the curve, and then I heard the
flagman give a yell and start up the hill, waving his flag like mad. I
jumped up and saw that a buggy containing two women had just started
down and that the horse was beyond control. It didn't take me above a
minute to run over, get the horse by the bridle, and stop him. I held
the track record for everything up to the half-mile while I was at
Sheff," he added, with a little apologetic smile. I nodded again; only, I thought, I should like to hear the flagman tell
the story. "The horse had knocked me about a bit," he went on, "and kicked me on
the legs once or twice, so when I let go the bridle I was a little
wobbly--made a fool of myself, I suppose. Anyway, I was bundled into the
buggy and taken back to Elizabeth, where the women lived." "Yes," I encouraged him, for he seemed to have come to a full stop; "and
then?" "Well, they took me home with them and fixed me up as though I were a
plaster baby. The elder woman introduced herself as Mrs. Lawrence and
the younger as her daughter Marcia. They made me stay for tea----"

He stopped again. "I don't know how to tell the rest, Mr. Lester," he blurted out. "Only
Marcia Lawrence was the divinest woman I ever met. Royce used to laugh
at me for having an ideal." "Yes, he told me," I said. "Well, I knew instantly that I'd found her. And she was very good to
me--better than I knew how to deserve. Three months ago, she promised to
be my wife--we were to have been married at noon to-day----"

He sat with bowed head and working face, unable to go on. "We were happy--she was happy, I know it!" he cried fiercely, after a
moment. "There wasn't a cloud--not a single cloud! It was too perfect, I
suppose--too perfect for this world. I've heard that perfect things
don't last. But I don't understand--I can't understand!" "Mr. Royce told me she'd disappeared," I said gently. "Disappeared utterly!" He was on his feet now and striding madly up and
down the room, his self-control gone from him. "There wasn't a cloud, I
tell you; not the slightest breath of suspicion or distrust or
unhappiness. Last night, some of her friends here gave a little
reception for her, and she was the gayest of the gay. This morning,
about ten o'clock, I called to see her; she seemed very happy--kissed me
good-bye until we should meet at the church." A convulsive shudder shook him. I saw how near he was to breaking down. "Let me tell the rest, Burr," said a low voice from the door, and I
turned to see a woman standing there--a woman dressed in black, with a
face of unusual sweetness, but shadowed by a great sorrow. CHAPTER IV

A Strange Message


I guessed in a breath who she was, and my heart went out to her in
instant pity. Yet a second glance told me that it was not the shadow of
this recent sorrow which lay across her face. Time alone could grave
those lines of calm endurance, could give to the eyes that look of quiet
resignation, to the mouth that curve of patient suffering; and only a
deep spiritual faith could preserve and heighten the sweetness and
gentleness of a countenance so marked. "This is Mr. Lester, Mrs. Lawrence," said our junior, quickly, and
placed a chair for her. "We've asked Mr. Lester to help us," he added. She closed the door behind her and came forward as we rose,
acknowledging the introduction with the faintest of bows. "Thank you," she said. "Lucy told me you had returned, Mr. Royce," she
went on, a little tremulously, "and I was anxious to know if you had any
news." "Not yet. Mr. Curtiss was just telling Mr. Lester----"

"Yes," she interrupted, "I saw how he was suffering and I wished to
spare him, if I could." "My dear Mrs. Lawrence," broke in Curtiss, "you must think only of
sparing yourself." "Still," I suggested, "it's possible that Mrs. Lawrence can help us a
great deal, if she will." She was holding herself admirably in hand, and I thought her in much
less danger of breaking down than Curtiss himself. Perhaps the old
sorrow had taught her how to bear the new one. "I shall be glad to help you all I can," she said, and smiled a faint
encouragement. It seemed brutal to question her at such a time, but I saw it must be
done and I nerved myself to do it. "Mrs. Lawrence," I began, "has any possible explanation of your
daughter's flight occurred to you?" "No," she answered quickly, and with an emphasis that rather startled
me. "It seems to me utterly unexplainable. Even yet, I can scarcely
believe it!" "She left no message for you?" "Not a word; she simply disappeared." "And you had no warning?" "Warning?" she repeated, facing around upon me. "No!" "Nor suspected that there was anything amiss?" "Not for an instant." "Since there _was_ something amiss, why did your daughter not confide in
you?" "I have asked myself the same question. I am utterly unable to answer
it." "She was in the habit of coming to you with her troubles?" "Always. There was the most perfect confidence between us." "And yet she concealed this?" "She did not conceal it!" she protested. "She could not have concealed
it from my eyes, even had she wished to. There was nothing to conceal. There was absolutely nothing wrong the last time I saw her." "And that was?" "Only a few minutes before she disappeared." "Will you tell me just what happened?" I suggested, as gently as I
could. "Every detail you can remember." She sat for a moment with compressed lips, steadying herself. "There's very little to tell," she began. "She was quite her usual self
this morning, so far as I could see, and very happy. Two or three of her
girl friends came in to see her for a moment, to talk over the final
arrangements, and she was giving some directions about the decorations
when Mr. Curtiss called. After he had gone, she made a last trip through
the house to see that all was right, and then started upstairs to dress. Half an hour later, she came to my room in her wedding-gown to ask how
she looked, and I had never seen her looking more beautiful. Only
perfect happiness can give such beauty to a woman. I remember thinking
what a joy it was to me that she had found a man whom she could love as
she loved----"

A half-stifled, choking sob from Curtiss interrupted her. She turned and
stretched out her hand to him, with a gesture of infinite affection. "I finished dressing," she continued, "and then went to Marcia's room,
but she wasn't there. Her maid said she'd been called downstairs for a
moment. I came down, and found that the decorator had wanted her opinion
of the final touches. She had left him, to go upstairs again, as he
supposed. It was then nearly half-past eleven, and the bridesmaids began
to arrive. I supposed Marcia was in the grounds somewhere, and sent two
of the servants to look for her and to tell her it was time to start for
the church. They came back saying she was not to be found. Then I began
to be alarmed, thinking that she had perhaps been taken suddenly ill,
and we searched the house and grounds systematically, but found no trace
of her. At last, it seemed just possible that she had gone on to the
church, and the bridesmaids hurried into the carriages and drove
away--but she wasn't there--only Burr waiting for her----"

She stopped with a sudden tremulousness. "Thank you," I said. "There's one question I must ask, Mrs. Lawrence,
before I can go to work intelligently. You will pardon it. Had your
daughter ever had any attachment previous to this one?" I saw Curtiss glance at her quickly. That solution of the problem had
occurred to him, then, too! "Not the shadow of one," answered Mrs. Lawrence instantly, and perhaps
it was only my fancy that the accent of sincerity was a trifle forced. "I have been Marcia's companion and confidante all her life, and I am
sure that no man ever distinctly interested her until she met Mr. Curtiss." "But she no doubt interested many men," I suggested. "Yes, but never with intention." "That only makes the case more desperate sometimes." "I don't believe there were any desperate cases. You will remember," she
added, "that we lived much abroad, and so had few intimate
acquaintances. Besides, Marcia was--well--extremely patriotic. She often
said that she would marry only an American--and an American who lived at
home and was proud of his country. One doesn't meet many of that kind in
Europe." "No," I agreed. Whatever my doubts might be, it was clearly impossible
at present to proceed any further along that line of inquiry. And what other line lay open? It seemed to me that I had come to an
impasse--a closed way--which barred further progress. I sat silent a moment, pondering the problem. Perhaps Mrs. Lawrence held
the key to it, and I turned to look at her. She was seemingly sunk in
reverie, and her lips moved from time to time, as though she were
repeating to herself some fragmentary words. She seemed more
self-possessed in the presence of this catastrophe than one would have
expected. Perhaps she knew where her daughter was; perhaps Miss Lawrence
had not really fled. There was nothing to show that she had left the
house. It seemed impossible that a woman clad as she had been could have
fled, in broad day, without attracting some one's notice. But whether
she had fled or not, I reflected, the mystery remained the same. Certainly, she had not appeared at the altar to keep her promise to Burr
Curtiss. "Mrs. Lawrence," I asked, "what reason have you to believe that your
daughter left the house?" She started from her reverie, and sat staring at me as though scarce
understanding. "Why," she said at last, "what else could she have done? She has
disappeared----"

"You're sure she isn't concealed somewhere about the place?" "Concealed?" and she paled a little under my eyes. "Oh, no; that's
impossible! We've searched everywhere!" "And you think she went of her own free will?" "She could scarcely have been abducted," she retorted. "Marcia is a
strong girl, and a single scream would have alarmed the house." "That's true," I agreed. "Your room is near hers?" "Just across the hall." The wish flashed into my brain to look through the house; perhaps I
should be able to arrange it. "There's no pit or hole or trap or anything of that sort into which she
could have fallen?" "Oh, no; nothing of the sort." "Nor closet nor chest into which she could have accidentally locked
herself?" I went on, remembering the fate of the bride in the old song. "No; besides, we've looked in them all. We've searched everywhere--every
corner. She's not in the house--I'm quite sure of that." "And yet you say she loved Mr. Curtiss?" "Loved him devotedly." "Then what possible reason could she have for deserting him? Why should
she----"

A knock at the door interrupted me. Mrs. Lawrence, who was sitting
nearest it, rose quickly and opened it. I caught a glimpse, in the
semi-darkness of the hall, of a woman in a maid's cap and apron. She
gave her mistress a letter, whispering, as she did so, a swift sentence
in her ear. I heard Mrs. Lawrence's low exclamation of surprise, as she held the
letter up to the light and read the superscription. Then she turned
swiftly toward us, her face pale with emotion. "It's a note!" she cried. "A note from Marcia! It will explain!" and she
handed the envelope to Curtiss. "A note?" he stammered. "Addressed to me?" "In Marcia's writing. Read it. It will explain," she repeated. He took it with trembling hand, went to the window, and tore it open. I
saw his lips quivering as he read it; I saw the white intensity with
which Mrs. Lawrence watched his face; I was conscious, too, of another
presence in the room, and I glanced around to see that the maid stood
leaning forward in the open doorway, her eyes sparkling with eagerness,
her mouth working, her hands clasping and unclasping convulsively. There
was something sinister in her dark, expressive face, in her
attitude--something almost of exulting, of triumph----

Curtiss crushed the letter in his hand with a quick movement of despair,
and turned to us distraught, flushed, astounded. "It tells nothing," he faltered; "nothing. It--it--I can't believe it! Read it, Mr. Lester," and he held the sheet of paper toward me. There were only a few lines upon it:--

     "Dearest: I cannot be your wife--how shall I tell you? It is
     quite, quite impossible. Oh, believe me, sweetheart, nothing
     but the certainty of that could keep me from you. I am fleeing;
     I cannot see you, cannot speak to you; there can be no
     explanation; only I shall love you always! Is it wrong to write
     that now, I wonder? Please do not attempt to follow me, to seek
     me out; that will only mean sorrow for us both--sorrow and
     shame. Perhaps some day, when the wound heals--will it ever
     heal?--I can tell you, can bear to see you. But oh, not now! "MARCIA LAWRENCE." CHAPTER V

Deeper in the Maze


I sat for a moment half-dazed, with this astonishing note in my fingers. Then I read it through again--there could be no doubting the sincerity
of the writer, her passionate earnestness. "I cannot be your wife ... it
is quite, quite impossible." But why was it impossible? Clearly not from
any lack of affection. If the note proved anything, it proved that
Marcia Lawrence loved Burr Curtiss far beyond the usual application of
the word. Why, then, had she fled? "There can be no explanation." There was
nothing left but flight; the marriage was impossible. But why should it
be impossible? Was not that too strong a term? Yet she no doubt believed
it. Something had happened; there had been some sudden and startling
revelation--the revelation of a secret so hideous that, rather than
betray it, rather than risk an explanation, she had fled. But that was
such a desperate thing to do; such a suicidal thing; and a woman does
not throw away her happiness thoughtlessly! I glanced at Curtiss, who had sunk down again into his chair and sat
staring straight before him. Was there in his past some unnamable stain
which had lain hidden till this last moment; which this stainless woman
had shrunk from, horrified? Or was there, after all, another man? A man, perhaps, whom she had never
intentionally encouraged, yet who had fallen thrall to her, none the
less, who had determined to possess her, and who, by some trick, some
desperate throw, had managed, at the last moment, to snatch her away
from Curtiss? Had she fled from the house of her own volition? Was there
any possible explanation of such a flight? None, except that she had
suddenly found herself face to face with the fact that she no longer
loved the man she was about to marry--face to face with a future so
intolerable that any shame, any disgrace, was preferable to it. Yet as I
looked again at the note's wording, I recognised anew the absurdity of
such a theory. Whatever the solution of the mystery, there could be no
doubting Marcia Lawrence's love for Burr Curtiss; whomever she had loved
in the past, it was certain that now she loved only him. And even in
Mrs. Lawrence's attitude, I seemed to discern an affection for him more
intense than is usually bestowed upon a son-in-law--at least, until he
has been tested in the crucible of marriage. There could be, I told myself, only one other explanation. Marcia
Lawrence had been abducted. It was true, as her mother had pointed out,
that a single scream would have alarmed the house; but perhaps that
scream had never been uttered. It could have been prevented easily
enough. And there had been no one with her at the time except her maid. Her maid! And I sat suddenly upright; I felt that I had found the key! "It was your daughter's maid gave you this, Mrs. Lawrence?" I asked. "Yes," she answered, turning toward me with a start which told me that
she had again sunk into reverie. "She said she had just found it on
Marcia's dresser." "It's strange," I said, "that it wasn't found before this. You were in
your daughter's room, I suppose, after she disappeared?" "Yes; several times." "And you didn't see this note?" "No; I did not notice it." "Is the maid an old servant?" "Yes," she said; "Lucy has been in the family for many years." "And you've always found her perfectly trustworthy?" "I have no cause of complaint against her," she answered, and though her
voice showed no sign of emotion, I saw a sudden trembling seize her and
shake her convulsively for a moment. Was it fear? Was it anger? Was
it----? Curtiss saw it, too, and, attributing it to a very different cause,
moved impatiently in his chair. I felt that I was hampered by these
witnesses. I must get rid of them, if I was to have freedom of
action--and without freedom of action I could do nothing. I turned again to the sheet of paper in my hand and examined it with
care. It was an ordinary linen, unruled. I held it to the light and
tried to decipher the watermark, but only two letters were on the sheet,
"Re." The remainder of the word had been cut away when the sheet was
trimmed to its present size. It seemed to me scarcely to possess the
quality which one would expect in Miss Lawrence's writing-paper. The
writing was in a woman's hand, a little irregular; but haste and stress
of emotion would account for that. As I examined the writing more
closely, I thought the ink seemed strangely fresh--scarcely dry, in
fact; and yet, if the maid's story were true, the note had been lying
upon the dresser for nearly three hours. And lying there unnoticed! "There's no doubt that Miss Lawrence wrote this?" I asked. "None whatever," answered Curtiss, with a quick shake of the head. "It's
her writing--I knew it instantly." I read the note again, and, satisfied that I had it almost by heart,
handed it back to him. "Of course, Mr. Curtiss," I said, "you must decide one thing before we
go any farther. Will you try to follow her, even though she expressly
forbids it?" He sat with knitted brow and quivering mouth, reading the note word by
word. "Yes," he said brokenly, at last. "Yes, I'll try to follow her. I'll do
everything I can to find her. I can't live without her!" "But if the marriage be really impossible?" I suggested. "Impossible!" and he turned upon me hotly. "How could it be? What could
make it impossible? I tell you, sir, there's nothing on earth can keep
us apart." "But this," and I leaned forward and tapped the note. "Yes--that--I can't explain it. At least, the only explanation I can
give is that it's a hideous mistake." "A mistake? But Miss Lawrence wasn't an emotional woman?" I questioned. "Not a woman to be carried away by a moment's passion?" "Oh, no! Quite the contrary." "Not a woman who would jump at a conclusion?" I persisted. "Not a woman
who would condemn a man unheard--who would overlook the possibility of
mistake and be convinced by what we lawyers call circumstantial
evidence?" "She was not such a woman at all," he said decidedly. "She was just the
opposite of all that." "That makes it more difficult," I pointed out. "I know; I've thought it all out, as well as I'm able--only there's a
blank wall I can't get past. Besides, if there's a reason, I have the
right to know it." "Yes," I assented heartily. "Undoubtedly you have the right to know it. There we're on solid ground. Well, that point is settled, then. And now
I must ask you another question, Mr. Curtiss, which you may resent, but
which it is absolutely necessary I should ask if I'm to be of any help
to you." "I think I can guess what it is, Mr. Lester," and he smiled grimly. "Since Marcia disappeared, I've reviewed carefully my whole past life,
and I can find nothing in it which would justify, in the slightest
degree, such an action. I've not been a saint, but at least I've never
been dishonourable nor dissolute. Does that answer the question?" "Perfectly," I said. There could be no doubting his utter truthfulness. "And your family history?" "Is neither long nor brilliant. My father and mother both died when I
was a baby. I was raised by my grandparents." "They lived in New York?" "No; on Long Island. My grandfather's name was John Curtiss. He managed
an estate belonging to a New York banker. He was an honest and
honourable man." "And he is dead?" "Yes; he and his wife have been dead ten years and more." "You have no brothers or sisters?" "No; nor any other near relatives." That was the end of that theory, then. If the secret did not concern
Curtiss, it must concern Miss Lawrence herself. More and more I felt
that she was the victim of a plot. Of the maid's complicity, I had not
the shadow of a doubt--but was Mrs. Lawrence a party to it, too? I turned back to her. She was, apparently, so busy with her own thoughts
that she paid no heed to what was passing. How explain her calmness, her
lack of interest? How, except on the theory that she knew where her
daughter was, had assisted in her disappearance and approved of it? I
felt my blood warm suddenly in Curtiss's behalf. If he had been the
victim of an adventuress, it should be my business to expose her! But a second glance at Mrs. Lawrence's face showed me the folly of such
a thought. She was no adventuress--she was a gentle, cultured Christian
woman, who had suffered, as all mortals must, but had still preserved
her sweetness and serenity, as few mortals do. Yet more and more was I
perplexed by that indefinable abstraction in her behaviour, which seemed
somehow out of tune with the circumstances. Perhaps she was really more
moved than she seemed to be; perhaps her apparent indifference was in
reality only an admirable self-control. I fancied that it had given way
for an instant when she was telling us the story of her daughter's
disappearance. If I could only hit upon some way to startle her out of
her self-possession, I might yet learn----

She turned suddenly and met my eyes. She flushed painfully--perhaps she
read my thought; and instantly I blamed myself for my clumsiness in
permitting my suspicion to appear in my face. It was a mischance not
easily retrieved. "I have told you all I know," she said, rising quickly, and answering
the question I had not uttered. "I feel the need of rest. If I can help
you in any way, command me." "Thank you," I answered, and opened the door for her. She paused on the threshold--glanced around--her eyes rested on Burr
Curtiss's dreary face. In an instant, she was beside him, bending over
him with infinite tenderness. "Dear boy," she said, so low I could scarcely hear her, and smoothed
back his hair with a gesture almost motherly, "dear boy, don't worry so. I'm sure it will all come right." He looked up and smiled at her tremulously. With a quick impulsiveness,
she stooped and kissed him, then went rapidly from the room, leaving me,
at least, more puzzled than before at this sudden glimpse of unsuspected
depths of tenderness. I closed the door after her and turned back to Curtiss. "Has Mrs. Lawrence favoured your suit for her daughter's hand?" I asked. "Favoured it?" he repeated. "Yes, from the very first." "Then, in your opinion, she couldn't have had anything to do with this
disappearance--advised it, perhaps assisted in it?" "No," he said decidedly; "that's absurd." "And yet----" I began. "If you knew her," he interrupted, "you would see its absurdity. She has
always been most kind to me. You saw----"

"Yes," I nodded. "She has always been like that. She has treated me as a dearly beloved
son ever since we told her of our engagement." "There has been no cloud?" "Not the slightest! She seemed to share in her daughter's happiness and
in mine. She has told me more than once that she thought fate had made
us for each other." "And she helped on the wedding-day?" "In a thousand ways. She and Marcia worked together upon the trousseau. She helped with all the plans. Surely, Mr. Lester, if she objected, she
wouldn't have waited till the last minute to make her objection known." "Most certainly she would not," I agreed. "Besides," Curtiss added hoarsely, "I don't believe that even her mother
could have kept Marcia from me." "She's a widow?" I asked. "Yes. Her husband has been dead ten or twelve years. Marcia is the only
child." "She seems to have had her share of sorrow," I remarked. "Her face shows
it." "She has not been quite well lately; but she was always a
little--well--sad, it seemed to me; serious, you know; smiling
sometimes, but rarely laughing. I've fancied she grieved for her
husband; but I really know nothing about it." "She doesn't look very strong," I hazarded, in the hope that Curtiss
really knew more than he supposed. "She isn't strong; but I've never seen her really ill. She is subject to
spells of depression, so Marcia told me. Of course, I've known her only
six months." So there _was_ an old trouble, as I had thought, beside which this new
one seemed of little moment. She had been schooled by suffering; perhaps
I had misjudged her in thinking her indifferent. But it was evident that
I could get no further information from Curtiss. "You were at the church," I asked, "when you heard that Miss Lawrence
had disappeared?" "Yes," he answered hoarsely. "Royce brought me word." "And you came straight here?" "Yes." "And searched for her?" "Where could I search? I was utterly at sea. I--I don't remember just
what I did at first." "But you didn't search the house nor the grounds?" "Why should I have done that when Mrs. Lawrence had already done it
thoroughly?" he demanded. "True," I assented. After all, I had no right to shake his faith in her
upon a mere suspicion. "I was overwhelmed," he added. "I was too dazed to think. Royce said
he'd wire for you. I'm glad he did, for I'm utterly unable to decide
what to do. I should like you to advise me." "Well, Mr. Curtiss," I said, "there's plainly only one thing to be
done--that is, to find Miss Lawrence and demand an explanation from her
own lips. Whether or not this is the wisest course, may be open to
question--but if I were in your place, I think I'd do just as you are
doing and take the risk." "But to find her--how can I do that? I can't set a detective on her
track." "No, of course not," I agreed; "but I think we can get along without a
detective." "We must. Detectives talk too much, and this thing mustn't get into the
papers." "I don't see how you can prevent that. It was to have been a church
wedding, wasn't it?" "Yes; a church wedding." "With an invited list of guests?" "Certainly." "And they were present at the church, weren't they?" Curtiss groaned and I saw the perspiration start out across his
forehead. "Present!" echoed Mr. Royce. "I should say they were--the church was
crowded. And we were waiting there in the minister's study, worrying
because it was so late, when word came----"

"Don't!" protested Curtiss, with a despairing gesture. "I'd never
thought of that. I've been thinking only of myself. Of course the papers
will have it!" and he groaned again. "Well, there's no use worrying about it," interposed Mr. Royce. "What is
done is done. The thing is to find Miss Lawrence, and if anybody can
find her, Lester can. I'm sure that five minutes' talk with her will
straighten out the whole tangle. There's been an absurd mistake of some
sort." "No doubt," I assented, though in my heart I did doubt it very much. At
any rate, the five minutes' talk could do no harm. "Now you go away somewhere for a day or two, and leave this thing in our
hands," added our junior. "What you need is rest. Don't worry any more
than you can help. Let us know where you are, and we'll wire you as soon
as we have any information. That's good advice, isn't it, Lester?" "Very good," I said. "I hope Mr. Curtiss will follow it." "No, no," he protested. "I can't go away--I must stay here--I couldn't
stand it to go away." "May I speak to you frankly, Mr. Curtiss?" I asked quietly. "Please do," he said. "Speak as frankly as you like." "Well, then," I began, "you'll pardon me for saying it, but I don't
believe you can help us any, just at present. Besides, you need to pull
yourself together." "That's true," he agreed, and glanced at his trembling hands. "Take my advice," I went on earnestly, "and Mr. Royce's advice. Leave
Elizabeth for a little while. There isn't much chance of my finding Miss
Lawrence for a day or two. You must get your calmness and
self-possession back, for you'll need them." "Yes," he said hoarsely; "yes, I'll need them. Very well, I'll do as you
say, Mr. Lester. Only it's deuced selfish of me to throw my troubles on
your shoulders this way." "Selfish nothing!" cried our junior. "Where will you go?" "I don't know," answered Curtiss helplessly. "Go to one of the beaches near New York. The sea-air and surf will do
you good. Let us know where you are; then, if we want you, we won't have
any trouble finding you, and you can get back here in an hour or two." "There's one thing Mr. Curtiss can do," I said. "A photograph of Miss
Lawrence might prove a great help." "Why, of course," he assented, and thrust his hand into an inner pocket. But, after an instant's hesitation, he drew it out empty. "I can't give
you that one," he said; "I must keep that one. I'll send you another. You're at the Sheridan?" "Yes." "I'll leave it there for you. But please don't use it unless you
absolutely have to." "I won't use it at all, if I can avoid it," I assured him. "I promise
you that it won't go out of my hands." "Thank you," he said. "I knew you'd understand. As soon as you have any
news you'll wire me?" "The very moment. I want you to rely on us." "I will." "And not worry." "I'll try not to," and he was gone. As the door closed behind him, Mr. Royce looked at me with a somewhat
guilty countenance. "You see, I've got you into it again, Lester," he began. "I hope you
don't mind." "I don't. Rather the contrary." "It's a little out of our line," he added. "But for a friend--and I
certainly pity the poor fellow--we lawyers have to do peculiar things
sometimes." "I've done more peculiar ones than this," I said. "This is, at bottom,
merely a matter of finding an important witness who is missing." "Thank you, Lester," he said, and held out his hand. "I didn't want to
seem to be imposing on you." "You're not," I assured him again, and rose. "Now I think I'd better be
getting to work." "Can I be of any help?" he asked, rising too. "If not, I'll take the
four-ten back to New York. I think Curtiss needs a little looking after. I'll hunt him up and take him with me. Besides, my wife is so wrought-up
over this affair that she wants to get home." "Very well," I assented. "Curtiss will need some one to protect him from
the reporters. It's a wonder they haven't treed him before this." "They tried to," said Mr. Royce, smiling grimly. "I succeeded in keeping
them off. He was too preoccupied to notice. There's nothing else I can
do?" "No, I think not. If I need you, I'll wire." "You won't need me," and he smiled again. "You know I'm no good at this
kind of work." "I know you'll be working harder than I will, keeping up with things at
the office." "Don't worry about that. You intend to stay here?" "Yes; but only for a day or two, I trust. I can't think it a very
difficult task to find a young woman who has run away in broad daylight
in her wedding finery. Somebody must have seen her--that is, if she ran
away at all." "No doubt," he agreed. "Of course you'll find her--it's not about that
I'm worrying so much; it's about her motive for doing such a thing. It
seems preposterous to suppose that any woman in her right mind would run
away half an hour before her wedding. Curtiss saw her at ten o'clock and
found her happy, yet an hour later she had taken this desperate step. I
wonder, Lester, if you realise just how desperate it was?" "Yes," I said; "I think I do." "Well, I'm free to confess I didn't until I saw its effect on my wife. Why, Lester, it was suicidal--it means social ostracism--no less. Even
if it doesn't altogether ruin her life, it will always shadow it. It's
something she can never outlive." "Yes," I said again; "it's all that." "And yet she was a thoughtful, self-controlled, well-balanced woman, who
would foresee all this--who would realise the consequences more clearly
than we can do. Lester--what was it drove her to it?" "Ah, if I only knew! But I'm going to find out!" "I hope you will--and yet I fear it, too. I'm afraid to think of it--I'm
afraid to try to guess the secret--I'm afraid I'll unearth some grisly,
loathsome skeleton, which should never have seen the light! But I'm sure
of one thing," he added, his face hardening. "I think you suspected,
too." "What was that?" "Whatever the secret is, Mrs. Lawrence knows it." "Yes," I agreed, "I believe she does." "And had a hand in her daughter's disappearance." "Yes," I said again, "I think that very likely." He stood for a moment longer, looking at me as though half-inclined to
say something more; then he shook hands abruptly and left the room. As I turned to sit down again, I noticed, in the chair from which I had
arisen, something white crushed into one corner of the seat. I picked it
up. It was a handkerchief of dainty lace and it was damp--with tears? CHAPTER VI

An Astonishing Request


I sat down again and examined my find more closely. I am no connoisseur
of lace, yet even I could appreciate the handkerchief's exquisite
beauty. But how came it here, crushed into a corner of this chair? Whose
was it? Some instinct--or was it merely a delusive hope?--told me that
it belonged to Marcia Lawrence--that it was she who had left it
here--that the tears which dampened it were her tears, tears of bitter,
bitter sorrow for dead hopes and a future which had changed from gold to
grey. She had stolen into the library for a moment's peace, that she
might face her sorrow and decide what she must do. She had left it----

But I shook myself together impatiently. All this was merely theorising;
I must lay my foundation first, get my facts; then perhaps it might be
possible to build a theory which would prove the right one. Thus far in
the investigation, I felt that I had been met with evasion rather than
with frankness; I suspected that an attempt was being made to puzzle and
bewilder me; I could see that my presence in the house was unwelcome to
Mrs. Lawrence. Well, my stay would be a short one; I dropped the
handkerchief into my pocket, opened the door, and stepped out into the
hall. The front door was open and two men were tugging an immense palm through
it. Another was engaged in taking down the wreaths of smilax. By the
tenderness with which he handled them I recognised the decorator. He
stopped and looked at me inquiringly as I went toward him. "I've come down from New York," I explained, "at the request of Mr.
Curtiss to assist him in finding Miss Lawrence. You, I believe, are the
last person who is known to have seen her. I'd like to ask you a few
questions." "Go ahead," he said, beaming with self-importance. "I'll be glad to tell
you anything I know, sir." "Do you remember what time it was when you called Miss Lawrence down to
have a last look at the decorations?" "It must have been nearly half-past eleven, sir. I remember hearing a
clock strike eleven and thinking it'd take me about half an hour to get
through." "Did you notice anything peculiar in her behaviour?" "Peculiar? No, sir. She was very kind and said some nice things about my
work." "She did not seem sad nor depressed?" "Oh, no, sir; quite the contrary." "When she left you, did she return upstairs?" "I think so, sir. At least, she started for the stairs. I stepped into
the dining-room for a moment to make sure everything was all right, and
when I came out again she was gone." "Was there any one else in the hall?" "No, sir; I think not; not just at that moment, though of course people
were passing back and forth through it all the time." "Did you notice a man loitering about--a stranger--middle-aged,
dark-complexioned, with a dark beard or moustache--rather striking in
appearance--perhaps a little dissolute?" "No, sir," he answered, with a stare of surprise. "I didn't see any
stranger about the whole morning--nobody I didn't know." I confess I was rather disappointed; I had hoped that my shot would
tell. "And you heard no unusual noise--no scream, nor anything of that sort." "No, sir; though I was so busy and worried I dare say I wouldn't have
heard a cannon-shot." "When did you learn that something was wrong?" "I heard Mrs. Lawrence asking if any one had seen her daughter. Then she
sent some of the servants to look for her." "What time was that?" "About ten minutes after I had spoken to her." "Yes--what then?" "Well, I didn't pay much attention, at first; but when the bridesmaids
came, they raised such a hullabaloo that I couldn't help but take
notice." "What did Mrs. Lawrence do?" "Why, she tried to quiet them--I must say she was the coolest one in the
house--except one." "Who was that?" "Miss Lawrence's maid. She just sat there on the stairs and glowered and
grinned and chewed her nails and never said a word. She gave me the
creeps. I could swear she knew all about it and was glad of it." I repressed a chuckle of satisfaction. Here was better luck than I had
expected. "How was Miss Lawrence dressed when you saw her?" I asked. "All in rustly white. I judged it was her wedding-dress." "And you say she seemed quite as usual?" "Yes, sir; only, of course, excited, as any woman would be--though calm,
too, and with a sort of deep glow in her eyes when she looked at you. I
can't describe it, sir; but I remember thinking that the man who was to
get her was a mighty lucky fellow. Did you know her, sir?" "No," I said; "I've never seen her." "Ah," he added, closing his eyes for an instant, "if you'd seen her
then, you'd never forget it. I never will. I never saw another woman to
touch her!" and he turned away to his work, with the vision he had
conjured up evidently still before him. As I started along the hall, I saw through the open front door a
mail-carrier coming up the walk. I hastened to meet him--this was
another fortunate chance. "How many deliveries do you make a day out here?" I asked, as he came up
the steps with a bundle of letters in his hand--I could guess the
belated congratulations which were among them! "Only two--morning and afternoon," he answered. "What time in the morning?" "About nine o'clock, usually." "It was about that time this morning?" "Yes, sir; maybe ten minutes after nine." "Who took the mail?" "I put it in the box here in the vestibule, as I always do," he said,
and suited the action to the word. I watched him as he walked away. So it had not been a letter which had
caused Miss Lawrence's sudden panic. That reduced the possibilities to
two. Either she had received a visitor or a telegram. I must endeavour
to----

A voice at my elbow aroused me. "Mrs. Lawrence wishes to see you, sir," it said. I turned, to find standing beside me the woman who had brought the note
to Mrs. Lawrence in the library--the woman whose attitude of malignant
triumph had so startled me. I blessed the chance which made it possible
for me to question her alone. "Very well," I said. "Are you Mrs. Lawrence's maid?" "No, sir; I'm Miss Marcia's maid." "Ah!" I said, and permitted myself to look at her more closely. She was
a woman apparently somewhat over thirty. She had very black hair and
eyes, and her face, while not actually repellent, had in it a certain
fierceness and hardness far from attractive. A fiery and emotional
nature was evident in every line of it--a sinister nature, too, it
seemed to me--and I remembered her as I had seen her standing in the
library door, exulting in another's misery. I pictured her as the
decorator had described her, sitting on the stair, grinning and biting
her nails in a kind of infernal triumph. Why should Miss Lawrence have
chosen such a woman to attend her? As I looked at her, I saw the folly
of attempting to win her confidence--the whip was the only weapon that
could touch her--and it must be wielded mercilessly. "Mrs. Lawrence wishes to see you," she said again, and I fancied there
was defiance in the eyes she turned upon me for the merest instant. "In a moment. Was it you who found the note your mistress left for Mr. Curtiss?" "Yes, sir," and she glanced at me again, this time with a quick
suspicion. "It was on her dressing-table, I believe?" "Yes, sir." "How did you happen to find it?" "I just happened to see it, sir." "It was lying in plain sight?" "Yes, sir." "Not concealed in any way--nothing lying over it?" She hesitated an instant, and shot me another quick glance before she
answered. "I believe not, sir," she said at last. "Of course it wouldn't be concealed," I said reassuringly. "Miss
Lawrence probably left it where she thought it would be most quickly
seen, don't you think so?" "Yes, sir; I suppose so." "And her dressing-table was a very conspicuous place?" "Yes, sir; very conspicuous." "In that case," I said slowly, "it seems most peculiar that the letter
wasn't discovered at once." She flushed hotly under my gaze and opened her lips to reply, but
thought better of it and started hastily up the stair. I followed her in
silence; but I had much to think about. What connection had she with
Miss Lawrence's disappearance? What connection could she have? Miss
Lawrence would scarcely make a confidante of her maid, more especially
of such a maid as this! At the stairhead I held her back for a final
question. "When did you see your mistress last?" "When she left her room to go downstairs to look at the decorations,"
she answered, so docilely that I was inclined to believe her former
defiance wholly my imagination. "You remained behind in the room?" "Yes, sir." "And she did not return?" "No, sir." "Then how do you explain the presence of the letter on the dresser?" She flushed again, more hotly than before; she realised that I had
caught her in a lie. "I--I can't explain it, sir," she stammered. "I didn't consider it any
of my business," she added fiercely. "I think you'll find it difficult to explain," I said, with irony; "even
more difficult than how it came to lie there unperceived for nearly
three hours. You'll pardon me if I find the story hard to believe." "It's nothing to me whether or not you believe it!" she retorted and
made a motion to go on again. "No," I said; "wait a moment. Which is her room?" "This one here," and she pointed to a half-open door just beside us. Ignoring her gesture of protest, I pushed the door back and stepped
inside. The room was a large and pleasant one, well lighted and looking out upon
the grove at the east side of the house. There was some little disorder
apparent, and over a chair at the farther side of the room I saw a veil
lying--no doubt the bridal veil. For the moment I did not seek to see
more, but turned back into the hall. "Nothing there," I said, as though my inspection of the room was ended. "I suppose you helped Miss Lawrence to dress?" "Yes, sir." "And she had on her wedding-gown when she went downstairs?" "Yes, sir, all but the veil." "What was the colour of the gown?" "White, sir," she answered, with evident contempt. "White satin made
very plain." "With a train?" "Yes, sir, with a train." "Thank you," I said. Plainly, a woman garbed in that fashion must be a
marked object, wherever she went. Then, seeing that the maid waited for
further questions, I added, "That is all, I believe." She opened a door just across the hall and motioned me to precede her. I
found myself in a pleasant sitting-room, and looked about for Mrs.
Lawrence, but she was not there. The maid went to an inner door which
stood half-open, and knocked. "In a moment," called a low voice, and I heard a rustle of draperies. Instinctively I knew that Mrs. Lawrence had been upon her knees. But I was not prepared for the deep distress which I saw in her
countenance the instant she appeared upon the threshold. So worn and
drawn was it, so changed even in the brief time since I had seen her
last, that I scarcely knew her. What had happened? Was her self-control
giving way under the strain, or had there been some new shock, some more
poignant blow which she had been unable to withstand? She came straight to me where I stood staring, perhaps a little
brutally, and lifted tear-dimmed eyes to mine. "Mr. Lester," she said, in a choked voice, "I must ask that this search
for Marcia cease." CHAPTER VII

Tangled Threads


I stared at her a moment without replying--so she _was_ guilty! So she
_did_ know! I heard the opening of the door as the maid left the room,
and the sound somehow restored me a portion of my self-control. "Cease? But why?" I asked. "Surely----"

"Marcia has said that the marriage is impossible," she interrupted. "Is
not that enough?" "Mr. Curtiss does not think so. 