

E-text prepared by Andrew Turek
and revised by Rita Bailey and Joseph E. Loewenstein, M.D. THE BELTON ESTATE

by

ANTHONY TROLLOPE







First published in serial form in the _Fortnightly Review_
in 1865 and in book form the same year




CONTENTS

        I. THE REMNANTS OF THE AMEDROZ FAMILY. II. THE HEIR PROPOSES TO VISIT HIS COUSINS. III. WILL BELTON. IV. SAFE AGAINST LOVE-MAKING. V. NOT SAFE AGAINST LOVE-MAKING. VI. SAFE AGAINST LOVE-MAKING ONCE AGAIN. VII. MISS AMEDROZ GOES TO PERIVALE. VIII. CAPTAIN AYLMER MEETS HIS CONSTITUENTS. IX. CAPTAIN AYLMER'S PROMISE TO HIS AUNT. X. SHOWING HOW CAPTAIN AYLMER KEPT HIS PROMISE. XI. MISS AMEDROZ IS TOO CANDID BY HALF. XII. MISS AMEDROZ RETURNS HOME. XIII. MR. WILLIAM BELTON TAKES A WALK IN THE COUNTRY. XIV. MR. WILLIAM BELTON TAKES A WALK IN LONDON. XV. EVIL WORDS. XVI. THE HEIR'S SECOND VISIT TO BELTON. XVII. AYLMER PARK. XVIII. MRS. ASKERTON'S STORY. XIX. MISS AMEDROZ HAS ANOTHER CHANCE. XX. WILLIAM BELTON DOES NOT GO OUT HUNTING. XXI. MRS. ASKERTON'S GENEROSITY. XXII. PASSIONATE PLEADING. XXIII. THE LAST DAY AT BELTON. XXIV. THE GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY HOTEL. XXV. MISS AMEDROZ HAS SOME HASHED CHICKEN. XXVI. THE AYLMER PARK HASHED CHICKEN COMES TO AN END. XXVII. ONCE MORE BACK TO BELTON. XXVIII. MISS AMEDROZ IS PURSUED. XXIX. THERE IS NOTHING TO TELL. XXX. MARY BELTON. XXXI. TAKING POSSESSION. XXXII. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER I. THE REMNANTS OF THE AMEDROZ FAMILY. Mrs. Amedroz, the wife of Bernard Amedroz, Esq., of Belton Castle,
and mother of Charles and Clara Amedroz, died when those children
were only eight and six years old, thereby subjecting them to the
greatest misfortune which children born in that sphere of life can be
made to suffer. And, in the case of this boy and girl the misfortune
was aggravated greatly by the peculiarities of the father's
character. Mr. Amedroz was not a bad man,--as men are held to be bad
in the world's esteem. He was not vicious,--was not a gambler or a
drunkard,--was not self-indulgent to a degree that brought upon him
any reproach; nor was he regardless of his children. But he was an
idle, thriftless man, who, at the age of sixty-seven, when the reader
will first make his acquaintance, had as yet done no good in the
world whatever. Indeed he had done terrible evil; for his son Charles
was now dead,--had perished by his own hand,--and the state of things
which had brought about this woful event had been chiefly due to the
father's neglect. Belton Castle is a pretty country seat, standing in a small
but beautifully wooded park, close under the Quantock hills in
Somersetshire; and the little town of Belton clusters round the park
gates. Few Englishmen know the scenery of England well, and the
prettinesses of Somersetshire are among those which are the least
known. But the Quantock hills are very lovely, with their rich
valleys lying close among them, and their outlying moorlands running
off towards Dulverton and the borders of Devonshire,--moorlands which
are not flat, like Salisbury Plain, but are broken into ravines and
deep watercourses and rugged dells hither and thither; where old oaks
are standing, in which life seems to have, dwindled down to the last
spark; but the last spark is still there, and the old oaks give forth
their scanty leaves from year to year. In among the hills, somewhat off the high road from Minehead to
Taunton, and about five miles from the sea, stands the little town,
or village, of Belton, and the modern house of Mr. Amedroz, which
is called Belton Castle. The village,--for it is in truth no more,
though it still maintains a charter for a market, and there still
exists on Tuesdays some pretence of an open sale of grain and
butcher's meat in the square before the church-gate,--contains
about two thousand persons. That and the whole parish of Belton did
once,--and that not long ago,--belong to the Amedroz family. They had
inherited it from the Beltons of old, an Amedroz having married the
heiress of the family. And as the parish is large, stretching away to
Exmoor on one side, and almost to the sea on the other, containing
the hamlet of Redicote, lying on the Taunton high road,--Redicote,
where the post-office is placed, a town almost in itself, and one
which is now much more prosperous than Belton,--as the property when
it came to the first Amedroz had limits such as these, the family had
been considerable in the county. But these limits had been straitened
in the days of the grandfather and the father of Bernard Amedroz; and
he, when he married a Miss Winterfield of Taunton, was thought to
have done very well, in that mortgages were paid off the property
with his wife's money to such an extent as to leave him in clear
possession of an estate that gave him two thousand a year. As Mr.
Amedroz had no grand neighbours near him, as the place is remote
and the living therefore cheap, and as with this income there was
no question of annual visits to London, Mr. and Mrs. Amedroz might
have done very well with such of the good things of the world as had
fallen to their lot. And had the wife lived such would probably have
been the case; for the Winterfields were known to be prudent people. But Mrs. Amedroz had died young, and things with Bernard Amedroz had
gone badly. And yet the evil had not been so much with him as with that terrible
boy of his. The father had been nearly forty when he married. He had
then never done any good; but as neither had he done much harm, the
friends of the family had argued well of his future career. After
him, unless he should leave a son behind him, there would be no
Amedroz left among the Quantock hills; and by some arrangement
in respect to that Winterfield money which came to him on his
marriage,--the Winterfields having a long-dated connection with the
Beltons of old,--the Amedroz property was, at Bernard's marriage,
entailed back upon a distant Belton cousin, one Will Belton, whom
no one had seen for many years, but who was by blood nearer to the
squire, in default of children of his own, than any other of his
relatives. And now Will Belton was the heir to Belton Castle; for
Charles Amedroz, at the age of twenty-seven, had found the miseries
of the world to be too many for him, and had put an end to them and
to himself. Charles had been a clever fellow,--a very clever fellow in the eyes
of his father. Bernard Amedroz knew that he himself was not a clever
fellow, and admired his son accordingly; and when Charles had been
expelled from Harrow for some boyish freak,--in his vengeance against
a neighbouring farmer, who had reported to the school authorities the
doings of a few beagles upon his land, Charles had cut off the heads
of all the trees in a young fir plantation,--his father was proud of
the exploit. When he was rusticated a second time from Trinity, and
when the father received an intimation that his son's name had better
be taken from the College books, the squire was not so well pleased;
but even then he found some delight in the stories which reached him
of his son's vagaries; and when the young man commenced Bohemian life
in London, his father did nothing to restrain him. Then there came
the old story--debts, endless debts; and lies, endless lies. During
the two years before his death, his father paid for him, or undertook
to pay, nearly ten thousand pounds, sacrificing the life assurances
which were to have made provision for his daughter; sacrificing, to a
great extent, his own life income,--sacrificing everything, so that
the property might not be utterly ruined at his death. That Charles
Amedroz should be a brighter, greater man than any other Amedroz,
had still been the father's pride. At the last visit which Charles
had paid to Belton his father had called upon him to pledge himself
solemnly that his sister should not be made to suffer by what had
been done for him. Within a month of that time he had blown his
brains out in his London lodgings, thus making over the entire
property to Will Belton at his father's death. At that last pretended
settlement with his father and his father's lawyer, he had kept back
the mention of debts as heavy nearly as those to which he had owned;
and there were debts of honour, too, of which he had not spoken,
trusting to the next event at Newmarket to set him right. The next
event at Newmarket had set him more wrong than ever, and so there had
come an end to everything with Charles Amedroz. This had happened in the spring, and the afflicted father,--afflicted
with the double sorrow of his son's terrible death and his daughter's
ruin,--had declared that he would turn his face to the wall and die. But the old squire's health, though far from strong, was stronger
than he had deemed it, and his feelings, sharp enough, were less
sharp than he had thought them; and when a month had passed by, he
had discovered that it would be better that he should live, in order
that his daughter might still have bread to eat and a house of her
own over her head. Though he was now an impoverished man, there was
still left to him the means of keeping up the old home; and he told
himself that it must, if possible, be so kept that a few pounds
annually might be put by for Clara. The old carriage-horses were
sold, and the park was let to a farmer, up to the hall door of the
castle. So much the squire could do; but as to the putting by of
the few pounds, any dependence on such exertion as that on his part
would, we may say, be very precarious. Belton Castle was not in truth a castle. Immediately before the front
door, so near to the house as merely to allow of a broad road running
between it and the entrance porch, there stood an old tower, which
gave its name to the residence,--an old square tower, up which the
Amedroz boys for three generations had been able to climb by means
of the ivy and broken stones in one of the inner corners,--and this
tower was a remnant of a real castle that had once protected the
village of Belton. The house itself was an ugly residence, three
stories high, built in the time of George II., with low rooms and
long passages, and an immense number of doors. It was a large
unattractive house,--unattractive, that is, as regarded its own
attributes,--but made interesting by the beauty of the small park in
which it stood. Belton Park did not, perhaps, contain much above a
hundred acres, but the land was so broken into knolls and valleys,
in so many places was the rock seen to be cropping up through the
verdure, there were in it so many stunted old oaks, so many points
of vantage for the lover of scenery, that no one would believe it
to be other than a considerable domain. The farmer who took it, and
who would not under any circumstances undertake to pay more than
seventeen shillings an acre for it, could not be made to think that
it was in any way considerable. But Belton Park, since first it
was made a park, had never before been regarded after this fashion. Farmer Stovey, of the Grange, was the first man of that class who
had ever assumed the right to pasture his sheep in Belton chase,--as
the people around were still accustomed to call the woodlands of the
estate. It was full summer at Belton, and four months had now passed since
the dreadful tidings had reached the castle. It was full summer,
and the people of the village were again going about their ordinary
business; and the shop-girls, with their lovers from Redicote, were
again to be seen walking among the oaks in the park on a Sunday
evening; and the world in that district of Somersetshire was getting
itself back into its grooves. The fate of the young heir had
disturbed the grooves greatly, and had taught many in those parts to
feel that the world was coming to an end. They had not loved young
Amedroz, for he had been haughty when among them, and there had been
wrongs committed by the dissolute young squire, and grief had come
from his misdoings upon more than one household; but to think that he
should have destroyed himself with his own hand! And then, to think
that Miss Clara would become a beggar when the old squire should die! All the neighbours around understood the whole history of the entail,
and knew that the property was to go to Will Belton. Now Will Belton
was not a gentleman! So, at least, said the Belton folk, who had
heard that the heir had been brought up as a farmer somewhere in
Norfolk. Will Belton had once been at the Castle as a boy, now some
fifteen years ago, and then there had sprung up a great quarrel
between him and his distant cousin Charles;--and Will, who was rough
and large of stature, had thrashed the smaller boy severely; and the
thing had grown to have dimensions larger than those which generally
attend the quarrels of boys; and Will had said something which
had shown how well he understood his position in reference to the
estate;--and Charles had hated him. So Will had gone, and had been
no more seen among the oaks whose name he bore. And the people, in
spite of his name, regarded him as an interloper. To them, with their
short memories and scanty knowledge of the past, Amedroz was more
honourable than Belton, and they looked upon the coming man as an
intruder. Why should not Miss Clara have the property? Miss Clara had
never done harm to any one! Things got back into their old grooves, and at the end of the third
month the squire was once more seen in the old family pew at church. He was a large man, who had been very handsome, and who now, in his
yellow leaf, was not without a certain beauty of manliness. He wore
his hair and his beard long; before his son's death they were grey,
but now they were very white. And though he stooped, there was still
a dignity in his slow step,--a dignity that came to him from nature
rather than from any effort. He was a man who, in fact, did little or
nothing in the world,--whose life had been very useless; but he had
been gifted with such a presence that he looked as though he were
one of God's nobler creatures. Though always dignified he was ever
affable, and the poor liked him better than they might have done had
he passed his time in searching out their wants and supplying them. They were proud of their squire, though he had done nothing for them. It was something to them to have a man who could so carry himself
sitting in the family pew in their parish church. They knew that he
was poor, but they all declared that he was never mean. He was a
real gentleman,--was this last Amedroz of the family; therefore they
curtsied low, and bowed on his reappearance among them, and made all
those signs of reverential awe which are common to the poor when they
feel reverence for the presence of a superior. Clara was there with him, but she had shown herself in the pew for
four or five weeks before this. She had not been at home when the
fearful news had reached Belton, being at that time with a certain
lady who lived on the further side of the county, at Perivale,--a
certain Mrs. Winterfield, born a Folliott, a widow, who stood to Miss
Amedroz in the place of an aunt. Mrs. Winterfield was, in truth, the
sister of a gentleman who had married Clara's aunt,--there having
been marriages and intermarriages between the Winterfields and
the Folliotts, and the Belton-Amedroz families. With this lady in
Perivale, which I maintain to be the dullest little town in England,
Miss Amedroz was staying when the news reached her father, and when
it was brought direct from London to herself. Instantly she had
hurried home, making the journey with all imaginable speed though her
heart was all but broken within her bosom. She had found her father
stricken to the ground, and it was the more necessary, therefore,
that she should exert herself. It would not do that she also should
yield to that longing for death which terrible calamities often
produce for a season. Clara Amedroz, when she first heard the news of her brother's fate,
had felt that she was for ever crushed to the ground. She had known
too well what had been the nature of her brother's life, but she
had not expected or feared any such termination to his career as
this which had now come upon him--to the terrible affliction of all
belonging to him. She felt at first, as did also her father, that
she and he were annihilated as regards this world, not only by an
enduring grief, but also by a disgrace which would never allow her
again to hold up her head. And for many a long year much of this
feeling clung to her;--clung to her much more strongly than to her
father. But strength was hers to perceive, even before she had
reached her home, that it was her duty to repress both the feeling
of shame and the sorrow, as far as they were capable of repression. Her brother had been weak, and in his weakness had sought a coward's
escape from the ills of the world around him. She must not also be a
coward! Bad as life might be to her henceforth, she must endure it
with such fortitude as she could muster. So resolving she returned to
her father, and was able to listen to his railings with a fortitude
that was essentially serviceable both to him and to herself. "Both of you! Both of you!" the unhappy father had said in his woe. "The wretched boy has destroyed you as much as himself!" "No, sir,"
she had answered, with a forbearance in her misery, which, terrible
as was the effort, she forced herself to accomplish for his sake. "It
is not so. No thought of that need add to your grief. My poor brother
has not hurt me;--not in the way you mean." "He has ruined us all,"
said the father; "root and branch, man and woman, old and young,
house and land. He has brought the family to an end;--ah me, to such
an end!" After that the name of him who had taken himself from among
them was not mentioned between the father and daughter, and Clara
settled herself to the duties of her new life, striving to live as
though there was no great sorrow around her--as though no cloud-storm
had burst over her head. The family lawyer, who lived at Taunton, had communicated the fact of
Charles's death to Mr. Belton, and Belton had acknowledged the letter
with the ordinary expressions of regret. The lawyer had alluded to
the entail, saying that it was improbable that Mr. Amedroz would have
another son. To this Belton had replied that for his cousin Clara's
sake he hoped that the squire's life might be long spared. The lawyer
smiled as he read the wish, thinking to himself that luckily no wish
on the part of Will Belton could influence his old client either for
good or evil. What man, let alone what lawyer, will ever believe
in the sincerity of such a wish as that expressed by the heir to a
property? And yet where is the man who will not declare to himself
that such, under such circumstances, would be his own wish? Clara Amedroz at this time was not a very young lady. She had already
passed her twenty-fifth birthday, and in manners, appearance, and
habits was, at any rate, as old as her age. She made no pretence to
youth, speaking of herself always as one whom circumstances required
to take upon herself age in advance of her years. She did not dress
young, or live much with young people, or correspond with other
girls by means of crossed letters; nor expect that, for her, young
pleasures should be provided. Life had always been serious with her;
but now, we may say, since the terrible tragedy in the family, it
must be solemn as well as serious. The memory of her brother must
always be upon her; and the memory also of the fact that her father
was now an impoverished man, on whose behalf it was her duty to care
that every shilling spent in the house did its full twelve pennies'
worth of work. There was a mixture in this of deep tragedy and of
little care, which seemed to destroy for her the poetry as well as
the pleasure of life. The poetry and tragedy might have gone hand
in hand together; and so might the cares and pleasures of life have
done, had there been no black sorrow of which she must be ever
mindful. But it was her lot to have to scrutinize the butcher's bill
as she was thinking of her brother's fate; and to work daily among
small household things while the spectre of her brother's corpse was
ever before her eyes. A word must be said to explain how it had come to pass that the life
led by Miss Amedroz had been more than commonly serious before that
tragedy had befallen the family. The name of the lady who stood to
Clara in the place of an aunt has been already mentioned. When a girl
has a mother, her aunt may be little or nothing to her. But when
the mother is gone, if there be an aunt unimpeded with other family
duties, then the family duties of that aunt begin--and are assumed
sometimes with great vigour. Such had been the case with Mrs.
Winterfield. No woman ever lived, perhaps, with more conscientious
ideas of her duty as a woman than Mrs. Winterfield of Prospect Place,
Perivale. And this, as I say it, is intended to convey no scoff
against that excellent lady. She was an excellent lady--unselfish,
given to self-restraint, generous, pious, looking to find in her
religion a safe path through life--a path as safe as the facts of
Adam's fall would allow her feet to find. She was a woman fearing
much for others, but fearing also much for herself, striving to
maintain her house in godliness, hating sin, and struggling with the
weakness of her humanity so that she might not allow herself to hate
the sinners. But her hatred for the sin she found herself bound at
all times to pronounce--to show it by some act at all seasons. To
fight the devil was her work--was the appointed work of every living
soul, if only living souls could be made to acknowledge the necessity
of the task. Now an aunt of that kind, when she assumes her duties
towards a motherless niece, is apt to make life serious. But, it will be said, Clara Amedroz could have rebelled; and Clara's
father was hardly made of such stuff that obedience to the aunt would
be enforced on her by parental authority. Doubtless Clara could
have rebelled against her aunt. Indeed, I do not know that she had
hitherto been very obedient. But there were family facts about these
Winterfield connections which would have made it difficult for her
to ignore her so-called aunt, even had she wished to do so. Mrs.
Winterfield had twelve hundred a year at her own disposal, and she
was the only person related to the Amedroz family from whom Mr.
Amedroz had a right to have expectations on his daughter's behalf. Clara had, in a measure, been claimed by the lady, and the father had
made good the lady's claim, and Clara had acknowledged that a portion
of her life was due to the demands of Perivale. These demands had
undoubtedly made her life serious. Life at Perivale was a very serious thing. As regards amusement,
ordinarily so called, the need of any such institution was not
acknowledged at Prospect House. Food, drink, and raiment were
acknowledged to be necessary to humanity, and, in accordance with the
rules of that house, they were supplied in plenty, and good of their
kind. Such ladies as Mrs. Winterfield generally keep good tables,
thinking no doubt that the eatables should do honour to the grace
that is said for them. And Mrs. Winterfield herself always wore a
thick black silk dress,--not rusty or dowdy with age,--but with
some gloss of the silk on it; giving away, with secret, underhand,
undiscovered charity, her old dresses to another lady of her own
sort, on whom fortune had not bestowed twelve hundred a year. And
Mrs. Winterfield kept a low, four-wheeled, one-horsed little phaeton,
in which she made her pilgrimages among the poor of Perivale, driven
by the most solemn of stable-boys, dressed up in a white great coat,
the most priggish of hats, and white cotton gloves. At the rate of
five miles an hour was she driven about, and this driving was to
her the amusement of life. But such an occupation to Clara Amedroz
assisted to make life serious. In person Mrs. Winterfield was tall and thin, wearing on her brow
thin braids of false hair. She had suffered much from acute ill
health, and her jaws were sunken, and her eyes were hollow, and there
was a look of woe about her which seemed ever to be telling of her
own sorrows in this world and of the sorrows of others in the world
to come. Ill-nature was written on her face, but in this her face was
a false face. She had the manners of a cross, peevish woman; but her
manners also were false, and gave no proper idea of her character. But still, such as she was, she made life very serious to those who
were called upon to dwell with her. I need, I hope, hardly say that a young lady such as Miss Amedroz,
even though she had reached the age of twenty-five,--for at the time
to which I am now alluding she had nearly done so,--and was not young
of her age, had formed for herself no plan of life in which her
aunt's money figured as a motive power. She had gone to Perivale
when she was very young, because she had been told to do so, and had
continued to go, partly from obedience, partly from habit, and partly
from affection. An aunt's dominion, when once well established in
early years, cannot easily be thrown altogether aside,--even though
a young lady have a will of her own. Now Clara Amedroz had a strong
will of her own, and did not at all,--at any rate in these latter
days,--belong to that school of divinity in which her aunt shone
almost as a professor. And this circumstance, also, added to the
seriousness of her life. But in regard to her aunt's money she had
entertained no established hopes; and when her aunt opened her mind
to her on that subject, a few days before the arrival of the fatal
news at Perivale, Clara, though she was somewhat surprised, was by
no means disappointed. Now there was a certain Captain Aylmer in the
question, of whom in this opening chapter it will be necessary to say
a few words. Captain Frederic Folliott Aylmer was, in truth, the nephew of Mrs.
Winterfield, whereas Clara Amedroz was not, in truth, her niece. And
Captain Aylmer was also Member of Parliament for the little borough
of Perivale, returned altogether on the Low Church interest,--for
a devotion to which, and for that alone, Perivale was noted
among boroughs. These facts together added not a little to Mrs.
Winterfield's influence and professorial power in the place, and gave
a dignity to the one-horse chaise which it might not otherwise have
possessed. But Captain Aylmer was only the second son of his father,
Sir Anthony Aylmer, who had married a Miss Folliott, sister of our
Mrs. Winterfield. On Frederic Aylmer his mother's estate was settled. That and Mrs. Winterfield's property lay in the neighbourhood of
Perivale; and now, on the occasion to which I am alluding, Mrs.
Winterfield thought it necessary to tell Clara that the property must
all go together. She had thought about it, and had doubted about it,
and had prayed about it, and now she found that such a disposition of
it was her duty. "I am quite sure you're right, aunt," Clara had said. She knew very
well what had come of that provision which her father had attempted
to make for her, and knew also how great were her father's
expectations in regard to Mrs. Winterfield's money. "I hope I am; but I have thought it right to tell you. I shall feel
myself bound to tell Frederic. I have had many doubts, but I think
I am right." "I am sure you are, aunt. What would he think of me if, at some
future time, he should have to find that I had been in his way?" "The future time will not be long now, my dear." "I hope it may; but long or short, it is better so." "I think it is, my dear; I think it is. I think it is my duty." It must be understood that Captain Aylmer was member for Perivale on
the Low Church interest, and that, therefore, when at Perivale he was
decidedly a Low Churchman. I am not aware that the peculiarity stuck
to him very closely at Aylmer Castle, in Yorkshire, or among his
friends in London; but there was no hypocrisy in this, as the world
goes. Women in such matters are absolutely false if they be not
sincere; but men, with political views, and with much of their
future prospects in jeopardy also, are allowed to dress themselves
differently for different scenes. Whatever be the peculiar interest
on which a man goes into Parliament, of course he has to live up to
that in his own borough. Whether malt, the franchise, or teetotalism
be his rallying point, of course he is full of it when among his
constituents. But it is not desirable that he should be full of it
also at his club. Had Captain Aylmer become Prime Minister, he would
no doubt, have made Low Church bishops. It was the side to which he
had taken himself in that matter,--not without good reasons. And
he could say a sharp word or two in season about vestments; he was
strong against candles, and fought for his side fairly well. No one
had good right to complain of Captain Aylmer as being insincere; but
had his aunt known the whole history of her nephew's life, I doubt
whether she would have made him her heir,--thinking that in doing so
she was doing the best for the good cause. The whole history of her niece's life she did know, and she knew that
Clara was not with her, heart and soul. Had Clara left the old woman
in doubt on this subject, she would have been a hypocrite. Captain
Aylmer did not often spend a Sunday at Perivale, but when he did, he
went to church three times, and submitted himself to the yoke. He was
thinking of the borough votes quite as much as of his aunt's money,
and was carrying on his business after the fashion of men. But Clara
found herself compelled to maintain some sort of a fight, though she
also went to church three times on Sunday. And there was another
reason why Mrs. Winterfield thought it right to mention Captain
Aylmer's name to her niece on this occasion. "I had hoped," she said, "that it might make no difference in what
way my money was left." Clara well understood what this meant, as will, probably, the reader
also. "I can't say but what it will make a difference," she answered,
smiling; "but I shall always think that you have done right. Why
should I stand in Captain Aylmer's way?" "I had hoped your ways might have been the same," said the old lady,
fretfully. "But they cannot be the same." "No; you do not see things as he sees them. Things that are serious
to him are, I fear, only light to you. Dear Clara, would I could
see you more in earnest as to the only matter that is worth our
earnestness." Miss Amedroz said nothing as to the Captain's
earnestness, though, perhaps, her ideas as to his ideas about
religion were more correct than those held by Mrs. Winterfield. But
it would not have suited her to raise any argument on that subject. "I pray for you, Clara," continued the old lady; "and will do so as
long as the power of prayer is left to me. I hope,--I hope you do not
cease to pray for yourself?" "I endeavour, aunt." "It is an endeavour which, if really made, never fails." Clara said nothing more, and her aunt also remained silent. Soon
afterwards, the four-wheeled carriage, with the demure stable-boy,
came to the door, and Clara was driven up and down through the
streets of Perivale in a manner which was an injury to her. She knew
that she was suffering an injustice, but it was one of which she
could not make complaint. She submitted to her aunt, enduring the
penances that were required of her; and, therefore, her aunt had
opportunity enough to see her shortcomings. Mrs. Winterfield did see
them, and judged her accordingly. Captain Aylmer, being a man and a
Member of Parliament, was called upon to bear no such penances, and,
therefore, his shortcomings were not suspected. But, after all, what title had she ever possessed to entertain
expectations from Mrs. Winterfield? When she thought of it all in her
room that night, she told herself that it was strange that her aunt
should have spoken to her in such a way on such a subject. But, then,
so much had been said to her on the matter by her father, so much, no
doubt, had reached her aunt's ears also, the hope that her position
with reference to the rich widow at Perivale might be beneficial to
her had been so often discussed at Belton as a make-weight against
the extravagance of the heir, there had already been so much of this
mistake, that she taught herself to perceive that the communication
was needed. "In her honesty she has not chosen to leave me with false
hopes," said Clara to herself. And at that moment she loved her aunt
for her honesty. Then, on the day but one following this conversation as to the
destiny of her aunt's property, came the terrible tidings of her
brother's death. Captain Aylmer, who had been in London at the time,
hurried down to Perivale, and had been the first to tell Miss Amedroz
what had happened. The words spoken between them then had not been
many, but Clara knew that Captain Aylmer had been kind to her; and
when he had offered to accompany her to Belton, she had thanked him
with a degree of gratitude which had almost seemed to imply more of
regard between them than Clara would have acknowledged to exist. But
in moments such as those, soft words may be spoken and hands may be
pressed without any of that meaning which soft words and the grasping
of hands generally carry with them. As far as Taunton Captain Aylmer
did go with Miss Amedroz, and there they parted, he on his journey up
to town, and she for her father's desolate house at Belton. CHAPTER II. THE HEIR PROPOSES TO VISIT HIS COUSINS. It was full summer at Belton, and the sweet scent of the new hay
filled the porch of the old house with fragrance, as Clara sat there
alone with her work. Immediately before the house door, between that
and the old tower, there stood one of Farmer Stovey's hay-carts, now
empty, with an old horse between the shafts looking as though he were
asleep in the sun. Immediately beyond the tower the men were loading
another cart, and the women and children were chattering as they
raked the scattered remnants up to the rows. Under the shadow of the
old tower, but in sight of Clara as she sat in the porch, there lay
the small beer-barrels of the hay-makers, and three or four rakes
were standing erect against the old grey wall. It was now eleven
o'clock, and Clara was waiting for her father, who was not yet out
of his room. She had taken his breakfast to him in bed, as was her
custom; for he had fallen into idle ways, and the luxury of his bed
was, of all his remaining luxuries, the one that he liked the best. After a while he came down to her, having an open letter in his hand. Clara saw that he intended either to show it to her or to speak of
it, and asked him therefore, with some tone of interest in her voice,
from whom it had come. But Mr. Amedroz was fretful at the moment, and
instead of answering her began to complain of his tenant's ill-usage
of him. "What has he got his cart there for? I haven't let him the road up to
the hall door. I suppose he will bring his things into the parlour
next." "I rather like it, papa." "Do you? I can only say that you're lucky in your tastes. I don't
like it, I can tell you." "Mr. Stovey is out there. Shall I ask him to have the things moved
further off?" "No, my dear,--no. I must bear it, as I do all the rest of it. What
does it matter? There'll be an end of it soon. He pays his rent, and
I suppose he is right to do as he pleases. But I can't say that I
like it." "Am I to see the letter, papa?" she asked, wishing to turn his mind
from the subject of the hay-cart. "Well, yes. I brought it for you to see; though perhaps I should be
doing better if I burned it, and said nothing more about it. It is a
most impudent production; and heartless,--very heartless." Clara was accustomed to such complaints as these from her father. Everything that everybody did around him he would call heartless. The man pitied himself so much in his own misery, that he expected
to live in an atmosphere of pity from others; and though the pity
doubtless was there, he misdoubted it. He thought that Farmer Stovey
was cruel in that he had left the hay-cart near the house, to wound
his eyes by reminding him that he was no longer master of the ground
before his own hall door. He thought that the women and children were
cruel to chatter so near his ears. He almost accused his daughter of
cruelty, because she had told him that she liked the contiguity of
the hay-making. Under such circumstances as those which enveloped him
and her, was it not heartless in her to like anything? It seemed to
him that the whole world of Belton should be drowned in woe because
of his misery. "Where is it from, papa?" she asked. "There, you may read it. Perhaps it is better that you should know
that it has been written." Then she read the letter, which was as
follows:--

"Plaistow Hall, -- July, 186--." Though she had never before seen the handwriting, she knew at once
from whence came the letter, for she had often heard of Plaistow
Hall. It was the name of the farm at which her distant cousin, Will
Belton, lived, and her father had more than once been at the trouble
of explaining to her, that though the place was called a hall, the
house was no more than a farmhouse. He had never seen Plaistow
Hall, and had never been in Norfolk; but so much he could take upon
himself to say, "They call all the farms halls down there." It was
not wonderful that he should dislike his heir; and, perhaps, not
unnatural that he should show his dislike after this fashion. Clara,
when she read the address, looked up into her father's face. "You
know who it is now," he said. And then she read the letter. Plaistow Hall, -- July, 186--. MY DEAR SIR,

   I have not written to you before since your bereavement,
   thinking it better to wait awhile; but I hope you have
   not taken me to be unkind in this, or have supposed me
   to be unmindful of your sorrow. Now I take up my pen,
   hoping that I may make you understand how greatly I was
   distressed by what has occurred. I believe I am now the
   nearest male relative that you have, and as such I am very
   anxious to be of service to you if it may be possible. Considering the closeness of our connection, and my
   position in reference to the property, it seems bad that
   we should never meet. I can assure you that you would find
   me very friendly if we could manage to come together. I should think nothing of running across to Belton, if you
   would receive me at your house. I could come very well
   before harvest, if that would suit you, and would stay
   with you for a week. Pray give my kindest regards to my
   cousin Clara, whom I can only just remember as a very
   little girl. She was with her aunt at Perivale when I was
   at Belton as a boy. She shall find a friend in me if she
   wants a friend. Your affectionate cousin,

   W. BELTON. Clara read the letter very slowly, so that she might make herself
sure of its tone and bearing before she was called upon by her
father to express her feeling respecting it. She knew that she would
be expected to abuse it violently, and to accuse the writer of
vulgarity, insolence, and cruelty; but she had already learned that
she must not allow herself to accede to all her father's fantasies. For his sake, and for his protection, it was necessary that she
should differ from him, and even contradict him. Were she not to do
so, he would fall into a state of wailing and complaining that would
exaggerate itself almost to idiotcy. And it was imperative that
she herself should exercise her own opinion on many points, almost
without reference to him. She alone knew how utterly destitute she
would be when he should die. He, in the first days of his agony, had
sobbed forth his remorse as to her ruin; but, even when doing so,
he had comforted himself with the remembrance of Mrs. Winterfield's
money, and Mrs. Winterfield's affection for his daughter. And the
aunt, when she had declared her purpose to Clara, had told herself
that the provision made for Clara by her father was sufficient. To
neither of them had Clara told her own position. She could not inform
her aunt that her father had given up to the poor reprobate who had
destroyed himself all that had been intended for her. Had she done so
she would have been asking her aunt for charity. Nor would she bring
herself to add to her father's misery, by destroying the hopes which
still supported him. She never spoke of her own position in regard
to money, but she knew that it had become her duty to live a wary,
watchful life, taking much upon herself in their impoverished
household, and holding her own opinion against her father's when her
doing so became expedient. So she finished the letter in silence, and
did not speak at the moment when the movement of her eyes declared
that she had completed the task. "Well," said he. "I do not think my cousin means badly." "You don't! I do, then. I think he means very badly. What business
has he to write to me, talking of his position?" "I can't see anything amiss in his doing so, papa. I think he wishes
to be friendly. The property will be his some day, and I don't see
why that should not be mentioned, when there is occasion." "Upon my word, Clara, you surprise me. But women never understand
delicacy in regard to money. They have so little to do with it,
and think so little about it, that they have no occasion for such
delicacy." Clara could not help the thought that to her mind the subject was
present with sufficient frequency to make delicacy very desirable,
if only it were practicable. But of this she said nothing. "And what
answer will you send to him, papa?" she asked. "None at all. Why should I trouble myself to write to him?" "I will take the trouble off your hands." "And what will you say to him?" "I will ask him to come here, as he proposes." "Clara!" "Why not, papa? He is the heir to the property, and why should he
not be permitted to see it? There are many things in which his
co-operation with you might be a comfort to you. I can't tell you
whether the tenants and people are treating you well, but he can do
so; and, moreover, I think he means to be kind. I do not see why
we should quarrel with our cousin because he is the heir to your
property. It is not through any doing of his own that he is so." This reasoning had no effect upon Mr. Amedroz, but his daughter's
resolution carried the point against him in spite of his want of
reason. No letter was written that day, or on the next; but on the
day following a formal note was sent off by Clara, in which Mr.
Belton was told that Mr. Amedroz would be happy to receive him at
Belton Castle. The letter was written by the daughter, but the father
was responsible for the formality. He sat over her while she wrote
it, and nearly drove her distracted by discussing every word and
phrase. At last, Clara was so annoyed with her own production, that
she was almost tempted to write another letter unknown to her father;
but the formal note went. MY DEAR SIR,

   I am desired by my father to say that he will be happy
   to receive you at Belton Castle, at the time fixed by
   yourself. Yours truly,

   CLARA AMEDROZ. There was no more than that, but that had the desired effect; and by
return of post there came a rejoinder, saying that Will Belton would
be at the Castle on the fifteenth of August. "They can do without me
for about ten days," he said in his postscript, writing in a familiar
tone, which did not seem to have been at all checked by the coldness
of his cousin's note,--"as our harvest will be late; but I must be
back for a week's work before the partridges." "Heartless! quite heartless!" Mr. Amedroz said as he read this. "Partridges! to talk of partridges at such a time as this!" Clara, however, would not acknowledge that she agreed with her
father; but she could not altogether restrain a feeling on her own
part that her cousin's good humour towards her and Mr. Amedroz should
have been repressed by the tone of her letter to him. The man was to
come, however, and she would not judge of him until he was there. In one house in the neighbourhood, and in only one, had Miss Amedroz
a friend with whom she was intimate; and as regarded even this single
friend, the intimacy was the effect rather of circumstances than of
real affection. She liked Mrs. Askerton, and saw her almost daily;
but she could hardly tell herself that she loved her neighbour. In the little town of Belton, close to the church, there stood a
pretty, small house, called Belton Cottage. It was so near the church
that strangers always supposed it to be the parsonage; but the
rectory stood away out in the country, half a mile from the town,
on the road to Redicote, and was a large house, three stories high,
with grounds of its own, and very ugly. Here lived the old bachelor
rector, seventy years of age, given much to long absences when he
could achieve them, and never on good terms with his bishop. His two
curates lived at Redicote, where there was a second church. Belton
Cottage, which was occupied by Colonel Askerton and Mrs. Askerton,
was on the Amedroz property, and had been hired some two years since
by the Colonel, who was then a stranger in the country and altogether
unknown to the Belton people. But he had come there for shooting, and
therefore his coming had been understood. Even as long ago as two
years since, there had been neither use nor propriety in keeping the
shooting for the squire's son, and it had been let with the cottage
to Colonel Askerton. So Colonel Askerton had come there with his
wife, and no one in the neighbourhood had known anything about them. Mr. Amedroz, with his daughter, had called upon them, and gradually
there had grown up an intimacy between Clara and Mrs. Askerton. There
was an opening from the garden of Belton Cottage into the park, so
that familiar intercourse was easy, and Mrs. Askerton was a woman who
knew well how to make herself pleasant to such another woman as Miss
Amedroz. The reader may as well know at once that rumours prejudicial to the
Askertons reached Belton before they had been established there
for six months. At Taunton, which was twenty miles distant, these
rumours were very rife, and there were people there who knew with
accuracy,--though, probably without a grain of truth in their
accuracy,--every detail in the history of Mrs. Askerton's life. And
something, too, reached Clara's ears--something from old Mr. Wright,
the rector, who loved scandal, and was very ill-natured. "A very
nice woman," the rector had said; "but she does not seem to have any
belongings in particular." "She has got a husband," Clara had replied
with some little indignation, for she had never loved Mr. Wright. "Yes; I suppose she has got a husband." Then Clara had, in her own
judgment, accused the rector of lying, evil-speaking, and slandering,
and had increased the measure of her cordiality to Mrs. Askerton. But
something more she had heard on the same subject at Perivale. "Before
you throw yourself into close intimacy with the lady, I think you
should know something about her," Mrs. Winterfield had said to her. "I do know something about her; I know that she has the manners and
education of a lady, and that she is living affectionately with her
husband, who is devoted to her. What more ought I to know?" "If you
really do know all that, you know a great deal," Mrs. Winterfield had
replied. "Do you know anything against her, aunt?" Clara asked, after a pause. There was another pause before Mrs. Winterfield answered. "No
my dear; I cannot say that I do. But I think that young ladies,
before they make intimate friendships, should be very sure of their
friends." "You have already acknowledged that I know a great deal about her,"
Clara replied. And then the conversation was at an end. Clara had not
been quite ingenuous, as she acknowledged to herself. She was aware
that her aunt would not permit herself to repeat rumours as to the
truth of which she had no absolute knowledge. She understood that the
weakness of her aunt's caution was due to the old lady's sense of
charity and dislike of slander. But Clara had buckled on her armour
for Mrs. Askerton, and was glad, therefore, to achieve her little
victory. When we buckle on our armour in any cause, we are apt to
go on buckling it, let the cause become as weak as it may; and
Clara continued her intimacy with Mrs. Askerton, although there was
something in the lady's modes of speech, and something also in her
modes of thinking, which did not quite satisfy the aspirations of
Miss Amedroz as to a friend. Colonel Askerton himself was a pleasant, quiet man, who seemed to
be contented with the life which he was leading. For six weeks in
April and May he would go up to town, leaving Mrs. Askerton at the
cottage,--as to which, probably jovial, absence in the metropolis
there seemed to be no spirit of grudging on the part of the wife. On
the first of September a friend would come to the cottage and remain
there for six weeks' shooting; and during the winter the Colonel and
his wife always went to Paris for a fortnight. Such had been their
life for the last two years; and thus,--so said Mrs. Askerton to
Clara,--did they intend to live as long as they could keep the
cottage at Belton. Society at Belton they had none, and,--as they
said,--desired none. Between them and Mr. Wright there was only a
speaking acquaintance. The married curate at Redicote would not
let his wife call on Mrs. Askerton, and the unmarried curate was a
hard-worked, clerical hack,--a parochial minister at all times and
seasons, who went to no houses except the houses of the poor, and who
would hold communion with no man, and certainly with no woman, who
would not put up with clerical admonitions for Sunday backslidings. Mr. Amedroz himself neither received guests nor went as a guest to
other men's houses. He would occasionally stand for a while at the
gate of the Colonel's garden, and repeat the list of his own woes as
long as his neighbour would stand there to hear it. But there was no
society at Belton, and Clara, as far as she herself was aware, was
the only person with whom Mrs. Askerton held any social intercourse,
except what she might have during her short annual holiday in Paris. "Of course, you are right," she said, when Clara told her of the
proposed coming of Mr. Belton. "If he turn out to be a good fellow,
you will have gained a great deal. And should he be a bad fellow,
you will have lost nothing. In either case you will know him, and
considering how he stands towards you, that itself is desirable." "But if he should annoy papa?" "In your papa's condition, my dear, the coming of any one will annoy
him. At least, he will say so; though I do not in the least doubt
that he will like the excitement better even than you will." "I can't say there will be much excitement to me." "No excitement in a young man's coming into the house! Without
shocking your propriety, allow me to say that that is impossible. Of
course, he is coming to see whether he can't make matters all right
by marrying you." "That's nonsense, Mrs. Askerton." "Very well. Let it be nonsense. But why shouldn't he? It's just what
he ought to do. He hasn't got a wife; and, as far as I know, you
haven't got a lover." "I certainly have not got a lover." "Our religious nephew at Perivale does not seem to be of any use." "I wish, Mrs. Askerton, you would not speak of Captain Aylmer in that
way. I don't know any man whom I like so much, or at any rate better,
than Captain Aylmer; but I hate the idea that no girl can become
acquainted with an unmarried man without having her name mentioned
with his, and having to hear ill-natured remarks of that kind." "I hope you will learn to like this other man much better. Think how
nice it will be to be mistress of the old place after all. And then
to go back to the old family name! If I were you I would make up my
mind not to let him leave the place till I had brought him to my
feet." "If you go on like that I will not speak to you about him again." "Or rather not to my feet,--for gentlemen have laid aside the humble
way of making love for the last twenty years at least; but I don't
know whether the women haven't gained quite as much by the change as
the men." "As I know nothing will stop you when you once get into a vein of
that kind, I shall go," said Clara. "And till this man has come and
gone I shall not mention his name again in your presence." "So be it," said Mrs. Askerton; "but as I will promise to say nothing
more about him, you need not go on his account." But Clara had got
up, and did leave the cottage at once. CHAPTER III. WILL BELTON. Mr. Belton came to the castle, and nothing further had been said at
the cottage about his coming. Clara had seen Mrs. Askerton in the
meantime frequently, but that lady had kept her promise--almost to
Clara's disappointment. For she--though she had in truth disliked the
proposition that her cousin could be coming with any special views
with reference to herself had nevertheless sufficient curiosity about
the stranger to wish to talk about him. Her father, indeed, mentioned
Belton's name very frequently, saying something with reference to him
every time he found himself in his daughter's presence. A dozen times
he said that the man was heartless to come to the house at such a
time, and he spoke of his cousin always as though the man were guilty
of a gross injustice in being heir to the property. But not the less
on that account did he fidget himself about the room in which Belton
was to sleep, about the food that Belton was to eat, and especially
about the wine that Belton was to drink. What was he to do for wine? The stock of wine in the cellars at Belton Castle was, no doubt, very
low. The squire himself drank a glass or two of port daily, and had
some remnant of his old treasures by him, which might perhaps last
him his time; and occasionally there came small supplies of sherry
from the grocer at Taunton; but Mr. Amedroz pretended to think that
Will Belton would want champagne and claret;--and he would continue
to make these suggestions in spite of his own repeated complaints
that the man was no better than an ordinary farmer. "I've no doubt
he'll like beer," said Clara. "Beer!" said her father, and then
stopped himself, as though he were lost in doubt whether it would
best suit him to scorn his cousin for having so low a taste as that
suggested on his behalf, or to ridicule his daughter's idea that the
household difficulty admitted of so convenient a solution. The day of the arrival at last came, and Clara certainly was in a
twitter, although she had steadfastly resolved that she would be in
no twitter at all. She had told her aunt by letter of the proposed
visit, and Mrs. Winterfield had expressed her approbation, saying
that she hoped it would lead to good results. Of what good results
could her aunt be thinking? The one probable good result would
surely be this--that relations so nearly connected should know each
other. Why should there be any fuss made about such a visit? But,
nevertheless, Clara, though she made no outward fuss, knew that
inwardly she was not as calm about the man's coming as she would have
wished herself to be. He arrived about five o'clock in a gig from Taunton. Five was the
ordinary dinner hour at Belton, but it had been postponed till six on
this day, in the hope that the cousin might make his appearance at
any rate by that hour. Mr. Amedroz had uttered various complaints
as to the visitor's heartlessness in not having written to name the
hour of his arrival, and was manifestly intending to make the most of
the grievance should he not present himself before six;--but this
indulgence was cut short by the sound of the gig wheels. Mr. Amedroz
and his daughter were sitting in a small drawing-room, which looked
out to the front of the house and he, seated in his accustomed
chair, near the window, could see the arrival. For a moment or two
he remained quiet in his chair, as though he would not allow so
insignificant a thing as his cousin's coming to ruffle him;--but he
could not maintain this dignified indifference, and before Belton was
out of the gig he had shuffled out into the hall. Clara followed her father almost unconsciously and soon found herself
shaking hands with a big man, over six feet high, broad in the
shoulders, large limbed, with bright quick grey eyes, a large mouth,
teeth almost too perfect and a well-formed nose, with thick short
brown hair and small whiskers which came but half-way down his
cheeks--a decidedly handsome man with a florid face, but still,
perhaps, with something of the promised roughness of the farmer. But
a more good-humoured looking countenance Clara felt at once that she
had never beheld. "And you are the little girl that I remember when I was a boy at Mr. Folliott's?" he said. His voice was clear, and rather loud, but it
sounded very pleasantly in that sad old house. "Yes; I am the little girl," said Clara, smiling. "Dear, dear! and that's twenty years ago now," said he. "But you oughtn't to remind me of that, Mr. Belton." "Oughtn't I? Why not?" "Because it shows how very old I am." "Ah, yes;--to be sure. But there's nobody here that signifies. How
well I remember this room;--and the old tower out there. It isn't
changed a bit!" "Not to the outward eye, perhaps," said the squire. "That's what I mean. So they're making hay still. Our hay has been
all up these three weeks. I didn't know you ever meadowed the park." Here he trod with dreadful severity upon the corns of Mr. Amedroz,
but he did not perceive it. And when the squire muttered something
about a tenant, and the inconvenience of keeping land in his own
hands, Belton would have gone on with the subject had not Clara
changed the conversation. The squire complained bitterly of this to
Clara when they were alone, saying that it was very heartless. She had a little scheme of her own,--a plan arranged for the saying
of a few words to her cousin on the earliest opportunity of their
being alone together,--and she contrived that this should take place
within half an hour after his arrival, as he went through the hall
up to his room. "Mr. Belton," she said, "I'm sure you will not take
it amiss if I take a cousin's privilege at once and explain to you
something of our way of living here. My dear father is not very
strong." "He is much altered since I saw him last." "Oh, yes. Think of all that he has had to bear! Well, Mr. Belton,
the fact is, that we are not so well off as we used to be, and are
obliged to live in a very quiet way. You will not mind that?" "Who? I?" "I take it very kind of you, your coming all this way to see us--"

"I'd have come three times the distance." "But you must put up with us as you find us, you know. The truth is
we are very poor." "Well, now;--that's just what I wanted to know. One couldn't write
and ask such a question; but I was sure I should find out if I came." "You've found it out already, you see." "As for being poor, it's a thing I don't think very much about,--not
for young people. But it isn't comfortable when a man gets old. Now
what I want to know is this; can't something be done?" "The only thing to do is to be very kind to him. He has had to let
the park to Mr. Stovey, and he doesn't like talking about it." "But if it isn't talked about, how can it be mended?" "It can't be mended." "We'll see about that. But I'll be kind to him; you see if I ain't. And I'll tell you what, I'll be kind to you too, if you'll let me. You have got no brother now." "No," said Clara; "I have got no brother now." Belton was looking
full into her face, and saw that her eyes had become clouded with
tears. "I will be your brother," said he. "You see if I don't. When I say
a thing I mean it. I will be your brother." And he took her hand,
caressing it, and showing her that he was not in the least afraid
of her. He was blunt in his bearing, saying things which her father
would have called indelicate and heartless, as though they gave
him no effort, and placing himself at once almost in a position of
ascendency. This Clara had not intended. She had thought that her
farmer cousin, in spite of the superiority of his prospects as heir
to the property, would have acceded to her little hints with silent
acquiescence; but instead of this he seemed prepared to take upon
himself the chief part in the play that was to be acted between them. "Shall it be so?" he said, still holding her hand. "You are very kind." "I will be more than kind; I will love you dearly if you will let me. You don't suppose that I have looked you up here for nothing. Blood
is thicker than water, and you have nobody now so near to you as I
am. I don't see why you should be so poor, as the debts have been
paid." "Papa has had to borrow money on his life interest in the place." "That's the mischief! Never mind. We'll see if we can't do something. And in the meantime don't make a stranger of me. Anything does for
me. Lord bless you! if you were to see how I rough it sometimes! I can eat beans and bacon with any one; and what's more, I can go
without 'em if I can't get 'em." "We'd better get ready for dinner now. I always dress, because papa
likes to see it." This she said as a hint to her cousin that he
would be expected to change his coat, for her father would have been
annoyed had his guest sat down to dinner without such ceremony. Will
Belton was not very good at taking hints; but he did understand this,
and made the necessary change in his apparel. The evening was long and dull, and nothing occurred worthy of remark
except the surprise manifested by Mr. Amedroz when Belton called his
daughter by her Christian name. This he did without the slightest
hesitation, as though it were the most natural thing in the world for
him to do. She was his cousin, and cousins of course addressed each
other in that way. Clara's quick eye immediately saw her father's
slight gesture of dismay, but Belton caught nothing of this. The
squire took an early opportunity of calling him Mr. Belton with some
little peculiarity of expression; but this was altogether lost upon
Will, who five times in the next five minutes addressed "Clara" as
though they were already on the most intimate terms. She would have
answered him in the same way, and would have called him Will, had she
not been afraid of offending her father. Mr. Amedroz had declared his purpose of coming down to breakfast
during the period of his cousin's visit, and at half-past nine he was
in the parlour. Clara had been there some time, but had not seen her
cousin. He entered the room immediately after her father, bringing
his hat with him in his hand, and wiping the drops of perspiration
from his brow. "You have been out, Mr. Belton," said the squire. "All round the place, sir. Six o'clock doesn't often find me in bed,
summer or winter. What's the use of laying in bed when one has had
enough of sleep?" "But that's just the question," said Clara; "whether one has had
enough at six o'clock." "Women want more than men, of course. A man, if he means to do any
good with land, must be out early. The grass will grow of itself at
nights, but it wants looking after as soon as the daylight comes." "I don't know that it would do much good to the grass here," said the
squire, mournfully. "As much here as anywhere. And indeed I've got something to say about
that." He had now seated himself at the breakfast-table, and was
playing with his knife and fork. "I think, sir, you're hardly making
the best you can out of the park." "We won't mind talking about it, if you please," said the squire. "Well; of course I won't, if you don't like it; but upon my word you
ought to look about you; you ought indeed." "In what way do you mean?" said Clara. "If your father doesn't like to keep the land in his own hands, he
should let it to some one who would put stock in it,--not go on
cutting it year after year, and putting nothing back, as this fellow
will do. I've been talking to Stovey, and that's just what he means." "Nobody here has got money to put stock on the land," said the
squire, angrily. "Then you should look for somebody somewhere else. That's all. I'll
tell you what now, Mr. Amedroz, I'll do it myself." By this time he
had helped himself to two large slices of cold mutton, and was eating
his breakfast and talking with an equal amount of energy for either
occupation. "That's out of the question," said the squire. "I don't see why it should be out of the question. It would be better
for you,--and better for me too, if this place is ever to be mine." On hearing this the squire winced, but said nothing. This terrible
fellow was so vehemently outspoken that the poor old man was
absolutely unable to keep pace with him,--even to the repeating
of his wish that the matter should be talked of no further. "I'll
tell you what I'll do, now," continued Belton. "There's altogether,
outside the palings and in, about a hundred and fifty acres of
it. I'll give you one pound two and sixpence an acre, and I won't
cut an acre of grass inside the park;--no, nor much of it outside
either;--only just enough to give me a little fodder for the cattle
in winter." "And give up Plaistow Hall?" asked Clara. "Lord love you, no. I've a matter of nine hundred acres on hand
there, and most of it under the plough. I've counted it up, and it
would just cost me a thousand pounds to stock this place. I should
come and look at it twice a year or so, and I should see my money
home again, if I didn't get any profit out of it." Mr. Amedroz was astonished. The man had only been in his house one
night, and was proposing to take all his troubles off his hands. He
did not relish the proposition at all. He did not like to be accused
of not doing as well for himself as others could do for him. He did
not wish to make any change,--although he remembered at the moment
his anger with Farmer Stovey respecting the haycarts. He did not
desire that the heir should have any immediate interest in the place. But he was not strong enough to meet the proposition with a direct
negative. "I couldn't get rid of Stovey in that way," he said,
plaintively. "I've settled it all with Stovey already," said Belton. "He'll be
glad enough to walk off with a twenty-pound note, which I'll give
him. He can't make money out of the place. He hasn't got means to
stock it, and then see the wages that hay-making runs away with! He'd
lose by it even at what he's paying, and he knows it. There won't be
any difficulty about Stovey." By twelve o'clock on that day Mr. Stovey had been brought into the
house, and had resigned the land. It had been let to Mr. William
Belton at an increased rental,--a rental increased by nearly forty
pounds per annum,--and that gentleman had already made many of his
arrangements for entering upon his tenancy. The twenty pounds had
already been paid to Stovey, and the transaction was complete. Mr.
Amedroz sat in his chair bewildered, dismayed--and, as he himself
declared,--shocked, quite shocked, at the precipitancy of the young
man. It might be for the best. He didn't know. He didn't feel at
all sure. But such hurrying in such a matter was, under all the
circumstances of the family, to say the least of it, very indelicate. He was angry with himself for having yielded, and angry with Clara
for having allowed him to do so. "It doesn't signify much," he said,
at last. "Of course he'll have it all to himself before long." "But, papa, it really seems to be a much better arrangement for you. You'll get more money--"

"Money is not everything, my dear." "But you'd sooner have Mr. Belton, our own cousin, about the place,
than Mr. Stovey." "I don't know. We shall see. The thing is done now, and there is
no use in complaining. I must say he hasn't shown a great deal of
delicacy." On that afternoon Belton asked Clara to go out with him, and walk
round the place. He had been again about the grounds, and had made
plans, and counted up capabilities, and calculated his profit and
losses. "If you don't dislike scrambling about," said he, "I'll show
you everything that I intend to do." "But I can't have any changes made, Mr. Belton," said Mr. Amedroz,
with some affectation of dignity in his manner. "I won't have the
fences moved, or anything of that kind." "Nothing shall be done, sir, that you don't approve. I'll just manage
it all as if I was acting as your own--bailiff." "Son," he was going
to say, but he remembered the fate of his cousin Charles just in time
to prevent the use of the painful word. "I don't want to have anything done," said Mr. Amedroz. "Then nothing shall be done. We'll just mend a fence or two, to keep
in the cattle, and leave other things as they are. But perhaps Clara
will walk out with me all the same." Clara was quite ready to walk out, and had already tied on her hat
and taken her parasol. "Your father is a little nervous," said he, as soon as they were
beyond hearing of the house. "Can you wonder at it, when you remember all that he has suffered?" "I don't wonder at it in the least; and I don't wonder at his
disliking me either." "I don't think he dislikes you, Mr. Belton." "Oh, but he does. Of course he does. I'm the heir to the place
instead of you. It is natural that he should dislike me. But I'll
live it down. You see if I don't. I'll make him so fond of me, he'll
always want to have me here. I don't mind a little dislike to begin
with." "You're a wonderful man, Mr. Belton." "I wish you wouldn't call me Mr. Belton. But of course you must do
as you please about that. If I can make him call me Will, I suppose
you'll call me so too." "Oh, yes; then I will." "It don't much matter what a person is called; does it? Only one
likes to be friendly with one's friends. I suppose you don't like my
calling you Clara." "Now you've begun you had better go on." "I mean to. I make it a rule never to go back in the world. Your
father is half sorry that he has agreed about the place; but I shan't
let him off now. And I'll tell you what. In spite of what he says,
I'll have it as different as possible before this time next year. Why, there's lots of timber that ought to come out of the plantation;
and there's places where the roots want stubbing up horribly. These
things always pay for themselves if they are properly done. Any good
done in the world always pays." Clara often remembered those words
afterwards when she was thinking of her cousin's character. Any good
done in the world always pays! "But you mustn't offend my father, even though it should do good,"
she said. "I understand," he answered. "I won't tread on his toes. Where do you
get your milk and butter?" "We buy them." "From Stovey, I suppose." "Yes; from Mr. Stovey. It goes against the rent." "And it ought to go against the grain too,--living in the country and
paying for milk! I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll give you a cow. It shall be a little present from me to you." He said nothing of
the more important present which this would entail upon him in the
matter of the grass for the cow; but she understood the nature of the
arrangement, and was anxious to prevent it. "Oh, Mr. Belton, I think we'd better not attempt that," she said. "But we will attempt it. I've pledged myself to do nothing to oppose
your father; but I've made no such promise as to you. We'll have a
cow before I'm many days older. What a pretty place this is! I do
like these rocks so much, and it is such a comfort to be off the
flat." "It is pretty." "Very pretty. You've no conception what an ugly place Plaistow is. The land isn't actual fen now, but it was once. And it's quite flat. And there is a great dike, twenty feet wide, oozing through it,--just
oozing, you know; and lots of little dikes, at right angles with the
big one. And the fields are all square. And there are no hedges,--and
hardly a tree to be seen in the place." "What a picture you have drawn! I should commit suicide if I lived
there." "Not if you had so much to do as I have." "And what is the house like?" "The house is good enough,--an old-fashioned manor-house, with high
brick chimneys, and brick gables, tiled all over, and large square
windows set in stone. The house is good enough, only it stands in the
middle of a farm-yard. I said there were no trees, but there is an
avenue." "Come, that's something." "It was an old family seat, and they used to have avenues in those
days; but it doesn't lead up to the present hall door. It comes
sideways up to the farm-yard; so that the whole thing must have
been different once, and there must have been a great court-yard. In Elizabeth's time Plaistow Manor was rather a swell place, and
belonged to some Roman Catholics who came to grief, and then the
Howards got it. There's a whole history about it, only I don't much
care about those things." "And is it yours now?" "It's between me and my uncle, and I pay him rent for his part. He's
a clergyman you know, and he has a living in Lincolnshire,--not far
off." "And do you live alone in that big house?" "There's my sister. You've heard of Mary;--haven't you?" Then Clara remembered that there was a Miss Belton,--a poor sickly
creature, with a twisted spine and a hump back, as to whose welfare
she ought to have made inquiries. "Oh, yes; of course," said Clara. "I hope she's better than she used
to be,--when we heard of her." "She'll never be better. But then she does not become much worse. I think she does grow a little weaker. She's older than I am, you
know,--two years older; but you would think she was quite an old
woman to look at her." Then, for the next half-hour, they talked
about Mary Belton as they visited every corner of the place. Belton
still had an eye to business as he went on talking, and Clara
remarked how many sticks he moved as he went, how many stones he
kicked on one side, and how invariably he noted any defect in the
fences. But still he talked of his sister, swearing that she was as
good as gold, and at last wiping away the tears from his eyes as he
described her maladies. "And yet I believe she is better off than any
of us," he said, "because she is so good." Clara began to wish that
she had called him Will from the beginning, because she liked him
so much. He was just the man to have for a cousin,--a true loving
cousin, stalwart, self-confident, with a grain or two of tyranny in
his composition as becomes a man in relation to his intimate female
relatives; and one, moreover, with whom she could trust herself to
be familiar without any danger of love-making! She saw his character
clearly, and told herself that she understood it perfectly. He was a
jewel of a cousin, and she must begin to call him Will as speedily as
possible. At last they came round in their walk to the gate leading into
Colonel Askerton's garden; and here in the garden, close to the gate,
they found Mrs. Askerton. I fancy that she had been watching for
them, or at any rate watching for Clara, so that she might know how
her friend was carrying herself with her cousin. She came at once to
the wicket, and there she was introduced by Clara to Mr. Belton. Mr.
Belton as he made his bow muttered something awkwardly, and seemed
to lose his self-possession for the moment. Mrs. Askerton was very
gracious to him, and she knew well how to be both gracious and
ungracious. She talked about the scenery, and the charms of the
old place, and the dullness of the people around them, and the
inexpediency of looking for society in country places; till after
awhile Mr. Belton was once more at his ease. "How is Colonel Askerton?" asked Clara. "He's in-doors. Will you come and see him? He's reading a French
novel, as usual. It's the only thing he ever does in summer. Do you
ever read French novels, Mr. Belton?" "I read very little at all, and when I do I read English." "Ah, you're a man who has a pursuit in life, no doubt." "I should rather think so,--that is, if you mean, by a pursuit,
earning my bread. A man has not much time for French novels with a
thousand acres of land on his hands; even if he knew how to read
French, which I don't." "But you're not always at work on your farm?" "It's pretty constant, Mrs. Askerton. Then I shoot, and hunt." "You're a sportsman?" "All men living in the country are,--more or less." "Colonel Askerton shoots a great deal. He has the shooting of Belton,
you know. He'll be delighted, I'm sure, to see you if you are here
some time in September. But you, coming from Norfolk, would not care
for partridge-shooting in Somersetshire." "I don't see why it shouldn't be as good here as there." "Colonel Askerton thinks he has got a fair head of game upon the
place." "I dare say. Game is easily kept if people knew how to set about it." "Colonel Askerton has a very good keeper, and has gone to a great
deal of expense since he has been here." "I'm my own head-keeper," said Belton; "and so I will be,--or rather
should be, if I had this place." Something in the lady's tone had grated against his feelings and
offended him; or perhaps he thought that she assumed too many of the
airs of proprietorship because the shooting of the place had been let
to her husband for thirty pounds a-year. "I hope you don't mean to say you'll turn us out," said Mrs.
Askerton, laughing. "I have no power to turn anybody out or in," said he. "I've got
nothing to do with it." Clara, perceiving that matters were not going quite pleasantly
between her old and new friend, thought it best to take her
departure. Belton, as he went, lifted his hat from his head, and
Clara could not keep herself from thinking that he was not only very
handsome, but that he looked very much like a gentleman, in spite of
his occupation as a farmer. "By-bye, Clara," said Mrs. Askerton; "come down and see me to-morrow,
there's a dear. Don't forget what a dull life I have of it." Clara
said that she would come. "And I shall be so happy to see Mr. Belton
if he will call before he leaves you." At this Belton again raised
his hat from his head, and muttered some word or two of civility. But
this, his latter muttering, was different from the first, for he had
altogether regained his presence of mind. "You didn't seem to get on very well with my friend," said Clara,
laughing, as soon as they had turned away from the cottage. "Well, no;--that is to say, not particularly well or particularly
badly. At first I took her for somebody else I knew slightly ever so
long ago, and I was thinking of that other person at the time." "And what was the other person's name?" "I can't even remember that at the present moment." "Mrs. Askerton was a Miss Oliphant." "That wasn't the other lady's name. But, independently of that, they
can't be the same. The other lady married a Mr. Berdmore." "A Mr. Berdmore!" Clara as she repeated the name felt convinced that
she had heard it before, and that she had heard it in connection
with Mrs. Askerton. She certainly had heard the name of Berdmore
pronounced, or had seen it written, or had in some shape come across
the name in Mrs. Askerton's presence; or at any rate somewhere on
the premises occupied by that lady. More than this she could not
remember; but the name, as she had now heard it from her cousin,
became at once distinctly connected in her memory with her friends at
the cottage. "Yes," said Belton; "a Mr. Berdmore. I knew more of him than of her,
though for the matter of that, I knew very little of him either. She
was a fast-going girl, and his friends were very sorry. But I think
they are both dead or divorced, or that they have come to grief in
some way." "And is Mrs. Askerton like the fast-going lady?" "In a certain way. Not that I remember what the fast-going lady was
like; but there was something about this woman that put me in mind of
the other. Vigo was her name; now I recollect it,--a Miss Vigo. It's
nine or ten years ago now, and I was little more than a boy." "Her name was Oliphant." "I don't suppose they have anything to do with each other. What riled
me was the way she talked of the shooting. People do when they take
a little shooting. They pay some trumpery thirty or forty pounds a
year, and then they seem to think that it's almost the same as though
they owned the property themselves. I've known a man talk of his
manor because he had the shooting of a wood and a small farm round
it. They are generally shopkeepers out of London, gin distillers, or
brewers, or people like that." "Why, Mr. Belton, I didn't think you could be so furious!" "Can't I? When my back's up, it is up! But it isn't up yet." "And I hope it won't be up while you remain in Somersetshire." "I won't answer for that. There's Stovey's empty cart standing
just where it stood yesterday; and he promised he'd have it home
before three to-day. My back will be up with him if he doesn't mind
himself." It was nearly six o'clock when they got back to the house, and Clara
was surprised to find that she had been out three hours with her
cousin. Certainly it had been very pleasant. The usual companion
of her walks, when she had a companion, was Mrs. Askerton; but Mrs.
Askerton did not like real walking. She would creep about the grounds
for an hour or so, and even such companionship as that was better to
Clara than absolute solitude; but now she had been carried about the
place, getting over stiles and through gates, and wandering through
the copses, till she was tired and hungry, and excited and happy. "Oh, papa," she said, "we have had such a walk!" "I thought we were to have dined at five," he replied, in a low
wailing voice. "No, papa, indeed,--indeed you said six." "That was for yesterday." "You said we were to make it six while Mr. Belton was here." "Very well;--if it must be, I suppose it must be." "You don't mean on my account," said Will. "I'll undertake to eat
my dinner, sir, at any hour that you'll undertake to give it me. If
there's a strong point about me at all, it is my appetite." Clara, when she went to her father's room that evening, told him what
Mr. Belton had said about the shooting, knowing that her father's
feelings would agree with those which had been expressed by her
cousin. Mr. Amedroz of course made this an occasion for further
grumbling, suggesting that Belton wanted to get the shooting for
himself as he had got the farm. But, nevertheless, the effect which
Clara had intended was produced, and before she left him he had
absolutely proposed that the shooting and the land should go
together. "I'm sure that Mr. Belton doesn't mean that at all," said Clara. "I don't care what he means," said the squire. "And it wouldn't do to treat Colonel Askerton in that way," said
Clara. "I shall treat him just as I like," said the squire. CHAPTER IV. SAFE AGAINST LOVE-MAKING. A dear cousin, and safe against love-making! This was Clara's verdict
respecting Will Belton, as she lay thinking of him in bed that night. Why that warranty against love-making should be a virtue in her eyes
I cannot, perhaps, explain. But all young ladies are apt to talk
to themselves in such phrases about gentlemen with whom they are
thrown into chance intimacy;--as though love-making were in itself
a thing injurious and antagonistic to happiness, instead of being,
as it is, the very salt of life. Safe against love-making! And yet
Mrs. Askerton, her friend, had spoken of the probability of such
love-making as being the great advantage of his coming. And there
could not be a second opinion as to the expediency of a match between
her and her cousin in a worldly point of view. Clara, moreover,
had already perceived that he was a man fit to guide a wife, very
good-humoured,--and good-tempered also, anxious to give pleasure to
others, a man of energy and forethought, who would be sure to do well
in the world and hold his head always high among his fellows;--as
good a husband as a girl could have. Nevertheless, she congratulated
herself in that she felt satisfied that he was safe against
love-making! Might it be possible that that pressing of hands at
Taunton had been so tender, and those last words spoken with Captain
Aylmer so soft, that on his account she felt delighted to think that
her cousin was warranted not to make love? And what did Will Belton think about his cousin, insured as he was
thus supposed to be against the dangers of love? He, also, lay awake
for awhile that night, thinking over this new friendship. Or rather
he thought of it walking about his room, and looking out at the
bright harvest moon;--for with him to be in bed was to be asleep. He sat himself down, and he walked about, and he leaned out of the
window into the cool night air; and he made some comparisons in his
mind, and certain calculations; and he thought of his present home,
and of his sister, and of his future prospects as they were concerned
with the old place at which he was now staying; and he portrayed to
himself, in his mind, Clara's head and face and figure and feet;--and
he resolved that she should be his wife. He had never seen a girl who
seemed to suit him so well. Though he had only been with her for a
day, he swore to himself that he knew he could love her. Nay;--he
swore to himself that he did love her. Then,--when he had quite made
up his mind, he tumbled into his bed and was asleep in five minutes. Miss Amedroz was a handsome young woman, tall, well-made, active, and
full of health. She carried herself as though she thought her limbs
were made for use, and not simply for ease upon a sofa. Her head and
neck stood well upon her shoulders, and her waist showed none of
those waspish proportions of which ladies used to be more proud than
I believe them to be now, in their more advanced state of knowledge
and taste. There was much about her in which she was like her cousin,
as though the blood they had in common between them had given to both
the same proportions and the same comeliness. Her hair was of a dark
brown colour, as was his. Her eyes were somewhat darker than his,
and perhaps not so full of constant movement; but they were equally
bright, and possessed that quick power of expressing tenderness which
belonged to them. Her nose was more finely cut, as was also her chin,
and the oval of her face; but she had the same large expressive
mouth, and the same perfection of ivory-white teeth. As has been said
before, Clara Amedroz, who was now nearly twenty-six years of age,
was not a young-looking young woman. To the eyes of many men that
would have been her fault; but in the eyes of Belton it was no fault. He had not made himself fastidious as to women by much consort with
them, and he was disposed to think that she who was to become his
wife had better be something more than a girl not long since taken
out of the nursery. He was well to do in the world, and could
send his wife out in her carriage, with all becoming bravery of
appurtenances. And he would do so, too, when he should have a wife. But still he would look to his wife to be a useful partner to him. She should be a woman not above agricultural solicitude, or too proud
to have a care for her cows. Clara, he was sure, had no false pride;
and yet,--as he was sure also, she was at every point such a lady as
would do honour to the carriage and the bravery when it should be
forthcoming. And then such a marriage as this would put an end to all
the trouble which he felt in reference to the entail on the estate. He knew that he was to be master of Belton, and of course had,
in that knowledge, the satisfaction which men do feel from the
consciousness of their future prosperity. And this with him was
enhanced by a strong sympathy with old-fashioned prejudices as to
family. He would be Belton of Belton; and there had been Beltons of
Belton in old days, for a longer time backwards than he was able to
count. But still the prospect had not been without its alloy, and he
had felt real distress at the idea of turning his cousin out of her
father's house. Such a marriage as that he now contemplated would put
all these things right. When he got up in the morning he was quite as keen about it as he had
been on the previous evening;--and as he thought about it the more,
he became keener and still more keen. On the previous evening, as he
was leaning out of the window endeavouring to settle in his own mind
what would be the proper conduct of the romance of the thing, he had
considered that he had better not make his proposal quite at once. He was to remain eight days at Belton, and as eight days was not a
long period of acquaintance, he had reflected that it might be well
for him to lay what foundation for love it might be in his power to
construct during his present sojourn, and then return and complete
the work before Christmas. But as he was shaving himself, the
habitual impatience of his nature predominated, and he became
disposed to think that delay would be useless, and might perhaps be
dangerous. It might be possible that Clara would be unable to give
him a decisive answer so quickly as to enable him to return home an
accepted lover; but if such doubt were left, such doubt would give
him an excuse for a speedy return to Belton. He did not omit to tell
himself that very probably he might not succeed at all. He was a man
not at all apt to feel assurance that he could carry all before him
in love. But in this matter, as in all others which required from him
any personal effort, he prepared himself to do his best, leaving the
consequences to follow as they might. When he threw his seed corn
into the earth with all such due appliances of agricultural skill and
industry as his capital and experience enabled him to use, he did his
part towards the production of next year's crop; and after that he
must leave it to a higher Power to give to him, or to withhold from
him, the reward of his labour. He had found that, as a rule, the
reward had been given when the labour had been honest; and he was now
prepared to follow the same plan, with the same hopes, in this matter
of his love-making. After much consideration,--very much consideration, a consideration
which took him the whole time that he was brushing his hair and
washing his teeth,--he resolved that he would, in the first instance,
speak to Mr. Amedroz. Not that he intended that the father should win
the daughter for him. He had an idea that he would like to do that
work for himself. But he thought that the old squire would be better
pleased if his consent were asked in the first instance. The present
day was Sunday, and he would not speak on the subject till Monday. This day he would devote to the work of securing his future
father-in-law's good opinion; to that,--and to his prayers. And he had gained very much upon Mr. Amedroz before the evening
of the day was over. He was a man before whom difficulties seemed
to yield, and who had his own way simply because he had become
accustomed to ask for it,--to ask for it and to work for it. He had
so softened the squire's tone of thought towards him, that the future
stocking of the land was spoken of between them with something like
energy on both sides; and Mr. Amedroz had given his consent, without
any difficulty, to the building of a shed for winter stall-feeding. Clara sat by listening, and perceived that Will Belton would soon be
allowed to do just what he pleased with the place. Her father talked
as she had not heard him talk since her poor brother's death, and
was quite animated on the subject of woodcraft. "We don't know much
about timber down where I am," said Will, "just because we've got no
trees." "I'll show you your way," said the old man. "I've managed the timber
on the estate myself for the last forty years." Will Belton of course
did not say a word as to the gross mismanagement which had been
apparent even to him. What a cousin he was! Clara thought,--what a
paragon among cousins! And then he was so manifestly safe against
love-making! So safe, that he only cared to talk about timber, and
oxen, and fences, and winter-forage! But it was all just as it ought
to be; and if her father did not call him Will before long, she
herself would set the way by doing so first. A very paragon among
cousins! "What a flatterer you are," she said to him that night. "A flatterer! I?" "Yes, you. You have flattered papa out of all his animosity already. I shall be jealous soon; for he'll think more of you than of me." "I hope he'll come to think of us as being nearly equally near to
him," said Belton, with a tone that was half serious and half tender. Now that he had made up his mind, he could not keep his hand from the
work before him an instant. But Clara had also made up her mind, and
would not be made to think that her cousin could mean anything that
was more than cousinly. "Upon my word," she said, laughing, "that is very cool on your part." "I came here determined to be friends with him at any rate." "And you did so without any thought of me. But you said you would be
my brother, and I shall not forget your promise. Indeed, indeed, I
cannot tell you how glad I am that you have come,--both for papa's
sake and my own. You have done him so much good that I only dread to
think that you are going so soon." "I'll be back before long. I think nothing of running across here
from Norfolk. You'll see enough of me before next summer." Soon after breakfast on the next morning he got Mr. Amedroz out into
the grounds, on the plea of showing him the proposed site for the
cattle shed; but not a word was said about the shed on that occasion. He went to work at his other task at once, and when that was well on
hand the squire was quite unfitted for the consideration of any less
important matter, however able to discuss it Belton might have been
himself. "I've got something particular that I want to say to you, sir,"
Belton began. Now Mr. Amedroz was of opinion that his cousin had been saying
something very particular ever since his arrival, and was rather
frightened at this immediate prospect of a new subject. "There's nothing wrong; is there?" "No, nothing wrong;--at least, I hope it's not wrong. Would not it be
a good plan, sir, if I were to marry my cousin Clara?" What a terrible young man! Mr. Amedroz felt that his breath was so
completely taken away from him that he was quite unable to speak a
word of answer at the moment. Indeed, he was unable to move, and
stood still, where he had been fixed by the cruel suddenness of the
proposition made to him. "Of course I know nothing of what she may think about it," continued
Belton. "I thought it best to come to you before I spoke a word to
her. And I know that in many ways she is above me. She is better
educated, and reads more, and all that sort of thing. And it may be
that she'd rather marry a London man than a fellow who passes all
his time in the country. But she couldn't get one who would love her
better or treat her more kindly. And then as to the property; you
must own it would be a good arrangement. You'd like to know it would
go to your own child and your own grandchild;--wouldn't you, sir? And
I'm not badly off, without looking to this place at all, and could
give her everything she wants. But then I don't know that she'd care
to marry a farmer." These last words he said in a melancholy tone, as
though aware that he was confessing his own disgrace. The squire had listened to it all, and had not as yet said a word. And now, when Belton ceased, he did not know what word to speak. He
was a man whose thoughts about women were chivalrous, and perhaps a
little old-fashioned. Of course, when a man contemplates marriage,
he could do nothing better, nothing more honourable, than consult
the lady's father in the first instance. But he felt that even a
father should be addressed on such a subject with great delicacy. There should be ambages in such a matter. The man who resolved to
commit himself to such a task should come forward with apparent
difficulty,--with great diffidence, and even with actual difficulty. He should keep himself almost hidden, as behind a mask, and should
tell of his own ambition with doubtful, quivering voice. And the
ambages should take time. He should approach the citadel to be taken
with covered ways,--working his way slowly and painfully. 