



Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team





THE TRAIL OF THE LONESOME PINE

BY

JOHN FOX, JR. ILLUSTRATED BY F. C. YOHN


[Illustration: Frontispiece]

[Illustration: Titlepage]


To F. S.






THE TRAIL OF THE LONESOME PINE




I


She sat at the base of the big tree--her little sunbonnet pushed back,
her arms locked about her knees, her bare feet gathered under her
crimson gown and her deep eyes fixed on the smoke in the valley below. Her breath was still coming fast between her parted lips. There were
tiny drops along the roots of her shining hair, for the climb had been
steep, and now the shadow of disappointment darkened her eyes. The
mountains ran in limitless blue waves towards the mounting sun--but at
birth her eyes had opened on them as on the white mists trailing up the
steeps below her. Beyond them was a gap in the next mountain chain and
down in the little valley, just visible through it, were trailing blue
mists as well, and she knew that they were smoke. Where was the great
glare of yellow light that the "circuit rider" had told about--and
the leaping tongues of fire? Where was the shrieking monster that ran
without horses like the wind and tossed back rolling black plumes all
streaked with fire? For many days now she had heard stories of the
"furriners" who had come into those hills and were doing strange things
down there, and so at last she had climbed up through the dewy morning
from the cove on the other side to see the wonders for herself. She had
never been up there before. She had no business there now, and, if she
were found out when she got back, she would get a scolding and maybe
something worse from her step-mother--and all that trouble and risk
for nothing but smoke. So, she lay back and rested--her little mouth
tightening fiercely. It was a big world, though, that was spread before
her and a vague awe of it seized her straightway and held her motionless
and dreaming. Beyond those white mists trailing up the hills, beyond the
blue smoke drifting in the valley, those limitless blue waves must run
under the sun on and on to the end of the world! Her dead sister had
gone into that far silence and had brought back wonderful stories of
that outer world: and she began to wonder more than ever before whether
she would ever go into it and see for herself what was there. With the
thought, she rose slowly to her feet, moved slowly to the cliff that
dropped sheer ten feet aside from the trail, and stood there like a
great scarlet flower in still air. There was the way at her feet--that
path that coiled under the cliff and ran down loop by loop through
majestic oak and poplar and masses of rhododendron. She drew a long
breath and stirred uneasily--she'd better go home now--but the path had
a snake-like charm for her and still she stood, following it as far down
as she could with her eyes. Down it went, writhing this way and that
to a spur that had been swept bare by forest fires. Along this spur it
travelled straight for a while and, as her eyes eagerly followed it
to where it sank sharply into a covert of maples, the little creature
dropped of a sudden to the ground and, like something wild, lay flat. A human figure had filled the leafy mouth that swallowed up the trail
and it was coming towards her. With a thumping heart she pushed slowly
forward through the brush until her face, fox-like with cunning and
screened by a blueberry bush, hung just over the edge of the cliff, and
there she lay, like a crouched panther-cub, looking down. For a moment,
all that was human seemed gone from her eyes, but, as she watched, all
that was lost came back to them, and something more. She had seen that
it was a man, but she had dropped so quickly that she did not see the
big, black horse that, unled, was following him. Now both man and horse
had stopped. The stranger had taken off his gray slouched hat and he was
wiping his face with something white. Something blue was tied loosely
about his throat. She had never seen a man like that before. His face
was smooth and looked different, as did his throat and his hands. His
breeches were tight and on his feet were strange boots that were the
colour of his saddle, which was deep in seat, high both in front and
behind and had strange long-hooded stirrups. Starting to mount, the man
stopped with one foot in the stirrup and raised his eyes towards her
so suddenly that she shrank back again with a quicker throbbing at her
heart and pressed closer to the earth. Still, seen or not seen, flight
was easy for her, so she could not forbear to look again. Apparently, he
had seen nothing--only that the next turn of the trail was too steep to
ride, and so he started walking again, and his walk, as he strode along
the path, was new to her, as was the erect way with which he held his
head and his shoulders. In her wonder over him, she almost forgot herself, forgot to wonder
where he was going and why he was coming into those lonely hills until,
as his horse turned a bend of the trail, she saw hanging from the
other side of the saddle something that looked like a gun. He was a
"raider"--that man: so, cautiously and swiftly then, she pushed herself
back from the edge of the cliff, sprang to her feet, dashed past the big
tree and, winged with fear, sped down the mountain--leaving in a spot of
sunlight at the base of the pine the print of one bare foot in the black
earth. II


He had seen the big pine when he first came to those hills--one morning,
at daybreak, when the valley was a sea of mist that threw soft clinging
spray to the very mountain tops: for even above the mists, that morning,
its mighty head arose--sole visible proof that the earth still slept
beneath. Straightway, he wondered how it had ever got there, so far
above the few of its kind that haunted the green dark ravines far below. Some whirlwind, doubtless, had sent a tiny cone circling heavenward and
dropped it there. It had sent others, too, no doubt, but how had this
tree faced wind and storm alone and alone lived to defy both so proudly? Some day he would learn. Thereafter, he had seen it, at noon--but little
less majestic among the oaks that stood about it; had seen it catching
the last light at sunset, clean-cut against the after-glow, and like a
dark, silent, mysterious sentinel guarding the mountain pass under the
moon. He had seen it giving place with sombre dignity to the passing
burst of spring--had seen it green among dying autumn leaves, green
in the gray of winter trees and still green in a shroud of snow--a
changeless promise that the earth must wake to life again. The Lonesome
Pine, the mountaineers called it, and the Lonesome Pine it always looked
to be. From the beginning it had a curious fascination for him, and
straightway within him--half exile that he was--there sprang up a
sympathy for it as for something that was human and a brother. And now
he was on the trail of it at last. From every point that morning it had
seemed almost to nod down to him as he climbed and, when he reached the
ledge that gave him sight of it from base to crown, the winds murmured
among its needles like a welcoming voice. At once, he saw the secret of
its life. On each side rose a cliff that had sheltered it from storms
until its trunk had shot upwards so far and so straight and so strong
that its green crown could lift itself on and on and bend--blow what
might--as proudly and securely as a lily on its stalk in a morning
breeze. Dropping his bridle rein he put one hand against it as though on
the shoulder of a friend. "Old Man," he said, "You must be pretty lonesome up here, and I'm glad
to meet you." For a while he sat against it--resting. He had no particular purpose
that day--no particular destination. His saddle-bags were across the
cantle of his cow-boy saddle. His fishing rod was tied under one flap. He was young and his own master. Time was hanging heavy on his hands
that day and he loved the woods and the nooks and crannies of them
where his own kind rarely made its way. Beyond, the cove looked dark,
forbidding, mysterious, and what was beyond he did not know. So down
there he would go. As he bent his head forward to rise, his eye caught
the spot of sunlight, and he leaned over it with a smile. In the black
earth was a human foot-print--too small and slender for the foot of
a man, a boy or a woman. Beyond, the same prints were visible--wider
apart--and he smiled again. A girl had been there. She was the crimson
flash that he saw as he started up the steep and mistook for a flaming
bush of sumach. She had seen him coming and she had fled. Still smiling,
he rose to his feet. III


On one side he had left the earth yellow with the coming noon, but it
was still morning as he went down on the other side. The laurel and
rhododendron still reeked with dew in the deep, ever-shaded ravine. The ferns drenched his stirrups, as he brushed through them, and each
dripping tree-top broke the sunlight and let it drop in tent-like beams
through the shimmering undermist. A bird flashed here and there through
the green gloom, but there was no sound in the air but the footfalls of
his horse and the easy creaking of leather under him, the drip of dew
overhead and the running of water below. Now and then he could see the
same slender foot-prints in the rich loam and he saw them in the sand
where the first tiny brook tinkled across the path from a gloomy ravine. There the little creature had taken a flying leap across it and, beyond,
he could see the prints no more. He little guessed that while he halted
to let his horse drink, the girl lay on a rock above him, looking down. She was nearer home now and was less afraid; so she had slipped from the
trail and climbed above it there to watch him pass. As he went on, she
slid from her perch and with cat-footed quiet followed him. When
he reached the river she saw him pull in his horse and eagerly bend
forward, looking into a pool just below the crossing. There was a bass
down there in the clear water--a big one--and the man whistled cheerily
and dismounted, tying his horse to a sassafras bush and unbuckling a tin
bucket and a curious looking net from his saddle. With the net in one
hand and the bucket in the other, he turned back up the creek and passed
so close to where she had slipped aside into the bushes that she came
near shrieking, but his eyes were fixed on a pool of the creek above
and, to her wonder, he strolled straight into the water, with his boots
on, pushing the net in front of him. He was a "raider" sure, she thought now, and he was looking for a
"moonshine" still, and the wild little thing in the bushes smiled
cunningly--there was no still up that creek--and as he had left his
horse below and his gun, she waited for him to come back, which he did,
by and by, dripping and soaked to his knees. Then she saw him untie the
queer "gun" on his saddle, pull it out of a case and--her eyes got big
with wonder--take it to pieces and make it into a long limber rod. In a
moment he had cast a minnow into the pool and waded out into the water
up to his hips. She had never seen so queer a fishing-pole--so queer
a fisherman. How could he get a fish out with that little switch, she
thought contemptuously? By and by something hummed queerly, the man gave
a slight jerk and a shining fish flopped two feet into the air. It was
surely very queer, for the man didn't put his rod over his shoulder and
walk ashore, as did the mountaineers, but stood still, winding something
with one hand, and again the fish would flash into the air and then
that humming would start again while the fisherman would stand quiet
and waiting for a while--and then he would begin to wind again. In her
wonder, she rose unconsciously to her feet and a stone rolled down to
the ledge below her. The fisherman turned his head and she started to
run, but without a word he turned again to the fish he was playing. Moreover, he was too far out in the water to catch her, so she advanced
slowly--even to the edge of the stream, watching the fish cut half
circles about the man. If he saw her, he gave no notice, and it was
well that he did not. He was pulling the bass to and fro now through the
water, tiring him out--drowning him--stepping backward at the same time,
and, a moment later, the fish slid easily out of the edge of the water,
gasping along the edge of a low sand-bank, and the fisherman reaching
down with one hand caught him in the gills. Then he looked up and
smiled--and she had seen no smile like that before. "Howdye, Little Girl?" One bare toe went burrowing suddenly into the sand, one finger went to
her red mouth--and that was all. She merely stared him straight in the
eye and he smiled again. "Cat got your tongue?" Her eyes fell at the ancient banter, but she lifted them straightway and
stared again. "You live around here?" She stared on. "Where?" No answer. "What's your name, little girl?" And still she stared. "Oh, well, of course, you can't talk, if the cat's got your tongue." The steady eyes leaped angrily, but there was still no answer, and he
bent to take the fish off his hook, put on a fresh minnow, turned his
back and tossed it into the pool. "Hit hain't!" He looked up again. She surely was a pretty little thing--and more, now
that she was angry. "I should say not," he said teasingly. "What did you say your name was?" "What's YO' name?" The fisherman laughed. He was just becoming accustomed to the mountain
etiquette that commands a stranger to divulge himself first. "My name's--Jack." "An' mine's--Jill." She laughed now, and it was his time for
surprise--where could she have heard of Jack and Jill? His line rang suddenly. "Jack," she cried, "you got a bite!" He pulled, missed the strike, and wound in. The minnow was all right, so
he tossed it back again. "That isn't your name," he said. "If 'tain't, then that ain't your'n?" "Yes 'tis," he said, shaking his head affirmatively. A long cry came down the ravine:

"J-u-n-e! eh--oh--J-u-n-e!" That was a queer name for the mountains, and
the fisherman wondered if he had heard aright--June. The little girl gave a shrill answering cry, but she did not move. "Thar now!" she said. "Who's that--your Mammy?" "No, 'tain't--hit's my step-mammy. I'm a goin' to ketch hell now." Her
innocent eyes turned sullen and her baby mouth tightened. "Good Lord!" said the fisherman, startled, and then he stopped--the
words were as innocent on her lips as a benediction. "Have you got a father?" Like a flash, her whole face changed. "I reckon I have." "Where is he?" "Hyeh he is!" drawled a voice from the bushes, and it had a tone that
made the fisherman whirl suddenly. A giant mountaineer stood on the bank
above him, with a Winchester in the hollow of his arm. "How are you?" The giant's heavy eyes lifted quickly, but he spoke to
the girl. "You go on home--what you doin' hyeh gassin' with furriners!" The girl shrank to the bushes, but she cried sharply back:

"Don't you hurt him now, Dad. He ain't even got a pistol. He ain't no--"

"Shet up!" The little creature vanished and the mountaineer turned to
the fisherman, who had just put on a fresh minnow and tossed it into the
river. "Purty well, thank you," he said shortly. "How are you?" "Fine!" was the nonchalant answer. For a moment there was silence and a
puzzled frown gathered on the mountaineer's face. "That's a bright little girl of yours--What did she mean by telling you
not to hurt me?" "You haven't been long in these mountains, have ye?" "No--not in THESE mountains--why?" The fisherman looked around and was
almost startled by the fierce gaze of his questioner. "Stop that, please," he said, with a humourous smile. "You make me
nervous." The mountaineer's bushy brows came together across the bridge of his
nose and his voice rumbled like distant thunder. "What's yo' name, stranger, an' what's yo' business over hyeh?" "Dear me, there you go! You can see I'm fishing, but why does everybody
in these mountains want to know my name?" "You heerd me!" "Yes." The fisherman turned again and saw the giant's rugged face stern
and pale with open anger now, and he, too, grew suddenly serious. "Suppose I don't tell you," he said gravely. "What--"

"Git!" said the mountaineer, with a move of one huge hairy hand up the
mountain. "An' git quick!" The fisherman never moved and there was the click of a shell thrown
into place in the Winchester and a guttural oath from the mountaineer's
beard. "Damn ye," he said hoarsely, raising the rifle. "I'll give ye--"

"Don't, Dad!" shrieked a voice from the bushes. "I know his name, hit's
Jack--" the rest of the name was unintelligible. The mountaineer dropped
the butt of his gun to the ground and laughed. [Illustration: "Don't, Dad!" shrieked a voice from the bushes, 0034]

"Oh, air YOU the engineer?" The fisherman was angry now. He had not moved hand or foot and he said
nothing, but his mouth was set hard and his bewildered blue eyes had
a glint in them that the mountaineer did not at the moment see. He
was leaning with one arm on the muzzle of his Winchester, his face had
suddenly become suave and shrewd and now he laughed again:

"So you're Jack Hale, air ye?" The fisherman spoke. "JOHN Hale, except to my friends." He looked hard
at the old man. "Do you know that's a pretty dangerous joke of yours, my friend--I might
have a gun myself sometimes. Did you think you could scare me?" The
mountaineer stared in genuine surprise. "Twusn't no joke," he said shortly. "An' I don't waste time skeering
folks. I reckon you don't know who I be?" "I don't care who you are." Again the mountaineer stared. "No use gittin' mad, young feller," he said coolly. "I mistaken ye fer
somebody else an' I axe yer pardon. When you git through fishin' come up
to the house right up the creek thar an' I'll give ye a dram." "Thank you," said the fisherman stiffly, and the mountaineer turned
silently away. At the edge of the bushes, he looked back; the stranger
was still fishing, and the old man went on with a shake of his head. "He'll come," he said to himself. "Oh, he'll come!" That very point Hale was debating with himself as he unavailingly cast
his minnow into the swift water and slowly wound it in again. How did
that old man know his name? And would the old savage really have hurt
him had he not found out who he was? The little girl was a wonder:
evidently she had muffled his last name on purpose--not knowing it
herself--and it was a quick and cunning ruse. He owed her something for
that--why did she try to protect him? Wonderful eyes, too, the little
thing had--deep and dark--and how the flame did dart from them when she
got angry! He smiled, remembering--he liked that. And her hair--it was
exactly like the gold-bronze on the wing of a wild turkey that he had
shot the day before. Well, it was noon now, the fish had stopped biting
after the wayward fashion of bass, he was hungry and thirsty and he
would go up and see the little girl and the giant again and get that
promised dram. Once more, however, he let his minnow float down into the
shadow of a big rock, and while he was winding in, he looked up to
see in the road two people on a gray horse, a man with a woman behind
him--both old and spectacled--all three motionless on the bank and
looking at him: and he wondered if all three had stopped to ask his name
and his business. No, they had just come down to the creek and both they
must know already. "Ketching any?" called out the old man, cheerily. "Only one," answered Hale with equal cheer. The old woman pushed back
her bonnet as he waded through the water towards them and he saw that
she was puffing a clay pipe. She looked at the fisherman and his tackle
with the naive wonder of a child, and then she said in a commanding
undertone. "Go on, Billy." "Now, ole Hon, I wish ye'd jes' wait a minute." Hale smiled. He loved
old people, and two kinder faces he had never seen--two gentler voices
he had never heard. "I reckon you got the only green pyerch up hyeh," said the old man,
chuckling, "but thar's a sight of 'em down thar below my old mill." Quietly the old woman hit the horse with a stripped branch of elm and
the old gray, with a switch of his tail, started. "Wait a minute, Hon," he said again, appealingly, "won't ye?" but calmly
she hit the horse again and the old man called back over his shoulder:

"You come on down to the mill an' I'll show ye whar you can ketch a
mess." "All right," shouted Hale, holding back his laughter, and on they went,
the old man remonstrating in the kindliest way--the old woman silently
puffing her pipe and making no answer except to flay gently the rump of
the lazy old gray. Hesitating hardly a moment, Hale unjointed his pole, left his minnow
bucket where it was, mounted his horse and rode up the path. About him,
the beech leaves gave back the gold of the autumn sunlight, and a little
ravine, high under the crest of the mottled mountain, was on fire
with the scarlet of maple. Not even yet had the morning chill left the
densely shaded path. When he got to the bare crest of a little rise,
he could see up the creek a spiral of blue rising swiftly from a stone
chimney. Geese and ducks were hunting crawfish in the little creek that
ran from a milk-house of logs, half hidden by willows at the edge of
the forest, and a turn in the path brought into view a log-cabin well
chinked with stones and plaster, and with a well-built porch. A fence
ran around the yard and there was a meat house near a little orchard
of apple-trees, under which were many hives of bee-gums. This man had
things "hung up" and was well-to-do. Down the rise and through a thicket
he went, and as he approached the creek that came down past the cabin
there was a shrill cry ahead of him. "Whoa thar, Buck! Gee-haw, I tell ye!" An ox-wagon evidently was coming
on, and the road was so narrow that he turned his horse into the bushes
to let it pass. "Whoa--Haw!--Gee--Gee--Buck, Gee, I tell ye! I'll knock yo' fool head
off the fust thing you know!" Still there was no sound of ox or wagon and the voice sounded like a
child's. So he went on at a walk in the thick sand, and when he turned
the bushes he pulled up again with a low laugh. In the road across the
creek was a chubby, tow-haired boy with a long switch in his right hand,
and a pine dagger and a string in his left. Attached to the string and
tied by one hind leg was a frog. The boy was using the switch as a goad
and driving the frog as an ox, and he was as earnest as though both were
real. "I give ye a little rest now, Buck," he said, shaking his head
earnestly. "Hit's a purty hard pull hyeh, but I know, by Gum, you can
make hit--if you hain't too durn lazy. Now, git up, Buck!" he yelled
suddenly, flaying the sand with his switch. "Git up--Whoa--Haw--Gee,
Gee!" The frog hopped several times. "Whoa, now!" said the little fellow, panting in sympathy. "I knowed you
could do it." Then he looked up. For an instant he seemed terrified but
he did not run. Instead he stealthily shifted the pine dagger over to
his right hand and the string to his left. "Here, boy," said the fisherman with affected sternness: "What are you
doing with that dagger?" The boy's breast heaved and his dirty fingers clenched tight around the
whittled stick. "Don't you talk to me that-a-way," he said with an ominous shake of his
head. "I'll gut ye!" The fisherman threw back his head, and his peal of laughter did what his
sternness failed to do. The little fellow wheeled suddenly, and his feet
spurned the sand around the bushes for home--the astonished frog dragged
bumping after him. "Well!" said the fisherman. IV


Even the geese in the creek seemed to know that he was a stranger and to
distrust him, for they cackled and, spreading their wings, fled cackling
up the stream. As he neared the house, the little girl ran around the
stone chimney, stopped short, shaded her eyes with one hand for a moment
and ran excitedly into the house. A moment later, the bearded giant
slouched out, stooping his head as he came through the door. "Hitch that 'ar post to yo' hoss and come right in," he thundered
cheerily. "I'm waitin' fer ye." The little girl came to the door, pushed one brown slender hand through
her tangled hair, caught one bare foot behind a deer-like ankle and
stood motionless. Behind her was the boy--his dagger still in hand. "Come right in!" said the old man, "we are purty pore folks, but you're
welcome to what we have." The fisherman, too, had to stoop as he came in, for he, too, was tall. The interior was dark, in spite of the wood fire in the big stone
fireplace. Strings of herbs and red-pepper pods and twisted tobacco hung
from the ceiling and down the wall on either side of the fire; and in
one corner, near the two beds in the room, hand-made quilts of many
colours were piled several feet high. On wooden pegs above the door
where ten years before would have been buck antlers and an old-fashioned
rifle, lay a Winchester; on either side of the door were auger holes
through the logs (he did not understand that they were port-holes) and
another Winchester stood in the corner. From the mantel the butt of a
big 44-Colt's revolver protruded ominously. On one of the beds in the
corner he could see the outlines of a figure lying under a brilliantly
figured quilt, and at the foot of it the boy with the pine dagger had
retreated for refuge. From the moment he stooped at the door something
in the room had made him vaguely uneasy, and when his eyes in swift
survey came back to the fire, they passed the blaze swiftly and met on
the edge of the light another pair of eyes burning on him. "Howdye!" said Hale. "Howdye!" was the low, unpropitiating answer. The owner of the eyes was nothing but a boy, in spite of his length: so
much of a boy that a slight crack in his voice showed that it was just
past the throes of "changing," but those black eyes burned on without
swerving--except once when they flashed at the little girl who, with her
chin in her hand and one foot on the top rung of her chair, was gazing
at the stranger with equal steadiness. She saw the boy's glance, she
shifted her knees impatiently and her little face grew sullen. Hale
smiled inwardly, for he thought he could already see the lay of the
land, and he wondered that, at such an age, such fierceness could be: so
every now and then he looked at the boy, and every time he looked, the
black eyes were on him. The mountain youth must have been almost six
feet tall, young as he was, and while he was lanky in limb he was well
knit. His jean trousers were stuffed in the top of his boots and were
tight over his knees which were well-moulded, and that is rare with a
mountaineer. A loop of black hair curved over his forehead, down almost
to his left eye. His nose was straight and almost delicate and his mouth
was small, but extraordinarily resolute. Somewhere he had seen that face
before, and he turned suddenly, but he did not startle the lad with his
abruptness, nor make him turn his gaze. "Why, haven't I--?" he said. And then he suddenly remembered. He had
seen that boy not long since on the other side of the mountains, riding
his horse at a gallop down the county road with his reins in his teeth,
and shooting a pistol alternately at the sun and the earth with either
hand. Perhaps it was as well not to recall the incident. He turned to
the old mountaineer. "Do you mean to tell me that a man can't go through these mountains
without telling everybody who asks him what his name is?" The effect of his question was singular. The old man spat into the fire
and put his hand to his beard. The boy crossed his legs suddenly and
shoved his muscular fingers deep into his pockets. The figure shifted
position on the bed and the infant at the foot of it seemed to
clench his toy-dagger a little more tightly. Only the little girl
was motionless--she still looked at him, unwinking. What sort of wild
animals had he fallen among? "No, he can't--an' keep healthy." The giant spoke shortly. "Why not?" "Well, if a man hain't up to some devilment, what reason's he got fer
not tellin' his name?" "That's his business." "Tain't over hyeh. Hit's mine. Ef a man don't want to tell his name over
hyeh, he's a spy or a raider or a officer looking fer somebody or," he
added carelessly, but with a quick covert look at his visitor--"he's got
some kind o' business that he don't want nobody to know about." "Well, I came over here--just to--well, I hardly know why I did come." "Jess so," said the old man dryly. "An' if ye ain't looking fer trouble,
you'd better tell your name in these mountains, whenever you're axed. Ef
enough people air backin' a custom anywhar hit goes, don't hit?" His logic was good--and Hale said nothing. Presently the old man rose
with a smile on his face that looked cynical, picked up a black lump and
threw it into the fire. It caught fire, crackled, blazed, almost oozed
with oil, and Hale leaned forward and leaned back. "Pretty good coal!" "Hain't it, though?" The old man picked up a sliver that had flown to
the hearth and held a match to it. The piece blazed and burned in his
hand. "I never seed no coal in these mountains like that--did you?" "Not often--find it around here?" "Right hyeh on this farm--about five feet thick!" "What?" "An' no partin'." "No partin'"--it was not often that he found a mountaineer who knew what
a parting in a coal bed was. "A friend o' mine on t'other side,"--a light dawned for the engineer. "Oh," he said quickly. "That's how you knew my name." "Right you air, stranger. He tol' me you was a--expert." The old man laughed loudly. "An' that's why you come over hyeh." "No, it isn't." "Co'se not,"--the old fellow laughed again. Hale shifted the talk. "Well, now that you know my name, suppose you tell me what yours is?" "Tolliver--Judd Tolliver." Hale started. "Not Devil Judd!" "That's what some evil folks calls me." Again he spoke shortly. The
mountaineers do not like to talk about their feuds. Hale knew this--and
the subject was dropped. But he watched the huge mountaineer with
interest. There was no more famous character in all those hills than the
giant before him--yet his face was kind and was good-humoured, but the
nose and eyes were the beak and eyes of some bird of prey. The little
girl had disappeared for a moment. She came back with a blue-backed
spelling-book, a second reader and a worn copy of "Mother Goose," and
she opened first one and then the other until the attention of the
visitor was caught--the black-haired youth watching her meanwhile with
lowering brows. "Where did you learn to read?" Hale asked. The old man answered:

"A preacher come by our house over on the Nawth Fork 'bout three year
ago, and afore I knowed it he made me promise to send her sister Sally
to some school up thar on the edge of the settlements. And after she
come home, Sal larned that little gal to read and spell. Sal died 'bout
a year ago." Hale reached over and got the spelling-book, and the old man grinned
at the quick, unerring responses of the little girl, and the engineer
looked surprised. She read, too, with unusual facility, and her
pronunciation was very precise and not at all like her speech. "You ought to send her to the same place," he said, but the old fellow
shook his head. "I couldn't git along without her." The little girl's eyes began to dance suddenly, and, without opening
"Mother Goose," she began:

"Jack and Jill went up a hill," and then she broke into a laugh and Hale
laughed with her. Abruptly, the boy opposite rose to his great length. "I reckon I better be goin'." That was all he said as he caught up a
Winchester, which stood unseen by his side, and out he stalked. There
was not a word of good-by, not a glance at anybody. A few minutes later
Hale heard the creak of a barn door on wooden hinges, a cursing command
to a horse, and four feet going in a gallop down the path, and he knew
there went an enemy. "That's a good-looking boy--who is he?" The old man spat into the fire. It seemed that he was not going to
answer and the little girl broke in:

"Hit's my cousin Dave--he lives over on the Nawth Fork." That was the seat of the Tolliver-Falin feud. Of that feud, too, Hale
had heard, and so no more along that line of inquiry. He, too, soon rose
to go. "Why, ain't ye goin' to have something to eat?" "Oh, no, I've got something in my saddlebags and I must be getting back
to the Gap." "Well, I reckon you ain't. You're jes' goin' to take a snack right
here." Hale hesitated, but the little girl was looking at him with such
unconscious eagerness in her dark eyes that he sat down again. "All right, I will, thank you." At once she ran to the kitchen and the
old man rose and pulled a bottle of white liquid from under the quilts. "I reckon I can trust ye," he said. The liquor burned Hale like fire,
and the old man, with a laugh at the face the stranger made, tossed off
a tumblerful. "Gracious!" said Hale, "can you do that often?" "Afore breakfast, dinner and supper," said the old man--"but I don't." Hale felt a plucking at his sleeve. It was the boy with the dagger at
his elbow. "Less see you laugh that-a-way agin," said Bub with such deadly
seriousness that Hale unconsciously broke into the same peal. "Now," said Bub, unwinking, "I ain't afeard o' you no more." V


Awaiting dinner, the mountaineer and the "furriner" sat on the porch
while Bub carved away at another pine dagger on the stoop. As Hale
passed out the door, a querulous voice said "Howdye" from the bed in
the corner and he knew it was the step-mother from whom the little girl
expected some nether-world punishment for an offence of which he was
ignorant. He had heard of the feud that had been going on between the
red Falins and the black Tollivers for a quarter of a century, and this
was Devil Judd, who had earned his nickname when he was the leader of
his clan by his terrible strength, his marksmanship, his cunning and his
courage. Some years since the old man had retired from the leadership,
because he was tired of fighting or because he had quarrelled with his
brother Dave and his foster-brother, Bad Rufe--known as the terror of
the Tollivers--or from some unknown reason, and in consequence there had
been peace for a long time--the Falins fearing that Devil Judd would
be led into the feud again, the Tollivers wary of starting hostilities
without his aid. After the last trouble, Bad Rufe Tolliver had gone West
and old Judd had moved his family as far away as possible. Hale looked
around him: this, then, was the home of Devil Judd Tolliver; the little
creature inside was his daughter and her name was June. All around the
cabin the wooded mountains towered except where, straight before his
eyes, Lonesome Creek slipped through them to the river, and the old man
had certainly picked out the very heart of silence for his home. There
was no neighbour within two leagues, Judd said, except old Squire Billy
Beams, who ran a mill a mile down the river. No wonder the spot was
called Lonesome Cove. "You must ha' seed Uncle Billy and ole Hon passin'," he said. "I did." Devil Judd laughed and Hale made out that "Hon" was short for
Honey. "Uncle Billy used to drink right smart. Ole Hon broke him. She followed
him down to the grocery one day and walked in. 'Come on, boys--let's
have a drink'; and she set 'em up an' set 'em up until Uncle Billy most
went crazy. He had hard work gittin' her home, an' Uncle Billy hain't
teched a drap since." And the old mountaineer chuckled again. All the time Hale could hear noises from the kitchen inside. The old
step-mother was abed, he had seen no other woman about the house and he
wondered if the child could be cooking dinner. Her flushed face answered
when she opened the kitchen door and called them in. She had not only
cooked but now she served as well, and when he thanked her, as he did
every time she passed something to him, she would colour faintly. Once
or twice her hand seemed to tremble, and he never looked at her but her
questioning dark eyes were full upon him, and always she kept one hand
busy pushing her thick hair back from her forehead. He had not asked her
if it was her footprints he had seen coming down the mountain for fear
that he might betray her, but apparently she had told on herself, for
Bub, after a while, burst out suddenly:

"June, thar, thought you was a raider." The little girl flushed and the
old man laughed. "So'd you, pap," she said quietly. "That's right," he said. "So'd anybody. I reckon you're the first man
that ever come over hyeh jus' to go a-fishin'," and he laughed again. The stress on the last words showed that he believed no man had yet come
just for that purpose, and Hale merely laughed with him. The old fellow
gulped his food, pushed his chair back, and when Hale was through, he
wasted no more time. "Want to see that coal?" "Yes, I do," said Hale. "All right, I'll be ready in a minute." The little girl followed Hale out on the porch and stood with her back
against the railing. "Did you catch it?" he asked. She nodded, unsmiling. "I'm sorry. What were you doing up there?" She showed no surprise that
he knew that she had been up there, and while she answered his question,
he could see that she was thinking of something else. "I'd heerd so much about what you furriners was a-doin' over thar." "You must have heard about a place farther over--but it's coming over
there, too, some day." And still she looked an unspoken question. The fish that Hale had caught was lying where he had left it on the edge
of the porch. "That's for you, June," he said, pointing to it, and the name as he
spoke it was sweet to his ears. "I'm much obleeged," she said, shyly. "I'd 'a' cooked hit fer ye if I'd
'a' knowed you wasn't goin' to take hit home." "That's the reason I didn't give it to you at first--I was afraid you'd
do that. I wanted you to have it." "Much obleeged," she said again, still unsmiling, and then she suddenly
looked up at him--the deeps of her dark eyes troubled. "Air ye ever comin' back agin, Jack?" Hale was not accustomed to the
familiar form of address common in the mountains, independent of sex or
age--and he would have been staggered had not her face been so serious. And then few women had ever called him by his first name, and this time
his own name was good to his ears. "Yes, June," he said soberly. "Not for some time, maybe--but I'm coming
back again, sure." She smiled then with both lips and eyes--radiantly. "I'll be lookin' fer ye," she said simply. VI


The old man went with him up the creek and, passing the milk house,
turned up a brush-bordered little branch in which the engineer saw signs
of coal. Up the creek the mountaineer led him some thirty yards above
the water level and stopped. An entry had been driven through the
rich earth and ten feet within was a shining bed of coal. There was no
parting except two inches of mother-of-coal--midway, which would make it
but easier to mine. Who had taught that old man to open coal in such a
way--to make such a facing? It looked as though the old fellow were in
some scheme with another to get him interested. As he drew closer, he
saw radiations of some twelve inches, all over the face of the coal,
star-shaped, and he almost gasped. It was not only cannel coal--it was
"bird's-eye" cannel. Heavens, what a find! Instantly he was the cautious
man of business, alert, cold, uncommunicative. "That looks like a pretty good--" he drawled the last two words--"vein
of coal. I'd like to take a sample over to the Gap and analyze it." His
hammer, which he always carried--was in his saddle pockets, but he did
not have to go down to his horse. There were pieces on the ground that
would suit his purpose, left there, no doubt, by his predecessor. "Now I reckon you know that I know why you came over hyeh." Hale started to answer, but he saw it was no use. "Yes--and I'm coming again--for the same reason." "Shore--come agin and come often." The little girl was standing on the porch as he rode past the milk
house. He waved his hand to her, but she did not move nor answer. What a
life for a child--for that keen-eyed, sweet-faced child! But that coal,
cannel, rich as oil, above water, five feet in thickness, easy to mine,
with a solid roof and perhaps self-drainage, if he could judge from the
dip of the vein: and a market everywhere--England, Spain, Italy, Brazil. The coal, to be sure, might not be persistent--thirty yards within it
might change in quality to ordinary bituminous coal, but he could settle
that only with a steam drill. A steam drill! He would as well ask for
the wagon that he had long ago hitched to a star; and then there might
be a fault in the formation. But why bother now? The coal would
stay there, and now he had other plans that made even that find
insignificant. And yet if he bought that coal now--what a bargain! It
was not that the ideals of his college days were tarnished, but he was
a man of business now, and if he would take the old man's land for
a song--it was because others of his kind would do the same! But why
bother, he asked himself again, when his brain was in a ferment with a
colossal scheme that would make dizzy the magnates who would some day
drive their roadways of steel into those wild hills. So he shook himself
free of the question, which passed from his mind only with a transient
wonder as to who it was that had told of him to the old mountaineer, and
had so paved his way for an investigation--and then he wheeled suddenly
in his saddle. The bushes had rustled gently behind him and out from
them stepped an extraordinary human shape--wearing a coon-skin cap,
belted with two rows of big cartridges, carrying a big Winchester over
one shoulder and a circular tube of brass in his left hand. With his
right leg straight, his left thigh drawn into the hollow of his saddle
and his left hand on the rump of his horse, Hale simply stared, his eyes
dropping by and by from the pale-blue eyes and stubbly red beard of the
stranger, down past the cartridge-belts to the man's feet, on which
were moccasins--with the heels forward! Into what sort of a world had he
dropped! "So nary a soul can tell which way I'm going," said the red-haired
stranger, with a grin that loosed a hollow chuckle far behind it. "Would you mind telling me what difference it can make to me which way
you are going?" Every moment he was expecting the stranger to ask his
name, but again that chuckle came. "It makes a mighty sight o' difference to some folks." "But none to me." "I hain't wearin' 'em fer you. I know YOU." "Oh, you do." The stranger suddenly lowered his Winchester and turned
his face, with his ear cocked like an animal. There was some noise on
the spur above. "Nothin' but a hickory nut," said the chuckle again. But Hale had
been studying that strange face. One side of it was calm, kindly,
philosophic, benevolent; but, when the other was turned, a curious
twitch of the muscles at the left side of the mouth showed the teeth and
made a snarl there that was wolfish. "Yes, and I know you," he said slowly. Self-satisfaction, straightway,
was ardent in the face. "I knowed you would git to know me in time, if you didn't now." This was the Red Fox of the mountains, of whom he had heard so
much--"yarb" doctor and Swedenborgian preacher; revenue officer and,
some said, cold-blooded murderer. He would walk twenty miles to preach,
or would start at any hour of the day or night to minister to the
sick, and would charge for neither service. At other hours he would be
searching for moonshine stills, or watching his enemies in the valley
from some mountain top, with that huge spy-glass--Hale could see
now that the brass tube was a telescope--that he might slip down and
unawares take a pot-shot at them. The Red Fox communicated with spirits,
had visions and superhuman powers of locomotion--stepping mysteriously
from the bushes, people said, to walk at the traveller's side and as
mysteriously disappearing into them again, to be heard of in a few hours
an incredible distance away. "I've been watchin' ye from up thar," he said with a wave of his hand. "I seed ye go up the creek, and then the bushes hid ye. I know what
you was after--but did you see any signs up thar of anything you wasn't
looking fer?" Hale laughed. "Well, I've been in these mountains long enough not to tell you, if I
had." The Red Fox chuckled. "I wasn't sure you had--" Hale coughed and spat to the other side of his
horse. When he looked around, the Red Fox was gone, and he had heard no
sound of his going. "Well, I be--" Hale clucked to his horse and as he climbed the last
steep and drew near the Big Pine he again heard a noise out in the
woods and he knew this time it was the fall of a human foot and not of a
hickory nut. He was right, and, as he rode by the Pine, saw again at its
base the print of the little girl's foot--wondering afresh at the reason
that led her up there--and dropped down through the afternoon shadows
towards the smoke and steam and bustle and greed of the Twentieth
Century. A long, lean, black-eyed boy, with a wave of black hair over
his forehead, was pushing his horse the other way along the Big Black
and dropping down through the dusk into the Middle Ages--both all
but touching on either side the outstretched hands of the wild little
creature left in the shadows of Lonesome Cove. VII


Past the Big Pine, swerving with a smile his horse aside that he might
not obliterate the foot-print in the black earth, and down the mountain,
his brain busy with his big purpose, went John Hale, by instinct,
inheritance, blood and tradition--pioneer. One of his forefathers had been with Washington on the Father's first
historic expedition into the wilds of Virginia. His great-grandfather
had accompanied Boone when that hunter first penetrated the "Dark
and Bloody Ground," had gone back to Virginia and come again with a
surveyor's chain and compass to help wrest it from the red men,
among whom there had been an immemorial conflict for possession and a
never-recognized claim of ownership. That compass and that chain his
grandfather had fallen heir to and with that compass and chain his
father had earned his livelihood amid the wrecks of the Civil War. Hale
went to the old Transylvania University at Lexington, the first seat of
learning planted beyond the Alleghanies. He was fond of history, of the
sciences and literature, was unusually adept in Latin and Greek, and had
a passion for mathematics. He was graduated with honours, he taught two
years and got his degree of Master of Arts, but the pioneer spirit in
his blood would still out, and his polite learning he then threw to the
winds. Other young Kentuckians had gone West in shoals, but he kept his eye on
his own State, and one autumn he added a pick to the old compass and the
ancestral chain, struck the Old Wilderness Trail that his grandfather
had travelled, to look for his own fortune in a land which that old
gentleman had passed over as worthless. At the Cumberland River he took
a canoe and drifted down the river into the wild coal-swollen hills. Through the winter he froze, starved and prospected, and a year later
he was opening up a region that became famous after his trust and
inexperience had let others worm out of him an interest that would have
made him easy for life. With the vision of a seer, he was as innocent as Boone. Stripped clean,
he got out his map, such geological reports as he could find and went
into a studious trance for a month, emerging mentally with the freshness
of a snake that has shed its skin. What had happened in Pennsylvania
must happen all along the great Alleghany chain in the mountains of
Virginia, West Virginia, Kentucky, Alabama, Tennessee. Some day the
avalanche must sweep south, it must--it must. That he might be a quarter
of a century too soon in his calculations never crossed his mind. Some
day it must come. Now there was not an ounce of coal immediately south-east of the
Cumberland Mountains--not an ounce of iron ore immediately north-east;
all the coal lay to the north-east; all of the iron ore to the
south-east. So said Geology. For three hundred miles there were only
four gaps through that mighty mountain chain--three at water level, and
one at historic Cumberland Gap which was not at water level and would
have to be tunnelled. So said Geography. All railroads, to east and to west, would have to pass through those
gaps; through them the coal must be brought to the iron ore, or the ore
to the coal. Through three gaps water flowed between ore and coal and
the very hills between were limestone. Was there any such juxtaposition
of the four raw materials for the making of iron in the known world? When he got that far in his logic, the sweat broke from his brows; he
felt dizzy and he got up and walked into the open air. As the vastness
and certainty of the scheme--what fool could not see it?--rushed through
him full force, he could scarcely get his breath. There must be a town
in one of those gaps--but in which? No matter--he would buy all of
them--all of them, he repeated over and over again; for some day there
must be a town in one, and some day a town in all, and from all he would
reap his harvest. He optioned those four gaps at a low purchase price
that was absurd. He went back to the Bluegrass; he went to New York;
in some way he managed to get to England. It had never crossed his mind
that other eyes could not see what he so clearly saw and yet everywhere
he was pronounced crazy. He failed and his options ran out, but he was
undaunted. He picked his choice of the four gaps and gave up the other
three. This favourite gap he had just finished optioning again, and now
again he meant to keep at his old quest. That gap he was entering now
from the north side and the North Fork of the river was hurrying to
enter too. On his left was a great gray rock, projecting edgewise,
covered with laurel and rhododendron, and under it was the first
big pool from which the stream poured faster still. There had been a
terrible convulsion in that gap when the earth was young; the strata
had been tossed upright and planted almost vertical for all time, and, a
little farther, one mighty ledge, moss-grown, bush-covered, sentinelled
with grim pines, their bases unseen, seemed to be making a heavy flight
toward the clouds. Big bowlders began to pop up in the river-bed and against them the water
dashed and whirled and eddied backward in deep pools, while above him
the song of a cataract dropped down a tree-choked ravine. Just there the
drop came, and for a long space he could see the river lashing rock and
cliff with increasing fury as though it were seeking shelter from some
relentless pursuer in the dark thicket where it disappeared. Straight in
front of him another ledge lifted itself. Beyond that loomed a mountain
which stopped in mid-air and dropped sheer to the eye. Its crown was
bare and Hale knew that up there was a mountain farm, the refuge of a
man who had been involved in that terrible feud beyond Black Mountain
behind him. Five minutes later he was at the yawning mouth of the gap
and there lay before him a beautiful valley shut in tightly, for all the
eye could see, with mighty hills. It was the heaven-born site for the
unborn city of his dreams, and his eyes swept every curve of the valley
lovingly. The two forks of the river ran around it--he could follow
their course by the trees that lined the banks of each--curving within
a stone's throw of each other across the valley and then looping away
as from the neck of an ancient lute and, like its framework, coming
together again down the valley, where they surged together, slipped
through the hills and sped on with the song of a sweeping river. Up
that river could come the track of commerce, out the South Fork, too, it
could go, though it had to turn eastward: back through that gap it could
be traced north and west; and so none could come as heralds into those
hills but their footprints could be traced through that wild, rocky,
water-worn chasm. Hale drew breath and raised in his stirrups. "It's a cinch," he said aloud. "It's a shame to take the money." Yet nothing was in sight now but a valley farmhouse above the ford where
he must cross the river and one log cabin on the hill beyond. Still on
the other river was the only woollen mill in miles around; farther
up was the only grist mill, and near by was the only store, the only
blacksmith shop and the only hotel. That much of a start the gap had had
for three-quarters of a century--only from the south now a railroad
was already coming; from the east another was travelling like a wounded
snake and from the north still another creeped to meet them. Every road
must run through the gap and several had already run through it lines
of survey. The coal was at one end of the gap, and the iron ore at the
other, the cliffs between were limestone, and the other elements to make
it the iron centre of the world flowed through it like a torrent. "Selah! It's a shame to take the money." He splashed into the creek and his big black horse thrust his nose into
the clear running water. Minnows were playing about him. A hog-fish flew
for shelter under a rock, and below the ripples a two-pound bass shot
like an arrow into deep water. Above and below him the stream was arched with beech, poplar and water
maple, and the banks were thick with laurel and rhododendron. His eye
had never rested on a lovelier stream, and on the other side of the town
site, which nature had kindly lifted twenty feet above the water level,
the other fork was of equal clearness, swiftness and beauty. "Such a drainage," murmured his engineering instinct. "Such a drainage!" It was Saturday. Even if he had forgotten he would have known that it
must be Saturday when he climbed the bank on the other side. Many horses
were hitched under the trees, and here and there was a farm-wagon
with fragments of paper, bits of food and an empty bottle or two lying
around. It was the hour when the alcoholic spirits of the day were
usually most high. Evidently they were running quite high that day and
something distinctly was going on "up town." A few yells--the high,
clear, penetrating yell of a fox-hunter--rent the air, a chorus of
pistol shots rang out, and the thunder of horses' hoofs started beyond
the little slope he was climbing. When he reached the top, a merry
youth, with a red, hatless head was splitting the dirt road toward him,
his reins in his teeth, and a pistol in each hand, which he was letting
off alternately into the inoffensive earth and toward the unrebuking
heavens--that seemed a favourite way in those mountains of defying God
and the devil--and behind him galloped a dozen horsemen to the music of
throat, pistol and iron hoof. The fiery-headed youth's horse swerved and shot by. Hale hardly knew
that the rider even saw him, but the coming ones saw him afar and they
seemed to be charging him in close array. Hale stopped his horse
a little to the right of the centre of the road, and being equally
helpless against an inherited passion for maintaining his own rights and
a similar disinclination to get out of anybody's way--he sat motionless. Two of the coming horsemen, side by side, were a little in advance. "Git out o' the road!" they yelled. Had he made the motion of an arm,
they might have ridden or shot him down, but the simple quietness of him
as he sat with hands crossed on the pommel of his saddle, face calm and
set, eyes unwavering and fearless, had the effect that nothing else he
could have done would have brought about--and they swerved on either
side of him, while the rest swerved, too, like sheep, one stirrup
brushing his, as they swept by. Hale rode slowly on. He could hear
the mountaineers yelling on top of the hill, but he did not look
back. Several bullets sang over his head. Most likely they were simply
"bantering" him, but no matter--he rode on. The blacksmith, the storekeeper and one passing drummer were coming in
from the woods when he reached the hotel. "A gang o' those Falins," said the storekeeper, "they come over lookin'
for young Dave Tolliver. They didn't find him, so they thought they'd
have some fun"; and he pointed to the hotel sign which was punctuated
with pistol-bullet periods. Hale's eyes flashed once but he said
nothing. He turned his horse over to a stable boy and went across to the
little frame cottage that served as office and home for him. While he
sat on the veranda that almost hung over the mill-pond of the other
stream three of the Falins came riding back. One of them had left
something at the hotel, and while he was gone in for it, another put a
bullet through the sign, and seeing Hale rode over to him. Hale's blue
eye looked anything than friendly. "Don't ye like it?" asked the horseman. "I do not," said Hale calmly. The horseman seemed amused. "Well, whut you goin' to do about it?" "Nothing--at least not now." "All right--whenever you git ready. You ain't ready now?" "No," said Hale, "not now." The fellow laughed. "Hit's a damned good thing for you that you ain't." Hale looked long after the three as they galloped down the road. "When I
start to build this town," he thought gravely and without humour, "I'll
put a stop to all that." VIII


On a spur of Black Mountain, beyond the Kentucky line, a lean horse was
tied to a sassafras bush, and in a clump of rhododendron ten yards away,
a lean black-haired boy sat with a Winchester between his stomach and
thighs--waiting for the dusk to drop. His chin was in both hands, the
brim of his slouch hat was curved crescent-wise over his forehead, and
his eyes were on the sweeping bend of the river below him. That was
the "Bad Bend" down there, peopled with ancestral enemies and the
head-quarters of their leader for the last ten years. Though they had
been at peace for some time now, it had been Saturday in the county town
ten miles down the river as well, and nobody ever knew what a Saturday
might bring forth between his people and them. So he would not risk
riding through that bend by the light of day. All the long way up spur after spur and along ridge after ridge, all
along the still, tree-crested top of the Big Black, he had been thinking
of the man--the "furriner" whom he had seen at his uncle's cabin in
Lonesome Cove. He was thinking of him still, as he sat there waiting
for darkness to come, and the two vertical little lines in his forehead,
that had hardly relaxed once during his climb, got deeper and deeper,
as his brain puzzled into the problem that was worrying it: who the
stranger was, what his business was over in the Cove and his business
with the Red Fox with whom the boy had seen him talking. He had heard of the coming of the "furriners" on the Virginia side. He
had seen some of them, he was suspicious of all of them, he disliked
them all--but this man he hated straightway. He hated his boots and his
clothes; the way he sat and talked, as though he owned the earth, and
the lad snorted contemptuously under his breath:

"He called pants 'trousers.'" It was a fearful indictment, and he
snorted again: "Trousers!" The "furriner" might be a spy or a revenue officer, but deep down in the
boy's heart the suspicion had been working that he had gone over there
to see his little cousin--the girl whom, boy that he was, he had marked,
when she was even more of a child than she was now, for his own. His
people understood it as did her father, and, child though she was,
she, too, understood it. The difference between her and the
"furriner"--difference in age, condition, way of life, education--meant
nothing to him, and as his suspicion deepened, his hands dropped and
gripped his Winchester, and through his gritting teeth came vaguely:

"By God, if he does--if he just does!" Away down at the lower end of the river's curving sweep, the dirt road
was visible for a hundred yards or more, and even while he was cursing
to himself, a group of horsemen rode into sight. All seemed to be
carrying something across their saddle bows, and as the boy's eyes
caught them, he sank sidewise out of sight and stood upright, peering
through a bush of rhododendron. Something had happened in town that
day--for the horsemen carried Winchesters, and every foreign thought in
his brain passed like breath from a window pane, while his dark, thin
face whitened a little with anxiety and wonder. Swiftly he stepped
backward, keeping the bushes between him and his far-away enemies. Another knot he gave the reins around the sassafras bush and then,
Winchester in hand, he dropped noiseless as an Indian, from rock to
rock, tree to tree, down the sheer spur on the other side. Twenty
minutes later, he lay behind a bush that was sheltered by the top
boulder of the rocky point under which the road ran. His enemies were in
their own country; they would probably be talking over the happenings in
town that day, and from them he would learn what was going on. So long he lay that he got tired and out of patience, and he was about
to creep around the boulder, when the clink of a horseshoe against
a stone told him they were coming, and he flattened to the earth and
closed his eyes that his ears might be more keen. The Falins were riding
silently, but as the first two passed under him, one said:

"I'd like to know who the hell warned 'em!" "Whar's the Red Fox?" was the significant answer. The boy's heart leaped. There had been deviltry abroad, but his kinsmen
had escaped. No one uttered a word as they rode two by two, under him,
but one voice came back to him as they turned the point. "I wonder if the other boys ketched young Dave?" He could not catch the
answer to that--only the oath that was in it, and when the sound of the
horses' hoofs died away, he turned over on his back and stared up at the
sky. Some trouble had come and through his own caution, and the mercy
of Providence that had kept him away from the Gap, he had had his escape
from death that day. He would tempt that Providence no more, even by
climbing back to his horse in the waning light, and it was not until
dusk had fallen that he was leading the beast down the spur and into a
ravine that sank to the road. There he waited an hour, and when another
horseman passed he still waited a while. Cautiously then, with ears
alert, eyes straining through the darkness and Winchester ready, he went
down the road at a slow walk. There was a light in the first house, but
the front door was closed and the road was deep with sand, as he knew;
so he passed noiselessly. At the second house, light streamed through
the open door; he could hear talking on the porch and he halted. He
could neither cross the river nor get around the house by the rear--the
ridge was too steep--so he drew off into the bushes, where he had to
wait another hour before the talking ceased. There was only one more
house now between him and the mouth of the creek, where he would be
safe, and he made up his mind to dash by it. That house, too, was
lighted and the sound of fiddling struck his ears. He would give them a
surprise; so he gathered his reins and Winchester in his left hand, drew
his revolver with his right, and within thirty yards started his horse
into a run, yelling like an Indian and firing his pistol in the air. As he swept by, two or three figures dashed pell-mell indoors, and he
shouted derisively:

"Run, damn ye, run!" They were running for their guns, he knew, but
the taunt would hurt and he was pleased. As he swept by the edge of a
cornfield, there was a flash of light from the base of a cliff straight
across, and a bullet sang over him, then another and another, but he
sped on, cursing and yelling and shooting his own Winchester up in the
air--all harmless, useless, but just to hurl defiance and taunt them
with his safety. His father's house was not far away, there was no sound
of pursuit, and when he reached the river he drew down to a walk and
stopped short in a shadow. Something had clicked in the bushes above him
and he bent over his saddle and lay close to his horse's neck. The moon
was rising behind him and its light was creeping toward him through the
bushes. In a moment he would be full in its yellow light, and he was
slipping from his horse to dart aside into the bushes, when a voice
ahead of him called sharply:

"That you, Dave?" It was his father, and the boy's answer was a loud laugh. Several men
stepped from the bushes--they had heard firing and, fearing that young
Dave was the cause of it, they had run to his help. "What the hell you mean, boy, kickin' up such a racket?" "Oh, I knowed somethin'd happened an' I wanted to skeer 'em a leetle." "Yes, an' you never thought o' the trouble you might be causin' us." "Don't you bother about me. I can take keer o' myself." Old Dave Tolliver grunted--though at heart he was deeply pleased. "Well, you come on home!" All went silently--the boy getting meagre monosyllabic answers to his
eager questions but, by the time they reached home, he had gathered the
story of what had happened in town that day. There were more men in
the porch of the house and all were armed. The women of the house moved
about noiselessly and with drawn faces. There were no lights lit, and
nobody stood long even in the light of the fire where he could be seen
through a window; and doors were opened and passed through quickly. The
Falins had opened the feud that day, for the boy's foster-uncle, Bad
Rufe Tolliver, contrary to the terms of the last truce, had come home
from the West, and one of his kinsmen had been wounded. The boy told
what he had heard while he lay over the road along which some of his
enemies had passed and his father nodded. The Falins had learned in some
way that the lad was going to the Gap that day and had sent men after
him. Who was the spy? "You TOLD me you was a-goin' to the Gap," said old Dave. "Whar was ye?" "I didn't git that far," said the boy. The old man and Loretta, young Dave's sister, laughed, and quiet smiles
passed between the others. "Well, you'd better be keerful 'bout gittin' even as far as you did
git--wharever that was--from now on." "I ain't afeered," the boy said sullenly, and he turned into the
kitchen. Still sullen, he ate his supper in silence and his mother asked
him no questions. He was worried that Bad Rufe had come back to the
mountains, for Rufe was always teasing June and there was something
in his bold, black eyes that made the lad furious, even when the
foster-uncle was looking at Loretta or the little girl in Lonesome
Cove. And yet that was nothing to his new trouble, for his mind hung
persistently to the stranger and to the way June had behaved in the
cabin in Lonesome Cove. Before he went to bed, he slipped out to the
old well behind the house and sat on the water-trough in gloomy unrest,
looking now and then at the stars that hung over the Cove and over the
Gap beyond, where the stranger was bound. It would have pleased him
a good deal could he have known that the stranger was pushing his big
black horse on his way, under those stars, toward the outer world. IX


It was court day at the county seat across the Kentucky line. Hale
had risen early, as everyone must if he would get his breakfast in the
mountains, even in the hotels in the county seats, and he sat with his
feet on the railing of the hotel porch which fronted the main street
of the town. He had had his heart-breaking failures since the autumn
before, but he was in good cheer now, for his feverish enthusiasm had at
last clutched a man who would take up not only his options on the great
Gap beyond Black Mountain but on the cannel-coal lands of Devil Judd
Tolliver as well. He was riding across from the Bluegrass to meet this
man at the railroad in Virginia, nearly two hundred miles away; he had
stopped to examine some titles at the county seat and he meant to go
on that day by way of Lonesome Cove. Opposite was the brick Court
House--every window lacking at least one pane, the steps yellow with
dirt and tobacco juice, the doorway and the bricks about the upper
windows bullet-dented and eloquent with memories of the feud which had
long embroiled the whole county. Not that everybody took part in it but,
on the matter, everybody, as an old woman told him, "had feelin's." It had begun, so he learned, just after the war. Two boys were playing
marbles in the road along the Cumberland River, and one had a patch on
the seat of his trousers. The other boy made fun of it and the boy with
the patch went home and told his father. As a result there had already
been thirty years of local war. In the last race for legislature,
political issues were submerged and the feud was the sole issue. And a
Tolliver had carried that boy's trouser-patch like a flag to victory and
was sitting in the lower House at that time helping to make laws for the
rest of the State. Now Bad Rufe Tolliver was in the hills again and
the end was not yet. Already people were pouring in, men, women and
children--the men slouch-hatted and stalking through the mud in the
rain, or filing in on horseback--riding double sometimes--two men or two
women, or a man with his wife or daughter behind him, or a woman with a
baby in her lap and two more children behind--all dressed in homespun
or store-clothes, and the paint from artificial flowers on her hat
streaking the face of every girl who had unwisely scanned the heavens
that morning. Soon the square was filled with hitched horses, and an
auctioneer was bidding off cattle, sheep, hogs and horses to the crowd
of mountaineers about him, while the women sold eggs and butter and
bought things for use at home. Now and then, an open feudsman with a
Winchester passed and many a man was belted with cartridges for the big
pistol dangling at his hip. When court opened, the rain ceased, the sun
came out and Hale made his way through the crowd to the battered temple
of justice. On one corner of the square he could see the chief store of
the town marked "Buck Falin--General Merchandise," and the big man in
the door with the bushy redhead, he guessed, was the leader of the Falin
clan. Outside the door stood a smaller replica of the same figure, whom
he recognized as the leader of the band that had nearly ridden him down
at the Gap when they were looking for young Dave Tolliver, the autumn
before. That, doubtless, was young Buck. For a moment he stood at the
door of the court-room. A Falin was on trial and the grizzled judge was
speaking angrily:

"This is the third time you've had this trial postponed because you
hain't got no lawyer. I ain't goin' to put it off. Have you got you a
lawyer now?" "Yes, jedge," said the defendant. "Well, whar is he?" "Over thar on the jury." The judge looked at the man on the jury. "Well, I reckon you better leave him whar he is. He'll do you more good
thar than any whar else." Hale laughed aloud--the judge glared at him and he turned quickly
upstairs to his work in the deed-room. Till noon he worked and yet there
was no trouble. After dinner he went back and in two hours his work was
done. An atmospheric difference he felt as soon as he reached the door. The crowd had melted from the square. There were no women in sight, but
eight armed men were in front of the door and two of them, a red Falin
and a black Tolliver--Bad Rufe it was--were quarrelling. In every
doorway stood a man cautiously looking on, and in a hotel window he saw
a woman's frightened face. It was so still that it seemed impossible
that a tragedy could be imminent, and yet, while he was trying to
take the conditions in, one of the quarrelling men--Bad Rufe
Tolliver--whipped out his revolver and before he could level it, a Falin
struck the muzzle of a pistol into his back. Another Tolliver flashed
his weapon on the Falin. This Tolliver was covered by another Falin
and in so many flashes of lightning the eight men in front of him were
covering each other--every man afraid to be the first to shoot, since he
knew that the flash of his own pistol meant instantaneous death for him. As Hale shrank back, he pushed against somebody who thrust him aside. It
was the judge:

"Why don't somebody shoot?" he asked sarcastically. "You're a purty set
o' fools, ain't you? I want you all to stop this damned foolishness. Now
when I give the word I want you, Jim Falin and Rufe Tolliver thar, to
drap yer guns." Already Rufe was grinning like a devil over the absurdity of the
situation. "Now!" said the judge, and the two guns were dropped. "Put 'em in yo' pockets." They did. "Drap!" All dropped and, with those two, all put up their guns--each
man, however, watching now the man who had just been covering him. It
is not wise for the stranger to show too much interest in the personal
affairs of mountain men, and Hale left the judge berating them and went
to the hotel to get ready for the Gap, little dreaming how fixed the
faces of some of those men were in his brain and how, later, they were
to rise in his memory again. His horse was lame--but he must go on:
so he hired a "yaller" mule from the landlord, and when the beast was
brought around, he overheard two men talking at the end of the porch. "You don't mean to say they've made peace?" "Yes, Rufe's going away agin and they shuk hands--all of 'em." The other
laughed. "Rufe ain't gone yit!" The Cumberland River was rain-swollen. The home-going people were
helping each other across it and, as Hale approached the ford of a creek
half a mile beyond the river, a black-haired girl was standing on a
boulder looking helplessly at the yellow water, and two boys were on the
ground below her. One of them looked up at Hale:

"I wish ye'd help this lady 'cross." "Certainly," said Hale, and the girl giggled when he laboriously turned
his old mule up to the boulder. Not accustomed to have ladies ride
behind him, Hale had turned the wrong side. Again he laboriously wheeled
about and then into the yellow torrent he went with the girl behind him,
the old beast stumbling over the stones, whereat the girl, unafraid,
made sounds of much merriment. Across, Hale stopped and said
courteously:

"If you are going up this way, you are quite welcome to ride on." "Well, I wasn't crossin' that crick jes' exactly fer fun," said the girl
demurely, and then she murmured something about her cousins and looked
back. They had gone down to a shallower ford, and when they, too, had
waded across, they said nothing and the girl said nothing--so Hale
started on, the two boys following. The mule was slow and, being in a
hurry, Hale urged him with his whip. Every time he struck, the beast
would kick up and once the girl came near going off. "You must watch out, when I hit him," said Hale. "I don't know when you're goin' to hit him," she drawled unconcernedly. "Well, I'll let you know," said Hale laughing. "Now!" And, as he whacked
the beast again, the girl laughed and they were better acquainted. Presently they passed two boys. Hale was wearing riding-boots and tight
breeches, and one of the boys ran his eyes up boot and leg and if they
were lifted higher, Hale could not tell. "Whar'd you git him?" he squeaked. The girl turned her head as the mule broke into a trot. "Ain't got time to tell. They are my cousins," explained the girl. "What is your name?" asked Hale. "Loretty Tolliver." Hale turned in his saddle. "Are you the daughter of Dave Tolliver?" "Yes." "Then you've got a brother named Dave?" "Yes." This, then, was the sister of the black-haired boy he had seen in
the Lonesome Cove. "Haven't you got some kinfolks over the mountain?" "Yes, I got an uncle livin' over thar. Devil Judd, folks calls him,"
said the girl simply. This girl was cousin to little June in Lonesome
Cove. Every now and then she would look behind them, and when Hale
turned again inquiringly she explained:

"I'm worried about my cousins back thar. I'm afeered somethin' mought
happen to 'em." "Shall we wait for them?" "Oh, no--I reckon not." Soon they overtook two men on horseback, and after they passed and were
fifty yards ahead of them, one of the men lifted his voice jestingly:

"Is that your woman, stranger, or have you just borrowed her?" Hale
shouted back:

"No, I'm sorry to say, I've just borrowed her," and he turned to see how
she would take this answering pleasantry. She was looking down shyly and
she did not seem much pleased. "They are kinfolks o' mine, too," she said, and whether it was in
explanation or as a rebuke, Hale could not determine. "You must be kin to everybody around here?" "Most everybody," she said simply. By and by they came to a creek. "I have to turn up here," said Hale. "So do I," she said, smiling now directly at him. "Good!" he said, and they went on--Hale asking more questions. She was
going to school at the county seat the coming winter and she was fifteen
years old. "That's right. The trouble in the mountains is that you girls marry so
early that you don't have time to get an education." She wasn't going
to marry early, she said, but Hale learned now that she had a sweetheart
who had been in town that day and apparently the two had had a quarrel. Who it was, she would not tell, and Hale would have been amazed had he
known the sweetheart was none other than young Buck Falin and that the
quarrel between the lovers had sprung from the opening quarrel that day
between the clans. Once again she came near going off the mule, and Hale
observed that she was holding to the cantel of his saddle. "Look here," he said suddenly, "hadn't you better catch hold of me?" She
shook her head vigorously and made two not-to-be-rendered sounds that
meant:

"No, indeed." "Well, if this were your sweetheart you'd take hold of him, wouldn't
you?" Again she gave a vigorous shake of the head. "Well, if he saw you riding behind me, he wouldn't like it, would he?" "She didn't keer," she said, but Hale did; and when he heard the
galloping of horses behind him, saw two men coming, and heard one
of them shouting--"Hyeh, you man on that yaller mule, stop thar"--he
shifted his revolver, pulled in and waited with some uneasiness. They
came up, reeling in their saddles--neither one the girl's sweetheart,
as he saw at once from her face--and began to ask what the girl
characterized afterward as "unnecessary questions": who he was, who she
was, and where they were going. Hale answered so shortly that the girl
thought there was going to be a fight, and she was on the point of
slipping from the mule. "Sit still," said Hale, quietly. "There's not going to be a fight so
long as you are here." "Thar hain't!" said one of the men. "Well"--then he looked sharply
at the girl and turned his horse--"Come on, Bill--that's ole Dave
Tolliver's gal." The girl's face was on fire. "Them mean Falins!" she said contemptuously, and somehow the mere fact
that Hale had been even for the moment antagonistic to the other
faction seemed to put him in the girl's mind at once on her side, and
straightway she talked freely of the feud. Devil Judd had taken
no active part in it for a long time, she said, except to keep it
down--especially since he and her father had had a "fallin' out" and
the two families did not visit much--though she and her cousin June
sometimes spent the night with each other. "You won't be able to git over thar till long atter dark," she said, and
she caught her breath so suddenly and so sharply that Hale turned to see
what the matter was. She searched his face with her black eyes, which
were like June's without the depths of June's. "I was just a-wonderin' if mebbe you wasn't the same feller that was
over in Lonesome last fall." "Maybe I am--my name's Hale." The girl laughed. "Well, if this ain't the
beatenest! I've heerd June talk about you. My brother Dave don't like
you overmuch," she added frankly. "I reckon we'll see Dave purty soon. If this ain't the beatenest!" she repeated, and she laughed again, as
she always did laugh, it seemed to Hale, when there was any prospect of
getting him into trouble. "You can't git over thar till long atter dark," she said again
presently. "Is there any place on the way where I can get to stay all night?" "You can stay all night with the Red Fox on top of the mountain." "The Red Fox," repeated Hale. "Yes, he lives right on top of the mountain. You can't miss his house." "Oh, yes, I remember him. I saw him talking to one of the Falins in town
to-day, behind the barn, when I went to get my horse." "You--seed--him--a-talkin'--to a Falin AFORE the trouble come up?" the
girl asked slowly and with such significance that Hale turned to look
at her. He felt straightway that he ought not to have said that, and
the day was to come when he would remember it to his cost. He knew how
foolish it was for the stranger to show sympathy with, or interest
in, one faction or another in a mountain feud, but to give any kind of
information of one to the other--that was unwise indeed. Ahead of them
now, a little stream ran from a ravine across the road. Beyond was a
cabin; in the doorway were several faces, and sitting on a horse at the
gate was young Dave Tolliver. "Well, I git down here," said the girl, and before his mule stopped she
slid from behind him and made for the gate without a word of thanks or
good-by. "Howdye!" said Hale, taking in the group with his glance, but leaving
his eyes on young Dave. The rest nodded, but the boy was too surprised
for speech, and the spirit of deviltry took the girl when she saw her
brother's face, and at the gate she turned:

"Much obleeged," she said. "Tell June I'm a-comin' over to see her next
Sunday." "I will," said Hale, and he rode on. To his surprise, when he had gone a
hundred yards, he heard the boy spurring after him and he looked around
inquiringly as young Dave drew alongside; but the boy said nothing and
Hale, amused, kept still, wondering when the lad would open speech. At
the mouth of another little creek the boy stopped his horse as though
he was to turn up that way. "You've come back agin," he said, searching
Hale's face with his black eyes. "Yes," said Hale, "I've come back again." "You goin' over to Lonesome Cove?" "Yes." The boy hesitated, and a sudden change of mind was plain to Hale in his
face. "I wish you'd tell Uncle Judd about the trouble in town to-day,"
he said, still looking fixedly at Hale. "Certainly." "Did you tell the Red Fox that day you seed him when you was goin' over
to the Gap last fall that you seed me at Uncle Judd's?" "No," said Hale. "But how did you know that I saw the Red Fox that day?" The boy laughed unpleasantly. "So long," he said. "See you agin some day." The way was steep and the
sun was down and darkness gathering before Hale reached the top of the
mountain--so he hallooed at the yard fence of the Red Fox, who peered
cautiously out of the door and asked his name before he came to the
gate. And there, with a grin on his curious mismatched face, he repeated
young Dave's words:

"You've come back agin." And Hale repeated his:

"Yes, I've come back again." "You goin' over to Lonesome Cove?" "Yes," said Hale impatiently, "I'm going over to Lonesome Cove. Can I
stay here all night?" "Shore!" said the old man hospitably. "That's a fine hoss you got
thar," he added with a chuckle. "Been swappin'?" Hale had to laugh as he
climbed down from the bony ear-flopping beast. "I left my horse in town--he's lame." "Yes, I seed you thar." Hale could not resist: "Yes, and I seed you." The old man almost turned. "Whar?" Again the temptation was too great. "Talking to the Falin who started the row." This time the Red Fox
wheeled sharply and his pale-blue eyes filled with suspicion. "I keeps friends with both sides," he said. "Ain't many folks can do
that." "I reckon not," said Hale calmly, but in the pale eyes he still saw
suspicion. When they entered the cabin, a little old woman in black, dumb and
noiseless, was cooking supper. The children of the two, he learned, had
scattered, and they lived there alone. On the mantel were two pistols
and in one corner was the big Winchester he remembered and behind it
was the big brass telescope. On the table was a Bible and a volume of
Swedenborg, and among the usual strings of pepper-pods and beans and
twisted long green tobacco were drying herbs and roots of all kinds, and
about the fireplace were bottles of liquids that had been stewed from
them. The little old woman served, and opened her lips not at all. Supper was eaten with no further reference to the doings in town that
day, and no word was said about their meeting when Hale first went to
Lonesome Cove until they were smoking on the porch. "I heerd you found some mighty fine coal over in Lonesome Cove." "Yes." "Young Dave Tolliver thinks you found somethin' else thar, too,"
chuckled the Red Fox. "I did," said Hale coolly, and the old man chuckled again. "She's a purty leetle gal--shore." "Who is?" asked Hale, looking calmly at his questioner, and the Red Fox
lapsed into baffled silence. The moon was brilliant and the night was still. Suddenly the Red Fox
cocked his ear like a hound, and without a word slipped swiftly within
the cabin. A moment later Hale heard the galloping of a horse and from
out the dark woods loped a horseman with a Winchester across his saddle
bow. He pulled in at the gate, but before he could shout "Hello" the Red
Fox had stepped from the porch into the moonlight and was going to
meet him. Hale had never seen a more easy, graceful, daring figure on
horseback, and in the bright light he could make out the reckless face
of the man who had been the first to flash his pistol in town that
day--Bad Rufe Tolliver. For ten minutes the two talked in whispers--Rufe
bent forward with one elbow on the withers of his horse but lifting his
eyes every now and then to the stranger seated in the porch--and then
the horseman turned with an oath and galloped into the darkness whence
he came, while the Red Fox slouched back to the porch and dropped
silently into his seat. "Who was that?" asked Hale. "Bad Rufe Tolliver." "I've heard of him." "Most everybody in these mountains has. He's the feller that's always
causin' trouble. Him and Joe Falin agreed to go West last fall to end
the war. Joe was killed out thar, and now Rufe claims Joe don't count
now an' he's got the right to come back. Soon's he comes back, things
git frolicksome agin. He swore he wouldn't go back unless another Falin
goes too. Wirt Falin agreed, and that's how they made peace to-day. Now
Rufe says he won't go at all--truce or no truce. My wife in thar is
a Tolliver, but both sides comes to me and I keeps peace with both of
'em." No doubt he did, Hale thought, keep peace or mischief with or against
anybody with that face of his. That was a common type of the bad man,
that horseman who had galloped away from the gate--but this old man with
his dual face, who preached the Word on Sundays and on other days was a
walking arsenal; who dreamed dreams and had visions and slipped through
the hills in his mysterious moccasins on errands of mercy or chasing men
from vanity, personal enmity or for fun, and still appeared so sane--he
was a type that confounded. No wonder for these reasons and as a tribute
to his infernal shrewdness he was known far and wide as the Red Fox
of the Mountains. But Hale was too tired for further speculation and
presently he yawned. "Want to lay down?" asked the old man quickly. "I think I do," said Hale, and they went inside. The little old woman
had her face to the wall in a bed in one corner and the Red Fox pointed
to a bed in the other:

"Thar's yo' bed." Again Hale's eyes fell on the big Winchester. "I reckon thar hain't more'n two others like it in all these mountains." "What's the calibre?" "Biggest made," was the answer, "a 50 x 75." "Centre fire?" "Rim," said the Red Fox. "Gracious," laughed Hale, "what do you want such a big one for?" "Man cannot live by bread alone--in these mountains," said the Red Fox
grimly. When Hale lay down he could hear the old man quavering out a hymn or two
on the porch outside: and when, worn out with the day, he went to sleep,
the Red Fox was reading his Bible by the light of a tallow dip. It is
fatefully strange when people, whose lives tragically intersect, look
back to their first meetings with one another, and Hale never forgot
that night in the cabin of the Red Fox. For had Bad Rufe Tolliver, while
he whispered at the gate, known the part the quiet young man silently
seated in the porch would play in his life, he would have shot him where
he sat: and could the Red Fox have known the part his sleeping guest was
to play in his, the old man would have knifed him where he lay. X


Hale opened his eyes next morning on the little old woman in black,
moving ghost-like through the dim interior to the kitchen. A wood-thrush
was singing when he stepped out on the porch and its cool notes had the
liquid freshness of the morning. Breakfast over, he concluded to leave
the yellow mule with the Red Fox to be taken back to the county town,
and to walk down the mountain, but before he got away the landlord's son
turned up with his own horse, still lame, but well enough to limp along
without doing himself harm. So, leading the black horse, Hale started
down. The sun was rising over still seas of white mist and wave after wave
of blue Virginia hills. In the shadows below, it smote the mists into
tatters; leaf and bush glittered as though after a heavy rain, and down
Hale went under a trembling dew-drenched world and along a tumbling
series of water-falls that flashed through tall ferns, blossoming laurel
and shining leaves of rhododendron. Once he heard something move below
him and then the crackling of brush sounded far to one side of the
road. He knew it was a man who would be watching him from a covert and,
straightway, to prove his innocence of any hostile or secret purpose, he
began to whistle. Farther below, two men with Winchesters rose from
the bushes and asked his name and his business. He told both readily. Everybody, it seemed, was prepared for hostilities and, though the news
of the patched-up peace had spread, it was plain that the factions were
still suspicious and on guard. Then the loneliness almost of Lonesome
Cove itself set in. For miles he saw nothing alive but an occasional
bird and heard no sound but of running water or rustling leaf. At the
mouth of the creek his horse's lameness had grown so much better that
he mounted him and rode slowly up the river. Within an hour he could
see the still crest of the Lonesome Pine. At the mouth of a creek a
mile farther on was an old gristmill with its water-wheel asleep, and
whittling at the door outside was the old miller, Uncle Billy Beams,
who, when he heard the coming of the black horse's feet, looked up and
showed no surprise at all when he saw Hale. "I heard you was comin'," he shouted, hailing him cheerily by name. "Ain't fishin' this time!" "No," said Hale, "not this time." "Well, git down and rest a spell. June'll be here in a minute an' you
can ride back with her. I reckon you air goin' that a-way." "June!" "Shore! My, but she'll be glad to see ye! She's always talkin' about ye. You told her you was comin' back an' ever'body told her you wasn't: but
that leetle gal al'ays said she KNOWED you was, because you SAID you
was. She's growed some--an' if she ain't purty, well I'd tell a man! You
jes' tie yo' hoss up thar behind the mill so she can't see it, an' git
inside the mill when she comes round that bend thar. My, but hit'll be a
surprise fer her." The old man chuckled so cheerily that Hale, to humour him, hitched his
horse to a sapling, came back and sat in the door of the mill. The old
man knew all about the trouble in town the day before. "I want to give ye a leetle advice. Keep yo' mouth plum' shut about this
here war. I'm Jestice of the Peace, but that's the only way I've kept
outen of it fer thirty years; an' hit's the only way you can keep outen
it." "Thank you, I mean to keep my mouth shut, but would you mind--"

"Git in!" interrupted the old man eagerly. "Hyeh she comes." His kind
old face creased into a welcoming smile, and between the logs of the
mill Hale, inside, could see an old sorrel horse slowly coming through
the lights and shadows down the road. On its back was a sack of corn and
perched on the sack was a little girl with her bare feet in the hollows
behind the old nag's withers. She was looking sidewise, quite hidden by
a scarlet poke-bonnet, and at the old man's shout she turned the smiling
face of little June. With an answering cry, she struck the old nag with
a switch and before the old man could rise to help her down, slipped
lightly to the ground. "Why, honey," he said, "I don't know whut I'm goin' to do 'bout yo'
corn. Shaft's broke an' I can't do no grindin' till to-morrow." "Well, Uncle Billy, we ain't got a pint o' meal in the house," she said. "You jes' got to LEND me some." "All right, honey," said the old man, and he cleared his throat as a
signal for Hale. The little girl was pushing her bonnet back when Hale stepped into sight
and, unstartled, unsmiling, unspeaking, she looked steadily at him--one
hand motionless for a moment on her bronze heap of hair and then
slipping down past her cheek to clench the other tightly. Uncle Billy
was bewildered. "Why, June, hit's Mr. Hale--why---"

"Howdye, June!" said Hale, who was no less puzzled--and still she gave
no sign that she had ever seen him before except reluctantly to give him
her hand. Then she turned sullenly away and sat down in the door of the
mill with her elbows on her knees and her chin in her hands. Dumfounded, the old miller pulled the sack of corn from the horse
and leaned it against the mill. Then he took out his pipe, filled and
lighted it slowly and turned his perplexed eyes to the sun. "Well, honey," he said, as though he were doing the best he could with a
difficult situation, "I'll have to git you that meal at the house. 'Bout
dinner time now. You an' Mr. Hale thar come on and git somethin' to eat
afore ye go back." "I got to get on back home," said June, rising. "No you ain't--I bet you got dinner fer yo' step-mammy afore you left,
an' I jes' know you was aimin' to take a snack with me an' ole Hon." The little girl hesitated--she had no denial--and the old fellow smiled
kindly. "Come on, now." Little June walked on the other side of the miller from Hale back to the
old man's cabin, two hundred yards up the road, answering his questions
but not Hale's and never meeting the latter's eyes with her own. "Ole
Hon," the portly old woman whom Hale remembered, with brass-rimmed
spectacles and a clay pipe in her mouth, came out on the porch and
welcomed them heartily under the honeysuckle vines. 