



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer








GRAUSTARK

By George Barr McCutcheon



I. MR. GRENFALL LORRY SEEKS ADVENTURE


Mr. Grenfall Lorry boarded the east-bound express at Denver with all the
air of a martyr. He had traveled pretty much all over the world, and
he was not without resources, but the prospect of a twenty-five hundred
mile journey alone filled him with dismay. The country he knew; the
scenery had long since lost its attractions for him; countless newsboys
had failed to tempt him with the literature they thrust in his face, and
as for his fellow-passengers--well, he preferred to be alone. And so it
was that he gloomily motioned the porter to his boxes and mounted the
steps with weariness. As it happened, Mr. Grenfall Lorry did not have a dull moment after the
train started. He stumbled on a figure that leaned toward the window in the dark
passageway. With reluctant civility he apologized; a lady stood up to
let him pass, and for an instant in the half light their eyes met, and
that is why the miles rushed by with incredible speed. Mr. Lorry had been dawdling away the months in Mexico and California. For years he had felt, together with many other people, that a
sea-voyage was the essential beginning of every journey; he had started
round the world soon after leaving Cambridge; he had fished through
Norway and hunted in India, and shot everything from grouse on the
Scottish moors to the rapids above Assouan. He had run in and out of
countless towns and countries on the coast of South America; he had done
Russia and the Rhone valley and Brittany and Damascus; he had seen
them all--but not until then did it occur to him that there might be
something of interest nearer home. True he had thought of joining
some Englishmen on a hunting tour in the Rockies, but that had fallen
through. When the idea of Mexico did occur to him he gave orders to pack
his things, purchased interminable green tickets, dined unusually well
at his club, and was off in no time to the unknown West. There was a theory in his family that it would have been a decenter
thing for him to stop running about and settle down to work. But his
thoughtful father had given him a wealthy mother, and as earning a
living was not a necessity, he failed to see why it was a duty. "Work is
becoming to some men," he once declared, "like whiskers or red ties,
but it does not follow that all men can stand it." After that the family
found him "hopeless," and the argument dropped. He was just under thirty years, as good-looking as most men, with no
one dependent upon him and an income that had withstood both the Maison
Doree and a dahabeah on the Nile. He never tired of seeing things and
peoples and places. "There's game to be found anywhere," he said, "only
it's sometimes out of season. If I had my way--and millions--I should
run a newspaper. Then all the excitements would come to me. As it
is--I'm poor, and so I have to go all over the world after them." This agreeable theory of life had worked well; he was a little bored at
times--not because he had seen too much, but because there were not
more things left to see. He had managed somehow to keep his enthusiasms
through everything--and they made life worth living. He felt too a
certain elation--like a spirited horse--at turning toward home, but
Washington had not much to offer him, and the thrill did not last. His
big bag and his hatbox--pasted over with foolish labels from continental
hotels--were piled in the corner of his compartment, and he settled back
in his seat with a pleasurable sense of expectancy. The presence in the
next room of a very smart appearing young woman was prominent in his
consciousness. It gave him an uneasiness which was the beginning of
delight. He had seen her for only a second in the passageway, but that
second had made him hold himself a little straighter. "Why is it," he
wondered, "that some girls make you stand like a footman the moment
you see them?" Grenfall had been in love too many times to think of
marriage; his habit of mind was still general, and he classified
women broadly. At the same time he had a feeling that in this case
generalities did not apply well; there was something about the girl that
made him hesitate at labelling her "Class A, or B, or Z." What it was
he did not know, but--unaccountably-she filled him with an affected
formality He felt like bowing to her with a grand air and much dignity. And yet he realized that his successes had come from confidence. At luncheon he saw her in the dining car. Her companions were
elderly persons--presumably her parents. They talked mostly in
French--occasionally using a German word or phrase. The old gentleman
was stately and austere--with an air of deference to the young woman
which Grenfall did not understand. His appearance was very striking; his
face pale and heavily lined; moustache and imperial gray; the eyebrows
large and bushy, and the jaw and chin square and firm. The white-haired
lady carried her head high with unmistakable gentility. They were all
dressed in traveling suits which suggested something foreign, but not
Vienna nor Paris; smart, but far from American tastes. Lorry watched the trio with great interest. Twice during luncheon
the young woman glanced toward him carelessly and left an annoying
impression that she had not seen him. As they left the table and passed
into the observation car, he stared at her with some defiance. But she
was smiling, and her dimples showed, and Grenfall was ashamed. For
some moments he sat gazing from the car window--forgetting his
luncheon-dreaming. When he got back to his compartment he rang vigorously for the porter. A
coin was carelessly displayed in his fingers. "Do you suppose you could
find out who has the next compartment, porter?" "I don't know their name, sub, but they's goin' to New York jis as fas'
as they can git thuh. I ain' ax um no questions, 'cause thuh's somethin'
'bout um makes me feel's if I ain' got no right to look at um even." The porter thought a moment. "I don' believe it'll do yuh any good, suh, to try to shine up to tha'
young lady. She ain' the sawt, I can tell yuh that. I done see too many
guhls in ma time--"

"What are you talking about? I'm not trying to shine up to her. I only
want to know who she is--just out of curiosity." Grenfall's face was a
trifle red. "Beg pahdon, suh; but I kind o' thought you was like orh' gent'men when
they see a han'some woman. Allus wants to fin' out somethin' 'bout huh,
suh, yuh know. 'Scuse me foh misjedgin' yuh, suh. Th' lady in question
is a foh'ner--she lives across th' ocean, 's fuh as I can fin' out. They's in a hurry to git home foh some reason, 'cause they ain' goin' to
stop this side o' New York, 'cept to change cahs." "Where do they change cars?" "St. Louis--goin' by way of Cincinnati an' Washin'ton." Grenfall's ticket carried him by way of Chicago. He caught himself
wondering if he could exchange his ticket in St. Louis. "Traveling with her father and mother, I suppose?" "No, suh; they's huh uncle and aunt. I heah huh call 'em uncle an' aunt. Th' ole gent'man is Uncle Caspar. I don' know what they talk 'bout. It's
mostly some foh'en language. Th' young lady allus speaks Amehican to me,
but th' old folks cain't talk it ver' well. They all been to Frisco,
an' the hired he'p they's got with 'em say they been to Mexico, too. Th'
young lady's got good Amehican dollahs, don' care wha' she's been. She
allus smiles when she ask me to do anythin', an' I wouldn' care if she
nevah tipped me, 's long as she smiles thataway." "Servants with them, you say?" "Yas, suh; man an' woman, nex' section t'other side the ole folks. Cain't say mor'n fifteen words in Amehican. Th' woman is huh maid, an'
the man he's th' genial hustler fer th' hull pahty." "And you don't know her name?" "No, sun, an' I cain't ver' well fin' out." "In what part of Europe does she live?" "Australia, I think, suh." "You mean Austria." "Do I? 'Scuse ma ig'nance. I was jis' guessin' at it anyhow; one place's
as good as 'nother ovah thuh, I reckon." "Have you one of those dollars she gave you?" "Yes, sub. Heh's a coin that ain' Amehican, but she says it's wuth
seventy cents in our money. It's a foh'en piece. She tell me to keep
it till I went ovah to huh country; then I could have a high time with
it--that's what she says--'a high time'--an' smiled kind o' knowin'
like." "Let me see that coin," said Lorry, eagerly taking the silver piece from
the porter's hand. "I never saw one like it before. Greek, it looks to
me, but I can't make a thing out of these letters. She gave it to you?" "Yas, suh--las' evenin'. A high time on seventy cents! That's
reediculous, ain't it?" demanded the porter scornfully. "I'll give you a dollar for it. You can have a higher time on that." The odd little coin changed owners immediately, and the new possessor
dropped it into his pocket with the inward conviction that he was the
silliest fool in existence. After the porter's departure he took the
coin from his pocket, and, with his back to the door, his face to the
window, studied its lettering. During the afternoon he strolled about the train, his hand constantly
jingling the coins. He passed her compartment several times, yet
refrained from looking in. But he wondered if she saw him pass. At one little station a group of Indian bear hunters created
considerable interest among the passengers. Grenfall was down at the
station platform at once, looking over a great stack of game. As he
left the car he met Uncle Caspar, who was hurrying toward his niece's
section. A few moments later she came down the steps, followed by the
dignified old gentleman. Grenfall tingled with a strange delight as she
moved quite close to his side in her desire to see. Once he glanced at
her face; there was a pretty look of fear in her eyes as she surveyed
the massive bears and the stark, stiff antelopes. But she laughed as she
turned away with her uncle. Grenfall was smoking his cigarette and vigorously jingling the coins in
his pocket when the train pulled out. Then he swung on the car steps and
found himself at her feet. She was standing at the top, where she had
lingered a moment. There was an expression of anxiety, in her eyes as
he looked up into them, followed instantly by one of relief. Then she
passed into the car. She had seen him swing upon the moving steps and
had feared for his safety--had shown in her glorious face that she was
glad he did not fall beneath the wheels. Doubtless she would have been
as solicitous had he been the porter or the brakeman, he reasoned, but
that she had noticed him at all pleased him. At Abilene he bought the Kansas City newspapers. After breakfast he
found a seat in the observation car and settled himself to read. Presently some one took a seat behind him. He did not look back, but
unconcernedly cast his eyes upon the broad mirror in the opposite car
wall. Instantly he forgot his paper. She was sitting within five feet of
him, a book in her lap, her gaze bent briefly on the flitting buildings
outside. He studied the reflection furtively until she took up the book
and began to read. Up to this time he had wondered why some nonsensical
idiot had wasted looking-glasses on the walls of a railway coach; now he
was thinking of him as a far-sighted man. The first page of his paper was fairly alive with fresh and important
dispatches, chiefly foreign. At length, after allowing himself to become
really interested in a Paris dispatch of some international consequence,
he turned his eyes again to the mirror. She was leaning slightly
forward, holding the open book in her lap, but reading, with straining
eyes, an article in the paper he held. He calmly turned to the next page and looked leisurely over it. Another
glance, quickly taken, showed to him a disappointed frown on the pretty
face and a reluctant resumption of novel reading. A few moments later he
turned back to the first page, holding the paper in such a position
that she could not see, and, full of curiosity, read every line of the
foreign news, wondering what had interested her. Under ordinary circumstances Lorry would have offered her the paper,
and thought nothing more of it. With her, however, there was an air that
made him hesitate. He felt strangely awkward and inexperienced beside
her; precedents did not seem to count. He arose, tossed the paper over
the back of the chair as if casting it aside forever, and strolled to
the opposite window and looked out for a few moments, jingling his coins
carelessly. The jingle of the pieces suggested something else to him. His paper still hung invitingly, upside down, as he had left it, on the
chair, and the lady was poring over her novel. As he passed her he drew
his right hand from his pocket and a piece of money dropped to the floor
at her feet. Then began an embarrassed search for the coin--in the
wrong direction, of course. He knew precisely where it had rolled, but
purposely looked under the seats on the other side of the car. She drew
her skirts aside and assisted in the search. Four different times he
saw the little piece of money, but did not pick it up. Finally, laughing
awkwardly, he began to search on her side of the car. Whereupon she rose
and gave him more room. She became interested in the search and bent
over to scan the dark corners with eager eyes. Their heads were very
close together more than once. At last she uttered an exclamation, and
her hand went to the floor in triumph. They arose together, flushed and
smiling. She had the coin in her hand. "I have it," she said, gaily, a delicious foreign tinge to the words. "I thank you--" he began, holding out his hand as if in a dream of
ecstacy, but her eyes had fallen momentarily on the object of their
search. "Oh!" she exclaimed, the prettiest surprise in the world coming into her
face. It was a coin from her faraway homeland, and she was betrayed
into the involuntary exclamation. Instantly, however, she regained her
composure and dropped the piece into his outstretched hand, a proud
flush mounting to her cheek, a look of cold reserve to her eyes. He had,
hoped she would offer some comment on what she must have considered a
strange coincidence, but he was disappointed. He wondered if she even
heard him say:

"I am sorry to have troubled you." She had resumed her seat, and, to him, there seemed a thousand miles
between them. Feeling decidedly uncomfortable and not a little abashed,
he left her and strode to the door. Again a mirror gave him a thrill. This time it was the glass in the car's end. He had taken but a
half dozen steps when the brown head was turned slyly and a pair of
interested eyes looked after him. She did not know that he could see
her, so he had the satisfaction of observing that pretty, puzzled face
plainly until he passed through the door. Grenfall had formed many chance acquaintances during his travels,
sometimes taking risks and liberties that were refreshingly bold. He
had seldom been repulsed, strange to say, and as he went to his section
dizzily, he thought of the good fortune that had been his in other
attempts, and asked himself why it had not occurred to him to make the
same advances in the present instance. Somehow she was different. There
was that strange dignity, that pure beauty, that imperial manner, all
combining to forbid the faintest thought of familiarity. He was more than astonished at himself for having tricked her a few
moments before into a perfectly natural departure from indifference. She had been so reserved and so natural that he looked back and asked
himself what had happened to flatter his vanity except a passing show
of interest. With this, he smiled and recalled similar opportunities in
days gone by, all of which had been turned to advantage and had resulted
in amusing pastimes. And here was a pretty girl with an air of mystery
about her, worthy of his best efforts, but toward whom he had not dared
to turn a frivolous eye. He took out the coin and leaned back in his chair, wondering where it
came from. "In any case," he thought, "it'll make a good pocket-piece
and some day I'll find some idiot who knows more about geography than I
do." Mr. Lorry's own ideas of geography were jumbled and vague--as if he
had got them by studying the labels on his hat-box. He knew the places
he had been to, and he recognized a new country by the annoyances of the
customs house, but beyond this his ignorance was complete. The coin,
so far as he knew, might have come from any one of a hundred small
principalities scattered about the continent. Yet it bothered him a
little that he could not tell which one. He was more than curious about
a very beautiful young woman--in fact, he was, undeniably interested in
her. He pleasantly called himself an "ass" to have his head turned by a
pretty face, a foreign accent and an insignificant coin, and yet he was
fascinated. Before the train reached St. Louis he made up his mind to change cars
there and go to Washington with her. It also occurred to him that
he might go on to New York if the spell lasted. During the day he
telegraphed ahead for accommodations; and when the flyer arrived in
St. Louis that evening he hurriedly attended to the transferring and
rechecking of his baggage, bought a new ticket, and dined. At eight
he was in the station, and at 8:15 he passed her in the aisle. She was
standing in her stateroom door, directing her maid. He saw a look of
surprise flit across her face as he passed. He slept soundly that night,
and dreamed that he was crossing the ocean with her. At breakfast he saw her, but if she saw him it was when he was not
looking at her. Once he caught Uncle Caspar staring at him through his
monocle, which dropped instantly from his eye in the manner that is
always self-explanatory. She had evidently called the uncle's attention
to him, but was herself looking sedately from the window when Lorry
unfortunately spoiled the scrutiny. His spirits took a furious bound
with the realization that she had deigned to honor him by recognition,
if only to call attention to him because he possessed a certain coin. Once the old gentleman asked him the time of day and set his watch
according to the reply. In Ohio the manservant scowled at him because he
involuntarily stared after his mistress as she paced the platform
while the train waited at a station. Again, in Ohio, they met in the
vestibule, and he was compelled to step aside to allow her to pass. He
did not feel particularly jubilant over this meeting; she did not even
glance at him. Lorry realized that his opportunities were fast disappearing, and that
he did not seem to be any nearer meeting her than when they started. He
had hoped to get Uncle Caspar into a conversation and then use him, but
Uncle Caspar was as distant as an iceberg. "If there should be a wreck,"
Grenfall caught himself thinking, "then my chance would come; but I
don't see how Providence is going to help me in any other way." Near the close of the day, after they left St. Louis, the train began
to wind through the foothills of the Alleghenies. Bellaire, Grafton and
other towns were left behind, and they were soon whirling up the steep
mountain, higher and higher, through tunnel after tunnel, nearer and
nearer to Washington every minute. As they were pulling out of a little
mining town built on the mountain side, a sudden jar stopped the train. There was some little excitement and a scramble for information. Some
part of the engine was disabled, and it would be necessary to replace,
it before the "run" could proceed. Lorry strolled up to the crowd of passengers who were watching the
engineer and fireman at work. A clear, musical voice, almost in his
ear, startled him, for he knew to whom it belonged. She addressed the
conductor, who, impatient and annoyed, stood immediately behind him. "How long are we to be delayed?" she asked. Just two minutes before
this same conductor had responded most ungraciously to a simple question
Lorry had asked and had gone so far as to instruct another inquisitive
traveler to go to a warmer climate because he persisted in asking for
information which could not be given except by a clairvoyant. But now
he answered in most affable tones: "We'll be here for thirty minutes, at
least, Miss--perhaps longer." She walked away, after thanking him, and
Grenfall looked at his watch. Off the main street of the town ran little lanes leading to the mines
below. They all ended at the edge of a steep declivity. There was a drop
of almost four hundred feet straight into the valley below. Along the
sides of this valley were the entrances to the mines. Above, on the
ledge, was the machinery for lifting the ore to the high ground on which
stood the town and railroad yards. Down one of these streets walked the young lady, curiously interested in
all about her. She seemed glad to escape from the train and its people,
and she hurried along, the fresh spring wind blowing her hair from
beneath her cap, the ends of her long coat fluttering. Lorry stood on the platform watching her; then he lighted a cigarette
and followed. He had a vague feeling that she ought not to be alone
with all the workmen. She started to come back before he reached her,
however, and he turned again toward the station. Then he heard a sudden
whistle, and a minute later from the end of the street he saw the train
pulling out. Lorry had rather distinguished himself in college as a
runner, and instinctively he dashed up the street, reaching the tracks
just in time to catch the railing of the last coach. But there he
stopped and stood with thumping heart while the coaches slid smoothly
up the track, leaving him behind. He remembered he was not the only
one left, and he panted and smiled. It occurred to him--when it was too
late--that he might have got on the train and pulled the rope or called
the conductor, but that was out of the question now. After all, it might
not be such a merry game to stay in that filthy little town; it did not
follow that she would prove friendly. A few moments later she appeared--wholly unconscious of what had
happened. A glance down the track and her face was the picture of
despair. Then she saw him coming toward her with long strides, flushed and
excited. Regardless of appearances, conditions or consequences, she
hurried to meet him. "Where is the train?" she gasped, as the distance between them grew
short, her blue eyes seeking his beseechingly, her hands clasped. "It has gone." "Gone? And we--we are left?" He nodded, delighted by the word "we." "The conductor said thirty minutes; it has been but twenty," she cried,
half tearfully, half angrily, looking at her watch. "Oh, what shall I
do?" she went on, distractedly. He had enjoyed the sweet, despairing
tones, but this last wail called for manly and instant action. "Can we catch the train? We must! I will give one thousand dollars. I
must catch it." She had placed her gloved hand against a telegraph
pole to steady her trembling, but her face was resolute, imperious,
commanding. She was ordering him to obey as she would have commanded a slave. In her
voice there was authority, in her eye there was fear. She could control
the one but not the other. "We cannot catch the flyer. I want to catch it as much as you and"--here
he straightened himself--"I would add a thousand to yours." He hesitated
a moment-thinking. "There is but one way, and no time to lose." With this he turned and ran rapidly toward the little depot and
telegraph office. II. TWO STRANGERS IN A COACH


Lorry wasted very little time. He dashed into the depot and up to the
operator's window. "What's the nearest station east of here?" "P----," leisurely answered the agent, in some surprise. "How far is it?" "Four miles." "Telegraph ahead and hold the train that just left here." "The train don't stop there." "It's got to stop there--or there'll be more trouble than this road has
had since it began business. The conductor pulled out and left two of
his passengers--gave out wrong information, and he'll have to hold his
train there or bring her back here. If you don't send that order I'll
report you as well as the conductor." Grenfall's manner was commanding. The agent's impression was that he was important that he had a right to
give orders. But he hesitated. "There's no way for you but to get to P---- anyway," he said, while
turning the matter over in his mind. "You stop that train! I'll get there inside of twenty minutes. Now, be
quick! Wire them to hold her--or there'll be an order from headquarters
for some ninety-day lay-offs." The agent stared at him; then turned to
his instrument, and the message went forward. Lorry rushed out. On the
platform he nearly ran over the hurrying figure in the tan coat. "Pardon me. I'll explain things in a minute," he gasped, and dashed
away. Her troubled eyes blinked with astonishment. At the end of the platform stood a mountain coach, along the sides of
which was printed in yellow letters: "Happy Springs." The driver was
climbing up to his seat and the cumbersome trap was empty. "Want to make ten dollars?" cried Grenfall. "What say?" demanded the driver, half falling to the ground. "Get me to P---- inside of twenty minutes, and I'll give you ten
dollars. Hurry up! Answer!" "Yes, but, you see, I'm hired to--"

"Oh, that's all right! You'll never make money easier. Can you get us
there in twenty minutes?" "It's four mile, pardner, and not very good road, either. Pile in, and
we'll make it er kill old Hip and Jim. Miss the train?" "Get yourself ready for a race with an express train and don't ask
questions. Kill 'em both if you have to. I'll be back in a second!" Back to the station he tore. She was standing near the door, looking up
the track miserably. Already night was falling. Men were lighting the
switch lanterns and the mountains were turning into great dark shadows. "Come quickly; I have a wagon out here." Resistlessly she was hurried along and fairly shoved through the open
door of the odd-looking coach. He was beside her on the seat in an
instant, and her bewildered ears heard him say:

"Drive like the very deuce!" Then the door slammed, the driver clattered
up to his seat, and the horses were off with a rush. "Where are we going?" she demanded, sitting very straight and defiant. "After that train--I'll tell you all about it when I get my breath. This
is to be the quickest escape from a dilemma on record--providing it is
an escape." By this time they were bumping along the flinty road at a
lively rate, jolting about on the seat in a most disconcerting manner. After a few long, deep breaths he told her how the ride in the Springs
hack had been conceived and of the arrangement he had made with the
despatcher. He furthermore acquainted her with the cause of his being
left when he might have caught the train. "Just as I reached the track, out of breath but rejoicing, I remembered
having seen you on that side street, and knew that you would be left. It would have been heartless to leave you here without protection, so
I felt it my duty to let the train go and help you out of a very ugly
predicament." "How can I ever repay you?" she murmured. "It was so good and so
thoughtful of you. Oh, I should have died had I been left here alone. Do
you not think my uncle will miss me and have the train sent back?" she
went on sagely. "That's so!" he exclaimed, somewhat disconcerted. "But I don't know,
either. He may not miss you for a long time, thinking you are in some
other car, you know. That could easily happen," triumphantly. "Can this man get us to the next station in time?" she questioned,
looking at the black mountains and the dense foliage. It was now quite
dark. "If he doesn't bump us to death before we get half way there. He's
driving like the wind." "You must let me pay half his bill," she said, decidedly, from the dark
corner in which she was huddling. He could find no response to this peremptory request. "The road is growing rougher. If you will allow me to make a suggestion,
I think you will see its wisdom. You can escape a great deal of ugly
jostling if you will take hold of my arm and cling to it tightly. I
will brace myself with this strap. I am sure it will save you many hard
bumps." Without a word she moved to his side and wound her strong little arm
about his big one. "I had thought of that," she said, simply. "Thank you." Then, after
a moment, while his heart thumped madly: "Had it occurred to you that
after you ran so hard you might have climbed aboard the train and
ordered the conductor to stop it for me?" "I--I never thought of that?" he cried, confusedly. "Please do not think me ungrateful. You have been very good to me, a
stranger. One often thinks afterward of things one might have done,
don't you know? You did the noblest when you inconvenienced yourself for
me. What trouble I have made for you." She said this so prettily that he
came gaily from the despondency into which her shrewdness, bordering
on criticism, had thrown him. He knew perfectly well that she was
questioning his judgment and presence of mind, and, the more he thought
of it, the more transparent became the absurdity of his action. "It has been no trouble," he floundered "An adventure like this is worth
no end of--er--inconvenience, as you call it. I'm sure I must have lost
my head completely, and I am ashamed of myself. How much anxiety I could
have saved you had I been possessed of an ounce of brains!" "Hush! I will not allow you to say that. You would have me appear
ungrateful when I certainly am not. Ach, how he is driving! Do you think
it dangerous?" she cried, as the hack gave two or three wild lurches,
throwing him into the corner, and the girl half upon him. "Not in the least," he gasped, the breath knocked out of his body. Just
the same, he was very much alarmed. It was as dark as pitch outside and
in, and he could not help wondering how near the edge of the mountain
side they were running. A false move of the flying horses and they might
go rolling to the bottom of the ravine, hundreds of feet below. Still,
he must not let her see his apprehension. "This fellow is considered the
best driver in the mountains," he prevaricated. Just then he remembered
having detected liquor on the man's breath as he closed the door behind
him. Perhaps he was intoxicated! "Do you know him?" questioned the clear voice, her lips close to his
ear, her warm body pressing against his. "Perfectly. He is no other than Lighthorse Jerry, the king of stage
drivers." In the darkness he smiled to himself maliciously. "Oh, then we need feel no alarm," she said, reassured, not knowing that
Jerry existed only in the yellow-backed novel her informant had read
when a boy. There was such a roaring and clattering that conversation became almost
impossible. When either spoke it was with the mouth close to the ear of
the other. At such times Grenfall could feel her breath on his cheek,
Her sweet voice went tingling to his toes with every word she uttered. He was in a daze, out of which sung the mad wish that he might clasp
her in his arms, kiss her, and then go tumbling down the mountain. She
trembled in the next fierce lurches, but gave forth no complaint. He
knew that she was in terror but too brave to murmur. Unable to resist, he released the strap to which he had clung so grimly,
and placed his strong, firm hand encouragingly over the little one that
gripped his arm with the clutch of death. It was very dark and very
lonely, too! "Oh!" she cried, as his hand clasped hers. "You must hold to the strap." "It is broken!" he lied, gladly, "There is no danger. See! My hand does
not tremble, does it? Be calm! It cannot be much farther." "Will it not be dreadful if the conductor refuses to stop?" she cried,
her hand resting calmly beneath its protector. He detected a tone of
security in her voice. "But he will stop! Your uncle will see to that, even if the operator
fails." "My uncle will kill him if he does not stop or come back for me," she
said, complacently. "I was mot wrong," thought Grenfall; "he looks like a duelist. Who the
devil are they, anyhow?" Then aloud: "At this rate we'd be able to beat
the train to Washington in a straight-away race. Isn't it a delightfully
wild ride?" "I have acquired a great deal of knowledge in America, but this is the
first time I have heard your definition of delight. I agree that it is
wild." For some moments there was silence in the noisy conveyance. Outside, the
crack of the driver's whip, his hoarse cries, and the nerve-destroying
crash of the wheels produced impressions of a mighty storm rather than
of peace and pleasure. "I am curious to know where you obtained the coin you lost in the car
yesterday," she said at last, as if relieving her mind of a question
that had been long subdued. "The one you so kindly found for me?" he asked, procrastinatingly. "Yes. They are certainly rare in this country." "I never saw a coin like it until after I had seen you," he confessed. He felt her arm press his a little tighter, and there was a quick
movement of her head which told him, dark as it was, that she was trying
to see his face and that her blue eyes were wide with something more
than terror. "I do not understand," she exclaimed. "I obtained the coin from a sleeping-car porter who said some one gave
it to him and told him to have a 'high time' with it," he explained in
her ear. "He evidently did not care for the 'high time,'" she said, after a
moment. He would have given a fortune for one glimpse of her face at
that instant. "I think he said it would be necessary to go to Europe in order to
follow the injunction of the donor. As I am more likely to go to Europe
than he, I relieved him of the necessity and bought his right to a 'high
time.'" There was a long pause, during which she attempted to withdraw herself
from his side, her little fingers struggling timidly beneath the big
ones. "Are you a collector of coins?" she asked at length, a perceptible
coldness in her voice. "No. I am considered a dispenser of coins. Still, I rather like the idea
of possessing this queer bit of money as a pocket-piece. I intend to
keep it forever, and let it descend as an heirloom to the generations
that follow me," he said, laughingly. "Why are you so curious about it?" "Because it comes from the city and country in which I live," she
responded. "If you were in a land far from your own would you not be
interested in anything--even a coin--that reminded you of home?" "Especially if I had not seen one of its kind since leaving home," he
replied, insinuatingly. "Oh, but I have seen many like it. In my purse there are several at this
minute." "Isn't it strange that this particular coin should have reminded you of
home?" "You have no right to question me, sir," she said, coldly, drawing away,
only to be lurched back again. In spite of herself she laughed audibly. "I beg your pardon," he said, tantalizingly. "When did he give it you?" "Who?" "The porter, sir." "You have no right to question me," he said. "Oh!" she gasped. "I did not mean to be inquisitive." "But I grant the right. He gave it me inside of two hours after I first
entered the car." "At Denver?" "How do you know I got on at Denver?' "Why, you passed me in the aisle with your luggage. Don't you remember?" Did he remember! His heart almost turned over with the joy of knowing
that she had really noticed and remembered him. Involuntarily his glad
fingers closed down upon the gloved hand that lay beneath them. "I believe I do remember, now that you speak of it," he said, in a
stifled voice. "You were standing at a window?" "Yes; and I saw you kissing those ladies goodby, too. Was one of them
your wife, or were they all your sisters? I have wondered." "They--they were--cousins," he informed her, confusedly, recalling an
incident that had been forgotten. He had kissed Mary Lyons and Edna
Burrage--but their brothers were present. "A foolish habit, isn't it?" "I do not know. I have no grown cousins," she replied, demurely. "You
Americans have such funny customs, though. Where I live, no gentleman
would think of pressing a lady's hand until it pained her. Is it
necessary?" In the question there was a quiet dignity, half submerged
in scorn, so pointed, so unmistakable that he flushed, turned cold with
mortification, and hastily removed the amorous fingers. "I crave your pardon. It is such a strain to hold myself and you against
the rolling of this wagon that I unconsciously gripped your hand harder
than I knew. You--you will not misunderstand my motive?" he begged,
fearful lest he had offended her by his ruthlessness. "I could not misunderstand something that does not exist," she said,
simply, proudly. "By Jove, she's beyond comparison!" he thought. "You have explained, and I am sorry I spoke as I did. I shall not again
forget how much I owe you." "Your indebtedness, if there be one, does not deprive you of the liberty
to speak to me as you will. You could not say anything unjust without
asking my forgiveness, and when you do that you more than pay the debt. It is worth a great deal to me to hear you say that you owe something to
me, for I am only too glad to be your creditor. If there is a debt, you
shall never pay it; it is too pleasant an account to be settled with
'you're welcome.' If you insist that you owe much to me, I shall refuse
to cancel the debt, and allow it to draw interest forever." "What a financier!" she cried. "That jest yeas worthy of a courtier's
deepest flattery. Let me say that I am proud to owe my gratitude to you. You will not permit it to grow less." "That was either irony or the prettiest speech a woman ever uttered," he
said, warmly. "I also am curious about something. You were reading
over my shoulder in the observation car--" "I was not!" she exclaimed,
indignantly. "How did you know that?" she inconsistently went on. "You forget the mirror in the opposite side of the car." "Ach, now I am offended." "With a poor old mirror? For shame! Yet, in the name of our American
glass industry, I ask your forgiveness. It shall not happen again. You
will admit that you were trying to read over my shoulder. Thanks for
that immutable nod. Well, I am curious to know what you were so eager to
read." "Since you presume to believe the mirror instead of me, I will tell you. There was a despatch on the first page that interested me deeply." "I believe I thought as much at the time. Oh, confound this road!" For half a mile or more the road had been fairly level, but, as the
ejaculation indicates, a rough place had been reached. He was flung
back in the corner violently, his head coming in contact with a sharp
projection of some kind. The pain was almost unbearable, but it was
eased by the fact that she had involuntarily thrown her arm across his
chest, her hand grasping his shoulder spasmodically. "Oh, we shall be killed!" she half shrieked. "Can you not stop him? This
is madness--madness!" "Pray be calm! I was to blame, for I had become careless. He is earning
his money, that's all. It was not stipulated in the contract that he was
to consider the comfort of his passengers." Grenfall could feel himself
turn pale as something warm began to trickle down his neck. "Now tell me
which despatch it was. I read all of them." "You did? Of what interest could they have been?" "Curiosity does not recognize reason." "You read every one of them?" "Assuredly." "Then I shall grant you the right to guess which interested me the most. You Americans delight in puzzles, I am told." "Now, that is unfair." "So it is. Did you read the despatch from Constantinople?" Her arm fell
to her side suddenly as if she had just realized its position. "The one that told of the French ambassador's visit to the Sultan?" "Concerning the small matter of a loan of some millions--yes. Well,
that was of interest to me inasmuch as the loan, if made, will affect my
country." "Will you tell me what country you are from?" "I am from Graustark." "Yes; but I don't remember where that is." "Is it possible that your American schools do not teach geography? Ours
tell us where the United States are located." "I confess ignorance," he admitted. "Then I shall insist that you study a map. Graustark is small, but I am
as proud of it as you are of this great broad country that reaches from
ocean to ocean. I can scarcely wait until I again see our dear crags
and valleys, our rivers and ever-blue skies, our plains and our towns. I
wonder if you worship your country as I love mine." "From the tenor of your remarks, I judge that you have been away from
home for a long time," he volunteered. "We have seen something of Asia, Australia, Mexico and the United States
since we left Edelweiss, six months ago. Now we are going home--home!" She uttered the word so lovingly, so longingly, so tenderly, that he
envied the homeland. There was a long break in the conversation, both evidently wrapped in
thought which could not be disturbed by the whirl of the coach. He was
wondering how he could give her up, now that she had been tossed into
his keeping so strangely. She was asking herself over and over again how
so thrilling an adventure would end. They were sore and fatigued with the strain on nerve and flesh. It was
an experience never to be forgotten, this romantic race over the wild
mountain road, the result still in doubt. Ten minutes ago--strangers;
now--friends at least, neither knowing the other. She was admiring him
for his generalship, his wonderful energy; he was blessing the fate
that had come to his rescue when hope was almost dead. He could scarcely
realize that he was awake. Could it be anything but a vivid fancy from
which he was to awaken and find himself alone in his berth, the buzzing,
clacking carwheels piercing his ears with sounds so unlike those that
had been whispered into them by a voice, sweet and maddening, from out
the darkness of a dreamland cab? "Surely we must be almost at the end of this awful ride," she moaned,
yielding completely to the long suppressed alarm. "Every bone in my body
aches. What shall we do if they have not held the train?" "Send for an undertaker," he replied grimly, seeing policy in jest. They
were now ascending an incline, bumping over boulders, hurtling through
treacherous ruts and water-washed holes, rolling, swinging, jerking,
crashing. "You have been brave all along; don't give up now. It is
almost over. You'll soon be with your friends." "How can I thank you"' she cried, gripping his arm once more. Again his
hand dropped upon hers and closed gently. "I wish that I could do a thousand times as much for you," he said,
thrillingly, her disheveled hair touching his face so close were his
lips. "Ah, the lights of the town!" he cried an instant later. "Look!" He held her so that she could peer through the rattling glass window. Close at hand, higher up the steep, many lights were twinkling ling
against the blackness. Almost before they realized how near they were to the lights, the horses
began to slacken their speed, a moment later coming to a standstill. The
awful ride was over. "The train! the train!" she cried, in ecstacy. "Here, on the other side. Thank heaven!" He could not speak for the joyful pride that distended his heart almost
to bursting. The coach door flew open, and Light-horse Jerry yelled:

"Here y'are! I made her!" "I should say you did!" exclaimed Grenfall, climbing out and drawing her
after him gently. "Here's your ten." "I must send you something, too, my good fellow," cried the lady. "What
is your address--quick?" "William Perkins, O----, West Virginny, ma'am." Lorry was dragging her toward the cars as the driver completed the
sentence. Several persons were running down the platform, dimly lighted
from the string of car windows She found time to pant as they sped
along:

"He was not Light-horse Jerry, at all!" III. MISS GUGGENSLOCKER


He laughed, looking down into her serious upturned face. A brief smile
of understanding flitted across her lips as she broke away from him
and threw herself into the arms of tall, excited Uncle Caspar. The
conductor, several trainmen and a few eager passengers came up, the
former crusty and snappish. "Well, get aboard!" he growled. "We can't wait all night." The young lady looked up quickly, her sensitive face cringing beneath
the rough command. Lorry stepped instantly to the conductor's side,
shook his finger vigorously under his nose, and exclaimed in no
uncertain tones:

"Now, that's enough from you! If I hear another word out of you, I'll
make you sweat blood before tomorrow morning. Understand, my friend." "Aw, who are you?" demanded the conductor, belligerently. "You'll learn that soon enough. After this you'll have sense enough to
find out whom you are talking to before you open that mouth of yours. Not another word!" Mr. Grenfall Lorry was not president of the road,
nor was he in any way connected with it, but his well assumed air of
authority caused the trainman's ire to dissolve at once. "Excuse me, sir. I've been worried to death on this run. I meant no
offence. That old gentleman has threatened to kill me. Just now he
took out his watch and said if I did not run back for his niece in two
minutes he'd call me out and run me through. I've been nearly crazy
here. For the life of me, I don't see how you happened to be--"

"Oh, that's all right. Let's be off," cried Lorry, who had fallen some
distance behind his late companion and her uncle. Hurrying after them,
he reached her side in time to assist her in mounting the car steps. "Thank you," smiling down upon him bewitchingly. At the top of the steps
she was met by her aunt, behind whom stood the anxious man-servant and
the maid. Into the coach she was drawn by the relieved old lady, who
was critically inspecting her personal appearance when Lorry and the
foreigner entered. "Ach, it was so wild and exhilarating, Aunt Yvonne," the girl was
saying, her eyes sparkling. She stood straight and firm, her chin in the
air, her hands in those of her aunt. The little traveling cap was on
the side of her head, her hair was loose and very much awry, strands
straying here, curls blowing there in utter confusion. Lorry fairly
gasped with admiration for the loveliness that would not be vanquished. "We came like the wind! I shall never, never forge: it," she said. "But how could you have remained there, child? Tell me how it happened. We have been frantic," said her aunt, half in English, half in German. "Not now, dear Aunt Yvonne. See my hair! What a fright I must be! Fortunate man, your hair cannot be so unruly as mine. Oh!" The
exclamation was one of alarm. In an instant she was at his side, peering
with terrified eyes at the bloodstains on his neck and face. "It is
blood! You are hurt! Uncle Caspar, Hedrick--quick! Attend him! Come to
my room at once. You are suffering. Minna, find bandages!" She dragged him to the door of her section before he could interpose a
remonstrance. "It is nothing--a mere scratch. Bumped my head against the side of the
coach. Please don't worry about it; I can care for myself. Really, it
doesn't--"

"But it does! It has bled terribly. Sit there! Now, Hedrick, some
water." Hedrick rushed off and was back in a moment with a basin of water, a
sponge and a towel, and before Grenfall fully knew what was happening,
the man-servant was bathing his head, the others looking on anxiously,
the young lady apprehensively, her hands clasped before her as she bent
over to inspect the wound above his ear. "It is quite an ugly cut," said Uncle Caspar, critically. "Does it pain
you, sir?" "Oh, not a great deal," answered Lorry, closing his eyes comfortably. It
was all very pleasant, he thought. "Should it not have stitches, Uncle Caspar?" asked the sweet, eager
voice. "I think not. The flow is staunched. If the gentleman will allow Hedrick
to trim the hair away for a plaster and then bandage it I think the
wound will give him no trouble." The old man spoke slowly and in very
good English. "Really, Uncle, is it not serious?" "No, no," interposed Grenfall Lorry. "I knew it was a trifle. You cannot
break an American's head. Let me go to my own section and I'll be ready
to present myself, as good as new, in ten minutes." "You must let Hedrick bandage your head," she insisted. "Go with him,
Hedrick." Grenfall arose and started toward his section, followed by Hedrick. "I trust you were not hurt during that reckless ride," he said, more as
a question, stopping in the aisle to look back at her. "I should have been a mass of bruises, gashes and lumps had it not been
for one thing," she said, a faint flush coming to her cheek, although
her eyes looked unfalteringly into his. "Will you join us in the dining
car? I will have a place prepared for you at our table." "Thank you. You are very good. I shall join you as soon as I am
presentable." "We are to be honored, sir," said the old gentleman, but in such a
way that Grenfall had a distinct feeling that it was he who was to be
honored. Aunt Yvonne smiled graciously, and he took his departure. While Hedrick was dressing the jagged little cut, Grenfall complacently
surveyed the patient in the mirror opposite, and said to himself a
hundred times: "You lucky dog! It was worth forty gashes like this. By
Jove, she's divine!" In a fever of eager haste he bathed and attired himself for dinner, the
imperturbable Hedrick assisting. One query filled the American's mind:
"I wonder if I am to sit beside her." And then: "I have sat beside her! There can never again be such delight!" It was seven o'clock before his rather unusual toilet was completed. "See if they have gone to the diner, Hedrick," he said to the
man-servant, who departed ceremoniously. "I don't know why he should be so damned polite," observed Lorry,
gazing wonderingly after him. "I'm not a king. That reminds me. I must
introduce myself. She doesn't know me from Adam." Hedrick returned and announced that they had just gone to the dining car
and were awaiting him there. He hurried to the diner and made his way
to their table. Uncle Caspar and his niece were facing him as he came
up between the tables, and he saw, with no little regret, that he was to
sit beside the aunt--directly opposite the girl, however. She smiled up
at him as he stood before them, bowing. He saw the expression of inquiry
in those deep, liquid eyes of violet as their gaze wandered over his
hair. "Your head? I see no bandage," she said, reproachfully. "There is a small plaster and that is all. Only heroes may have
dangerous wounds," he said, laughingly. "Is heroism in America measured by the number of stitches or the size of
the plaster?" she asked, pointedly. "In my country it is a joy, and not
a calamity. Wounds are the misfortune of valor. Pray, be seated, Mr.
Lorry is it not?" she said, pronouncing it quaintly. He sat down rather suddenly on hearing her utter his name. How had she
learned it? Not a soul on the train knew it, he was sure. "I am Caspar Guggenslocker. Permit me, Mr. Lorry, to present my wife and
my niece, Miss Guggenslocker," said the uncle, more gracefully than he
had ever heard such a thing uttered before. In a daze, stunned by the name,--Guggenslocker, mystified over their
acquaintance with his own when he had been foiled at every fair attempt
to learn theirs, Lorry could only mumble his acknowledgments. In all
his life he had never lost command of himself as at this moment. Guggenslocker! He could feel the dank sweat of disappointment starting
on his brow. A butcher,--a beer maker,--a cobbler,--a gardener,--all
synonyms of Guggenslocker. A sausage manufacturer's niece--Miss
Guggenslocker! He tried to glance unconcernedly at her as he took up
his napkin, but his eyes wavered helplessly. She was looking serenely at
him, yet he fancied he saw a shadow of mockery in her blue eyes. "If you were a novel writer, Mr. Lorry, what manner of heroine would
you choose?" she asked, with a smile so tantalizing that he understood
instinctively why she was reviving a topic once abandoned. His
confusion was increased. Her uncle and aunt were regarding him
calmly,--expectantly, he imagined. "I--I have no ambition to be a novel writer," he said, "so I have not
made a study of heroines." "But you would have an ideal," she persisted. "I'm sure I--I don't--that is, she would not necessarily be a heroine. Unless, of course, it would require heroism to pose as an ideal for such
a prosaic fellow as I." "To begin with, you would call her Clarabel Montrose or something
equally as impossible. You know the name of a heroine in a novel must
be euphonious. That is an exacting rule." It was an open taunt, and
he could see that she was enjoying his discomfiture. It aroused his
indignation and his wits. "I would first give my hero a distinguished name. No matter what the
heroine's name might be--pretty or otherwise--I could easily change it
to his in the last chapter." She flushed beneath his now bright, keen
eyes and the ready, though unexpected retort. Uncle Caspar placed his
napkin to his lips and coughed. Aunt Yvonne studiously inspected her
bill of fare. "No matter what you call a rose, it is always sweet," he
added, meaningly. At this she laughed good-naturedly. He marveled at her white teeth
and red lips. A rose, after all. Guggenslocker, rose; rose, not
Guggenslocker. No, no! A rose only! He fancied he caught a sly look of
triumph in her uncle's swift glance toward her. But Uncle Caspar was not
a rose--he was Guggenslocker. Guggenslocker--butcher! Still, he did not
look the part--no, indeed. That extraordinary man a butcher, a gardener,
a--and Aunt Yvonne? Yet they were Guggenslockers. "Here is the waiter," the girl observed, to his relief. "I am famished
after my pleasant drive. It was so bracing, was it not Mr. Grenfall
Lorry?" "Give me a mountain ride always as an appetizer," he said, obligingly,
and so ended the jest about a name. The orders for the dinner were given and the quartette sat back in their
chairs to await the coming of the soup. Grenfall was still wondering how
she had learned his name, and was on the point of asking several times
during the conventional discussion of the weather, the train and the
mountains. He considerately refrained, however, unwilling to embarrass
her. "Aunt Yvonne tells me she never expected to see me alive after the
station agent telegraphed that we were coming overland in that awful old
carriage. The agent at P---- says it is a dangerous road, at the very
edge of the mountain. He also increased the composure of my uncle and
aunt by telling them that a wagon rolled off yesterday, killing a man,
two women and two horses. Dear Aunt Yvonne, how troubled you must have
been." "I'll confess there were times when I thought we were rolling down the
mountain," said Lorry, with a relieved shake of the head. "Sometimes I thought we were soaring through space, whether upward or
downwards I could not tell. We never failed to come to earth, though,
did we?" she laughingly asked. "Emphatically! Earth and a little grief," he said, putting his hand to
his head. "Does it pain you?" she asked, quickly. "Not in the least. I was merely feeling to see if the cut were still
there. Mr--Mr. Guggenslocker, did the conductor object to holding the
train?" he asked, remembering what the conductor had told him of the old
gentleman's actions. "At first, but I soon convinced him that it should be held," said the
other, quietly. "My husband spoke very harshly to the poor man," added Aunt Yvonne. "But, I am afraid, Caspar, he did not understand a word you said. You
were very much excited." The sweet old lady's attempts at English were
much more laborious than her husband's. "If he did not understand my English, he was very good at guessing,"
said her husband, grimly. "He told me you had threatened to call him out," ventured the young man. "Call him out? Ach, a railroad conductor!" exclaimed Uncle Caspar, in
fine scorn. "Caspar, I heard you say that you would call him out," interposed his
wife, with reproving eyes. "Ach, God! God! I have made a mistake! I see it all! It was the
other word I meant--down not out! I intended to call him down, as you
Americans say. I hope he will not think I challenged him." He was very
much perturbed. "I think he was afraid you would," said Lorry. "He should have no fear. I could not meet a railroad conductor. Will you
please tell him I could not so condescend? Besides, dueling is murder in
your country, I am told." "It usually is, sir. Much more so than in Europe." The others looked
at him inquiringly. "I mean that in America when two men pull
their revolvers and go to shooting at each other, some one is
killed--frequently both. In Europe, as I understand it, a scratch with a
sword ends the combat." "You have been misinformed," exclaimed Uncle Caspar, his eyebrows
elevated. "Why, Uncle Caspar has fought more duels than he can count," cried the
girl, proudly. "And has he slain his man every time?" asked Grenfall, smilingly,
glancing from one to the other. Aunt Yvonne shot a reproving look at the
girl, whose face paled instantly, her eyes going quickly in affright to
the face of her uncle. "God!" Lorry heard the old gentleman mutter. He was looking at his bill
of fare, but his eyes were fixed and staring. The card was crumpling
between the long, bony fingers. The American realized that a forbidden
topic had been touched upon. "He has fought and he has slain," he thought as quick as a flash, "He is
no butcher, no gardener, no cobbler. That's certain!" "Tell us, Uncle Caspar, what you said to the conductor," cried the young
lady, nervously. "Tell them, Caspar, how alarmed we were," added soft-voiced Aunt Yvonne. Grenfall was a silent, interested spectator. He somehow felt as if a
scene from some tragedy had been reproduced in that briefest of moments. Calmly and composedly, a half smile now in his face, the soldierly
Caspar narrated the story of the train's run from one station to the
other. "We did not miss you until we had almost reached the other station. Then
your Aunt Yvonne asked me where you had gone. I told her I had not seen
you, but went into the coach ahead to search. You were not there. Then I
went on to the dining car. Ach, you were not there. In alarm I returned
to our car. Your aunt and I looked everywhere. You were not anywhere. I shall never forget your aunt's face when she sank into a chair, nor
shall I feel again so near like dying as when she suggested that you
might have fallen from the train. I sent Hedrick ahead to summon the
conductor, but he had hardly left us when the engine whistled sharply
and the train began to slow up in a jerky fashion. We were very pale
as we looked at each other, for something told us that the stop was
unusual. I rushed to the platform meeting Hedrick, who was as much
alarmed as I. He said the train had been flagged, and that there must
be something wrong. Your aunt came out and told me that she had made a
strange discovery." Grenfall observed that he was addressing himself exclusively to the
young lady. "She had found that the gentleman in the next section was also missing. While we were standing there in doubt and perplexity, the train came to
a standstill, and soon there was shouting on the outside. I climbed down
from the car and saw that we were at a little station. The conductor
came running toward me excitedly. "'Is the young lady in the car?' he asked. "'No. For Heaven's sake, what have you heard? 'I cried. "'Then she has been left at O----,' he exclaimed, and used some very
extraordinary American words. "I then informed him that he should run back for you, first learning
that you were alive and well. He said he would be damned if he
would--pardon the word, ladies. He was very angry, and said he would
give orders to go ahead, but I told him I would demand restitution of
his government. He laughed in my face, and then I became shamelessly
angry. I said to him:

"'Sir, I shall call you down--not out, as you have said--and I shall run
you through the mill.' "That was good American talk, sir, was it not, Mr. Lorry? I wanted
him to understand me, so I tried to use your very best language. Some
gentlemen who are traveling on this train and some very excellent ladies
also joined in the demand that the train be held. His despatch from
O---- said that you, Mr. Lorry, insisted on having it held for twenty
minutes. The conductor insulted you, sir, by saying that you had
more--ah, what is it?--gall than any idiot he had ever seen. When he
said that, although I did not fully understand that it was a reflection
on you, so ignorant am I of your language, I took occasion to tell him
that you were a gentleman and a friend of mine. He asked me your name,
but, as I did not know it, I could only tell him that he would learn it
soon enough. Then he said something which has puzzled me ever since. He
told me to close my face. What did he mean by that, Mr. Lorry?" "Well, Mr. Guggenslocker, that means, in refined American, 'stop
talking,'" said Lorry, controlling a desire to shout. "Ach, that accounts for his surprise when I talked louder and faster
than ever. I did not know what he meant. He said positively he would not
wait, but just then a second message came from the other station. I did
not know what it was then, but a gentleman told me that it instructed
him to hold the train if he wanted to hold his job. Job is situation,
is it not? Well, when he read that message he said he would wait just
twenty minutes. I asked him to tell me how you were coming to us, but he
refused to answer. Your aunt and I went at once to the telegraph man
and implored him to tell us the truth, and he said you were coming in a
carriage over a very dangerous road. Imagine our feelings when he said
some people had been killed yesterday on that very road. "He said you would have to drive like the--the very devil if you got
here in twenty minutes." "We did, Uncle Caspar," interrupted Miss Guggenslocker, naively. "Our
driver followed Mr. Lorry's instructions." Mr. Grenfall Lorry blushed and laughed awkwardly. He had been admiring
her eager face and expressive eyes during Uncle Caspar's recital. How
sweet her voice when it pronounced his name, how charming the foreign
flavor to the words. "He would not have understood if I had said other things," he explained,
hastily. "When your aunt and I returned to the train we saw the conductor holding
his watch. He said to me: 'In just three minutes we pull out. If they
are not here by that time they can get on the best they know how. I've
done all I can: I did not say a word, but went to my section and had
Hedrick get out my pistols. If the train left before you arrived it
would be without its conductor. In the meantime, your Aunt Yvonne was
pleading with the wretch. I hastened back to his side with my pistols in
my pocket. It was then that I told him to start his train if he dared. That man will never know how close he was to death. One minute passed,
and he coolly announced that but one minute was left. I had made up my
mind to give him one of my pistols when the time was up, and to tell
him to defend himself. It was not to be a duel, for there was nothing
regular about it. It was only a question as to whether the train should
move. Then came the sound of carriage wheels and galloping horses. Almost before we knew it you were with us. I am so happy that you were
not a minute later." There was something so cool and grim in the quiet voice, something so
determined in those brilliant eyes, that Grenfall felt like looking up
the conductor to congratulate him. The dinner was served, and while
it was being discussed his fair companion of the drive graphically
described the experience of twenty strange minutes in a shackle-down
mountain coach. He was surprised to find that she omitted no part, not
even the hand clasp or the manner in which she clung to him. His ears
burned as he listened to this frank confession, for he expected to
hear words of disapproval from the uncle and aunt. His astonishment was
increased by their utter disregard of these rather peculiar details. It was then that he realized how trusting she had been, how serenely
unconscious of his tender and sudden passion. And had she told her
relatives that she had kissed him, he firmly believed they would have
smiled approvingly. Somehow the real flavor of romance was stricken from
the ride by her candid admissions. What he had considered a romantic
treasure was being calmly robbed of its glitter, leaving for his memory
the blurr of an adventure in which he had played the part of a gallant
gentleman and she a grateful lady. He was beginning to feel ashamed of
the conceit that had misled him. Down in his heart he was saying: "I
might have known it. I did know it. She is not like other women." The
perfect confidence that dwelt in the rapt faces of the others forced
into his wondering mind the impression that this girl could do no wrong. "And, Aunt Yvonne," she said, in conclusion, "the luck which you say is
mine as birthright asserted itself. I escaped unhurt, while Mr. Lorry
alone possesses the pain and unpleasantness of our ride." "I possess neither," he objected. "The pain that you refer to is a
pleasure." "The pain that a man endures for a woman should always be a pleasure,"
said Uncle Caspar smilingly. "But it could not be a pleasure to him unless the woman considered it a
pain," reasoned Miss Guggenslocker. "He could not feel happy if she did
not respect the pain." "And encourage it," supplemented Lorry, drily. "If you do not remind me
occasionally that I am hurt, Miss Guggenslocker, I am liable to forget
it." To himself he added: "I'll never learn how to say it in one
breath." "If I were not so soon to part from you I should be your physician,
and, like all physicians, prolong your ailment interminably," she said,
prettily. "To my deepest satisfaction," he said, warmly, not lightly. There was
nothing further from his mind than servile flattery, as his rejoinder
might imply. "Alas!" he went on, "we no sooner meet than we part. May I
ask when you are to sail?" "On Thursday," replied Mr. Guggenslocker. "On the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse," added his niece, a faraway look
coming into her eyes. "We are to stop off one day, to-morrow, in Washington," said Aunt
Yvonne, and the jump that Lorry's heart gave was so mighty that he was
afraid they could see it in his face. "My uncle has some business to transact in your city, Mr. Lorry. We are
to spend tomorrow there and Wednesday in New York. Then we sail. Ach,
how I long for Thursday!" His heart sank like lead to the depths from
which it had sprung. It required no effort on his part to see that
he was alone in his infatuation. Thursday was more to her than his
existence; she could forget him and think of Thursday, and when she
thought of Thursday, the future, he was but a thing of the past, not
even of the present. "Have you always lived in Washington, Mr. Lorry?" asked Mrs.
Guggenslocker. "All my life," he replied wishing at that moment that he was homeless
and free to choose for himself. "You Americans live in one city and then in another," she said. "Now, in
our country generation after generation lives and dies in one town. We
are not migratory." "Mr. Lorry has offended us by not knowing where Graustark is located on
the map," cried the young lady, and he could see the flash of resentment
in her eyes. "Why, my dear sir, Graustark is in--" began Uncle Caspar, but she checked
him instantly. "Uncle Caspar, you are not to tell him. I have recommended that he
study geography and discover us for himself. He should be ashamed of his
ignorance." He was not ashamed, but he mentally vowed that before he was a day older
he would find Graustark on the map and would stock his negligent brain
with all that history and the encyclopedia had to say of the unknown
land. Her uncle laughed, and, to Lorry's disappointment, obeyed the
young lady's command. "Shall I study the map of Europe, Asia or Africa?" asked he, and they
laughed. "Study the map of the world," said Miss Guggenslocker, proudly. "Edelweiss is the capital?" "Yes, our home city,--the queen of the crags," cried she. "You should
see Edelweiss, Mr. Lorry. It is of the mountain, the plain and the sky. There are homes in the valley, homes on the mountain side and homes in
the clouds." "And yours? From what you say it must be above the clouds--in heaven." "We are farthest from the clouds, for we live in the green valley,
shaded by the white topped mountains. We may, in Edelweiss, have what
climate we will. Doctors do not send us on long journeys for our health. They tell us to move up or down the mountain. We have balmy spring,
glorious summer, refreshing autumn and chilly winter, just as we like." "Ideal! I think you must be pretty well toward the south. You could not
have July and January if you were far north." "True; yet we have January in July. Study your map. We are discernible
to the naked eye," she said, half ironically. "I care not if there are but three inhabitants Graustark, all told, it
is certainly worthy of a position on any map," said Lorry, gallantly;
and his listeners applauded with patriotic appreciation. "By the way,
Mr. Gug--Guggenslocker, you say the conductor asked you for my name
and you did not know it. May I ask how you learned it later on?" His
curiosity got the better of him, and his courage was increased by the
champagne the old gentleman had ordered. "I did not know your name until my niece told it to me after your
arrival in the carriage," said Uncle Caspar. "I don't remember giving it to Miss Guggenslocker at any time," said
Lorry. "You were not my informant," she said, demurely. "Surely you did not guess it." "Oh, no, indeed. I am no mind reader." "My own name was the last thing you could have read in my mind, in that
event, for I have not thought of it in three days." She was sitting with her elbows on the table, her chin in her hands, a
dreamy look in her blue eyes. "You say you obtained that coin from the porter on the Denver train?" "Within two hours after I got aboard." "Well, that coin purchased your name for me," she said, calmly,
candidly. He gasped. "You--you don't mean that you--" he stammered. "You see, Mr. Lorry, I wanted to know the name of a man who came nearest
my ideal of what an American should be. As soon as I saw you I knew
that you were the American as I had grown to know him through the
books,--big, strong, bold and comely. That is why I bought your name
of the porter. I shall always say that I know the name of an ideal
American,--Grenfall Lorry." The ideal American was not unmoved. He was in a fever of fear and
happiness,--fear because he thought she was jesting, happiness because
he hoped she was not. He laughed awkwardly, absolutely unable to express
himself in words. Her frank statement staggered him almost beyond the
power of recovery. There was joy in the knowledge that she had been attracted to him at
first sight, but there was bitterness in the thought that he had come to
her notice as a sort of specimen, the name of which she had sought as a
botanist would look for the name of an unknown flower. "I--I am honored," he at last managed to say, his eyes gleaming with
embarrassment. 