












The Woman in White


by

Wilkie Collins




CONTENTS

First Epoch

  THE STORY BEGUN BY WALTER HARTRIGHT
  THE STORY CONTINUED BY VINCENT GILMORE
  THE STORY CONTINUED BY MARIAN HALCOMBE


Second Epoch

  THE STORY CONTINUED BY MARIAN HALCOMBE. THE STORY CONTINUED BY FREDERICK FAIRLIE, ESQ. THE STORY CONTINUED BY ELIZA MICHELSON
  THE STORY CONTINUED IN SEVERAL NARRATIVES

     THE NARRATIVE OF HESTER PINHORN
     THE NARRATIVE OF THE DOCTOR
     THE NARRATIVE OF JANE GOULD
     THE NARRATIVE OF THE TOMBSTONE
     THE NARRATIVE OF WALTER HARTRIGHT


Third Epoch

  THE STORY CONTINUED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT. THE STORY CONTINUED BY MRS. CATHERICK
  THE STORY CONTINUED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT
  THE STORY CONTINUED BY ISIDOR, OTTAVIO, BALDASSARE FOSCO
  THE STORY CONCLUDED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT




THE STORY BEGUN BY WALTER HARTRIGHT

(of Clement's Inn, Teacher of Drawing)


This is the story of what a Woman's patience can endure, and what a
Man's resolution can achieve. If the machinery of the Law could be depended on to fathom every case
of suspicion, and to conduct every process of inquiry, with moderate
assistance only from the lubricating influences of oil of gold, the
events which fill these pages might have claimed their share of the
public attention in a Court of Justice. But the Law is still, in certain inevitable cases, the pre-engaged
servant of the long purse; and the story is left to be told, for the
first time, in this place. As the Judge might once have heard it, so
the Reader shall hear it now. No circumstance of importance, from the
beginning to the end of the disclosure, shall be related on hearsay
evidence. When the writer of these introductory lines (Walter
Hartright by name) happens to be more closely connected than others
with the incidents to be recorded, he will describe them in his own
person. When his experience fails, he will retire from the position of
narrator; and his task will be continued, from the point at which he
has left it off, by other persons who can speak to the circumstances
under notice from their own knowledge, just as clearly and positively
as he has spoken before them. Thus, the story here presented will be told by more than one pen, as
the story of an offence against the laws is told in Court by more than
one witness--with the same object, in both cases, to present the truth
always in its most direct and most intelligible aspect; and to trace
the course of one complete series of events, by making the persons who
have been most closely connected with them, at each successive stage,
relate their own experience, word for word. Let Walter Hartright, teacher of drawing, aged twenty-eight years, be
heard first. II

It was the last day of July. The long hot summer was drawing to a
close; and we, the weary pilgrims of the London pavement, were
beginning to think of the cloud-shadows on the corn-fields, and the
autumn breezes on the sea-shore. For my own poor part, the fading summer left me out of health, out of
spirits, and, if the truth must be told, out of money as well. During
the past year I had not managed my professional resources as carefully
as usual; and my extravagance now limited me to the prospect of
spending the autumn economically between my mother's cottage at
Hampstead and my own chambers in town. The evening, I remember, was still and cloudy; the London air was at
its heaviest; the distant hum of the street-traffic was at its
faintest; the small pulse of the life within me, and the great heart of
the city around me, seemed to be sinking in unison, languidly and more
languidly, with the sinking sun. I roused myself from the book which I
was dreaming over rather than reading, and left my chambers to meet the
cool night air in the suburbs. It was one of the two evenings in every
week which I was accustomed to spend with my mother and my sister. So
I turned my steps northward in the direction of Hampstead. Events which I have yet to relate make it necessary to mention in this
place that my father had been dead some years at the period of which I
am now writing; and that my sister Sarah and I were the sole survivors
of a family of five children. My father was a drawing-master before
me. His exertions had made him highly successful in his profession;
and his affectionate anxiety to provide for the future of those who
were dependent on his labours had impelled him, from the time of his
marriage, to devote to the insuring of his life a much larger portion
of his income than most men consider it necessary to set aside for that
purpose. Thanks to his admirable prudence and self-denial my mother
and sister were left, after his death, as independent of the world as
they had been during his lifetime. I succeeded to his connection, and
had every reason to feel grateful for the prospect that awaited me at
my starting in life. The quiet twilight was still trembling on the topmost ridges of the
heath; and the view of London below me had sunk into a black gulf in
the shadow of the cloudy night, when I stood before the gate of my
mother's cottage. I had hardly rung the bell before the house door was
opened violently; my worthy Italian friend, Professor Pesca, appeared
in the servant's place; and darted out joyously to receive me, with a
shrill foreign parody on an English cheer. On his own account, and, I must be allowed to add, on mine also, the
Professor merits the honour of a formal introduction. Accident has made
him the starting-point of the strange family story which it is the
purpose of these pages to unfold. I had first become acquainted with my Italian friend by meeting him at
certain great houses where he taught his own language and I taught
drawing. All I then knew of the history of his life was, that he had
once held a situation in the University of Padua; that he had left
Italy for political reasons (the nature of which he uniformly declined
to mention to any one); and that he had been for many years respectably
established in London as a teacher of languages. Without being actually a dwarf--for he was perfectly well proportioned
from head to foot--Pesca was, I think, the smallest human being I ever
saw out of a show-room. Remarkable anywhere, by his personal
appearance, he was still further distinguished among the rank and file
of mankind by the harmless eccentricity of his character. The ruling
idea of his life appeared to be, that he was bound to show his
gratitude to the country which had afforded him an asylum and a means
of subsistence by doing his utmost to turn himself into an Englishman. Not content with paying the nation in general the compliment of
invariably carrying an umbrella, and invariably wearing gaiters and a
white hat, the Professor further aspired to become an Englishman in his
habits and amusements, as well as in his personal appearance. Finding
us distinguished, as a nation, by our love of athletic exercises, the
little man, in the innocence of his heart, devoted himself impromptu to
all our English sports and pastimes whenever he had the opportunity of
joining them; firmly persuaded that he could adopt our national
amusements of the field by an effort of will precisely as he had
adopted our national gaiters and our national white hat. I had seen him risk his limbs blindly at a fox-hunt and in a
cricket-field; and soon afterwards I saw him risk his life, just as
blindly, in the sea at Brighton. We had met there accidentally, and were bathing together. If we had
been engaged in any exercise peculiar to my own nation I should, of
course, have looked after Pesca carefully; but as foreigners are
generally quite as well able to take care of themselves in the water as
Englishmen, it never occurred to me that the art of swimming might
merely add one more to the list of manly exercises which the Professor
believed that he could learn impromptu. Soon after we had both struck
out from shore, I stopped, finding my friend did not gain on me, and
turned round to look for him. To my horror and amazement, I saw
nothing between me and the beach but two little white arms which
struggled for an instant above the surface of the water, and then
disappeared from view. When I dived for him, the poor little man was
lying quietly coiled up at the bottom, in a hollow of shingle, looking
by many degrees smaller than I had ever seen him look before. During
the few minutes that elapsed while I was taking him in, the air revived
him, and he ascended the steps of the machine with my assistance. With
the partial recovery of his animation came the return of his wonderful
delusion on the subject of swimming. As soon as his chattering teeth
would let him speak, he smiled vacantly, and said he thought it must
have been the Cramp. When he had thoroughly recovered himself, and had joined me on the
beach, his warm Southern nature broke through all artificial English
restraints in a moment. He overwhelmed me with the wildest expressions
of affection--exclaimed passionately, in his exaggerated Italian way,
that he would hold his life henceforth at my disposal--and declared
that he should never be happy again until he had found an opportunity
of proving his gratitude by rendering me some service which I might
remember, on my side, to the end of my days. I did my best to stop the torrent of his tears and protestations by
persisting in treating the whole adventure as a good subject for a
joke; and succeeded at last, as I imagined, in lessening Pesca's
overwhelming sense of obligation to me. Little did I think
then--little did I think afterwards when our pleasant holiday had drawn
to an end--that the opportunity of serving me for which my grateful
companion so ardently longed was soon to come; that he was eagerly to
seize it on the instant; and that by so doing he was to turn the whole
current of my existence into a new channel, and to alter me to myself
almost past recognition. Yet so it was. If I had not dived for Professor Pesca when he lay
under water on his shingle bed, I should in all human probability never
have been connected with the story which these pages will relate--I
should never, perhaps, have heard even the name of the woman who has
lived in all my thoughts, who has possessed herself of all my energies,
who has become the one guiding influence that now directs the purpose
of my life. III

Pesca's face and manner, on the evening when we confronted each other
at my mother's gate, were more than sufficient to inform me that
something extraordinary had happened. It was quite useless, however,
to ask him for an immediate explanation. I could only conjecture,
while he was dragging me in by both hands, that (knowing my habits) he
had come to the cottage to make sure of meeting me that night, and that
he had some news to tell of an unusually agreeable kind. We both bounced into the parlour in a highly abrupt and undignified
manner. My mother sat by the open window laughing and fanning herself. Pesca was one of her especial favourites and his wildest eccentricities
were always pardonable in her eyes. Poor dear soul! from the first
moment when she found out that the little Professor was deeply and
gratefully attached to her son, she opened her heart to him
unreservedly, and took all his puzzling foreign peculiarities for
granted, without so much as attempting to understand any one of them. My sister Sarah, with all the advantages of youth, was, strangely
enough, less pliable. She did full justice to Pesca's excellent
qualities of heart; but she could not accept him implicitly, as my
mother accepted him, for my sake. Her insular notions of propriety
rose in perpetual revolt against Pesca's constitutional contempt for
appearances; and she was always more or less undisguisedly astonished
at her mother's familiarity with the eccentric little foreigner. I
have observed, not only in my sister's case, but in the instances of
others, that we of the young generation are nothing like so hearty and
so impulsive as some of our elders. I constantly see old people
flushed and excited by the prospect of some anticipated pleasure which
altogether fails to ruffle the tranquillity of their serene
grandchildren. Are we, I wonder, quite such genuine boys and girls now
as our seniors were in their time? Has the great advance in education
taken rather too long a stride; and are we in these modern days, just
the least trifle in the world too well brought up? Without attempting to answer those questions decisively, I may at least
record that I never saw my mother and my sister together in Pesca's
society, without finding my mother much the younger woman of the two. On this occasion, for example, while the old lady was laughing heartily
over the boyish manner in which we tumbled into the parlour, Sarah was
perturbedly picking up the broken pieces of a teacup, which the
Professor had knocked off the table in his precipitate advance to meet
me at the door. "I don't know what would have happened, Walter," said my mother, "if
you had delayed much longer. Pesca has been half mad with impatience,
and I have been half mad with curiosity. The Professor has brought
some wonderful news with him, in which he says you are concerned; and
he has cruelly refused to give us the smallest hint of it till his
friend Walter appeared." "Very provoking: it spoils the Set," murmured Sarah to herself,
mournfully absorbed over the ruins of the broken cup. While these words were being spoken, Pesca, happily and fussily
unconscious of the irreparable wrong which the crockery had suffered at
his hands, was dragging a large arm-chair to the opposite end of the
room, so as to command us all three, in the character of a public
speaker addressing an audience. Having turned the chair with its back
towards us, he jumped into it on his knees, and excitedly addressed his
small congregation of three from an impromptu pulpit. "Now, my good dears," began Pesca (who always said "good dears" when he
meant "worthy friends"), "listen to me. The time has come--I recite my
good news--I speak at last." "Hear, hear!" said my mother, humouring the joke. "The next thing he will break, mamma," whispered Sarah, "will be the
back of the best arm-chair." "I go back into my life, and I address myself to the noblest of created
beings," continued Pesca, vehemently apostrophising my unworthy self
over the top rail of the chair. "Who found me dead at the bottom of
the sea (through Cramp); and who pulled me up to the top; and what did
I say when I got into my own life and my own clothes again?" "Much more than was at all necessary," I answered as doggedly as
possible; for the least encouragement in connection with this subject
invariably let loose the Professor's emotions in a flood of tears. "I said," persisted Pesca, "that my life belonged to my dear friend,
Walter, for the rest of my days--and so it does. I said that I should
never be happy again till I had found the opportunity of doing a good
Something for Walter--and I have never been contented with myself till
this most blessed day. Now," cried the enthusiastic little man at the
top of his voice, "the overflowing happiness bursts out of me at every
pore of my skin, like a perspiration; for on my faith, and soul, and
honour, the something is done at last, and the only word to say now
is--Right-all-right!" It may be necessary to explain here that Pesca prided himself on being
a perfect Englishman in his language, as well as in his dress, manners,
and amusements. Having picked up a few of our most familiar colloquial
expressions, he scattered them about over his conversation whenever
they happened to occur to him, turning them, in his high relish for
their sound and his general ignorance of their sense, into compound
words and repetitions of his own, and always running them into each
other, as if they consisted of one long syllable. "Among the fine London Houses where I teach the language of my native
country," said the Professor, rushing into his long-deferred
explanation without another word of preface, "there is one, mighty
fine, in the big place called Portland. You all know where that is? Yes, yes--course-of-course. The fine house, my good dears, has got
inside it a fine family. A Mamma, fair and fat; three young Misses,
fair and fat; two young Misters, fair and fat; and a Papa, the fairest
and the fattest of all, who is a mighty merchant, up to his eyes in
gold--a fine man once, but seeing that he has got a naked head and two
chins, fine no longer at the present time. Now mind! I teach the
sublime Dante to the young Misses, and ah!--my-soul-bless-my-soul!--it
is not in human language to say how the sublime Dante puzzles the
pretty heads of all three! No matter--all in good time--and the more
lessons the better for me. Now mind! Imagine to yourselves that I am
teaching the young Misses to-day, as usual. We are all four of us down
together in the Hell of Dante. At the Seventh Circle--but no matter
for that: all the Circles are alike to the three young Misses, fair and
fat,--at the Seventh Circle, nevertheless, my pupils are sticking fast;
and I, to set them going again, recite, explain, and blow myself up
red-hot with useless enthusiasm, when--a creak of boots in the passage
outside, and in comes the golden Papa, the mighty merchant with the
naked head and the two chins.--Ha! my good dears, I am closer than you
think for to the business, now. Have you been patient so far? or have
you said to yourselves, 'Deuce-what-the-deuce! Pesca is long-winded
to-night?'" We declared that we were deeply interested. The Professor went on:

"In his hand, the golden Papa has a letter; and after he has made his
excuse for disturbing us in our Infernal Region with the common mortal
Business of the house, he addresses himself to the three young Misses,
and begins, as you English begin everything in this blessed world that
you have to say, with a great O. 'O, my dears,' says the mighty
merchant, 'I have got here a letter from my friend, Mr.----'(the name
has slipped out of my mind; but no matter; we shall come back to that;
yes, yes--right-all-right). So the Papa says, 'I have got a letter from
my friend, the Mister; and he wants a recommend from me, of a
drawing-master, to go down to his house in the country.' My-soul-bless-my-soul! when I heard the golden Papa say those words, if
I had been big enough to reach up to him, I should have put my arms
round his neck, and pressed him to my bosom in a long and grateful hug! As it was, I only bounced upon my chair. My seat was on thorns, and my
soul was on fire to speak but I held my tongue, and let Papa go on. 'Perhaps you know,' says this good man of money, twiddling his friend's
letter this way and that, in his golden fingers and thumbs, 'perhaps
you know, my dears, of a drawing-master that I can recommend?' The
three young Misses all look at each other, and then say (with the
indispensable great O to begin) "O, dear no, Papa! But here is Mr.
Pesca'  At the mention of myself I can hold no longer--the thought of
you, my good dears, mounts like blood to my head--I start from my seat,
as if a spike had grown up from the ground through the bottom of my
chair--I address myself to the mighty merchant, and I say (English
phrase) 'Dear sir, I have the man! The first and foremost
drawing-master of the world! Recommend him by the post to-night, and
send him off, bag and baggage (English phrase again--ha! ), send him
off, bag and baggage, by the train to-morrow!' 'Stop, stop,' says
Papa; 'is he a foreigner, or an Englishman?' 'English to the bone of
his back,' I answer. 'Respectable?' says Papa. 'Sir,' I say (for this
last question of his outrages me, and I have done being familiar with
him--) 'Sir! the immortal fire of genius burns in this Englishman's
bosom, and, what is more, his father had it before him!' 'Never mind,'
says the golden barbarian of a Papa, 'never mind about his genius, Mr.
Pesca. We don't want genius in this country, unless it is accompanied
by respectability--and then we are very glad to have it, very glad
indeed. Can your friend produce testimonials--letters that speak to
his character?' I wave my hand negligently. 'Letters?' I say. 'Ha! my-soul-bless-my-soul! I should think so, indeed! Volumes of letters
and portfolios of testimonials, if you like!' 'One or two will do,'
says this man of phlegm and money. 'Let him send them to me, with his
name and address. And--stop, stop, Mr. Pesca--before you go to your
friend, you had better take a note.' 'Bank-note!' I say, indignantly. 'No bank-note, if you please, till my brave Englishman has earned it
first.' 'Bank-note!' says Papa, in a great surprise, 'who talked of
bank-note? I mean a note of the terms--a memorandum of what he is
expected to do. Go on with your lesson, Mr. Pesca, and I will give you
the necessary extract from my friend's letter.' Down sits the man of
merchandise and money to his pen, ink, and paper; and down I go once
again into the Hell of Dante, with my three young Misses after me. In
ten minutes' time the note is written, and the boots of Papa are
creaking themselves away in the passage outside. From that moment, on
my faith, and soul, and honour, I know nothing more! The glorious
thought that I have caught my opportunity at last, and that my grateful
service for my dearest friend in the world is as good as done already,
flies up into my head and makes me drunk. How I pull my young Misses
and myself out of our Infernal Region again, how my other business is
done afterwards, how my little bit of dinner slides itself down my
throat, I know no more than a man in the moon. Enough for me, that
here I am, with the mighty merchant's note in my hand, as large as
life, as hot as fire, and as happy as a king! Ha! ha! ha! right-right-right-all-right!" Here the Professor waved the memorandum
of terms over his head, and ended his long and voluble narrative with
his shrill Italian parody on an English cheer." My mother rose the moment he had done, with flushed cheeks and
brightened eyes. She caught the little man warmly by both hands. "My dear, good Pesca," she said, "I never doubted your true affection
for Walter--but I am more than ever persuaded of it now!" "I am sure we are very much obliged to Professor Pesca, for Walter's
sake," added Sarah. She half rose, while she spoke, as if to approach
the arm-chair, in her turn; but, observing that Pesca was rapturously
kissing my mother's hands, looked serious, and resumed her seat. "If
the familiar little man treats my mother in that way, how will he treat
ME?" Faces sometimes tell truth; and that was unquestionably the
thought in Sarah's mind, as she sat down again. Although I myself was gratefully sensible of the kindness of Pesca's
motives, my spirits were hardly so much elevated as they ought to have
been by the prospect of future employment now placed before me. When
the Professor had quite done with my mother's hand, and when I had
warmly thanked him for his interference on my behalf, I asked to be
allowed to look at the note of terms which his respectable patron had
drawn up for my inspection. Pesca handed me the paper, with a triumphant flourish of the hand. "Read!" said the little man majestically. "I promise you my friend,
the writing of the golden Papa speaks with a tongue of trumpets for
itself." The note of terms was plain, straightforward, and comprehensive, at any
rate. It informed me,

First, That Frederick Fairlie, Esquire, of Limmeridge House. Cumberland, wanted to engage the services of a thoroughly competent
drawing-master, for a period of four months certain. Secondly, That the duties which the master was expected to perform
would be of a twofold kind. He was to superintend the instruction of
two young ladies in the art of painting in water-colours; and he was to
devote his leisure time, afterwards, to the business of repairing and
mounting a valuable collection of drawings, which had been suffered to
fall into a condition of total neglect. Thirdly, That the terms offered to the person who should undertake and
properly perform these duties were four guineas a week; that he was to
reside at Limmeridge House; and that he was to be treated there on the
footing of a gentleman. Fourthly, and lastly, That no person need think of applying for this
situation unless he could furnish the most unexceptionable references
to character and abilities. The references were to be sent to Mr.
Fairlie's friend in London, who was empowered to conclude all necessary
arrangements. These instructions were followed by the name and address
of Pesca's employer in Portland Place--and there the note, or
memorandum, ended. The prospect which this offer of an engagement held out was certainly
an attractive one. The employment was likely to be both easy and
agreeable; it was proposed to me at the autumn time of the year when I
was least occupied; and the terms, judging by my personal experience in
my profession, were surprisingly liberal. I knew this; I knew that I
ought to consider myself very fortunate if I succeeded in securing the
offered employment--and yet, no sooner had I read the memorandum than I
felt an inexplicable unwillingness within me to stir in the matter. I
had never in the whole of my previous experience found my duty and my
inclination so painfully and so unaccountably at variance as I found
them now. "Oh, Walter, your father never had such a chance as this!" said my
mother, when she had read the note of terms and had handed it back to
me. "Such distinguished people to know," remarked Sarah, straightening
herself in the chair; "and on such gratifying terms of equality too!" "Yes, yes; the terms, in every sense, are tempting enough," I replied
impatiently. "But before I send in my testimonials, I should like a
little time to consider----"

"Consider!" exclaimed my mother. "Why, Walter, what is the matter with
you?" "Consider!" echoed my sister. "What a very extraordinary thing to say,
under the circumstances!" "Consider!" chimed in the Professor. "What is there to consider about? Answer me this! Have you not been complaining of your health, and have
you not been longing for what you call a smack of the country breeze? Well! there in your hand is the paper that offers you perpetual choking
mouthfuls of country breeze for four months' time. Is it not so? Ha! Again--you want money. Well! Is four golden guineas a week nothing? My-soul-bless-my-soul! only give it to me--and my boots shall creak
like the golden Papa's, with a sense of the overpowering richness of
the man who walks in them! Four guineas a week, and, more than that,
the charming society of two young misses! and, more than that, your
bed, your breakfast, your dinner, your gorging English teas and lunches
and drinks of foaming beer, all for nothing--why, Walter, my dear good
friend--deuce-what-the-deuce!--for the first time in my life I have not
eyes enough in my head to look, and wonder at you!" Neither my mother's evident astonishment at my behaviour, nor Pesca's
fervid enumeration of the advantages offered to me by the new
employment, had any effect in shaking my unreasonable disinclination to
go to Limmeridge House. After starting all the petty objections that I
could think of to going to Cumberland, and after hearing them answered,
one after another, to my own complete discomfiture, I tried to set up a
last obstacle by asking what was to become of my pupils in London while
I was teaching Mr. Fairlie's young ladies to sketch from nature. The
obvious answer to this was, that the greater part of them would be away
on their autumn travels, and that the few who remained at home might be
confided to the care of one of my brother drawing-masters, whose pupils
I had once taken off his hands under similar circumstances. My sister
reminded me that this gentleman had expressly placed his services at my
disposal, during the present season, in case I wished to leave town; my
mother seriously appealed to me not to let an idle caprice stand in the
way of my own interests and my own health; and Pesca piteously
entreated that I would not wound him to the heart by rejecting the
first grateful offer of service that he had been able to make to the
friend who had saved his life. The evident sincerity and affection which inspired these remonstrances
would have influenced any man with an atom of good feeling in his
composition. Though I could not conquer my own unaccountable
perversity, I had at least virtue enough to be heartily ashamed of it,
and to end the discussion pleasantly by giving way, and promising to do
all that was wanted of me. The rest of the evening passed merrily enough in humorous anticipations
of my coming life with the two young ladies in Cumberland. Pesca,
inspired by our national grog, which appeared to get into his head, in
the most marvellous manner, five minutes after it had gone down his
throat, asserted his claims to be considered a complete Englishman by
making a series of speeches in rapid succession, proposing my mother's
health, my sister's health, my health, and the healths, in mass, of Mr.
Fairlie and the two young Misses, pathetically returning thanks
himself, immediately afterwards, for the whole party. "A secret,
Walter," said my little friend confidentially, as we walked home
together. "I am flushed by the recollection of my own eloquence. My
soul bursts itself with ambition. One of these days I go into your
noble Parliament. It is the dream of my whole life to be Honourable
Pesca, M.P.!" The next morning I sent my testimonials to the Professor's employer in
Portland Place. Three days passed, and I concluded, with secret
satisfaction, that my papers had not been found sufficiently explicit. On the fourth day, however, an answer came. It announced that Mr.
Fairlie accepted my services, and requested me to start for Cumberland
immediately. All the necessary instructions for my journey were
carefully and clearly added in a postscript. I made my arrangements, unwillingly enough, for leaving London early
the next day. Towards evening Pesca looked in, on his way to a
dinner-party, to bid me good-bye. "I shall dry my tears in your absence," said the Professor gaily, "with
this glorious thought. It is my auspicious hand that has given the
first push to your fortune in the world. Go, my friend! When your sun
shines in Cumberland (English proverb), in the name of heaven make your
hay. Marry one of the two young Misses; become Honourable Hartright,
M.P. ; and when you are on the top of the ladder remember that Pesca, at
the bottom, has done it all!" I tried to laugh with my little friend over his parting jest, but my
spirits were not to be commanded. Something jarred in me almost
painfully while he was speaking his light farewell words. When I was left alone again nothing remained to be done but to walk to
the Hampstead cottage and bid my mother and Sarah good-bye. IV

The heat had been painfully oppressive all day, and it was now a close
and sultry night. My mother and sister had spoken so many last words, and had begged me
to wait another five minutes so many times, that it was nearly midnight
when the servant locked the garden-gate behind me. I walked forward a
few paces on the shortest way back to London, then stopped and
hesitated. The moon was full and broad in the dark blue starless sky, and the
broken ground of the heath looked wild enough in the mysterious light
to be hundreds of miles away from the great city that lay beneath it. The idea of descending any sooner than I could help into the heat and
gloom of London repelled me. The prospect of going to bed in my
airless chambers, and the prospect of gradual suffocation, seemed, in
my present restless frame of mind and body, to be one and the same
thing. I determined to stroll home in the purer air by the most
roundabout way I could take; to follow the white winding paths across
the lonely heath; and to approach London through its most open suburb
by striking into the Finchley Road, and so getting back, in the cool of
the new morning, by the western side of the Regent's Park. I wound my way down slowly over the heath, enjoying the divine
stillness of the scene, and admiring the soft alternations of light and
shade as they followed each other over the broken ground on every side
of me. So long as I was proceeding through this first and prettiest
part of my night walk my mind remained passively open to the
impressions produced by the view; and I thought but little on any
subject--indeed, so far as my own sensations were concerned, I can
hardly say that I thought at all. But when I had left the heath and had turned into the by-road, where
there was less to see, the ideas naturally engendered by the
approaching change in my habits and occupations gradually drew more and
more of my attention exclusively to themselves. By the time I had
arrived at the end of the road I had become completely absorbed in my
own fanciful visions of Limmeridge House, of Mr. Fairlie, and of the
two ladies whose practice in the art of water-colour painting I was so
soon to superintend. I had now arrived at that particular point of my walk where four roads
met--the road to Hampstead, along which I had returned, the road to
Finchley, the road to West End, and the road back to London. I had
mechanically turned in this latter direction, and was strolling along
the lonely high-road--idly wondering, I remember, what the Cumberland
young ladies would look like--when, in one moment, every drop of blood
in my body was brought to a stop by the touch of a hand laid lightly
and suddenly on my shoulder from behind me. I turned on the instant, with my fingers tightening round the handle of
my stick. There, in the middle of the broad bright high-road--there, as if it had
that moment sprung out of the earth or dropped from the heaven--stood
the figure of a solitary Woman, dressed from head to foot in white
garments, her face bent in grave inquiry on mine, her hand pointing to
the dark cloud over London, as I faced her. I was far too seriously startled by the suddenness with which this
extraordinary apparition stood before me, in the dead of night and in
that lonely place, to ask what she wanted. The strange woman spoke
first. "Is that the road to London?" she said. I looked attentively at her, as she put that singular question to me. It was then nearly one o'clock. All I could discern distinctly by the
moonlight was a colourless, youthful face, meagre and sharp to look at
about the cheeks and chin; large, grave, wistfully attentive eyes;
nervous, uncertain lips; and light hair of a pale, brownish-yellow hue. There was nothing wild, nothing immodest in her manner: it was quiet
and self-controlled, a little melancholy and a little touched by
suspicion; not exactly the manner of a lady, and, at the same time, not
the manner of a woman in the humblest rank of life. The voice, little
as I had yet heard of it, had something curiously still and mechanical
in its tones, and the utterance was remarkably rapid. She held a small
bag in her hand: and her dress--bonnet, shawl, and gown all of
white--was, so far as I could guess, certainly not composed of very
delicate or very expensive materials. Her figure was slight, and
rather above the average height--her gait and actions free from the
slightest approach to extravagance. This was all that I could observe
of her in the dim light and under the perplexingly strange
circumstances of our meeting. What sort of a woman she was, and how
she came to be out alone in the high-road, an hour after midnight, I
altogether failed to guess. The one thing of which I felt certain was,
that the grossest of mankind could not have misconstrued her motive in
speaking, even at that suspiciously late hour and in that suspiciously
lonely place. "Did you hear me?" she said, still quietly and rapidly, and without the
least fretfulness or impatience. "I asked if that was the way to
London." "Yes," I replied, "that is the way: it leads to St. John's Wood and the
Regent's Park. You must excuse my not answering you before. I was
rather startled by your sudden appearance in the road; and I am, even
now, quite unable to account for it." "You don't suspect me of doing anything wrong, do you? I have done
nothing wrong. I have met with an accident--I am very unfortunate in
being here alone so late. Why do you suspect me of doing wrong?" She spoke with unnecessary earnestness and agitation, and shrank back
from me several paces. I did my best to reassure her. "Pray don't suppose that I have any idea of suspecting you," I said,
"or any other wish than to be of assistance to you, if I can. I only
wondered at your appearance in the road, because it seemed to me to be
empty the instant before I saw you." She turned, and pointed back to a place at the junction of the road to
London and the road to Hampstead, where there was a gap in the hedge. "I heard you coming," she said, "and hid there to see what sort of man
you were, before I risked speaking. I doubted and feared about it till
you passed; and then I was obliged to steal after you, and touch you." Steal after me and touch me? Why not call to me? Strange, to say the
least of it. "May I trust you?" she asked. "You don't think the worse of me because
I have met with an accident?" She stopped in confusion; shifted her bag
from one hand to the other; and sighed bitterly. The loneliness and helplessness of the woman touched me. The natural
impulse to assist her and to spare her got the better of the judgment,
the caution, the worldly tact, which an older, wiser, and colder man
might have summoned to help him in this strange emergency. "You may trust me for any harmless purpose," I said. "If it troubles
you to explain your strange situation to me, don't think of returning
to the subject again. I have no right to ask you for any explanations. Tell me how I can help you; and if I can, I will." "You are very kind, and I am very, very thankful to have met you." The
first touch of womanly tenderness that I had heard from her trembled in
her voice as she said the words; but no tears glistened in those large,
wistfully attentive eyes of hers, which were still fixed on me. "I
have only been in London once before," she went on, more and more
rapidly, "and I know nothing about that side of it, yonder. Can I get
a fly, or a carriage of any kind? Is it too late? I don't know. If you
could show me where to get a fly--and if you will only promise not to
interfere with me, and to let me leave you, when and how I please--I
have a friend in London who will be glad to receive me--I want nothing
else--will you promise?" She looked anxiously up and down the road; shifted her bag again from
one hand to the other; repeated the words, "Will you promise?" and
looked hard in my face, with a pleading fear and confusion that it
troubled me to see. What could I do? Here was a stranger utterly and helplessly at my
mercy--and that stranger a forlorn woman. No house was near; no one
was passing whom I could consult; and no earthly right existed on my
part to give me a power of control over her, even if I had known how to
exercise it. I trace these lines, self-distrustfully, with the shadows
of after-events darkening the very paper I write on; and still I say,
what could I do? What I did do, was to try and gain time by questioning her. "Are you
sure that your friend in London will receive you at such a late hour as
this?" I said. "Quite sure. Only say you will let me leave you when and how I
please--only say you won't interfere with me. Will you promise?" As she repeated the words for the third time, she came close to me and
laid her hand, with a sudden gentle stealthiness, on my bosom--a thin
hand; a cold hand (when I removed it with mine) even on that sultry
night. Remember that I was young; remember that the hand which touched
me was a woman's. "Will you promise?" "Yes." One word! The little familiar word that is on everybody's lips, every
hour in the day. Oh me! and I tremble, now, when I write it. We set our faces towards London, and walked on together in the first
still hour of the new day--I, and this woman, whose name, whose
character, whose story, whose objects in life, whose very presence by
my side, at that moment, were fathomless mysteries to me. It was like
a dream. Was I Walter Hartright? Was this the well-known, uneventful
road, where holiday people strolled on Sundays? Had I really left,
little more than an hour since, the quiet, decent, conventionally
domestic atmosphere of my mother's cottage? I was too bewildered--too
conscious also of a vague sense of something like self-reproach--to
speak to my strange companion for some minutes. It was her voice again
that first broke the silence between us. "I want to ask you something," she said suddenly. "Do you know many
people in London?" "Yes, a great many." "Many men of rank and title?" There was an unmistakable tone of
suspicion in the strange question. I hesitated about answering it. "Some," I said, after a moment's silence. "Many"--she came to a full stop, and looked me searchingly in the
face--"many men of the rank of Baronet?" Too much astonished to reply, I questioned her in my turn. "Why do you ask?" "Because I hope, for my own sake, there is one Baronet that you don't
know." "Will you tell me his name?" "I can't--I daren't--I forget myself when I mention it." She spoke
loudly and almost fiercely, raised her clenched hand in the air, and
shook it passionately; then, on a sudden, controlled herself again, and
added, in tones lowered to a whisper "Tell me which of them YOU know." I could hardly refuse to humour her in such a trifle, and I mentioned
three names. Two, the names of fathers of families whose daughters I
taught; one, the name of a bachelor who had once taken me a cruise in
his yacht, to make sketches for him. "Ah! you DON'T know him," she said, with a sigh of relief. "Are you a
man of rank and title yourself?" "Far from it. I am only a drawing-master." As the reply passed my lips--a little bitterly, perhaps--she took my
arm with the abruptness which characterised all her actions. "Not a man of rank and title," she repeated to herself. "Thank God! I
may trust HIM." I had hitherto contrived to master my curiosity out of consideration
for my companion; but it got the better of me now. "I am afraid you have serious reason to complain of some man of rank
and title?" I said. "I am afraid the baronet, whose name you are
unwilling to mention to me, has done you some grievous wrong? Is he the
cause of your being out here at this strange time of night?" "Don't ask me: don't make me talk of it," she answered. "I'm not fit
now. I have been cruelly used and cruelly wronged. You will be kinder
than ever, if you will walk on fast, and not speak to me. I sadly want
to quiet myself, if I can." We moved forward again at a quick pace; and for half an hour, at least,
not a word passed on either side. From time to time, being forbidden
to make any more inquiries, I stole a look at her face. It was always
the same; the lips close shut, the brow frowning, the eyes looking
straight forward, eagerly and yet absently. We had reached the first
houses, and were close on the new Wesleyan college, before her set
features relaxed and she spoke once more. "Do you live in London?" she said. "Yes." As I answered, it struck me that she might have formed some
intention of appealing to me for assistance or advice, and that I ought
to spare her a possible disappointment by warning her of my approaching
absence from home. So I added, "But to-morrow I shall be away from
London for some time. I am going into the country." "Where?" she asked. "North or south?" "North--to Cumberland." "Cumberland!" she repeated the word tenderly. "Ah! wish I was going
there too. I was once happy in Cumberland." I tried again to lift the veil that hung between this woman and me. "Perhaps you were born," I said, "in the beautiful Lake country." "No," she answered. "I was born in Hampshire; but I once went to
school for a little while in Cumberland. Lakes? I don't remember any
lakes. It's Limmeridge village, and Limmeridge House, I should like to
see again." It was my turn now to stop suddenly. In the excited state of my
curiosity, at that moment, the chance reference to Mr. Fairlie's place
of residence, on the lips of my strange companion, staggered me with
astonishment. "Did you hear anybody calling after us?" she asked, looking up and down
the road affrightedly, the instant I stopped. "No, no. I was only struck by the name of Limmeridge House. I heard
it mentioned by some Cumberland people a few days since." "Ah! not my people. Mrs. Fairlie is dead; and her husband is dead; and
their little girl may be married and gone away by this time. I can't
say who lives at Limmeridge now. If any more are left there of that
name, I only know I love them for Mrs. Fairlie's sake." She seemed about to say more; but while she was speaking, we came
within view of the turnpike, at the top of the Avenue Road. Her hand
tightened round my arm, and she looked anxiously at the gate before us. "Is the turnpike man looking out?" she asked. He was not looking out; no one else was near the place when we passed
through the gate. The sight of the gas-lamps and houses seemed to
agitate her, and to make her impatient. "This is London," she said. "Do you see any carriage I can get? I am
tired and frightened. I want to shut myself in and be driven away." I explained to her that we must walk a little further to get to a
cab-stand, unless we were fortunate enough to meet with an empty
vehicle; and then tried to resume the subject of Cumberland. It was
useless. That idea of shutting herself in, and being driven away, had
now got full possession of her mind. She could think and talk of
nothing else. We had hardly proceeded a third of the way down the Avenue Road when I
saw a cab draw up at a house a few doors below us, on the opposite side
of the way. A gentleman got out and let himself in at the garden door. I hailed the cab, as the driver mounted the box again. When we crossed
the road, my companion's impatience increased to such an extent that
she almost forced me to run. "It's so late," she said. "I am only in a hurry because it's so late." "I can't take you, sir, if you're not going towards Tottenham Court
Road," said the driver civilly, when I opened the cab door. "My horse
is dead beat, and I can't get him no further than the stable." "Yes, yes. That will do for me. I'm going that way--I'm going that
way." She spoke with breathless eagerness, and pressed by me into the
cab. I had assured myself that the man was sober as well as civil before I
let her enter the vehicle. And now, when she was seated inside, I
entreated her to let me see her set down safely at her destination. "No, no, no," she said vehemently. "I'm quite safe, and quite happy
now. If you are a gentleman, remember your promise. Let him drive on
till I stop him. Thank you--oh! thank you, thank you!" My hand was on the cab door. She caught it in hers, kissed it, and
pushed it away. The cab drove off at the same moment--I started into
the road, with some vague idea of stopping it again, I hardly knew
why--hesitated from dread of frightening and distressing her--called,
at last, but not loudly enough to attract the driver's attention. The
sound of the wheels grew fainter in the distance--the cab melted into
the black shadows on the road--the woman in white was gone. Ten minutes or more had passed. I was still on the same side of the
way; now mechanically walking forward a few paces; now stopping again
absently. At one moment I found myself doubting the reality of my own
adventure; at another I was perplexed and distressed by an uneasy sense
of having done wrong, which yet left me confusedly ignorant of how I
could have done right. I hardly knew where I was going, or what I
meant to do next; I was conscious of nothing but the confusion of my
own thoughts, when I was abruptly recalled to myself--awakened, I might
almost say--by the sound of rapidly approaching wheels close behind me. I was on the dark side of the road, in the thick shadow of some garden
trees, when I stopped to look round. On the opposite and lighter side
of the way, a short distance below me, a policeman was strolling along
in the direction of the Regent's Park. The carriage passed me--an open chaise driven by two men. "Stop!" cried one. "There's a policeman. Let's ask him." The horse was instantly pulled up, a few yards beyond the dark place
where I stood. "Policeman!" cried the first speaker. "Have you seen a woman pass this
way?" "What sort of woman, sir?" "A woman in a lavender-coloured gown----"

"No, no," interposed the second man. "The clothes we gave her were
found on her bed. She must have gone away in the clothes she wore when
she came to us. In white, policeman. A woman in white." "I haven't seen her, sir." "If you or any of your men meet with the woman, stop her, and send her
in careful keeping to that address. I'll pay all expenses, and a fair
reward into the bargain." The policeman looked at the card that was handed down to him. "Why are we to stop her, sir? What has she done?" "Done! She has escaped from my Asylum. Don't forget; a woman in white. Drive on." V

"She has escaped from my Asylum!" I cannot say with truth that the terrible inference which those words
suggested flashed upon me like a new revelation. Some of the strange
questions put to me by the woman in white, after my ill-considered
promise to leave her free to act as she pleased, had suggested the
conclusion either that she was naturally flighty and unsettled, or that
some recent shock of terror had disturbed the balance of her faculties. But the idea of absolute insanity which we all associate with the very
name of an Asylum, had, I can honestly declare, never occurred to me,
in connection with her. I had seen nothing, in her language or her
actions, to justify it at the time; and even with the new light thrown
on her by the words which the stranger had addressed to the policeman,
I could see nothing to justify it now. What had I done? Assisted the victim of the most horrible of all false
imprisonments to escape; or cast loose on the wide world of London an
unfortunate creature, whose actions it was my duty, and every man's
duty, mercifully to control? I turned sick at heart when the question
occurred to me, and when I felt self-reproachfully that it was asked
too late. In the disturbed state of my mind, it was useless to think of going to
bed, when I at last got back to my chambers in Clement's Inn. Before
many hours elapsed it would be necessary to start on my journey to
Cumberland. I sat down and tried, first to sketch, then to read--but
the woman in white got between me and my pencil, between me and my
book. Had the forlorn creature come to any harm? That was my first
thought, though I shrank selfishly from confronting it. Other thoughts
followed, on which it was less harrowing to dwell. Where had she
stopped the cab? What had become of her now? Had she been traced and
captured by the men in the chaise? Or was she still capable of
controlling her own actions; and were we two following our widely
parted roads towards one point in the mysterious future, at which we
were to meet once more? It was a relief when the hour came to lock my door, to bid farewell to
London pursuits, London pupils, and London friends, and to be in
movement again towards new interests and a new life. Even the bustle
and confusion at the railway terminus, so wearisome and bewildering at
other times, roused me and did me good. My travelling instructions directed me to go to Carlisle, and then to
diverge by a branch railway which ran in the direction of the coast. As a misfortune to begin with, our engine broke down between Lancaster
and Carlisle. The delay occasioned by this accident caused me to be
too late for the branch train, by which I was to have gone on
immediately. I had to wait some hours; and when a later train finally
deposited me at the nearest station to Limmeridge House, it was past
ten, and the night was so dark that I could hardly see my way to the
pony-chaise which Mr. Fairlie had ordered to be in waiting for me. The driver was evidently discomposed by the lateness of my arrival. He
was in that state of highly respectful sulkiness which is peculiar to
English servants. We drove away slowly through the darkness in perfect
silence. The roads were bad, and the dense obscurity of the night
increased the difficulty of getting over the ground quickly. It was,
by my watch, nearly an hour and a half from the time of our leaving the
station before I heard the sound of the sea in the distance, and the
crunch of our wheels on a smooth gravel drive. We had passed one gate
before entering the drive, and we passed another before we drew up at
the house. I was received by a solemn man-servant out of livery, was
informed that the family had retired for the night, and was then led
into a large and lofty room where my supper was awaiting me, in a
forlorn manner, at one extremity of a lonesome mahogany wilderness of
dining-table. I was too tired and out of spirits to eat or drink much, especially
with the solemn servant waiting on me as elaborately as if a small
dinner party had arrived at the house instead of a solitary man. In a
quarter of an hour I was ready to be taken up to my bedchamber. The
solemn servant conducted me into a prettily furnished room--said,
"Breakfast at nine o'clock, sir"--looked all round him to see that
everything was in its proper place, and noiselessly withdrew. "What shall I see in my dreams to-night?" I thought to myself, as I put
out the candle; "the woman in white? or the unknown inhabitants of this
Cumberland mansion?" It was a strange sensation to be sleeping in the
house, like a friend of the family, and yet not to know one of the
inmates, even by sight! VI

When I rose the next morning and drew up my blind, the sea opened
before me joyously under the broad August sunlight, and the distant
coast of Scotland fringed the horizon with its lines of melting blue. The view was such a surprise, and such a change to me, after my weary
London experience of brick and mortar landscape, that I seemed to burst
into a new life and a new set of thoughts the moment I looked at it. A
confused sensation of having suddenly lost my familiarity with the
past, without acquiring any additional clearness of idea in reference
to the present or the future, took possession of my mind. Circumstances that were but a few days old faded back in my memory, as
if they had happened months and months since. Pesca's quaint
announcement of the means by which he had procured me my present
employment; the farewell evening I had passed with my mother and
sister; even my mysterious adventure on the way home from
Hampstead--had all become like events which might have occurred at some
former epoch of my existence. Although the woman in white was still in
my mind, the image of her seemed to have grown dull and faint already. A little before nine o'clock, I descended to the ground-floor of the
house. The solemn man-servant of the night before met me wandering
among the passages, and compassionately showed me the way to the
breakfast-room. My first glance round me, as the man opened the door, disclosed a
well-furnished breakfast-table, standing in the middle of a long room,
with many windows in it. I looked from the table to the window
farthest from me, and saw a lady standing at it, with her back turned
towards me. The instant my eyes rested on her, I was struck by the
rare beauty of her form, and by the unaffected grace of her attitude. Her figure was tall, yet not too tall; comely and well-developed, yet
not fat; her head set on her shoulders with an easy, pliant firmness;
her waist, perfection in the eyes of a man, for it occupied its natural
place, it filled out its natural circle, it was visibly and
delightfully undeformed by stays. She had not heard my entrance into
the room; and I allowed myself the luxury of admiring her for a few
moments, before I moved one of the chairs near me, as the least
embarrassing means of attracting her attention. She turned towards me
immediately. The easy elegance of every movement of her limbs and body
as soon as she began to advance from the far end of the room, set me in
a flutter of expectation to see her face clearly. She left the
window--and I said to myself, The lady is dark. She moved forward a
few steps--and I said to myself, The lady is young. She approached
nearer--and I said to myself (with a sense of surprise which words fail
me to express), The lady is ugly! Never was the old conventional maxim, that Nature cannot err, more
flatly contradicted--never was the fair promise of a lovely figure more
strangely and startlingly belied by the face and head that crowned it. The lady's complexion was almost swarthy, and the dark down on her
upper lip was almost a moustache. She had a large, firm, masculine
mouth and jaw; prominent, piercing, resolute brown eyes; and thick,
coal-black hair, growing unusually low down on her forehead. Her
expression--bright, frank, and intelligent--appeared, while she was
silent, to be altogether wanting in those feminine attractions of
gentleness and pliability, without which the beauty of the handsomest
woman alive is beauty incomplete. To see such a face as this set on
shoulders that a sculptor would have longed to model--to be charmed by
the modest graces of action through which the symmetrical limbs
betrayed their beauty when they moved, and then to be almost repelled
by the masculine form and masculine look of the features in which the
perfectly shaped figure ended--was to feel a sensation oddly akin to
the helpless discomfort familiar to us all in sleep, when we recognise
yet cannot reconcile the anomalies and contradictions of a dream. "Mr. Hartright?" said the lady interrogatively, her dark face lighting
up with a smile, and softening and growing womanly the moment she began
to speak. "We resigned all hope of you last night, and went to bed as
usual. Accept my apologies for our apparent want of attention; and
allow me to introduce myself as one of your pupils. Shall we shake
hands? I suppose we must come to it sooner or later--and why not
sooner?" These odd words of welcome were spoken in a clear, ringing, pleasant
voice. The offered hand--rather large, but beautifully formed--was
given to me with the easy, unaffected self-reliance of a highly-bred
woman. We sat down together at the breakfast-table in as cordial and
customary a manner as if we had known each other for years, and had met
at Limmeridge House to talk over old times by previous appointment. "I hope you come here good-humouredly determined to make the best of
your position," continued the lady. "You will have to begin this
morning by putting up with no other company at breakfast than mine. My
sister is in her own room, nursing that essentially feminine malady, a
slight headache; and her old governess, Mrs. Vesey, is charitably
attending on her with restorative tea. My uncle, Mr. Fairlie, never
joins us at any of our meals: he is an invalid, and keeps bachelor
state in his own apartments. There is nobody else in the house but me. Two young ladies have been staying here, but they went away yesterday,
in despair; and no wonder. All through their visit (in consequence of
Mr. Fairlie's invalid condition) we produced no such convenience in the
house as a flirtable, danceable, small-talkable creature of the male
sex; and the consequence was, we did nothing but quarrel, especially at
dinner-time. How can you expect four women to dine together alone
every day, and not quarrel? We are such fools, we can't entertain each
other at table. You see I don't think much of my own sex, Mr.
Hartright--which will you have, tea or coffee?--no woman does think
much of her own sex, although few of them confess it as freely as I do. Dear me, you look puzzled. Why? Are you wondering what you will have
for breakfast? or are you surprised at my careless way of talking? In
the first case, I advise you, as a friend, to have nothing to do with
that cold ham at your elbow, and to wait till the omelette comes in. In the second case, I will give you some tea to compose your spirits,
and do all a woman can (which is very little, by-the-bye) to hold my
tongue." She handed me my cup of tea, laughing gaily. Her light flow of talk,
and her lively familiarity of manner with a total stranger, were
accompanied by an unaffected naturalness and an easy inborn confidence
in herself and her position, which would have secured her the respect
of the most audacious man breathing. While it was impossible to be
formal and reserved in her company, it was more than impossible to take
the faintest vestige of a liberty with her, even in thought. I felt
this instinctively, even while I caught the infection of her own bright
gaiety of spirits--even while I did my best to answer her in her own
frank, lively way. "Yes, yes," she said, when I had suggested the only explanation I could
offer, to account for my perplexed looks, "I understand. You are such a
perfect stranger in the house, that you are puzzled by my familiar
references to the worthy inhabitants. Natural enough: I ought to have
thought of it before. At any rate, I can set it right now. Suppose I
begin with myself, so as to get done with that part of the subject as
soon as possible? My name is Marian Halcombe; and I am as inaccurate as
women usually are, in calling Mr. Fairlie my uncle, and Miss Fairlie my
sister. My mother was twice married: the first time to Mr. Halcombe,
my father; the second time to Mr. Fairlie, my half-sister's father. Except that we are both orphans, we are in every respect as unlike each
other as possible. My father was a poor man, and Miss Fairlie's father
was a rich man. I have got nothing, and she has a fortune. I am dark
and ugly, and she is fair and pretty. Everybody thinks me crabbed and
odd (with perfect justice); and everybody thinks her sweet-tempered and
charming (with more justice still). In short, she is an angel; and I
am----  Try some of that marmalade, Mr. Hartright, and finish the
sentence, in the name of female propriety, for yourself. What am I to
tell you about Mr. Fairlie? Upon my honour, I hardly know. He is sure
to send for you after breakfast, and you can study him for yourself. In
the meantime, I may inform you, first, that he is the late Mr.
Fairlie's younger brother; secondly, that he is a single man; and
thirdly, that he is Miss Fairlie's guardian. I won't live without her,
and she can't live without me; and that is how I come to be at
Limmeridge House. My sister and I are honestly fond of each other;
which, you will say, is perfectly unaccountable, under the
circumstances, and I quite agree with you--but so it is. You must
please both of us, Mr. Hartright, or please neither of us: and, what is
still more trying, you will be thrown entirely upon our society. Mrs.
Vesey is an excellent person, who possesses all the cardinal virtues,
and counts for nothing; and Mr. Fairlie is too great an invalid to be a
companion for anybody. I don't know what is the matter with him, and
the doctors don't know what is the matter with him, and he doesn't know
himself what is the matter with him. We all say it's on the nerves,
and we none of us know what we mean when we say it. However, I advise
you to humour his little peculiarities, when you see him to-day. Admire his collection of coins, prints, and water-colour drawings, and
you will win his heart. Upon my word, if you can be contented with a
quiet country life, I don't see why you should not get on very well
here. From breakfast to lunch, Mr. Fairlie's drawings will occupy you. After lunch, Miss Fairlie and I shoulder our sketch-books, and go out
to misrepresent Nature, under your directions. Drawing is her favourite
whim, mind, not mine. Women can't draw--their minds are too flighty,
and their eyes are too inattentive. No matter--my sister likes it; so I
waste paint and spoil paper, for her sake, as composedly as any woman
in England. As for the evenings, I think we can help you through them. Miss Fairlie plays delightfully. For my own poor part, I don't know
one note of music from the other; but I can match you at chess,
backgammon, ecarte, and (with the inevitable female drawbacks) even at
billiards as well. What do you think of the programme? Can you
reconcile yourself to our quiet, regular life? or do you mean to be
restless, and secretly thirst for change and adventure, in the humdrum
atmosphere of Limmeridge House?" She had run on thus far, in her gracefully bantering way, with no other
interruptions on my part than the unimportant replies which politeness
required of me. The turn of the expression, however, in her last
question, or rather the one chance word, "adventure," lightly as it
fell from her lips, recalled my thoughts to my meeting with the woman
in white, and urged me to discover the connection which the stranger's
own reference to Mrs. Fairlie informed me must once have existed
between the nameless fugitive from the Asylum, and the former mistress
of Limmeridge House. "Even if I were the most restless of mankind," I said, "I should be in
no danger of thirsting after adventures for some time to come. The
very night before I arrived at this house, I met with an adventure; and
the wonder and excitement of it, I can assure you, Miss Halcombe, will
last me for the whole term of my stay in Cumberland, if not for a much
longer period." "You don't say so, Mr. Hartright! May I hear it?" "You have a claim to hear it. The chief person in the adventure was a
total stranger to me, and may perhaps be a total stranger to you; but
she certainly mentioned the name of the late Mrs. Fairlie in terms of
the sincerest gratitude and regard." "Mentioned my mother's name! You interest me indescribably. Pray go
on." I at once related the circumstances under which I had met the woman in
white, exactly as they had occurred; and I repeated what she had said
to me about Mrs. Fairlie and Limmeridge House, word for word. Miss Halcombe's bright resolute eyes looked eagerly into mine, from the
beginning of the narrative to the end. Her face expressed vivid
interest and astonishment, but nothing more. She was evidently as far
from knowing of any clue to the mystery as I was myself. "Are you quite sure of those words referring to my mother?" she asked. "Quite sure," I replied. "Whoever she may be, the woman was once at
school in the village of Limmeridge, was treated with especial kindness
by Mrs. Fairlie, and, in grateful remembrance of that kindness, feels
an affectionate interest in all surviving members of the family. She
knew that Mrs. Fairlie and her husband were both dead; and she spoke of
Miss Fairlie as if they had known each other when they were children." "You said, I think, that she denied belonging to this place?" "Yes, she told me she came from Hampshire." "And you entirely failed to find out her name?" "Entirely." "Very strange. I think you were quite justified, Mr. Hartright, in
giving the poor creature her liberty, for she seems to have done
nothing in your presence to show herself unfit to enjoy it. But I wish
you had been a little more resolute about finding out her name. We
must really clear up this mystery, in some way. You had better not
speak of it yet to Mr. Fairlie, or to my sister. They are both of them,
I am certain, quite as ignorant of who the woman is, and of what her
past history in connection with us can be, as I am myself. But they
are also, in widely different ways, rather nervous and sensitive; and
you would only fidget one and alarm the other to no purpose. As for
myself, I am all aflame with curiosity, and I devote my whole energies
to the business of discovery from this moment. When my mother came
here, after her second marriage, she certainly established the village
school just as it exists at the present time. But the old teachers are
all dead, or gone elsewhere; and no enlightenment is to be hoped for
from that quarter. The only other alternative I can think of----"

At this point we were interrupted by the entrance of the servant, with
a message from Mr. Fairlie, intimating that he would be glad to see me,
as soon as I had done breakfast. "Wait in the hall," said Miss Halcombe, answering the servant for me,
in her quick, ready way. "Mr. Hartright will come out directly. I was
about to say," she went on, addressing me again, "that my sister and I
have a large collection of my mother's letters, addressed to my father
and to hers. In the absence of any other means of getting information,
I will pass the morning in looking over my mother's correspondence with
Mr. Fairlie. He was fond of London, and was constantly away from his
country home; and she was accustomed, at such times, to write and
report to him how things went on at Limmeridge. Her letters are full
of references to the school in which she took so strong an interest;
and I think it more than likely that I may have discovered something
when we meet again. The luncheon hour is two, Mr. Hartright. I shall
have the pleasure of introducing you to my sister by that time, and we
will occupy the afternoon in driving round the neighbourhood and
showing you all our pet points of view. Till two o'clock, then,
farewell." She nodded to me with the lively grace, the delightful refinement of
familiarity, which characterised all that she did and all that she
said; and disappeared by a door at the lower end of the room. As soon
as she had left me, I turned my steps towards the hall, and followed
the servant, on my way, for the first time, to the presence of Mr.
Fairlie. VII

My conductor led me upstairs into a passage which took us back to the
bedchamber in which I had slept during the past night; and opening the
door next to it, begged me to look in. "I have my master's orders to show you your own sitting-room, sir,"
said the man, "and to inquire if you approve of the situation and the
light." I must have been hard to please, indeed, if I had not approved of the
room, and of everything about it. The bow-window looked out on the
same lovely view which I had admired, in the morning, from my bedroom. The furniture was the perfection of luxury and beauty; the table in the
centre was bright with gaily bound books, elegant conveniences for
writing, and beautiful flowers; the second table, near the window, was
covered with all the necessary materials for mounting water-colour
drawings, and had a little easel attached to it, which I could expand
or fold up at will; the walls were hung with gaily tinted chintz; and
the floor was spread with Indian matting in maize-colour and red. It
was the prettiest and most luxurious little sitting-room I had ever
seen; and I admired it with the warmest enthusiasm. The solemn servant was far too highly trained to betray the slightest
satisfaction. He bowed with icy deference when my terms of eulogy were
all exhausted, and silently opened the door for me to go out into the
passage again. We turned a corner, and entered a long second passage, ascended a short
flight of stairs at the end, crossed a small circular upper hall, and
stopped in front of a door covered with dark baize. The servant opened
this door, and led me on a few yards to a second; opened that also, and
disclosed two curtains of pale sea-green silk hanging before us; raised
one of them noiselessly; softly uttered the words, "Mr. Hartright," and
left me. I found myself in a large, lofty room, with a magnificent carved
ceiling, and with a carpet over the floor, so thick and soft that it
felt like piles of velvet under my feet. One side of the room was
occupied by a long book-case of some rare inlaid wood that was quite
new to me. It was not more than six feet high, and the top was adorned
with statuettes in marble, ranged at regular distances one from the
other. On the opposite side stood two antique cabinets; and between
them, and above them, hung a picture of the Virgin and Child, protected
by glass, and bearing Raphael's name on the gilt tablet at the bottom
of the frame. On my right hand and on my left, as I stood inside the
door, were chiffoniers and little stands in buhl and marquetterie,
loaded with figures in Dresden china, with rare vases, ivory ornaments,
and toys and curiosities that sparkled at all points with gold, silver,
and precious stones. At the lower end of the room, opposite to me, the
windows were concealed and the sunlight was tempered by large blinds of
the same pale sea-green colour as the curtains over the door. The
light thus produced was deliciously soft, mysterious, and subdued; it
fell equally upon all the objects in the room; it helped to intensify
the deep silence, and the air of profound seclusion that possessed the
place; and it surrounded, with an appropriate halo of repose, the
solitary figure of the master of the house, leaning back, listlessly
composed, in a large easy-chair, with a reading-easel fastened on one
of its arms, and a little table on the other. If a man's personal appearance, when he is out of his dressing-room,
and when he has passed forty, can be accepted as a safe guide to his
time of life--which is more than doubtful--Mr. Fairlie's age, when I
saw him, might have been reasonably computed at over fifty and under
sixty years. His beardless face was thin, worn, and transparently
pale, but not wrinkled; his nose was high and hooked; his eyes were of
a dim greyish blue, large, prominent, and rather red round the rims of
the eyelids; his hair was scanty, soft to look at, and of that light
sandy colour which is the last to disclose its own changes towards
grey. He was dressed in a dark frock-coat, of some substance much
thinner than cloth, and in waistcoat and trousers of spotless white. His feet were effeminately small, and were clad in buff-coloured silk
stockings, and little womanish bronze-leather slippers. Two rings
adorned his white delicate hands, the value of which even my
inexperienced observation detected to be all but priceless. Upon the
whole, he had a frail, languidly-fretful, over-refined look--something
singularly and unpleasantly delicate in its association with a man,
and, at the same time, something which could by no possibility have
looked natural and appropriate if it had been transferred to the
personal appearance of a woman. My morning's experience of Miss
Halcombe had predisposed me to be pleased with everybody in the house;
but my sympathies shut themselves up resolutely at the first sight of
Mr. Fairlie. On approaching nearer to him, I discovered that he was not so entirely
without occupation as I had at first supposed. Placed amid the other
rare and beautiful objects on a large round table near him, was a dwarf
cabinet in ebony and silver, containing coins of all shapes and sizes,
set out in little drawers lined with dark purple velvet. One of these
drawers lay on the small table attached to his chair; and near it were
some tiny jeweller's brushes, a wash-leather "stump," and a little
bottle of liquid, all waiting to be used in various ways for the
removal of any accidental impurities which might be discovered on the
coins. His frail white fingers were listlessly toying with something
which looked, to my uninstructed eyes, like a dirty pewter medal with
ragged edges, when I advanced within a respectful distance of his
chair, and stopped to make my bow. "So glad to possess you at Limmeridge, Mr. Hartright," he said in a
querulous, croaking voice, which combined, in anything but an agreeable
manner, a discordantly high tone with a drowsily languid utterance. "Pray sit down. And don't trouble yourself to move the chair, please. In the wretched state of my nerves, movement of any kind is exquisitely
painful to me. Have you seen your studio? Will it do?" "I have just come from seeing the room, Mr. Fairlie; and I assure
you----"

He stopped me in the middle of the sentence, by closing his eyes, and
holding up one of his white hands imploringly. I paused in
astonishment; and the croaking voice honoured me with this explanation--

"Pray excuse me. But could you contrive to speak in a lower key? In
the wretched state of my nerves, loud sound of any kind is
indescribable torture to me. You will pardon an invalid? I only say to
you what the lamentable state of my health obliges me to say to
everybody. Yes. And you really like the room?" "I could wish for nothing prettier and nothing more comfortable," I
answered, dropping my voice, and beginning to discover already that Mr.
Fairlie's selfish affectation and Mr. Fairlie's wretched nerves meant
one and the same thing. "So glad. You will find your position here, Mr. Hartright, properly
recognised. There is none of the horrid English barbarity of feeling
about the social position of an artist in this house. So much of my
early life has been passed abroad, that I have quite cast my insular
skin in that respect. I wish I could say the same of the
gentry--detestable word, but I suppose I must use it--of the gentry in
the neighbourhood. They are sad Goths in Art, Mr. Hartright. People, I
do assure you, who would have opened their eyes in astonishment, if
they had seen Charles the Fifth pick up Titian's brush for him. Do you
mind putting this tray of coins back in the cabinet, and giving me the
next one to it? In the wretched state of my nerves, exertion of any
kind is unspeakably disagreeable to me. Yes. Thank you." As a practical commentary on the liberal social theory which he had
just favoured me by illustrating, Mr. Fairlie's cool request rather
amused me. I put back one drawer and gave him the other, with all
possible politeness. He began trifling with the new set of coins and
the little brushes immediately; languidly looking at them and admiring
them all the time he was speaking to me. "A thousand thanks and a thousand excuses. Do you like coins? Yes. So
glad we have another taste in common besides our taste for Art. Now,
about the pecuniary arrangements between us--do tell me--are they
satisfactory?" "Most satisfactory, Mr. Fairlie." "So glad. And--what next? Ah! I remember. Yes. In reference to the
consideration which you are good enough to accept for giving me the
benefit of your accomplishments in art, my steward will wait on you at
the end of the first week, to ascertain your wishes. And--what next? Curious, is it not? I had a great deal more to say: and I appear to
have quite forgotten it. Do you mind touching the bell? In that
corner. Yes. Thank you." I rang; and a new servant noiselessly made his appearance--a foreigner,
with a set smile and perfectly brushed hair--a valet every inch of him. "Louis," said Mr. Fairlie, dreamily dusting the tips of his fingers
with one of the tiny brushes for the coins, "I made some entries in my
tablettes this morning. Find my tablettes. A thousand pardons, Mr.
Hartright, I'm afraid I bore you." As he wearily closed his eyes again, before I could answer, and as he
did most assuredly bore me, I sat silent, and looked up at the Madonna
and Child by Raphael. In the meantime, the valet left the room, and
returned shortly with a little ivory book. Mr. Fairlie, after first
relieving himself by a gentle sigh, let the book drop open with one
hand, and held up the tiny brush with the other, as a sign to the
servant to wait for further orders. "Yes. Just so!" said Mr. Fairlie, consulting the tablettes. "Louis,
take down that portfolio." He pointed, as he spoke, to several
portfolios placed near the window, on mahogany stands. "No. Not the
one with the green back--that contains my Rembrandt etchings, Mr.
Hartright. Do you like etchings? Yes? So glad we have another taste in
common. The portfolio with the red back, Louis. Don't drop it! You
have no idea of the tortures I should suffer, Mr. Hartright, if Louis
dropped that portfolio. Is it safe on the chair? Do YOU think it safe,
Mr. Hartright? Yes? So glad. Will you oblige me by looking at the
drawings, if you really think they are quite safe. Louis, go away. What an ass you are. Don't you see me holding the tablettes? Do you
suppose I want to hold them? Then why not relieve me of the tablettes
without being told? A thousand pardons, Mr. Hartright; servants are
such asses, are they not? Do tell me--what do you think of the
drawings? They have come from a sale in a shocking state--I thought
they smelt of horrid dealers' and brokers' fingers when I looked at
them last. CAN you undertake them?" Although my nerves were not delicate enough to detect the odour of
plebeian fingers which had offended Mr. Fairlie's nostrils, my taste
was sufficiently educated to enable me to appreciate the value of the
drawings, while I turned them over. They were, for the most part,
really fine specimens of English water-colour art; and they had
deserved much better treatment at the hands of their former possessor
than they appeared to have received. "The drawings," I answered, "require careful straining and mounting;
and, in my opinion, they are well worth----"

"I beg your pardon," interposed Mr. Fairlie. "Do you mind my closing
my eyes while you speak? Even this light is too much for them. Yes?" "I was about to say that the drawings are well worth all the time and
trouble----"

Mr. Fairlie suddenly opened his eyes again, and rolled them with an
expression of helpless alarm in the direction of the window. "I entreat you to excuse me, Mr. Hartright," he said in a feeble
flutter. "But surely I hear some horrid children in the garden--my
private garden--below?" "I can't say, Mr. Fairlie. I heard nothing myself." "Oblige me--you have been so very good in humouring my poor
nerves--oblige me by lifting up a corner of the blind. Don't let the
sun in on me, Mr. Hartright! Have you got the blind up? Yes? Then will
you be so very kind as to look into the garden and make quite sure?" I complied with this new request. The garden was carefully walled in,
all round. Not a human creature, large or small, appeared in any part
of the sacred seclusion. I reported that gratifying fact to Mr.
Fairlie. "A thousand thanks. My fancy, I suppose. There are no children, thank
Heaven, in the house; but the servants (persons born without nerves)
will encourage the children from the village. Such brats--oh, dear me,
such brats! Shall I confess it, Mr. Hartright?--I sadly want a reform
in the construction of children. Nature's only idea seems to be to
make them machines for the production of incessant noise. Surely our
delightful Raffaello's conception is infinitely preferable?" He pointed to the picture of the Madonna, the upper part of which
represented the conventional cherubs of Italian Art, celestially
provided with sitting accommodation for their chins, on balloons of
buff-coloured cloud. "Quite a model family!" said Mr. Fairlie, leering at the cherubs. "Such
nice round faces, and such nice soft wings, and--nothing else. No
dirty little legs to run about on, and no noisy little lungs to scream
with. How immeasurably superior to the existing construction! I will
close my eyes again, if you will allow me. And you really can manage
the drawings? So glad. Is there anything else to settle? if there is,
I think I have forgotten it. Shall we ring for Louis again?" Being, by this time, quite as anxious, on my side, as Mr. Fairlie
evidently was on his, to bring the interview to a speedy conclusion, I
thought I would try to render the summoning of the servant unnecessary,
by offering the requisite suggestion on my own responsibility. "The only point, Mr. Fairlie, that remains to be discussed," I said,
"refers, I think, to the instruction in sketching which I am engaged to
communicate to the two young ladies." "Ah! just so," said Mr. Fairlie. "I wish I felt strong enough to go
into that part of the arrangement--but I don't. The ladies who profit
by your kind services, Mr. Hartright, must settle, and decide, and so
on, for themselves. My niece is fond of your charming art. She knows
just enough about it to be conscious of her own sad defects. Please
take pains with her. Yes. Is there anything else? No. We quite
understand each other--don't we? I have no right to detain you any
longer from your delightful pursuit--have I? So pleasant to have
settled everything--such a sensible relief to have done business. Do
you mind ringing for Louis to carry the portfolio to your own room?" "I will carry it there myself, Mr. Fairlie, if you will allow me." "Will you really? Are you strong enough? How nice to be so strong! Are
you sure you won't drop it? So glad to possess you at Limmeridge, Mr.
Hartright. I am such a sufferer that I hardly dare hope to enjoy much
of your society. Would you mind taking great pains not to let the
doors bang, and not to drop the portfolio? Thank you. Gently with the
curtains, please--the slightest noise from them goes through me like a
knife. Yes. GOOD morning!" When the sea-green curtains were closed, and when the two baize doors
were shut behind me, I stopped for a moment in the little circular hall
beyond, and drew a long, luxurious breath of relief. It was like coming
to the surface of the water after deep diving, to find myself once more
on the outside of Mr. Fairlie's room. As soon as I was comfortably established for the morning in my pretty
little studio, the first resolution at which I arrived was to turn my
steps no more in the direction of the apartments occupied by the master
of the house, except in the very improbable event of his honouring me
with a special invitation to pay him another visit. Having settled
this satisfactory plan of future conduct in reference to Mr. Fairlie, I
soon recovered the serenity of temper of which my employer's haughty
familiarity and impudent politeness had, for the moment, deprived me. The remaining hours of the morning passed away pleasantly enough, in
looking over the drawings, arranging them in sets, trimming their
ragged edges, and accomplishing the other necessary preparations in
anticipation of the business of mounting them. I ought, perhaps, to
have made more progress than this; but, as the luncheon-time drew near,
I grew restless and unsettled, and felt unable to fix my attention on
work, even though that work was only of the humble manual kind. At two o'clock I descended again to the breakfast-room, a little
anxiously. Expectations of some interest were connected with my
approaching reappearance in that part of the house. My introduction to
Miss Fairlie was now close at hand; and, if Miss Halcombe's search
through her mother's letters had produced the result which she
anticipated, the time had come for clearing up the mystery of the woman
in white. VIII

When I entered the room, I found Miss Halcombe and an elderly lady
seated at the luncheon-table. The elderly lady, when I was presented to her, proved to be Miss
Fairlie's former governess, Mrs. Vesey, who had been briefly described
to me by my lively companion at the breakfast-table, as possessed of
"all the cardinal virtues, and counting for nothing." I can do little
more than offer my humble testimony to the truthfulness of Miss
Halcombe's sketch of the old lady's character. Mrs. Vesey looked the
personification of human composure and female amiability. A calm
enjoyment of a calm existence beamed in drowsy smiles on her plump,
placid face. Some of us rush through life, and some of us saunter
through life. Mrs. Vesey SAT through life. Sat in the house, early and
late; sat in the garden; sat in unexpected window-seats in passages;
sat (on a camp-stool) when her friends tried to take her out walking;
sat before she looked at anything, before she talked of anything,
before she answered Yes, or No, to the commonest question--always with
the same serene smile on her lips, the same vacantly-attentive turn of
the head, the same snugly-comfortable position of her hands and arms,
under every possible change of domestic circumstances. A mild, a
compliant, an unutterably tranquil and harmless old lady, who never by
any chance suggested the idea that she had been actually alive since
the hour of her birth. Nature has so much to do in this world, and is
engaged in generating such a vast variety of co-existent productions,
that she must surely be now and then too flurried and confused to
distinguish between the different processes that she is carrying on at
the same time. Starting from this point of view, it will always remain
my private persuasion that Nature was absorbed in making cabbages when
Mrs. Vesey was born, and that the good lady suffered the consequences
of a vegetable preoccupation in the mind of the Mother of us all. "Now, Mrs. Vesey," said Miss Halcombe, looking brighter, sharper, and
readier than ever, by contrast with the undemonstrative old lady at her
side, "what will you have? A cutlet?" Mrs. Vesey crossed her dimpled hands on the edge of the table, smiled
placidly, and said, "Yes, dear." "What is that opposite Mr. Hartright? Boiled chicken, is it not? I
thought you liked boiled chicken better than cutlet, Mrs. Vesey?" Mrs. Vesey took her dimpled hands off the edge of the table and crossed
them on her lap instead; nodded contemplatively at the boiled chicken,
and said, "Yes, dear." "Well, but which will you have, to-day? Shall Mr. Hartright give you
some chicken? or shall I give you some cutlet?" Mrs. Vesey put one of her dimpled hands back again on the edge of the
table; hesitated drowsily, and said, "Which you please, dear." "Mercy on me! it's a question for your taste, my good lady, not for
mine. Suppose you have a little of both? and suppose you begin with
the chicken, because Mr. Hartright looks devoured by anxiety to carve
for you." Mrs. Vesey put the other dimpled hand back on the edge of the table;
brightened dimly one moment; went out again the next; bowed obediently,
and said, "If you please, sir." Surely a mild, a compliant, an unutterably tranquil and harmless old
lady! But enough, perhaps, for the present, of Mrs. Vesey. All this time, there were no signs of Miss Fairlie. We finished our
luncheon; and still she never appeared. Miss Halcombe, whose quick eye
nothing escaped, noticed the looks that I cast, from time to time, in
the direction of the door. "I understand you, Mr. Hartright," she said; "you are wondering what
has become of your other pupil. She has been downstairs, and has got
over her headache; but has not sufficiently recovered her appetite to
join us at lunch. If you will put yourself under my charge, I think I
can undertake to find her somewhere in the garden." She took up a parasol lying on a chair near her, and led the way out,
by a long window at the bottom of the room, which opened on to the
lawn. It is almost unnecessary to say that we left Mrs. Vesey still
seated at the table, with her dimpled hands still crossed on the edge
of it; apparently settled in that position for the rest of the
afternoon. As we crossed the lawn, Miss Halcombe looked at me significantly, and
shook her head. "That mysterious adventure of yours," she said, "still remains involved
in its own appropriate midnight darkness. I have been all the morning
looking over my mother's letters, and I have made no discoveries yet. However, don't despair, Mr. Hartright. This is a matter of curiosity;
and you have got a woman for your ally. Under such conditions success
is certain, sooner or later. The letters are not exhausted. I have
three packets still left, and you may confidently rely on my spending
the whole evening over them." Here, then, was one of my anticipations of the morning still
unfulfilled. I began to wonder, next, whether my introduction to Miss
Fairlie would disappoint the expectations that I had been forming of
her since breakfast-time. "And how did you get on with Mr. Fairlie?" inquired Miss Halcombe, as
we left the lawn and turned into a shrubbery. "Was he particularly
nervous this morning? Never mind considering about your answer, Mr.
Hartright. The mere fact of your being obliged to consider is enough
for me. I see in your face that he WAS particularly nervous; and, as I
am amiably unwilling to throw you into the same condition, I ask no
more." We turned off into a winding path while she was speaking, and
approached a pretty summer-house, built of wood, in the form of a
miniature Swiss chalet. The one room of the summer-house, as we
ascended the steps of the door, was occupied by a young lady. She was
standing near a rustic table, looking out at the inland view of moor
and hill presented by a gap in the trees, and absently turning over the
leaves of a little sketch-book that lay at her side. This was Miss
Fairlie. How can I describe her? How can I separate her from my own sensations,
and from all that has happened in the later time? How can I see her
again as she looked when my eyes first rested on her--as she should
look, now, to the eyes that are about to see her in these pages? The water-colour drawing that I made of Laura Fairlie, at an after
period, in the place and attitude in which I first saw her, lies on my
desk while I write. I look at it, and there dawns upon me brightly,
from the dark greenish-brown background of the summer-house, a light,
youthful figure, clothed in a simple muslin dress, the pattern of it
formed by broad alternate stripes of delicate blue and white. A scarf
of the same material sits crisply and closely round her shoulders, and
a little straw hat of the natural colour, plainly and sparingly trimmed
with ribbon to match the gown, covers her head, and throws its soft
pearly shadow over the upper part of her face. Her hair is of so faint
and pale a brown--not flaxen, and yet almost as light; not golden, and
yet almost as glossy--that it nearly melts, here and there, into the
shadow of the hat. It is plainly parted and drawn back over her ears,
and the line of it ripples naturally as it crosses her forehead. The
eyebrows are rather darker than the hair; and the eyes are of that
soft, limpid, turquoise blue, so often sung by the poets, so seldom
seen in real life. Lovely eyes in colour, lovely eyes in form--large
and tender and quietly thoughtful--but beautiful above all things in
the clear truthfulness of look that dwells in their inmost depths, and
shines through all their changes of expression with the light of a
purer and a better world. The charm--most gently and yet most
distinctly expressed--which they shed over the whole face, so covers
and transforms its little natural human blemishes elsewhere, that it is
difficult to estimate the relative merits and defects of the other
features. It is hard to see that the lower part of the face is too
delicately refined away towards the chin to be in full and fair
proportion with the upper part; that the nose, in escaping the aquiline
bend (always hard and cruel in a woman, no matter how abstractedly
perfect it may be), has erred a little in the other extreme, and has
missed the ideal straightness of line; and that the sweet, sensitive
lips are subject to a slight nervous contraction, when she smiles,
which draws them upward a little at one corner, towards the cheek. It
might be possible to note these blemishes in another woman's face but
it is not easy to dwell on them in hers, so subtly are they connected
with all that is individual and characteristic in her expression, and
so closely does the expression depend for its full play and life, in
every other feature, on the moving impulse of the eyes. Does my poor portrait of her, my fond, patient labour of long and happy
days, show me these things? Ah, how few of them are in the dim
mechanical drawing, and how many in the mind with which I regard it! A
fair, delicate girl, in a pretty light dress, trifling with the leaves
of a sketch-book, while she looks up from it with truthful, innocent
blue eyes--that is all the drawing can say; all, perhaps, that even the
deeper reach of thought and pen can say in their language, either. The
woman who first gives life, light, and form to our shadowy conceptions
of beauty, fills a void in our spiritual nature that has remained
unknown to us till she appeared. Sympathies that lie too deep for
words, too deep almost for thoughts, are touched, at such times, by
other charms than those which the senses feel and which the resources
of expression can realise. The mystery which underlies the beauty of
women is never raised above the reach of all expression until it has
claimed kindred with the deeper mystery in our own souls. Then, and
then only, has it passed beyond the narrow region on which light falls,
in this world, from the pencil and the pen. Think of her as you thought of the first woman who quickened the pulses
within you that the rest of her sex had no art to stir. Let the kind,
candid blue eyes meet yours, as they met mine, with the one matchless
look which we both remember so well. Let her voice speak the music
that you once loved best, attuned as sweetly to your ear as to mine. Let her footstep, as she comes and goes, in these pages, be like that
other footstep to whose airy fall your own heart once beat time. Take
her as the visionary nursling of your own fancy; and she will grow upon
you, all the more clearly, as the living woman who dwells in mine. Among the sensations that crowded on me, when my eyes first looked upon
her--familiar sensations which we all know, which spring to life in
most of our hearts, die again in so many, and renew their bright
existence in so few--there was one that troubled and perplexed me: one
that seemed strangely inconsistent and unaccountably out of place in
Miss Fairlie's presence. Mingling with the vivid impression produced by the charm of her fair
face and head, her sweet expression, and her winning simplicity of
manner, was another impression, which, in a shadowy way, suggested to
me the idea of something wanting. At one time it seemed like something
wanting in HER: at another, like something wanting in myself, which
hindered me from understanding her as I ought. The impression was
always strongest in the most contradictory manner, when she looked at
me; or, in other words, when I was most conscious of the harmony and
charm of her face, and yet, at the same time, most troubled by the
sense of an incompleteness which it was impossible to discover. Something wanting, something wanting--and where it was, and what it
was, I could not say. The effect of this curious caprice of fancy (as I thought it then) was
not of a nature to set me at my ease, during a first interview with
Miss Fairlie. The few kind words of welcome which she spoke found me
hardly self-possessed enough to thank her in the customary phrases of
reply. Observing my hesitation, and no doubt attributing it, naturally
enough, to some momentary shyness on my part, Miss Halcombe took the
business of talking, as easily and readily as usual, into her own hands. "Look there, Mr. Hartright," she said, pointing to the sketch-book on
the table, and to the little delicate wandering hand that was still
trifling with it. "Surely you will acknowledge that your model pupil
is found at last? The moment she hears that you are in the house, she
seizes her inestimable sketch-book, looks universal Nature straight in
the face, and longs to begin!" Miss Fairlie laughed with a ready good-humour, which broke out as
brightly as if it had been part of the sunshine above us, over her
lovely face. "I must not take credit to myself where no credit is due," she said,
her clear, truthful blue eyes looking alternately at Miss Halcombe and
at me. "Fond as I am of drawing, I am so conscious of my own ignorance
that I am more afraid than anxious to begin. Now I know you are here,
Mr. Hartright, I find myself looking over my sketches, as I used to
look over my lessons when I was a little girl, and when I was sadly
afraid that I should turn out not fit to be heard." She made the confession very prettily and simply, and, with quaint,
childish earnestness, drew the sketch-book away close to her own side
of the table. Miss Halcombe cut the knot of the little embarrassment
forthwith, in her resolute, downright way. "Good, bad, or indifferent," she said, "the pupil's sketches must pass
through the fiery ordeal of the master's judgment--and there's an end
of it. Suppose we take them with us in the carriage, Laura, and let
Mr. Hartright see them, for the first time, under circumstances of
perpetual jolting and interruption? If we can only confuse him all
through the drive, between Nature as it is, when he looks up at the
view, and Nature as it is not when he looks down again at our
sketch-books, we shall drive him into the last desperate refuge of
paying us compliments, and shall slip through his professional fingers
with our pet feathers of vanity all unruffled." "I hope Mr. Hartright will pay ME no compliments," said Miss Fairlie,
as we all left the summer-house. "May I venture to inquire why you express that hope?" I asked. "Because I shall believe all that you say to me," she answered simply. In those few words she unconsciously gave me the key to her whole
character: to that generous trust in others which, in her nature, grew
innocently out of the sense of her own truth. I only knew it
intuitively then. I know it by experience now. We merely waited to rouse good Mrs. Vesey from the place which she
still occupied at the deserted luncheon-table, before we entered the
open carriage for our promised drive. The old lady and Miss Halcombe
occupied the back seat, and Miss Fairlie and I sat together in front,
with the sketch-book open between us, fairly exhibited at last to my
professional eyes. All serious criticism on the drawings, even if I
had been disposed to volunteer it, was rendered impossible by Miss
Halcombe's lively resolution to see nothing but the ridiculous side of
the Fine Arts, as practised by herself, her sister, and ladies in
general. I can remember the conversation that passed far more easily
than the sketches that I mechanically looked over. That part of the
talk, especially, in which Miss Fairlie took any share, is still as
vividly impressed on my memory as if I had heard it only a few hours
ago. Yes! let me acknowledge that on this first day I let the charm of her
presence lure me from the recollection of myself and my position. The
most trifling of the questions that she put to me, on the subject of
using her pencil and mixing her colours; the slightest alterations of
expression in the lovely eyes that looked into mine with such an
earnest desire to learn all that I could teach, and to discover all
that I could show, attracted more of my attention than the finest view
we passed through, or the grandest changes of light and shade, as they
flowed into each other over the waving moorland and the level beach. At any time, and under any circumstances of human interest, is it not
strange to see how little real hold the objects of the natural world
amid which we live can gain on our hearts and minds? We go to Nature
for comfort in trouble, and sympathy in joy, only in books. Admiration
of those beauties of the inanimate world, which modern poetry so
largely and so eloquently describes, is not, even in the best of us,
one of the original instincts of our nature. As children, we none of
us possess it. No uninstructed man or woman possesses it. Those whose
lives are most exclusively passed amid the ever-changing wonders of sea
and land are also those who are most universally insensible to every
aspect of Nature not directly associated with the human interest of
their calling. Our capacity of appreciating the beauties of the earth
we live on is, in truth, one of the civilised accomplishments which we
all learn as an Art; and, more, that very capacity is rarely practised
by any of us except when our minds are most indolent and most
unoccupied. How much share have the attractions of Nature ever had in
the pleasurable or painful interests and emotions of ourselves or our
friends? What space do they ever occupy in the thousand little
narratives of personal experience which pass every day by word of mouth
from one of us to the other? All that our minds can compass, all that
our hearts can learn, can be accomplished with equal certainty, equal
profit, and equal satisfaction to ourselves, in the poorest as in the
richest prospect that the face of the earth can show. There is surely
a reason for this want of inborn sympathy between the creature and the
creation around it, a reason which may perhaps be found in the
widely-differing destinies of man and his earthly sphere. The grandest
mountain prospect that the eye can range over is appointed to
annihilation. The smallest human interest that the pure heart can feel
is appointed to immortality. We had been out nearly three hours, when the carriage again passed
through the gates of Limmeridge House. On our way back I had let the ladies settle for themselves the first
point of view which they were to sketch, under my instructions, on the
afternoon of the next day. When they withdrew to dress for dinner, and
when I was alone again in my little sitting-room, my spirits seemed to
leave me on a sudden. I felt ill at ease and dissatisfied with myself,
I hardly knew why. Perhaps I was now conscious for the first time of
having enjoyed our drive too much in the character of a guest, and too
little in the character of a drawing-master. Perhaps that strange
sense of something wanting, either in Miss Fairlie or in myself, which
had perplexed me when I was first introduced to her, haunted me still. Anyhow, it was a relief to my spirits when the dinner-hour called me
out of my solitude, and took me back to the society of the ladies of
the house. I was struck, on entering the drawing-room, by the curious contrast,
rather in material than in colour, of the dresses which they now wore. While Mrs. Vesey and Miss Halcombe were richly clad (each in the manner
most becoming to her age), the first in silver-grey, and the second in
that delicate primrose-yellow colour which matches so well with a dark
complexion and black hair, Miss Fairlie was unpretendingly and almost
poorly dressed in plain white muslin. It was spotlessly pure: it was
beautifully put on; but still it was the sort of dress which the wife
or daughter of a poor man might have worn, and it made her, so far as
externals went, look less affluent in circumstances than her own
governess. At a later period, when I learnt to know more of Miss
Fairlie's character, I discovered that this curious contrast, on the
wrong side, was due to her natural delicacy of feeling and natural
intensity of aversion to the slightest personal display of her own
wealth. Neither Mrs. Vesey nor Miss Halcombe could ever induce her to
let the advantage in dress desert the two ladies who were poor, to lean
to the side of the one lady who was rich. When the dinner was over we returned together to the drawing-room. Although Mr. Fairlie (emulating the magnificent condescension of the
monarch who had picked up Titian's brush for him) had instructed his
butler to consult my wishes in relation to the wine that I might prefer
after dinner, I was resolute enough to resist the temptation of sitting
in solitary grandeur among bottles of my own choosing, and sensible
enough to ask the ladies' permission to leave the table with them
habitually, on the civilised foreign plan, during the period of my
residence at Limmeridge House. The drawing-room, to which we had now withdrawn for the rest of the
evening, was on the ground-floor, and was of the same shape and size as
the breakfast-room. Large glass doors at the lower end opened on to a
terrace, beautifully ornamented along its whole length with a profusion
of flowers. The soft, hazy twilight was just shading leaf and blossom
alike into harmony with its own sober hues as we entered the room, and
the sweet evening scent of the flowers met us with its fragrant welcome
through the open glass doors. Good Mrs. Vesey (always the first of the
party to sit down) took possession of an arm-chair in a corner, and
dozed off comfortably to sleep. At my request Miss Fairlie placed
herself at the piano. As I followed her to a seat near the instrument,
I saw Miss Halcombe retire into a recess of one of the side windows, to
proceed with the search through her mother's letters by the last quiet
rays of the evening light. How vividly that peaceful home-picture of the drawing-room comes back
to me while I write! From the place where I sat I could see Miss
Halcombe's graceful figure, half of it in soft light, half in
mysterious shadow, bending intently over the letters in her lap; while,
nearer to me, the fair profile of the player at the piano was just
delicately defined against the faintly-deepening background of the
inner wall of the room. Outside, on the terrace, the clustering
flowers and long grasses and creepers waved so gently in the light
evening air, that the sound of their rustling never reached us. The
sky was without a cloud, and the dawning mystery of moonlight began to
tremble already in the region of the eastern heaven. The sense of
peace and seclusion soothed all thought and feeling into a rapt,
unearthly repose; and the balmy quiet, that deepened ever with the
deepening light, seemed to hover over us with a gentler influence
still, when there stole upon it from the piano the heavenly tenderness
of the music of Mozart. It was an evening of sights and sounds never
to forget. We all sat silent in the places we had chosen--Mrs. Vesey still
sleeping, Miss Fairlie still playing, Miss Halcombe still reading--till
the light failed us. By this time the moon had stolen round to the
terrace, and soft, mysterious rays of light were slanting already
across the lower end of the room. The change from the twilight
obscurity was so beautiful that we banished the lamps, by common
consent, when the servant brought them in, and kept the large room
unlighted, except by the glimmer of the two candles at the piano. For half an hour more the music still went on. After that the beauty
of the moonlight view on the terrace tempted Miss Fairlie out to look
at it, and I followed her. When the candles at the piano had been
lighted Miss Halcombe had changed her place, so as to continue her
examination of the letters by their assistance. We left her, on a low
chair, at one side of the instrument, so absorbed over her reading that
she did not seem to notice when we moved. We had been out on the terrace together, just in front of the glass
doors, hardly so long as five minutes, I should think; and Miss Fairlie
was, by my advice, just tying her white handkerchief over her head as a
precaution against the night air--when I heard Miss Halcombe's
voice--low, eager, and altered from its natural lively tone--pronounce
my name. "Mr. Hartright," she said, "will you come here for a minute? I want to
speak to you." 