



Produced by Irma Spehar and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





                         UNCLE TOBY'S SERIES.

                            NAUGHTY PUPPIES




                          THE NAUGHTY PUPPIES


          _Tiny and his Parents._

    There were two little puppy dogs,
      "Tiny" named, and "Toodles,"
    Who got into all kinds of scrapes,
      Like little foolish noodles.

    Tiny was a brownish dog,
      And Toodles was a white one;
    And Tiny had a cunning eye,
      And Toodles had a bright one.

    Tiny played all kinds of tricks.
      For which his parents chid him:
    And Toodles did--poor, foolish pup--
      Whatever Tiny bid him.

[Illustration]


      _Tiny, Toodles, and the Turkey._

    "Come, Toodles," Tiny said, one day,
      "It's bright and pleasant weather,
    We'll go and fight the turkey-cock:"
      And off they went together.

    But all their courage oozed away,
      When the turkey-cock said "Gobble;"
    They both turned tail, and scampered off,
      As fast as they could toddle.

    But turkey caught them up at last,
      And read them both a lecture;
    And how he served them with his beak,
      I leave you to conjecture.

    So home they went with drooping tails,
      And pace so lame and jerky,
    And said, "Next time we'll tease the hens,
      And leave alone the turkey."

[Illustration]


  _New Mischief done by the Puppies._

    The visits to the poultry-yard,
      Of Tiny and of Toodles,
    Soon brought on their papa a call
      Of Master Cockadoodle's.

    He said, "My hens can't lay an egg,
      Though once I had a case full;
    Because your puppies frighten them--
      It's wicked, it's disgraceful!

    "But let them venture once again,
      My hens to chase and worry,
    And I'll receive them in a way
      Shall make them sad and sorry."

    Toodles heard this, and crept away,
      And in the straw lay quiet;
    But Tiny yelled till the cock marched off,
      Disgusted with the riot.


    _Tiny and Toodles behave worse than ever._

    From bad to worse went these naughty pups--
      It's almost past believing,
    But yet, I assure you, 'tis a fact,
      That now they took to thieving.

    They soon fell into bad company;
      And certain unprincipled poodles,
    And idle mongrels, and bob-tailed curs,
      Were the consorts of Tiny and Toodles.

    They let these bad dogs into the house,
      Where a pot of milk was standing;
    In quest of which they scampered upstairs,
      As far as the first-floor landing.

    But Betty, the cook, was scrubbing the stairs,
      With a mop and a pail of water;
    And Tiny ran off, with his head in the pot,
      While the rest yelled out for quarter.

[Illustration]


_How Tiny hunted the Cat, and what he got by it._

    Now little Miss Jane had a Persian cat.
      Whose fur was soft and silky;
    Whose tail was long, and whose eyes were blue,
      And whose color was white and milky.

    This was a quiet, good-natured cat.
      And Master Tiny knew it;
    He said, "I'll frighten her out of her wits:
      Just watch me, Toodles--I'll do it."

    So he ran at Puss, with a yelp and a snap,
      As fast as he was able;
    Across the paddock, and through the yard,
      And over the fence by the stable.

    But Puss turned suddenly, scratched his nose,
      And set him yelling and weeping;
    And Tiny owned, with a rueful face,
      That he wished he'd left her sleeping.

[Illustration]


      _What happened to Tiny and Toodles._

    Punishment follows folks who play tricks,
      Although they hope to keep clear of it:
    The puppies' bad conduct was told papa,
      Who was mightily grieved to hear of it.

    For papa was a grave, respectable dog,
      Faithful, and full of affection;
    And the farmyard was safe from robbers by night,
      Under his steady protection.

    So he said: "To cure you of pranks like these,
      I condemn each little sinner,
    To stand and look on for three whole days,
      While I eat up his dinner.

    "And to show you I mean to mend your ways,
      By every means in my power,
    You shall both learn, 'How doth the busy bee
      Improve each shining hour.'"




                NEW PICTURE BOOKS FOR LITTLE CHILDREN.

            Particular attention is called to the following

                    UNRIVALLED "THREE CENT BOOKS."

                      _UNCLE TOBY'S SERIES--New._

Twelve kinds. A happy collection of enjoyable, childish stories. Four
full-page illustrations, elegantly printed in colors. 16mo. 10 pages.

Old Mother Bantry.
Dame Duck's First Lecture.
The Three Tiny Pigs.
The Naughty Puppies.
The Little Dog Trusty.
Whittington and his Cat.
The Enraged Miller.
Jack and Jill.
Tommy Tatter.
Queen and Princess of Dolly-Land.
Chattering Jack.
Little Totty.


                 _DR. WATTS' DIVINE AND MORAL SONGS._

Six kinds. Some of the best that have ever been written, embracing
those recommended by Dr. Watts, as standards for the guidance of other
writers. 12 pages. Well printed, with four elegant illustrations in
colors. Showy pictorial covers, printed in colors.

Against Faults.
Good Resolutions.
Good Examples.
Praises for Good.
Against Evil.
Early Religion.


                           _PLEASURE BOOKS._

Six kinds. Standard stories, with full-page showy illustrations. 16mo.
16 pages. Pictorial covers, printed in colors.

The House that Jack Built.
Fox and Geese.
The Three Bears.
Old Dame and her Silver Sixpence.
Life and Death of Jenny Wren.
Little Man and Little Maid.

Many novelties in preparation, which will be superior to
anything heretofore published.

For a complete list of our popular Publications, send for Catalogue to

            =McLOUGHLIN BROS., 71 & 73 DUANE STREET, N. Y.=





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Naughty Puppies, by Anonymous

