

E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team



AT A WINTER'S FIRE

by

BERNARD CAPES

Author of _The Lake of Wine_, etc. 1899







All except three of the following Tales have already appeared in English
or American Magazines. The best thanks of the author are due to the
Editors of the "Cornhill," "Macmillan's," "Lippincott's" and "Pearson's"
Magazines, and to the Editor of the "Sketch," for permission to reprint
such of the stories as have been published in their pages. Contents

THE MOON STRICKEN

JACK AND JILL

THE VANISHING HOUSE

DARK DIGNUM

WILLIAM TYRWHITT'S "COPY"

A LAZY ROMANCE

BLACK VENN

AN EDDY ON THE FLOOR

DINAH'S MAMMOTH

THE BLACK REAPER

A VOICE FROM THE PIT




THE MOON STRICKEN


It so fell that one dark evening in the month of June I was belated
in the Bernese Oberland. Dusk overtook me toiling along the great
Chamounix Road, and in the heart of a most desolate gorge, whose towering
snow-flung walls seemed--as the day sucked inwards to a point secret as a
leech's mouth--to close about me like a monstrous amphitheatre of ghosts. The rutted road, dipping and climbing toilfully against the shouldering
of great tumbled boulders, or winning for itself but narrow foothold over
slippery ridges, was thawed clear of snow; but the cold soft peril yet
lay upon its flanks thick enough for a wintry plunge of ten feet, or may
be fifty where the edge of the causeway fell over to the lower furrows
of the ravine. It was a matter of policy to go with caution, and a thing
of some moment to hear the thud and splintering of little distant
icefalls about one in the darkness. Now and again a cold arrow of wind
would sing down from the frosty peaks above or jerk with a squiggle of
laughter among the fallen slabs in the valley. And these were the only
voices to prick me on through a dreariness lonely as death. I knew the road, but not its night terrors. Passing along it some days
before in the glory of sunshine, broad paddocks and islands of green had
comforted the shattered white ruin of the place, and I had traversed it
merely as a magnificent episode in the indifferent history of my life. Now, as it seemed, I became one with it--an awful waif of solemnity, a
thing apart from mankind and its warm intercourse and ruddy inn doors, a
spectral anomaly, whose austere epitaph was once writ upon the snow
coating some fallen slab of those glimmering about me. I thought the
whole gorge smelt of tombs, like the vault of a cathedral. I thought, in
the incomprehensible low moaning sound that ever and again seemed to eddy
about me when the wind had swooped and passed, that I recognised the
forlorn voices of brother spirits long since dead and forgotten of the
world. Suddenly I felt the sweat cold under the knapsack that swung upon my
back; stopped, faced about and became human again. Ridge over ridge
to my right the mountain summits fell away against a fathomless sky; and
topping the furthermost was a little paring of silver light, the coronet
of the rising moon. But the glory of the full orb was in the retrospect;
for, closing the savage vista of the ravine, stood up far away a cluster
of jagged pinnacles--opal, translucent, lustrous as the peaks of icebergs
that are the frozen music of the sea. It was the toothed summit of the Aiguille Verte, now prosaically bathed
in the light of the full moon; but to me, looking from that grim and
passionless hollow, it stood for the white hand of God lifted in menace
to the evil spirits of the glen. I drank my fill of the good sight, and then turned me to my tramp again
with a freshness in my throat as though it had gulped a glass of
champagne. Presently I knew myself descending, leaving, as I felt rather
than saw, the stark horror of the gorge and its glimmering snow patches
above me. Puffs of a warmer air purred past my face with little friendly
sighs of welcome, and the hum of a far-off torrent struck like a wedge
into the indurated fibre of the night. As I dropped, however, the
mountain heads grew up against the moon, and withheld the comfort of her
radiance; and it was not until the whimper of the torrent had quickened
about me to a plunging roar, and my foot was on the striding bridge that
took its waters at a step, that her light broke through a topmost cleft
in the hills, and made glory of the leaping thunder that crashed beneath
my feet. Thereafter all was peace. The road led downwards into a broadening
valley, where the smell of flowers came about me, and the mountain walls
withdrew and were no longer overwhelming. The slope eased off, dipping
and rising no more than a ground swell; and by-and-by I was on a level
track that ran straight as a stretched ribbon and was reasonable to my
tired feet. Now the first dusky chalets of the hamlet of Bel-Oiseau straggled towards
me, and it was music in my ears to hear the cattle blow and rattle in
their stalls under the sleeping lofts as I passed outside in the
moonlight. Five minutes more, and the great zinc onion on the spire of
the church glistened towards me, and I was in the heart of the silent
village. From the deep green shadow cast by the graveyard wall, heavily
buttressed against avalanches, a form wriggled out into the moonlight
and fell with a dusty thud at my feet, mowing and chopping at the air
with its aimless claws. I started back with a sudden jerk of my pulses. The thing was horrible by reason of its inarticulate voice, which issued
from the shapeless folds of its writhings like the wet gutturizing of a
back-broken horse. Instinct with repulsion, I stood a moment dismayed,
when light flashed from an open doorway a dozen yards further down the
street, and a woman ran across to the prostrate form. "Up, graceless one!" she cried; "and carry thy seven devils within
doors!" The figure gathered itself together at her voice, and stood in an angle
of the buttresses quaking and shielding its eyes with two gaunt arms. "Can I not exchange a word with Mere Pettit," scolded the woman, "but
thou must sneak from behind my back on thy crazed moon-hunting?" "Pity, pity," moaned the figure; and then the woman noticed me, and
dropped a curtsy. "Pardon," she said; "but he has been affronting Monsieur with his
antics?" "He is stricken, Madame?" "Ah, yes, Monsieur. Holy Mother, but how stricken!" "It is sad." "Monsieur knows not how sad. It is so always, but most a great deal when
the moon is full. He was a good lad once." Monsieur puts his hand in his pocket. Madame hears the clink of coin and
touches the enclosed fingers with her own delicately. Monsieur withdraws
his hand empty. "Pardon, Madame." "Monsieur has the courage of a gentleman. Come, Camille, little fool! a
sweet good-night to Monsieur." "Stay, Madame. I have walked far and am weary. Is there an hotel in
Bel-Oiseau?" "Monsieur is jesting. We are but a hundred of poor chalets." "An auberge, then--a cabaret--anything?" "_Les Trois Chevres_. It is not for such as you." "Is it, then, that I must toil onwards to Chatelard?" "Monsieur does not know? The _Hotel Royal_ was burned to the walls six
months since." "It follows that I must lie in the fields." Madame hesitates, ponders, and makes up her mind. "I keep Monsieur talking, and the night wind is sharp from the snow. It
is ill for a heated skin, and one should be indoors. I have a bedroom
that is at Monsieur's disposition, if Monsieur will condescend?" Monsieur will condescend. Monsieur would condescend to a loft and a truss
of straw, in default of the neat little chilly chamber that is allotted
him, so sick are his very limbs with long tramping, and so uninviting
figures the further stretch in the moonlight to Chatelard, with its
burnt-out carcase of an hotel. This is how I came to quarter myself on Madame Barbiere and her idiot
son, and how I ultimately learned from the lips of the latter the strange
story of his own immediate fall from reason and the dear light of
intellect. *       *       *       *       *

By day Camille Barbiere proved to be a young man, some five and twenty
years of age, of a handsome and impressive exterior. His dark hair
lay close about his well-shaped head; his features were regular and cut
bold as an Etruscan cameo; his limbs were elastic and moulded into the
supple finish of one whose life has not been set upon level roads. At a
speculative distance he appeared a straight specimen of a Burgundian
youth--sinewy, clean-formed, and graceful, though slender to gauntness;
and it was only on nearer contact that one marvelled to see the soul die
out of him, as a face set in the shadow of leafage resolves itself into
some accident of twisted branches as one approaches the billowing tree
that presented it. The soul of Camille, the idiot, had warped long after its earthly
tabernacle had grown firm and fair to look upon. Cause and effect were
not one from birth in him; and the result was a most wistful expression,
as though the lost intellect were for ever struggling and failing to
recall its ancient mastery. Mostly he was a gentle young man, noteworthy
for nothing but the uncomplaining patience with which he daily observed
the monotonous routine of simple duties that were now all-sufficient for
the poor life that had "crept so long on a broken wing." He milked the
big, red, barrel-bodied cow, and churned industriously for butter; he
kept the little vegetable garden in order and nursed the Savoys into
fatness like plumping babies; he drove the goats to pasture on the
mountain slopes, and all day sat among the rhododendrons, the forgotten
soul behind his eyes conning the dead language of fate, as a foreigner
vainly interrogates the abstruse complexity of an idiom. By-and-by I made it an irregular habit to accompany him on these
shepherdings; to join him in his simple midday meal of sour brown bread
and goat-milk cheese; to talk with him desultorily, and study him the
while, inasmuch as he wakened an interest in me that was full of
speculation. For his was not an imbecility either hereditary or
constitutional. From the first there had appeared to me something
abnormal in it--a suspension of intelligence only, a frost-bite in the
brain that presently some April breath of memory might thaw out. This was
not merely conjectural, of course. I had the story of his mental collapse
from his mother in the early days of my sojourn in Bel-Oiseau; for it
came to pass that a fitful caprice induced me to prolong my stay in the
swart little village far into the gracious Swiss summer. The "story" I have called it; but it was none. He was out on the hills
one moonlight night, and came home in the early morning mad. That was
all. This had happened some eight years before, when he was a lad of
seventeen--a strong, beautiful lad, his mother told me; and with a dreamy
"poet's corner" in his brain, she added, but in her own better way of
putting it. She had no shame that her shepherd should be an Endymion. In
Switzerland they still look upon Nature as a respectable pursuit for a
young man. Well, they had thought him possessed of a devil; and his father had at
first sought to exorcise it with a chamois-hide thong, as Munchausen
flogged the black fox out of his skin. But the counter-irritant failed of
its purpose. The devil clung deep, and rent poor Camille with periodic
convulsions of insanity. It was noted that his derangement waxed and waned with the monthly moon;
that it assumed a virulent character with the passing of the second
quarter, and culminated, as the orb reached its fulness, in a species of
delirium, during which it was necessary to carefully watch him; that it
diminished with the lessening crescent until it fell away into a quiet
abeyance of faculties that was but a step apart from the normal
intelligence of his kind. At his worst he was a stricken madman
acutely sensitive to impressions; at his best an inoffensive peasant who
said nothing foolish and nothing wise. When he was twenty, his father died, and Camille and his mother had to
make out existence in company. Now, the veil, in my first knowledge of him, was never rent; yet
occasionally it seemed to me to gape in a manner that let a little
momentary finger of light through, in the flashing of which a soul
kindled and shut in his eyes, like a hard-dying spark in ashes. I wished
to know what gave life to the spark, and I set to pondering the problem. "He was not always thus?" I would say to Madame Barbiere. "But no, Monsieur, truly. This place--bah! we are here imbeciles all to
the great world, without doubt; but Camille!--_he_ was by nature of those
who make the history of cities--a rose in the wilderness. Monsieur
smiles?" "By no means. A scholar, Madame?" "A scholar of nature, Monsieur; a dreamer of dreams such as they become
who walk much with the spirits on the lonely mountains." "Torrents, and avalanches, and the good material forces of nature, Madame
means." "Ah! Monsieur may talk, but he knows. He has heard the _foehn_ sweep down
from the hills and spin the great stones off the house-roofs. And one may
look and see nothing, yet the stones go. It is the wind that runs before
the avalanche that snaps the pine trees; and the wind is the spirit that
calls down the great snow-slips." "But how may Madame who sees nothing; know then a spirit to be abroad?" "My faith; one may know one's foot is on the wild mint without shifting
one's sole to look." "Madame will pardon me. No doubt also one may know a spirit by the smell
of sulphur?" "Monsieur is a sceptic. It comes with the knowledge of cities. There
are even such in little Bel-Oiseau, since the evil time when they took
to engrossing the contracts of good citizens on the skins of the poor
jew-beards that give us flesh and milk. It is horrible as the Tannery of
Meudon. In my young days, Monsieur, such agreements were inscribed upon
wood." "Quite so, Madame, and entirely to the point. Also one may see from whom
Camille inherited his wandering propensities. But for his fall--it was
always unaccountable?" "Monsieur, as one trips on the edge of a crevasse and disappears. His
soul dropped into the frozen cleft that one cannot fathom." "Madame will forgive my curiosity." "But surely. There was no dark secret in my Camille's life. If the little
head held pictures beyond the ken of us simple women, the angels painted
them of a certainty. Moreover, it is that I willingly recount this grief
to the wise friend that may know a solution." "At least the little-wise can seek for one." "Ah, if Monsieur would only find the remedy!" "It is in the hands of fate." Madame crossed herself. "Of the _Bon Dieu_, Monsieur." At another time Madame Barbiere said:--

"It was in such a parched summer as this threatens to be that my Camille
came home in the mists of the morning possessed. He was often out on the
sweet hills all night--that was nothing. It had been a full moon, and the
whiteness of it was on his face like leprosy, but his hands were hot with
fever. Ah, the dreadful summer! The milk turned sour in the cows' udders
and the tufts of the stone pines on the mountains fell into ashes like
Dead Sea fruit. The springs were dried, and the great cascade of Buet
fell to half its volume." "This cascade; I have never seen it. Is it in the neighbourhood?" "Of a surety. Monsieur must have passed the rocky ravine that vomits the
torrent, on his way hither." "I remember. I will explore it. Camille shall be my guide." "Never." "And why?" Madame shrugged her plump shoulders. "Who may say? The ways of the afflicted are not our ways. Only I know
that Camille will never drive his flock to pasture near the lip of that
dark valley." "That is strange. Can the place have associations for him connected with
his malady?" "It is possible. Only the good God knows." But _I_ was to know later on, with a little reeling of the reason also. *       *       *       *       *

"Camille, I want to see the Cascade de Buet." The hunted eyes of the stricken looked into mine with a piercing glance
of fear. "Monsieur must not," he said, in a low voice. "And why not?" "The waters are bad--bad--haunted!" "I fear no ghosts. Wilt thou show me the way, Camille?" "I!" The idiot fell upon the grass with a sort of gobbling cry. I thought
it the prelude to a fit of some sort, and was stepping towards him, when
he rose to his feet, waved me off and hurried away down the slope
homewards. Here was food for reflection, which I mumbled in secret. A day or two afterwards I joined Camille at midday on the heights where
he was pasturing his flocks. He had shifted his ground a little distance
westwards, and I could not find him at once. At last I spied him, his
back to a rock, his hand dabbled for coolness in a little runnel that
trickled at his side. He looked up and greeted me with a smile. He had
conceived an affection for me, this poor lost soul. "It will go soon," he said, referring to the miniature streamlet. "It is
safe in the woods; but to-morrow or next day the sun will lap it up ere
it can reach the skirt of the shadow above there. A farewell kiss to you,
little stream!" He bent and sipped a mouthful of the clear water. He was in a more
reasonable state than he had shown for long, though it was now close
on the moon's final quarter, a period that should have marked a more
general tenor of placidity in him. The summer solstice, was, however, at
hand, and the weather sultry to a degree--as it had been, I did not fail
to remember, the year of his seizure. "Camille," I said, "why to-day hast thou shifted thy ground a little in
the direction of the Buet ravine?" He sat up at once, with a curious, eager look in his face. "Monsieur has asked it," he said. "It was to impel Monsieur to ask it
that I moved. Does Monsieur seek a guide?" "Wilt thou lead me, Camille?" "Monsieur, last night I dreamed and one came to me. Was it my father? I
know not, I know not. But he put my forehead to his breast, and the evil
left it, and I remembered without terror. 'Reveal the secret to the
stranger,' he said; 'that he may share thy burden and comfort thee; for
he is strong where thou art weak, and the vision shall not scare him.' Monsieur, wilt thou come?" He leaped to his feet, and I to mine. "Lead on, Camille. I follow." He called to the leader of his flock: "Petitjean! stray not, my little
one. I shall be back sooner than the daisies close." Then he turned to me
again. I noticed a pallid, desperate look in his face, as though he were
strung to great effort; but it was the face of a mindless one still. "Do you not fear?" he said, in a whisper; and the apple in his throat
seemed all choking core. "I fear nothing," I answered with a smile; yet the still sombreness of
the woods found a little tremor in my breast. "It is good," he answered, regarding me. "The angel spoke truth. Follow,
Monsieur." He went off through the trees of a sudden, and I had much ado to keep
pace with him. He ran as one urged on by a sure sense of doom, looking
neither to right nor left. His mountain instincts had remained with him
when memory itself had closed around like a fog, leaving him face to face
and isolated with his one unconfessed point of terror. Swiftly we made
our way, ever slightly climbing, along the rugged hillside, and soon
broke into country very wild and dismal. The pastoral character of the
scene lessened and altogether disappeared. The trees grew matted and
grotesquely gnarled, huddling together in menacing battalions--save
where some plunging rock had burst like a shell, forcing a clearing and
strewing the black moss with a jagged wreck of splinters. Here no
flowers crept for warmth, no sentinel marmot turned his little scut with
a whistle of alarm to vanish like a red shadow. All was melancholy and
silence and the massed defiance of ever-impending ruin. Storm, and
avalanche, and the bitter snap of frost had wrought their havoc year by
year, till an uncrippled branch was a rare distinction. The very
saplings, of stunted growth, bore the air of thieves reared in a rookery
of crime. We strode with difficulty in an inhuman twilight through this great dark
quickset of Nature, and had paused a moment where the thronging trunks
thinned somewhat, when a little mouthing moan came towards us on the
crest of a ripple of wind. My companion stopped on the instant, and
clutched my arm, his face twisting with panic. "The Cascade, Monsieur!" he shook out in a terrified whisper. "Courage, my friend! It is that we come to seek." "Ah! My God, yes--it is that! I dare not--I dare not!" He drew back livid with fear, but I urged him on. "Remember the dream, Camille!" I cried. "Yes, yes--it was good. Help me, Monsieur, and I will try--yes, I will
try!" I drew his arm within mine, and together we stumbled on. The undergrowth
grew denser and more fantastic; the murmur filled out, increased and
resolved itself into a sound of falling water that ever took shape, and
volume, and depth, till its crash shook the ground at our feet. Then in
a moment a white blaze of sky came at us through the trunks, and we burst
through the fringe of the wood to find ourselves facing the opposite side
of a long cleft in the mountain and the blade's edge of a roaring
cataract. It shot out over the lip of the fall, twenty feet above us, in a curve
like a scimitar, passed in one sheet the spot where we stood, and dived
into a sunless pool thirty feet below with a thunderous boom. What it may
have been in full phases of the stream, I know not; yet even now it was
sufficiently magnificent to give pause to a dying soul eager to shake off
the restless horror of the world. The flat of its broad blade divided the
lofty black walls of a deep and savage ravine, on whose jagged shelves
some starved clumps of rhododendron shook in the wind of the torrent. Far down the narrow gully we could see the passion of water tossing,
champed white with the ravening of its jaws, until it took a bend of the
cliffs at a leap and rushed from sight. We stood upon a little platform of coarse grass and bramble, whose fringe
dipped and nodded fitfully as the sprinkle caught it. Beyond, the sliding
sheet of water looked like a great strap of steel, reeled ceaselessly off
a whirling drum pivoted between the hills. The midday sun shot like a
piston down the shaft of the valley, painting purple spears and angles
behind its abutting rocks, and hitting full upon the upper curve of the
fall; but half-way down the cataract slipped into shadow. My brain sickened with the endless gliding and turmoil of descent, and I
turned aside to speak to my companion. He was kneeling upon the grass,
his eyes fixed and staring, his white lips mumbling some crippled memory
of a prayer. He started and cowered down as I touched him on the
shoulder. "I cannot go, Monsieur; I shall die!" "What next, Camille? I will go alone,"

"My God, Monsieur! the cave under the fall! It is there the horror is." He pointed to a little gap in the fringing bushes with shaking finger. I stole gingerly in the direction he indicated. With every step I
took the awful fascination of the descending water increased upon
me. It seemed hideous and abnormal to stand mid-way against a
perpendicularly-rushing torrent. Above or below the effect would have
been different; but here, to look up was to feel one's feet dragging
towards the unseen--to look down and pass from vision of the lip of the
fall was to become the waif of a force that was unaccountable. I had a battle with my nerves, and triumphed. As I approached the opening
in the brambles I became conscious of a certain relief. At a little
distance the cataract had seemed to actually wash in its descent the edge
of the platform. Now I found it to be further away than I had imagined,
the ground dropping in a sharp slope to a sort of rocky buttress which
lay obliquely on the slant of the ravine, and was the true margin of the
torrent. Before I essayed the descent, I glanced back at my companion. He
was kneeling where I had left him, his hands pressed to his face, his
features hidden; but looking back once again, when I had with infinite
caution accomplished the downward climb, I saw that he had crept to
the edge of the slope, and was watching me with wide, terrified eyes. I
waved my hand to him and turned to the wonderful vision of water that
now passed almost within reach of my arm. I stood near the point where
the whole glassy breadth glided at once from sunlight into shadow. It
fell silently, without a break, for only its feet far below trod the
thunder. Now, as I peered about, I noticed a little cleft in the rocky margin, a
minute's climb above me. I was attracted to this by an appearance of
smoke or steam that incessantly emerged from it, as though some witch's
caldron were simmering alongside the fall. Spray it might be, or the
condensing of water splashed on the granite; but of this I might not be
sure. Therefore I determined to investigate, and straightway began
climbing the rocks--with my heart in my mouth, it must be confessed, for
the foothold was undesirable and the way perilous. And all the time
I was conscious that the white face of Camille watched me from above. As
I reached the cleft I fancied I heard a queer sort of gasping sob issue
from his lips, but to this I could give no heed in the sudden wonder that
broke upon me. For, lo! it appeared that the cleft led straight to a
narrow platform or ledge of rock right underneath the fall itself, but
extending how far I could not see, by reason of the steam that filled the
passage, and for which I was unable to account. Footing it carefully and
groping my way, I set step in the little water-curtained chamber and
advanced a pace or two. Suddenly, light grew about me, and a beautiful
rose of fire appeared on the wall of the passage in the midst of what
seemed a vitrified scoop in the rock. Marvelling, I put out my hand to touch it, and fell back on the narrow
floor with a scream of anguish. An inch farther, and these lines had
not been written. As it was, the fall caught me by the fingers with the
suck of a cat-fish, and it was only a gigantic wrench that saved me from
slipping off the ledge. The jerk brought my head against the rock with a
stunning blow, and for some moments I lay dizzy and confused, daring
hardly to breathe, and conscious only of a burning and blistering agony
in my right hand. At length I summoned courage to gather my limbs together and crawl out
the way I had entered. The distance was but a few paces, yet to traverse
these seemed an interminable nightmare of swaying and stumbling. I know
only one other occasion upon which the liberal atmosphere of the open
earth seemed sweeter to my senses when I reached it than it did on this. I tumbled somehow through the cleft, and sat down, shaking, upon the
grass of the slope beyond; but, happening to throw myself backwards in
the reeling faintness induced by my fright and the pain of my head, my
eyes encountered a sight that woke me at once to full activity. Balanced upon the very verge of the slope, his face and neck craned
forward, his jaw dropped, a sick, tranced look upon his features, stood
Camille. I saw him topple, and shouted to him; but before my voice was
well out, he swayed, collapsed, and came down with a running thud that
shook the ground. Once he wheeled over, like a shot rabbit, and, bounding
thwack with his head against a flat boulder not a dozen yards from me,
lay stunned and motionless. I scrambled to him, quaking all over. His breath came quick, and a spirt
of blood jerked from a sliced cut in his forehead at every pump of his
heart. I kicked out a wad of cool moist turf, and clapped it in a pad over the
wound, my handkerchief under. For his body, he was shaken and bruised,
but otherwise not seriously hurt. Presently he came to himself; to himself in the best sense of the
word--for Camille was sane. I have no explanation to offer. Only I know that, as a fall will set a
long-stopped watch pulsing again, the blow here seemed to have restored
the misplaced intellect to its normal balance. When he woke, there was a new soft light of sanity in his eyes that was
pathetic in the extreme. "Monsieur," he whispered, "the terror has passed." "God be thanked! Camille," I answered, much moved. He jerked his poor battered head in reverence. "A little while," he said, "and I shall know. The punishment was just." "What punishment, my poor Camille?" "Hush! The cloud has rolled away. I stand naked before _le bon Dieu_. Monsieur, lift me up; I am strong." I winced as I complied. The palm of my hand was scorched and blistered in
a dozen places. He noticed at once, and kissed and fondled the wounded
limb as softly as a woman might. "Ah, the poor hand!" he murmured. "Monsieur has touched the disc of
fire." "Camille," I whispered, "what is it?" "Monsieur shall know--ah! yes, he shall know; but not now. Monsieur, my
mother." "Thou art right, good son." I bound up his bruised forehead and my own burnt hand as well as I was
able, and helped him to his feet. He stood upon them staggering; but
in a minute could essay to stumble on the homeward journey with
assistance. It was a long and toilsome progress; but in time we
accomplished it. Often we had to sit down in the blasted woods and rest
awhile; often moisten our parched mouths at the runnels of snow-water
that thridded the undergrowth. The shadows were slanting eastwards
as we reached the clearing we had quitted some hours earlier, and the
goats had disappeared. Petitjean was leading his charges homewards in
default of a human commander, and presently we overtook them browsingly
loitering and desirous of definite instructions. I pass over Camille's meeting with his mother, and the wonder, and fear,
and pity of it all. Our hurts were attended to, and the battery of
questions met with the best armour of tact at command. For myself, I
said that I had scorched my hand against a red-hot rock, which was
strictly true; for Camille, that it were wisest to take no early
advantage of the reason that God had restored to him. She was voluble,
tearful, half-hysterical with joy and the ecstasy of gratitude. "That a blow should effect the marvel! Monsieur, but it passes
comprehension." All night long I heard her stirring and sobbing softly outside his door,
for I slept little, owing to pain and the wonder in my mind. But towards
morning I dozed, and my dreams were feverish and full of terror. The next day Camille kept his bed and I my room. By this I at least
escaped the first onset of local curiosity, for the villagers naturally
made of Camille's restoration a nine-days' wonder. But towards evening
Madame Barbiere brought a message from him that he would like to see
Monsieur alone, if Monsieur would condescend to visit him in his room. I
went at once, and found him, as Haydon found Keats, lying in a white bed,
hectic, and on his back. He greeted me with a smile peculiarly sweet and
restful. "Does Monsieur wish to know?" he said in a low voice. "If it will not hurt thee, Camille." "Not now--not now; the good God has made me sound. I remember, and am not
terrified." I closed the door and took a seat by his bedside. There, with my hand
shading my eyes from the level glory of sunset that flamed into the room,
I listened to the strange tale of Camille's seizure. *       *       *       *       *

"Once, Monsieur, I lived in myself and was exultant with a loneliness of
fancied knowledge. My youth was my excuse; but God could not pardon me
all. I read where I could find books, and chance put an evil choice in my
way, for I learned to sneer at His name, His heaven, His hell. Each man
has his god in self-will, I thought in my pride, and through it alone he
accepts the responsibility of life and death. He is his own curse or
blessing here and hereafter, inheriting no sin and earning no doom but
such as he himself inflicts upon himself. I interpret this from the world
about me, and knowing it, I have no fear and own no tyrant but my own
passions. Monsieur, it was through fear the most terrible that God
asserted Himself to me." The light was fading in the west, and a lance of shadow fell upon the
white bed, as though the hushed day were putting a finger to its lips as
it withdrew. "I was no coward then, Monsieur--that at least I may say. I lived among
the mountains, and on their ledges the feet of my own goats were not
surer. Often, in summer, I spent the night among the woods and hills,
reading in them the story of the ages, and exploring, exploring till my
feet were wearier than my brain. Strangers came from far to see the great
cascade; but none but I--and you, too, Monsieur, now--know the track
through the thicket that leads to the cave under the waters. I found it
by chance, and, like you, was scorched by the fire, though not badly." "Camille--the cause?" "Monsieur, I will tell you a wonderful thing. The falling waters there
make a monstrous burning glass, when the hot sun is upon them, which has
melted the rock behind like wax." "Can that be so?" "It is true--dear Jesus, I have fearful reason to know it." He half rose on his elbow, his face, crossed by the bandage, grey as
stone in the gathering dusk. Hereafter he spoke in an awed whisper. "When the knowledge broke upon me, I grew great to myself in the
possession of a wonderful secret. Day after day I visited the cave and
examined this phenomenon--and yet another more marvellous in its
connection with the first. The huge lens was a simple accident of curved
rocks and convex water, planed smooth as crystal. In other than a
droughty summer it would probably not exist; the spouting torrent would
overwhelm it--but I know not. Was not this astonishing enough? Yet Nature
had worked a second miracle to mock in anticipation the self-sufficient
plagiarism of little man. I noticed that the rays of the sun concentrated
in the lens only during the half-hour of the orb's apparent crossing of
the ravine. Then the light smote upon a strange curved little fan of
water, that spouted from a high crevice at the mouth of the shallow
vitrified tunnel, and devoured it, and played upon the rocks behind, that
hissed and sputtered like pitch, and the place was blind with steam. But
when the tooth of fire was withdrawn, the tiny inner cascade fell again
and wrought coolness with its sprinkling. "I did not discover this all at once, for at first fright took me, and it
was enough to watch for the moment of the light's appearance and then
flee with a little laughter. But one day I ventured back into the cave
after the sun had crossed the valley, and the steam had died away, and
the rock cooled behind the miniature cascade. "I looked through the lens, and it seemed full of a great white light
that blazed into my eyes, so that I fell back through the inner fan of
water and was well soused by it; but my sight presently recovering, I
stood forward in the scoop of rock admiring the dainty hollow curve the
fan took in its fall. By-and-by I became aware that I was looking out
through a smaller lens upon the great one, and that strange whirling
mists seemed to be sweeping across a huge disc, within touch of my hand
almost. "It was long before I grasped the meaning of this; but, in a flash, it
came upon me. The great lens formed the object glass, the small, the
eyeglass, of a natural telescope of tremendous power, that drew the high
summer clouds down within seeming touch and opened out the heavens before
my staring eyes. "Monsieur, when this dawned upon me I was wild. That so astonishing a
discovery should have been reserved for a poor ignorant Swiss peasant
filled me with pride wicked in proportion with its absence of gratitude
to the mighty dispenser of good. I came even to think my individuality
part of the wonder and necessary to its existence. 'Were it not for my
courage and enterprise,' I cried, 'this phenomenon would have remained a
secret of the Nature that gave birth to it. She yields her treasures to
such only as fear not.' "I had read in a book of Huyghens, Guinand, Newton, Herschel--the great
high-priests of science who had striven through patient years to read the
hieroglyphics of the heavens. 'The wise imbeciles,' I thought. 'They
toiled and died, and Nature held no mirror up to them. For me, the
poor Camille, she has worked in secret while they grew old and passed
unsatisfied.' "Brilliant projects of astronomy whirled in my brain. The evening of my
last discovery I remained out on the hills, and entered the cave as it
grew dusk. A feeling of awe surged in me as dark fell over the valley,
and the first stars glistened faintly. I dipped under the fan of water
and took my stand in the hollow behind it. There was no moon, but my
telescope was inclined, as it were, at a generous angle, and a section of
the firmament was open before me. My heart beat fast as I looked through
the lens. "Shall I tell you what I saw then and many nights after? Rings and
crosses in the heavens of golden mist, spangled, as it seemed, with
jewels; stars as big as cart-wheels, twinkling points no longer, but
round, like great bosses of molten fire; things shadowy, luminous, of
strange colours and stranger forms, that seemed to brush the waters
as they passed, but were in reality vast distances away. "Sometimes the thrust of wind up the ravine would produce a tremulous
motion in the image at the focus of the mirror; but this was seldom. For the most part the wonderful lenses presented a steady curvature, not
flawless, but of magnificent capacity. "Now it flashed upon me that, when the moon was at the full, she would
top the valley in the direct path of my telescope's range of view. At
the thought I grew exultant. I--I, little Camille, should first read
aright the history of this strange satellite. The instrument that could
give shape to the stars would interpret to me the composition of that
lonely orb as clearly as though I stood upon her surface. "As the time of her fulness drew near I grew feverish with excitement. I
was sickening, as it were, to my madness, for never more should I look
upon her willingly, with eyes either speculative or insane." At this point Camille broke off for a little space, and lay back on his
pillow. When he spoke again it was out of the darkness, with his face
turned to the wall. "Monsieur, I cannot dwell upon it--I must hasten. We have no right to
peer beyond the boundary God has drawn for us. I saw His hell--I saw His
hell, I tell you. It is peopled with the damned--silent, horrible,
distorted in the midst of ashes and desolation. It was a memory that,
like the snake of Aaron, devoured all others till yesterday--till
yesterday, by Christ's mercy." *       *       *       *       *

It seemed to me, as the days wore on, that Camille had but recovered his
reason at the expense of his life; that the long rest deemed necessary
for him after his bitter period of brain exhaustion might in the end
prove an everlasting one. Possibly the blow to his head had, in expelling
the seven devils, wounded beyond cure the vital function that had
fostered them. He lay white, patient, and sweet-tempered to all, but
moved by no inclination to rise and re-assume the many-coloured garment
of life. His description of the dreadful desert in the sky I looked upon, merely,
as an abiding memory of the brain phantasm that had finally overthrown
a reason, already tottering under the tremendous excitement induced by
his discovery of the lenses, and the magnified images they had presented
to him. That there was truth in the asserted fact of the existence of
these, my own experience convinced me; and curiosity as to this alone
impelled me to the determination of investigating further, when my hand
should be sufficiently recovered to act as no hindrance to me in forcing
my way once more through the dense woods that bounded the waterfall. Moreover, the dispassionate enquiry of a mind less sensitive to
impressions might, in the result, do more towards restoring the warped
imagination of my friend to its normal state than any amount of spoken
scepticism. To Camille I said nothing of my resolve; but waited on, chafing at the
slow healing of my wounds. In the meantime the period of the full
moon approached, and I decided, at whatever cost, to make the venture on
the evening she topped her orbit, if circumstances at the worst should
prevent my doing so sooner--and thus it turned out. On the eve of my enterprise, the first fair spring of rain in a drought
of two months fell, to my disappointment, among the hills; for I feared
an increase of the torrent and the effacement of the mighty lens. I set
off, however, on the afternoon of the following day, in hot sunshine,
mentally prognosticating a favourable termination to my expedition, and
telling Madame Barbiere not to expect me back till late. In leisurely fashion I made my way along the track we had previously
traversed, risking no divergence through overhaste, and carefully
examining all landmarks before deciding on any direction. Thus slowly
proceeding, I had the good fortune to come within sound of the cataract
as the sun was sinking behind the mountain ridges to my front; and
presently emerged from the woods at the very spot we had struck in our
former journey together. A chilly twilight reigned in the ravine, and the noise that came up from
the ruin of the torrent seemed doubly accented by reason of it. The
sound of water moving in darkness has always conveyed to me an impression
of something horrible and deadly, be it nothing of more moment than
the drip and hollow tinkle of a gutter pipe. But the crash in this
echoing gorge was appalling indeed. For some moments I stood on the brink of the slope, looking across at the
great knife of the fall, with a little shiver of fear. Then I shook
myself, laughed, and without further ado took my courage in hand, and
scrambled down the declivity and up again towards the cleft in the rocks. Here the chill of heart gripped me again--the watery sliding tunnel
looked so evil in the contracting gloom. A false step in that humid
chamber, and my bones would pound and crackle on the rocks forty feet
below. It must be gone through with now, however; and, taking a long
breath, I set foot in the passage under the curving downpour that seemed
taut as an arched muscle. Reaching the burnt recess, a few moments sufficed to restore my
self-confidence; and without further hesitation I dived under the inner
little fan-shaped fall--which was there, indeed, as Camille had described
it--and recovered my balance with pulses drumming thicker than I could
have desired. In a moment I became conscious that some great power was before me. Across a vast, irregular disc filled with the ashy whiteness of the outer
twilight, strange, unaccountable forms, misty and undefined, passed, and
repassed, and vanished. Cirrus they might have been, or the shadows flung
by homing flights of birds; but of this I could not be certain. As the
dusk deepened they showed no more, and presently I gazed only into a
violet fathomless darkness. My own excitement now was great; and I found some difficulty in keeping
it under control. But for the moment, it seemed to me, I pined greatly
for free commune with the liberal atmosphere of earth. Therefore, I
dipped under the little fall and made my cautious way to the margin of
the cataract. I was surprised to find for how long a time the phenomenon had absorbed
me. The moon was already high in the heavens, and making towards
the ravine with rapid steps. Far below, the tumbling waters flashed in
her rays, and on all sides great tiers of solemn, trees stood up at
attention to salute her. When her disc silvered the inner rim of the slope I had descended, I
returned to my post of observation with tingling nerves. The field of
the great object lens was already suffused with the radiance of her
approach. Suddenly my pupils shrank before the apparition of a ghastly grey light,
and all in a moment I was face to face with a segment of desolation
more horrible than any desert. Monstrous growths of leprosy that had
bubbled up and stiffened; fields of ashen slime--the sloughing of a world
of corruption; hills of demon, fungus swollen with the fatness of
putrefaction; and, in the midst of all, dim, convulsed shapes wallowing,
protruding, or stumbling aimlessly onwards, till they sank and
disappeared. *       *       *       *       *

Madame Barbiere threw up her hands when she let me in at the door. My
appearance, no doubt, was ghastly. I knew not the hour nor the lapse
of time covered by my wanderings about the hills, my face hidden in my
palms, a drawn feeling about my heart, my lips muttering--muttering
fragments of prayers, and my throat jerking with horrible laughter. For hours I lay face downwards on my bed. "Monsieur has seen it?" "I have seen it." "I heard the rain on the hills. The lens will have been blurred. Monsieur
has been spared much." "God, in His mercy, pity thee! And me--oh, Camille, and me too!" "He has held out His white hand to me. I go, when I go, with a safe
conduct." *       *       *       *       *

He went before the week was out. The drought had broken and for five days
the thunder crashed and the wild rain swept the mountains. On the
morning of the sixth a drenched shepherd reported in the village that a
landslip had choked the fall of Buet, and completely altered its shape. Madame Barbiere broke into the room where I was sitting with Camille, big
with the news. She little guessed how it affected her listeners. "The _bon Dieu_" said Camille, when she had gone, "has thundered His
curse on Nature for revealing His secrets. I, who have penetrated into
the forbidden, must perish." "And I, Camille?" He turned to me with a melancholy sweet smile, and answered, paraphrasing
the dying words of certain noble lips,--

"Be good, Monsieur; be good." JACK AND JILL


My friend, Monsieur ----, absolutely declines to append his name to these
pages, of which he is the virtual author. Nevertheless, he permits me to
publish them anonymously, being, indeed, a little curious to ascertain
what would have been the public verdict as to his sanity, had he given
his personal imprimatur to a narrative on the face of it so incredible. "How!" he says. "Should I have believed it of another, when I have such
astonishing difficulty at this date in realizing that it was I--yes, I,
my friend--this same little callow _poupon_--that was an actual hero of
the adventure? Fidele" (by which term we cover the identity of his
wife)--"Fidele will laugh in my face sometimes, crying, 'Not thou, little
cabbage, nor yet thy faithful, was it that dived through half the world
and came up breathless! No, no--I cannot believe it. We folk, so
matter-of-fact and so comical. It was of Hansel and Gretel we had been
reading hand-in-hand, till we fell asleep in the twilight and fancied
this thing.' And then she will trill like a bird at the thought of how
solemn Herr Grabenstock, of the Hotel du Mont Blanc, would have stared
and edged apart, had we truly recounted to him that which had befallen us
between the rising and the setting of a sun. We go forth; it rains--my
faith! as it will in the Chamounix valley--and we return in the evening
sopped. Very natural. But, for a first cause of our wetting. Ah! there we
must be fastidious of an explanation, or we shall find ourselves in peril
of restraint. "Now, write this for me, and believe it if you can. We are not in a
conspiracy of imagination--I and the dear courageous." Therefore I _do_ write it, speaking in the person of Monsieur ----, and
largely from his dictation; and my friend shall amuse himself over the
nature of its reception. *       *       *       *       *

"One morning (it was in late May)," says Monsieur ----, "my Fidele and I
left the Hotel du Mont Blanc for a ramble amongst the hills. We were a
little adventurous, because we were innocent. We took no guide but our
commonsense; and that served us very ill--or very well, according to the
point of view. Ours was that of the birds, singing to the sky and
careless of the snake in the grass so long as they can pipe their tune. Of a surety that is the only course. If one would make provision against
every chance of accident, one must dematerialize. To die is the only way
to secure oneself from fatality. "Still, it is a wise precaution, I will admit, not to eat of all hedge
fruit because blackberries are sweet. Some day, after the fiftieth
stomach-ache, we shall learn wisdom, my Fidele and I. "'Fools rush in where angels fear to tread.' That, I know, comes into the
English gospel. "Well, I will tell you, I am content to be considered of the first; and
my Fidele is assuredly of the second. Yet did she fear, or I rush in? On
the contrary, I have a little laughing thought that it was the angel
inveighed against the dulness of caution when the fool would have
hesitated. "Now, it was before the season of the Alps; and the mountain aubergistes
were, for the most part, not arrived at their desolate hill-taverns. Nor
were guides at all in evidence, being yet engaged, the sturdy souls, over
their winter occupations. One, no doubt, we could have procured, had we
wished it; but we did not. We would explore under the aegis of no
cicerone but our curiosity. That was native to us, if the district was
strange. "Following, at first, the instructions of Herr Baedeker, we travelled and
climbed, chattering and singing as we went, in the direction of the
Montenvert, whence we were to descend upon the Mer de Glace, and enjoy
the spectacle of a stupendous glacier. "'And that, I am convinced,' said Fidele, 'is nothing more nor less than
one of those many windows that give light to the monsters of the
under-earth.' "'Little imbecile! In some places this window is six hundred feet thick.' "'So?' she said. 'That is because their dim eyes could not endure the
full light of the sun.' "We had brought a tin box of sandwiches with us; and this, with my large
pewter flask full of wine, was slung upon my back. For we had been told
the Hotel du Montenvert was yet closed; and, sure enough when we reached
it, the building stood black in a pool of snow, its shuttered windows
forlorn, and long icicles hung from the eaves. "The depression induced by this sight was momentary. We turned from it to
the panorama of majestic loveliness that stretched below and around us. The glacier--that rolling sea of glass--descended from the enormous gates
of the hills. Its source was the white furnace of the skies; its
substance the crystal refuse of the stars; and from its margins the
splintered peaks stood up in a thousand forms of beauty. Right and left,
in the hollows of the mountains, the mist lay like ponds, opal and
translucent; and the shafts of the pine trees standing in it looked like
the reflections of themselves. "It made the eyes ache--this silence of greatness; and it became a relief
to shift one's gaze to the reality of one's near neighbourhood--the
grass, and the rhododendron bushes, and even the dull walls of the
deserted auberge. "A narrow path dipped over the hill-side and fled into the very jaws of
the moraine. Down the first of this path we raced, hand in hand; but
soon, finding the impetus overmastering us, we pulled up with difficulty,
and descended the rest of the way circumspectly. "At the foot of the steep slope we came upon the little wooden hutch
where, ordinarily, one may procure a guide (also rough socks to stretch
over one's boots) for the passage of the glacier. Now, however, the shed
was closed and tenantless; and we must e'en dispense with a conductor,
should we adventure further. "Herr Baedeker says, 'Guide unnecessary for the experienced.' "'Fidele, are we experienced?' "'We shall be, _mon ami_, when we have crossed. A guide could not alter
that.' "'But it is true, _ma petite_. Come, then!' "We clambered down amongst huge stones. Fidele's little feet went in and
out of the crannies like sand-martins. Suddenly, before we realized it,
we were on the glacier. "Fidele exclaimed. "'_Mon Dieu_! Is this ice--these blocks of dirty alabaster?' "Alas! she was justified. This torrent of majestic crystal--seen from
above so smooth and bountiful--a flood of the milk of Nature dispensed
from the white bosom of the hills! Now, near at hand, what do we find it? A medley of opaque blocks, smeared with grit and rubbish; a vast ruin of
avalanches hurled together and consolidated, and of the colour of rock
salt. "'_Peste!_' I cried. 'We must get to the opposite bank, for all that. "_Mignonne, allons voir si la rose,
  Qui ce matin avoit desclose_....'"

"We clasped hands and set forth on our little traversee, our landmark an
odd-shaped needle of spar on the further side. My faith! it was simple. The _paveurs_ of Nature had left the road a trifle rough, that was all. Suddenly we came upon a wide fissure stretched obliquely like the mouth
of a sole. Going glibly, we learnt a small lesson of caution therefrom. Six paces, and we should have tumbled in. "We looked over fearfully. Here, in truth, was real ice at last--green as
bottle-glass at the edges, and melting into unfathomable deeps of glowing
blue. "In a moment, with a shriek like that of escaping steam, a windy demon
leapt at us from the underneath. It was all of winter in a breath. It
seemed to shrivel the skin from our faces--the flesh from our bones. We
staggered backwards. "'_Mon ami! mon ami_!' cried Fidele, 'my heart is a stone; my eyes are
two blisters of water!' "We danced as the blood returned unwilling to our veins. It was minutes
before we could proceed. "Afterwards I learned that these hellish eruptions of air betoken a
change of temperature. It was coming then shortly in a dense rainfall. "When we were recovered, we sought about for a way to circumambulate the
crevasse. Then we remarked that up a huge boulder of ice that had
seemed to block our path recent steps, or toe-holes, had been cut. In a
twinkling we were over. Fidele--no, a woman never falls. "'For all this,' she says, shaking her head, 'I maintain that a guide
here is a sinecurist.' "Well, we made the passage safely, and toiled up the steep, loose moraine
beyond--to find the track over which was harder than crossing the
glacier. But we did it, and struck the path along the hillside, which
leads by the _Mauvais Pas_ (the _mauvais quart d'heure_) to the little
cabaret called the _Chapeau_. This tavern, too, was shut and dismal. It did not matter. We sat like sparrows on a railing, and munched our
egg-sandwiches and drank our wine in a sort of glorious stupefaction. For
right opposite us was the vast glacier-fall, whose crashing foam was
towers and parapets of ice, that went over and rolled into the valley
below, a ruin of thunder. "Far beyond, where the mouth of the gorge spread out littered with
monstrous destruction, we saw the hundred threads of the glacier streams
collect into a single rope of silver, that went drawn between the hills,
a highway of water. It was all a majestic panorama of grey and pearly
white--the sky, the torrents, the mountains; but the blue and rusty green
of the stone pines, flung abroad in hanging woods and coppices, broke up
and distributed the infinite serenity of the snow fields. "Presently, having drunk deep of rich content, we rose to retrace our
steps. For, spurred by vanity, we must be returning the way we had come,
to show our confident experience of glaciers. "All went well. Actually we had passed over near two-thirds of the
ice-bed, when a touch on my arm stayed me, and _ma mie_ looked into my
eyes, very comical and insolent. "'Little cabbage,' she said; 'will you not put your new knowledge to
account?' "'But how, my soul?' "She laughed and pressed my arm to her side. Her heart fluttered like a
nestling after its first flight. "'To rest on the little prowess of a small adventure! No, no! Shall he
who has learnt to swim be always content to bathe in shallow water?' "I was speechless as I gazed on her. "'Behold, then!' she cried. 'We have opposed ourselves to this problem of
the ice, and we have mastered it. See how it rears itself to the
inaccessible peaks, the which to reach the poor innocents expend
themselves over rocks and drifts. But why should one not climb the
mountain by way of the glacier?' "'Fidele!' I gasped. "'Ah!' she exclaimed, nodding her head; 'but poor men! They are mules. They spill their blood on the scaling ladders when the town gate is
open.' "Again I cried 'Fidele!' "'But, yes,' she said, 'it needs a woman to see. It is but two o'clock. Let us ascend the glacier, like a staircase; and presently we shall stand
upon the summit of the mountain. Those last little peaks above the ice
can be of no importance.' "I was touched, astounded by the sublimity of her idea. Had no one, then,
ever thought of this before? "We began the ascent. "I swear we must have toiled upwards half a mile, when the catastrophe
took place. "It was raining then--a dense small mist; and the ice was as if it
had been greased. We were proceeding with infinite care, arm in arm,
tucked close together. A little doubt, I think, was beginning to oppress
us. We could move only with much caution and difficulty; and there were
noises--sounds like the clapping of great hands in those rocky attics
above us. Then there would come a slamming report, as if the window of
the unknown had been burst open by demons; and the moans of the lost
would issue, surging down upon the world. "These thunders, as we were afterwards told, are caused by the splitting
of the ice when there comes a fall in the barometer. Then the glacier
will yawn like a sliced junket. "My faith! what a simile! But again the point of view, my friend. "All in a moment I heard a little cluck. I looked down. Alas! the fine
spirit was obscured. Fidele was weeping. "'_Chut! chut!_' I exclaimed in consternation. 'We will go back at once.' "She struggled to smile, the poor _mignonne_. "'It is only that my knees are sick,' she said piteously. "I took her in my strong arms tenderly. "We had paused on a ridge of hard snow. "There came a tearing clang--an enormous sucking sound, as of wet lips
opening. The snow sank under our feet. "'My God!' shrieked Fidele. "I held her convulsively. It happened in an instant, before one could
leap aside. The bed of snow on which we were standing broke down into
the crevasse it had bridged, and let us through to the depths. "Will you believe what follows? Pinch your nose and open your mouth. You
shall take the whole draught at a breath. _The ice at the point where we
entered was five hundred feet thick; and we fell to the very bottom of
it._

"Ha! ha! Is it difficult to swallow? But it is true--it is quite true. Here I sit, sound and safe, and eminently sane, and that after a fall of
five hundred feet. "Now, listen. "We went down, welded together, with a rush and a buzz like a
cannon-ball. Thoughts? Ah! my friend, I had none. Who can think even
in a high wind? And here the wind of our going would have brained an ox. Only one desperate instinct I had, one little forlorn remnant of
humanity--to shield the love of my heart. So my arms never left her; and
we fell together. I dreaded nothing, feared nothing, foresaw no terror
in the inevitable mangling crash of the end. For time, that is necessary
to emotion, was annihilated. We had outstripped it, and left sense and
reason sluggishly following in our wake. "Sense, yes; but not altogether sensation. Flashingly I was conscious
here of incredibly swift transitions, from cold to deeper wells of frost;
thence down through a stratum of death and negation, between mere blind
walls of frigid inhumanity, to have been stayed a moment by which would
have pointed all our limbs as stiff as icicles, as stiff as those of
frogs plunged into boiling water. But we passed and fell, still crashing
upon no obstruction; and thought pursued us, tailing further behind. "It was the passage of the eternal night--frozen, self-contained; awful
as any fancied darkness that is without one tradition of a star. Yet,
struggling hereafter to, in some shadowy sense, renew my feelings of the
moment, it seemed to me that I had not fallen through darkness at all;
but rather that the friction of descent had kindled an inner radiance in
me that was independent of the vision of the eyes, and full of promise of
a sudden illumination of the soul. "Now, after falling what depths God knows, I become numbly aware of a
little griding sensation at my back, that communicated a whistling small
vibration to my whole frame. This intensified, became more pronounced. Perceptibly, in that magnificent refinement of speed, our enormous pace I
felt to decrease ever so little. Still we had so far outstripped
intelligence as that I was incapable of considering the cause of the
change. "Suddenly, for the first time, pain made itself known; and immediately
reason, plunging from above, overtook me, and I could think. "Then it was I became conscious that, instead of falling, we were
rising, rising with immense swiftness, but at a pace that momently
slackened--rising, slipping over ice and in contact with it,

"The muscles of my arms, clasped still about Fidele, involuntarily
swelled to her. My God! there was a tiny answering pressure. I could have
screamed with joy; but physical anguish overmastered me. My back seemed
bursting into flame. "The suffering was intolerable. When, at last, I thought I should go mad,
in a moment we took a surging swoop, shot down an easy incline, and
_stopped_. "There had been noise in our descent, as only now I knew by its
cessation--a hissing sound as of wire whirring from a draw-plate. In the
profound enormous silence that, at last, enwrapped us, the bliss of
freedom from that metallic accompaniment fell on me like a balm. My
eyelids closed. Possibly I fainted. "All in a moment I came to myself, to an undefinable sense of the
tremendous pressure of nothingness. Darkness! it was not that; yet it was
as little light. It was as if we lay in a dim, luminous chaos, ourselves
an integral part of its self-containment. I did not stir; but I spoke:
and my strange voice broke the enchantment. Surely never before or since
was speech exchanged under such conditions. "'Fidele!' "'I can speak, but I cannot look. If I hide so for ever I can die
bravely.' "'_Ma petite!_ oh, my little one! Are you hurt?' "'I don't know. I think not.' "Her voice, her dear voice was so odd; but, _Mon Dieu_! how wonderful in
its courage! That, Heaven be praised! is no monopoly of intellect. Indeed, it is imagination that makes men cowards; and to the lack of this
possibly we owed our salvation. "Now, calm and freed of that haunting jar of descent, I became conscious
that a sound, that I had at first taken for the rush of my own arteries,
had an origin apart from us. It was like the wash and thunder of waters
in a deep sewer. "'Fidele!' I said again. "'I am listening.' "'Hear, then! Canst thou free my right arm, that I may feel for the
lucifers in my pocket?' "She moved at once, never raising her face from my breast. I groped for
the box, found it; and manipulating with one hand, succeeded in striking
a match. It flamed up--a long wax vesta. "A glory of sleek fires sprang on the instant into life. We lay
imprisoned in a house of glass at the foot of a smooth incline rising
behind us to unknown heights. A wall of porous and opaque ice-rubbish,
into which our feet had plunged deep, had stayed our progress. "I placed the box by my side ready for use. Our last moments should be
lavish of splendour. Stooping for another match, to kindle from the flame
of the near-expired one, a thought struck me. Why had we not been at once
frozen to death? Yet we lay where we had brought up, as snug and glowing
as if we were wrapped in bedclothes. "The answer came to me in a flash. We had fallen sheer to the glacier
bed, which, warmed by subterraneous heat, was ever in process of melting. Possibly, but a comparatively thin curtain of perforated ice separated us
from the under torrent. "The enforced conclusion was astounding; but as yet it inspired no hope. We were none the less doomed and buried. "I lit a second match, turned about, and gave a start of terror. There,
imbedded in the transparent wall at my very shoulder, was something--the
body of a man. "A horrible sight--a horrible, horrible sight--crushed, flattened--a
caricature; the very gouts of blood that had burst from him held poised
in the massed congelations of water. "For how long ages had he been travelling to the valley, and from what
heights? He was of a bygone generation, by his huge coat cuffs, his metal
buttons, by his shoe buckles and the white stockings on his legs, which
were pressed thin and sharp, as if cut out of paper. Had he been a
climber, an explorer--a contemporary, perhaps, of Saussure and a rival? And what had been his unrecorded fate? To slip into a crevasse, and so
for the parted ice to snap upon him again, like a hideous jaw? Its work
done, it might at least have opened and dropped him through--not held him
intact to jog us, out of all that world of despair, with his battered
elbow! "Perhaps to witness in others the fate he had himself suffered! "I dropped the match I was holding. I tightened my clasp convulsively
about Fidele. Thank God she, at any rate, was blind to this horror within
a horror! "All at once--was it the start I had given, or the natural process of
dissolution beneath our feet?--we were moving again. Swift--swifter! Fidele uttered a little moaning cry. The rubbish of ice crashed below us,
and we sank through. "I knew nothing, then, but that we were in water--that we had fallen from
a little height, and were being hurried along. The torrent, now deep, now
so shallow that my feet scraped its bed, gushed in my ears and blinded my
eyes. "Still I hugged Fidele, and I could feel by her returning grasp that she
lived. The water was not unbearably cold as yet. The air that came
through cracks and crevasses had not force to overcome the under warmth. "I felt something slide against me--clutched and held on. It was a brave
pine log. Could I recover it at this date I would convert it into a
flagstaff for the tricolour. It was our raft, our refuge; and it carried
us to safety. "I cannot give the extravagant processes of that long journey. It was all
a rushing, swirling dream--a mad race of mystery and sublimity, to
which the only conscious periods were wild, flitting glimpses of
wonderful ice arabesques, caught momentarily as we passed under fissures
that let the light of day through dimly. "Gradually a ghostly radiance grew to encompass us; and by a like
gradation the water waxed intensely cold. Hope then was blazing in our
hearts; but this new deathliness went nigh to quench it altogether. Yet,
had we guessed the reason, we could have foregone the despair. For, in
truth, we were approaching that shallower terrace of the glacier beyond
the fall, through which the light could force some weak passage, and the
air make itself felt, blowing upon the beds of ice. "Well, we survived; and still we survive. My faith, what a couple! Sublimity would have none of us. The glacier rejected souls so
commonplace as not to be properly impressed by its inexorability. "This, then, was the end. We swept into a huge cavern of ice--through
it--beyond it, into the green valley and the world that we love. And
there, where the torrent splits up into a score of insignificant streams,
we grounded and crawled to dry land and sat down and laughed. "Yes, we could do it--we could laugh. Is that not bathos? But Fidele and
I have a theory that laughter is the chief earnest of immortality. "To _dry_ land I have said. _Mon Dieu!_ the torrent was no wetter. It
rains in the Chamounix valley. We looked to see whence we had fallen, and
not even the _Chapeau_ was visible through the mist. "But, as I turned, Fidele uttered a little cry. "'The flask, and the sandwich-box, and your poor coat!' "'_Comment?_' I said; and in a moment was in my shirt-sleeves. "I stared, and I wondered, and I clucked in my throat. "Holy saints! I was adorned with a breastplate on my back. The friction
of descent, first welding together these, the good ministers to our
appetite, had worn the metal down in the end to a mere skin or badge, the
heat generated from which had scorched and frizzled the cloth beneath it. "I needed not to seek further explanation of the pain I had suffered--was
suffering then, indeed, as I had reason to know when ecstasy permitted a
return of sensation. My back bears the scars at this moment. "'It shall remain there for ever!' I cried, 'like the badge of a _cocher
de fiacre_, who has made the fastest journey on record. 'Coachman! from
the glacier to the valley.' '_Mais oui, monsieur_. Down this crevasse, if
you please.' "And that is the history of our adventure. "Why we were not dashed to pieces? But that, as I accept it, is easy of
elucidation. Imagine a vast crescent moon, with a downward nick from the
end of the tail. This form the fissure took, in one enormous sweep and
drop towards the mouth of the valley. Now, as we rushed headlong, the
gentle curve received us from space to substance quite gradually, until
we were whirring forward wholly on the latter, my luggage suffering the
brunt of the friction. The upward sweep of the crescent diminished our
progress--more and yet more--until we switched over the lower point and
shot quietly down the incline beyond. And all this in ample room, and
without meeting with a single unfriendly obstacle. "'_Voila, mes chers amis, ce qui me met en peine_.' "Fidele laughs, the rogue! "'Ta, ta, ta!' she says. 'But they will not believe a word of it all.'" THE VANISHING HOUSE


"My grandfather," said the banjo, "drank 'dog's-nose,' my father drank
'dog's-nose,' and I drink 'dog's-nose.' If that ain't heredity, there's
no virtue in the board schools." "Ah!" said the piccolo, "you're always a-boasting of your science. And
so, I suppose, your son'll drink 'dog's-nose,' too?" "No," retorted the banjo, with a rumbling laugh, like wind in the
bung-hole of an empty cask; "for I ain't got none. The family ends with
me; which is a pity, for I'm a full-stop to be proud on." He was an enormous, tun-bellied person--a mere mound of expressionless
flesh, whose size alone was an investment that paid a perpetual dividend
of laughter. When, as with the rest of his company, his face was
blackened, it looked like a specimen coal on a pedestal in a museum. There was Christmas company in the Good Intent, and the sanded tap-room,
with its trestle tables and sprigs of holly stuck under sooty beams
reeked with smoke and the steam of hot gin and water. "How much could you put down of a night, Jack?" said a little grinning
man by the door. "Why," said the banjo, "enough to lay the dustiest ghost as ever walked." "Could you, now?" said the little man. "Ah!" said the banjo, chuckling. "There's nothing like settin' one sperit
to lay another; and there I could give you proof number two of heredity." "What! Don't you go for to say you ever see'd a ghost!" "Haven't I? What are you whisperin' about, you blushful chap there by the
winder?" "I was only remarking sir, 'twere snawin' like the devil." "_Is_ it? Then the devil has been misjudged these eighteen hundred and
ninety odd years." "But _did_ you ever see a ghost?" said the little grinning man, pursuing
his subject. "No, I didn't, sir," mimicked the banjo, "saving in coffee grounds. But
my grandfather in _his_ cups see'd one; which brings us to number three
in the matter of heredity." "Give us the story, Jack," said the "bones," whose agued shins were
extemporizing a rattle on their own account before the fire. "Well, I don't mind," said the fat man. "It's seasonable; and I'm
seasonable, like the blessed plum-pudden, I am; and the more burnt brandy
you set about me, the richer and headier I'll go down." "You'd be a jolly old pudden to digest," said the piccolo. "You blow your aggrawation into your pipe and sealing-wax the stops,"
said his friend. He drew critically at his "churchwarden" a moment or so, leaned forward,
emptied his glass into his capacious receptacles, and, giving his
stomach a shift, as if to accommodate it to its new burden, proceeded as
follows:--

"Music and malt is my nat'ral inheritance. My grandfather blew his
'dog's-nose,' and drank his clarinet like a artist and my father--"

"What did you say your grandfather did?" asked the piccolo. "He played the clarinet." "You said he blew his 'dog's-nose.'" "Don't be a ass, Fred!" said the banjo, aggrieved. "How the blazes could
a man blow his dog's nose, unless he muzzled it with a handkercher, and
then twisted its tail? He played the clarinet, I say; and my father
played the musical glasses, which was a form of harmony pertiklerly
genial to him. Amongst us we've piped out a good long century--ah! we
have, for all I look sich a babby bursting on sops and spoon meat." "What!" said the little man by the door. "You don't include them cockt
hatses in your expeerunce?" "My grandfather wore 'em, sir. He wore a play-actin' coat, too, and
buckles to his shoes, when he'd got any; and he and a friend or two made
a permanency of 'waits' (only they called 'em according to the season),
and got their profit goin' from house to house, principally in the
country, and discoursin' music at the low rate of whatever they could get
for it." "Ain't you comin' to the ghost, Jack?" said the little man hungrily. "All in course, sir. Well, gentlemen, it was hard times pretty often with
my grandfather and his friends, as you may suppose; and never so much
as when they had to trudge it across country, with the nor'-easter
buzzin' in their teeth and the snow piled on their cockt hats like lemon
sponge on entry dishes. The rewards, I've heard him say--for he lived to
be ninety, nevertheless--was poor compensation for the drifts, and the
inflienza, and the broken chilblains; but now and again they'd get a fair
skinful of liquor from a jolly squire, as 'd set 'em up like boggarts
mended wi' new broomsticks." "Ho-haw!" broke in a hurdle-maker in a corner; and then, regretting the
publicity of his merriment, put his fingers bashfully to his stubble
lips. "Now," said the banjo, "it's of a pertikler night and a pertikler skinful
that I'm a-going to tell you; and that night fell dark, and that skinful
were took a hundred years ago this December, as I'm a Jack-pudden!" He paused a moment for effect, before he went on:--

"They were down in the sou'-west country, which they little knew; and
were anighing Winchester city, or should 'a' been. But they got muzzed on
the ungodly downs, and before they guessed, they was off the track. My
good hat! there they was, as lost in the snow as three nutshells
a-sinkin' into a hasty pudden. Well, they wandered round; pretty
confident at first, but getting madder and madder as every sense of their
bearings slipped from them. And the bitter cold took their vitals, so as
they saw nothing but a great winding sheet stretched abroad for to wrap
their dead carcasses in. "At last my grandfather he stopt and pulled hisself together with an
awful face, and says he: 'We're Christmas pie for the carrying-on crows
if we don't prove ourselves human. Let's fetch out our pipes and blow our
trouble into 'em.' So they stood together, like as if they was before a
house, and they played 'Kate of Aberdare' mighty dismal and flat, for
their fingers froze to the keys. "Now, I tell you, they hadn't climbed over the first stave, when there
come a skirl of wind and spindrift of snow as almost took them off of
their feet; and, on the going down of it, Jem Sloke, as played the
hautboy, dropped the reed from his mouth, and called out, 'Sakes alive! if we fools ain't been standin' outside a gentleman's gate all the time,
and not knowin' it!' "You might 'a' knocked the three of 'em down wi' a barley straw, as they
stared and stared, and then fell into a low, enjoyin' laugh. For they was
standin' not six fut from a tall iron gate in a stone wall, and behind
these was a great house showin' out dim, with the winders all lighted up. "'Lord!' chuckled my grandfather, 'to think o' the tricks o' this
vagarious country! But, as we're here, we'll go on and give 'em a taste
of our quality.' "They put new heart into the next movement, as you may guess; and they
hadn't fair started on it, when the door of the house swung open, and
down the shaft of light that shot out as far as the gate there come a
smiling young gal, with a tray of glasses in her hands. "Now she come to the bars; and she took and put a glass through, not
sayin' nothin', but invitin' some one to drink with a silent laugh. "Did any one take that glass? Of course he did, you'll be thinkin'; and
you'll be thinkin' wrong. Not a man of the three moved. They was struck
like as stone, and their lips was gone the colour of sloe berries. Not a
man took the glass. For why? The moment the gal presented it, each saw
the face of a thing lookin' out of the winder over the porch, and the
face was hidjus beyond words, and the shadder of it, with the light
behind, stretched out and reached to the gal, and made her hidjus, too. "At last my grandfather give a groan and put out his hand; and, as he did
it, the face went, and the gal was beautiful to see agen. "'Death and the devil!' said he. 'It's one or both, either way; and I
prefer 'em hot to cold!' "He drank off half the glass, smacked his lips, and stood staring a
moment. "'Dear, dear!' said the gal, in a voice like falling water, 'you've drunk
blood, sir!' "My grandfather gave a yell, slapped the rest of the liquor in the faces
of his friends, and threw the cup agen the bars. It broke with a noise
like thunder, and at that he up'd with his hands and fell full length
into the snow." There was a pause. The little man by the door was twisting nervously in
his chair. "He came to--of course, he came to?" said he at length. "He come to," said the banjo solemnly, "in the bitter break of dawn; that
is, he come to as much of hisself as he ever was after. He give a
squiggle and lifted his head; and there was he and his friends a-lyin' on
the snow of the high downs." "And the house and the gal?" "Narry a sign of either, sir, but just the sky and the white stretch; and
one other thing." "And what was that?" "A stain of red sunk in where the cup had spilt." There was a second pause, and the banjo blew into the bowl of his pipe. "They cleared out of that neighbourhood double quick, you'll bet," said
he. "But my grandfather was never the same man agen. His face took
purple, while his friends' only remained splashed with red, same as birth
marks; and, I tell you, if he ever ventur'd upon 'Kate of Aberdare,' his
cheeks swelled up to the reed of his clarinet, like as a blue plum on a
stalk. And forty year after, he died of what they call solution of blood
to the brain." "And you can't have better proof than that," said the little man. "That's what _I_ say," said the banjo. "Next player, gentlemen, please." DARK DIGNUM


"I'd not go higher, sir," said my landlady's father. I made out his
warning through the shrill piping of the wind; and stopped and took in
the plunging seascape from where I stood. The boom of the waves came up
from a vast distance beneath; sky and the horizon of running water seemed
hurrying upon us over the lip of the rearing cliff. "It crumbles!" he cried. "It crumbles near the edge like as frosted
mortar. I've seen a noble sheep, sir, eighty pound of mutton, browsing
here one moment, and seen it go down the next in a puff of white dust. Hark to that! Do you hear it?" Through the tumult of the wind in that high place came a liquid vibrant
sound, like the muffled stroke of iron on an anvil. I thought it the
gobble of water in clanging caves deep down below. "It might be a bell," I said. The old man chuckled joyously. He was my cicerone for the nonce; had
come out of his chair by the ingle-nook to taste a little the salt of
life. The north-easter flashed in the white cataracts of his eyes and
woke a feeble activity in his scrannel limbs. When the wind blew loud,
his daughter had told me, he was always restless, like an imprisoned
sea-gull. He would be up and out. He would rise and flap his old draggled
pinions, as if the great air fanned an expiring spark into flame. "It is a bell!" he cried--"the bell of old St. Dunstan's, that was
swallowed by the waters in the dark times." "Ah," I said. "That is the legend hereabouts." "No legend, sir--no legend. Where be the tombstones of drownded mariners
to prove it such? Not one to forty that they has in other sea-board
parishes. For why? Dunstan bell sounds its warning, and not a craft will
put out." "There is the storm cone," I suggested. He did not hear me. He was punching with his staff at one of a number of
little green mounds that lay about us. "I could tell you a story of these," he said. "Do you know where we
stand?" "On the site of the old churchyard?" "Ay, sir; though it still bore the name of the new yard in my first
memory of it." "Is that so? And what is the story?" He dwelt a minute, dense with introspection. Suddenly he sat himself down
upon a mossy bulge in the turf, and waved me imperiously to a place
beside him. "The old order changeth," he said. "The only lasting foundations of men's
works shall be godliness and law-biding. Long ago they builded a new
church--here, high up on the cliffs, where the waters could not reach;
and, lo! the waters wrought beneath and sapped the foundations, and the
church fell into the sea." "So I understand," I said. "The godless are fools," he chattered knowingly. "Look here at these
bents--thirty of 'em, may be. Tombstones, sir; perished like man his
works, and the decayed stumps of them coated with salt grass." He pointed to the ragged edge of the cliff a score paces away. "They raised it out there," he said, "and further--a temple of bonded
stone. They thought to bribe the Lord to a partnership in their
corruption, and He answered by casting down the fair mansion into the
waves." I said, "Who--who, my friend?" "They that builded the church," he answered. "Well," I said. "It seems a certain foolishness to set the edifice so
close to the margin." Again he chuckled. "It was close, close, as you say; yet none so close as you might think
nowadays. Time hath gnawed here like a rat on a cheese. But the
foolishness appeared in setting the brave mansion between the winds and
its own graveyard. Let the dead lie seawards, one had thought, and the
church inland where we stand. So had the bell rung to this day; and only
the charnel bones flaked piecemeal into the sea." "Certainly, to have done so would show the better providence." "Sir, I said the foolishness _appeared_. But, I tell you, there was
foresight in the disposition--in neighbouring the building to the cliff
path. _For so they could the easier enter unobserved, and store their
Tcegs of Nantes brandy in the belly of the organ_." "They? Who were they?" "Why, who--but two-thirds of all Dunburgh?" "Smugglers?"' "It was a nest of 'em--traffickers in the eternal fire o' weekdays, and
on the Sabbath, who so sanctimonious? But honesty comes not from the
washing, like a clean shirt, nor can the piety of one day purge the evil
of six. They built their church anigh the margin, forasmuch as it was
handy, and that they thought, 'Surely the Lord will not undermine His
own?' A rare community o' blasphemers, fro' the parson that took his
regular toll of the organ-loft, to him that sounded the keys and pulled
out the joyous stops as if they was so many spigots to what lay behind." "Of when do you speak?" "I speak of nigh a century and a half ago. I speak of the time o' the
Seven Years' War and of Exciseman Jones, that, twenty year after he were
buried, took his revenge on the cliff side of the man that done him to
death." "And who was that?" "They called him Dark Dignum, sir--a great feat smuggler, and as wicked
as he was bold,"

"Is your story about him?" "Ay, it is; and of my grandfather, that were a boy when they laid, and
was glad to lay, the exciseman deep as they could dig; for the sight of
his sooty face in his coffin was worse than a bad dream." "Why was that?" The old man edged closer to me, and spoke in a sibilant voice. "He were murdered, sir, foully and horribly, for all they could never
bring it home to the culprit." "Will you tell me about it?" He was nothing loth. The wind, the place of perished tombs, the very
wild-blown locks of this 'withered apple-john', were eerie accompaniments
to the tale he piped in my ear:--

"When my grandfather were a boy," he said, "there lighted in Dunburgh
Exciseman Jones. P'r'aps the village had gained an ill reputation. P'r'aps Exciseman Jones's predecessor had failed to secure the confidence
o' the exekitive. At any rate, the new man was little to the fancy of the
village. He was a grim, sour-looking, brass-bound galloot; and
incorruptible--which was the worst. The keg o' brandy left on his
doorstep o' New Year's Eve had been better unspiled and run into the
gutter; for it led him somehow to the identification of the innocent that
done it, and he had him by the heels in a twinkling. The squire snorted
at the man, and the parson looked askance; but Dark Dignum, he swore he'd
be even with him, if he swung for it. They was hurt and surprised, that
was the truth, over the scrupulosity of certain people; and feelin'
ran high against Exciseman Jones. "At that time Dark Dignum was a young man with a reputation above his
years for profaneness and audacity. Ugly things there were said about
him; and amongst many wicked he was feared for his wickedness. Exciseman
Jones had his eye on him; and that was bad for Exciseman Jones. "Now one murk December night Exciseman Jones staggered home with a
bloody long slice down his scalp, and the red drip from it spotting the
cobble-stones. "'Summut fell on him from a winder,' said Dark Dignum, a little later, as
he were drinkin' hisself hoarse in the Black Boy. 'Summut fell on him
retributive, as you might call it. For, would you believe it, the man had
at the moment been threatenin' me? He did. He said, "I know damn well
about you, Dignum; and for all your damn ingenuity, I'll bring you with a
crack to the ground yet."' "What had happened? 