

E-text prepared by Stephen Schulze and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team



HOMESTEAD ON THE HILLSIDE

by

MRS. MARY JANE HOLMES







By the Same Author in uniform style:

  _Dora Deane_
  _Cousin Maude_
  _Lena Rivers_
  _Meadow Brook_
  _English Orphans_
  _Maggie Miller_
  _Rosamond_
  _Tempest And Sunshine_
  _Homestead on the Hillside_





CONTENTS

The Homestead On The Hillside

   Chapter I.     Mrs. Hamilton
   Chapter II. Lenora And Her Mother
   Chapter III. One Step Toward The Homestead
   Chapter IV. After The Burial
   Chapter V.     Kate Kirby
   Chapter VI. Raising The Wind
   Chapter VII. The Stepmother
   Chapter VIII. Domestic Life At The Homestead
   Chapter IX. Lenora And Carrie
   Chapter X.     Darkness
   Chapter XI. Margaret And Her Father
   Chapter XII. "Carrying Out Dear Mr. Hamilton's Plans"
   Chapter XIII. Retribution
   Chapter XIV. Finale

Rice Corner

   Chapter I. Rice Corner
   Chapter II. The Belle Of Rice Corner
   Chapter III. Monsieur Penoyer
   Chapter IV. Cousin Emma
   Chapter V.     Richard Evelyn And Harley Ashmore
   Chapter VI. Mike And Sally
   Chapter VII. The Bride

The Gilberts; Or, Rice Corner Number Two

   Chapter I. The Gilberts
   Chapter II. Nellie
   Chapter III. The Haunted House
   Chapter IV. Jealousy
   Chapter V.     New Relations
   Chapter VI. Poor, Poor Nellie

The Thanksgiving Party And Its Consequences

   Chapter I. Night Before Thanksgiving
   Chapter II. Thanksgiving Day
   Chapter III. Ada Harcourt
   Chapter IV. Lucy
   Chapter V.     Uncle Israel
   Chapter VI. Explanation
   Chapter VII. A Maneuver
   Chapter VIII. Cousin Berintha And Lucy's Party
   Chapter IX. A Wedding At St. Luke's
   Chapter X. A Surprise
   Chapter XI. Lizzie





CHAPTER I.

MRS. HAMILTON. For many years the broad, rich acres, and old-fashioned, massive
building known as "The Homestead on the Hillside," had passed
successively from father to son, until at last it belonged by right of
inheritance to Ernest Hamilton. Neither time nor expense had been
spared in beautifying and embellishing both house and grounds, and at
the time of which we are speaking there was not for miles around so
lovely a spot as was the shady old homestead. It stood at some distance from the road, and on the bright green lawn
in front were many majestic forest trees, on which had fallen the
lights and shadows of more than a century; and under whose
widespreading branches oft, in the olden time, the Indian warrior had
paused from the chase until the noonday heat was passed. Leading from
the street to the house was a wide, graveled walk bordered with box,
and peeping out from the wilderness of vines and climbing roses were
the white walls of the huge building, which was surrounded on all
sides by a double piazza. Many and hallowed were the associations connected with that old
homestead. On the curiously-carved seats beneath the tall shade trees
were cut the names of some who there had lived, and loved, and passed
away. Through the little gate at the foot of the garden and just
across the brooklet, whose clear waters leaped and laughed in the
glad sunshine, and then went dancing away in the woodland below, was a
quiet spot, where gracefully the willow tree was bending, where the
wild sweetbrier was blooming, and where, too, lay sleeping those who
once gathered round the hearthstone and basked in the sunlight which
ever seemed resting upon the Homestead on the Hillside. But a darker day was coming; a night was approaching when a deep gloom
would overshadow the homestead and the loved ones within its borders. The servants, ever superstitious, now whispered mysteriously that the
spirits of the departed returned nightly to their old accustomed
places, and that dusky hands from the graves of the slumbering dead
were uplifted, as if to warn the master of the domain of the
desolation; which was to come. For more than a year the wife of Ernest
Hamilton had been dying--slowly, surely dying--and though when the
skies were brightest and the sunshine warmest she ever seemed better,
each morning's light still revealed some fresh ravage the disease had
made, until at last there was no hope, and the anxious group which
watched her knew full well that ere long among them would be a vacant
chair, and in the family burying ground an added grave. One evening Mrs. Hamilton seemed more than usually restless, and
requested her daughters to leave her, that she might compose herself
to sleep. Scarcely was she alone when with cat-like tread there glided
through the doorway the dark figure of a woman, who advanced toward
the bedside, noiselessly as a serpent would steal to his ambush. She
was apparently forty-five years of age, and dressed in deep mourning,
which seemed to increase the marble whiteness of her face. Her eyes,
large, black, and glittering, fastened themselves upon, the invalid
with a gaze so intense that Mrs. Hamilton's hand involuntarily sought
the bell-rope, to summon some one else to her room. But ere the bell was rung a strangely sweet, musical voice fell on her
ear, and arrested her movements. "Pardon me for intruding," said the
stranger, "and suffer me to introduce myself. I am Mrs. Carter, who
not long since removed to the village. I have heard of your illness,
and wishing to render you any assistance in my power, I have ventured,
unannounced, into your presence, hoping that I at least am not
unwelcome." Mrs. Hamilton had heard of a widow lady, who with an only daughter had
recently removed to the village, which lay at the foot of the long
hill on which stood the old homestead. She had heard, too, that Mrs.
Carter, though rather singular in some respects, was unusually
benevolent, spending much time in visiting the sick and needy, and, as
far as possible, ministering to their comfort. Extending her hand, she said, "I know you by reputation, Mrs. Carter,
and feel greatly pleased that you have thought to visit me. Pray be
seated." This last invitation was superfluous, for with the air of a person
entirely at home, the lady had seated herself, and as the room was
rather warm, she threw back her bonnet, disclosing to view a mass of
rich brown hair, which made her look several years younger than she
really was. Nothing could be more apparently kind and sincere than
were her words of sympathy, nothing more soothing than the sound of
her voice; and when she for a moment raised Mrs. Hamilton, while she
adjusted her pillows, the sick woman declared that never before had
any one done it so gently or so well. Mrs. Carter was just resuming her seat when in the adjoining hall
there was the sound of a heavy tread, and had Mrs. Hamilton been at
all suspicious of her visitor she would have wondered at the flush
which deepened on her cheek when the door opened and Mr. Hamilton
stood in their midst. On seeing a stranger he turned to leave, but his
wife immediately introduced him, and seating himself upon the sofa, he
remarked, "I have seen you frequently in church, Mrs. Carter, but I
believe I have never spoken with you before." A peculiar expression flitted over her features at these words, an
expression which Mr. Hamilton noticed, and which awoke remembrances of
something unpleasant, though he could not tell what. "Where have I seen her before?" thought he, as she bade them good
night, promising to come again and stay a longer time. "Where have I
seen her before?" and then involuntarily his thoughts went back to the
time, years and years ago, when, a wild young man in college, he had
thoughtlessly trifled with the handsome daughter of his landlady. Even
now he seemed to hear her last words, as he bade her farewell: "You
may go, Ernest Hamilton, and forget me if you can, but Luella does not
so easily forget; and remember, when least you expect it, we shall
meet again." Could this strange being, with honeyed words and winning ways, be that
fiery, vindictive girl? Impossible!--and satisfied with this
conclusion Mr. Hamilton resumed his evening paper. CHAPTER II. LENORA AND HER MOTHER. From the windows of a small, white cottage, at the extremity of
Glenwood village, Lenora Carter watched for her mother's return. "She
stays long," thought she, "but it bodes success to her plan; though
when did she undertake a thing and fail!" The fall of the gatelatch was heard, and in a moment Mrs. Carter was
with her daughter, whose first exclamation was, "What a little
eternity you've been gone! Did you renew your early vows to the man?" "I've no vows to renew," answered Mrs. Carter, "but I've paved the way
well, and got invited to call again." "Oh, capital!" said Lenora. "It takes you, mother, to do up things,
after all; but, really, was Mrs. Hamilton pleased with you?" "Judging by the pressure of her hand when she bade me good-by I should
say she was," answered Mrs. Carter; and Lenora continued: "Did you see
old moneybags?" "Lenora, child, you must not speak so disrespectfully of Mr.
Hamilton," said Mrs. Carter. "I beg your pardon," answered Lenora, while her mother continued: "I
saw him, but do not think he recognized me; and perhaps it is as well
that he should not, until I have made myself indispensable to him and
his family." "Which you will never do with the haughty Mag, I am sure," said
Lenora; "but tell me, is the interior of the house as handsome as the
exterior?" "Far more so," was the reply; and Mrs. Carter proceeded to enumerate
the many costly articles of furniture she had seen. She was interrupted by Lenora, who asked, "How long, think you, will
the incumbrance live?" "Lenora," said Mrs. Carter, "you shall not talk so. No one wishes Mrs.
Hamilton to die; but if such an afflictive dispensation does occur, I
trust we shall all be resigned." "Oh, I keep forgetting that you are acting the part of a resigned
widow; but I, thank fortune, have no part to act, and can say what I
please." "And spoil all our plans, too, by your foolish babbling," interposed
Mrs. Carter. "Let me alone for that," answered Lenora. "I haven't been trained by
such a mother for nothing. But, seriously, how is Mrs. Hamilton's
health?" "She is very low, and cannot possibly live long," was the reply. Here there was a pause in the conversation, during which we will take
the opportunity of introducing more fully to our readers the estimable
Mrs. Carter and her daughter. Mr. Hamilton was right when he
associated the resigned widow with his old flame, Luella Blackburn,
whom be had never seriously thought of marrying, though by way of
pastime he had frequently teased, tormented, and flattered her. Luella
was ambitious, artful, and designing. Wealth and position was the goal
at which she aimed. Both of these she knew Ernest Hamilton possessed,
and she had felt greatly pleased at his evident preference. When,
therefore, at the end of his college course he left her with a few
commonplace remarks, such as he would have spoken to any familiar
acquaintance, her rage knew no bounds; and in the anger of the moment
she resolved, sooner or later, to be revenged upon him. Years, however, passed on, and a man whom she thought wealthy offered
her his hand. She accepted it, and found, too late, that she was
wedded to poverty. This aroused the evil of her nature to such an
extent that her husband's life became one of great unhappiness, and
four years after Lenora's birth he left her. Several years later she
succeeded in procuring a divorce, although she still retained his
name. Recently she had heard of his death, and about the same time,
too, she heard that the wife of Ernest Hamilton was dying. Suddenly a
wild scheme entered her mind. She would remove to the village of
Glenwood, would ingratiate herself into the favor of Mrs. Hamilton,
win her confidence and love, and then when she was dead the rest she
fancied would be an easy matter, for she knew that Mr. Hamilton was
weak and easily flattered. For several weeks they had been in Glenwood, impatiently waiting an
opportunity for making the acquaintance of the Hamiltons. But as
neither Margaret nor Carrie called, Lenora became discouraged, and one
day exclaimed, "I should like to know what you are going to do. There
is no probability of that proud Mag's calling on me. How I hate her,
with her big black eyes and hateful ways!" "Patience, patience," said Mrs. Carter, "I'll manage it; as Mrs.
Hamilton is sick, it will be perfectly proper for me to go and see
her," and then was planned the visit which we have described. "Oh, won't it be grand!" said Lenora that night, as she sat sipping
her tea. "Won't it be grand, if you do succeed, and won't I lord it
over Miss Margaret! As for that little white-faced Carrie, she's too
insipid for one to trouble herself about, and I dare say thinks you a
very nice woman, for how can her Sabbath-school teacher be otherwise;"
and a satirical laugh echoed through the room. Suddenly springing up,
Lenora glanced at herself in the mirror, and turning to her mother,
said, "Did you hear when Walter is expected--and am I so very ugly
looking?" While Mrs. Carter is preparing an answer to the first question, we,
for the sake of our readers, will answer the last one. Lenora was a
little dark-looking girl about eighteen years of age. Her eyes were
black, her face was black, and her hair was black, standing out from
her head in short, thick curls, which gave to her features a strange
witch-like expression. From her mother she had inherited the same
sweet, cooing voice, the same gliding, noiseless footsteps, which had
led some of their acquaintance to accuse them of what, in the days of
New England witchcraft, would have secured their passport to another
world. Lenora had spoken truthfully when she said that she had not been
trained by such a mother for nothing, for whatever of evil appeared in
her conduct was more the result of her mother's training than of a
naturally bad disposition. At times her mother petted and caressed
her, and again, in a fit of ill-humor, drove her from the room,
taunting her with the strong resemblance which she bore to the man
whom she had once called father! On such occasions Lenora was never at
a loss for words, and the scenes which sometimes occurred were too
disgraceful for repetition. On one subject, however, they were united,
and that was in their efforts to become inmates of the homestead on
the hillside. In the accomplishment of this Lenora had a threefold
object: first, it would secure her a luxuriant home; second, she would
be thrown in the way of Walter Hamilton, who was about finishing his
college course; and last, though not least, it would be such a triumph
over Margaret, who, she fancied, treated her with cold indifference. Long after the hour of midnight was rung from the village clock, the
widow and her daughter sat by their fireside, forming plans for the
future, and when at last they retired to sleep it was to dream of
funeral processions, bridal favors, stepchildren, half-sisters, and
double connections all around. CHAPTER III. ONE STEP TOWARD THE HOMESTEAD. Weeks passed on, and so necessary to the comfort of the invalid did
the presence of Mrs. Carter become, that at last, by particular
request, she took up her abode at the homestead, becoming Mrs.
Hamilton's constant nurse and attendant. Lenora, for the time being,
was sent to the house of a friend, who lived not far distant. When
Margaret Hamilton learned of the arrangement she opposed it with all
her force. "Send her away, mother," said she one evening; "please send her away,
for I cannot endure her presence, with her oily words and silent
footsteps. She reminds me of the serpent, who decoyed Eve into eating
that apple, and I always feel an attack of the nightmare whenever I
know that her big, black eyes are fastened upon me." "How differently people see!" laughed Carrie, who was sitting by. "Why, Mag, I always fancy _her_ to be in a nightmare when your big
eyes light upon her." "It's because she knows she's guilty," answered Mag, her words and
manner warming up with the subject. "Say, mother, won't you send her
off! It seems as though a dark shadow falls upon us all the moment she
eaters the house." "She is too invaluable a nurse to be discharged for a slight whim,"
answered Mrs. Hamilton. "Besides she bears the best of reputations,
and I don't see what possible harm can come of her being here." Margaret sighed, for though she knew full well the "possible harm"
which might come of it, she could not tell it to her pale, dying
mother; and ere she had time for any answer, the black bombazine
dress, white linen, collar, and white, smooth face of Widow Carter
moved silently into the room. There was a gleam of intense hatred in
the dark eyes which for a moment flashed on Margaret's face, and then
a soft hand gently stroked the glossy hair of the indignant girl, and
in the most musical tones imaginable a low voice murmured, "Maggie,
dear, you look flushed and wearied. Are you quite well?" "Perfectly so," answered Margaret; and then rising, she left the room,
but not until she had heard her mother say, "Dear Mrs. Carter, I am so
glad you've come!" "Is everybody bewitched," thought Mag, as she repaired to her chamber,
"father, mother, Carrie, and all? How I wish Walter was here. He
always sees things as I do." Margaret Hamilton was a high-spirited, intelligent girl, about
nineteen years of age. She was not beautiful, but had you asked for
the finest-looking girl in all Glenwood, Mag would surely have been
pointed out. She was rather above the medium height, and in her whole
bearing there was a quiet dignity, which many mistook for hauteur. Naturally frank, affectionate, and kind-hearted, she was, perhaps, a
little strong in her prejudices, which, when once satisfactorily
formed, could not easily be shaken. For Mrs. Carter she had conceived a strong dislike, for she believed
her to be an artful, hypocritical woman, and now, as she sat by the
window in her room, her heart swelled with indignation toward one who
had thus usurped her place by her mother's bedside, whom Carrie was
learning to confide in, and of whom even the father said, "she is a
most excellent woman." "I will write to Walter," said she, "and tell him to come
immediately." Suiting the action to the word, she drew up her writing desk, and soon
a finished letter was lying before her. Ere she had time to fold and
direct it, a loud cry from her young brother Willie summoned her for a
few moments from the room, and on her return she met in the doorway
the black bombazine and linen collar. "Madam," said she, "did you wish for anything?" "Yes, dear," was the soft answer, which, however, in this case failed
to turn, away wrath. "Yes, dear, your mother said you knew where there
were some fine bits of linen." "And could not Carrie come for them?" asked Mag. "Yes, dear, but she looks so delicate that I do not like to send her
up these long stairs oftener than is necessary. Haven't you noticed
how pale she is getting of late? I shouldn't be at all surprised--"
but before the sentence was finished the linen was found, and the door
closed upon Mrs. Carter. A new idea had been awakened in Margaret's mind, and for the first
time she thought how much her sister really had changed. Carrie, who
was four years younger than Margaret, had ever been delicate, and her
parents had always feared that not long could they keep her; but
though each winter her cough had returned with increased severity,
though the veins on her white brow grew more distinct, and her large,
blue eyes glowed with unwonted luster, still Margaret had never before
dreamed of danger, never thought that soon her sister's voice would be
missed, and that Carrie would be gone. But she thought of it now, and
laying her head upon the table wept for a time in silence. At length, drying her tears, she folded her letter and took it to the
post-office. As she was returning home she was met by a servant, who
exclaimed, "Run, Miss Margaret, run; your mother is dying, and Mrs.
Carter sent me for you!" Swift as the mountain chamois, Margaret sped up the long, steep hill,
and in a few moments stood within her mother's sick-room. Supported in
the arms of Mrs. Carter lay the dying woman, while her eyes, already
overshadowed with the mists of coming death, wandered anxiously around
the room, as if in quest of some one. The moment Margaret appeared, a
satisfied smile broke over her wasted features, and beckoning her
daughter to her bedside, she whispered, "Dear Maggie, you did not
think I'd die so soon, when you went away." A burst of tears was Maggie's only answer, as she passionately kissed
the cold, white lips, which had never breathed aught to her save words
of love and gentleness. Far different, however, would have been her
reply had she known the reason of her mother's question. Not long
after she had left the house for the office, Mrs. Hamilton had been
taken worse, and the physician, who chanced to be present, pronounced
her dying. Instantly the alarmed husband summoned together his
household, but Mag was missing. No one had seen her; no one knew where
she was, until Mrs. Carter, who had been some little time absent from
the room reentered it, saying "Margaret had started for the
post-office with a letter when I sent a servant to tell her of her
mother's danger, but for some reason she kept on, though I dare say
she will soon be back." As we well know, the substance of this speech was true, though the
impression which Mrs. Carter's words conveyed was entirely false. For
the advancement of her own cause she felt that it was necessary to
weaken the high estimation in which Mr. Hamilton held his daughter,
and she fancied that the mother's death-bed was as fitting a place
where to commence operations as she could select. As Margaret hung over her mother's pillow, the false woman, as if to
confirm the assertion she had made, leaned forward and said, "Robin
told you, I suppose? I sent him to do so." Margaret nodded assent, while a deeper gloom fell upon the brow of Mr.
Hamilton, who stood with folded arms watching the advance of the great
destroyer. It came at last, and though no perceptible change heralded
its approach, there was one fearful spasm, one long-drawn sigh, a
striving of the eye for one more glimpse of the loved ones gathered
near, and then Mrs. Hamilton was dead. On the bosom of Mrs. Carter her
life was breathed away, and when all was over that lady laid gently
down her burden, carefully adjusted the tumbled covering, and then
stepping to the window, looked out, while the stricken group deplored
their loss. Long and bitterly over their dead they wept, but not on one of that
weeping band fell the bolt so crushingly as upon Willie, the youngest
of the flock, the child four summers old, who had ever lived in the
light of his mother's love. They had told him she would die, but he
understood them not, for never before had he looked on death; and now,
when to his childish words of love his mother made no answer, most
piteously rang out the infantile cry, "Mother, oh, my mother, who'll
be my mother now?" Caressingly, a small, white hand was laid on Willie's yellow curls,
but ere the words of love were spoken Margaret took the little fellow
in her arms, and whispered through her tears, "I'll be your mother,
darling." Willie brushed the tear-drops from his sister's cheek and laying his
fair, round face upon her neck, said, "And who'll be Maggie's mother? Mrs. Carter?" "Never! never!" answered Mag, while to the glance of hatred and
defiance cast upon her she returned one equally scornful and
determined. Soon from the village there came words of sympathy and offers of
assistance; but Mrs. Carter could do everything, and in her blandest
tones she declined the services of the neighbors, refusing even to
admit them into the presence of Margaret and Carrie, who, she said
were so much exhausted as to be unable to bear the fresh burst of
grief which the sight of an old friend would surely produce. So the
neighbors went home, and as the world will ever do, descanted upon the
probable result of Mrs. Carter's labors at the homestead. Thus, ere
Ernest Hamilton had been three days a widower, many in fancy had
wedded him to Mrs. Carter, saying that nowhere could he find so good a
mother for his children. And truly she did seem to be indispensable in that house of mourning. 'Twas she who saw that everything was done, quietly and in order;
'twas she who so neatly arranged the muslin shroud; 'twas her arms
that supported the half-fainting Carrie when first her eye rested on
her mother, coffined for the grave; 'twas she who whispered words of
comfort to the desolate husband; and she, too, it was, who, on the
night when Walter was expected home, _kindly_ sat up until past
midnight to receive him! She had read Mag's letter, and by being first to welcome the young man
home, she hoped to remove from his mind any prejudice which he might
feel for her, and by her bland smiles and gentle words to lure him
into the belief that she was perfect, and Margaret uncharitable. Partially she succeeded, too, for when next morning Mag expressed a
desire that Mrs. Carter would go home, he replied, "I think you judge
her wrongfully; she seems to be a most amiable, kind-hearted woman." "_Et tu, Brute!_" Mag could have said, but 'twas neither the time nor
the place, and linking her arm within her brother's she led him into
the adjoining room, where stood their mother's coffin. CHAPTER IV. AFTER THE BURIAL. Across the bright waters of the silvery lake which lay not far from
Glenwood village, over the grassy hillside, and down the long, green
valley, had floated the notes of the tolling bell. In the Hamilton
mansion sympathizing friends had gathered, and through the crowded
parlors a solemn hush had reigned, broken only by the voice of the
white-haired man of God, who in trembling tones prayed for the
bereaved ones. Over the costly coffin tear-wet faces had bent, and on
the marble features of her who slept within it had been pressed the
passionate kisses of a long, a last farewell. Through the shady garden and across the running brook, whose waters
this day murmured more sadly than 'twas their wont to do, the funeral
train had passed; and in the dark, moist earth, by the side of many
other still, pale sleepers, who offered no remonstrance when among
them another came, they had buried the departed. From the windows of
the homestead lights were gleaming, and in the common sitting-room sat
Ernest Hamilton, and by his side his four motherless children. In the
stuffed armchair, sacred for the sake of one who had called it hers,
reclined the black bombazine and linen collar of Widow Carter! She had, as she said, fully intended to return home immediately after
the burial, but there were so many little things to be seen to, so
much to be done, which Margaret, of course, did not feel like doing,
that she decided to stay until after supper, together with Lenora, who
had come to the funeral. When supper was over, and there was no longer
an excuse for lingering, she found, very greatly to her surprise and
chagrin, no doubt, that the clouds, which all day had looked dark and
angry, were now pouring rain. "What shall I do?" she exclaimed in great apparent distress; then
stepping to the door of the sitting-room, she said, "Maggie, dear, can
you lend me an umbrella? It is raining very hard, and I do not wish to
go home without one; I will send it back to-morrow." "Certainly," answered Margaret. "Umbrella and overshoes, too;" and
rising, she left the room to procure them. "But you surely are not going out in this storm," said Mr. Hamilton;
while Carrie, who really liked Mrs. Carter, and felt that it would be
more lonely when she was gone, exclaimed eagerly, "Oh, don't leave us
to-night, Mrs. Carter. Don't." "Yes, I think I must," was the answer, while Mr. Hamilton continued:
"You had better stay; but if you insist upon going, I will order the
carriage, as you must not walk." "Rather than put you to all that trouble, I will remain," said Mrs.
Carter; and when Mag returned with two umbrellas and two pairs of
overshoes, she found the widow comfortably seated in her mother's
armchair, while on the stool at her side sat Lenora looking not unlike
a little imp, with her wild, black face, and short, thick curls. Walter Hamilton had not had much opportunity for scanning the face of
Mrs. Carter, but now, as she sat there with the firelight flickering
over her features, he fancied that he could trace marks of the
treacherous deceit of which Mag had warned him; and when the full
black eyes rested upon Margaret he failed not to note the glance of
scorn which flashed from them, and which changed to a look of
affectionate regard the moment she saw she was observed. "There is
something wrong about her," thought he, "and the next time I am alone
with Mag I'll ask what it is she fears from this woman." That night, in the solitude of their room, mother and child communed
together as follows: "I do believe, mother, you are twin sister to the
old one himself. Why, who would have thought, when first you made that
_friendly_ visit, that in five weeks time both of us would be snugly
ensconced in the best chamber of the homestead?" "If you think we are in the best chamber, you are greatly mistaken,"
replied Mrs. Carter. "Margaret Hamilton has power enough yet to keep
us out of that. Didn't she look crestfallen though, when she found I
was going to stay, notwithstanding her very disinterested offer of
umbrellas and overshoes? But I'll pay it all back when I become--"

"Mistress of the house," added Lenora. "Why not speak out plainly? Or
are you afraid the walls have ears, and that the devoted Mrs. Carter's
speeches would not sound well repeated? Oh, how sanctimonious you did
look to-day when you were talking pious to Carrie! I actually had to
force a sneeze, to keep from laughing outright, though she, little
simpleton, swallowed it all, and I dare say wonders where you keep
your wings! But really, mother, I hope you don't intend to pet her so
always, for 'twould be more than it's worth to see it." "I guess I know how to manage," returned Mrs. Carter. "There's nothing
will win a parent's affection so soon as to pet the children." "And so I suppose you expect Mr. Hamilton to pet _this_ beautiful
child!" said Lenora, laughing loudly at the idea, and waltzing back
and forth before the mirror. "Lenora! _behave!_ I will not see you conduct so," said the widow; to
which the young lady replied, "Shut your eyes, and then you can't!" Meantime, an entirely different conversation was going on in another
part of the house, where sat Walter Hamilton, with his arm thrown
affectionately around, Mag, who briefly told of what she feared would
result from Mrs. Carter's intimacy at their house. "Impossible!" said the young man, starting to his feet. "Impossible! Our father has too much sense to marry again anyway, and much more, to
marry one so greatly inferior to our own dear mother." "I hope it may prove so," answered Mag; "but with all due respect for
our father, _you_ know and I know that mother's was the stronger mind,
the controlling spirit, and now that she is gone father will be more
easily deceived." Margaret told the truth; for her mother had possessed a strong,
intelligent mind, and was greatly the superior of her father, who, as
we have before remarked, was rather weak and easily flattered. Always
sincere himself in what he said, he could not believe that other
people were aught than what they seemed to be, and thus oftentimes his
confidence had been betrayed by those in whom he trusted. As yet he
had, of course, entertained no thought of ever making Mrs. Carter his
wife; but her society was agreeable, her words and manner soothing,
and when, on the day following the burial, she actually took her
departure, bag, baggage, Lenora, and all, he felt how doubly lonely
was the old homestead, and wondered why she could not stay. There was
room enough, and then Margaret was too young to assume the duties of
housekeeper. Other men in similar circumstances had hired
housekeepers, and why could not he? He would speak to Mag about it
that very night. But when evening came, Walter, Carrie, and Willie all
were present, and he found no opportunity of seeing Margaret alone;
neither did any occur until after Walter had returned to college,
which he did the week following his mother's death. That night the little parlor at the cottage where dwelt the Widow
Carter looked unusually snug and cozy. It was autumn, and as the
evenings were rather cool a cheerful wood fire was blazing on the
hearth. Before it stood a tasteful little workstand, near which were
seated Lenora and her mother, the one industriously knitting, and the
other occasionally touching the strings of her guitar, which was
suspended from her neck by a crimson ribbon. On the sideboard stood a
fruit dish loaded with red and golden apples, and near it a basket
filled with the rich purple grapes. That day in the street Lenora had met Mr. Hamilton, who asked if her
mother would be at home that evening, saying he intended to call for
the purpose of settling the bill which he owed her for services
rendered to his family in their late affliction. "When I once get him here, I will keep him as long as possible," said
Mrs. Carter; "and, Lenora, child, if he stays late, say till nine
o'clock, you had better go quietly to bed." "Or into the next room, and listen," thought Lenora. Seven o'clock came, and on the graveled walk there was heard the sound
of footsteps, and in a moment Ernest Hamilton stood in the room,
shaking the warm hand of the widow, who was delighted to see him, but
_so_ sorry to find him looking pale and thin! Rejecting a seat in the
comfortable rocking-chair, which Lenora pushed toward him, he
proceeded at once to business, and taking from his purse fifteen
dollars, passed them toward Mrs. Carter, asking if that would
remunerate her for the three weeks' services in his family. But Mrs. Carter thrust them aside, saying, "Sit down, Mr. Hamilton,
sit down. I have a great deal to ask you about Maggie and dear
Carrie's health." "And sweet little Willie," chimed in Lenora. Accordingly Mr. Hamilton sat down, and so fast did Mrs. Carter talk
that the clock was pointing to half past eight ere he got another
chance to offer his bills. Then, with the look of a much-injured
woman, Mrs. Carter declined the money, saying, "Is it possible, Mr.
Hamilton, that you suppose my services can be bought! What I did for
your wife, I would do for any one who needed me, though for but few
could I entertain the same feelings I did for her. Short as was our
acquaintance, she seemed to me like a beloved sister; and now that she
is gone I feel that we have lost an invaluable treasure--"

Here Mrs. Carter broke down entirely, and was obliged to raise her
cambric handkerchief to her eyes, while Lenora walked to the window to
conceal her emotions, whatever they might have been! When the
agitation of the company had somewhat subsided, Mr. Hamilton again
insisted, and again Mrs. Carter refused. At last, finding her
perfectly inexorable, he proceeded to express his warmest thanks and
deepest gratitude for what she had done, saying he should ever feel
indebted to her for her great kindness; then, as the clock struck
nine, he arose to go, in spite of Mrs. Carter's zealous efforts to
detain him longer. "Call again," said she, as she lighted him to the door; "call again
and we will talk over old times when we were young, and lived in New
Haven!" Mr. Hamilton started, and looking her full in the face, exclaimed,
"Luella Blackburn! It is as I at first suspected; but who would have
thought it!" "Yes--I am Luella," said Mrs. Carter; "though greatly changed, I
trust, from the Luella you once knew, and of whom even I have no very
pleasant reminiscences; but call again, and I will tell you of many of
your old classmates." Mr. Hamilton would have gone almost anywhere for the sake of hearing
from his classmates, many of whom he greatly esteemed; and as in this
case the "anywhere" was only at Widow Carter's, the idea was not
altogether distasteful to him, and when he bade her good night he was
under a promise to call again soon. All hopes, however, of procuring
her for his housekeeper were given up, for if she resented his offer
of payment for what she had already done, she surely would be doubly
indignant at his last proposed plan. After becoming convinced of this
fact, it is a little strange how suddenly he found that he did not
need a housekeeper--that Margaret, who before could not do at all,
could now do very well--as well as anybody. And Margaret did do well,
both as housekeeper and mother of little Willie, who seemed to have
transferred to her the affection he had borne for his mother. At intervals during the autumn Mrs. Carter called, always giving a
world of good advice, patting Carrie's pale cheek, kissing Willie, and
then going away. But as none of her calls were ever returned they
gradually became less frequent, and as the winter advanced ceased
altogether; while Margaret, hearing nothing, and seeing nothing, began
to forget her fears, and to laugh at them as having been groundless. CHAPTER V.

KATE KIRBY. The little brooklet, which danced so merrily by the homestead
burial-place, and then flowed on in many graceful turns and
evolutions, finally lost itself in a glossy mill-pond, whose waters,
when the forest trees were stripped of their foliage, gleamed and
twinkled in the smoky autumn light, or lay cold and still beneath the
breath of winter. During this season of the year, from the upper
windows of the homestead the mill-pond was discernible, together with
a small red building which stood upon its banks. For many years this house had been occupied by Mr. Kirby, who had been
a schoolboy with Ernest Hamilton, and who, though naturally
intelligent, had never aspired to any higher employment than that of
being miller on the farm of his old friend. Three years before our
story opens Mr. Kirby had died, and a stranger had been employed to
take his place. Mrs. Kirby, however, was so much attached to her
woodland home and its forest scenery that she still continued to
occupy the low red house together with her daughter Kate, who sighed
for no better or more elegant home, although rumor whispered that
there was in store for her a far more costly dwelling, than the
"Homestead on the Hillside." Currently was it reported that during Walter Hamilton's vacations the
winding footpath, which followed the course of the streamlet down to
the mill-pond, was trodden more frequently than usual. The
postmaster's wife, too, had hinted strongly of certain ominous letters
from New Haven, which regularly came, directed to Kate, when Walter
was not at home; so, putting together these two facts, and adding to
them the high estimation in which Mrs. Kirby and her daughter were
known to be held by the Hamiltons, it was generally conceded that
there could be no shadow of doubt concerning the state of affairs
between the heir apparent of the old homestead and the daughter of the
poor miller. Kate was a universal favorite, and by nearly all was it thought that
in everything save money she was fully the equal of Walter Hamilton. To a face and form of the most perfect beauty she added a degree of
intelligence and sparkling wit, which, in all the rides, parties, and
_fetes_ given by the young people of Glenwood, caused her society to
be chosen in preference to those whose fathers counted their money by
thousands. A few there were who said that Kate's long intimacy with Margaret
Hamilton had made her proud; but in the rude dwellings and crazy
tenements which skirted the borders of Glenwood village was many a
blind old woman, and many a hoary-headed man, who in their daily
prayers remembered the beautiful Kate, the "fair forest flower," who
came so oft among them with her sweet young face and gentle words. For
Kate both Margaret and Carrie Hamilton already felt a sisterly
affection, while their father smiled graciously upon her, secretly
hoping, however, that his son would make a more brilliant match, but
resolving not to interfere if at last his choice should fall upon her. One afternoon, early in April, as Margaret sat in her chamber, busy
upon a piece of needlework, the door softly opened, and a mass of
bright chestnut curls became visible; next appeared the laughing blue
eyes; and finally the whole of Kate Kirby bounded into the room
saying, "Good afternoon, Maggie; are you very busy, and wish I hadn't
come?" "I am never too busy to see you," answered Margaret, at the same time
pushing toward Kate the little ottoman on which she always sat when in
that room. Kate took the proffered seat, and throwing aside her bonnet, began
with, "Maggie, I want to tell you something, though I don't know as it
is quite right to do so; still you may as well hear it from me as any
one." "Do pray tell," answered Mag, "I am dying with curiosity." So Kate smoothed down her black silk apron, twisted one of her curls
into a horridly ugly shape, and commenced with, "What kind of a woman
is that Mrs. Carter, down in the village?" Instantly Margaret's suspicions were aroused, and starting as if a
serpent had stung her, she exclaimed, "Mrs. Carter! is it of her you
will tell me? She is a most dangerous woman--a woman whom your mother
would call a 'snake in the grass.'" "Precisely so," answered Kate. "That is just what mother says of her,
and yet nearly all the village are ready to fall down and worship
her." "Let them, then," said Mag; "I have no objections, provided they keep
their molten calf to themselves. No one wants her here. But what is it
about her?--tell me." Briefly then Kate told her how Mr. Hamilton was, and for a long time
had been, in the habit of spending one evening every week with Mrs.
Carter; and that people, not without good cause, were already pointing
her out as the future mistress of the homestead. "Never, never!" cried Mag vehemently. "Never shall she come here. She
our mother indeed! It shall not be, if I can prevent it." After a little further conversation, Kate departed, leaving Mag to
meditate upon the best means by which to avert the threatened evil. What Kate had told her was true. Mr. Hamilton had so many questions to
ask concerning his old classmates, and Mrs. Carter had so much to
tell, that, though they had worked industriously all winter, they were
not through yet; neither would they be until Mrs. Carter found herself
again within the old homestead. The night following Kate's visit Mag determined to speak with her
father; but immediately after tea he went out, saying he should not
return until nine o'clock. With a great effort Mag forced down the
angry words which she felt rising within her, and then seating herself
at her work she resolved to await his return. Not a word on the
subject did she say to Carrie, who retired to her room at half-past
eight, as was her usual custom. Alone now Margaret waited. Nine, ten,
eleven had been struck, and then into the sitting-room came Mr.
Hamilton, greatly astonished at finding his daughter there. "Why, Margaret," said he, "why are you sitting up so late?" "If it is late for me, it is late for you," answered Margaret, who,
now that the trial had come, felt the awkwardness of the task she had
undertaken. "But I had business," answered Mr. Hamilton; and Margaret, looking him
steadily in the face, asked:

"Is not your business of a nature which equally concerns us all?" A momentary flush passed over his features as he replied, "What do you
mean? I do not comprehend." Hurriedly, and in broken sentences, Margaret told him what she meant,
and then tremblingly she waited for his answer. Frowning angrily, he
spoke to his daughter the first harsh words which had ever passed his
lips toward either of his children. "Go to your room, and don't presume to interfere with me again. I
trust I am competent to attend to my own matters!" Almost convulsively Margaret's arms closed round her father's neck,
as she said, "Don't speak so to me, father. You never did
before--never would now, but for _her_. Oh, father, promise me, by the
memory of my angel mother, never to see her again. She is a base,
designing woman." Mr. Hamilton unwound his daughter's arms from his neck, and speaking
more gently, said, "What proof have you of that assertion? Give me
proof, and I promise to do your bidding." But Mag had no such proof at hand, and she could only reiterate her
suspicions, her belief, which, of course, failed to convince the
biased man, who, rising, said: "Your mother confided and trusted in
her, so why should not you?" The next moment Margaret was alone. For a long time she wept, and it
was not until the eastern horizon began to grow gray in the morning
twilight that she laid her head upon her pillow, and forgot in sleep
how unhappy she had been. Her words, however, were not without their
effect, for when the night came round on which her father was
accustomed to pay his weekly visit, he stayed at home, spending the
whole evening with his daughters, and appearing really gratified at
Margaret's efforts to entertain him. But, alas! the chain of the widow
was too firmly thrown around him for a daughter's hand alone to sever
the fast-bound links. When the next Thursday evening came Mag was confined to her room by a
sick headache, from which she had been suffering all day. As night
approached she frequently asked if her father were below. At last the
front door opened, and she heard his step upon the piazza. Starting
up, she hurried to the window, while at the same moment Mr. Hamilton
paused, and raising his eyes saw the white face of his daughter
pressed against the window-pane as she looked imploringly after him;
but there was not enough of power in a single look to deter him, and,
wafting her a kiss, he turned away. Sadly Margaret watched him until
he disappeared down the long hill; then, returning to her couch, she
wept bitterly. Meantime Mrs. Carter, who had been greatly chagrined at the
non-appearance of Mr. Hamilton the week before, was now confidently
expecting him. He had not yet asked her to be his wife, and the delay
somewhat annoyed both herself and Lenora. "I declare, mother," said Lenora, "I should suppose you might contrive
up something to bring matters to a focus. I think it's perfectly
ridiculous to see two old crones, who ought to be trotting their
grandchildren, cooing and simpering away at each other, and all for
nothing, too." "Can't you be easy awhile longer?" asked Mrs. Carter "hasn't he said
everything he can say except 'will you marry me?'" "A very important question, too," returned Lenora; "and I don't know
what business you have to expect anything from him until it is asked." "Mr. Hamilton is proud," answered Mrs. Carter--"is afraid of doing
anything which might possibly lower him. Now, if by any means I could
make him believe that I had received an offer from some one fully if
not more than his equal, I think it would settle the matter, and I've
decided upon the following plan. I'll write a proposal myself, sign
old Judge B----'s name to it, and next time Mr. Hamilton comes let him
surprise me in reading it. Then, as he is such a _dear_, long-tried
friend, it will be quite proper for me to confide in him, and ask his
advice." Lenora's eyes opened wider, as she exclaimed, "_My gracious_! who but
_you_ would ever have thought of that." Accordingly the letter was written, sealed, directed, broken open,
laughed over, and laid away in the stand drawer. "Mr. Hamilton, mother," said Lenora, as half an hour afterward she
ushered that gentleman into the room. But so wholly absorbed was the
black bombazine and linen collar in the contents of an open letter,
which she held in her hand, that the words were twice repeated--"Mr.
Hamilton, mother"--ere she raised her eyes! Then coming forward with
well-feigned confusion, she apologized for not having observed him
before, saying she was sure he would excuse her if he knew the
contents of her letter. Of course he wanted to know, and of course she
didn't want to tell. He was too polite to urge her, and the
conversation soon took another channel. After a time Lenora left the room, and Mrs. Carter, again speaking of
the letter, begged to make a confidant of Mr. Hamilton, and ask his
advice. He heard the letter read through, and after a moment's silence
asked, "Do you like him, Mrs. Carter?" "Why--no--I don't think I do," said she, "but then the widow's lot is
so lonely." "I know it is," sighed he, while through the keyhole of the opposite
door came something which sounded very much like a stifled laugh! It
was the hour of Ernest Hamilton's temptation, and but for the
remembrance of the sad, white face which had gazed so sorrowfully at
him from the window he had fallen. But Maggie's presence seemed with
him--her voice whispered in his ear, "Don't do it, father, don't"--and
he calmly answered that it would be a good match. But he could not, no
he could not advise her to marry him; so he qualified what he had said
by asking her not to be in a hurry--to wait awhile. The laugh through
the keyhole was changed to a hiss, which Mrs. Carter said must be the
wind, although there was not enough stirring to move the rose bushes
which grew by the doorstep! So much was Mr. Hamilton held in thrall by the widow that on his way
home he hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry that he had not
proposed. If Judge B---- would marry her she surely was good enough
for him. Anon, too, he recalled her hesitation about confessing that
the judge was indifferent to her. Jealousy crept in and completed
what flattery and intrigue had commenced. One week from that night
Ernest Hamilton and Luella Carter were engaged, but for appearance's
sake their marriage was not to take place until the ensuing autumn. CHAPTER VI. RAISING THE WIND. "Where are you going now?" asked Mrs. Carter of her daughter, as she
saw her preparing to go out one afternoon, a few weeks after the
engagement. "Going to raise the wind," was the answer. "Going to what?" exclaimed Mrs. Carter. "To raise the wind! Are you deaf?" yelled Lenora. "Raise the wind!" repeated Mrs. Carter; "what do you mean?" "Mean what I say," said Lenora; and closing the door after her she
left her mother to wonder "what fresh mischief the little torment was
at." But she was only going to make a _friendly_ call on Margaret and
Carrie, the latter of whom she had heard was sick. "Is Miss Hamilton at home?" asked she of the servant girl who answered
her ring, and whom she had never seen before. "Yes, ma'am; walk in the parlor. What name shall I give her if you
please?" "Miss Carter--Lenora Carter;" and the servant girl departed, repeating
to herself all the way up the stairs, "Miss Carther--Lenora Carther!" "Lenora Carter want to see me!" exclaimed Mag, who, together with Kate
Kirby, was in her sister's room. "Yes, ma'am; an' sure 'twas Miss Hampleton she was wishin' to see,"
said the Irish girl. "Well, I shall not go down," answered Mag. "Tell her, Rachel, that I
am otherwise engaged." "Oh, Maggie," said Carrie, "why not see her? I would if I were you." "Rachel can ask her up here if you wish it," answered Mag, "but I
shall leave the room." "Faith, an' what shall I do?" asked Rachel, who was fresh from "swate
Ireland" and felt puzzled to know why a "silk frock and smart bonnet"
should not always be welcome. "Ask her up," answered Kate. "I've never
seen her nearer than across the church and have some curiosity--"

A moment after Rachel thrust her head in at the parlor door, saying,
"If you please, ma'am, Miss Marget is engaged, and does not want to
see you, but Miss Carrie says you may come up there." "Very well," said Lenora; and tripping after the servant girl, she was
soon in Carrie's room. After retailing nearly all the gossip of which she was mistress, she
suddenly turned to Carrie, and said, "Did you know that your father
was going to be married?" "My father going to be married!" said Carrie, opening her blue eyes in
astonishment. "My father going to be married! To whom pray?" "To a lady from the East--one whom he used to know and flirt with when
he was in college!" was Lenora's grave reply. "What is her name?" asked Kate. "Her name? Let me see--Miss--Blackwell--Blackmer--_Blackheart_. It
sounds the most like Blackheart." "What a queer name," said Kate; "but tell us what opportunity has Mr.
Hamilton had of renewing his early acquaintance with the lady." "Don't you know he's been East this winter?" asked Lenora. "Yes, as far as Albany," answered Carrie. "Well," continued Lenora, "'twas during his Eastern trip that the
matter was settled; but pray don't repeat it from me, except it be to
Maggie, who I dare say, will feel glad to be relieved of her heavy
responsibilities--but as I live, Carrie, you are crying! What is the
matter?" But Carrie made no answer, and for a time wept on in silence. She
could not endure the thought that another would so soon take the place
of her lost mother in the household and in the affections of her
father. There was, besides, something exceedingly annoying in the
manner of her who communicated the intelligence, and secretly Carrie
felt glad that the dreaded "Miss Blackheart" had, of course, no Lenora
to bring with her! "Do you know all this to be true?" asked Kate. "Perfectly true," said Lenora. "We have friends living in the vicinity
of the lady, and there can be no mistake, except, indeed, in the name,
which I am not sure is right!" Then hastily kissing Carrie, the little hussy went away, very well
satisfied with her afternoon's call. As soon as she was out of hearing
Margaret entered her sister's room, and on noticing Carrie's flushed
cheek and red eyes, inquired the cause. Immediately Kate told her what
Lenora had said, but instead of weeping, as Carrie had done, she
betrayed no emotion whatever. "Why, Maggie, ain't you sorry?" asked Carrie. "No, I am glad," returned Mag. "I've seen all along that sooner or
later father would make himself ridiculous, and I'd rather he'd marry
forty women from the East, than one woman not far from here whom I
know." All that afternoon Mag tripped with unwonted gaiety about the house. A
weight was lifted from her heart, for in her estimation any one whom
her father would marry was preferable to Mrs. Carter. *       *       *       *       *

Oh, how the widow scolded the daughter, and how the daughter laughed
at the widow, when she related the particulars of her call. "Lenora, what could have possessed you to tell such a lie?" said Mrs.
Carter. "Not so fast, mother mine," answered Lenora. "'Twasn't a lie. Mr.
Hamilton _is_ engaged to a lady from the East. He _did_ flirt with her
in his younger days; and, pray, didn't he have to come East when be
called to inquire after his beloved classmates, and ended by getting
checkmated! Besides, I think you ought to thank me for turning the
channel of gossip in another direction, for now you will be saved from
all impertinent questions and remarks." This mode of reasoning failed to convince the widow, who felt quite
willing that people should know of her flattering prospects; and when
a few days after Mrs. Dr. Otis told her that Mrs. Kimball said that
Polly Larkins said that her hired girl told her that Mrs. Kirby's
hired girl told her that she overheard Miss Kate telling her mother
that Lenora Carter said that Mr. Hamilton was going to be married to
her mother's intimate friend, Mrs. Carter would have denied the whole
and probably divulged her own secret, had not Lenora, who chanced to
be present, declared, with the coolest effrontery, that 'twas all
true--that her mother had promised to stand up with them, and so folks
would find it to be if they did not die of curiosity before autumn! "Lenora, child, how can you talk so?" asked the distressed lady, as
the door closed upon her visitor. Lenora went off into fits of explosive laughter, bounding up and down
like an india-rubber ball, and at last condescended to say, "I know
what I'm about. Do you want Mag Hamilton breaking up the match, as she
surely would do, between this and autumn, if she knew it?" "And what can she do?" asked Mrs. Carter. "Why," returned Lenora, "can't she write to the place you came from,
if, indeed, such a spot can be found?--for I believe you sometimes
book yourself from one town and sometimes from another. But depend
upon it you had better take my advice and keep still, and in the
denouement which follows, I alone shall be blamed for a slight stretch
of truth which you can easily excuse as 'one of _dear_ Lenora's silly,
childish freaks!'" Upon second thoughts, Mrs. Carter concluded to follow her daughter's
advice, and the next time Mr. Hamilton called, she laughingly told the
story which Lenora had set afloat, saying, by way of excuse, that the
dear girl did not like to hear her mother joked on the subject of
matrimony, and had turned the attention of people another way. Mr. Hamilton hardly relished this, and half wished, mayhap, as,
indeed, gentlemen generally do in similar circumstances, that the
little "objection" in the shape of Lenora had never had existence, or
at least had never called the widow mother! CHAPTER VII. THE STEPMOTHER. Rapidly the summer was passing away, and as autumn drew near the wise
gossips of Glenwood began to whisper that the lady from the East was
in danger of being supplanted in her rights by the widow, whose house
Mr. Hamilton was known to visit two or three times each week. But
Lenora had always some plausible story on hand. "Mother and the lady
had been so intimate--in fact, more than once rocked in the same
cradle--and 'twas no wonder Mr. Hamilton came often to a place where
he could hear so much about her." So when business again took Mr. Hamilton to Albany suspicion was
wholly lulled, and Walter, on his return from college, was told by Mag
that her fears concerning Mrs. Carter were groundless. During the
spring Carrie had been confined to her bed, but now she seemed much
better, and after Walter had been at home awhile he proposed that he
and his sisters should take a traveling excursion, going first to
Saratoga, thence to Lake Champlain and Montreal, and returning home by
way of Canada and the Falls, This plan Mr. Hamilton warmly seconded,
and when Carrie asked if he would not feel lonely he answered, "Oh,
no; Willie and I will do very well while you are gone." "But who will stay with Willie evenings, when you are away?" asked
Mag, looking her father steadily in the face. Mr. Hamilton colored slightly, but after a moment replied: "I shall
spend my evenings at home." "'Twill be what he hasn't done for many a week," thought Mag, as she
again busied herself with her preparations. The morning came at last on which our travelers were to leave. Kate
Kirby had been invited to accompany them, but her mother would not
consent. "It would give people too much chance for talk," she said; so
Kate was obliged to content herself with going as far as the depot,
and watching, until out of sight, the car which bore them away. Upon the piazza stood the little group, awaiting the arrival of the
carriage which was to convey them to the station. Mr. Hamilton seemed
unusually gloomy, and with folded arms paced up and down the long
piazza, rarely speaking or noticing any one. "Are you sorry we are going, father?" asked Carrie, going up to him. "If you are I will gladly stay with you." Mr. Hamilton paused, and pushing back the fair hair from his
daughter's white brow, he kissed her tenderly, saying, "No, Carrie; I
want you to go. The journey will do you good, for you are getting too
much the look your poor mother used to wear." Why thought he then of Carrie's mother? Was it because he knew that
ere his child returned to him another would be in that mother's place? Anon, Margaret came near, and motioning Carrie away, Mr. Hamilton took
his other daughter's hand, and led her to the end of the piazza, where
could easily be seen the little graveyard and tall white monument
pointing toward the bright blue sky where dwelt the one whose grave
that costly marble marked. Pointing out the spot to Margaret, he said, "Tell me truly, Maggie,
did you love your father or your mother best?" Mag looked wonderingly at him a moment, and then replied, "While
mother lived I loved her more than you, but now that she is dead, I
think of and love you as both father and mother." "And will you always love me thus?" asked he. "Always," was Mag's reply, as she looked curiously in her father's
face, and thinking that he had not said what he intended to when first
he drew her there. Just then the carriage drove up, and after a few good-bys and parting
words Ernest Hamilton's children were gone, and he was left alone. "Why didn't I tell her, as I intended to?" thought he. "Is it because
I fear her--fear my own child? No, it cannot be--and yet there is that
in her eye which sometimes makes me quail, and which, if necessary,
would keep at bay a dozen stepmothers. But neither she, nor either one
of them, has aught to dread from Mrs. Carter, whose presence will, I
think, be of great benefit to us all, and whose gentle manners, I
trust, will tend to soften Mag!" Meantime his children were discussing and wondering at the strange
mood of their father. Walter, however, took no part in the
conversation. He had lived longer than his sisters--had seen more of
human nature, and had his own suspicions with regard to what would
take place during their absence; but he could not spoil all Margaret's
happiness by telling her his thoughts, so he kept them to himself,
secretly resolving to make the best of whatever might occur, and to
advise Mag to do the same. Now for a time we leave them, and take a look into the cottage of
Widow Carter, where, one September morning, about three weeks after
the departure of the Hamiltons, preparations were making for some
great event. In the kitchen a servant girl was busily at work, while
in the parlor Lenora was talking and the widow was listening. "Oh, mother," said Lenora, "isn't it so nice that they went away just
now? But won't Mag look daggers at us when she comes home and finds us
in quiet possession, and is told to call you _mother_!" "I never expect her to do that," answered Mrs. Carter. "The most I can
hope for is that she will call me Mrs. Hamilton." "Now really, mother, if I were in Mag's place, I wouldn't please you
enough to say Mrs. Hamilton; I'd always call you Mrs. Carter," said
Lenora. "How absurd!" was the reply; and Lenora continued:

"I know it's absurd, but I'd do it; though if she does, I, as the
dutiful child of a most worthy parent, shall feel compelled to resent
the insult by calling her father _Mr. Carter_!" By this time Mrs. Carter was needed in the kitchen; so, leaving
Lenora, who at once was the pest and torment of her mother's life, we
will go into the village and see what effect the approaching nuptials
was producing. It was now generally known that the "lady from the
East" who had been "rocked in Mrs. Carter's cradle," was none other
than Mrs. Carter herself, and many were the reproving looks which the
people had cast toward Lenora for the trick she had put upon them. The
little hussy only laughed at them good-humoredly, telling them they
were angry because she had cheated them out of five months' gossip,
and that if her mother could have had her way, she would have sent the
news to the _Herald_ and had it inserted under the head of "Awful
Catastrophe!" Thus Mrs. Carter was exonerated from all blame; but many
a wise old lady shook her head, saying, "How strange that so fine a
woman as Mrs. Carter should have such a reprobate of a daughter." When, this remark came to Lenora's ears she cut numerous flourishes,
which ended in the upsetting of a bowl of starch on her mother's new
black silk; then dancing before the highly indignant lady, she said,
"Perhaps if they knew what a scapegrace you represent my father to
have been, and how you whipped me once to make me say I saw him strike
you, when I never did, they would wonder at my being as good as I am." Mrs. Carter was too furious to venture a verbal reply; so seizing the
starch bowl she hurled it with the remainder of the contents at the
head of the little vixen, who, with an elastic bound not entirely
unlike a somersault dodged the missile, which passed on and fell upon
the hearthrug. This is but one of a series of similar scenes which occurred between
the widow and her child before the happy day arrived when, in the
presence of a select few of the villagers, Luella Carter was
transformed into Luella Hamilton. The ceremony was scarcely over when
Mr. Hamilton, who for a few days had been rather indisposed,
complained of feeling sick. Immediately Lenora, with a sidelong glance
at her mother, exclaimed, "What, sick of your bargain so quick? It's
sooner even than _I_ thought 'twould be, and I'm sure I'm capable of
judging." "Dear Lenora," said Mrs. Carter, turning toward one of her neighbors,
"she has such a flow of spirits that I am afraid Mr. Hamilton will
find her troublesome." "Don't be alarmed, mother; he'll never think of me when you are
around," was Lenora's reply in which Mrs. Carter saw more than one
meaning. That evening the bridal party repaired to the homestead, where, at Mr.
Hamilton's request, Mrs. Kirby was waiting to receive them. Willie had
been told by the servants that his mother was coming home that night,
and, with the trusting faith of childhood, he had drawn a chair to the
window from which he could see his mother's grave; and there for more
than an hour he watched for the first indications of her coming,
saying occasionally, "Oh, I wish she'd come. Willie's so sorry here." At last growing weary and discouraged, he turned away and said, "No,
ma'll never come home again; Maggie said she wouldn't." Upon the carriage road which wound from the street to the house there
was the sound of coming wheels, and Rachel, seizing Willie, bore him
to the front door, exclaiming, "An' faith, Willie, don't you see her? That's your mother, honey, with the black gown." But Willie saw only the wild eyes of Lenora, who caught him in her
arms, overwhelming him with caresses. "Let me go, Leno," said he, "I
want to see my ma. Where is she?" A smile of scorn curled Lenora's lips as she released him, and leading
him toward her mother, she said, "There she is; there's your ma. Now
hold up your head and make a bow." Willie's lip quivered, his eyes filled with tears, and hiding his face
in his apron, he sobbed, "I want my own ma--the one they shut up in a
big black box. Where is she, Leno?" Mr. Hamilton took Willie on his knee, and tried to explain to him how
that now his own mother was dead, he had got a new one, who would love
him and be kind to him. Then putting him down, he said, "Go, my son,
and speak to her, won't you?" Willie advanced rather cautiously toward the black silk figure, which
reached out its hand, saying, "Dear Willie, you'll love me a little,
won't you?" "Yes, if you are good to me," was the answer, which made the new
stepmother mentally exclaim, "A young rebel, I know," while Lenora,
bending between the two, whispered emphatically:

"She _shall_ be good to you!" And soon, in due order, the servants were presented to their new
mistress. Some were disposed to like her, others eyed her askance, and
old Polly Pepper, the black cook, who had been in the family ever
since Mr. Hamilton's first marriage, returned her salutation rather
gruffly, and then, stalking back to the kitchen, muttered to, those
who followed her, "I don't like her face nohow; she looks just like
the milk snakes, when they stick their heads in at the door." "But you knew how she looked before," said Lucy, the chambermaid. "I know it," returned Polly; "but when she was here nussin' I never
noticed _her_, more I would any on you; for who'd of thought that Mr.
Hamilton would marry her, when he knows, or or'to know, that nusses
ain't fust cut, nohow; and you may depend on't, things ain't a-goin'
to be here as they used to be." Here Rachel started up, and related the circumstance of Margaret's
refusing to see "that little evil-eyed-lookin-varmint, with curls
almost like Polly's." Lucy, too, suddenly remembered something which
she had seen, or heard, or made up--so that Mrs. Carter had not been
an hour in the coveted homestead ere there was mutiny against her
afloat in the kitchen; "But," said Aunt Polly, "I 'vises you all to be
civil till she sasses you fust!" "My dear, what room can Lenora have for her own?" asked Mrs. Hamilton,
as we must now call her, the morning following her marriage. "Why, really, I don't know," answered the husband; "you must suit
yourselves with regard to that." "Yes; but I'd rather you'd select, and then no one can blame me," was
the answer. "Choose any room you please, except the one which Mag and Carrie now
occupy, and rest assured you shall not be blamed," said Mr. Hamilton. The night before Lenora had appropriated to herself the best chamber,
but the room was so large and so far distant from any one, and the
windows and fireboard rattled so, that she felt afraid, and did not
care to repeat her experiment. "I 'clar for't!" said Polly, when she heard of it. "Gone right into
the best bed, where even Miss Margaret never goes! What are we all
comin' to? Tell her, Luce, the story of the ghosts, and I'll be bound
she'll make herself scarce in them rooms!" "Tell her yourself," said Lucy; and when, after breakfast, Lenora,
anxious to spy out everything, appeared in the kitchen, Aunt Polly
called out, "Did you hear anything last night, Miss Lenora?" "Why, yes--I heard the windows rattle," was the answer; and Aunt
Polly, with an ominous shake of the head, continued:

"There's more than windows rattle, I guess. Didn't you see nothin',
all white and corpse-like, go a-whizzin, and rappin' by your bed?" "Why, no," said Lenora; "what do you mean?" So Polly told her of the ghosts and goblins which nightly ranged the
two chambers over the front and back parlors. Lenora said nothing, but
she secretly resolved not to venture again after dark into the haunted
portion of the house. But where should she sleep? That was now the
important question. Adjoining the sitting-room was a pleasant, cozy
little place, which Margaret called her music-room. In it she kept her
piano, her music stand, books, and several fine plants, besides
numerous other little conveniences. At the end of this room was a
large closet where, at different seasons of the year, Mag hung away
the articles of clothing which she and her sister did not need. Toward this place Lenora turned her eyes; for, besides being unusually
pleasant, it was also very near her mother, whose sleeping-room
joined, though it did not communicate with it. Accordingly, before
noon the piano was removed to the parlor; the plants were placed, some
on the piazza, and some in the sitting-room window, while Margaret and
Carrie's dresses were removed to the closet of their room, which
chanced to be a trifle too small to hold them all conveniently; so
they were crowded one above the other, and left for "the girls to see
to when they came home!" In perfect horror Aunt Polly looked on, regretting for once the ghost
story which she had told. "Why don't you take the chamber jinin' the young ladies? that ain't
haunted," said she, when they sent for her to help move the piano. "Miss Margaret won't thank you for scattern' her things." "You've nothing to do with Lenora," said Mrs. Hamilton; "you've only
to attend to your own matters." "Wonder then what I'm up here for a-h'istin this pianner," muttered
Polly. "This ain't my matters, sartin'." When Mr. Hamilton came in to dinner he was shown the little room with
its single bed, tiny bureau, silken lounge and easy chair, of which
the last two were Mag's especial property. "All very nice," said he, "but where is Mag's piano?" "In the parlor," answered his wife. "People often ask for music, and
it is more convenient to have it there than to come across the hall
and through the sitting-room." Mr. Hamilton said nothing, but he secretly wished Mag's rights had not
been invaded quite so soon. His wife must have guessed as much; for,
laying her hand on his, she, with the utmost deference, offered to
undo all she had done, if it did not please him. "Certainly not--certainly not; it does please me," said he; while
Polly, who stood on the cellar stairs listening, exclaimed, "What a
fool a woman can make of a man!" Three days after Mr. Hamilton's marriage he received a letter from
Walter, saying that they would be at home on the Thursday night
following. Willie was in, ecstasies, for though as yet he liked his
new mother tolerably well, he still loved Maggie better; and the
thought of seeing her again made him wild with delight. All day long
on Thursday he sat in the doorway, listening for the shrill cry of the
train which was to bring her home. "Don't you love Maggie?" said he to Lenora, who chanced to pass him. "Don't I love Maggie? No, I don't; neither does she love me," was the
answer. Willie was puzzled to know why any one should not like Mag; but his
confidence in her was not at all shaken, and when, soon after sunset,
Lenora cried, "There, they've come," he rushed to the door, and was
soon in the arms of his sister-mother. Pressing his lips to hers, he
said, "Did you 'know I'd got a new mother? Mrs. Carter and Leno--they
are in there," pointing toward the parlor. Instantly Mag dropped him. It was the first intimation of her father's
marriage which she had received, and reeling backward, she would have
fallen had not Walter supported her. Quickly rallying, she advanced
toward her father, who came to meet her, and whose hand trembled in
her grasp. After greeting each of his children he turned to present
them to _his wife_, wisely taking Carrie first. She was not
prejudiced, like Mag, and returned her stepmother's salutation with
something like affection, for which Lenora rewarded her by terming her
a "little simpleton." But Mag--she who had warned her father against that woman--she who on
her knees had begged him not to marry her--she had no word of welcome,
and when Mrs. Hamilton offered her hand she affected not to see it,
though with the most frigid politeness she said, "Good evening, madam;
this is, indeed, a surprise!" "And not a very pleasant one, either, I imagine," whispered Lenora to
Carrie. Walter came last, and though he took the lady's hand, there was
something in his manner which plainly said she was not wanted there. Tea was now announced, and Mag bit her lip when, she saw her
accustomed seat occupied by another. Feigning to recollect herself, Mrs. Hamilton, in the blandest tones,
said, "Perhaps, dear Maggie, you would prefer this seat?" "Of course not," said Mag, while Lenora thought to herself:

"And if she does, I wonder what good it will do?" That young lady, however, made no remarks, for Walter Hamilton's
searching eyes were upon her and kept her silent. After tea, Walter
said, "Come, Mag, I have not heard your piano in a long time. Give us
some music." Mag arose to comply with his wishes, but ere she had reached the door
Mrs. Hamilton gently detained her, saying, "Maggie, dear, Lenora has
always slept near me, and as I knew you would not object, if you were
here, I took the liberty to remove your piano to the parlor, and to
fit this up for Lenora's sleeping-room. See"--and she threw open the
door, disclosing the metamorphose, while Willie, who began to get an
inkling of matters, and who always called the piazza "outdoors,"
chimed in, "And they throw'd your little trees outdoors, too!" Mag stood for a moment, mute with astonishment; then thinking she
could not "do the subject justice," she turned silently away. A
roguish smile from Walter met her eye, but she did not laugh, until,
with Carrie, she repaired to her own room, and tried to put something
in the closet. Then coming upon the pile of extra clothes, she
exclaimed, "What in the world! Here's all our winter clothing, and, as
I live, five dresses crammed upon one nail! We'll have to move to the
barn next!" This was too much, and sitting down, Mag cried and laughed
alternately. CHAPTER VIII. DOMESTIC LIFE AT THE HOMESTEAD. For a few weeks after Margaret's return matters at the Homestead
glided on smoothly enough, but at the end of that time Mrs. Hamilton
began to reveal her real character. Carrie's journey had not been as
beneficial as her father had hoped it would be, and as the days grew
colder she complained of extreme languor and a severe pain in her
side, and at last kept her room entirely, notwithstanding the numerous
hints from her stepmother that it was no small trouble to carry so
many dishes up and down stairs three times a day. Mrs. Hamilton was naturally very stirring and active, and in spite of
her remarkable skill in nursing, she felt exceedingly annoyed when any
of her own family were ill. She fancied, too, that Carrie was feigning
all her bad feelings, and that she would be much better if she exerted
herself more. Accordingly, one afternoon when Mag was gone, she
repaired to Carrie's room, giving vent to her opinion as follows:
"Carrie," said she (she now dropped the _dear_ when Mr. Hamilton was
not by), "Carrie, I shouldn't suppose you'd ever expect to get well,
so long as you stay moped up here all day. You ought to come
down-stairs, and stir around more." "Oh, I should be so glad if I could," answered Carrie. "Could!" repeated Mrs. Hamilton; "you could if you would. Now, it's my
opinion that you complain altogether too much, and fancy you are a
great deal worse than you really are, when all you want is exercise. A
short walk on the piazza, and a little fresh air each, morning, would
soon cure you." "I know fresh air does me good," said Carrie; "but walking makes my
side ache so hard, and makes me cough so, that Maggie thinks I'd
better not." Mag, quoted as authority, exasperated Mrs. Hamilton who replied
rather sharply, "Fudge on Mag's old-maidish whims! I know that any one
who eats as much as you do can't be so very weak!" "I don't eat half you send me," said poor Carrie, beginning to cry at
her mother's unkind remarks; "Willie 'most always comes up here and
eats with me." "For mercy's sake, mother, let the child have what she wants to eat,
for 'tisn't long she'll need it," said Lenora, suddenly appearing in
the room. "Lenora, go right down; you are not wanted here," said Mrs. Hamilton. "Neither are you, I fancy," was Lenora's reply, as she coolly seated
herself on the foot of Carrie's bed, while her mother continued:

"Really, Carrie, you must try and come down to your meals, for you
have no idea how much it hinders the work, to bring them up here. Polly isn't good for anything until she has conjured up something
extra for your breakfast, and then they break so many dishes!" "I'll try to come down to-morrow," said Carrie meekly; and as the
door-bell just then rang Mrs. Hamilton departed, leaving her with
Lenora, whose first exclamation was:

"If I were in your place, Carrie, I wouldn't eat anything, and die
quick." "I don't want to die," said Carrie; and Lenora, clapping her hands
together, replied:

"Why, you poor little innocent, who supposed you did? Nobody wants to
die not even _I_, good as I am; but I should expect to, if I had the
consumption." "Lenora, have I got the consumption?" asked Carrie, fixing her eyes
with mournful earnestness upon her companion, who thoughtlessly
replied:

"To be sure you have. They say one lung is entirely gone and the other
nearly so." Wearily the sick girl turned upon her side; and, resting her dimpled
cheek upon her hand, she said softly, "Go away now, Lenora; I want to
be alone." Lenora complied, and when Margaret returned from the village she
found her sister lying in the same position in which Lenora had left
her, with her fair hair falling over her face, which it hid from view. "Are you asleep, Carrie?" said Mag; but Carrie made no answer, and
there was something so still and motionless in her repose that Mag
went up to her, and pushing back from her face the long silken hair,
saw that she had fainted. The excitement of her stepmother's visit, added to the startling news
which Lenora had told her, was too much for her weak nerves, and for a
time she remained insensible. At length, rousing herself, she looked
dreamily around, saying, "Was it a dream, Maggie--- all a dream?" "Was what a dream, love?" said Margaret, supporting her sister's head
upon her bosom. Suddenly Carrie remembered the whole, but she resolved not to tell of
her stepmother's visit, though she earnestly desired to know if what
Lenora had told her were true. Raising herself, so that she could see
Margaret's face, she said, "Maggie, is there no hope for me; and do
the physicians say I must die?" "Why, what do you mean? I never knew that they said so," answered Mag;
and then with breathless indignation she listened, while Carrie told
her what Lenora had said. "I'll see that she doesn't get in here
again," said Margaret. "I know she made more than half of that up;
for, though the physicians say you lungs are very much diseased, they
have never saw that you could not recover." The next morning, greatly to Mag's astonishment Carrie insisted upon
going down to breakfast. "Why, you must not do it; you are not able," said Mag. But Carrie was
determined; and, wrapping herself in her thick shawl, she slowly
descended the stay though the cold air in the long hall made her
shiver. "Carrie, dear, you are better this morning, and there is quite a rosy
flush on your cheek," said Mrs. Hamilton, rising to meet her. _(Mr._
Hamilton, be it remembered, was present.) But Carrie shrank
instinctively from her stepmother's advances, and took her seat by the
side of her father. After breakfast Mag remembered that she had an
errand in the village, and Carrie, who felt too weary to return
immediately to her room, said she would wait below until her sister
returned. Mag had been gone but a few moments when Mrs. Hamilton,
opening the outer door, called to Lenora, saying, "Come and take a few
turns on the piazza with Carrie. The air is bracing this morning, and
will do her good." Willie, who was present, cried out, "No--Carrie is sick; she can't
walk--Maggie said she couldn't," and he grasped his sister's hand to
hold her. With a not very gentle jerk Mrs. Hamilton pulled him off,
while Lenora, who came bobbing and bounding into the room, took
Carrie's arm, saying. "Oh, yes, I'll walk with you; shall we have a hop, skip, or jump?" "Don't, don't!" said Carrie, holding back; "I can't walk fast,
Lenora," and actuated by some sudden impulse of kindness, Lenora
conformed her steps to those of the invalid. Twice they walked up and
down the piazza, and were about turning for the third time, when
Carrie, clasping her hand over her side, exclaimed, "No, no; I can't
go again." Little Willie, who fancied that his sister was being hurt, sprang
toward Lenora, saying, "Leno, you mustn't hurt Carrie. Let her go;
she's sick." And now to the scene of action came Dame Hamilton, and seizing her
young stepson, she tore him away from Lenora, administering at the
same time a bit of a motherly shake. Willie's blood was up, and in
return he dealt her a blow, for which she rewarded him by another
shake, and by tying him to the table. That Lenora was not all bad was shown by the unselfish affection she
ever manifested for Willie, although her untimely interference between
him and her mother oftentimes made matters worse. Thus, on the
occasion of which we have been speaking, Mrs. Hamilton had scarcely
left the room ere Lenora released Willie from his confinement, thereby
giving him the impression that his mother alone was to blame. Fortunately, however, Margaret's judgment was better, and though she
felt justly indignant at the cruelty practised upon poor Carrie, she
could not uphold Willie in striking his mother. Calling him to her
room, she talked to him until he was wholly softened, and offered, of
his own accord, to go and say he was sorry, provided Maggie would
accompany him as far as the door of the sitting-room, where his mother
would probably be found. Accordingly, Mag descended the stairs with
him, and meeting Lenora in the hall, said, "Is she in the
sitting-room?" "Is _she_ in the sitting-room?" repeated Lenora; "and pray who may
_she_ be?" then quick as thought she added, "Oh, yes, I know. She is
in there telling HE!" Lenora was right in her conjecture, for Mrs. Hamilton, greatly enraged
at Willie's presumption in striking her, and still more provoked at
him for untying himself, as she supposed he had, was laying before her
husband quite an aggravated case of assault and battery. In the midst of her argument Willie entered the room, with
tear-stained eyes, and without noticing the presence of his father,
went directly to his mother, and burying his face in her lap, sobbed
out, "Willie is sorry he struck you, and will never do so again, if
you will forgive him." In a much gentler tone than she would have assumed had not her husband
been present, Mrs. Hamilton replied, "I can forgive you for striking
me, Willie, but what have you to say about untying yourself?" "I didn't do it," said Willie; "Leno did that." "Be careful what you say," returned Mrs. Hamilton. "I can't believe
Lenora would do so." Ere Willie had time to repeat his assertion Lenora, who all the time
had been standing by the door, appeared, saying, "You may believe him,
for he has never been whipped to make him lie. I did do it, and I
would do it again." "Lenora," said Mr. Hamilton, rather sternly, "you should not interfere
in that manner. You will spoil the child." It was the first time he had presumed to reprove his stepdaughter, and
as there was nothing on earth which Mrs. Hamilton so much feared as
Lenora's tongue, she dreaded the disclosures which further remark from
her husband might call forth. So, assuming an air of great distress,
she said, "Leave her to me, my dear. She is a strange girl, as I
always told you, and no one can manage her as well as myself." Then
kissing Willie in token of forgiveness, she left the room, drawing
Lenora after her and whispering fiercely in her ear, "How can you ever
expect to succeed with the son, if you show off this way before the
father." With a mocking laugh Lenora replied, "Pshaw! I gave that up the first
time I ever saw him, for of course he thinks me a second edition of
Mrs. Carter, minus any improvements. But he's mistaken; I'm not half
as bad as I seem. I'm only what you've made me." Mrs. Hamilton turned away, thinking that if her daughter could so
easily give up Walter Hamilton, _she_ would not. She was resolved upon
an alliance between him and Lenora. And who ever knew _her_ to fail in
what she undertook? She had wrung from her husband the confession that "he believed there
was a sort of childish affection between Walter and Kate Kirby, though
'twas doubtful whether it ever amounted to anything." She had also
learned that he was rather averse to the match, and though Lenora had
not yet been named as a substitute for Kate, she strove in many ways
to impress her husband with a sense of her daughter's superior
abilities, at the same time taking pains to mortify Margaret by
setting Lenora above her. For this, however, Margaret cared but little, and it was only when
her mother ill-treated Willie, which she frequently did, that her
spirit was fully roused. At Mrs. Hamilton's first marriage she had been presented with a
handsome glass pitcher, which she of course greatly prized. One day it
stood upon the stand in her room, where Willie was also playing with
some spools which Lenora had found and arranged for him. Malta, the
pet kitten, was amusing herself by running after the spools, and when
at last Willie, becoming tired, laid them on the stand, she sprang
toward them, upsetting the pitcher, which was broken in a dozen
pieces. On hearing the crash Mrs. Hamilton hastened toward the room,
where the sight of her favorite pitcher in fragments greatly enraged
her. Thinking, of course, that Willie had done it, she rudely seized
him by the arm, administered a cuff or so, and then dragged him toward
the china closet. As soon as Willie could regain his breath he screamed, "Oh ma, don't
shut me up; I'll be good; I didn't do it, certain true; kittie knocked
it off." "None of your lies," said Mrs. Hamilton. "It's likely kittie knocked
it off!" Lenora, who had seen the whole, and knew that what Willie said was
true, was about coming to the rescue, when looking up, she saw
Margaret, with dilated nostrils and eyes flashing fire watching the
proceedings of her stepmother. "He's safe," thought Lenora; "I'll let Mag fire the first gun, and
then I'll bring up the rear." Margaret had never known Willie to tell a lie, and had no reason for
thinking he had done so in this instance. Besides, the blows her
mother gave him exasperated her, and she stepped forward just as Mrs.
Hamilton was about pushing him into the closet. So engrossed was that
lady that she heard not Margaret's approach until a firm hand was laid
upon her shoulder while Willie was violently wrested from her grasp,
and ere she could recover from her astonishment she herself was
pushed into the closet, the door of which was closed and locked
against her. "Bravo, Margaret Hamilton," cried Lenora, "I'm with you now, if I
never was before. It serves her right, for Willie told the truth. I
was sitting by and saw it all. Keep her in there an hour, will you? It
will pay her for the many times she has shut me up for nothing." Mrs. Hamilton stamped and pushed against the door, while Lenora danced
and sang at the top of her voice:

    "My dear precious mother got wrathy one day
      And seized little Will by the hair;
    But when in the closet she'd stow him away,
      She herself was pushed headlong in there." At length the bolt, yielding to the continued pressure of Mrs.
Hamilton's body, broke, and out came the termagant, foaming with rage. She dared not molest Margaret, of whose physical powers she had just
received such mortifying proof, so she aimed a box at the ears of
Lenora. But the lithe little thing dodged it, and with one bound
cleared the table which sat in the center of the room, landing safely
on the other side; and then, shaking her short, black curls at her
mother, she said, "You didn't come it, that time, my darling." Mr. Hamilton, who chanced to be absent for a few days, was, on his
return, regaled with an exaggerated account of the proceeding, his
wife ending her discourse by saying: "If you don't do something with
your upstart daughter I'll leave the house; yes, I will." Mr. Hamilton was cowardly. He was afraid of his wife, and he was
afraid of Mag. So he tried to compromise the matter by promising the
one that he surely would see to it, and by asking the other if she
were not ashamed. But old Polly didn't let the matter pass so easily. She was greatly shocked at having "such shameful carryin's on in a
decent man's house." "'Clare for't," said she, "I'll give marster a piece of Polly Pepper's
mind the fust time I get a lick at him." In the course of a few days Mr. Hamilton had occasion to go for
something into Aunt Polly's dominions. The old lady was ready for him. "Mr. Hampleton," said she, "I've been waitin' to see you this long
spell." "To see me, Polly?" said he; "what do you want?" "What I wants is this," answered Polly, dropping into a chair. "I want
to know what this house is a comin' to, with such bedivilment in it as
there's been since madam came here with that little black-headed,
ugly-favored, ill-begotten, Satan-possessed, shoulder-unj'inted young
one of her'n. It's been nothin' but a rowdadow the whole time, and you
hain't grit enough to stop it. Madam boxes Willie, and undertakes to
shet him up for a lie he never told; Miss Margaret interferes jest as
she or'to, takes Willie away, and shets up madam; while that
ill-marnered Lenora jumps and screeches loud enough to wake the dead. Madam busts the door down, and pitches into the varmint, who jumps
spang over a four-foot table, which Lord knows _I_ never could have
done in my spryest days." "But how can I help all this?" asked Mr. Hamilton. "Help it?" returned Polly. "You needn't have got into the fire in the
fust place. I hain't lived fifty-odd year for nothin', and though I
hain't no larnin', I know too much to heave myself away on the fust
nussin' woman that comes along." "Stop, Polly; you must not speak so of Mrs. Hamilton," said Mr.
Hamilton; while Polly continued:

"And I wouldn't nuther, if she could hold a candle to the t'other one;
but she can't. You'd no business to marry a second time, even if you
didn't marry a nuss; neither has any man who's got grow'd-up gals, and
a faithful critter like Polly in the kitchen. Stepmothers don't often
do well, particularly them as is sot up by marryin'." Here Mr. Hamilton, who did not like to hear so much truth, left the
kitchen, while Aunt Polly said to herself, "I've gin it to him good,
this time." Lenora, who always happened to be near when she was talked about, had
overheard the whole, and repeated it to her mother. Accordingly, that
very afternoon word came to the kitchen that Mrs. Hamilton wished to
see Polly. "Reckon she'll find this child ain't afeared on her," said Polly, as
she wiped the flour from her face and repaired to Mrs. Hamilton's
room. "Polly," began that lady, with a very grave face, "Lenora tells me
that you have been talking very disrespectfully to Mr. Hamilton." "In the name of the Lord, can't he fight his own battles?" interrupted
Polly. "I only tried to show him that he was henpecked--and he is." "It isn't of him alone I would speak," resumed Mrs. Hamilton, with
stately gravity; "you spoke insultingly of me, and as I make it a
practise never to keep a servant after they get insolent, I have----"

"For the dear Lord's sake," again interrupted Polly, "I 'spect we's
the fust servants you ever had." "Good!" said a voice from some quarter, and Mrs. Hamilton continued:
"I have sent for you to give you twenty-four hours' warning to leave
this house." "I shan't budge an inch until marster says so," said Polly. "Wonder
who's the best title deed here? Warn't I here long afore you come a
nussin' t'other one?" And Polly went back to the kitchen, secretly fearing that Mr.
Hamilton, who she knew was wholly ruled by his wife, would say that
she must go. And he did say so, though much against his will. Lenora
ran with the decision, to Aunt Polly, causing her to drop a loaf of
new bread. But the old negress chased her from the cellar with the
oven broom, and then stealing by a back staircase to Margaret's room,
laid the case before her, acknowledging that she was sorry and asking
her young mistress to intercede for her. Margaret stepped to the head
of the stairs, and calling to her father, requested him to come for a
moment to her room. This he was more ready to do, as he had no
suspicion why he was sent for, but on seeing old Polly, he
half-resolved to turn back. Margaret, however, led him into the room,
and then entreated him not to send away one who had served him so long
and so faithfully. Polly, too, joined in with her tears and prayers, saying, "She was an
old black fool anyway, and let her tongue get the better on her,
though she didn't mean to say more than was true, and reckoned she
hadn't." In his heart Mr. Hamilton wished to revoke what he had said, but dread
of the explosive storm which he knew would surely follow made him
irresolute, until Carrie said, "Father, the first person of whom I
have any definite recollection is Aunt Polly, and I shall be so
lonesome if she goes away. For my sake let her stay, at least until I
am dead." This decided the matter. "She _shall_ stay," said Mr. Hamilton, and
Aunt Polly, highly elated, returned to the kitchen with the news. Lenora, who seemed to be everywhere at once, overheard it, and, bent
on mischief, ran with it to her mother. In the meantime Mr. Hamilton
wished, yet dreaded, to go down, and finally, mentally cursing himself
for his weakness, asked Margaret to accompany him. She was about to
comply with his request, when Mrs. Hamilton came up the stairs,
furious at her husband, whom she called "a craven coward, led by the
nose by all who chose to lead him." Wishing to shut out her noise, Mag
closed and bolted the door, and in the hall the modern Xantippe
extended her wrath against her husband and his offspring, while poor
Mr. Hamilton laid his face in Carrie's lap and wept. Margaret was
trying to devise some means by which to rid herself of her stepmother,
when Lenora was heard to exclaim:

"Shall I pitch her over the stairs, Mag? I will if you say so." Immediately Mrs. Hamilton's anger took another channel, and turning
upon her daughter, she said, "What are you here for, you prating
parrot? Didn't you tell me what Aunt Polly said, and haven't you acted
in the capacity of reporter ever since?" "To be sure I did," said Lenora, poising herself on one foot, and
whirling around in circles; "but if you thought I did it because I
blamed Aunt Polly, you are mistaken." "What did you do it for, then?" said Mrs. Hamilton; and Lenora, giving
the finishing touch to her circles by dropping upon the floor,
answered, "I like to live in a hurricane--so I told you what I did. Now, if you think it will add at all to the excitement of the present
occasion, I'll get an ax for you to split the door down." "Oh, don't, Lenora," screamed Carrie, from within, to which Lenora
responded:

"Poor little simple chick bird, I wouldn't harm a hair of your soft
head for anything. But there is a _man_ in there, or one who passes
for a man, that I think would look far more respectable if he'd come
out and face the tornado. She's easy to manage when you know how. At
least Mag and I find her so." Here Mr. Hamilton ashamed of himself and emboldened, perhaps, by
Lenora's words, slipped back the bolt of the door, and walking out,
confronted his wife. "Shall I order pistols and coffee for two?" asked Lenora, swinging
herself entirely over the bannister, and dropping like a squirrel on
the stair below. "Is Polly going to stay in this house?" asked Mrs. Hamilton. "She is," was the reply. "Then I leave to-night," said Mrs. Hamilton. "Very well, you can go," returned the husband, growing stronger in
himself each moment. Mrs. Hamilton turned away to her own room, where she remained until
supper time, when Lenora asked "If she had got her chest packed, and
where they should direct their letters!" Neither Margaret nor her
father could refrain from laughter. Mrs. Hamilton, too, who had no notion of leaving the comfortable
Homestead, and who thought this as good a time to veer round as any
she would have, also joined in the laugh, saying, "What a child you
are, Lenora!" Gradually the state of affairs at the homestead was noised throughout
the village, and numerous were the little tea parties where none dared
speak above a whisper to tell what they had heard, and where each and
every one were bound to the most profound secrecy, for fear the
reports might not be true. At length, however, the story of the china
closet got out, causing Sally Martin to spend one whole day in
retailing the gossip from door to door. Many, too, suddenly remembered
certain suspicious things which they had seen in Mrs. Hamilton, who
was unanimously voted to be a bad woman, and who, of course, began to
be slighted. The result of this was to increase the sourness of her disposition;
and life at the Homestead would have been one continuous scene of
turmoil had not Margaret wisely concluded to treat whatever her
stepmother did with silent contempt. Lenora, too, always seemed ready
to fill up all vacant niches, until even Mag acknowledged that the
mother would be unendurable without the daughter. CHAPTER IX. LENORA AND CARRIE. Ever since the day on which Lenora had startled Carrie by informing
her of her danger, she had been carefully kept from the room, or
allowed only to enter it when Margaret was present. One afternoon,
however, early in February, Mag had occasion to go to the village. Lenora, who saw her depart, hastily gathered up her work, and repaired
to Carrie's room, saying, as she entered it, "Now, Carrie, we'll have
a good time; Mag has gone to see old deaf Peggy, who asks a thousand
questions, and will keep her at least two hours, and I am going to
entertain you to the best of my ability." Carrie's cheek flushed, for she felt some misgivings with regard to
the nature of Lenora's entertainment; but she knew there was no help
for it, so she tried to smile, and said, "I am willing you should
stay, Lenora, but you mustn't talk bad things to me, for I can't bear
it." "Bad things!" repeated Lenora; "who ever heard me talk bad things! What do you mean?" "I mean," said Carrie, "that you must not talk about your mother as
you sometimes do. It is wicked." "Why, you dear little thing," answered Lenora, "don't you know that
what would be wicked for you isn't wicked for me?" "No, I do not know so," answered Carrie; "but I know I wouldn't talk
about my mother as you do about yours for anything." "Bless your heart," said Lenora, "haven't you sense enough to see that
there is a great difference between Mrs. Hamilton first, and Mrs.
Hamilton second? Now, I'm not naturally bad, and if I had been the
daughter of Mrs. Hamilton first instead of Widow Carter's young one,
why, I should have been as good as you--no, not as good as _you_, for
you don't know enough to be bad--but as good as Mag, who, in my
opinion, has the right kind of goodness, for all I used to hate her
so." "Hate Margaret!" said Carrie, opening her eyes to their utmost extent. "What did you hate Margaret for?" "Because I didn't know her, I suppose," returned Lenora; "for now I
like her well enough--not quite as well as I do you, perhaps; and yet,
when I see you bear mother's abuse so meekly, I positively hate you
for a minute, and ache to box your ears; but when Mag squares up to
her, shuts her in the china closet, and all that, I want to put my
arms right round neck." "Why, don't you like your mother?" asked Carrie, and Lenora replied:

"Of course I do; but I know what she is and I know she isn't what she
sometimes seems. Why, she'd be anything to suit the circumstances. She
wanted your father, and she assumed the character most likely to
secure him; for, between you and me, he isn't very smart." "What did she marry him for, then?" asked Carrie. "Marry _him_! I hope you don't for a moment suppose she married
_him_!" "Why, Lenora, _ain't they married?_ I thought they were. Oh,
dreadful!" and Carrie started to her feet, while the perspiration
stood thickly on her forehead. Lenora screamed with delight, saying, "You certainly have the softest
brain I ever saw. Of course the minister went through with the
ceremony; but it was not your father that mother wanted; it was his
house--his money--his horses--his servants, and his name. Now, maybe
in your simplicity you have thought that mother came here out of
kindness to the motherless children; but I tell you she would be
better satisfied if neither of you had ever been born. I suppose it is
wicked in me to say so, but I think she makes me worse than I would
otherwise be; for I am not naturally so bad, and I like people much
better than I pretend to. Anyway, I like you, and _love_ little
Willie, and always have, since the first time I saw him. Your mother
lay in her coffin, and Willie stood by her, caressing her cold cheek,
and saying, 'Wake up, mamma, it's Willie; don't you know Willie? I
took him in my arms, and vowed to love and shield him from the coming
evil; for I knew then, as well as I do now, that what has happened
would happen. Mag wasn't there; she didn't see me. If she had, she
might have liked me better; now she thinks there is no good in me; and
if, when you die, I should feel like shedding tears, and perhaps I
shall, it would be just like her to wonder 'what business _I_ had to
cry--it was none of my funeral!'" "You do wrong to talk so, Lenora," said Carrie; "but tell me, did you
never have any one to love except Willie?" "Yes," said Lenora; "when I was a child, a little, innocent child, I
had a grandmother--my father's mother--who taught me to pray, and told
me of God." "Where is she now?" asked Carrie. "In heaven," was the answer. "I know she is there, because when she
died there was the same look on her face that there was on your
mother's--the same that there will be on yours, when you are dead." "Never mind," gasped Carrie, who did not care to be so frequently
reminded of her mortality, while Lenora continued:

"Perhaps you don't know that my father was, as mother says, a bad man;
though I always loved him dearly, and cried when he went away. We
lived with grandmother, and sometimes now, in my dreams, I am a child
again, kneeling by grandma's side, in our dear old eastern home, where
the sunshine fell so warmly, where the summer birds sang in the old
maple trees, and where the long shadows, which I called spirits, came
and went over the bright green meadows. But there was a sadder day; a
narrow coffin, a black hearse, and a tolling bell, which always wakes
me from my sleep, and I find the dream all gone, and nothing left of
the little child but the wicked Lenora Carter." Here the dark girl buried her face in her hands and wept, while Carrie
gently smoothed her tangled curls. After a while, as if ashamed of her
emotion, Lenora dried her tears, and Carrie said, "Tell me more of
your early life. I like you when you act as you do now." "There is nothing more to tell but wickedness," answered Lenora. "Grandma died, and I had no one to teach me what was right. About a
year after her death mother wanted to get a divorce from father; and
one day she told me that a lawyer was coming to inquire about my
father's treatment of her. 'Perhaps,' said she, 'he will ask if you
ever saw him strike me, and you must say that you have a great many
times. 'But never did,' said I; and then she insisted upon my telling
that falsehood, and I refused, until she whipped me, and made me
promise to say whatever she wished me to. In this way I was trained to
be what I am. Nobody loves me; nobody ever can love me; and sometimes
when Mag speaks so kindly to you, and looks so affectionately upon
you, I think, what would I not give for some one to love me; and then
I go away to cry, and wish I had never been born." Here Mrs. Hamilton called to her daughter, and gathering up her work,
Lenora left the room just as Margaret entered it, on her return from
the village. CHAPTER X.

DARKNESS. As the spring opened and the days grew warmer Carrie's health seemed
much improved; and, though she did not leave her room, she was able to
sit up nearly all day, busying herself with some light work. Ever
hopeful, Margaret hugged to her bosom the delusion which whispered,
"She will not die," while even the physician was deceived, and spoke
encouragingly of her recovery. For several months Margaret had thought of visiting her grandmother,
who lived in Albany; and as Mr. Hamilton had occasion to visit that
city, Carrie urged her to accompany him saying, she was perfectly able
to be left alone, and she wished her sister would go, for the trip
would do her good. For some time past Mrs. Hamilton had seemed exceedingly amiable and
affectionate, although her husband appeared greatly depressed, and
acted, as Lenora said, "Just as though he had been stealing sheep." This depression Mag had tried in vain to fathom, and at last,
fancying that a change of place and scene might do him good, she
consented to accompany him, on condition that Kate Kirby would stay
with Carrie. At mention of Kate's name Mr. Hamilton's eyes instantly
went over to his wife, whose face wore the same stony expression as
she answered, "Yes, Maggie, can come." Accordingly, on the morning when the travelers would start, Kate came
up to the homestead, receiving a thousand and one directions about
what to do and when to do it, hearing not more than half the
injunctions, and promising to comply with every one. Long before the
door the carriage waited, while Margaret, lingering in Carrie's room,
kissed again and again her sister's pure brow, and gazed into her deep
blue eyes, as if she knew that it was the last time. Even when half
way down the stairs she turned back again to say good-by, this time
whispering, "I have half a mind not to go, for something tells me I
shall never see you again." "Oh, Mag," said Carrie, "don't be superstitious. I am a great deal
better, and when you come home you will find me in the parlor." In the lower hall Mr. Hamilton caressed his little Willie, who begged
that he, too, might go. "Don't leave, me, Maggie, don't," said he, as
Mag came up to say good-by. Long years after the golden curls which Mag pushed back from Willie's
forehead were covered by the dark moist earth, did she remember her
baby-brother's childish farewell, and oft in bitterness of heart she
asked, "Why did I go--why leave my loved ones to die alone?" Just a week after Mag's departure news was received at the homestead
that Walter was coming to Glenwood for a day or two, and on the
afternoon of the same day Kate had occasion to go home. As she was
leaving the house Mrs. Hamilton detained her, while she said, "Miss
Kirby, we are all greatly obliged to you for your kindness in staying
with Carrie, although your services really are not needed. I
understand how matters stand between you and Walter, and as he is to
be here to-morrow; you of course will feel some delicacy about
remaining, consequently I release you from all obligations to do so." Of course there was no demurring to this. Kate's pride was touched;
and though Carrie wept, and begged her not to go, she yielded only so
far as to stay until the next morning, when, with a promise to call
frequently, she left. Lonely and long seemed the hours to poor Carrie;
for though Walter came, he stayed but two days, and spent a part of
that time at the mill-pond cottage. The evening after he went away, as Carrie lay, half-dozing, thinking
of Mag, and counting the weary days which must pass ere her return,
she was startled by the sound of Lenora's voice in the room opposite,
the door of which was ajar. Lenora had been absent a few days, and
Carrie was about calling to her, when some words spoken by her
stepmother arrested her attention, and roused her curiosity. They
were, "You think too little of yourself, Lenora. Now, I know there is
nothing in the way of your winning Walter, if you choose." "I should say there was everything in the way," answered Lenora. "In
the first place, there is Kate Kirby, and who, after seeing her
handsome face, would ever look at such a black, turned-up nose,
bristle-headed thing as I am? But I perceive there is some weighty
secret on your mind, so what is it? Have Walter and Kate quarreled, or
have you told him some falsehood about her?" "Neither," said Mrs. Hamilton. "What I have to say concerns your
father." "My father!" interrupted Lenora; "my own father! Oh, is he living?" "No, I hope not," was the answer; "it is Mr. Hamilton whom I mean." Instantly Lenora's tone changed, and she replied, "If you please you
need not call that putty-headed man _my_ father. He acts too much like
a whipped spaniel to suit me, and I really think Carrie ought to be
respected for knowing what little she does, while I wonder where
Walter, Mag, and Willie got their good sense. But what is it? What
have you made Mr. Hamilton do?--something ridiculous, of course." "I've made him make his will," was the answer; while Lenora continued:

"Well, what then? What good will that do me?" "It may do you a great deal of good," said Mrs. Hamilton; "that is, if
Walter likes the homestead as I think he does. But I tell you, it was
hard work, and I didn't know, one while, but I should have to give it
up. However, I succeeded, and he has willed the homestead to Walter,
provided he marries you. If not, Walter has nothing, and the homestead
comes to _me_ and my heirs forever!" "Heartless old fool!" exclaimed Lenora, while Carrie, too, groaned in
sympathy. "And do you suppose he intends to let it go so! Of course
not; he'll make another when you don't know it"

"I'll watch him too closely for that," said Mrs. Hamilton and after a
moment Lenora asked:

"What made you so anxious for a will? Have you received warning of his
sudden demise?" "How foolish!" said Mrs. Hamilton. "Isn't it the easiest thing in the
world for me to let Walter know what's in the will, and I fancy
that'll bring him to terms, for he likes money, no mistake about
that." "Mr. Hamilton is a bigger fool, and you a worse woman, than I
supposed," said Lenora. "Do you think I am mean enough to marry Walter
under such circumstances? Indeed, I'm not. But how is Carrie? I must
go and see her." She was about leaving the room, when she turned back, saying in a
whisper, "Mother, mother, her door is wide open, as well as this one,
and she must have heard every word!" "Oh, horror!" exclaimed Mrs. Hamilton; "go in and ascertain the fact,
if possible." It took but one glance to convince Lenora that Carrie was in
possession of the secret. Her cheeks were flushed, her eyes wet with
tears; and when Lenora stooped to kiss her, she said. "I know it all,
I heard it all." "Then I hope you feel better," said Mrs. Hamilton, coming forward. "Listeners never hear any good of themselves." "Particularly if it's Widow Carter who is listened to," suggested
Lenora. Mrs. Hamilton did not reply to this, but continued speaking to Carrie. "If you have heard anything new you can keep it to yourself. No one
has interfered with you, or intends to. Your father has a right to do
what he chooses with his own, and I shall see that he exercises that
right, too." So saying she left the room, while Carrie, again bursting into tears,
wept until perfectly exhausted. The next morning she was attacked with
bleeding at the lungs, which in a short time reduced her so low that
the physician spoke doubtfully of her recovery, should the hemorrhage
again return. In the course of two or three days she was again
attacked; and now, when there was no longer hope of life, her thoughts
turned with earnest longings toward her absent father and sister, and
once, as the physician was preparing to leave her, she said, "Doctor,
tell me truly, can I live twenty-four hours?" "I think you may," was the answer. "Then I shall see them, for if you telegraph to-night they can come in
the morning train. Go yourself and have it done, will you?" The physician promised that he would, and then left the room. In the
hall he met Mrs. Hamilton, who with the utmost anxiety depicted upon
her countenance, said, "Dear Carrie is leaving us, isn't she? I have
telegraphed for her father, who will be here in the morning. 'Twas
right to do so, was it not?" "Quite right," answered the physician. "I promised to see to it
myself, and was just going to do so." "Poor child," returned Mrs. Hamilton, "she feels anxious, I suppose. But I have saved you the trouble." The reader will not, perhaps, be greatly surprised to learn that what
Mrs. Hamilton had said was false. She suspected that one reason why
Carrie so greatly desired to see her father was to tell him what she
had heard, and beg of him to undo what he had done; and as she feared
the effect which the sight and words of his dying child might have
upon him, she resolved, if possible, to keep him away until Carrie's
voice was hushed in death. Overhearing what had been said by the
doctor, she resorted to the stratagem of which we have just spoken. The next morning, however, she ordered a telegram to be despatched,
knowing full well that her husband could not reach home until the day
following. Meantime, as the hour for the morning train drew near, Carrie, resting
upon pillows, and whiter than the linen which covered them, strained
her ears to catch the first sound of the locomotive. At last, far off
through an opening among the hills, was heard a rumbling noise, which
increased each moment in loudness, until the puffing engine shot out
into the long, green valley, and then rolled rapidly up to the depot. Little Willie had seemed unwell for a few days, but since his sister's
illness he had stayed by her almost constantly, gazing half-curiously,
half-timidly into her face, and asking if she was going to the home
where his mamma lived. She had told him that Margaret was coming, and
when the shrill whistle of the eastern train sounded through the room
he ran to the window, whither Lenora had preceded him, and there
together they watched for the coming of the omnibus. A sinister smile
curled the lips of Mrs. Hamilton who was present, and who, of course,
affected to feel interested. At last Willie, clapping his hands, exclaimed, "There 'tis! They're
coming. That's Maggie's big trunk!" Then, noticing the glow which his
announcement called up to Carrie's cheek, he said, "She'll make you
well, Carrie, Maggie will. Oh, I'm so glad, and so is Leno." Nearer and nearer came the omnibus, brighter and deeper grew the flush
on Carrie's face, while little Willie danced up and down with joy. "It isn't coming here," said Mrs. Hamilton; "it has gone by," and
Carrie's feverish heat was succeeded by an icy chill. "Haven't they come, Lenora?" she said. Lenora shook her head, and Willie, running to his sister, wound his
arms around her neck, and for several minutes the two lone, motherless
children wept. "If Maggie knew how my head ached she'd come," said Willie; but Carrie
thought not of _her_ aching head, nor of the faintness of death which
was fast coming on. One idea alone engrossed her. Her brother--how
would he be saved from the threatened evil, and her father's name from
dishonor? At last Mrs. Hamilton left the room, and Carrie, speaking to Lenora
and one of the villagers who was present, asked if they, too, would
not leave her alone for a time with Willie. They complied with her
request, and then asking her brother to bring her pencil and paper,
she hurriedly wrote a few lines to her father telling him of what she
had heard, and entreating him, for her sake, and the sake of the
mother with whom she would be when those words met his eye, not to do
Walter so great a wrong. "I shall give this to Willie's care," she
wrote, in conclusion, "and he will keep it carefully until you come. And now, I bid you a long farewell, my precious father--my noble
Mag--my darling Walter." The note was finished, and calling Willie to her, she said, "I am
going to die. When Maggie returns I shall be dead and still, like our
own dear mother." "Oh, Carrie, Carrie," sobbed the child, "don't leave me till Maggie
comes." There was a footstep on the stairs, and Carrie, without replying to
her brother, said quickly, "Take this paper, Willie, and give it to
father when he comes; let no one see it--Lenora, mother, nor any one." Willie promised compliance, and had but just time to conceal the note
in his bosom ere Mrs. Hamilton entered the room, accompanied by the
physician, to whom she loudly expressed her regrets that her husband
had not come, saying that she had that morning telegraphed again,
although he could not now reach home until the morrow. "To-morrow I shall never see," said Carrie, faintly. And she spoke
truly, too, for even then death was freezing her life-blood with the
touch of his icy hand. To the last she seemed conscious of the tiny
arms which so fondly encircled her neck; and when the soul had drifted
far out on the dark channel of death the childish words of "Carrie,
Carrie, speak once more," roused her, and folding her brother more
closely to her bosom, she murmured, "Willie, darling Willie, our
mother is waiting for us both." Mrs. Hamilton, who stood near, now bent down, and laying her hand on
the pale, damp brow said gently, "Carrie, dear, have you no word of
love for this mother?" There was a visible shudder, an attempt to speak, a low moan, in which
the word "Walter" seemed struggling to be spoken; and then death, as
if impatient of delay, bore away the spirit, leaving only the form
which in life had been most beautiful. Softly Lenora closed over the
blue eyes the long, fringed lids, and pushed back from the forehead
the sunny tresses which clustered so thickly around it; then, kissing
the white lips and leaving on the face of the dead traces of her
tears, she led Willie from the room, soothing him in her arms until
he fell asleep. Elsewhere we have said that for a few days Willie had not seemed well;
but so absorbed were all in Carrie's more alarming symptoms that no
one had heeded him, although his cheeks were flushed with fever, and
his head was throbbing with pain. He was in the habit of sleeping in
his parents' room, and that night his loud breathings and uneasy
turnings disturbed and annoyed his mother, who at last called out in
harsh tones, "Willie, Willie, for mercy's sake stop that horrid noise! I shall never get asleep this way. I know there's no need of breathing
like that!" "It chokes me so," sobbed little Willie, "but I'll try." 