



Produced by Nicole Apostola




INVISIBLE LINKS


FROM THE SWEDISH OF SELMA LAGERLOeF

TRANSLATED BY PAULINE BANCROFT FLACH



CONTENTS

THE SPIRIT OF FASTING AND PETTER NORD
THE LEGEND OF THE BIRD'S NEST
THE KING'S GRAVE
THE OUTLAWS
THE LEGEND OF REOR
VALDEMAR ATTERDAG
MAMSELL FREDRIKA
THE ROMANCE OF A FISHERMAN'S WIFE
MOTHER'S PORTRAIT
A FALLEN KING
A CHRISTMAS GUEST
UNCLE REUBEN
DOWNIE
AMONG THE CLIMBING ROSES



THE SPIRIT OF FASTING AND PETTER NORD

I

I can see before me the little town, friendly as a home. It is so
small that I know its every hole and corner, am friends with all
the children and know the name of every one of its dogs. Who ever
walked up the street knew to which window he must raise his eyes to
see a lovely face behind the panes, and who ever strolled through
the town park knew well whither he should turn his steps to meet
the one he wished to meet. One was as proud of the beautiful roses in the garden of a
neighbor, as if they had grown in one's own. If anything mean or
vulgar was done, it was as great a shame as if it had happened in
one's own family; but at the smallest adventure, at a fire or a
fight in the market-place, one swelled with pride and said: "Only
see what a community! Do such things ever happen anywhere else? What a wonderful town!" In my beloved town nothing ever changes. If I ever come there
again, I shall find the same houses and shops that I knew of old;
the same holes in the pavements will cause my downfall; the same
stiff hedges of lindens, the same clipped lilac bushes will
captivate my fascinated gaze. Again shall I see the old Mayor who
rules the whole town walking down the street with elephantine
tread. What a feeling of security there is in knowing that you are
walking there! And deaf old Halfvorson will still be digging in his
garden, while his eyes, clear as water, stare and wander as if they
would say: "We have investigated everything, everything; now,
earth, we will bore down to your very centre." But one who will not still be there is little, round Petter Nord:
the little fellow from Vaermland, you know, who was in Halfvorson's
shop; he who amused the customers with his small mechanical
inventions and his white mice. There is a long story about him. There are stories to be told about everything and everybody in the
town. Nowhere else do such wonderful things happen. He was a peasant boy, little Petter Nord. He was short and round;
he was brown-eyed and smiling. His hair was paler than birch leaves
in the autumn; his cheeks were red and downy. And he was from
Vaermland. No one, seeing him, could imagine that he was from any
other place. His native land had equipped him with its excellent
qualities. He was quick at his work, nimble with his fingers, ready
with his tongue, clear in his thoughts. And, moreover, full of fun,
good-natured and brave, kind and quarrelsome, inquisitive and a
chatterbox. A madcap, he never could show more respect to a
burgomaster than to a beggar! But he had a heart; he fell in love
every other day, and confided in the whole town. This child of rich gifts attended to the work in the shop in rather
an extraordinary manner. The customers were waited on while he fed
the white mice. Money was changed and counted while he put wheels
on his little automatic wagons. And while he told the customers of
his very last love-affair, he kept his eye on the quart measure,
into which the brown molasses was slowly curling. It delighted his
admiring listeners to see him suddenly leap over the counter and
rush out into the street to have a brush with a passing street-boy;
also to see him calmly return to tie the string on a package or to
finish measuring a piece of cloth. Was it not quite natural that he should be the favorite of the
whole town? We all felt obliged to trade with Halfvorson, after
Petter Nord came there. Even the old Mayor himself was proud when
Petter Nord took him apart into a dark corner and showed him the
cages of the white mice. It was nervous work to show the mice, for
Halfvorson had forbidden him to have them in the shop. But then in the brightening February there came a few days of warm,
misty weather. Petter Nord became suddenly serious and silent. He
let the white mice nibble the steel bars of their cages without
feeding them. He attended to his duties in the most irreproachable
way. He fought with no more street boys. Could Petter Nord not bear
the change in the weather? Oh no, the matter was that he had found a fifty-crown note on one
of the shelves. He believed that it had got caught in a piece of
cloth, and without any one's seeing him he had pushed it under a
roll of striped cotton which was out of fashion and was never taken
down from the shelf. The boy was cherishing great anger in his heart against Halfvorson. The latter had destroyed a, whole family of mice for him, and now
he meant to be revenged. Before his eyes he still saw the white
mother with her helpless offspring. She had not made the slightest
attempt to escape; she had remained in her place with steadfast
heroism, staring with red, burning eyes on the heartless murderer. Did he not deserve a short time of anxiety? Petter Nord wished to
see him come out pale as death from his office and begin to look
for the fifty crowns. He wished to see the same despair in his
watery eyes as he had seen in the ruby red ones of the white mouse. The shopkeeper should search, he should turn the whole shop upside
down before Petter Nord would let him find the bank-note. But the fifty crowns lay in its hiding-place all day without any
one's asking about it. It was a new note, many-colored and bright,
and had big numbers in all the corners. When Petter Nord was alone
in the shop, he put a step-ladder against the shelves and climbed
up to the roll of cotton. Then he took out the fifty crowns,
unfolded it and admired its beauties. In the midst of the most eager trade he would grow anxious lest
something should have happened to the fifty crowns. Then he
pretended to look for something on the shelf, and groped about
under the roll of cotton till he felt the smooth bank-note rustle
under his fingers. The note had suddenly acquired a supernatural power over him. Might
there not be something living in it? The figures surrounded by wide
rings were like magnetic eyes. The boy kissed them all and
whispered: "I should like to have many, very many like you." He began to have all sorts of thoughts about the note, and why
Halfvorson did not inquire for it. Perhaps it was not Halfvorson's? Perhaps it had lain in the shop for a long time? Perhaps it no
longer had any owner? Thoughts are contagious.--At supper Halfvorson had begun to speak
of money and moneyed-men. He told Petter Nord about all the poor
boys who had amassed riches. He began with Whittington and ended
with Astor and Jay Gould. Halfvorson knew all their histories; he
knew how they had striven and denied themselves; what they had
discovered and ventured. He grew eloquent when he began on such
tales. He lived through the sufferings of those young people; he
followed them in their successes; he rejoiced in their victories. Petter Nord listened quite fascinated. Halfvorson was stone deaf, but that was no obstacle to conversation,
for he read by the lips everything that was said. On the other
hand, he could not hear his own voice. It rolled out as strangely
monotonous as the roar of a distant waterfall. But his peculiar way
of speaking made everything he said sink in, so that one could not
escape from it for many days. Poor Petter Nord! "What is most needed to become rich," said Halfvorson, "is the
foundation. But it cannot be earned. Take note that they all have
found it in the street or discovered it between the lining and
cloth of a coat which they had bought at a pawnbroker's sale; or
that it had been won at cards, or had been given to them in alms by
a beautiful and charitable lady. After they had once found that
blessed coin, everything had gone well with them. The stream of
gold welled from it as from a fountain. The first thing that is
necessary, Petter Nord, is the foundation." Halfvorson's voice sounded ever fainter and fainter. Young Petter
Nord sat in a kind of trance and saw endless vistas of gold before
him. On the dining table rose great piles of ducats; the floor
heaved white with silver, and the indistinct patterns on the dirty
wall-paper changed into banknotes, big as handkerchiefs. But
directly before his eyes fluttered the fifty-crown note, surrounded
by wide rings, luring him like the most beautiful eyes. "Who can
know," smiled the eyes, "perhaps the fifty crowns up on the shelf
is just such a foundation?" "Mark my words," said Halfvorson, "that, after the foundation, two
things are necessary for those who wish to reach the heights. Work,
untiring work, Petter Nord, is one; and the other is renunciation. Renunciation of play and love, of talk and laughter, of morning
sleep and evening strolls. In truth, in truth, two things are
necessary for him who would win fortune. One is called work, and
the other renunciation." Petter Nord looked as if he would like to weep. Of course he wished
to be rich, naturally he wished to be fortunate, but fortune should
not be so anxiously and sadly won. Fortune ought to come of
herself. Just as Petter Nord was fighting with the street boys, the
noble lady should stop her coach at the shop-door, and invite the
Vaermland boy to the place at her side. But now Halfvorson's voice
still rolled in his ears. His brain was full of it. He thought of
nothing else, knew nothing else. Work and renunciation, work and
renunciation, that was life and the object of life. He asked
nothing else, dared not think that he had ever wished anything
else. The next day he did not dare to kiss the fifty-crown note, did not
dare even to look at it. He was silent and low-spirited, orderly
and industrious. He attended to all his duties so irreproachably
that any one could see that there was something wrong with him. The
old Mayor was troubled about the boy and did what he could to cheer
him. "Did you think of going to the Mid-Lent ball this evening?" asked
the old man. "So, you did not. Well, then I invite you. And be sure
that you come, or I will tell Halfvorson where you keep your
mouse-cages." Petter Nord sighed and promised to go to the ball. The Mid-Lent ball, fancy Petter Nord at the Mid-Lent ball! Petter
Nord would see all the beautiful ladies of the town, delicate,
dressed in white, adorned with flowers. But of course Petter Nord
would not be allowed to dance with a single one of them. Well, it
did not matter. He was not in the mood to dance. At the ball he stood in a doorway and made no attempt to dance. Several people had asked him to take part, but he had been firm and
said no. He could not dance any of those dances. Neither would any
of those fine ladies be willing to dance with him. He was much too
humble for them. But as he stood there, his eyes began to kindle and shine, and he
felt joy creeping through his I hubs. It came from the dance music;
it came from the fragrance of the flowers; it came from all the
beautiful faces about him. After a little while he was so
sparklingly happy that, if joy had been fire, he would have been
surrounded by bursting flames. And if love were it, as many say it
is, it would have been the same. He was always in love with some
pretty girl, but hitherto with only one at a time. But when he now
saw all those beautiful ladies together, it was no longer a single
fire, which laid waste his sixteen-year-old heart; it was a whole
conflagration. Sometimes he looked down at his boots, which were by no means
dancing shoes. But how he could have marked the time with the broad
heels and spun round on the thick soles! Something was dragging and
pulling him and trying to hurl him out on the floor like a whipped
ball. He could still resist it, although his excitement grew
stronger as the hours advanced. He grew delirious and hot. Heigh
ho, he was no longer poor Petter Nord! He was the young whirlwind,
that raises the seas and overthrows the forests. Just then a hambo-polska [Note: A Swedish national dance of a very
lively character] struck up. The peasant boy was quite beside himself. He thought it sounded like the polska, like the Vaermland polska. Suddenly Petter Nord was out on the floor. All his fine manners
dropped off him. He was no longer at the town-hall ball; he was at
home in the barn at the midsummer dance. He came forward, his knees
bent, his head drawn down between his shoulders. Without stopping
to ask, he threw his arms round a lady's waist and drew her with
him. And then he began to dance the polska. The girl followed him, half unwillingly, almost dragged. She was
not in time; she did not know what kind of a dance it was, but
suddenly it went quite of itself. The mystery of the dance was
revealed to her. The polska bore her, lifted her; her feet had
wings; she felt as light as air. She thought that she was flying. For the Vaermland polska is the most wonderful dance. It transforms
the heavy-footed sons of earth. Without a sound soles an inch thick
float over the unplaned barn floor. They whirl about, light as
leaves in an autumn wind. It is supple, quick, silent, gliding. Its
noble, measured movements set the body free and let it feel itself
light, elastic, floating. While Petter Nord danced the dance of his native land, there was
silence in the ball-room. At first people laughed, but then they
all recognized that this was dancing. It floated away in even,
rapid whirls; it was dancing indeed, if anything. In the midst of his delirium Petter Nord perceived that round about
him reigned a strange silence. He stopped short and passed his hand
over his forehead. There was no black barn floor, no leafy walls,
no light blue summer night, no merry peasant maiden in the reality
he gazed upon. He was ashamed and wished to steal away. But he was already surrounded, besieged. The young ladies crowded
about the shop-boy and cried: "Dance with us; dance with us!" They wished to learn the polska. They all wished to learn to dance
the polska. The ball was turned from its course and became a
dancing-school. All said that they had never known before what it
was to dance. And Petter Nord was a great man for that evening. He
had to dance with all the fine ladies, and they were exceedingly
kind to him. He was only a boy, and such a madcap besides. No one
could help making a pet of him. Petter Nord felt that this was happiness. To be the favorite of the
ladies, to dare to talk to them, to be in the midst of lights, of
movement, to be made much of, to be petted, surely this was happiness. When the ball was over, he was too happy to think about it. He
needed to come home to be able to think over quietly what had
happened to him that evening. Halfvorson was not married, but he had in his house a niece who
worked in the office. She was poor and dependent on Halfvorson, but
she was quite haughty towards both him and Petter Nord. She had
many friends among the more important people of the town and was
invited to families where Halfvorson could never come. She and
Petter Nord went home from the ball together. "Do you know, Nord," asked Edith Halfvorson, "that a suit is soon
to be brought against Halfvorson for illicit trading in brandy? You
might tell me how it really is." "There is nothing worth making a fuss about," said Petter Nord. Edith sighed. "Of course there is nothing. But there will be a
lawsuit and fines and shame without end. I wish that I really knew
how it is." "Perhaps it is best not to know anything," said Petter Nord. "I wish to rise in the world, do you see," continued Edith, "and I
wish to drag Halfvorson up with me, but he always drops back again. And then he does something so that I become impossible too. He is
scheming something now. Do you not know what it is? It would be
good to know." "No," said Petter Nord, and not another word would he say. It was
inhuman to talk to him of such things on the way home from his
first ball. Beyond the shop there was a little dark room for the shop-boy. There sat Petter Nord of to-day and came to an understanding with
Petter Nord of yesterday. How pale and cowardly the churl looked. Now he heard what he really was. A thief and a miser. Did he know
the seventh commandment? By rights he ought to have forty stripes. That was what he deserved. God be blessed and praised for having let him go to the ball and
get a new view of it all. Usch! what ugly thoughts he had had; but
now it was quite changed. As if riches were worth sacrificing
conscience and the soul's freedom for their sake! As if they were
worth as much as a white mouse, if the heart could not be glad at
the same time! He clapped his hands and cried out in joy--that he
was free, free, free! There was not even a longing to possess the
fifty crowns in his heart. How good it was to be happy! When he had gone to bed, he thought that he would show Halfvorson
the fifty crowns early the next morning. Then he became uneasy that
the tradesman might come into the shop before him the next morning,
search for the note and find it. He might easily think that Petter
Nord had hidden it to keep it. The thought gave him no peace. He
tried to shake it off, but he could not succeed. He could not
sleep. So he rose, crept into the shop and felt about till he found
the fifty crowns. Then he fell asleep with the note under his pillow. An hour later he awoke. A light shone sharply in his eyes; a hand
was fumbling under his pillow and a rumbling voice was scolding and
swearing. Before the boy was really awake, Halfvorson had the note in his
hand and showed it to the two women, who stood in the doorway to
his room. "You see that I was right," said Halfvorson. "You see
that it was well worth while for me to drag you up to bear witness
against him! You see that he is a thief!" "No, no, no," screamed poor Petter Nord. "I did not wish to steal. I only hid the note." Halfvorson heard nothing. Both the women stood with their backs
turned to the room, as if determined to neither hear nor see. Petter Nord sat up in bed. He looked all of a sudden pitifully weak
and small. His tears were streaming. He wailed aloud. "Uncle," said Edith, "he is weeping." "Let him weep," said Halfvorson, "let him weep!" And he walked
forward and looked at the boy. "You can weep all you like," he
said, "but that does not take me in." "Oh, oh," cried Petter Nord, "I am no thief. I hid the note as a
joke--to make you angry. I wanted to pay you back for the mice. I am not a thief. Will no one listen to me. I am not a thief." "Uncle," said Edith, "if you have tortured him enough now, perhaps
we may go back to bed?" "I know, of course, that it sounds terrible," said Halfvorson, "but
it cannot be helped." He was gay, in very high spirits. "I have had
my eye on you for a long time," he said to the boy. "You have
always something you are tucking away when I come into the shop. But now I have caught you. Now I leave witnesses, and now I am
going for the police." The boy gave a piercing scream. "Will no one help me, will no one
help me?" he cried. Halfvorson was gone, and the old woman who
managed his house came up to him. "Get up and dress yourself, Petter Nord! Halforson has gone for the
police, and while he is away you can escape. The young lady can go
out into the kitchen and get you a little food. I will pack your
things." The terrible weeping instantly ceased. After a short tine of hurry
the boy was ready. He kissed both the women on the hand, humbly,
like a whipped dog. And then off he ran. They stood in the door and looked after him. When he was gone, they
drew a sigh of relief. "What will Halfvorson say?" said Edith. "He will be glad," answered the housekeeper. "He put the money there for the boy, I think. I guess that he
wanted to be rid of him." "But why? The boy was the best one we have had in the shop for many
years." "He probably did not want him to give testimony in the affair with
the brandy." Edith stood silent and breathed quickly. "It is so base, so base,"
she murmured. She clenched her fist towards the office and towards
the little pane in the door, through which Halfvorson could see
into the shop. She would have liked, she too, to have fled out into
the world, away from all this meanness. She heard a sound far in,
in the shop. She listened, went nearer, followed the noise, and at
last found behind a keg of herring the cage of Petter Nord's white
mice. She took it up, put it on the counter, and opened the cage door. Mouse after mouse scampered out and disappeared behind boxes and
barrels. "May you flourish and increase," said Edith. "May you do injury and
revenge your master!" II

The little town lay friendly and contented under its red hill. It
was so embedded in green that the church tower only just stuck up
out of it. Garden after garden crowded one another on narrow
terraces up the slope, and when they could go no further in that
direction, they leaped with their bushes and trees across the
street and spread themselves out between the scattered farmhouses
and on the narrow strips of earth about them, until they were
stopped by the broad river. Complete silence and quiet reigned in the town. Not a soul was to
be seen; only trees and bushes, and now and again a house. The only
sound to be heard was the rolling of balls in the bowling-alley,
like distant thunder on a summer day. It belonged to the silence. But now the uneven stones of the market-place were ground under
iron-shod heels. The noise of coarse voices thundered against the
walls of the town-hall and the church was thrown back from the
mountain, and hastened unchecked down the long street. Four
wayfarers disturbed the noonday peace. Alas, for the sweet silence, the holiday peace of years! How
terrified they were! One could almost see them betaking themselves
in flight up the mountain slopes. One of the noisy crew who broke into the village was Petter Nord,
the Vaermland boy, who six years before had run away, accused of
theft. Those who were with him were three longshoremen from the big
commercial town that lies only a few miles away. How had little Petter Nord been getting on? He had been getting on
well. He had found one of the most sensible of friends and
companions. As he ran away from the village in the dark, rainy February
morning, the polska tunes seethed and roared in his ears. And one
of them was more persistent than all the others. It was the one
they all had sung during the ring dance. Christmas time has come,
        Christmas time has come,
        And after Christmas time comes Easter. That is not true at all,
        That is not true at all,
        For Lent comes after Christmas feasting. The fugitive heard it so distinctly, so distinctly. And then the
wisdom that is hidden in the old ring dance forced itself upon the
little pleasure-loving Vaermland boy, forced itself into his very
fibre, blended with every drop of blood, soaked into his brain and
marrow. It is so; that is the meaning. Between Christmas and
Easter, between the festivals of birth and death, comes life's
fasting. One shall ask nothing of life; it is a poor, miserable
fast. One shall never trust it, however it may appear. The next
moment it is gray and ugly again. It is not its fault, poor thing,
it cannot help it! Petter Nord felt almost proud at having cheated life out of its
most profound secret. He thought he saw the pallid Spirit of Fasting creeping about over
the earth in the shape of a beggar with Lenten twigs [Translator's
Note: In Sweden, just before Easter, bunches of birch twigs with
small feathers tied on the ends, are sold everywhere on the
streets. The origin of this custom is unknown.] in her hand. And he
heard how she hissed at him: "You have wished to celebrate the
festival of joy and merry moods in the midst of the time of
fasting, which is called life. Therefore shame and dishonor shall
befall you, until you change your ways." He had changed his ways, and the Spirit of Fasting had protected
him. He had never needed to go farther than to the big town, for he
was never followed. And in its working quarter the Spirit of
Fasting had her dwelling. Petter Nord found work in a machine shop. He grew strong and energetic. He became serious and thrifty. He had
fine Sunday clothes; he acquired new knowledge, borrowed books and
went to lectures. There was nothing really left of little Petter
Nord but his white hair and his brown eyes. That night had broken something in him, and the heavy work at the
machine-shop made the break ever bigger, so that the wild Vaermland
boy had crept quite out through it. He no longer talked nonsense,
for no one was allowed to speak in the shop, and he soon learned
silent ways. He no longer invented anything new, for since he had
to look after springs and wheels in earnest, he no longer found
them amusing. He never fell in love, for he could not be interested
in the women of the working quarter, after he had learned to know
the beauties of his native town. He had no mice, no squirrels,
nothing to play with. He had no time; he understood that such
things were useless, and he thought with horror of the time when he
used to fight with street boys. Petter Nord did not believe that life could be anything but gray,
gray, gray. Petter Nord always had a dull time, but he was so used
to it that he did not notice it. Petter Nord was proud of himself
because he had become so virtuous. He dated his good behavior from
that night when Joy failed him and Fasting became his companion and
friend. But how could the virtuous Petter Nord be coming to the village on
a work-day, accompanied by three boon companions, who were loafers
and drunken? He had always been a good boy, poor Petter Nord. And he had always
tried to help those three good-for-nothings as well as he could,
although he despised them. He had come with wood to their miserable
hovel, when the winter was most severe, and he had patched and
mended their clothes. The men held together like brothers,
principally because they were all three named Petter. That name
united them much more than if they bad been born brothers. And now
they allowed the boy on account of that name to do them friendly
services, and when they had got their grog ready and settled
themselves comfortably on their wooden chairs, they entertained
him, sitting and darning the gaping holes in their stockings, with
gallows humor and adventurous lies. Petter Nord liked it, although
he would not acknowledge it. They were now for him almost what the
mice had been formerly. Now it happened that these wharf-rats had heard some gossip from
the village. And after the space of six years they brought Petter
Nord information that Halfvorson had put the fifty crowns out for
him to disqualify him as a witness. And in their opinion Petter
Nord ought to go back to the town and punish Halfvorson. But Petter Nord was sensible and deliberate, and equipped with the
wisdom of this world. He would not have anything to do with such a
proposal. The Petters spread the story about through the whole quarter. Every
one said to Petter Nord: "Go back and punish Halfvorson, then you
will be arrested, and there will be a trial, and the thing will get
into the papers, and the fellow's shame will be known throughout
all the land." But Petter Nord would not. It might be amusing, but revenge is a
costly pleasure, and Petter Nord knew that Life is poor. Life
cannot afford such amusements. One morning the three men had come to him and said that they were
going in his place to beat Halfvorson, "that justice should be done
on earth," as they said. Petter Nord threatened to kill all three of them if they went one
step on the way to the village. Then one of them who was little and short, and whose name was
Long-Petter, made a speech to Petter Nord. "This earth," he said, is an apple hanging by a string over a fire
to roast. By the fire I mean the kingdom of the evil one; Petter
Nord, and the apple must hang near the fire to be sweet and tender;
but if the string breaks and the apple falls into the fire, it is
destroyed. Therefore the string is very important, Petter Nord. Do
you understand what is meant by the string?" "I guess it must be a steel wire," said Petter Nord. "By the string I mean justice," said Long-Petter with deep
seriousness. "If there is no justice on earth, everything falls
into the fire. Therefore the avenger may not refuse to punish, or
if he will not do it, others must." "This is the last time I will offer any of you any grog," said
Petter Nord, quite unmoved by the speech. "Yes, it can't be helped," said Long-Petter, "justice must be
done." "We do not do it to be thanked by you, but in order that the
honorable name of Petter shall not be brought to disrepute," said
one, whose name was Rulle-Petter, and who was tall and morose. "Really, is the name so highly esteemed!" said Petter Nord,
contemptuously. "Yes, and the worst of it is that they are beginning to say
everywhere in all the saloons that you must have meant to steal the
fifty crowns, since you will not have the shopkeeper punished." Those words bit in deep. Petter Nord started up and said that he
would go and beat the shopkeeper. "Yes, and we will go with you and help you," said the loafers. And so they started off, four men strong, to the village. At first
Petter Nord was gloomy and surly, and much more angry with his
friends than with his enemy. But when he came to the bridge over
the river, he became quite changed. He felt as if he had met there
a little, weeping fugitive, and had crept into him. And as he
became more at home in the old Petter Nord he felt what a grievous
wrong the shopkeeper had done him. Not only because he had tried to
tempt him and ruin him, but, worst of all, because he had driven
him away from that town, where Petter Nord could have remained
Petter Nord all the days of his life. Oh, what fun he had had in
those days, how happy and glad he had been, how open his heart, how
beautiful the world! Lord God, if he had only been allowed always
to live here! And he thought of what he was now--silent and stupid,
serious and industrious--quite like a prodigal. He grew passionately angry with Halfvorson, and instead of, as
before, following his companions, he dashed past them. But the tramps, who had not come merely to punish Halfvorson, but
also to let their wrath break loose, hardly knew how to begin. There was nothing for an angry man to do here. There was not a dog
to chase, not a street-sweeper to pick a quarrel with, nor a fine
gentleman at whom to throw an insult. It was early in the year; the spring was just turning into summer. It was the white time of cherry and hawthorn blossoms, when bunches
of lilacs cover the high, round bushes, and the air is full of the
fragrance of the apple-blossoms. These men who had come direct from
paved streets and wharves to this realm of flowers were strangely
affected by it. Three pairs of fists that till now had been
fiercely clenched, relaxed, and three pairs of heels thundered a
little less violently against the pavement. From the market-place they saw a pathway that wound up the hill. Along it grew young cherry-trees which formed vaulted arches with
their white tops. The arch was light and floating, and the branches
absurdly slender, altogether weak, delicate and youthful. The cherry-tree path attracted the eyes of the men against their
will. What an unpractical hole it was, where people planted cherry
trees, where any one could take the cherries. The three Petters had
considered it before as a nest of iniquity, full of cruelty and
tyranny. Now they began to laugh at it, and even to despise it a
little. But the fourth one of the company did not laugh. His longing for
revenge was seething ever more fiercely, for he felt that this was
the town where he ought to have lived and labored. It was his lost
paradise. And without paying any attention to the others he walked
quickly up the street. They followed him; and when they saw that there was only one
street, and when they saw only flowers, and more flowers the whole
length of it, their scorn and their good humor increased. It was
perhaps the first time in their lives that they had ever noticed
flowers, but here they could not help it, for the clusters of lilac
blossoms brushed off their caps and the petals of cherry-blossoms
rained down over them. "What kind of people do you suppose live in this town?" said
Long-Petter, musingly. "Bees," answered Cobbler-Petter, who had received his name because
he had once lived in the same house as a shoemaker. Of course, little by little, they perceived a few people. In the
windows, behind shining panes and white curtains, appeared young,
pretty faces, and they saw children playing on the terraces. But no
noise disturbed the silence. It seemed to them as if the trump of
the Day of Doom itself would not be able to wake this town. What
could they do with themselves in such a town! They went into a shop and bought some beer. There they asked
several questions of the shopman in a terrible voice. They asked if
the fire-brigade had their engines in order, and wondered if there
were clappers in the church bells, if there should happen to be an
alarm. They drank their beer in the street and threw the bottles away. One, two, three, all the bottles at the same corner, thunder and
crash, and the splinters flew about their ears. They heard steps behind them, real steps; voices, loud, distinct
voices; laughter, much laughter, and, moreover, a rattling as if of
metal. They were appalled, and drew back into a doorway. It sounded
like a whole company. It was one, too, but of young girls. All the maids of the town were
going out in a body to the pastures to milk. It made the deepest impression on these city men, these citizens of
the world. The maids of the town with milk-pails! It was almost
touching! They suddenly jumped out of their doorway and cried "Boo!" The whole troop of girls scattered instantly. They screamed and
ran. Their skirts fluttered; their head cloths loosened; their
milk-pails rolled about the street. And at the same time, along the whole street, was heard a deafening
sound of gates and doors slammed to, of hooks and bolts and locks. Farther down the street stood a big linden tree, and under it sat
an old woman by a table with candies and cakes. She did not move;
she did not look round; 9111' only sat still. She was not asleep
either. "She is made of wood," said Cobbler-Petter,

"No, of clay," said Rulle-Petter. They walked abreast, all three. Just in front of the old woman they
began to reel. They staggered against her table. And the old woman
began to scold. "Neither of wood nor of clay," they said,--"venom, only venom." During all this time Petter Nord had not spoken to them, but now,
at last, they were directly in front of Halfvorson's shop, and
there he was waiting for them. "This is undeniably, my affair," he said proudly, and pointed at
the shop. "I wish to go in alone and attend to it. If I do not
succeed, then you may try." They nodded. "Go ahead, Petter Nord! We will wait outside." Petter Nord went in, found a young man alone in the shop, and asked
about Halfvorson. He heard that the latter had gone away. He had
quite a talk with the clerk, and obtained a good deal of
information about his master. Halfvorson had never been accused of illicit trade. How he had
behaved towards Petter Nord every one knew, but no one spoke of
that affair any more. Halfvorson had risen in the world, and now he
was not at all dangerous. He was not inhuman to his debtors, and
had ceased to spy on his shop-boys. The last few years he had
devoted himself to gardening. He had laid out a garden around his
house in the town, and a kitchen garden near the customhouse. He
worked so eagerly in his gardens that he scarcely thought of
amassing money. Petter Nord felt a stab in his heart. Of course the man was good. He had remained in paradise. Of course any one was good who lived
there. Edith Halfvorson was still with her uncle, but she had been ill for
a while. Her lungs were weak, ever since an attack of pneumonia in
the winter. While Petter Nord was listening to all this, and more too, the
three men stood outside and waited. In Halfvorson's shadeless garden a bower of birch had been arranged
so that Edith might lie there in the beautiful, warm spring days. She regained her strength slowly, but her life was no longer in
danger. Some people make one feel that they are not able to live. At their
first illness they lie down and die. Halfvorson's niece was long
since weary of everything, of the office, of the dim little shop,
of money-getting. When she was seventeen years old, she had the
incentive of winning friends and acquaintances. Then she undertook
to try to keep Halfvorson in the path of virtue, but now everything
was accomplished. She saw no prospect of escaping from the monotony
of her life. She might as well die. She was of an elastic nature, like a steel spring: a bundle of
nerves and vivacity, when anything troubled or tormented her. How
she had worked with strategy and artifice, with womanly goodness
and womanly daring, before she had reached the point with her uncle
when she was sure that there was no longer danger of any Petter
Nord affairs! But now that he was tamed and subdued, she had
nothing to interest her. Yes, and yet she would not die! She lay
and thought of what she would do when she was well again. Suddenly she started up, hearing some one say in a very loud voice
that he alone wished to settle with Halvorson. And then another
voice answered: "Go ahead, Petter Nord!" Petter Nord was the most terrible, the most fatal name in the
world. It meant a revival of all the old troubles. Edith rose with
trembling limbs, and just then three dreadful creatures came around
the corner and stopped to stare at her. There was only a low rail
and a thin hedge between her and the street. Edith was alone. The maids had gone to milk, and Halfvorson was
working in his garden by the custom-house, although he had told the
shop-boy to nay that he had gone away, for he was ashamed of his
passion for gardening. Edith was terribly frightened at the three
men as well as at the one who had gone into the shop. She was sure
that they wished to do her harm. So she turned and ran up the
mountain by the steep, slippery path and the narrow, rotten wooden
steps which led from terrace to terrace. The strange men thought it too delightfully funny that she ran from
them. They could not resist pretending that they wished to catch
her. One of them climbed up on the railing, and all three shouted
with a terrible voice. Edith ran as one runs in dreams, panting, falling, terrified to
death, with a horrible feeling of not getting away from one spot. All sorts of emotions stormed through her, and shook her so that
she thought she was going to die. Yes, if one of those men laid his
hand on her, she knew that she should die. When she had reached the
highest terrace, and dared to look back, she found that the men
were still in the street, and were no longer looking at her. Then
she threw herself down on the ground, quite powerless. The exertion
had been greater than she could bear. She felt something burst in
her. Then blood streamed from her lips. She was found by the maids as they went home from the milking. She
was then half dead. For the moment she was brought back to life,
but no one dared to hope that she could live long. She could not talk that day enough to tell in what way she had been
frightened. Had she done so, it is uncertain if the strange men had
come alive from the town. They fared badly enough as it was. For
after Petter Nord had come out to them again, and had told them
that Halfvorson was not at home, all four of them in good accord
went out through the gates, and found a sunny slope where they
could sleep away the time until the shopman returned. But in the afternoon, when all the men of the town, who had been
working in the fields, came home again, the women told them about
the tramps' visit, about their threatening questions in the shop
where they had bought the beer, and about all their boisterous
behavior. The women exaggerated and magnified everything, for they
had sat at home and frightened one another the whole afternoon. Their husbands believed that their houses and homes were in danger. They determined to capture the disturbers of the peace, found a
stout-hearted man to lead them, took thick cudgels with them and
started off. The whole town was alive. The women came out on their doorsteps and
frightened one another. It was both terrible and exciting. Before long the captors returned with their game. They had them all
four. They had made a ring round them while they slept and captured
them. No heroism had been required for the deed. Now they came back to the town with them, driving them as if they
had been animals. A mad thirst for revenge had seized upon the
conquerors. They struck for the pleasure of striking. When one of
the prisoners clenched his fist at them, he received a blow on the
head which knocked him down, and thereupon blows hailed upon him,
until he got up and went on. The four men were almost dead. The old poems are so beautiful. The captured hero sometimes must
walk in chains in the triumphal procession of his victorious enemy. But he is proud and beautiful still in adversity. And looks follow
him as well as the fortunate one who has conquered him. Beauty's
tears and wreaths belong to him still, even in misfortune. But who could be enraptured of poor Petter Nord? His coat was torn
and his tow-colored hair sticky with blood. He received the most
blows, for he offered the most resistance. He looked terrible, as
he walked. He roared without knowing it. Boys caught hold of him,
and he dragged them long distances. Once he stopped and flung off
the crowd in the street. Just as he was about to escape, a blow
from a cudgel fell on his head and knocked him down. He rose up
again, half stunned, and staggered on, blows raining upon him, and
the boys hanging like leeches to his arms and legs. They met the old Mayor, who was on his way home from his game of
whist in the garden of the inn. "Yes," he said to the advance
guard,--"yes, take them to the prison." He placed himself at the head of the procession, shouted and
ordered. In a second everything was in line. Prisoners and guards
marched in peace and order. The villagers' cheeks flushed; some of
them threw down their cudgels; others put them on their shoulders
like muskets. And so the prisoners were transferred into the
keeping of the police, and were taken to the prison in the
market-place. Those who had saved the town stood a long time in the market-place
and told of their courage and of their great exploit. And in the
little room of the inn, where the smoke is as thick as a cloud, and
the great men of the town mix their midnight toddy, more is heard
of the deed, magnified. They grow bigger in their rocking-chairs;
they swell in their sofa corners; they are all heroes. What force
is slumbering in that little town of mighty memories! Thou
formidable inheritance, thou old Viking blood! The old Mayor did not like the whole affair. He could not quite
reconcile himself to the stirring of the old Viking blood. He could
not sleep for thinking of it, and went out again into the street
and strolled slowly towards the square. It was a mild spring night. The church clock's only hand pointed to
eleven. The balls had ceased to roll on the bowling alley. The
curtains were drawn down. The houses seemed to sleep with closed
eyelids. The steep hill behind was black, as if in mourning. But in
the midst of all the sleep there was one thing awake--the fragrance
of the flowers did not sleep. It stole over the linden hedges;
poured out from the gardens; rushed up and down the street; climbed
up to every window standing open, to every skylight that sucked in
fresh air. Every one whom the fragrance reached instantly saw before him his
little town, although the darkness had gently settled down over it. He saw it as a village of flowers, where it was not house by house,
but garden by garden. He saw the cherry trees that raised their
white arches over the steep wood-path, the lilac clusters, the
swelling buds of glorious roses, the proud peonies, and the drifts
of flower-petals on the ground beneath the hawthorns. The old Mayor was deep in thought. He was so wise and so old. Seventy years had he reached, and for fifty he had managed the
affairs of the town. But that night be asked himself if he had done
right. "I had the town in my hand," he thought, "but I have not
made it anything great." And he thought of its great past, and was
the more uncertain if he had done right. He stood in the market-place, looking out over the river. A boat
came with oars. A few villagers were coming home from a picnic. Girls in light dresses held the oars. They steered in under the
arch of the bridge, but there the current was strong and they were
drawn back. There was a violent struggle. Their slender bodies were
bent backwards, until they lay even with the edge of the boat. Their soft arm-muscles tightened. The oars bent like bows. The
noise of laughter and cries filled the air. Again and again the
current conquered. The boat was driven back. And when at last the
girls had to land at the market quay, and leave the boat for men to
take home, how red and vexed they were, and how they laughed! How
their laughter echoed down the street! How their broad, shady hats,
their light, fluttering summer dresses enlivened the quiet night. The old Mayor saw in his mind's eye, for in the darkness he could
not see them distinctly, their sweet, young faces, their beautiful
clear eyes and red lips. Then he straightened himself proudly up. The little town was not without all glory. Other communities could
boast of other things, but he knew no place richer in flowers and
in the enchanting fairness of its women. Then the old man thought with new-born courage of his efforts. He
need not fear for the future of the town. Such a town did not need
to protect itself with strict laws. He felt compassion on the unfortunate prisoners. He went and waked
the justice of the peace, and talked with him. And the two were of
one mind. They went together to the prison and set Petter Nord and
his companions free. And they did right. For the little town is like the Milo Aphrodite. It has alluring beauty, and it lacks arms to hold fast. III

I shall almost be compelled to leave reality, and turn to the world
of saga and extravagance to be able to relate what now happened. If
young Petter Nord had been Per, the Swineherd, with a gold crown
under his hat, it would all have seemed simple and natural. But no
one, of course, will believe me if I say that Petter Nord also wore
a royal crown on his tow hair. No one can ever know how many
wonderful things happen in that little town. No one can guess how
many enchanted princesses are waiting there for the shepherd boy of
adventure. At first it looked as if there were to be no more adventures. For
when Petter Nord had been set free by the old Mayor, and for the
second time had to flee in shame and disgrace from the town, the
same thoughts came over him as when he fled the first time. The
polska tunes rang again suddenly in his ears, and loudest among
them all sounded the old ring-dance. Christmas time has come,
           Christmas time has come,
           And after Christmas time comes Easter. That is not true at all,
           That is not true at all,
           For Lent comes after Christmas feasting. And he saw distinctly the pallid Spirit of Fasting stealing about
over the earth with her bundle of twigs on her arm. And she called
to him: "Spendthrift, spendthrift! You have wished to celebrate the
festival of revenge and reparation during the time of fasting, that
is called life. Can you afford such extravagances, foolish one?" Thereupon he had again sworn obedience and become the quiet and
thrifty workman. He again stood peaceful and sensible at his work. No one could believe that it was he who had roared with rage and
flung about the people in the street, as an elk at bay shakes off
the dogs. A few weeks later Halfvorson came to him at the machine-shop. He
looked him up, at his niece's desire. She wished, if possible, to
speak to him that same day. Petter Nord began to shake and tremble when he saw Halfvorson. It
was as if he had seen a slippery snake. He did not know which he
wished most--to strike him or to run away from him; but he soon
perceived that Halfvorson looked much troubled. The tradesman looked as one does after having been out in a strong
wind. The muscles of his face were drawn; his mouth was compressed;
his eyes red and full of tears. He struggled visibly with some
sorrow. The only thing in him that was the same was his voice. It
was as inhumanly expressionless as ever. "You need not be afraid of the old story nor of the new one
either," said Halfvorson. "It is known that you were with those men
who made all the trouble with us the other day. And as we supposed
that they came from here, I could learn where you were. Edith is
going to die soon," he continued, and his whole face twitched as if
it would fall to pieces. "She wishes to speak to you before she
dies. But we wish you no harm." "Of course I shall come," said Petter Nord. Soon they were both on board the steamer. Petter Nord was decked
out in his fine Sunday clothes. Under his hat played and smiled all
the dreams of his boyhood in a veritable kingly crown; they
encircled his light hair. Edith's message made him quite dizzy. Had
he not always thought that fine ladies would love him? And now here
was one who wished to see him before she died. Most wonderful of
all things wonderful!--He sat and thought of her as she had been
formerly. How proud, how alive! And now she was going to die. He
was in such sorrow for her sake. But that she had been thinking of
him all these years! A warm, sweet melancholy came over him. He was really there again, the old, mad Petter Nord. As soon as he
approached the village the Spirit of Fasting went away from him
with disgust and contempt. Halfvorson could not keep still for a moment. The heavy gale, which
he alone perceived, swept him forward and back on the deck. As he
passed Petter, he murmured a few words, so that the latter could
know by what paths his despairing thoughts wandered. "They found her on the ground, half dead--blood everywhere about
her," he said once. And another time: "Was she not good? Was she
not beautiful? How could such things come to her?" And again: "She
has made me good too. Could not see her sitting in sorrow all day
long and ruining the account-book with her tears." Then this came:
"A clever child, besides. Won her way with me. Made my home
pleasant. Got me acquaintances among fine people. Understood what
she was after, but could not resist her." He wandered away to the
bow of the boat. When he came back he said: "I cannot bear to have
her die." He said it all with that helpless voice, which he could not subdue
or control. Petter Nord had a proud feeling that such a man as he
who wore a royal crown on his brow had no right to be angry with
Halfvorson. The latter was separated from men by his infirmity, and
could not win their love. Therefore he had to treat them all as
enemies. He was not to be measured by the same standard as other
people. Petter Nord sank again into his dreams. _She_ had remembered him
all these years, and now she could not die before she had seen him. Oh, fancy that a young girl for all these years had been thinking
of him, loving him, missing him! As soon as they landed and reached the tradesman's house, he was
taken to Edith, who was waiting for him in the arbor. The happy Petter Nord woke from his dreams when he saw her. She was
a fair vision, this girl, withering away in emulation with the
rootless birches around her. Her big eyes had darkened and grown
clearer. Her hands were so thin and transparent that one feared to
touch them for their fragility. And it was she who loved him. Of course he had to love her
instantly in return, deeply, dearly, ardently! It was bliss, after
so many years, to feel his heart glow at the sight of a fellow-being. He had stopped motionless at the entrance of the arbor, while eyes,
heart and brain worked most eagerly. When she saw how he stood and
stared at her, she began to smile with that most despairing smile
in the world, the smile of the very ill, that says: "See, this is
what I have become, but do not count on me! I cannot be beautiful
and charming any longer. I must die soon." It brought him back to reality. He saw that he had to do not with a
vision, but with a spirit which was about to spread its wings, and
therefore had made the walls of its prison so delicate and
transparent. It now showed so plainly in his face and in the way he
took Edith's hand, that he all at once suffered with her suffering,--
that he had forgotten everything but grief, that she was going to
die. The sick girl felt the same pity for herself, and her eyes
filled with tears. Oh, what sympathy he felt for her from the first moment. He
understood instantly that she would not wish to show her emotion. Of course it was agitating for her to see him, whom she had longed
for so long, but it was her weakness that had made her betray
herself. She naturally would not like him to pay any attention to
it. And so he began on an innocent subject of conversation. "Do you know what happened to my white mice?" he said. She looked at him with admiration. He seemed to wish to make the
way easier for her. "I let them loose in the shop," she said. "They
have thriven well." "No, really! Are there any of them left?" "Halfvorson says that he will never be rid of Petter Nord's mice. They have revenged you, you understand," she said with meaning. "It was a very good race," answered Petter Nord, proudly. The conversation lagged for a while. Edith closed her eyes, as if
to rest, and he kept a respectful silence. His last answer she had
not understood. He had not responded to what she had said about
revenge. When he began to talk of the mice, she believed that he
understood what she wished to say to him. She knew that he had come
to the town a few weeks before to be revenged. Poor Petter Nord! Many a time she had wondered what had become of him. Many a night
had the cries of the frightened boy come to her in dreams. It was
partly for his sake that she should never again have to live
through such a night, that she had begun to reform her uncle, had
made his house a home for him, had let the lonely man feel the
value of having a sympathetic friend near him. Her lot was now
again bound together with that of Petter Nord. His attempt at
revenge had frightened her to death. As soon as she had regained
her strength after that severe attack, she had begged Halfvorson to
look him up. And Petter Nord sat there and believed that it was for love she had
called him. He could not know that she believed him vindictive,
coarse, degraded, a drunkard and a bully. He who was an example to
all his comrades in the working quarter, he could not guess that
she had summoned him, in order to preach virtue and good habits to
him, in order to say to him, if nothing else helped: "Look at me,
Petter Nord! It is your want of judgment, your vindictiveness, that
is the cause of my death. Think of it, and begin another life!" He had come filled with love of life and dreams to celebrate love's
festival, and she lay there and thought of plunging him into the
black depths of remorse. There must have been something of the glory of the kingly crown
shining on her, which made her hesitate so that she decided to
question him first. "But, Petter Nord, was it really you who were here with those three
terrible men?" He flushed and looked on the ground. Then he had to tell her the
whole story of the day with all its shame. In the first place, what
unmanliness he had shown in not sooner demanding justice, and how
he had only gone because he was forced to it, and then how he had
been beaten and whipped instead of beating some one himself. He did
not dare to look up while he was speaking; he did expect that even
those gentle eyes would judge him with forbearance. He felt that he
was robbing himself of all the glory with which she must have
surrounded him in her dreams. "But Petter Nord, what would have happened if you had met
Halfvorson?" asked Edith, when he had finished. He hung his head even lower. "I saw him well enough," he said. "He
had not gone away. He was working in his garden outside the gates. The boy in the shop told me everything." "Well, why did you not avenge yourself?" said Edith. He was spared nothing.--But he felt the inquiring glance of her
eyes on him and he began obediently: "When the men lay down to
sleep on a slope, I went alone to find Halfvorson, for I wished to
have him to myself. He was working there, staking his peas. It must
have rained in torrents the day before, for the peas had been
broken down to the ground; some of the leaves were whipped to
ribbons, others covered with earth. It was like a hospital, and
Halfvorson was the doctor. He raised them up so gently, brushed
away the earth and helped the poor little things to cling to the
twigs. I stood and looked on. He did not hear me, and he had no
time to look up. I tried to retain my anger by force. But what
could I do? I could not fly at him while he was busy with the peas. My time will come afterwards, I thought. "But then he started up, struck himself on the forehead and rushed
away to the hotbed. He lifted the glass and looked in, and I looked
too, for he seemed to be in the depths of despair. Yes, it was
dreadful, of course. He had forgotten to shade it from the sun, and
it must have been terribly hot under the glass. The cucumbers lay
there half-dead and gasped for breath; some of the leaves were
burnt, and others were drooping. I was so overcome, I too, that I
never thought what I was doing, and Halfvorson caught sight of my
shadow. 'Look here, take the watering-pot that is standing in the
asparagus bed and run down to the river for water,' he said,
without looking up. I suppose he thought it was the gardener's boy. And I ran." "Did you, Petter Nord?" "Yes; you see, the cucumbers ought not to suffer on account of our
enmity. I thought myself that it showed lack of character and so
on, but I could not help it. I wanted to see if they would come to
life. When I came back, he had lifted the glass off and still stood
and stared despairingly. I thrust the watering-pot into his hand,
and he began to pour over them. Yes, it was almost visible what
good it did in the hotbed. I thought almost that they raised
themselves, and he must have thought so too, for he began to laugh. Then I ran away." "You ran away, Petter Nord, you ran away?" Edith had raised herself in the arm-chair. "I could not strike him," said Petter Nord. Edith felt an ever stronger impression of the glory round poor
Petter Nord's head. So it was not necessary to plunge him into the
depths of remorse with the heavy burden of sin around his neck. Was
he such a man? Such a tender-hearted, sensitive man! She sank back,
closed her eyes and thought. She did not need to say it to him. She
was astonished that she felt such a relief not to have to cause him
pain. "I am so glad that you have given up your plans for revenge, Petter
Nord," she began in friendly tones. "It was about that that I
wished to talk to you. Now I can die in peace." He drew along breath. She was not unfriendly. She did not look as if she had been mistaken in him. She must love
him very much when she could excuse such cowardice.--For when she
said that she had sent for him to ask him to give up his thoughts
of revenge, it must have been from bashfulness not to have to
acknowledge the real reason of the summons. She was so right in it. He who was the man ought to say the first word. "How can they let you die?" he burst out. "Halfvorson and all the others, how can they? If I were here, I
would refuse to let you die. I would give you all my strength. I
would take all your suffering." "I have no pain," she said, smiling at such bold promises. "I am thinking that I would like to carry you away like a frozen
bird, lay you under my vest like a young squirrel. Fancy what it
would be to work if something so warm and soft was waiting for one
at home! But if you were well, there would be so many--"

She looked at him with weary surprise, prepared to put him back in
his proper place. But she must have seen again something of the
magic crown about the boy's head, for she had patience with him. He
meant nothing. He had to talk as he did. He was not like others. "Ah," she said, indifferently, "there are not so many, Petter Nord. There has hardly been any one in earnest." But now there came another turn to his advantage. In her suddenly
awoke the eager hunger of a sick person for compassion. She longed
for the tenderness, the pity that the poor workman could give her. She felt the need of being near that deep, disinterested sympathy. The sick cannot have enough of it. She wished to read it in his
glance and his whole being. Words meant nothing to her. "I like to see you here," she said. "Sit here for a while, and tell
me what you have been doing these six years!" While he talked, she lay and drew in the indescribable something
which passed between them. She heard and yet she did not hear. But
by some strange sympathy she felt herself strengthened and
vivified. Nevertheless she did get one impression from his story. It took her
into the workman's quarter, into a new world, full of tumultuous
hopes and strength. How they longed and trusted! How they hated and
suffered! "How happy the oppressed are," she said. It occurred to her, with a longing for life, that there might be
something for her there, she who always needed oppression and
compulsion to make life worth living. "If I were well," she said, "perhaps I would have gone there with
you. I should enjoy working my way up with some one I liked." Petter Nord started. Here was the confession that he had been
waiting for the whole time. "Oh, can you not live!" he prayed. And he beamed with happiness. She became observant. "That is love," she said to herself. "And now
he believes that I am also in love. What madness, that Vaermland boy!" She wished to bring him back to reason, but there was something in
Petter Nord on that day of victory that restrained her. She had not
the heart to spoil his happy mood. She felt compassion for his
foolishness and let him live in it. "It does not matter, as I am to
die so soon," she said to herself. But she sent him away soon after, and when he asked if he might not
come again, she forbade him absolutely. "But," she said, "do you
remember our graveyard up on the hill, Petter Nord. You can come
there in a few weeks and thank death for that day." As Petter Nord came out of the garden, he met Halfvorson. He was
walking forward and back in despair, and his only consolation was
the thought that Edith was laying the burden of remorse on the
wrong-doer. To see him overpowered by pangs of conscience, for that
alone had he sought him out. But when he met the young workman, he
saw that Edith had not told him everything. He was serious, but at
the same time he certainly was madly happy. "Has Edith told you why she is dying?" said Halfvorson. "No," answered Petter Nord. Halfvorson laid his hand on his shoulder as if to keep him from
escaping. "She is dying because of you, because of your damned pranks. She
was slightly ill before, but it was nothing. No one thought that
she would die; but then you came with those three wretched tramps,
and they frightened her while you were in my shop. They chased her,
and she ran away from them, ran till she got a hemorrhage. But that
is what you wanted; you wished to be revenged on me by killing her,
wished to leave me lonely and unhappy without a soul near me who
cares for me. All my joy you wished to take from me, all my joy." He would have gone on forever, overwhelmed Petter Nord with
reproaches, killed him with curses; but the latter tore himself
away and ran, as if an earthquake had shaken the town and all the
houses were tumbling down. IV

Behind the town the mountain walls rise perpendicularly, but after
one has climbed up them by steep stone steps and slippery pine
paths, one finds that the mountain spreads out into a wide,
undulating plateau. And there lies an enchanted wood. Over the whole stretch of the mountain stands a pine wood without
pine-needles; a wood which dies in the spring and grows green in
the autumn; a lifeless wood, which blossoms with the joy of life
when other trees are laying aside their green garments; a wood that
grows without any one knowing how, that stands green in winter
frosts and brown in summer dews. It is a newly-planted wood. Young firs have been forced to take
root in the clefts between the granite blocks. Their tough roots
have bored down like sharp wedges into the fissures and crevices. It was very well for a while; the young trees shot up like spires,
and the roots bored down into the granite. But at last they could
go no further, and then the wood was filled with an ill-concealed
peevishness. It wished to go high, but also deep. After the way
down had been closed to it, it felt that life was not worth living. Every spring it was ready to throw off the burden of life in its
discouragement. During the summer when Edith was dying, the young
wood was quite brown. High above the town of flowers stood a gloomy
row of dying trees. But up on the mountain it is not all gloom and the agony of death. As one walks between the brown trees, in such distress that one is
ready to die, one catches glimpses of green trees. The perfume of
flowers fills the air; the song of birds exults and calls. Then
thoughts rise of the sleeping forest and of the paradise of the
fairy-tale, encircled by thorny thickets. And when one comes at
last to the green, to the flower fragrance, to the song of the
birds, one sees that it is the hidden graveyard of the little town. The home of the dead lies in an earth-filled hollow in the mountain
plateau. And there, within the grey stone walls, the knowledge and
weariness of life end. Lilacs stand at the entrance, bending under
heavy clusters. Lindens and beeches spread a lofty arch of
luxuriant growth over the whole place. Jasmines and roses blossom
freely in that consecrated earth. Over the big old tombstones creep
vines of ivy and periwinkle. There is a corner where the pine-trees grow mast-high. Does it not
seem as if the young wood outside ought to be ashamed at the sight
of them? And there are hedges there, quite grown beyond their
keeper's hands, blooming and sending forth shoots without thought
of shears or knife. The town now has a new burial-place, to which the dead can come
without special trouble. It was a weary way for them to be carried
up in winter, when the steep wood-paths are covered with ice, and
the steps slippery and covered with snow. The coffin creaked; the
bearers panted; the old clergyman leaned heavily on the sexton and
the grave-digger. Now no one has to be buried up there who does not
ask it. The graves are not beautiful. There are few who know how to make
the resting-place of the dead attractive. But the fresh green sheds
its peace and beauty over them all. It is strangely solemn to know
that those who are buried are glad to lie there. The living who go
up after a day hot with work, go there as among friends. Those who
sleep have also loved the lofty trees and the stillness. If a stranger comes up there, they do not tell him of death and
loss; they sit down on the big slabs of stone, on the broad
burgomaster tombs, and tell him about Petter Nord, the Vaermland
boy, and of his love. The story seems fitting to be told up here,
where death has lost its terrors. The consecrated earth seems to
rejoice at having also been the scene of awakened happiness and
new-born life. For it happened that after Petter Nord ran away from Halfvorson, he
sought refuge in the graveyard. At first he ran towards the bridge over the river and turned his
steps towards the big town. But on the bridge the unfortunate
fugitive stopped. The kingly crown on his brow was quite gone. It
had disappeared as if it had been spun of sunbeams. He was deeply
bent with sorrow; his whole body shook; his heart throbbed; his
brain burned like fire. Then he thought he saw the Spirit of Fasting coming towards him for
the third time. She was much more friendly, much more compassionate
than before; but she seemed to him only so much the more terrible. "Alas, unhappy one," she said, "surely this must be the last of
your pranks! You have wished to celebrate the festival of love
during that time of fasting which is called life; but you see what
happens to you. Come now and be faithful to me; you have tried
everything and have only me to whom to turn." He waved his arm to keep her off. "I know what you wish of me. You
wish to lead me back to work and renunciation, but I cannot. Not
now, not now!" The pallid Spirit of Fasting smiled ever more mildly. "You are
innocent, Petter Nord. Do not grieve so over what you have not
caused! Was not Edith kind to you? Did you not see that she had
forgiven you? Come with me to your work! Live, as you have lived!" The boy cried more vehemently. "Is it any better for me, do you
think, that I have killed just her who has been kind to me, her,
who cares for me? Had it not been better if I had murdered some one
whom I wished to murder. I must make amends. I must save her life. I cannot think of work now." "Oh, you madman," said the Spirit of Fasting, "the festival of
reparation which you wish to celebrate is the greatest audacity
of all." Then Petter Nord rebelled absolutely against his friend of many
years. He scoffed at her. "What have you made me believe?" he said. "That you were a tiresome and peevish old woman with arms full of
small, harmless twigs. You are a sorceress of life. You are a
monster. You are beautiful, and you are terrible. You yourself know
no bounds nor limits; why should I know them? How can you preach
fasting, you, who wish to deluge me with such an overmeasure of
sorrow? What are the festivals I have celebrated compared to those
you are continually preparing for me! Begone with your pallid
moderation! Now I wish to be as mad as yourself." Not one step could he take towards the big town. Neither could he
turn directly round and again go the length of the one street in
the village; he took the path up the mountain, climbed to the
enchanted pine-wood, and wandered about among the stiff, prickly
young trees, until a friendly path led him to the graveyard. There
he found a hiding-place in a corner where the pines grew high as
masts, and there he threw himself weary unto death on the ground. He almost lost consciousness. He did not know if time passed or if
everything stood still. But after a while steps were heard, and he
woke to a feeble consciousness. He seemed to have been far, far
away. He saw a funeral procession draw near, and instantly a
confused thought rose in him. How long had he lain there? Was Edith
dead already? Was she looking for him here? Was the corpse in the
coffin hunting for its murderer? He shook and sweated. He lay well
hidden in the dark pine thicket; but he trembled for what might
happen if the corpse found him. He bent aside the branches and
looked out. A hunted deserter could not have spied more wildly
after his pursuers. The funeral was that of a poor man. The attendance was small. The
coffin was lowered without wreaths into the grave. There was no
sign of tears on any of the faces. Petter Nord had still enough
sense to see that this could not be Edith Halfvorson's funeral
train. But if this was not she, who knows if it was not a greeting from
her. Petter Nord felt that he had no right to escape. She had said
that he was to go up to the graveyard. She must have meant that he
was to wait for her there, so that she could find him to give him
his punishment. The funeral was a greeting, a token. She wished him
to wait for her there. To his sick brain the low churchyard wall rose as high as a
rampart. He stared despairingly at the frail trellis-gate; it was
like the most solid door of oak. He was imprisoned. He could never
get away, until she herself came up and brought him his punishment. What she was going to do with him he did not know. Only one thing
was distinct and clear; that he must wait here until she came for
him. Perhaps she would take him with her into the grave; perhaps
she would command him to throw himself from the mountain. He could
not know--he must wait for a while yet. Reason fought a despairing struggle: "You are innocent, Petter
Nord. Do not grieve over what you have not caused! She has not sent
you any messages. Go down to your work! Lift your foot and you are
over the wall; push with one finger and the gate is open." No, he could not. Most of the time he was in a stupor, a trance. His thoughts were indistinct, as when on the point of falling
asleep. He only knew one thing, that he must stay where he was. The news came to her lying and fading in emulation with the
rootless birches. "Petter Nord, with whom you played one summer
day, is in the graveyard waiting for you. Petter Nord, whom your
uncle has frightened out of his senses, cannot leave the graveyard
until your flower-decked coffin comes to fetch him." The girl opened her eyes as if to look at the world once more. She
sent a message to Petter Nord. She was angry at his mad pranks. Why
could she not die in peace? She had never wished that he should
have any pangs of conscience for her sake. The bearer of the message came back without Petter Nord. He could
not come. The wall was too high and the gate too strong. There was
only one who could free him. During those days they thought of nothing else in the little town. "He is there; he is there still," they told one another every day. "Is he mad?" they asked most often, and some who had talked with
him answered that he certainly would be when "she" came. But they
were exceedingly proud of that martyr to love who gave a glory to
the town. The poor took him food. 