



Produced by Charles Keller. HTML version by Al Haines. THE REDHEADED OUTFIELD AND OTHER BASEBALL STORIES


by

ZANE GREY



CONTENTS

  THE REDHEADED OUTFIELD
  THE RUBE
  THE RUBE'S PENNANT
  THE RUBE'S HONEYMOON
  THE RUBE'S WATERLOO
  BREAKING INTO FAST COMPANY
  THE KNOCKER
  THE WINNING BALL
  FALSE COLORS
  THE MANAGER OF MADDEN'S HILL
  OLD WELL-WELL




THE REDHEADED OUTFIELD AND OTHER BASEBALL STORIES



There was Delaney's red-haired trio--Red Gilbat, left fielder; Reddy
Clammer, right fielder, and Reddie Ray, center fielder, composing the
most remarkable outfield ever developed in minor league baseball. It
was Delaney's pride, as it was also his trouble. Red Gilbat was nutty--and his batting average was .371. Any student of
baseball could weigh these two facts against each other and understand
something of Delaney's trouble. It was not possible to camp on Red
Gilbat's trail. The man was a jack-o'-lantern, a will-o'-the-wisp, a
weird, long-legged, long-armed, red-haired illusive phantom. When the
gong rang at the ball grounds there were ten chances to one that Red
would not be present. He had been discovered with small boys peeping
through knotholes at the vacant left field he was supposed to inhabit
during play. Of course what Red did off the ball grounds was not so important as
what he did on. And there was absolutely no telling what under the sun
he might do then except once out of every three times at bat he could
be counted on to knock the cover off the ball. Reddy Clammer was a grand-stand player--the kind all managers
hated--and he was hitting .305. He made circus catches, circus stops,
circus throws, circus steals--but particularly circus catches. That is
to say, he made easy plays appear difficult. He was always strutting,
posing, talking, arguing, quarreling--when he was not engaged in making
a grand-stand play. Reddy Clammer used every possible incident and
artifice to bring himself into the limelight. Reddie Ray had been the intercollegiate champion in the sprints and a
famous college ball player. After a few months of professional ball he
was hitting over .400 and leading the league both at bat and on the
bases. It was a beautiful and a thrilling sight to see him run. He
was so quick to start, so marvelously swift, so keen of judgment, that
neither Delaney nor any player could ever tell the hit that he was not
going to get. That was why Reddie Ray was a whole game in himself. Delaney's Rochester Stars and the Providence Grays were tied for first
place. Of the present series each team had won a game. Rivalry had
always been keen, and as the teams were about to enter the long
homestretch for the pennant there was battle in the New England air. The September day was perfect. The stands were half full and the
bleachers packed with a white-sleeved mass. And the field was
beautifully level and green. The Grays were practicing and the Stars
were on their bench. "We're up against it," Delaney was saying. "This new umpire, Fuller,
hasn't got it in for us. Oh, no, not at all! Believe me, he's a
robber. But Scott is pitchin' well. Won his last three games. He'll
bother 'em. And the three Reds have broken loose. They're on the
rampage. They'll burn up this place today." Somebody noted the absence of Gilbat. Delaney gave a sudden start. "Why, Gil was here," he said slowly. "Lord!--he's about due for a nutty stunt." Whereupon Delaney sent boys and players scurrying about to find Gilbat,
and Delaney went himself to ask the Providence manager to hold back the
gong for a few minutes. Presently somebody brought Delaney a telephone message that Red Gilbat
was playing ball with some boys in a lot four blocks down the street. When at length a couple of players marched up to the bench with Red in
tow Delaney uttered an immense sigh of relief and then, after a close
scrutiny of Red's face, he whispered, "Lock the gates!" Then the gong rang. The Grays trooped in. The Stars ran out, except
Gilbat, who ambled like a giraffe. The hum of conversation in the
grand stand quickened for a moment with the scraping of chairs, and
then grew quiet. The bleachers sent up the rollicking cry of
expectancy. The umpire threw out a white ball with his stentorian
"Play!" and Blake of the Grays strode to the plate. Hitting safely, he started the game with a rush. With Dorr up, the Star
infield played for a bunt. Like clockwork Dorr dumped the first ball as
Blake got his flying start for second base. Morrissey tore in for the
ball, got it on the run and snapped it underhand to Healy, beating the
runner by an inch. The fast Blake, with a long slide, made third base. The stands stamped. The bleachers howled. White, next man up, batted
a high fly to left field. This was a sun field and the hardest to play
in the league. Red Gilbat was the only man who ever played it well. He judged the fly, waited under it, took a step hack, then forward, and
deliberately caught the ball in his gloved hand. A throw-in to catch
the runner scoring from third base would have been futile, but it was
not like Red Gilbat to fail to try. He tossed the ball to O'Brien. And Blake scored amid applause. "What do you know about that?" ejaculated Delaney, wiping his moist
face. "I never before saw our nutty Redhead pull off a play like that." Some of the players yelled at Red, "This is a two-handed league, you
bat!" The first five players on the list for the Grays were left-handed
batters, and against a right-handed pitcher whose most effective ball
for them was a high fast one over the outer corner they would naturally
hit toward left field. It was no surprise to see Hanley bat a
skyscraper out to left. Red had to run to get under it. He braced
himself rather unusually for a fielder. He tried to catch the ball in
his bare right hand and muffed it, Hanley got to second on the play
while the audience roared. When they got through there was some
roaring among the Rochester players. Scott and Captain Healy roared at
Red, and Red roared back at them. "It's all off. Red never did that before," cried Delaney in despair. "He's gone clean bughouse now." Babcock was the next man up and he likewise hit to left. It was a low,
twisting ball--half fly, half liner--and a difficult one to field. Gilbat ran with great bounds, and though he might have got two hands on
the ball he did not try, but this time caught it in his right, retiring
the side. The Stars trotted in, Scott and Healy and Kane, all veterans, looking
like thunderclouds. Red ambled in the last and he seemed very
nonchalant. "By Gosh, I'd 'a' ketched that one I muffed if I'd had time to change
hands," he said with a grin, and he exposed a handful of peanuts. He
had refused to drop the peanuts to make the catch with two hands. That
explained the mystery. It was funny, yet nobody laughed. There was
that run chalked up against the Stars, and this game had to be won. "Red, I--I want to take the team home in the lead," said Delaney, and
it was plain that he suppressed strong feeling. "You didn't play the
game, you know." Red appeared mightily ashamed. "Del, I'll git that run back," he said. Then he strode to the plate, swinging his wagon-tongue bat. For all
his awkward position in the box he looked what he was--a formidable
hitter. He seemed to tower over the pitcher--Red was six feet one--and
he scowled and shook his bat at Wehying and called, "Put one over--you
wienerwurst!" Wehying was anything but red-headed, and he wasted so
many balls on Red that it looked as if he might pass him. He would
have passed him, too, if Red had not stepped over on the fourth ball
and swung on it. White at second base leaped high for the stinging
hit, and failed to reach it. The ball struck and bounded for the
fence. When Babcock fielded it in,  Red was standing on third base,
and the bleachers groaned. Whereupon Chesty Reddy Clammer proceeded to draw attention to himself,
and incidentally delay the game, by assorting the bats as if the
audience and the game might gladly wait years to see him make a choice. "Git in the game!" yelled Delaney. "Aw, take my bat, Duke of the Abrubsky!" sarcastically said Dump Kane. When the grouchy Kane offered to lend his bat matters were critical in
the Star camp. Other retorts followed, which Reddy Clammer deigned not to notice. At
last he got a bat that suited him--and then, importantly, dramatically,
with his cap jauntily riding his red locks, he marched to the plate. Some wag in the bleachers yelled into the silence, "Oh, Maggie, your
lover has come!" Not improbably Clammer was thinking first of his presence before the
multitude, secondly of his batting average and thirdly of the run to be
scored. In this instance he waited and feinted at balls and fouled
strikes at length to work his base. When he got to first base suddenly
he bolted for second, and in the surprise of the unlooked-for play he
made it by a spread-eagle slide. It was a circus steal. Delaney snorted. Then the look of profound disgust vanished in a flash
of light. His huge face beamed. Reddie Ray was striding to the plate. There was something about Reddie Ray that pleased all the senses. His
lithe form seemed instinct with life; any sudden movement was
suggestive of stored lightning. His position at the plate was on the
left side, and he stood perfectly motionless, with just a hint of tense
waiting alertness. Dorr, Blake and Babcock, the outfielders for the
Grays, trotted round to the right of their usual position. Delaney
smiled derisively, as if he knew how futile it was to tell what field
Reddie Ray might hit into. Wehying, the old fox, warily eyed the
youngster, and threw him a high curve, close in. It grazed Reddie's
shirt, but he never moved a hair. Then Wehying, after the manner of
many veteran pitchers when trying out a new and menacing batter, drove
a straight fast ball at Reddie's head. Reddie ducked, neither too slow
nor too quick, just right to show what an eye he had, how hard it was
to pitch to. The next was a strike. And on the next he appeared to
step and swing in one action. There was a ringing rap, and the ball
shot toward right, curving down, a vicious, headed hit. Mallory, at
first base, snatched at it and found only the air. Babcock had only
time to take a few sharp steps, and then he plunged down, blocked the
hit and fought the twisting ball. Reddie turned first base, flitted on
toward second, went headlong in the dust, and shot to the base before
White got the throw-in from Babcock. Then, as White wheeled and lined
the ball home to catch the scoring Clammer, Reddie Ray leaped up, got
his sprinter's start and, like a rocket, was off for third. This time
he dove behind the base, sliding in a half circle, and as Hanley caught
Strickland's perfect throw and whirled with the ball, Reddie's hand
slid to the bag. Reddie got to his feet amid a rather breathless silence. Even the
coachers were quiet. There was a moment of relaxation, then Wehying
received the ball from Hanley and faced the batter. This was Dump Kane. There was a sign of some kind, almost
imperceptible, between Kane and Reddie. As Wehying half turned in his
swing to pitch, Reddie Ray bounded homeward. It was not so much the
boldness of his action as the amazing swiftness of it that held the
audience spellbound. Like a thunderbolt Reddie came down the line,
almost beating Wehying's pitch to the plate. But Kane's bat
intercepted the ball, laying it down, and Reddie scored without
sliding. Dorr, by sharp work, just managed to throw Kane out. Three runs so quick it was hard to tell how they had come. Not in the
major league could there have been faster work. And the ball had been
fielded perfectly and thrown perfectly. "There you are," said Delaney, hoarsely. "Can you beat it? If you've
been wonderin' how the cripped Stars won so many games just put what
you've seen in your pipe and smoke it. Red Gilbat gets on--Reddy
Clammer gets on--and then Reddie Ray drives them home or chases them
home." The game went on, and though it did not exactly drag it slowed down
considerably. Morrissey and Healy were retired on infield plays. And
the sides changed. For the Grays, O'Brien made a scratch hit, went to
second on Strickland's sacrifice, stole third and scored on Mallory's
infield out. Wehying missed three strikes. In the Stars' turn the
three end players on the batting list were easily disposed of. In the
third inning the clever Blake, aided by a base on balls and a hit
following, tied the score, and once more struck fire and brimstone from
the impatient bleachers. Providence was a town that had to have its
team win. "Git at 'em, Reds!" said Delaney gruffly. "Batter up!" called Umpire Fuller, sharply. "Where's Red? Where's the bug? Where's the nut? Delaney, did you
lock the gates? Look under the bench!" These and other remarks, not
exactly elegant, attested to the mental processes of some of the Stars. Red Gilbat did not appear to be forthcoming. There was an anxious
delay Capt. Healy searched for the missing player. Delaney did not say
any more. Suddenly a door under the grand stand opened and Red Gilbat appeared. He hurried for his bat and then up to the plate. And he never offered
to hit one of the balls Wehying shot over. When Fuller had called the
third strike Red hurried back to the door and disappeared. "Somethin' doin'," whispered Delaney. Lord Chesterfield Clammer paraded to the batter's box and, after
gradually surveying the field, as if picking out the exact place he
meant to drive the ball, he stepped to the plate. Then a roar from the
bleachers surprised him. "Well, I'll be dog-goned!" exclaimed Delaney. "Red stole that sure as
shootin'." Red Gilbat was pushing a brand-new baby carriage toward the batter's
box. There was a tittering in the grand stand; another roar from the
bleachers. Clammer's face turned as red as his hair. Gilbat shoved
the baby carriage upon the plate, spread wide his long arms, made a
short presentation speech and an elaborate bow, then backed away. All eyes were centered on Clammer. If he had taken it right the
incident might have passed without undue hilarity. But Clammer became
absolutely wild with rage. It was well known that he was unmarried. Equally well was it seen that Gilbat had executed one of his famous
tricks. Ball players were inclined to be dignified about the
presentation of gifts upon the field, and Clammer, the dude, the swell,
the lady's man, the favorite of the baseball gods--in his own
estimation--so far lost control of himself that he threw his bat at his
retreating tormentor. Red jumped high and the bat skipped along the
ground toward the bench. The players sidestepped and leaped and, of
course, the bat cracked one of Delaney's big shins. His eyes popped
with pain, but he could not stop laughing. One by one the players lay
down and rolled over and yelled. The superior Clammer was not
overliked by his co-players. From the grand stand floated the laughter of ladies and gentlemen. And
from the bleachers--that throne of the biting, ironic, scornful
fans--pealed up a howl of delight. It lasted for a full minute. Then,
as quiet ensued, some boy blew a blast of one of those infernal little
instruments of pipe and rubber balloon, and over the field wailed out a
shrill, high-keyed cry, an excellent imitation of a baby. Whereupon
the whole audience roared, and in discomfiture Reddy Clammer went in
search of his bat. To make his chagrin all the worse he ingloriously struck out. And then
he strode away under the lea of the grand-stand wall toward right field. Reddie Ray went to bat and, with the infield playing deep and the
outfield swung still farther round to the right, he bunted a little
teasing ball down the third-base line. Like a flash of light he had
crossed first base before Hanley got his hands on the ball. Then Kane
hit into second base, forcing Reddie out. Again the game assumed less spectacular and more ordinary play. Both
Scott and Wehying held the batters safely and allowed no runs. But in
the fifth inning, with the Stars at bat and two out, Red Gilbat again
electrified the field. He sprang up from somewhere and walked to the
plate, his long shape enfolded in a full-length linen duster. The
color and style of this garment might not have been especially
striking, but upon Red it had a weird and wonderful effect. Evidently
Red intended to bat while arrayed in his long coat, for he stepped into
the box and faced the pitcher. Capt. Healy yelled for him to take the
duster off. Likewise did the Grays yell. The bleachers shrieked their disapproval. To say the least, Red
Gilbat's crazy assurance was dampening to the ardor of the most blindly
confident fans. At length Umpire Fuller waved his hand, enjoining
silence and calling time. "Take it off or I'll fine you." From his lofty height Gilbat gazed down upon the little umpire, and it
was plain what he thought. "What do I care for money!" replied Red. "That costs you twenty-five," said Fuller. "Cigarette change!" yelled Red. "Costs you fifty." "Bah! Go to an eye doctor," roared Red. "Seventy-five," added Fuller, imperturbably. "Make it a hundred!" "It's two hundred." "ROB-B-BER!" bawled Red. Fuller showed willingness to overlook Red's back talk as well as
costume, and he called, "Play!" There was a mounting sensation of prophetic certainty. Old fox Wehying
appeared nervous. He wasted two balls on Red; then he put one over the
plate, and then he wasted another. Three balls and one strike! That
was a bad place for a pitcher, and with Red Gilbat up it was worse. Wehying swung longer and harder to get all his left behind the throw
and let drive. Red lunged and cracked the ball. It went up and up and
kept going up and farther out, and as the murmuring audience was slowly
transfixed into late realization the ball soared to its height and
dropped beyond the left-field fence. A home run! Red Gilbat gathered up the tails of his duster, after the manner of a
neat woman crossing a muddy street, and ambled down to first base and
on to second, making prodigious jumps upon the bags, and round third,
to come down the home-stretch wagging his red head. Then he stood on
the plate, and, as if to exact revenge from the audience for the fun
they made of him, he threw back his shoulders and bellowed:  "HAW! HAW! HAW!" Not a handclap greeted him, but some mindless, exceedingly adventurous
fan yelled:  "Redhead! Redhead! Redhead!" That was the one thing calculated to rouse Red Gilbat. He seemed to
flare, to bristle, and he paced for the bleachers. Delaney looked as if he might have a stroke. "Grab him! Soak him with
a bat! Somebody grab him!" But none of the Stars was risking so much, and Gilbat, to the howling
derision of the gleeful fans, reached the bleachers. He stretched his
long arms up to the fence and prepared to vault over. "Where's the guy
who called me redhead?" he yelled. That was heaping fuel on the fire. From all over the bleachers, from
everywhere, came the obnoxious word. Red heaved himself over the fence
and piled into the fans. Then followed the roar of many voices, the
tramping of many feet, the pressing forward of line after line of
shirt-sleeved men and boys. That bleacher stand suddenly assumed the
maelstrom appearance of a surging mob round an agitated center. In a
moment all the players rushed down the field, and confusion reigned. "Oh! Oh! Oh!" moaned Delaney. However, the game had to go on. Delaney, no doubt, felt all was over. Nevertheless there were games occasionally that seemed an unending
series of unprecedented events. This one had begun admirably to break
a record. And the Providence fans, like all other fans, had cultivated
an appetite as the game proceeded. They were wild to put the other
redheads out of the field or at least out for the inning, wild to tie
the score, wild to win and wilder than all for more excitement. Clammer
hit safely. But when Reddie Ray lined to the second baseman, Clammer,
having taken a lead, was doubled up in the play. Of course, the sixth inning opened with the Stars playing only eight
men. There was another delay. Probably everybody except Delaney and
perhaps Healy had forgotten the Stars were short a man. Fuller called
time. The impatient bleachers barked for action. Capt. White came over to Delaney and courteously offered to lend a
player for the remaining innings. Then a pompous individual came out
of the door leading from the press boxes--he was a director Delaney
disliked. "Guess you'd better let Fuller call the game," he said brusquely. "If you want to--as the score stands now in our favor," replied Delaney. "Not on your life! It'll be ours or else we'll play it out and beat
you to death." He departed in high dudgeon. "Tell Reddie to swing over a little toward left," was Delaney's order
to Healy. Fire gleamed in the manager's eye. Fuller called play then, with Reddy Clammer and Reddie Ray composing
the Star outfield. And the Grays evidently prepared to do great
execution through the wide lanes thus opened up. At that stage it
would not have been like matured ball players to try to crop hits down
into the infield. White sent a long fly back of Clammer. Reddy had no time to loaf on
this hit. It was all he could do to reach it and he made a splendid
catch, for which the crowd roundly applauded him. That applause was
wine to Reddy Clammer. He began to prance on his toes and sing out to
Scott:  "Make 'em hit to me, old man! Make 'em hit to me!" Whether
Scott desired that or not was scarcely possible to say; at any rate,
Hanley pounded a hit through the infield. And Clammer, prancing high
in the air like a check-reined horse, ran to intercept the ball. He
could have received it in his hands, but that would never have served
Reddy Clammer. He timed the hit to a nicety, went down with his old
grand-stand play and blocked the ball with his anatomy. Delaney swore. And the bleachers, now warm toward the gallant outfielder, lustily
cheered him. Babcock hit down the right-field foul line, giving
Clammer a long run. Hanley was scoring and Babcock was sprinting for
third base when Reddy got the ball. He had a fine arm and he made a
hard and accurate throw, catching his man in a close play. Perhaps even Delaney could not have found any fault with that play. But the aftermath spoiled the thing. Clammer now rode the air; he
soared; he was in the clouds; it was his inning and he had utterly
forgotten his team mates, except inasmuch as they were performing mere
little automatic movements to direct the great machinery in his
direction for his sole achievement and glory. There is fate in baseball as well as in other walks of life. O'Brien
was a strapping fellow and he lifted another ball into Clammer's wide
territory. The hit was of the high and far-away variety. Clammer
started to run with it, not like a grim outfielder, but like one
thinking of himself, his style, his opportunity, his inevitable
success. Certain it was that in thinking of himself the outfielder
forgot his surroundings. He ran across the foul line, head up, hair
flying, unheeding the warning cry from Healy. And, reaching up to make
his crowning circus play, he smashed face forward into the bleachers
fence. Then, limp as a rag, he dropped. The audience sent forth a
long groan of sympathy. "That wasn't one of his stage falls," said Delaney. "I'll bet he's
dead....  Poor Reddy! And I want him to bust his face!" Clammer was carried off the field into the dressing room and a
physician was summoned out of the audience. "Cap., what'd it--do to him?" asked Delaney. "Aw, spoiled his pretty mug, that's all," replied Healy, scornfully. "Mebee he'll listen to me now." Delaney's change was characteristic of the man. "Well, if it didn't
kill him I'm blamed glad he got it....  Cap, we can trim 'em yet. Reddie Ray'll play the whole outfield. Give Reddie a chance to run! Tell the boy to cut loose. And all of you git in the game. Win or
lose, I won't forget it. I've a hunch. Once in a while I can tell
what's comin' off. Some queer game this! And we're goin' to win. Gilbat lost the game; Clammer throwed it away again, and now Reddie
Ray's due to win it.... I'm all in, but I wouldn't miss the finish
to save my life." Delaney's deep presaging sense of baseball events was never put to a
greater test. And the seven Stars, with the score tied, exhibited the
temper and timber of a championship team in the last ditch. It was so
splendid that almost instantly it caught the antagonistic bleachers. Wherever the tired Scott found renewed strength and speed was a
mystery. But he struck out the hard-hitting Providence catcher and
that made the third out. The Stars could not score in their half of
the inning. Likewise the seventh inning passed without a run for
either side; only the infield work of the Stars was something superb. When the eighth inning ended, without a tally for either team, the
excitement grew tense. There was Reddy Ray playing outfield alone, and
the Grays with all their desperate endeavors had not lifted the ball
out of the infield. But in the ninth, Blake, the first man up, lined low toward right
center. The hit was safe and looked good for three bases. No one
looking, however, had calculated on Reddie's Ray's fleetness. He
covered ground and dove for the bounding ball and knocked it down. Blake did not get beyond first base. The crowd cheered the play
equally with the prospect of a run. Dorr bunted and beat the throw. White hit one of the high fast balls Scott was serving and sent it
close to the left-field foul line. The running Reddie Ray made on that
play held White at second base. But two runs had scored with no one
out. Hanley, the fourth left-handed hitter, came up and Scott pitched to him
as he had to the others--high fast balls over the inside corner of the
plate. Reddy Ray's position was some fifty yards behind deep short,
and a little toward center field. He stood sideways, facing two-thirds
of that vacant outfield. In spite of Scott's skill, Hanley swung the
ball far round into right field, but he hit it high, and almost before
he actually hit it the great sprinter was speeding across the green. The suspense grew almost unbearable as the ball soared in its parabolic
flight and the red-haired runner streaked dark across the green. The
ball seemed never to be coming down. And when it began to descend and
reached a point perhaps fifty feet above the ground there appeared more
distance between where it would alight and where Reddie was than
anything human could cover. It dropped and dropped, and then dropped
into Reddie Ray's outstretched hands. He had made the catch look easy. But the fact that White scored from second base on the play showed what
the catch really was. There was no movement or restlessness of the audience such as usually
indicated the beginning of the exodus. Scott struck Babcock out. The
game still had fire. The Grays never let up a moment on their
coaching. And the hoarse voices of the Stars were grimmer than ever. Reddie Ray was the only one of the seven who kept silent. And he
crouched like a tiger. The teams changed sides with the Grays three runs in the lead. Morrissey, for the Stars, opened with a clean drive to right. Then
Healy slashed a ground ball to Hanley and nearly knocked him down. When old Burns, by a hard rap to short, advanced the runners a base and
made a desperate, though unsuccessful, effort to reach first the
Providence crowd awoke to a strange and inspiring appreciation. They
began that most rare feature in baseball audiences--a strong and
trenchant call for the visiting team to win. The play had gone fast and furious. Wehying, sweaty and disheveled,
worked violently. All the Grays were on uneasy tiptoes. And the Stars
were seven Indians on the warpath. Halloran fouled down the
right-field line; then he fouled over the left-field fence. Wehying
tried to make him too anxious, but it was in vain. Halloran was
implacable. With two strikes and three balls he hit straight down to
white, and was out. The ball had been so sharp that neither runner on
base had a chance to advance. Two men out, two on base, Stars wanting three runs to tie, Scott, a
weak batter, at the plate! The situation was disheartening. Yet there
sat Delaney, shot through and through with some vital compelling force. He saw only victory. And when the very first ball pitched to Scott hit
him on the leg, giving him his base, Delaney got to his feet, unsteady
and hoarse. Bases full, Reddie Ray up, three runs to tie! Delaney looked at Reddie. And Reddie looked at Delaney. The manager's
face was pale, intent, with a little smile. The player had eyes of
fire, a lean, bulging jaw and the hands he reached for his bat clutched
like talons. "Reddie, I knew it was waitin' for you," said Delaney, his voice
ringing. "Break up the game!" After all this was only a baseball game, and perhaps from the fans'
viewpoint a poor game at that. But the moment when that lithe,
redhaired athlete toed the plate was a beautiful one. The long crash
from the bleachers, the steady cheer from the grand stand, proved that
it was not so much the game that mattered. Wehying had shot his bolt; he was tired. Yet he made ready for a final
effort. It seemed that passing Reddie Ray on balls would have been a
wise play at that juncture. But no pitcher, probably, would have done
it with the bases crowded and chances, of course, against the batter. Clean and swift, Reddie leaped at the first pitched ball. Ping! For a
second no one saw the hit. Then it gleamed, a terrific drive, low
along the ground, like a bounding bullet, straight at Babcock in right
field. It struck his hands and glanced viciously away to roll toward
the fence. Thunder broke loose from the stands. Reddie Ray was turning first
base. Beyond first base he got into his wonderful stride. Some
runners run with a consistent speed, the best they can make for a given
distance. But this trained sprinter gathered speed as he ran. He was
no short-stepping runner. His strides were long. They gave an
impression of strength combined with fleetness. He had the speed of a
race horse, but the trimness, the raciness, the delicate legs were not
characteristic of him. Like the wind he turned second, so powerful
that his turn was short. All at once there came a difference in his
running. It was no longer beautiful. The grace was gone. It was now
fierce, violent. His momentum was running him off his legs. He
whirled around third base and came hurtling down the homestretch. His
face was convulsed, his eyes were wild. His arms and legs worked in a
marvelous muscular velocity. He seemed a demon--a flying streak. He
overtook and ran down the laboring Scott, who had almost reached the
plate. The park seemed full of shrill, piercing strife. It swelled, reached a
highest pitch, sustained that for a long moment, and then declined. "My Gawd!" exclaimed Delaney, as he fell back. "Wasn't that a finish? Didn't I tell you to watch them redheads!" THE RUBE

It was the most critical time I had yet experienced in my career as a
baseball manager. And there was more than the usual reason why I must
pull the team out. A chance for a business deal depended upon the
good-will of the stockholders of the Worcester club. On the outskirts
of the town was a little cottage that I wanted to buy, and this
depended upon the business deal. My whole future happiness depended
upon the little girl I hoped to install in that cottage. Coming to the Worcester Eastern League team, I had found a strong
aggregation and an enthusiastic following. I really had a team with
pennant possibilities. Providence was a strong rival, but I beat them
three straight in the opening series, set a fast pace, and likewise set
Worcester baseball mad. The Eastern League clubs were pretty evenly
matched; still I continued to hold the lead until misfortune overtook
me. Gregg smashed an umpire and had to be laid off. Mullaney got spiked
while sliding and was out of the game. Ashwell sprained his ankle and
Hirsch broke a finger. Radbourne, my great pitcher, hurt his arm on a
cold day and he could not get up his old speed. Stringer, who had
batted three hundred and seventy-one and led the league the year
before, struck a bad spell and could not hit a barn door handed up to
him. Then came the slump. The team suddenly let down; went to pieces;
played ball that would have disgraced an amateur nine. It was a trying
time. Here was a great team, strong everywhere. A little hard luck had
dug up a slump--and now! Day by day the team dropped in the race. When
we reached the second division the newspapers flayed us. Worcester
would never stand for a second division team. Baseball admirers,
reporters, fans--especially the fans--are fickle. The admirers quit,
the reporters grilled us, and the fans, though they stuck to the games
with that barnacle-like tenacity peculiar to them, made life miserable
for all of us. I saw the pennant slowly fading, and the successful
season, and the business deal, and the cottage, and Milly----

But when I thought of her I just could not see failure. Something must
be done, but what? I was at the end of my wits. When Jersey City beat
us that Saturday, eleven to two, shoving us down to fifth place with
only a few percentage points above the Fall River team, I grew
desperate, and locking my players in the dressing room I went after
them. They had lain down on me and needed a jar. I told them so
straight and flat, and being bitter, I did not pick and choose my words. "And fellows," I concluded, "you've got to brace. A little more of
this and we can't pull out. I tell you you're a championship team. We
had that pennant cinched. A few cuts and sprains and hard luck--and
you all quit! You lay down! I've been patient. I've plugged for you. Never a man have I fined or thrown down. But now I'm at the end of my
string. I'm out to fine you now, and I'll release the first man who
shows the least yellow. I play no more substitutes. Crippled or not,
you guys have got to get in the game." I waited to catch my breath and expected some such outburst as managers
usually get from criticized players. But not a word! Then I addressed
some of them personally. "Gregg, your lay-off ends today. You play Monday. Mullaney, you've
drawn your salary for two weeks with that spiked foot. If you can't
run on it--well, all right, but I put it up to your good faith. I've
played the game and I know it's hard to run on a sore foot. But you
can do it. Ashwell, your ankle is lame, I know--now, can you run?" "Sure I can. I'm not a quitter. I'm ready to go in," replied Ashwell. "Raddy, how about you?" I said, turning to my star twirler. "Connelly, I've seen as fast a team in as bad a rut and yet pull out,"
returned Radbourne. "We're about due for the brace. When it
comes--look out! As for me, well, my arm isn't right, but it's acting
these warm days in a way that tells me it will be soon. It's been
worked too hard. Can't you get another pitcher? I'm not knocking Herne
or Cairns. They're good for their turn, but we need a new man to help
out. And he must be a crackerjack if we're to get back to the lead." "Where on earth can I find such a pitcher?" I shouted, almost
distracted. "Well, that's up to you," replied Radbourne. Up to me it certainly was, and I cudgeled my brains for inspiration. After I had given up in hopelessness it came in the shape of a notice I
read in one of the papers. It was a brief mention of an amateur
Worcester ball team being shut out in a game with a Rickettsville nine. Rickettsville played Sunday ball, which gave me an opportunity to look
them over. It took some train riding and then a journey by coach to get to
Rickettsville. I mingled with the crowd of talking rustics. There was
only one little "bleachers" and this was loaded to the danger point
with the feminine adherents of the teams. Most of the crowd centered
alongside and back of the catcher's box. I edged in and got a position
just behind the stone that served as home plate. Hunting up a player in this way was no new thing to me. I was too wise
to make myself known before I had sized up the merits of my man. So,
before the players came upon the field I amused myself watching the
rustic fans and listening to them. Then a roar announced the
appearance of the Rickettsville team and their opponents, who wore the
name of Spatsburg on their Canton flannel shirts. The uniforms of
these country amateurs would have put a Philadelphia Mummer's parade to
the blush, at least for bright colors. But after one amused glance I
got down to the stern business of the day, and that was to discover a
pitcher, and failing that, baseball talent of any kind. Never shall I forget my first glimpse of the Rickettsville twirler. He
was far over six feet tall and as lean as a fence rail. He had a great
shock of light hair, a sunburned, sharp-featured face, wide, sloping
shoulders, and arms enormously long. He was about as graceful and had
about as much of a baseball walk as a crippled cow. "He's a rube!" I ejaculated, in disgust and disappointment. But when I had seen him throw one ball to his catcher I grew as keen as
a fox on a scent. What speed he had! I got round closer to him and
watched him with sharp, eager eyes. He was a giant. To be sure, he
was lean, rawboned as a horse, but powerful. What won me at once was
his natural, easy swing. He got the ball away with scarcely any
effort. I wondered what he could do when he brought the motion of his
body into play. "Bub, what might be the pitcher's name?" I asked of a boy. "Huh, mister, his name might be Dennis, but it ain't. Huh!" replied
this country youngster. Evidently my question had thrown some
implication upon this particular player. "I reckon you be a stranger in these parts," said a pleasant old
fellow. "His name's Hurtle--Whitaker Hurtle. Whit fer short. He
hain't lost a gol-darned game this summer. No sir-ee! Never pitched
any before, nuther." Hurtle! What a remarkably fitting name! Rickettsville chose the field and the game began. Hurtle swung with his
easy motion. The ball shot across like a white bullet. It was a
strike, and so was the next, and the one succeeding. He could not
throw anything but strikes, and it seemed the Spatsburg players could
not make even a foul. Outside of Hurtle's work the game meant little to me. And I was so
fascinated by what I saw in him that I could hardly contain myself. After the first few innings I no longer tried to. I yelled with the
Rickettsville rooters. The man was a wonder. A blind baseball manager
could have seen that. He had a straight ball, shoulder high, level as
a stretched string, and fast. He had a jump ball, which he evidently
worked by putting on a little more steam, and it was the speediest
thing I ever saw in the way of a shoot. He had a wide-sweeping
outcurve, wide as the blade of a mowing scythe. And he had a drop--an
unhittable drop. He did not use it often, for it made his catcher dig
too hard into the dirt. But whenever he did I glowed all over. Once
or twice he used an underhand motion and sent in a ball that fairly
swooped up. It could not have been hit with a board. And best of all,
dearest to the manager's heart, he had control. Every ball he threw
went over the plate. He could not miss it. To him that plate was as
big as a house. What a find! Already I had visions of the long-looked-for brace of my
team, and of the pennant, and the little cottage, and the happy light
of a pair of blue eyes. What he meant to me, that country pitcher
Hurtle! He shut out the Spatsburg team without a run or a hit or even
a scratch. Then I went after him. I collared him and his manager, and
there, surrounded by the gaping players, I bought him and signed him
before any of them knew exactly what I was about. I did not haggle. I
asked the manager what he wanted and produced the cash; I asked Hurtle
what he wanted, doubled his ridiculously modest demand, paid him in
advance, and got his name to the contract. Then I breathed a long,
deep breath; the first one for weeks. Something told me that with
Hurtle's signature in my pocket I had the Eastern League pennant. Then
I invited all concerned down to the Rickettsville hotel. We made connections at the railroad junction and reached Worcester at
midnight in time for a good sleep. I took the silent and backward
pitcher to my hotel. In the morning we had breakfast together. I
showed him about Worcester and then carried him off to the ball grounds. I had ordered morning practice, and as morning practice is not
conducive to the cheerfulness of ball players, I wanted to reach the
dressing room a little late. When we arrived, all the players had
dressed and were out on the field. I had some difficulty in fitting
Hurtle with a uniform, and when I did get him dressed he resembled a
two-legged giraffe decked out in white shirt, gray trousers and maroon
stockings. Spears, my veteran first baseman and captain of the team, was the first
to see us. "Sufferin' umpires!" yelled Spears. "Here, you Micks! Look at this
Con's got with him!" What a yell burst from that sore and disgruntled bunch of ball tossers! My players were a grouchy set in practice anyway, and today they were
in their meanest mood. "Hey, beanpole!" "Get on to the stilts!" "Con, where did you find that?" I cut short their chaffing with a sharp order for batting practice. "Regular line-up, now no monkey biz," I went on. "Take two cracks and
a bunt. Here, Hurtle," I said, drawing him toward the pitcher's box,
"don't pay any attention to their talk. That's only the fun of ball
players. Go in now and practice a little. Lam a few over." Hurtle's big freckled hands closed nervously over the ball. I thought
it best not to say more to him, for he had a rather wild look. I
remembered my own stage fright upon my first appearance in fast
company. Besides I knew what my amiable players would say to him. I
had a secret hope and belief that presently they would yell upon the
other side of the fence. McCall, my speedy little left fielder, led off at bat. He was full of
ginger, chipper as a squirrel, sarcastic as only a tried ball player
can be. "Put 'em over, Slats, put 'em over," he called, viciously swinging his
ash. Hurtle stood stiff and awkward in the box and seemed to be rolling
something in his mouth. Then he moved his arm. We all saw the ball
dart down straight--that is, all of us except McCall, because if he had
seen it he might have jumped out of the way. Crack! The ball hit him
on the shin. McCall shrieked. We all groaned. That crack hurt all of us. Any
baseball player knows how it hurts to be hit on the shinbone. McCall
waved his bat madly. "Rube! Rube! Rube!" he yelled. Then and there Hurtle got the name that was to cling to him all his
baseball days. McCall went back to the plate, red in the face, mad as a hornet, and he
sidestepped every time Rube pitched a ball. He never even ticked one
and retired in disgust, limping and swearing. Ashwell was next. He did
not show much alacrity. On Rube's first pitch down went Ashwell flat in
the dust. The ball whipped the hair of his head. Rube was wild and I
began to get worried. Ashwell hit a couple of measly punks, but when he
assayed a bunt the gang yelled derisively at him. "What's he got?" The old familiar cry of batters when facing a new
pitcher! Stringer went up, bold and formidable. That was what made him the
great hitter he was. He loved to bat; he would have faced anybody; he
would have faced even a cannon. New curves were a fascination to him. And speed for him, in his own words, was "apple pie." In this
instance, surprise was in store for Stringer. Rube shot up the
straight one, then the wide curve, then the drop. Stringer missed them
all, struck out, fell down ignominiously. It was the first time he had
fanned that season and he looked dazed. We had to haul him away. I called off the practice, somewhat worried about Rube's showing, and
undecided whether or not to try him in the game that day. So I went to
Radbourne, who had quietly watched Rube while on the field. Raddy was
an old pitcher and had seen the rise of a hundred stars. I told him
about the game at Rickettsville and what I thought of Rube, and frankly
asked his opinion. "Con, you've made the find of your life," said Raddy, quietly and
deliberately. This from Radbourne was not only comforting; it was relief, hope,
assurance. I avoided Spears, for it would hardly be possible for him
to regard the Rube favorably, and I kept under cover until time to show
up at the grounds. Buffalo was on the ticket for that afternoon, and the Bisons were
leading the race and playing in topnotch form. I went into the
dressing room while the players were changing suits, because there was
a little unpleasantness that I wanted to spring on them before we got
on the field. "Boys," I said, curtly, "Hurtle works today. Cut loose, now, and back
him up." I had to grab a bat and pound on the wall to stop the uproar. "Did you mutts hear what I said? Well, it goes. Not a word, now. I'm
handling this team. We're in bad, I know, but it's my judgment to
pitch Hurtle, rube or no rube, and it's up to you to back us. That's
the baseball of it." Grumbling and muttering, they passed out of the dressing room. I knew
ball players. If Hurtle should happen to show good form they would
turn in a flash. Rube tagged reluctantly in their rear. He looked
like a man in a trance. I wanted to speak encouragingly to him, but
Raddy told me to keep quiet. It was inspiring to see my team practice that afternoon. There had
come a subtle change. I foresaw one of those baseball climaxes that
can be felt and seen, but not explained. Whether it was a hint of the
hoped-for brace, or only another flash of form before the final
let-down, I had no means to tell. But I was on edge. Carter, the umpire, called out the batteries, and I sent my team into
the field. When that long, lanky, awkward rustic started for the
pitcher's box, I thought the bleachers would make him drop in his
tracks. The fans were sore on any one those days, and a new pitcher
was bound to hear from them. "Where! Oh, where! Oh, where!" "Connelly's found another dead one!" "Scarecrow!" "Look at his pants!" "Pad his legs!" Then the inning began, and things happened. Rube had marvelous speed,
but he could not find the plate. He threw the ball the second he got
it; he hit men, walked men, and fell all over himself trying to field
bunts. The crowd stormed and railed and hissed. The Bisons pranced
round the bases and yelled like Indians. Finally they retired with
eight runs. Eight runs! Enough to win two games! I could not have told how it
happened. I was sick and all but crushed. Still I had a blind, dogged
faith in the big rustic. I believed he had not got started right. It
was a trying situation. I called Spears and Raddy to my side and
talked fast. "It's all off now. Let the dinged rube take his medicine," growled
Spears. "Don't take him out," said Raddy. "He's not shown at all what's in
him. The blamed hayseed is up in the air. He's crazy. He doesn't
know what he's doing. I tell you, Con, he may be scared to death, but
he's dead in earnest." Suddenly I recalled the advice of the pleasant old fellow at
Rickettsville. "Spears, you're the captain," I said, sharply. "Go after the rube. Wake him up. Tell him he can't pitch. Call him 'Pogie!' That's a
name that stirs him up." "Well, I'll be dinged! He looks it," replied Spears. "Here, Rube, get
off the bench. Come here." Rube lurched toward us. He seemed to be walking in his sleep. His
breast was laboring and he was dripping with sweat. "Who ever told you that you could pitch?" asked Spears genially. He
was master at baseball ridicule. I had never yet seen the youngster
who could stand his badinage. He said a few things, then wound up
with:  "Come now, you cross between a hayrack and a wagon tongue, get
sore and do something. Pitch if you can. Show us! Do you hear, you
tow-headed Pogie!" Rube jumped as if he had been struck. His face flamed red and his
little eyes turned black. He shoved his big fist under Capt. Spears'
nose. "Mister, I'll lick you fer thet--after the game! And I'll show you
dog-goned well how I can pitch." "Good!" exclaimed Raddy; and I echoed his word. Then I went to the
bench and turned my attention to the game. Some one told me that
McCall had made a couple of fouls, and after waiting for two strikes
and three balls had struck out. Ashwell had beat out a bunt in his old
swift style, and Stringer was walking up to the plate on the moment. It was interesting, even in a losing game, to see Stringer go to bat. We all watched him, as we had been watching him for weeks, expecting
him to break his slump with one of the drives that had made him famous. Stringer stood to the left side of the plate, and I could see the bulge
of his closely locked jaw. He swung on the first pitched ball. With
the solid rap we all rose to watch that hit. The ball lined first,
then soared and did not begin to drop till it was far beyond the
right-field fence. For an instant we were all still, so were the
bleachers. Stringer had broken his slump with the longest drive ever
made on the grounds. The crowd cheered as he trotted around the bases
behind Ashwell. Two runs. "Con, how'd you like that drive?" he asked me, with a bright gleam in
his eyes. "O-h-!--a beaut!" I replied, incoherently. The players on the bench
were all as glad as I was. Henley flew out to left. Mullaney smashed a
two-bagger to right. Then Gregg hit safely, but Mullaney, in trying to
score on the play, was out at the plate. "Four hits! I tell you fellows, something's coming off," said Raddy. "Now, if only Rube----"

What a difference there was in that long rustic! He stalked into the
box, unmindful of the hooting crowd and grimly faced Schultz, the first
batter up for the Bisons. This time Rube was deliberate. And where he
had not swung before he now got his body and arm into full motion. The
ball came in like a glint of light. Schultz looked surprised. The
umpire called "Strike!" "Wow!" yelled the Buffalo coacher. Rube sped up the sidewheeler and
Schultz reached wide to meet it and failed. The third was the
lightning drop, straight over the plate. The batter poked weakly at
it. Then Carl struck out and Manning following, did likewise. Three
of the best hitters in the Eastern retired on nine strikes! That was
no fluke. I knew what it meant, and I sat there hugging myself with
the hum of something joyous in my ears. Gregg had a glow on his sweaty face. "Oh, but say, boys, take a tip
from me! The Rube's a world beater! Raddy knew it; he sized up that
swing, and now I know it. Get wise, you its!" When old Spears pasted a single through shortstop, the Buffalo manager
took Clary out of the box and put in Vane, their best pitcher. Bogart
advanced the runner to second, but was thrown out on the play. Then
Rube came up. He swung a huge bat and loomed over the Bison's twirler. Rube had the look of a hitter. He seemed to be holding himself back
from walking right into the ball. And he hit one high and far away. The fast Carl could not get under it, though he made a valiant effort. Spears scored and Rube's long strides carried him to third. The cold
crowd in the stands came to life; even the sore bleachers opened up. McCall dumped a slow teaser down the line, a hit that would easily have
scored Rube, but he ran a little way, then stopped, tried to get back,
and was easily touched out. Ashwell's hard chance gave the Bison's
shortstop an error, and Stringer came up with two men on bases. Stringer hit a foul over the right-field fence and the crowd howled. Then he hit a hard long drive straight into the centerfielder's hands. "Con, I don't know what to think, but ding me if we ain't hittin' the
ball," said Spears. Then to his players:  "A little more of that and
we're back in our old shape. All in a minute--at 'em now! Rube, you
dinged old Pogie, pitch!" Rube toed the rubber, wrapped his long brown fingers round the ball,
stepped out as he swung and--zing! That inning he unloosed a few more
kinks in his arm and he tried some new balls upon the Bisons. But
whatever he used and wherever he put them the result was the same--they
cut the plate and the Bisons were powerless. That inning marked the change in my team. They had come hack. The
hoodoo had vanished. The championship Worcester team was itself again. The Bisons were fighting, too, but Rube had them helpless. When they
did hit a ball one of my infielders snapped it up. No chances went to
the outfield. I sat there listening to my men, and reveled in a moment
that I had long prayed for. "Now you're pitching some, Rube. Another strike! Get him a board!" called Ashwell. "Ding 'em, Rube, ding 'em!" came from Capt. Spears. "Speed? Oh-no!" yelled Bogart at third base. "It's all off, Rube! It's all off--all off!" So, with the wonderful pitching of an angry rube, the Worcester team
came into its own again. I sat through it all without another word;
without giving a signal. In a way I realized the awakening of the
bleachers, and heard the pound of feet and the crash, but it was the
spirit of my team that thrilled me. Next to that the work of my new
find absorbed me. I gloated over his easy, deceiving swing. I rose
out of my seat when he threw that straight fast ball, swift as a
bullet, true as a plumb line. And when those hard-hitting, sure
bunting Bisons chopped in vain at the wonderful drop, I choked back a
wild yell. For Rube meant the world to me that day. In the eighth the score was 8 to 6. The Bisons had one scratch hit to
their credit, but not a runner had got beyond first base. Again Rube
held them safely, one man striking out, another fouling out, and the
third going out on a little fly. Crash! Crash! Crash! Crash! The bleachers were making up for many
games in which they could not express their riotous feelings. "It's a cinch we'll win!" yelled a fan with a voice. Rube was the
first man up in our half of the ninth and his big bat lammed the first
ball safe over second base. The crowd, hungry for victory, got to
their feet and stayed upon their feet, calling, cheering for runs. It
was the moment for me to get in the game, and I leaped up, strung like
a wire, and white hot with inspiration. I sent Spears to the coaching
box with orders to make Rube run on the first ball. I gripped McCall
with hands that made him wince. Then I dropped back on the bench spent and panting. It was only a
game, yet it meant so much! Little McCall was dark as a thunder cloud,
and his fiery eyes snapped. He was the fastest man in the league, and
could have bunted an arrow from a bow. The foxy Bison third baseman
edged in. Mac feinted to bunt toward him then turned his bat inward
and dumped a teasing curving ball down the first base line. Rube ran
as if in seven-league boots. Mac's short legs twinkled; he went like
the wind; he leaped into first base with his long slide, and beat the
throw. The stands and bleachers seemed to be tumbling down. For a moment the
air was full of deafening sound. Then came the pause, the dying away
of clatter and roar, the close waiting, suspended quiet. Spears' clear
voice, as he coached Rube, in its keen note seemed inevitable of
another run. Ashwell took his stand. He was another left-hand hitter, and against a
right-hand pitcher, in such circumstances as these, the most dangerous
of men. Vane knew it. Ellis, the Bison captain knew it, as showed
plainly in his signal to catch Rube at second. But Spears' warning
held or frightened Rube on the bag. Vane wasted a ball, then another. Ashwell could not be coaxed. Wearily Vane swung; the shortstop raced out to get in line for a
possible hit through the wide space to his right, and the second
baseman got on his toes as both base runners started. Crack! The old story of the hit and run game! Ashwell's hit crossed
sharply where a moment before the shortstop had been standing. With
gigantic strides Rube rounded the corner and scored. McCall flitted
through second, and diving into third with a cloud of dust, got the
umpire's decision. When Stringer hurried up with Mac on third and Ash
on first the whole field seemed racked in a deafening storm. Again it
subsided quickly. The hopes of the Worcester fans had been crushed too
often of late for them to be fearless. But I had no fear. I only wanted the suspense ended. I was like a man
clamped in a vise. Stringer stood motionless. Mac bent low with the
sprinters' stoop; Ash watched the pitcher's arm and slowly edged off
first. Stringer waited for one strike and two balls, then he hit the
next. It hugged the first base line, bounced fiercely past the bag and
skipped over the grass to bump hard into the fence. McCall romped
home, and lame Ashwell beat any run he ever made to the plate. Rolling,
swelling, crashing roar of frenzied feet could not down the high
piercing sustained yell of the fans. It was great. Three weeks of
submerged bottled baseball joy exploded in one mad outburst! The fans,
too, had come into their own again. We scored no more. But the Bisons were beaten. Their spirit was
broken. This did not make the Rube let up in their last half inning. Grim and pale he faced them. At every long step and swing he tossed
his shock of light hair. At the end he was even stronger than at the
beginning. He still had the glancing, floating airy quality that
baseball players call speed. And he struck out the last three batters. In the tumult that burst over my ears I sat staring at the dots on my
score card. Fourteen strike outs! one scratch hit! No base on balls
since the first inning! That told the story which deadened senses
doubted. There was a roar in my ears. Some one was pounding me. As I
struggled to get into the dressing room the crowd mobbed me. But I did
not hear what they yelled. I had a kind of misty veil before my eyes,
in which I saw that lanky Rube magnified into a glorious figure. I saw
the pennant waving, and the gleam of a white cottage through the trees,
and a trim figure waiting at the gate. Then I rolled into the dressing
room. Somehow it seemed strange to me. Most of the players were stretched
out in peculiar convulsions. Old Spears sat with drooping head. Then a
wild flaming-eyed giant swooped upon me. With a voice of thunder he
announced:

"I'm a-goin' to lick you, too!" After that we never called him any name except Rube. THE RUBE'S PENNANT

"Fellows, it's this way. You've got to win today's game. It's the
last of the season and means the pennant for Worcester. One more hard
scrap and we're done! Of all the up-hill fights any bunch ever made to
land the flag, our has been the best. You're the best team I ever
managed, the gamest gang of ball players that ever stepped in spikes. We've played in the hardest kind of luck all season, except that short
trip we called the Rube's Honeymoon. We got a bad start, and sore arms
and busted fingers, all kinds of injuries, every accident calculated to
hurt a team's chances, came our way. But in spite of it all we got the
lead and we've held it, and today we're still a few points ahead of
Buffalo." I paused to catch my breath, and looked round on the grim, tired faces
of my players. They made a stern group. The close of the season found
them almost played out. What a hard chance it was, after their
extraordinary efforts, to bring the issue of the pennant down to this
last game! "If we lose today, Buffalo, with three games more to play at home, will
pull the bunting," I went on. "But they're not going to win! I'm
putting it up to you that way. I know Spears is all in; Raddy's arm is
gone; Ash is playing on one leg; you're all crippled. But you've got
one more game in you, I know. These last few weeks the Rube has been
pitching out of turn and he's about all in, too. He's kept us in the
lead. If he wins today it'll be Rube's Pennant. But that might apply
to all of you. Now, shall we talk over the play today? Any tricks to
pull off? Any inside work?" "Con, you're pretty much upset an' nervous," replied Spears, soberly. "It ain't no wonder. This has been one corker of a season. I want to
suggest that you let me run the team today. I've talked over the play
with the fellers. We ain't goin' to lose this game, Con. Buffalo has
been comin' with a rush lately, an' they're confident. But we've been
holdin' in, restin' up as much as we dared an' still keep our lead. Mebbee it'll surprise you to know we've bet every dollar we could get
hold of on this game. Why, Buffalo money is everywhere." "All right, Spears, I'll turn the team over to you. We've got the
banner crowd of the year out there right now, a great crowd to play
before. I'm more fussed up over this game than any I remember. But I
have a sort of blind faith in my team.... I guess that's all I want
to say." Spears led the silent players out of the dressing room and I followed;
and while they began to toss balls to and fro, to limber up cold, dead
arms, I sat on the bench. The Bisons were prancing about the diamond, and their swaggering
assurance was not conducive to hope for the Worcesters. I wondered how
many of that vast, noisy audience, intent on the day's sport, even had
a thought of what pain and toil it meant to my players. The Buffalo
men were in good shape; they had been lucky; they were at the top of
their stride, and that made all the difference. At any rate, there were a few faithful little women in the grand
stand--Milly and Nan and Rose Stringer and Kate Bogart--who sat with
compressed lips and hoped and prayed for that game to begin and end. The gong called off the practice, and Spears, taking the field, yelled
gruff encouragement to his men. Umpire Carter brushed off the plate
and tossed a white ball to Rube and called:  "Play!" The bleachers set
up an exultant, satisfied shout and sat down to wait. Schultz toed the plate and watched the Rube pitch a couple. There
seemed to be no diminution of the great pitcher's speed and both balls
cut the plate. Schultz clipped the next one down the third-base Line. Bogart trapped it close to the bag, and got it away underhand, beating
the speedy runner by a nose. It was a pretty play to start with, and
the spectators were not close-mouthed in appreciation. The short,
stocky Carl ambled up to bat, and I heard him call the Rube something. It was not a friendly contest, this deciding game between Buffalo and
Worcester. "Bing one close to his swelled nut!" growled Spears to the Rube. Carl chopped a bouncing grounder through short and Ash was after it
like a tiger, but it was a hit. The Buffalo contingent opened up. Then Manning faced the Rube, and he, too, vented sarcasm. It might not
have been heard by the slow, imperturbable pitcher for all the notice
he took. Carl edged off first, slid back twice, got a third start, and
on the Rube's pitch was off for second base with the lead that always
made him dangerous. Manning swung vainly, and Gregg snapped a throw to
Mullaney. Ball and runner got to the bag apparently simultaneously;
the umpire called Carl out, and the crowd uttered a quick roar of
delight. The next pitch to Manning was a strike. Rube was not wasting any
balls, a point I noted with mingled fear and satisfaction. For he
might have felt that he had no strength to spare that day and so could
not try to work the batters. Again he swung, and Manning rapped a long
line fly over McCall. As the little left fielder turned at the sound
of the hit and sprinted out, his lameness was certainly not in
evidence. He was the swiftest runner in the league and always when he
got going the crowd rose in wild clamor to watch him. Mac took that fly
right off the foul flag in deep left, and the bleachers dinned their
pleasure. 