








The Moon Endureth

Tales and Fancies

by

John Buchan




Contents

From the Pentlands looking North and South


    I The Company of the Marjolaine
      Avignon 1759

   II A Lucid Interval
      The Shorter Catechism (revised version)

  III The Lemnian
      Atta's song

   IV Space
      Stocks and stones

    V Streams of water in the South
      The Gipsy's song to the lady Cassilis

   VI The grove of Ashtaroth
      Wood magic

  VII The riding of Ninemileburn
      Plain Folk

 VIII The Kings of Orion
      Babylon

   IX The green glen
      The wise years
      [Updater's note: Chapter 9 missing from etext]

    X The rime of True Thomas




FROM THE PENTLANDS LOOKING NORTH AND SOUTH

  Around my feet the clouds are drawn
  In the cold mystery of the dawn;
  No breezes cheer, no guests intrude
  My mossy, mist-clad solitude;
  When sudden down the steeps of sky
  Flames a long, lightening wind. On high
  The steel-blue arch shines clear, and far,
  In the low lands where cattle are,
  Towns smoke. And swift, a haze, a gleam,--
  The Firth lies like a frozen stream,
  Reddening with morn. Tall spires of ships,
  Like thorns about the harbour's lips,
  Now shake faint canvas, now, asleep,
  Their salt, uneasy slumbers keep;
  While golden-grey, o'er kirk and wall,
  Day wakes in the ancient capital. Before me lie the lists of strife,
  The caravanserai of life,
  Whence from the gates the merchants go
  On the world's highways; to and fro
  Sail laiden ships; and in the street
  The lone foot-traveller shakes his feet,
  And in some corner by the fire
  Tells the old tale of heart's desire. Thither from alien seas and skies
  Comes the far-questioned merchandise:--
  Wrought silks of Broussa, Mocha's ware
  Brown-tinted, fragrant, and the rare
  Thin perfumes that the rose's breath
  Has sought, immortal in her death:
  Gold, gems, and spice, and haply still
  The red rough largess of the hill
  Which takes the sun and bears the vines
  Among the haunted Apennines. And he who treads the cobbled street
  To-day in the cold North may meet,
  Come month, come year, the dusky East,
  And share the Caliph's secret feast;
  Or in the toil of wind and sun
  Bear pilgrim-staff, forlorn, fordone,
  Till o'er the steppe, athwart the sand
  Gleam the far gates of Samarkand. The ringing quay, the weathered face
  Fair skies, dusk hands, the ocean race
  The palm-girt isle, the frosty shore,
  Gales and hot suns the wide world o'er
  Grey North, red South, and burnished West
  The goals of the old tireless quest,
  Leap in the smoke, immortal, free,
  Where shines yon morning fringe of sea
  I turn, and lo! the moorlands high
  Lie still and frigid to the sky. The film of morn is silver-grey
  On the young heather, and away,
  Dim, distant, set in ribs of hill,
  Green glens are shining, stream and mill,
  Clachan and kirk and garden-ground,
  All silent in the hush profound
  Which haunts alone the hills' recess,
  The antique home of quietness. Nor to the folk can piper play
  The tune of "Hills and Far Away,"
  For they are with them. Morn can fire
  No peaks of weary heart's desire,
  Nor the red sunset flame behind
  Some ancient ridge of longing mind. For Arcady is here, around,
  In lilt of stream, in the clear sound
  Of lark and moorbird, in the bold
  Gay glamour of the evening gold,
  And so the wheel of seasons moves
  To kirk and market, to mild loves
  And modest hates, and still the sight
  Of brown kind faces, and when night
  Draws dark around with age and fear
  Theirs is the simple hope to cheer.--
  A land of peace where lost romance
  And ghostly shine of helm and lance
  Still dwell by castled scarp and lea,
  And the last homes of chivalry,
  And the good fairy folk, my dear,
  Who speak for cunning souls to hear,
  In crook of glen and bower of hill
  Sing of the Happy Ages still. O Thou to whom man's heart is known,
  Grant me my morning orison. Grant me the rover's path--to see
  The dawn arise, the daylight flee,
  In the far wastes of sand and sun! Grant me with venturous heart to run
  On the old highway, where in pain
  And ecstasy man strives amain,
  Conquers his fellows, or, too weak,
  Finds the great rest that wanderers seek! Grant me the joy of wind and brine,
  The zest of food, the taste of wine,
  The fighter's strength, the echoing strife
  The high tumultuous lists of life--
  May I ne'er lag, nor hapless fall,
  Nor weary at the battle-call!... But when the even brings surcease,
  Grant me the happy moorland peace;
  That in my heart's depth ever lie
  That ancient land of heath and sky,
  Where the old rhymes and stories fall
  In kindly, soothing pastoral. There in the hills grave silence lies,
  And Death himself wears friendly guise
  There be my lot, my twilight stage,
  Dear city of my pilgrimage. I

THE COMPANY OF THE MARJOLAINE

  "Qu'est-c'qui passe ici si tard,
   Compagnons de la Marjolaine,"
      --CHANSONS DE FRANCE


...I came down from the mountain and into the pleasing valley of the
Adige in as pelting a heat as ever mortal suffered under. The way
underfoot was parched and white; I had newly come out of a wilderness
of white limestone crags, and a sun of Italy blazed blindingly in an
azure Italian sky. You are to suppose, my dear aunt, that I had had
enough and something more of my craze for foot-marching. A fortnight
ago I had gone to Belluno in a post-chaise, dismissed my fellow to
carry my baggage by way of Verona, and with  no more than a valise on
my back plunged into the fastnesses of those mountains. I had a fancy
to see the little sculptured hills which made backgrounds for
Gianbellini, and there were rumours of great mountains built wholly of
marble which shone like the battlements. ...1 This extract from the unpublished papers of the Manorwater family
has seemed to the Editor worth printing for its historical interest. The famous Lady Molly Carteron became Countess of Manorwater by her
second marriage. She was a wit and a friend of wits, and her nephew,
the Honourable Charles Hervey-Townshend (afterwards our Ambassador at
The Hague), addressed to her a series of amusing letters while making,
after the fashion of his contemporaries, the Grand Tour of Europe. Three letters, written at various places in the Eastern Alps and
despatched from Venice, contain the following short narrative....

of the Celestial City. So at any rate reported young Mr. Wyndham, who
had travelled with me from Milan to Venice. I lay the first night at
Pieve, where Titian had the fortune to be born, and the landlord at the
inn displayed a set of villainous daubs which he swore were the early
works of that master. Thence up a toilsome valley I journeyed to the
Ampezzan country, valley where indeed I saw my white mountains, but,
alas! no longer Celestial. For it rained like Westmorland for five
endless days, while I kicked my heels in an inn and turned a canto of
Aristo into halting English couplets. By-and-by it cleared, and I
headed westward towards Bozen, among the tangle of rocks where the
Dwarf King had once his rose-garden. The first night I had no inn but
slept in the vile cabin of a forester, who spoke a tongue half Latin,
half Dutch, which I failed to master. The next day was a blaze of
heat, the mountain-paths lay thick with dust, and I had no wine from
sunrise to sunset. Can you wonder that, when the following noon I saw
Santa Chiara sleeping in its green circlet of meadows, my thought was
only of a deep draught and a cool chamber? I protest that I am a great
lover of natural beauty, of rock and cascade, and all the properties of
the poet: but the enthusiasm of Rousseau himself would sink from the
stars to earth if he had marched since breakfast in a cloud of dust
with a throat like the nether millstone. Yet I had not entered the place before Romance revived. The little
town--a mere wayside halting-place on the great mountain-road to the
North--had the air of mystery which foretells adventure. Why is it
that a dwelling or a countenance catches the fancy with the promise of
some strange destiny? I have houses in my mind which I know will some
day and somehow be intertwined oddly with my life; and I have faces in
memory of which I know nothing--save that I shall undoubtedly cast eyes
again upon them. My first glimpses of Santa Chiara gave me this earnest
of romance. It was walled and fortified, the streets were narrow pits
of shade, old tenements with bent fronts swayed to meet each other. Melons lay drying on flat roofs, and yet now and then would come a
high-pitched northern gable. Latin and Teuton met and mingled in the
place, and, as Mr. Gibbon has taught us, the offspring of this
admixture is something fantastic and unpredictable. I forgot my
grievous thirst and my tired feet in admiration and a certain vague
expectation of wonders. Here, ran my thought, it is fated, maybe, that
romance and I shall at last compass a meeting. Perchance some princess
is in need of my arm, or some affair of high policy is afoot in this
jumble of old masonry. You will laugh at my  folly, but I had an
excuse for it. A fortnight in strange mountains disposes a man to look
for something at his next encounter with his kind, and the sight of
Santa Chiara would have fired the imagination of a judge in Chancery. I strode happily into the courtyard of the Tre Croci, and presently had
my expectation confirmed for I found my fellow,--a faithful rogue I got
in Rome on a Cardinal's recommendation,--hot in dispute with a lady's
maid. The woman was old, harsh-featured--no Italian clearly, though she
spoke fluently in the tongue. She rated my man like a pickpocket, and
the dispute was over a room. "The signor will bear me out," said Gianbattista. "Was not I sent to
Verona with his baggage, and thence to this place of ill manners? Was
I not bidden engage for him a suite of apartments? Did I not duly
choose these fronting on the gallery, and dispose therein the signor's
baggage? And lo! an hour ago I found it all turned into the yard and
this woman installed in its place. It is monstrous, unbearable! Is
this an inn for travellers, or haply the private mansion of these
Magnificences?" "My servant speaks truly," I said firmly yet with courtesy, having no
mind to spoil adventure by urging rights. "He had orders to take these
rooms for me, and I know not what higher power can countermand me." The woman had been staring at me scornfully, for no doubt in my dusty
habit I was a figure of small count; but at the sound of my voice she
started, and cried out, "You are English, signor?" I bowed an admission. "Then my mistress shall speak with you," she
said, and dived into the inn like an elderly rabbit. Gianbattista was for sending for the landlord and making a riot in that
hostelry; but I stayed him, and bidding him fetch me a flask of white
wine, three lemons, and a glass of eau de vie, I sat down peaceably at
one of the little tables in the courtyard and prepared for the
quenching of my thirst. Presently, as I sat drinking that excellent
compound of my own invention, my shoulder was touched, and I turned to
find the maid and her mistress. Alas for my hopes of a glorious being,
young and lissom and bright with the warm riches of the south! I saw a
short, stout little lady, well on the wrong side of thirty. She had
plump red cheeks, and fair hair dressed indifferently in the Roman
fashion. Two candid blue eyes redeemed her plainness, and a certain
grave and gentle dignity. She was notably a gentlewoman, so I got up,
doffed my hat, and awaited her commands. She spoke in Italian. "Your pardon, signor, but I fear my good
Cristine has done you unwittingly a wrong." Cristine snorted at this premature plea of guilty, while I hastened to
assure the fair apologist that any rooms I might have taken were freely
at her service. I spoke unconsciously in English, and she replied in a halting parody
of that tongue. "I understand him," she said, "but I do not speak him
happily. I will discourse, if the signor pleases, in our first speech." She and her father, it appeared, had come over the Brenner, and arrived
that morning at the Tre Croci, where they purposed to lie for some
days. He was an old man, very feeble, and much depending upon her
constant care. Wherefore it was necessary that the rooms of all the
party should adjoin, and there was no suite of the size in the inn save
that which I had taken. Would I therefore consent to forgo my right,
and place her under an eternal debt? I agreed most readily, being at all times careless where I sleep, so
the bed be clean, or where I eat, so the meal be good. I bade my
servant see the landlord and have my belongings carried to other rooms. Madame thanked me sweetly, and would have gone, when a thought detained
her. "It is but courteous," she said, "that you should know the names of
those whom you have befriended. My father is called the Count
d'Albani, and I am his only daughter. We travel to Florence, where we
have a villa in the environs." "My name," said I, "is Hervey-Townshend, an Englishman travelling
abroad for his entertainment." "Hervey?" she repeated. "Are you one of the family of Miladi Hervey?" "My worthy aunt," I replied, with a tender recollection of that
preposterous woman. Madame turned to Cristine, and spoke rapidly in a whisper. "My father, sir," she said, addressing me, "is an old frail man, little
used to the company of strangers; but in former days he has had
kindness from members of your house, and it would be a satisfaction to
him, I think, to have the privilege of your acquaintance." She spoke with the air of a vizier who promises a traveller a sight of
the Grand Turk. I murmured my gratitude, and hastened after
Gianbattista. In an hour I had bathed, rid myself of my beard, and
arrayed myself in decent clothing. Then I strolled out to inspect the
little city, admired an altar-piece, chaffered with a Jew for a cameo,
purchased some small necessaries, and returned early in the afternoon
with a noble appetite for dinner. The Tre Croci had been in happier days a Bishop's lodging, and
possessed a dining-hall ceiled with black oak and adorned with frescos. It was used as a general salle a manger for all dwellers in the inn,
and there accordingly I sat down to my long-deferred meal. At first
there were no other diners, and I had two maids, as well as
Gianbattista, to attend on my wants. Presently Madame d'Albani
entered, escorted by Cristine and by a tall gaunt serving-man, who
seemed no part of the hostelry. The landlord followed, bowing civilly,
and the two women seated themselves at the little table at the farther
end. "Il Signor Conte dines in his room," said Madame to the host, who
withdrew to see to that gentleman's needs. I found my eyes straying often to the little party in the cool twilight
of that refectory. The man-servant was so old and battered, and of
such a dignity, that he lent a touch of intrigue to the thing. He stood
stiffly behind Madame's chair, handing dishes with an air of great
reverence--the lackey of a great noble, if I had ever seen the type. Madame never glanced toward me, but conversed sparingly with Cristine,
while she pecked delicately at her food. Her name ran in my head with
a tantalizing flavour of the familiar. Albani! D'Albani! It was a
name not uncommon in the Roman States, but I had never heard it linked
to a noble family. And yet I had somehow, somewhere; and in the vain
effort at recollection I had almost forgotten my hunger. There was
nothing bourgeois in the little lady. The austere servants, the high
manner of condescension, spake of a stock used to deference, though,
maybe, pitifully decayed in its fortunes. There was a mystery in
these quiet folk which tickled my curiosity. Romance after all was not
destined to fail me at Santa Chiara. My doings of the afternoon were of interest to me alone. Suffice it to
say that when at nightfall I found Gianbattista the trustee of a
letter. It was from Madame, written in a fine thin hand on a delicate
paper, and it invited me to wait upon the signor her father, that
evening at eight o'clock. What caught my eye was a coronet stamped in
a corner. A coronet, I say, but in truth it was a crown, the same as
surmounts the Arms Royal of England on the sign-board of a Court
tradesman. I marvelled at the ways of foreign heraldry. Either this
family of d'Albani had higher pretensions than I had given it credit
for, or it employed an unlearned and imaginative stationer. I
scribbled a line of acceptance and went to dress. The hour of eight found me knocking at the Count's door. The grim
serving-man admitted me to the pleasant chamber which should have been
mine own. A dozen wax candles burned  in sconces, and on the table
among fruits and the remains of supper stood a handsome candelabra of
silver. A small fire of logs had been lit on the hearth, and before it
in an armchair sat a strange figure of a man. He seemed not so much
old as aged. I should have put him at sixty, but the marks he bore
were clearly less those of time than of life. There sprawled before me
the relics of noble looks. The fleshy nose, the pendulous cheek, the
drooping mouth, had once been cast in looks of manly beauty. Heavy
eyebrows above and heavy bags beneath spoiled the effect of a choleric
blue eye, which age had not dimmed. The man was gross and yet haggard;
it was not the padding of good living which clothed his bones, but a
heaviness as of some dropsical malady. I could picture him in health a
gaunt loose-limbed being, high-featured and swift and eager. He was
dressed wholly in black velvet, with fresh ruffles and wristbands, and
he wore heeled shoes with antique silver buckles. It was a figure of
an older age which rose to greet me, in one hand a snuff-box and a
purple handkerchief, and in the other a book with finger marking place. He made me a great bow as Madame uttered my name, and held out a hand
with a kindly smile. "Mr. Hervey-Townshend," he said, "we will speak English, if you please. I am fain to hear it again, for 'tis a tongue I love. I make you
welcome, sir, for your own sake and for the sake of your kin. How is
her honourable ladyship, your aunt? A week ago she sent me a letter." I answered that she did famously, and wondered what cause of
correspondence my worthy aunt could have with wandering nobles of Italy. He motioned me to a chair between Madame and himself, while a servant
set a candle on a shelf behind him. Then he proceeded to catechise me
in excellent English, with now and then a phrase of French, as to the
doings in my own land. Admirably informed this Italian gentleman
proved himself. I defy you to find in Almack's more intelligent
gossip. He inquired as to the chances of my Lord North and the mind of
my Lord Rockingham. He had my Lord Shelburne's foibles at his fingers'
ends. The habits of the Prince, the aims of the their ladyships of
Dorset and Buckingham, the extravagance of this noble Duke and that
right honourable gentleman were not hid from him. I answered
discreetly yet frankly, for there was no ill-breeding in his curiosity. Rather it seemed like the inquiries of some fine lady, now buried deep
in the country, as to the doings of a forsaken Mayfair. There was
humour in it and something of pathos. "My aunt must be a voluminous correspondent, sir," I said. He laughed, "I have many friends in England who write to me, but I have
seen none of them for long, and I doubt I may never see them again. Also in my youth I have been in England." And he sighed as at
sorrowful recollection. Then he showed the book in his hand. "See," he said, "here is one of
your English writings, the greatest book I have ever happened on." It
was a volume of Mr. Fielding. For a little he talked of books and
poets. He admired Mr. Fielding profoundly, Dr. Smollet somewhat less,
Mr. Richardson not at all. But he was clear that England had a
monopoly of good writers, saving only my friend M. Rousseau, whom he
valued, yet with reservations. Of the Italians he had no opinion. I
instanced against him the plays of Signor Alfieri. He groaned, shook
his head, and grew moody. "Know you Scotland?" he asked suddenly. I replied that I had visited Scotch cousins, but had no great
estimation for the country. "It is too poor and jagged," I said, "for
the taste of one who loves colour and sunshine and suave outlines." He
sighed. "It is indeed a bleak land, but a kindly. When the sun shines
at all he shines on the truest hearts in the world. I love its
bleakness too. There is a spirit in the misty hills and the harsh
sea-wind which inspires men to great deeds. Poverty and courage go
often together, and my Scots, if they are poor, are as untamable as
their mountains." "You know the land, sir?" I asked. "I have seen it, and I have known many Scots. You will find them in
Paris and Avignon and Rome, with never a plack in their pockets. I
have a feeling for exiles, sir, and I have pitied these poor people. They gave their all for the cause they followed." Clearly the Count shared my aunt's views of history--those views which
have made such sport for us often at Carteron. Stalwart Whig as I am,
there was something in the tone of the old gentleman which made me feel
a certain majesty in the lost cause. "I am Whig in blood and Whig in principle," I said,--"but I have never
denied that those Scots who followed the Chevalier were too good to
waste on so trumpery a leader." I had no sooner spoken the words than I felt that somehow I had been
guilty of a betise. "It may be so," said the Count. "I did not bid you here, sir, to argue
on politics, on which I am assured we should differ. But I will ask
you one question. The King of England is a stout upholder of the right
of kings. How does he face the defection of his American possessions?" "The nation takes it well enough, and as for his Majesty's feelings,
there is small inclination to inquire into them. I conceive of the
whole war as a blunder out of which we have come as we deserved. The
day is gone by for the assertion of monarchic rights against the will
of a people." "May be. But take note that the King of England is suffering to-day
as--how do you call him?--the Chevalier suffered forty years ago. 'The
wheel has come full circle,' as your Shakespeare says. Time has
wrought his revenge." He was staring into a fire, which burned small and smokily. "You think the day for kings is ended. I read it differently. The
world will ever have need of kings. If a nation cast out one it will
have to find another. And mark you, those later kings, created by the
people, will bear a harsher hand than the old race who ruled as of
right. Some day the world will regret having destroyed the kindly and
legitimate line of monarchs and put in their place tyrants who govern
by the sword or by flattering an idle mob." This belated dogma would at other times have set me laughing, but the
strange figure before me gave no impulse to merriment. I glanced at
Madame, and saw her face grave and perplexed, and I thought I read a
warning gleam in her eye. There was a mystery about the party which
irritated me, but good breeding forbade me to seek a clue. "You will permit me to retire, sir,"  I said. "I have but this morning
come down from a long march among the mountains east of this valley. Sleeping in wayside huts and tramping those sultry paths make a man
think pleasantly of bed." The Count seemed to brighten at my words. "You are a marcher, sir, and
love the mountains! Once I would gladly have joined you, for in my
youth I was a great walker in hilly places. Tell me, now, how many
miles will you cover in a day?" I told him thirty at a stretch. "Ah," he said, "I have done fifty, without food, over the roughest and
mossiest mountains. I lived on what I shot, and for drink I had
spring-water. Nay, I am forgetting. There was another beverage, which
I wager you have never tasted. Heard you ever, sir, of that eau de vie
which the Scots call usquebagh? It will comfort a traveller as no thin
Italian wine will comfort him. By my soul, you shall taste it. Charlotte, my dear, bid Oliphant fetch glasses and hot water and
lemons. I will give Mr. Hervey-Townshend a sample of the brew. You
English are all tetes-de-fer, sir, and are worthy of it." The old man's face had lighted up, and for the moment his air had the
jollity of youth. I would have accepted the entertainment had I not
again caught Madame's eye. It said, unmistakably and with serious
pleading, "Decline." I therefore made my excuses, urged fatigue,
drowsiness, and a delicate stomach, bade my host good-night, and in
deep mystification left the room. Enlightenment came upon me as the door closed. There in the threshold
stood the manservant whom they called Oliphant, erect as a sentry on
guard. The sight reminded me of what I had once seen at Basle when by
chance a Rhenish Grand Duke had shared the inn with me. Of a sudden a
dozen clues linked together--the crowned notepaper, Scotland, my aunt
Hervey's politics, the tale of old wanderings. "Tell me,"  I said in a whisper, "who is the Count d'Albani, your
master?" and I whistled softly a bar of "Charlie is my darling." "Ay," said the man, without relaxing a muscle of his grim face. "It is
the King of England--my king and yours." II

In the small hours of the next morning I was awoke by a most unearthly
sound. It was as if all the cats on all the roofs of Santa Chiara were
sharpening their claws and wailing their battle-cries. Presently out
of the noise came a kind of music--very slow, solemn, and melancholy. The notes ran up in great flights of ecstasy, and sunk anon to the
tragic deeps. In spite of my sleepiness I was held spellbound and the
musician had concluded with certain barbaric grunts before I had the
curiosity to rise. It came from somewhere in the gallery of the inn,
and as I stuck my head out of my door I had a glimpse of Oliphant,
nightcap on head and a great bagpipe below his arm, stalking down the
corridor. The incident, for all the gravity of the music, seemed to give a touch
of farce to my interview of the past evening. I had gone to bed with
my mind full of sad stories of the deaths of kings. Magnificence in
tatters has always affected my pity more deeply than tatters with no
such antecedent, and a monarch out at elbows stood for me as the last
irony of our mortal life. Here was a king whose misfortunes could find
no parallel. He had been in his youth the hero of a high adventure,
and his middle age had been spent in fleeting among the courts of
Europe, and waiting as pensioner on the whims of his foolish but
regnant brethren. I had heard tales of a growing sottishness, a
decline in spirit, a squalid taste in pleasures. Small blame, I had
always thought, to so ill-fated a princeling. And now I had chanced
upon the gentleman in his dotage, travelling with a barren effort at
mystery, attended by a sad-faced daughter and two ancient domestics. It was a lesson in the vanity of human wishes which the shallowest
moralist would have noted. Nay, I felt more than the moral. Something
human and kindly in the old fellow had caught my fancy. The decadence
was too tragic to prose about, the decadent too human to moralise on. I had left the chamber of the--shall I say de jure King of England?--a
sentimental adherent of the cause. But this business of the bagpipes
touched the comic. To harry an old valet out of bed and set him
droning on pipes in the small hours smacked of a theatrical taste, or
at least of an undignified fancy. Kings in exile, if they wish to keep
the tragic air, should not indulge in such fantastic serenades. My mind changed again when after breakfast I fell in with Madame on the
stair. She drew aside to let me pass, and then made as if she would
speak to me. I gave her good-morning, and, my mind being full of her
story, addressed her as "Excellency." "I see, sir," she said, "That you know the truth. I have to ask your
forbearance for the concealment I practised yesterday. It was a poor
requital for your generosity, but is it one of the shifts of our sad
fortune. An uncrowned king must go in disguise or risk the laughter of
every stable-boy. Besides, we are too poor to travel in state, even if
we desired it." Honestly, I knew not what to say. I was not asked to sympathise, having
already revealed my politics, and yet the case cried out for sympathy. You remember, my dear aunt, the good Lady Culham, who was our
Dorsetshire neighbour, and tried hard to mend my ways at Carteron? This poor Duchess--for so she called herself--was just such another. A
woman made for comfort, housewifery, and motherhood, and by no means
for racing about Europe in charge of a disreputable parent. I could
picture her settled equably on a garden seat with a lapdog and
needlework, blinking happily over green lawns and mildly rating an
errant gardener. I could fancy her sitting in a summer parlour, very
orderly and dainty, writing lengthy epistles to a tribe of nieces. I
could see her marshalling a household in the family pew, or riding
serenely in the family coach behind fat bay horses. But here, on an
inn staircase, with a false name and a sad air of mystery, she was
woefully out of place. I noted little wrinkles forming in the corners
of her eyes, and the ravages of care beginning in the plump rosiness of
her face. Be sure there was nothing appealing in her mien. She spoke
with the air of a great lady, to whom the world is matter only for an
afterthought. It was the facts that appealed and grew poignant from
her courage. "There is another claim upon your good nature," she said. "Doubtless
you were awoke last night by Oliphant's playing upon the pipes. I
rebuked the landlord for his insolence in protesting, but to you, a
gentleman and a friend, an explanation is due. My father sleeps ill,
and your conversation seems to have cast him into a train of sad
memories. It has been his habit on such occasions to have the pipes
played to him, since they remind him of friends and happier days. It
is a small privilege for an old man, and he does not claim it often." I declared that the music had only pleased, and that I would welcome
its repetition. Where upon she left me with a little bow and an
invitation to join them that day at dinner, while I departed into the
town on my own errands. I returned before midday, and was seated at an
arbour in the garden, busy with letters, when there hove in sight the
gaunt figure of Oliphant. He hovered around me, if such a figure can
be said to hover, with the obvious intention of addressing me. The
fellow had caught my fancy, and I was willing to see more of him. His
face might have been hacked out of grey granite, his clothes hung
loosely on his spare bones, and his stockined shanks would have done no
discredit to Don Quixote. There was no dignity in his air, only a
steady and enduring sadness. Here, thought I, is the one of the
establishment who most commonly meets the shock of the world's buffets. I called him by name and asked him his desires. It appeared that he took me for a Jacobite, for he began a rigmarole
about loyalty and hard fortune. I hastened to correct him, and he took
the correction with the same patient despair with which he took all
things. 'Twas but another of the blows of Fate. "At any rate," he said in a broad Scotch accent, "ye come of kin that
has helpit my maister afore this. I've many times heard tell o'
Herveys and Townshends in England, and a' folk said they were on the
richt side. Ye're maybe no a freend, but ye're a freend's freend, or I
wadna be speirin' at ye." I was amused at the prologue, and waited on the tale. It soon came. Oliphant, it appeared, was the purse-bearer of the household, and
woeful straits that poor purse-bearer must have been often put to. I
questioned him as to his master's revenues, but could get no clear
answer. There were payments due next month in Florence which would
solve the difficulties for the winter, but in the meantime expenditure
had beaten income. Travelling had cost much, and the Count must have
his small comforts. The result in plain words was that Oliphant had
not the wherewithal to frank the company to Florence; indeed, I doubted
if he could have paid the reckoning in Santa Chiara. A loan was
therefore sought from a friend's friend, meaning myself. I was very really embarrassed. Not that I would not have given
willingly, for I had ample resources at the moment and was mightily
concerned about the sad household. But I knew that the little Duchess
would take Oliphant's ears from his head if she guessed that he had
dared to borrow from me, and that, if I lent, her back would for ever
be turned against me. And yet, what would follow on my refusal? In a
day of two there would be a pitiful scene with mine host, and as like
as not some of their baggage detained as security for payment. I did
not love the task of conspiring behind the lady's back, but if it could
be contrived 'twas indubitably the kindest course. I glared sternly at
Oliphant, who met me with his pathetic, dog-like eyes. "You know that your mistress would never consent to the request you
have made of me?" "I ken," he said humbly. "But payin' is my job, and I simply havena
the siller. It's no the first time it has happened, and it's a sair
trial for them both to be flung out o' doors by a foreign hostler
because they canna meet his charges. But, sir, if ye can lend to me,
ye may be certain that her leddyship will never, hear a word o't. Puir
thing, she takes nae thocht o' where the siller comes frae, ony mair
than the lilies o' the field." I became a conspirator. "You swear, Oliphant, by all you hold sacred,
to breathe nothing of this to your mistress, and if she should suspect,
to lie like a Privy Councillor?" A flicker of a smile crossed his face. "I'll lee like a Scotch
packman, and the Father o' lees could do nae mair. You need have no
fear for your siller, sir. I've aye repaid when I borrowed, though you
may have to wait a bittock." And the strange fellow strolled off. At dinner no Duchess appeared till long after the appointed hour, nor
was there any sign of Oliphant. When she came at last with Cristine,
her eyes looked as if she had been crying, and she greeted me with
remote courtesy. My first thought was that Oliphant had revealed the
matter of the loan, but presently I found that the lady's trouble was
far different. Her father, it seemed, was ill again with his old
complaint. What that was I did not ask, nor did the Duchess reveal it. We spoke in French, for I had discovered that this was her favourite
speech. There was no Oliphant to wait on us, and the inn servants were
always about, so it was well to have a tongue they did not comprehend. The lady was distracted and sad. When I inquired feelingly as to the
general condition of her father's health she parried the question, and
when I offered my services she disregarded my words. It was in truth a
doleful meal, while the faded Cristine sat like a sphinx staring into
vacancy. I spoke of England and of her friends, of Paris and
Versailles, of Avignon where she had spent some years, and of the
amenities of Florence, which she considered her home. But it was like
talking to a nunnery door. I got nothing but "It is indeed true, sir,"
or "Do you say so, sir!" till my energy began to sink. Madame
perceived my discomfort, and, as she rose, murmured an apology. "Pray
forgive my distraction, but I am poor company when my father is ill. I
have a foolish mind, easily frightened. Nay, nay!" she went on when I
again offered help, "the illness is trifling. It will pass off by
to-morrow, or at the latest the next day. Only I had looked forward to
some ease at Santa Chiara, and the promise is belied." As it chanced that evening, returning to the inn, I passed by the north
side where the windows of the Count's room looked over a little
flower-garden abutting on the courtyard. The dusk was falling, and a
lamp had been lit which gave a glimpse into the interior. The sick man
was standing by the window, his figure flung into relief by the
lamplight. If he was sick, his sickness was of a curious type. His
face was ruddy, his eye wild, and, his wig being off, his scanty hair
stood up oddly round his head. He seemed to be singing, but I could
not catch the sound through the shut casement. Another figure in the
room, probably Oliphant, laid a hand on the Count's shoulder, drew him
from the window, and closed the shutter. It needed only the recollection of stories which were the property of
all Europe to reach a conclusion on the gentleman's illness. The
legitimate King of England was very drunk. As I went to my room that night I passed the Count's door. There stood
Oliphant as sentry, more grim and haggard than ever, and I thought that
his eye met mine with a certain intelligence. From inside the room
came a great racket. There was the sound of glasses falling, then a
string of oaths, English, French, and for all I know, Irish, rapped out
in a loud drunken voice. A pause, and then came the sound of maudlin
singing. It pursued me along the gallery, an old childish song,
delivered as if 'twere a pot-house catch--

  "Qu'est-ce qui passe ici si tard,
  Compagnons de la Marjolaine--"

One of the late-going company of the Marjolaine hastened to bed. This
king in exile, with his melancholy daughter, was becoming too much for
him. III

It was just before noon next day that the travellers arrived. I was
sitting in the shady loggia of the inn, reading a volume of De Thou,
when there drove up to the door two coaches. Out of the first
descended very slowly and stiffly four gentlemen; out of the second
four servants and a quantity of baggage. As it chanced there was no
one about, the courtyard slept its sunny noontide sleep, and the only
movement was a lizard on the wall and a buzz of flies by the fountain. Seeing no sign of the landlord, one of the travellers approached me
with a grave inclination. "This is the inn called the Tre Croci, sir?" he asked. I said it was, and shouted on my own account for the host. Presently
that personage arrived with a red face and a short wind, having
ascended rapidly from his own cellar. He was awed by the dignity of
the travellers, and made none of his usual protests of incapacity. The
servants filed off solemnly with the baggage, and the four gentlemen
set themselves down beside me in the loggia and ordered each a modest
flask of wine. At first I took them for our countrymen, but as I watched them the
conviction vanished. All four were tall and lean beyond the average of
mankind. They wore suits of black, with antique starched frills to
their shirts; their hair was their own and unpowdered. Massive buckles
of an ancient pattern adorned their square-toed shoes, and the canes
they carried were like the yards of a small vessel. They were four
merchants, I had guessed, of Scotland, maybe, or of Newcastle, but
their voices were not Scotch, and their air had no touch of commerce. Take the heavy-browed preoccupation of a Secretary of State, add the
dignity of a bishop, the sunburn of a fox-hunter, and something of the
disciplined erectness of a soldier, and you may perceive the manner of
these four gentlemen. By the side of them my assurance vanished. Compared with their Olympian serenity my Person seemed fussy and
servile. Even so, I mused, must Mr. Franklin have looked when baited
in Parliament by the Tory pack. The reflection gave me the cue. Presently I caught from their conversation the word "Washington,"  and
the truth flashed upon me. I was in the presence of four of Mr.
Franklin's countrymen. Having never seen an American in the flesh, I
rejoiced at the chance of enlarging my acquaintance. They brought me into the circle by a polite question as to the length
of road to Verona. Soon introductions followed. My name intrigued
them, and they were eager to learn of my kinship to Uncle Charles. The
eldest of the four, it appeared, was Mr. Galloway out of Maryland. Then came two brothers, Sylvester by name, of Pennsylvania, and last
Mr. Fish, a lawyer of New York. All four had campaigned in the late
war, and all four were members of the Convention, or whatever they call
their rough-and-ready parliament. They were modest in their behaviour,
much disinclined to speak of their past, as great men might be whose
reputation was world-wide. Somehow the names stuck in my memory. I
was certain that I had heard them linked with some stalwart fight or
some moving civil deed or some defiant manifesto. The making of
history was in their steadfast eye and the grave lines of the mouth. Our friendship flourished mightily in a brief hour, and brought me the
invitation, willingly accepted, to sit with them at dinner. There was no sign of the Duchess or Cristine or Oliphant. Whatever had
happened, that household to-day required all hands on deck, and I was
left alone with the Americans. In my day I have supped with the
Macaronies, I have held up my head at the Cocoa Tree, I have avoided
the floor at hunt dinners, I have drunk glass to glass with Tom
Carteron. But never before have I seen such noble consumers of good
liquor as those four gentlemen from beyond the Atlantic. They drank
the strong red Cyprus as if it had been spring-water. "The dust of
your Italian roads takes some cleansing, Mr. Townshend," was their only
excuse, but in truth none was needed. The wine seemed only to thaw
their iron decorum. Without any surcease of dignity they grew
communicative, and passed from lands to peoples and from peoples to
constitutions. Before we knew it we were embarked upon high politics. Naturally we did not differ on the war. Like me, they held it to have
been a grievous necessity. They had no bitterness against England,
only regrets for her blunders. Of his Majesty they spoke with respect,
of his Majesty's advisers with dignified condemnation. They thought
highly of our troops in America; less highly of our generals. "Look you, sir," said Mr. Galloway, "in a war such as we have witnessed
the Almighty is the only strategist. You fight against the forces of
Nature, and a newcomer little knows that the success or failure of
every operation he can conceive depends not upon generalship, but upon
the confirmation of a vast country. Our generals, with this in mind
and with fewer men, could make all your schemes miscarry. Had the
English soldiers not been of such stubborn stuff, we should have been
victors from the first. Our leader was not General Washington but
General America, and his brigadiers were forests, swamps, lakes,
rivers, and high mountains." "And now,"  I said, "having won, you have the greatest of human
experiments before you. Your business is to show that the Saxon stock
is adaptable to a republic." It seemed to me that they exchanged glances. "We are not pedants," said Mr. Fish, "and have no desire to dispute
about the form of a constitution. A people may be as free under a king
as under a senate. Liberty is not the lackey of any type of government." These were strange words from a member of a race whom I had thought
wedded to the republicanism of Helvidius Priscus. "As a loyal subject of a monarchy,"  I said, "I must agree with you. But your hands are tied, for I cannot picture the establishment of a
House of Washington and--if not, where are you to turn for your
sovereign?" Again a smile seemed to pass among the four. "We are experimenters, as you say, sir, and must go slowly. In the
meantime, we have an authority which keeps peace and property safe. We
are at leisure to cast our eyes round and meditate on the future." "Then, gentlemen," said I, "you take an excellent way of meditation in
visiting this museum of old sovereignties. Here you have the relics of
any government you please--a dozen republics, tyrannies, theocracies,
merchant confederations, kingdoms, and more than one empire. You have
your choice. I am tolerably familiar with the land, and if I can
assist you I am at your service." They thanked me gravely "We have letters," said Mr. Galloway; "one in
especial is to a gentleman whom we hope to meet in this place. Have
you heard in your travels of the Count of Albany?" "He has arrived," said I, "two days ago. Even now he is in the chamber
above us at dinner." The news interested them hugely. "You have seen him?" they cried. "What is he like?" "An elderly gentleman in poor health, a man who has travelled much,
and, I judge, has suffered something from fortune. He has a fondness
for the English, so you will be welcome, sirs; but he was indisposed
yesterday, and may still be unable to receive you. His daughter
travels with him and tends his old age." "And you--you have spoken with him?" "The night before last I was in his company. We talked of many things,
including the late war. He is somewhat of your opinion on matters of
government." The four looked at each other, and then Mr. Galloway rose. "I ask your permission, Mr. Townshend, to consult for a moment with my
friends. The matter is of some importance, and I would beg you to
await us." So saying, he led the others out of doors, and I heard them
withdraw to a corner of the loggia. Now, thought I, there is something
afoot, and my long-sought romance approaches fruition. The company of
the Marjolaine, whom the Count had sung of, have arrived at last. Presently they returned and seated themselves at the table. "You can be of great assistance to us, Mr. Townshend, and we would fain
take you into our confidence. Are you aware who is this Count of
Albany?" I nodded. "It is a thin disguise to one familiar with history." "Have you reached any estimate of his character or capabilities? You
speak to friends, and, let me tell you, it is a matter which deeply
concerns the Count's interests." "I think him a kindly and pathetic old gentleman. He naturally bears
the mark of forty years' sojourn in the wilderness." Mr. Galloway took snuff. "We have business with him, but it is business which stands in need of
an agent. There is no one in the Count's suite with whom we could
discuss affairs?" "There is his daughter." "Ah, but she would scarcely suit the case. Is there no man--a friend,
and yet not a member of the family who can treat with us?" I replied that I thought that I was the only being in Santa Chiara who
answered the description. "If you will accept the task, Mr. Townshend, you are amply qualified. We will be frank with you and reveal our business. We are on no less
an errand than to offer the Count of Albany a crown." I suppose I must have had some suspicion of their purpose, and yet the
revelation of it fell on me like a thunderclap. I could only stare
owlishly at my four grave gentlemen. Mr. Galloway went on unperturbed. "I have told you that in America we
are not yet republicans. There are those among us who favour a
republic, but they are by no means a majority. We have got rid of a
king who misgoverned us, but we have no wish to get rid of kingship. We want a king of our own choosing, and we would get with him all the
ancient sanctions of monarchy. The Count of Albany is of the most
illustrious royal stock in Europe--he is, if legitimacy goes for
anything, the rightful King of Britain. Now, if the republican party
among us is to be worsted, we must come before the nation with a
powerful candidate for their favour. You perceive my drift? What more
potent appeal to American pride than to say: 'We have got rid of King
George; we choose of our own free will the older line and King
Charles'?" I said foolishly that I thought monarchy had had its day, and that
'twas idle to revive it. "That is a sentiment well enough under a monarchical government; but
we, with a clean page to write upon, do not share it. You know your
ancient historians. Has not the repository of the chief power always
been the rock on which republicanism has shipwrecked? If that power is
given to the chief citizen, the way is prepared for the tyrant. If it
abides peacefully in a royal house, it abides with cyphers who dignify,
without obstructing, a popular constitution. Do not mistake me, Mr.
Townshend. This is no whim of a sentimental girl, but the reasoned
conclusion of the men who achieved our liberty. There is every reason
to believe that General Washington shares our views, and Mr. Hamilton,
whose name you may know, is the inspirer of our mission." "But the Count is an old man,"  I urged; for I knew not where to begin
in my exposition of the hopelessness of their errand. "By so much the better. We do not wish a young king who may be
fractious. An old man tempered by misfortune is what our purpose
demands." "He has also his failings. A man cannot lead his life for forty years
and retain all the virtues." At that one of the Sylvesters spoke sharply. "I have heard such
gossip, but I do not credit it. I have not forgotten Preston and
Derby." I made my last objection. "He has no posterity--legitimate
posterity--to carry on his line." The four gentlemen smiled. "That happens to be his chiefest
recommendation," said Mr. Galloway. "It enables us to take the House
of Stuart on trial. We need a breathing-space and leisure to look
around; but unless we establish the principle of monarchy at once the
republicans will forestall us. Let us get our king at all costs, and
during the remaining years of his life we shall have time to settle the
succession problem. "We have no wish to saddle ourselves for good with a race who might
prove burdensome. If King Charles fails he has no son, and we can look
elsewhere for a better monarch. You perceive the reason of my view?" I did, and I also perceived the colossal absurdity of the whole
business. But I could not convince them of it, for they met my
objections with excellent arguments. Nothing save a sight of the Count
would, I feared, disillusion them. "You wish me to make this proposal on your behalf?" I asked. "We shall make the proposal ourselves, but we desire you to prepare the
way for us. He is an elderly man, and should first be informed of our
purpose." "There is one person whom I beg leave to consult--the Duchess, his
daughter. It may be that the present is an ill moment for approaching
the Count, and the affair requires her sanction." They agreed, and with a very perplexed mind I went forth to seek the
lady. The irony of the thing was too cruel, and my heart ached for
her. In the gallery I found Oliphant packing some very shabby trunks,
and when I questioned him he told me that the family were to leave
Santa Chiara on the morrow. Perchance the Duchess had awakened to the
true state of their exchequer, or perchance she thought it well to get
her father on the road again as a cure for his ailment. I discovered Cristine, and begged for an interview with her mistress on
an urgent matter. She led me to the Duchess's room, and there the
evidence of poverty greeted me openly. All the little luxuries of the
menage had gone to the Count. The poor lady's room was no better than
a servant's garret, and the lady herself sat stitching a rent in a
travelling cloak. She rose to greet me with alarm in her eyes. As briefly as I could I set out the facts of my amazing mission. At
first she seemed scarcely to hear me. "What do they want with him?" she asked. "He can give them nothing. He is no friend to the
Americans or to any people who have deposed their sovereign." Then, as
she grasped my meaning, her face flushed. "It is a heartless trick, Mr. Townshend. I would fain think you no
party to it." "Believe me, dear madame, it is no trick. The men below are in sober
earnest. You have but to see their faces to know that theirs is no
wild adventure. I believe sincerely that they have the power to
implement their promise." "But it is madness. He is old and worn and sick. His day is long past
for winning a crown." "All this I have said, but it does not move them." And I told her
rapidly Mr. Galloway's argument. She fell into a muse. "At the
eleventh hour! Nay, too late, too late. Had he been twenty years
younger, what a stroke of fortune! Fate bears too hard on us, too
hard!" Then she turned to me fiercely. "You have no doubt heard, sir, the
gossip about my father, which is on the lips of every fool in Europe. Let us have done with this pitiful make-believe. My father is a sot. Nay, I do not blame him. I blame his enemies and his miserable
destiny. But there is the fact. Were he not old, he would still be
unfit to grasp a crown and rule over a turbulent people. He flees from
one city to another, but he cannot flee from himself. That is his
illness on which you condoled with me yesterday." The lady's control was at breaking-point. Another moment and I
expected a torrent of tears. But they did not come. With a great
effort she regained her composure. "Well, the gentlemen must have an answer. You will tell them that the
Count, my father--nay--give him his true title if you care--is vastly
obliged to them for the honour they have done him, but would decline on
account of his age and infirmities. You know how to phrase a decent
refusal." "Pardon me,"  said I, "but I might give them that answer till doomsday
and never content them. They have not travelled many thousand miles to
be put off by hearsay evidence. Nothing will satisfy them but an
interview with your father himself. "It is impossible," she said sharply. "Then we must expect the renewed attentions of our American friends. They will wait till they see him." She rose and paced the room. "They must go," she repeated many times. "If they see him sober he
will accept with joy, and we shall be the laughing-stock of the world. I tell you it cannot be. I alone know how immense is the
impossibility. He cannot afford to lose the last rags of his dignity,
the last dregs of his ease. They must not see him. I will speak with
them myself." "They will be honoured, madame, but I do not think they will be
convinced. They are what we call in my land 'men of business.' They
will not be content till they get the Count's reply from his own lips." A new Duchess seemed to have arisen, a woman of quick action and sharp
words. "So be it. They shall see him. Oh, I am sick to death of fine
sentiments and high loyalty and all the vapouring stuff I have lived
among for years. All I ask for myself and my father is a little peace,
and, by Heaven! I shall secure it. If nothing will kill your
gentlemen's folly but truth, why, truth they shall have. They shall
see my father, and this very minute. Bring them up, Mr. Townshend, and
usher them into the presence of the rightful King of England. You will
find him alone." She stopped her walk and looked out of the window. I went back in a hurry to the Americans. "I am bidden to bring you to
the Count's chamber. He is alone and will see you. These are the
commands of madame his daughter." "Good!" said Mr. Galloway, and all four, grave gentlemen as they were,
seemed to brace themselves to a special dignity as befitted ambassadors
to a king. I led them upstairs, tapped at the Count's door, and,
getting no answer, opened it and admitted them. And this was what we saw. The furniture was in disorder, and on a couch
lay an old man sleeping a heavy drunken sleep. His mouth was open and
his breath came stertorously. The face was purple, and large purple
veins stood out on the mottled forehead. His scanty white hair was
draggled over his cheek. On the floor was a broken glass, wet stains
still lay on the boards, and the place reeked of spirits. The four
looked for a second--I do not think longer at him whom they would have
made their king. They did not look at each other. With one accord
they moved out, and Mr. Fish, who was last, closed the door very gently
behind him. In the hall below Mr. Galloway turned to me. "Our mission is ended,
Mr. Townshend. I have to thank you for your courtesy." Then to the
others, "If we order the coaches now, we may get well on the way to
Verona ere sundown." An hour later two coaches rolled out of the courtyard of the Tre Croci. As they passed, a window was half-opened on the upper floor, and a head
looked out. A line of a song came down, a song sung in a strange
quavering voice. It was the catch I had heard the night before:

  "Qu'est-ce qui passe ici si tard,
  Compagnons de la Marjolaine--e!" It was true. The company came late indeed--too late by forty
years. . . . AVIGNON

1759

  Hearts to break but nane to sell,
    Gear to tine but nane to hain;--
  We maun dree a weary spell
    Ere our lad comes back again. I walk abroad on winter days,
    When storms have stripped the wide champaign,
  For northern winds have norland ways,
    And scents of Badenoch haunt the rain. And by the lipping river path,
    When in the fog the Rhone runs grey,
  I see the heather of the Strath,
    And watch the salmon leap in Spey. The hills are feathered with young trees,
    I set them for my children's boys. I made a garden deep in ease,
    A pleasance for my lady's joys. Strangers have heired them. Long ago
    She died,--kind fortune thus to die;
  And my one son by Beauly flow
    Gave up the soul that could not lie. Old, elbow-worn, and pinched I bide
    The final toll the gods may take. The laggard years have quenched my pride;
    They cannot kill the ache, the ache. Weep not the dead, for they have sleep
    Who lie at home: but ah, for me
  In the deep grave my heart will weep
    With longing for my lost countrie. Hearts to break but nane to sell,
           Gear to tine but nane to hain;--
          We maun dree a weary spell
           Ere our lad comes back again. II

A LUCID INTERVAL

To adopt the opening words of a more famous tale,  "The truth of this
strange matter is what the world has long been looking for." The
events which I propose to chronicle were known to perhaps a hundred
people in London whose fate brings them into contact with politics. The consequences were apparent to all the world, and for one hectic
fortnight tinged the soberest newspapers with saffron, drove more than
one worthy election agent to an asylum, and sent whole batches of
legislators to Continental cures. "But no reasonable explanation of
the mystery has been forthcoming until now, when a series of chances
gave the key into my hands." Lady Caerlaverock is my aunt, and I was present at the two remarkable
dinner-parties which form the main events in this tale. I was also
taken into her confidence during the terrible fortnight which
intervened between them. Like everybody else, I was hopelessly in the
dark, and could only accept what happened as a divine interposition. My first clue came when James, the Caerlaverocks' second footman,
entered my service as valet, and being a cheerful youth chose to gossip
while he shaved me. I checked him, but he babbled on, and I could not
choose but learn something about the disposition of the Caerlaverock
household below stairs. I learned--what I knew before--that his
lordship had an inordinate love for curries, a taste acquired during
some troubled years as Indian Viceroy. I had often eaten that
admirable dish at his table, and had heard him boast of the skill of
the Indian cook who prepared it. James, it appeared, did not hold with
the Orient in the kitchen. He described the said Indian gentleman as a
"nigger," and expressed profound distrust of his ways. He referred
darkly to the events of the year before, which in some distorted way
had reached the servants' ears. "We always thought as 'ow it was them
niggers as done it," he declared; and when I questioned him on his use
of the plural, admitted that at the time in question "there 'ad been
more nor one nigger 'anging about the kitchen." Pondering on these sayings, I asked myself if it were not possible that
the behaviour of certain eminent statesmen was due to some strange
devilry of the East, and I made a vow to abstain in future from the
Caerlaverock curries. But last month my brother returned from India,
and I got the whole truth. He was staying with me in Scotland, and in
the smoking-room the talk turned on occultism in the East. I declared
myself a sceptic, and George was stirred. He asked me rudely what I
knew about it, and proceeded to make a startling confession of faith. He was cross-examined by the others, and retorted with some of his
experiences. Finding an incredulous audience, his tales became more
defiant, until he capped them all with one monstrous yarn. He
maintained that in a Hindu family of his acquaintance there had been
transmitted the secret of a drug, capable of altering a man's whole
temperament until the antidote was administered. It would turn a
coward into a bravo, a miser into a spendthrift, a rake into a fakir. Then, having delivered his manifesto he got up abruptly and went to bed. I followed him to his room, for something in the story had revived a
memory. By dint of much persuasion I dragged from the somnolent George
various details. The family in question were Beharis, large
landholders dwelling near the Nepal border. He had known old Ram Singh
for years, and had seen him twice since his return from England. He
got the story from him under no promise of secrecy, for the family drug
was as well known in the neighbourhood as the nine incarnations of
Krishna. He had no doubt about the truth of it, for he had positive
proof. "And others besides me," said George. "Do you remember when
Vennard had a lucid interval a couple of years ago and talked sense for
once? That was old Ram Singh's doing, for he told me about it." Three years ago it seems the Government of India saw fit to appoint a
commission to inquire into land tenure on the Nepal border. Some of
the feudal Rajahs had been "birsing yont," like the Breadalbanes, and
the smaller zemindars were gravely disquieted. The result of the
commission was that Ram Singh had his boundaries rectified, and lost a
mile or two of country which his hard-fisted fathers had won. I know nothing of the rights of the matter, but there can be no doubt
about Ram Singh's dissatisfaction. He appealed to the law courts, but
failed to upset the commission's finding, and the Privy Council upheld
the Indian judgment. Thereupon in a flowery and eloquent document he
laid his case before the Viceroy, and was told that the matter was
closed. Now Ram Singh came of a fighting stock, so he straightway took
ship to England to petition the Crown. He petitioned Parliament, but
his petition went into the bag behind the Speaker's chair, from which
there is no return. He petitioned the King, but was courteously
informed that he must approach the Department concerned. He tried the
Secretary of State for India, and had an interview with Abinger
Vennard, who was very rude to him, and succeeded in mortally insulting
the feudal aristocrat. He appealed to the Prime Minister, and was
warned off by a harassed private secretary. The handful of members of
Parliament who make Indian grievances their stock-in-trade fought shy
of him, for indeed Ram Singh's case had no sort of platform appeal in
it, and his arguments were flagrantly undemocratic. But they sent him
to Lord Caerlaverock, for the ex-viceroy loved to be treated as a kind
of consul-general for India. But this Protector of the Poor proved a
broken reed. He told Ram Singh flatly that he was a belated feudalist,
which was true; and implied that he was a land-grabber, which was not
true, Ram Singh having only enjoyed the fruits of his fore-bears'
enterprise. Deeply incensed, the appellant shook the dust of
Caerlaverock House from his feet, and sat down to plan a revenge upon
the Government which had wronged him. And in his wrath he thought of
the heirloom of his house, the drug which could change men's souls. It happened that Lord Caerlaverock cook's came from the same
neighbourhood as Ram Singh. This cook, Lal Muhammad by name, was one
of a large poor family, hangers-on of Ram Singh's house. The aggrieved
landowner summoned him, and demanded as of right his humble services. Lal Muhammad, who found his berth to his liking, hesitated, quibbled,
but was finally overborne. He suggested a fee for his services, but
hastily withdrew when Ram Singh sketched a few of the steps he proposed
to take on his return by way of punishing Lal Muhammad's insolence on
Lal Muhammad's household. Then he got to business. There was a great
dinner next week--so he had learned from Jephson, the butler--and more
than one member of the Government would honour Caerlaverock House by
his presence. With deference he suggested this as a fitting occasion
for the experiment, and Ram Singh was pleased to assent. I can picture these two holding their meetings in the South Kensington
lodgings where Ram Singh dwelt. We know from James, the second
footman, that they met also at Caerlaverock House, no doubt that Ram
Singh might make certain that his orders were duly obeyed. I can see
the little packet of clear grains--I picture them like small granulated
sugar--added to the condiments, and soon dissolved out of sight. The
deed was done; the cook returned to Bloomsbury and Ram Singh to
Gloucester Road, to await with the patient certainty of the East the
consummation of a great vengeance. II

My wife was at Kissengen, and I was dining with the Caerlaverocks en
garcon. When I have not to wait upon the adornment of the female
person I am a man of punctual habits, and I reached the house as the
hall clock chimed the quarter-past. My poor friend, Tommy Deloraine,
arrived along with me, and we ascended the staircase together. I call
him "my poor friend," for at the moment Tommy was under the weather. He had the misfortune to be a marquis, and a very rich one, and at the
same time to be in love with Claudia Barriton. Neither circumstance
was in itself an evil, but the combination made for tragedy. For
Tommy's twenty-five years of healthy manhood, his cleanly-made
up-standing figure, his fresh countenance and cheerful laugh, were of
no avail in the lady's eyes when set against the fact that he was an
idle peer. Miss Claudia was a charming girl, with a notable bee in her
bonnet. She was burdened with the cares of the State, and had no
patience with any one who took them lightly. To her mind the social
fabric was rotten beyond repair, and her purpose was frankly
destructive. I remember some of her phrases:  "A bold and generous
policy of social amelioration"; "The development of a civic
conscience"; "A strong hand to lop off decaying branches from the trunk
of the State." I have no fault to find with her creed, but I objected
to its practical working when it took the shape of an inhuman hostility
to that devout lover, Tommy Deloraine. She had refused him, I believe,
three times, with every circumstance of scorn. The first time she had
analysed his character, and described him as a bundle of attractive
weaknesses. "The only forces I recognise are those of intellect and
conscience," she had said, "and you have neither." The second time--it
was after he had been to Canada on the staff--she spoke of the
irreconcilability of their political ideals. "You are an Imperialist,"
she said, "and believe in an empire of conquest for the benefit of the
few. I want a little island with a rich life for all." Tommy declared
that he would become a Doukhobor to please her, but she said something
about the inability of Ethiopians to change their skin. The third time
she hinted vaguely that there was "another." The star of Abinger
Vennard was now blazing in the firmament, and she had conceived a
platonic admiration for him. The truth is that Miss Claudia, with all
her cleverness, was very young and--dare I say it?--rather silly. Caerlaverock was stroking his beard, his legs astraddle on the
hearthrug, with something appallingly viceregal in his air, when Mr.
and Mrs. Alexander Cargill were announced. The Home Secretary was a
joy to behold. He had the face of an elderly and pious bookmaker, and
a voice in which lurked the indescribable Scotch quality of "unction." When he was talking you had only to shut your eyes to imagine yourself
in some lowland kirk on a hot Sabbath morning. He had been a
distinguished advocate before he left the law for politics, and had
swayed juries of his countrymen at his will. The man was
extraordinarily efficient on a platform. There were unplumbed depths
of emotion in his eye, a juicy sentiment in his voice, an overpowering
tenderness in his manner, which gave to politics the glamour of a
revival meeting. He wallowed in obvious pathos, and his hearers, often
unwillingly, wallowed with him. I have never listened to any orator at
once so offensive and so horribly effective. There was no appeal too
base for him, and none too august:  by some subtle alchemy he blended
the arts of the prophet and the fishwife. He had discovered a new kind
of language. Instead of "the hungry millions," or "the toilers," or
any of the numerous synonyms for our masters, he invented the phrase,
"Goad's people." "I shall never rest," so ran his great declaration,
"till Goad's green fields and Goad's clear waters are free to Goad's
people." I remember how on this occasion he pressed my hand with his
famous cordiality, looked gravely and earnestly into my face, and then
gazed sternly into vacancy. It was a fine picture of genius descending
for a moment from its hill-top to show how close it was to poor
humanity. Then came Lord Mulross, a respectable troglodytic peer, who represented
the one sluggish element in a swiftly progressing Government. He was
an oldish man with bushy whiskers and a reputed mastery of the French
tongue. A Whig, who had never changed his creed one iota, he was
highly valued by the country as a sober element in the nation's
councils, and endured by the Cabinet as necessary ballast. He did not
conceal his dislike for certain of his colleagues, notably Mr. Vennard
and Mr. Cargill. When Miss Barriton arrived with her stepmother the party was almost
complete. She entered with an air of apologising for her prettiness. Her manner with old men was delightful, and I watched with interest the
unbending of Caerlaverock and the simplifying of Mr. Cargill in her
presence. Deloraine, who was talking feverishly to Mrs. Cargill,
started as if to go and greet her, thought better of it, and continued
his conversation. The lady swept the room with her eye, but did not
acknowledge his presence. She floated off with Mr. Cargill to a
window-corner, and metaphorically sat at his feet. I saw Deloraine
saying things behind his moustache, while he listened to Mrs. Cargill's
new cure for dyspepsia. Last of all, twenty minutes late, came Abinger Vennard. He made a fine
stage entrance, walking swiftly with a lowering brow to his hostess,
and then glaring fiercely round the room as if to challenge criticism. I have heard Deloraine, in a moment of irritation, describe him as a
"Pre-Raphaelite attorney,"  but there could be no denying his good
looks. He had a bad, loose figure, and a quantity of studiously
neglected hair, but his face was the face of a young Greek. A certain
kind of political success gives a man the manners of an actor, and both
Vennard and Cargill bristled with self-consciousness. You could see it
in the way they patted their hair, squared their shoulders, and shifted
their feet to positions loved by sculptors. "Well, Vennard, what's the news from the House?" Caerlaverock asked. "Simpson is talking," said Vennard wearily. "He attacks me, of course. He says he has lived forty years in India--as if that mattered! When
will people recognise that the truths of democratic policy are
independent of time and space? Liberalism is a category, an eternal
mode of thought, which cannot be overthrown by any trivial happenings. I am sick of the word 'facts.' I long for truths." Miss Barriton's eyes brightened, and Cargill said, "Excellent." Lord
Mulross, who was a little deaf, and in any case did not understand the
language, said loudly to my aunt that he wished there was a close time
for legislation. "The open season for grouse should be the close season for politicians." And then we went down to dinner. Miss Barriton sat on my left hand, between Deloraine and me, and it was
clear she was discontented with her position. Her eyes wandered down
the table to Vennard, who had taken in an American duchess, and seemed
to be amused at her prattle. She looked with disfavour at Deloraine,
and turned to me as the lesser of two evils. I was tactless enough to say that I thought there was a good deal in
Lord Mulross's view. "Oh, how can you?" she cried. "Is there a close
season for the wants of the people? It sounds to me perfectly horrible
the way you talk of government, as if it were a game for idle men of
the upper classes. I want professional politicians, men who give their
whole heart and soul to the service of the State. I know the kind of
member you and Lord Deloraine like--a rich young man who eats and
drinks too much, and thinks the real business of life is killing little
birds. He travels abroad and shoots some big game, and then comes home
and vapours about the Empire. He knows nothing about realities, and
will go down before the men who take the world seriously." I am afraid I laughed, but Deloraine, who had been listening, was in no
mood to be amused. "I don't think you are quite fair to us, Miss Claudia," he said slowly. "We take things seriously enough, the things we know about. We can't
be expected to know about everything, and the misfortune is that the
things I care about don't interest you. But they are important enough
for all that." "Hush," said the lady rudely. "I want to hear what Mr. Vennard is
saying." Mr. Vennard was addressing the dinner-table as if it were a large
public meeting. It was a habit he had, for he had no mind to confine
the pearls of his wisdom to his immediate neighbours. His words were
directed to Caerlaverock at the far end. "In my opinion this craze for the scientific stand-point is not merely
overdone--it is radically vicious. Human destinies cannot be treated
as if they were inert objects under the microscope. The cold-blooded
logical way of treating a problem is in almost every case the wrong
way. Heart and imagination to me are more vital than intellect. I
have the courage to be illogical, to defy facts for the sake of an
ideal, in the certainty that in time facts will fall into conformity. My Creed may be put in the words of Newman's favourite quotation:  Non
in dialectica complacuit Deo salvum facere populum suum--Not in cold
logic is it God's will that His people should find salvation." "It is profoundly true," sighed Mr. Cargill, and Miss Claudia's beaming
eyes proved her assent. The moment of destiny, though I did not know
it, had arrived. The entree course had begun, and of the two entrees
one was the famous Caerlaverock curry. Now on a hot July evening in
London there are more attractive foods than curry seven times heated,
MORE INDICO. I doubt if any guest would have touched it, had not our
host in his viceregal voice called the attention of the three ministers
to its merits, while explaining that under doctor's orders he was
compelled to refrain for a season. The result was that Mulross,
Cargill, and Vennard alone of the men partook of it. Miss Claudia,
alone of the women, followed suit in the fervour of her hero-worship. She ate a mouthful, and then drank rapidly two glasses of water. My narrative of the events which followed is based rather on what I
should have seen than on what I saw. I had not the key, and missed
much which otherwise would have been plain to me. For example, if I
had known the secret, I must have seen Miss Claudia's gaze cease to
rest upon Vennard and the adoration die out of her eyes. I must have
noticed her face soften to the unhappy Deloraine. As it was, I did not
remark her behaviour, till I heard her say to her neighbour--

"Can't you get hold of Mr. Vennard and forcibly cut his hair?" Deloraine looked round with a start. Miss Barriton's tone was intimate
and her face friendly. "Some people think it picturesque," he said in serious bewilderment. "Oh, yes, picturesque--like a hair-dresser's young man!" she shrugged
her shoulders. "He looks as if he had never been out of doors in his
life." Now, whatever the faults of Tommy's appearance, he had a wholesome
sunburnt face, and he knew it. This speech of Miss Barriton's cheered
him enormously, for he argued that if she had fallen out of love with
Vennard's looks she might fall in love with his own. Being a
philosopher in his way, he was content to take what the gods gave, and
ask for no explanations. I do not know how their conversation prospered, for my attention was
distracted by the extraordinary behaviour of the Home Secretary. Mr.
Cargill had made himself notorious by his treatment of "political"
prisoners. It was sufficient in his eyes for a criminal to confess to
political convictions to secure the most lenient treatment and a speedy
release. The Irish patriot who cracked skulls in the Scotland Division
of Liverpool, the Suffragist who broke windows and the noses of the
police, the Social Democrat whose antipathy to the Tsar revealed itself
in assaults upon the Russian Embassy, the "hunger-marchers" who had
designs on the British Museum,--all were sure of respectful and tender
handling. He had announced more than once, amid tumultuous cheering,
that he would never be the means of branding earnestness, however
mistaken, with the badge of the felon. He was talking I recall, to Lady Lavinia Dobson, renowned in two
hemispheres for her advocacy of women's rights. And this was what I
heard him say. His face had grown suddenly flushed and his eye bright,
so that he looked liker than ever to a bookmaker who had had a good
meeting. "No, no, my dear lady, I have been a lawyer, and it is my
duty in office to see that the law, the palladium of British liberties
is kept sacrosanct. The law is no respecter of persons, and I intend
that it shall be no respecter of creeds. If men or women break the
laws, to jail they shall go, though their intentions were those of the
Apostle Paul. We don't punish them for being Socialists or
Suffragists, but for breaking the peace. Why, goodness me, if we
didn't, we should have every malefactor in Britain claiming
preferential treatment because he was a Christian Scientist or a
Pentecostal Dancer." "Mr. Cargill, do you realise what you are saying?" said Lady Lavinia
with a scared face. "Of course I do. I am a lawyer, and may be presumed to know the law. If any other doctrine were admitted, the Empire would burst up in a
fortnight." "That I should live to hear you name that accursed name!" cried the
outraged lady. "You are denying your gods, Mr. Cargill. You are
forgetting the principles of a lifetime." Mr. Cargill was becoming excited, and exchanging his ordinary
Edinburgh-English for a broader and more effective dialect. "Tut, tut, my good wumman, I may be allowed to know my own principles
best. I tell ye I've always maintained these views from the day when I
first walked the floor of the Parliament House. Besides, even if I
hadn't, I'm surely at liberty to change if I get more light. Whoever
makes a fetish of consistency is a trumpery body and little use to God
or man. What ails ye at the Empire, too? Is it not better to have a
big country than a kailyard, or a house in Grosvenor Square than a
but-and-ben in Balham?" Lady Lavinia folded her hands. "We slaughter our black
fellow-citizens, we fill South Africa with yellow slaves, we crowd the
Indian prisons with the noblest and most enlightened of the Indian
race, and we call it Empire building!" "No, we don't," said Mr. Cargill stoutly, "we call it common-sense. That is the penal and repressive side of any great activity. D'ye mean
to tell me that you never give your maid a good hearing? But would you
like it to be said that you spent the whole of your days swearing at
the wumman?" "I never swore in my life," said Lady Lavinia. "I spoke metaphorically," said Mr. Cargill. "If ye cannot understand a
simple metaphor, ye cannot understand the rudiments of politics." Picture to yourself a prophet who suddenly discovers that his God is
laughing at him, a devotee whose saint winks and tells him that the
devotion of years has been a farce, and you will get some idea of Lady
Lavinia's frame of mind. Her sallow face flushed, her lip trembled,
and she slewed round as far as her chair would permit her. Meanwhile
Mr. Cargill, redder than before, went on contentedly with his dinner. I was glad when my aunt gave the signal to rise. The atmosphere was
electric, and all were conscious of it save the three Ministers,
Deloraine, and Miss Claudia. Vennard seemed to be behaving very badly. He was arguing with Caerlaverock down the table, and the ex-Viceroy's
face was slowly getting purple. When the ladies had gone, we remained
oblivious to wine and cigarettes, listening to this heated controversy
which threatened any minute to end in a quarrel. The subject was India, and Vennard was discussing on the follies of all
Viceroys. "Take this idiot we've got now," he declared. "He expects me to be a
sort of wet-nurse to the Government of India and do all their dirty
work for them. They know local conditions, and they have ample powers
if they would only use them, but they won't take an atom of
responsibility. How the deuce am I to decide for them, when in the
nature of things I can't be half as well informed about the facts!" "Do you maintain," said Caerlaverock, stuttering in his wrath, "that
the British Government should divest itself of responsibility for the
governement of our great Indian Dependency?" "Not a bit," said Vennard impatiently; "of course we are responsible,
but that is all the more reason why the fellows who know the business
at first hand should do their duty. If I am the head of a bank I am
responsible for its policy, but that doesn't mean that every local
bank-manager should consult me about the solvency of clients I never
heard of. Faversham keeps bleating to me that the state of India is
dangerous. Well, for God's sake let him suppress every native paper,
shut up the schools, and send every agitator to the Andamans. I'll
back him up all right. But don't let him ask me what to do, for I
don't know." "You think such a course would be popular?" asked a large, grave man, a
newspaper editor. "Of course it would," said Vennard cheerily. "The British public hates
the idea of letting India get out of hand. But they want a lead. They
can't be expected to start the show any more than I can." Lord Caerlaverock rose to join the ladies with an air of outraged
dignity. Vennard pulled out his watch and announced that he must go
back to the House. "Do you know what I am going to do?" he asked. "I am going down to
tell Simpson what I think of him. He gets up and prates of having been
forty years in India. Well, I am going to tell him that it is to him
and his forty-year lot that all this muddle is due. Oh, I assure you,
there's going to be a row," said Vennard, as he struggled into his coat. Mulross had been sitting next me, and I asked him if he was leaving
town. "I wish I could," he said, "but I fear I must stick on over the
Twelth. I don't like the way that fellow Von Kladow has been talking. He's up to no good, and he's going to get a flea in his ear before he
is very much older." Cheerfully, almost hilariously the three Ministers departed, Vennard
and Cargill in a hansom and Mulross on foot. I can only describe the
condition of those left behind as nervous prostration. We looked
furtively at each other, each afraid to hint his suspicions, but all
convinced that a surprising judgment had befallen at least two members
of his Majesty's Government. For myself I put the number at three, for
I did not like to hear a respected Whig Foreign Secretary talk about
giving the Chancellor of a friendly but jealous Power a flea in his ear. The only unperplexed face was Deloraine's. He whispered to me that
Miss Barriton was going on to the Alvanleys' ball, and had warned him
to be there. "She hasn't been to a dance for months, you know," he
said. "I really think things are beginning to go a little better, old
man." III

When I opened my paper next morning I read two startling pieces of
news. Lord Mulross had been knocked down by a taxi-cab on his way home
the night before, and was now in bed suffering from a bad shock and a
bruised ankle. There was no cause for anxiety, said the report, but
his lordship must keep his room for a week or two. The second item, which filled leading articles and overflowed into
"Political Notes," was Mr. Vennard's speech. The Secretary for India
had gone down about eleven o'clock to the House, where an Indian debate
was dragging out its slow length. He sat himself on the Treasury Bench
and took notes, and the House soon filled in anticipation of his reply. His "tail"--progressive young men like himself--were there in full
strength, ready to cheer every syllable which fell from their idol. Somewhere about half-past twelve he rose to wind up the debate, and the
House was treated to an unparalleled sensation. He began with his
critics, notably the unfortunate Simpson, and, pretty much in
Westbury's language to the herald, called them silly old men who did
not understand their silly old business. But it was the reasons he
gave for this abuse which left his followers aghast. He attacked his
critics not for being satraps and reactionaries, but because they had
dared to talk second-rate Western politics in connection with India. "Have you lived for forty years with your eyes shut," he cried, "that
you cannot see the difference between a Bengali, married at fifteen and
worshipping a pantheon of savage gods, and the university-extension
Young Radical at home? There is a thousand years between them, and you
dream of annihilating the centuries with a little dubious popular
science!" Then he turned to the other critics of Indian
administration--his quondam supporters. He analysed the character of
these "members for India" with a vigour and acumen which deprived them
of speech. The East, he said, had had its revenge upon the West by
making certain Englishmen babus. His honourable friends had the same
slipshod minds, and they talked the same pigeon-English, as the
patriots of Bengal. Then his mood changed, and he delivered a solemn
warning against what he called "the treason begotten of restless vanity
and proved incompetence." He sat down, leaving a House deeply
impressed and horribly mystified. The Times did not know what to make of it at all. In a weighty leader
it welcomed Mr. Vennard's conversion, but hinted that with a convert's
zeal he had slightly overstated his case. The Daily Chronicle talked
of "nervous breakdown,"  and suggested "kindly forgetfulness" as the
best treatment. The Daily News, in a spirited article called "The
Great Betrayal," washed its hands of Mr. Vennard unless he donned the
white sheet of the penitent. Later in the day I got The Westminster
Gazette, and found an ingenious leader which proved that the speech in
no way conflicted with Liberal principles, and was capable of a quite
ordinary explanation. Then I went to see Lady Caerlaverock. I found my aunt almost in tears. "What has happened?" she cried. "What have we done that we should be
punished in this awful way? And to think that the blow fell in this
house? Caerlaverock--we all--thought Mr. Vennard so strange last night,
and Lady Lavinia told me that Mr. Cargill was perfectly horrible. I
suppose it must be the heat and the strain of the session. And that
poor Lord Mulross, who was always so wise, should be stricken down at
this crisis!" I did not say that I thought Mulross's accident a merciful
dispensation. I was far more afraid of him than of all the others, for
if with his reputation for sanity he chose to run amok, he would be
taken seriously. He was better in bed than affixing a flea to Von
Kladow's ear. "Caerlaverock was with the Prime Minister this morning," my aunt went
on. "He is going to make a statement in the Lords tomorrow to try to
cover Mr. Vennard's folly. They are very anxious about what Mr.
Cargill will do today. He is addressing the National Convention of
Young Liberals at Oldham this afternoon, and though they have sent him
a dozen telegrams they can get no answer. Caerlaverock went to Downing
Street an hour ago to get news." There was the sound of an electric brougham stopping in the square
below, and we both listened with a premonition of disaster. A minute
later Caerlaverock entered the room, and with him the Prime Minister. The cheerful, eupeptic countenance of the latter was clouded with care. He shook hands dismally with my aunt, nodded to me, and flung himself
down on a sofa. "The worst has happened," Caerlaverock boomed solemnly. "Cargill has
been incredibly and infamously silly." He tossed me an evening paper. One glance convinced me that the Convention of Young Liberals had had a
waking-up. Cargill had addressed them on what he called the true view
of citizenship. He had dismissed manhood suffrage as an obsolete
folly. The franchise, he maintained, should be narrowed and given only
to citizens, and his definition of citizenship was military training
combined with a fairly high standard of rates and taxes. I do not know
how the Young Liberals received his creed, but it had no sort of
success with the Prime Minister. "We must disavow him," said Caerlaverock. "He is too valuable a man to lose," said the Prime Minister. "We must
hope that it is only a temporary aberration. I simply cannot spare him
in the House." "But this is flat treason." "I know, I know. It is all too horrible, and utterly unexpected. But
the situation wants delicate handling, my dear Caerlaverock. I see
nothing for it but to give out that he was ill."

"Or drunk?" I suggested. The Prime Minister shook his head sadly. "I fear it will be the same
thing. What we call illness the ordinary man will interpret as
intoxication. It is a most regrettable necessity, but we must face it." The harassed leader rose, seized the evening paper, and departed as
swiftly as he had come. "Remember, illness," were his parting words. "An old heart trouble, which is apt to affect his brain. His friends
have always known about it." I walked home, and looked in at the Club on my way. There I found
Deloraine devouring a hearty tea and looking the picture of virtuous
happiness. "Well, this is tremendous news,"  I said, as I sat down beside him. "What news?" he asked with a start. "This row about Vennard and Cargill." "Oh, that! I haven't seen the papers to-day. What's it all about?" His tone was devoid of interest. Then I knew that something of great private moment had happened to
Tommy. "I hope I may congratulate you,"  I said. 