



Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Greg Weeks, David Garcia
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





_Beginning a thrilling New Serial of Interplanetary Life and Travel by
Edward E. Smith, Ph.D._

_Author of "Skylark of Space" and "Skylark Three"_




Spacehounds of IPC


    _A good many of us, who are now certain beyond a doubt that space
    travel will forever remain in the realm of the impossible, probably
    would, if a rocket that were shot to the moon, for instance, did
    arrive, and perhaps return to give proof of its safe arrival on our
    satellite, accept the phenomenon in a perfectly blase, twentieth
    century manner. Dr. Smith, that phenomenal writer of classic
    scientific fiction, seems to have become so thoroughly convinced of
    the advent of interplanetary travel that it is difficult for the
    reader to feel, after finishing "Spacehounds of IPC," that travel
    in the great spaces is not already an established fact. Dr. Smith,
    as a professional chemist, is kept fairly busy. As a writer, he is
    satisfied with nothing less than perfection. For that reason, a
    masterpiece from his pen has become almost an annual event. We know
    you will like "Spacehounds" even better than the "Skylark" series._


Illustrated by WESSO




CHAPTER I

The IPV _Arcturus_ Sets Out for Mars


A narrow football of steel, the Interplanetary Vessel _Arcturus_ stood
upright in her berth in the dock like an egg in its cup. A hundred feet
across and a hundred and seventy feet deep was that gigantic bowl, its
walls supported by the structural steel and concrete of the dock and
lined with hard-packed bumper-layers of hemp and fibre. High into the
air extended the upper half of the ship of space--a sullen gray expanse
of fifty-inch hardened steel armor, curving smoothly upward to a needle
prow. Countless hundred of fine vertical scratches marred every inch
of her surface, and here and there the stubborn metal was grooved and
scored to a depth of inches--each scratch and score the record of an
attempt of some wandering cosmic body to argue the right-of-way with
the stupendous mass of that man-made cruiser of the void. A burly young man made his way through the throng about the entrance,
nodded unconcernedly to the gatekeeper, and joined the stream of
passengers flowing through the triple doors of the double air-lock
and down a corridor to the center of the vessel. However, instead of
entering one of the elevators which were whisking the passengers up to
their staterooms in the upper half of the enormous football, he in some
way caused an opening to appear in an apparently blank steel wall and
stepped through it into the control room. "Hi, Breck!" the burly one called, as he strode up to the instrument-desk
of the chief pilot and tossed his bag carelessly into a corner. "Behold
your computer in the flesh! What's all this howl and fuss about poor
computation?" "Hello, Steve!" The chief pilot smiled as he shook hands cordially. "Glad to see you again--but don't try to kid the old man. I'm simple
enough to believe almost anything, but some things just aren't being
done. We have been yelling, and yelling hard, for trained computers
ever since they started riding us about every one centimeter change in
acceleration, but I know that you're no more an I-P computer than I am
a Digger Indian. They don't shoot sparrows with coast-defense guns!" [Illustration]

"Thanks for the compliment, Breck, but I'm your computer for this trip,
anyway. Newton, the good old egg, knows what you fellows are up against
and is going to do something about it, if he has to lick all the rest of
the directors to do it. He knew that I was loose for a couple of weeks
and asked me to come along this trip to see what I could see. I'm to
check the observatory data--they don't know I'm aboard--take the peaks
and valleys off your acceleration curve, if possible, and report to
Newton just what I find out and what I think should be done about it. How early am I?" While the newcomer was talking, he had stripped the
covers from a precise scale model of the solar system and from a large
and complicated calculating machine and had set to work without a wasted
motion or instant--scaling off upon the model the positions of the
various check-stations and setting up long and involved integrals and
equations upon the calculator. The older man studied the broad back of the younger, bent over his
computations, and a tender, almost fatherly smile came over his careworn
face as he replied:

"Early? You? Just like you always were--plus fifteen seconds on the
deadline. The final dope is due right now." He plugged the automatic
recorder and speaker into a circuit marked "Observatory," waited until
a tiny light above the plug flashed green, and spoke. "IPV _Arcturus_; Breckenridge, Chief Pilot; trip number forty-three
twenty-nine. Ready for final supplementary route and flight data, Tellus
to Mars." "Meteoric swarms still too numerous for safe travel along the scheduled
route," came promptly from the speaker. "You must stay further away from
the plane of the ecliptic. The ether will be clear for you along route
E2-P6-W41-K3-R19-S7-M14. You will hold a constant acceleration of 981.27
centimeters between initial and final check stations. Your take-off
will be practically unobstructed, but you will have to use the utmost
caution in landing upon Mars, because in order to avoid a weightless
detour and a loss of thirty-one minutes, you must pass very close
to both the Martian satellites. To do so safely you must pass the
last meteorological station, M14, on schedule time plus or minus five
seconds, at scheduled velocity plus or minus ten meters, with exactly
the given negative acceleration of 981.27 centimeters, and exactly upon
the pilot ray M14 will have set for you." "All x." Breckenridge studied his triplex chronometer intently, then
unplugged and glanced around the control room, in various parts of which
half a dozen assistants were loafing at their stations. "Control and power check-out--Hipe!" he barked. "Driving converters and
projectors!" The first assistant scanned his meters narrowly as he swung a
multi-point switch in a flashing arc. "Converter efficiency 100,
projector reactivity 100; on each of numbers one to forty-five
inclusive. All x." "Dirigible projectors!" *       *       *       *       *

Two more gleaming switches leaped from point to point. "Converter
efficiency 100, projector reactivity 100, dirigibility 100, on each of
numbers one to thirty-two, inclusive, of upper band; and numbers one to
thirty-two, inclusive, of lower band. All x." "Gyroscopes!" "35,000. Drivers in equilibrium at ten degrees plus. All x." "Upper lights and lookout plates!" The second assistant was galvanized into activity, and upon a screen
before him there appeared a view as though he were looking directly
upward from the prow of the great vessel. The air above them was full of
aircraft of all shapes and sizes, and occasionally the image of one of
that flying horde flared into violet splendor upon the screen as it was
caught in the mighty, roving beam of one of the twelve ultra-light
projectors under test. "Upper lights and lookout plates--all x," the second assistant reported,
and other assistants came to attention as the check-out went on. "Lower lights and lookout plates!" "All x," was the report, after each of the twelve ultra-lights of the
stern had swung around in its supporting brackets, illuminating every
recess of the dark depths of the bottom well of the berth and throwing
the picture upon another screen in lurid violet relief. "Lateral and vertical detectors!" "Laterals XP2710--all x. Verticals AJ4290--all x." "Receptors!" "15,270 kilofranks--all x." "Accumulators!" "700,000 kilofrank-hours--all x." Having thus checked and tested every function of his department,
Breckenridge plugged into "Captain," and when the green light went on:

"Chief pilot check-out--all x," he reported briefly. "All x," acknowledged the speaker, and the chief pilot unplugged. Fifteen minutes remained, during which time one department head after
another would report to the captain of the liner that everything in his
charge was ready for the stupendous flight. "All x, Steve?" Breckenridge turned to the computer. "How do you check
acceleration and power with the observatory?" "Not so good, old bean," the younger man frowned in thought. "They
figure like astronomers, not navigators. They've made no allowances for
anything, not even the reversal--and I figure four thousands for that
and for minor detours. Then there's check station errors...."

"Check-station errors! Why, they're always right--that's what they're
for!" "Don't fool yourself--they've got troubles of their own, the same as
anybody else. In fact, from a study of the charts of the last few weeks,
I'm pretty sure that E2 is at least four thousand kilometers this side
of where he thinks he is, that W41 is ten or twelve thousand beyond his
station, and that they've both got a lateral displacement that's simply
fierce. I'm going to check up, and argue with them about it as we pass. Then there's another thing--they figure to only two places, and we've
got to have the third place almost solid if we expect to get a smooth
curve. A hundredth of a centimeter of acceleration means a lot on a long
trip when they're holding us as close as they are doing now. We'll ride
this trip on 981.286 centimeters--with our scheduled mass, that means
thirty six points of four seven kilofranks _plus_ equilibrium power. All
set to go," the computer stated, as he changed, by fractions of arc, the
course-plotters of the automatic integrating goniometer. "You're the doctor--but I'm glad it's you that'll have to explain to the
observatory," and Breckenridge set his exceedingly delicate excess power
potentiometer exactly upon the indicated figure. "Well, we've got a few
minutes left for a chin-chin before we lift her off." "What's all this commotion about? Dish out the low-down." "Well, it's like this, Steve. We pilots are having one sweet
time--we're being growled at on every trip. The management squawks if
we're thirty seconds plus or minus at the terminals, and the passenger
department squalls if we change acceleration five centimeters total en
route--claims it upsets the dainty customers and loses business for
the road. They're tightening up on us all the time. A couple of years
ago, you remember, it didn't make any difference what we did with the
acceleration as long as we checked in somewhere near zero time--we used
to spin 'em dizzy when we reversed at the half-way station--but that
kind of stuff doesn't go any more. We've got to hold the acceleration
constant and close to normal, got to hold our schedule on zero, _plus_
or _minus_ ten seconds, and yet we've got to make any detours they
tell us to, such as this seven-million kilometer thing they handed
us just now. To make things worse, we've got to take orders at every
check-station, and yet _we_ get the blame for everything that happens
as a consequence of obeying those orders! Of course, I know as well
as you do that it's rotten technique to change acceleration at every
check-station; but we've told 'em over and over that we can't do any
better until they put a real computer on every ship and tell the
check-stations to report meteorites and other obstructions to us and
then to let us alone. So you'd better recommend us some computers!" "You're getting rotten computation, that's a sure thing, and I don't
blame you pilots for yelling, but I don't believe that you've got the
right answer. I can't help but think that the astronomers are lying down
on the job. They are so sure that you pilots are to blame that it hasn't
occurred to them to check up on themselves very carefully. However,
we'll know pretty quick, and then we'll take steps." "I hope so--but say, Steve, I'm worried about using that much plus
equilibrium power. Remember, we've got to hit M14 in absolutely good
shape, or plenty heads will drop." "I'll say they will. I know just how the passengers will howl if we
hold them weightless for half an hour, waiting for those two moons to get
out of the way, and I know just what the manager will do if we check in
minus thirty-one minutes. Wow! He'll swell up and bust, sure. But don't
worry, Breck--if we don't check in all right, anybody can have my head
that wants it, and I'm taking full responsibility, you know." "You're welcome to it." Breckenridge shrugged and turned the
conversation into a lighter vein. "Speaking of weightlessness,
it's funny how many weight-fiends there are in the world, isn't
it? You'd think the passengers would enjoy a little weightlessness
occasionally--especially the fat ones--but they don't. But say, while
I think of it, how come you were here and loose to make this check-up? I thought you were out with the other two of the Big Three, solving
all the mysteries of the Universe?" "Had to stay in this last trip--been doing some work on the ether,
force-field theory, and other advanced stuff that I had to go to Mars
and Venus to get. Just got back last week. As for solving mysteries,
laugh while you can, old hyena. You and a lot of other dim bulbs think
that Roeser's Rays are the last word--that there's nothing left to
discover--are going to get jarred loose from your hinges one of these
days. When I came in nine months ago they were hot on the trail of
something big, and I'll bet they bring it in...."

Out upon the dock an insistent siren blared a crescendo and diminuendo
blast of sound, and two minutes remained. In every stateroom and in
every lounge and saloon speakers sounded a warning:

"For a short time, while we are pulling clear of the gravitational field
of the Earth, walking will be somewhat difficult, as everything on board
will apparently increase in weight by about one-fifth of its present
amount. Please remain seated, or move about with caution. In about an
hour weight will gradually return to normal. We start in one minute." "Hipe!" barked the chief pilot as a flaring purple light sprang into
being upon his board, and the assistants came to attention at their
stations. "Seconds! Four! Three! Two! One! LIFT!" He touched a
button and a set of plunger switches drove home, releasing into the
forty-five enormous driving projectors the equilibrium power--the
fifteen-thousand-and-odd kilofranks of energy that exactly
counterbalanced the pull of gravity upon the mass of the cruiser. Simultaneously there was added from the potentiometer, already set
to the exact figure given by the computer, the _plus_-equilibrium
power--which would not be changed throughout the journey if the ideal
acceleration curve were to be registered upon the recorders--and the
immense mass of the cruiser of the void wafted vertically upward at a
low and constant velocity. The bellowing, shrieking siren had cleared
the air magically of the swarm of aircraft in her path, and quietly,
calmly, majestically, the _Arcturus_ floated upward. *       *       *       *       *

Breckenridge, sixty seconds after the initial lift, actuated the system
of magnetic relays which would gradually cut in the precisely measured
"starting power," which it would be necessary to employ for sixty-nine
minutes--for, without the acceleration given by this additional power,
they would lose many precious hours of time in covering merely the
few thousands of miles during which Earth's attraction would operate
powerfully against their progress. Faster and faster the great cruiser shot upward as more and more of the
starting power was released, and heavier and heavier the passengers
felt themselves become. Soon the full calculated power was on and the
acceleration became constant. Weight no longer increased, but remained
constant at a value of plus twenty three and six-tenths percent. For a
few moments there had been uneasy stomachs among the passengers--perhaps
a few of the first-trippers had been made ill--but it was not much worse
than riding in a high-speed elevator, particularly since there was no
change from positive to negative acceleration such as is experienced in
express elevators. The computer, his calculations complete, watched the pilot with
interest, for, accustomed as he was to traversing the depths of space,
there was a never-failing thrill to his scientific mind in the delicacy
and precision of the work which Breckenridge was doing--work which could
be done only by a man who had had long training in the profession and
who was possessed of instantaneous nervous reaction and of the highest
degree of manual dexterity and control. Under his right and left hands
were the double-series potentiometers actuating the variable-speed
drives of the flight-angle directors in the hour and declination ranges;
before his eyes was the finely marked micrometer screen upon which the
guiding goniometer threw its needle-point of light; powerful optical
systems of prisms and lenses revealed to his sight the director-angles,
down to fractional seconds of arc. It was the task of the chief pilot
to hold the screened image of the cross-hairs of the two directors in
such position relative to the ever-moving point of light as to hold the
mighty vessel precisely upon its course, in spite of the complex system
of forces acting upon it. For almost an hour Breckenridge sat motionless, his eyes flashing from
micrometer screen to signal panel, his sensitive fingers moving the
potentiometers through minute arcs because of what he saw upon the
screen and in instantaneous response to the flashing, multi-colored
lights and tinkling signals of his board. Finally, far from earth, the
moon's attraction and other perturbing forces comparatively slight, the
signals no longer sounded and the point of light ceased its irregular
motion, becoming almost stationary. The chief pilot brought both
cross-hairs directly upon the brilliant point, which for some time they
had been approaching more and more nearly, adjusted the photo-cells
and amplifiers which would hold them immovably upon it, and at the
calculated second of time, cut out the starting power by means of
another set of automatically timed relays. When only the regular driving
power was left, and the acceleration had been checked and found to be
exactly the designated value of 981.286 centimeters, he stood up and
heaved a profound sigh of relief. "Well, Steve, that's over with--we're on our way. I'm always glad when
this part of it is done." "It's a ticklish job, no fooling--even for an expert," the mathematician
agreed. "No wonder the astronomers think you birds are the ones who are
gumming up their dope. Well, it's about time to plug in on E2. Here's
where the fireworks start!" He closed the connections which transferred
the central portion of the upper lookout screen to a small micrometer
screen at Breckenridge's desk and plugged it into the first
check-station. Instantly a point of red light, surrounded by a vivid
orange circle, appeared upon the screen, low down and to the left of
center, and the timing galvanometer showed a wide positive deflection. "Hashed again!" growled Breckenridge. "I must be losing my grip,
I guess. I put everything I had on that sight, and missed it ten
divisions. I think I'll turn in my badge--I've cocked our perfect curve
already, before we got to the first check-station!" His hands moved
toward the controls, to correct their course and acceleration. "As you were--hold everything! Lay off those controls!" snapped the
computer. "There's something screwy, just as I thought--and it isn't
you, either. I'm no pilot, of course, but I do know good compensation
when I see it, and if you weren't compensating that point I never saw it
done. Besides, with your skill and my figures I know darn well that we
aren't off more than a tenth of one division. He's cuckoo! Don't call
him--let him start it, and refer him to me." "All x--I'll be only too glad to pass the buck. But I still think,
Steve, that you're playing with dynamite. Who ever heard of an
astronomer being wrong?" "You'd be surprised," grinned the physicist, "Since this fuss has
just started, nobody has tried to find out whether they were wrong
or not...."

"IPV _Arcturus_, attention!" came from the speaker curtly. "IPV _Arcturus_, Breckenridge," from the chief pilot. "You have been on my ray almost a minute. Why are you not correcting
course and acceleration?" "Doctor Stevens is computing us and has full control of course and
acceleration," replied Breckenridge. "He will answer you." "I am changing neither course nor acceleration because you are not
in position," declared Stevens, crisply, "Please give me your present
supposed location, and your latest precision goniometer bearings on the
sun, the moon, Mars, Venus, and your Tellurian reference limb, with
exact time of observations, gyroscope zero-planes, and goniometer
factors!" "Correct at once or I shall report you to the Observatory," E2 answered
loftily, paying no attention to the demand for proof of position. "Be sure you do that, guy--and while you're at it report that your
station hasn't taken a precision bearing in a month. Report that you've
been muddling along on radio loop bearings, and that you don't know
where you are, within seven thousand kilometers. And speaking of
reporting--I know already that a lot of you astronomical guessers
have only the faintest possible idea of where you really are, _plus_,
_minus_, or lateral; and if you don't get yourselves straightened out
before we get to W41, I'm going to make a report on my own account that
will jar some of you birds loose from your upper teeth!" He unplugged
with a vicious jerk, and turned to the pilot with a grin. "Guess that'll hold him for a while, won't it?" "He'll report us, sure," remonstrated Breckenridge. The older man was
plainly ill at ease at this open defiance of the supposedly infallible
check-stations. "Not that baby," returned the computer confidently. "I'll bet you a
small farm against a plugged nickel that right now he's working his
goniometer so hard that it's pivots are getting hot. He'll sneak back
into position as soon as he can calculate his results, and pretend he's
always been there." "The others will be all right, then, probably, by the time we get to
them?" "Gosh, no--you're unusually dumb today, Breck. He won't tell anybody
anything--he doesn't want to be the only goat, does he?" "Oh, I see. How could you dope this out, with only the recorder charts?" "Because I know the kind of stuff you pilots are--and those humps are
altogether too big to be accounted for by anything I know about you. Another thing--the next station, P6, I think is keeping himself all x. If so, when you corrected for E2, which was wrong, it'd throw you all
off on P6, which was right, and so on--a bad hump at almost every
check-station. See?" *       *       *       *       *

True to prediction, the pilot ray of P6 came in almost upon the exact
center of the micrometer screen, and Breckenridge smiled in relief as he
began really to enjoy the trip. "How do we check on chronometers?" asked P6 when Stevens had been
introduced. "By my time you seem to be about two and a half seconds
_plus_?" "All x--two points four seconds plus--we're riding on 981.286
centimeters, to allow for the reversal and for minor detours. Bye." "All this may have been coincidence, Breck, but we'll find out pretty
quick now," the computer remarked when the flying vessel was nearing
the third check-station. "Unless I'm all out of control we'll check in
almost fourteen seconds minus on W41, and we may not even find him on
the center block of the screen." When he plugged in W41 was on the block, but was in the extreme upper
right corner. They checked in thirteen and eight-tenths seconds minus on
the station, and a fiery dialogue ensued when the computer questioned
the accuracy of the location of the station and refused point-blank to
correct his course. "Well, Breck, old onion, that tears it," Stevens declared as he
unplugged. "No use going any further on these bum reference points. I'm going to report to Newton--he'll rock the Observatory on its
foundations!" He plugged into the telegraph room. "Have you got a free
high-power wave?... Please put me on Newton, in the main office." Moving lights flashed and flickered for an instant upon the communicator
screen, settling down into a white glow which soon resolved itself into
the likeness of a keen-eyed, gray-haired man, seated at his desk in the
remote office of the Interplanetary Corporation. Newton smiled as he
recognized the likeness of Stevens upon his own screen, and greeted him
cordially. "Have you started your investigation, Doctor Stevens?" "Started it? I've finished it!" and Stevens tersely reported what he
had learned, concluding: "So you see, you don't need special computers
on these ships any more than a hen needs teeth. You've got all the
computers you need, in the observatories--all you've got to do is make
them work at their trade." "The piloting was all x, then?" "Absolutely--our curve so far is exactly flat ever since we cut
off the starting power. Of course, all the pilots can't be as good as
Breckenridge, but give them good computation and good check points and
you shouldn't get any humps higher than about half a centimeter." "They'll get both, from now on," the director assured him. "Thanks. If
your work for the trip is done, you might show my little girl, Nadia,
around the _Arcturus_. She's never been out before, and will be
interested. Would you mind?" "Glad to, Mr. Newton--I'll be a regular uncle to her." "Thanks again, Operator, I'll speak to Captain King, please." "Pipe down that guff, you unlicked cub, or I'll crown you with a
proof-bar!" the chief pilot growled, as soon as Stevens had unplugged. "You and who else?" retorted the computer, cheerfully. "Pipe down
yourself, guy--if you weren't so darn dumb and didn't have such a
complex, you'd know that you're the crack pilot of the outfit and
wouldn't care who else knew it." Stevens carefully covered and put away
the calculating machine and other apparatus he had been using and turned
again to the pilot. "I didn't know Newton had any kids, especially little ones, or I'd have
got acquainted with them long ago. Of course I don't know him very well,
since I never was around the office much, but the old tiger goes over
big with me." "Hm--m. Think you'll enjoy playing nursemaid all the rest of the trip?" Breckenridge asked caustically, but with an enigmatic smile. "Think so? I _know_ so!" replied Stevens, positively. "I always did
like kids, and they always did like me--we fall for each other like ten
thousand bricks falling down a well. Why, a kid--_any_ kid--and I team
up just like grace and poise.... What's gnawing on you anyway, to make
you turn Cheshire cat all of a sudden? By the looks of that grin I'd
say you had swallowed a canary of mine some way or other; but darned if
I know that I've lost any," and he stared at his friend suspiciously. "To borrow your own phrase, Steve, 'You'd be surprised,'" and
Breckenridge, though making no effort to conceal his amusement, would
say no more. In a few minutes the door opened, and through it there stepped a
grizzled four-striper. Almost hidden behind his massive form there was
a girl, who ran up to Breckenridge and seized both his hands, her eyes
sparkling. "Hi, Breckie, you old darling! I knew that if we both kept after
him long enough Dad would let me ride with you sometime. Isn't this
_gorgeous_?" Stevens was glad indeed that the girl's enthusiastic greeting of the
pilot was giving him time to recover from his shock, for Director
Newton's "little girl, Nadia" was not precisely what he had led himself
to expect. Little she might be, particularly when compared with the
giant frame of Captain King, or with Steve's own five-feet-eleven of
stature and the hundred and ninety pounds of rawhide and whalebone that
was his body, but child she certainly was not. Her thick, fair hair,
cut in the square bob that was the mode of the moment, indicated that
Nature had intended her to be a creamy blonde, but as she turned to be
introduced to him, Stevens received another surprise--for she was one
of those rare, but exceedingly attractive beings, a natural blonde with
brown eyes and black eyebrows. Sun and wind had tanned her satin skin
to a smooth and even shade of brown, and every movement of her lithe and
supple body bespoke to the discerning mind a rigidly-trained physique. "Doctor Stevens, you haven't met Miss Newton, I hear," the captain
introduced them informally. "All the officers who are not actually tied
down at their posts are anxious to do the honors of the vessel, but as
I have received direct orders from the owners, I am turning her over to
you--you are to show her around." "Thanks, Captain, I won't mutiny a bit against such an order. I'm mighty
glad to know you, Miss Newton." "I've heard a lot about you, Doctor. Dad and Breckie here are always
talking about the Big Three--what you have done and what you are going
to do. I want to meet Doctor Brandon and Doctor Westfall, too," and her
hand met his in a firm and friendly clasp. She turned to the captain,
and Stevens, noticing that the pilot, with a quizzical expression, was
about to say something, silenced him with a fierce aside. "Clam it, ape, or I'll climb up you like a squirrel!" he hissed, and the
grinning Breckenridge nodded assent to this demand for silence
concerning children and nursemaids. "Since you've never been out, Miss Newton, you'll want to see the whole
works," Stevens addressed the girl. "Where do you want to begin? Shall
we start at the top and work down?" "All right with me," she agreed, and fell into step beside him. She was
dressed in dove-gray from head to foot--toque, blouse, breeches, heavy
stockings, and shoes were of the one shade of smooth, lustrous silk; and
as they strolled together down the passage-way, the effortless ease and
perfect poise of her carriage called aloud to every hard-schooled fibre
of his own highly-trained being. "We're a lot alike you and I--do you know it?" he asked, abruptly and
unconventionally. "Yes, I've felt it, too," she replied frankly, and studied him without
affectation. "It has just come to me what it is. We're both in fine
condition and in hard training. You're an athlete of some kind, and I'm
sure you're a star--I ought to recognize you, but I'm ashamed to say I
don't. What do you do?" "Swim." "Oh, of course--Stevens, the great Olympic high and fancy diver! I would
_never_ have connected our own Doctor Stevens, the eminent mathematical
physicist, with the King of the Springboard. Say, ever since I quit
being afraid of the water I've had a yen to do that two-and-a-half twist
of yours, but I never met anybody who knew it well enough to teach it
to me, and I've almost broken my back forty times trying to learn it
alone!" "I've got you, now, too--American and British Womens' golf champion. Shake!" and the two shook hands vigorously, in mutual congratulation. "Tell you what--I'll give you some pointers on diving, and you can show
me how to make a golf ball behave. Next to Norman Brandon, I've got
the most vicious hook in captivity--and Norm can't help himself. He's
left-handed, you know, and, being a southpaw, he's naturally wild. He
slices all his woods and hooks all his irons. I'm consistent, anyway--I
hook everything, even my putts." "It's a bargain! What do you shoot?" "Pretty dubby. Usually in the middle eighties--none of us play much,
being out in space most of the time, you know--sometimes, when my hook
is going particularly well, I go up into the nineties." "We'll lick that hook," she promised, as they entered an elevator and
were borne upward, toward the prow of the great interplanetary cruiser. CHAPTER II

----But Does Not Arrive


"All out--we climb the rest of the way on foot," Stevens told his
companion, as the elevator stopped at the uppermost passenger floor. They walked across the small circular hall and the guard on duty came
to attention and saluted as they approached him. "I have orders to pass you and Miss Newton, sir. Do you know all the
combinations?" "I know this good old tub better than the men that built her--I helped
calculate her," Stevens replied, as he stepped up to an apparently blank
wall of steel and deftly manipulated an almost invisible dial set flush
with its surface. "This is to keep the passengers where they belong," he
explained, as a section of the wall swung backward in a short arc and
slid smoothly aside. "We will now proceed to see what makes it tick." Ladder after ladder of steel they climbed, and bulkhead after bulkhead
opened at Stevens's knowing touch. At each floor the mathematician
explained to the girl the operation of the machinery there automatically
at work--devices for heating and cooling, devices for circulating,
maintaining, and purifying the air and the water--in short, all the
complex mechanism necessary for the comfort and convenience of the human
cargo of the liner. Soon they entered the conical top compartment, a room scarcely fifteen
feet in diameter, tapering sharply upward to a hollow point some
twenty feet above them. The true shape of the room, however, was not
immediately apparent, because of the enormous latticed beams and
girders which braced the walls in every direction. The air glowed
with the violet light of the twelve great ultra-light projectors, like
searchlights with three-foot lenses, which lined the wall. The floor
beneath their feet was not a level steel platform, but seemed to be
composed of many lenticular sections of dull blue alloy. "We are standing upon the upper lookout lenses, aren't we?" asked the
girl. "Is that perfectly all right?" "Sure. They're so hard that nothing can scratch them, and of course
Roeser's Rays go right through our bodies, or any ordinary substance,
like a bullet through a hole in a Swiss cheese. Even those lenses
wouldn't deflect them if they weren't solid fields of force." As he spoke, one of the ultra-lights flashed around in a short, quick
arc, and the girl saw that instead of the fierce glare she had expected,
it emitted only a soft violet light. Nevertheless she dodged
involuntarily and Stevens touched her arm reassuringly. "All x, Miss Newton--they're as harmless as mice. They hardly ever have
to swing past the vertical, and even if one shines right through you you
can look it right in the eye as long as you want to--it can't hurt you
a bit." "No ultra-violet at all?" "None whatever. Just a color--one of the many remaining crudities of our
ultra-light vision. A lot of good men are studying this thing of direct
vision, though, and it won't be long before we have a system that will
really work." "I think it's all perfectly wonderful!" she breathed. "Just think of
traveling in comfort through empty space, and of actually seeing through
seamless steel walls, without even a sign of a window! How can such
things be possible?" "I'll have to go pretty well back," he warned, "and any adequate
explanation is bound to be fairly deep wading in spots. How technical
can you stand it?" "I can go down with you middling deep--I took a lot of general science,
and physics through advanced mechanics. Of course, I didn't get into any
such highly specialized stuff as sub-electronics or Roeser's Rays, but
if you start drowning me, I'll yell." "That's fine--you can get the idea all x, with that to go on. Let's sit
down here on this girder. Roeser didn't do it all, by any means, even
though he got credit for it--he merely helped the Martians do it. The
whole thing started, of course, when Goddard shot his first rocket to
the moon, and was intensified when Roeser so perfected his short waves
that signals were exchanged with Mars--signals that neither side could
make any sense out of. Goddard's pupils and followers made bigger and
better rockets, and finally got one that could land safely upon Mars. Roeser, who was a mighty keen bird, was one of the first voyagers, and
he didn't come back--he stayed there, living in a space-suit for three
or four years, and got a brand-new education. Martian science always
was hot, you know, but they were impractical. They were desperately
hard up for water and air, and while they had a lot of wonderful
ideas and theories, they couldn't overcome the practical technical
difficulties in the way of making their ideas work. Now putting other
peoples' ideas to work was Roeser's long suit--don't think that I'm
belittling Roeser at all, either, for he was a brave and far-sighted
man, was no mean scientist, and was certainly one of the best organizers
and synchronizers the world has ever known--and since Martian and
Tellurian science complemented each other, so that one filled in the
gaps of the other, it wasn't long until fleets of space-freighters were
bringing in air and water from Venus, which had more of both than she
needed or wanted. "Having done all he could for the Martians and having learned most of
the stuff he wanted to know, Roeser came back to Tellus and organized
Interplanetary, with scientists and engineers on all three planets,
and set to work to improve the whole system, for the vessels they used
then were dangerous--regular mankillers, in fact. At about this same
time Roeser and the Interplanetary Corporation had a big part in the
unification of the world into one nation, so that wars could no longer
interfere with progress." *       *       *       *       *

"With this introduction I can get down to fundamentals. Molecules are
particles of the first order, and vibrations of the first order include
sound, light, heat, electricity, radio, and so on. Second order,
atoms--extremely short vibrations, such as hard X-rays. Third order,
electrons and protons, with their accompanying Millikan, or cosmic,
rays. Fourth order, sub-electrons and sub-protons. These, in the
material aspect, are supposed to be the particles of the fourth order,
and in the energy aspect they are known as Roeser's Rays. That is, these
fourth-order rays and particles seem to partake of the nature of both
energy and matter. Following me?" "Right behind you," she assured him. She had been listening intently,
her wide-spaced brown eyes fastened upon his face. "Since these Roeser's Rays, or particles or rays of the fourth order,
seem to be both matter and energy, and since the rays can be converted
into what is supposed to be the particles, they have been thought to be
the things from which both electrons and protons were built. Therefore,
everybody except Norman Brandon has supposed them the ultimate units of
creation, so that it would be useless to try to go any further...."

"Why, we were taught that they _are_ the ultimate units!" she protested. "I know you were--but we really don't know anything, except what we
have learned empirically, even about our driving forces. What is called
the fourth-order particle is absolutely unknown, since nobody has been
able to detect it, to say nothing of determining its velocity or other
properties. It has been assumed to have the velocity of light only
because that hypothesis does not conflict with observational data. I'm
going to give you the generally accepted idea, since we have nothing
definite to offer in its place, but I warn you that that idea is very
probably wrong. There's a lot of deep stuff down there hasn't been dug
up yet. In fact, Brandon thinks that the product of conversion isn't
what we think it is, at all--that the actual fundamental unit and the
primary mechanism of the transformation lie somewhere below the fourth
order, and possibly even below the level of the ether--but we haven't
been able to find a point of attack yet that will let us get in
anywhere. However, I'm getting 'way ahead of our subject. To get back to
it, energy can be converted into something that acts like matter through
Roeser's Rays, and that is the empirical fact underlying the drive of
our space-ships, as well as that of almost all other vehicles on all
three planets. Power is generated by the great waterfalls of Tellus and
Venus--water's mighty scarce on Mars, of course, so most of our plants
there use fuel--and is transmitted on light beams, by means of powerful
fields of force to the receptors, wherever they may be. The individual
transmitting fields and receptors are really simply matched-frequency
units, each matching the electrical characteristics of some particular
and unique beam of force. This beam is composed of Roeser's Rays, in
their energy aspect. It took a long time to work out this tight-beam
transmission of power, but it was fairly simple after they got it." He took out a voluminous notebook, at the sight of which Nadia smiled. "A computer might forget to dress, but you'd never catch one without a
full magazine pencil and a lot of blank paper," he grinned in reply and
went on, writing as he talked. "For any given frequency, _f_, and phase angle, _theta_, you integrate,
between limits zero and _pi_ divided by two, sine theta d...."

"Hold it--I'm sinking!" Nadia exclaimed. "I don't integrate at all
unless it is absolutely necessary. As long as you stick to general
science, I'm right on your heels, but please lay off of integrations
and all that--most especially stay away from those terrible electrical
integrations. I always did think that they were the most poisonous kind
known. I want only a general idea--that's all that I can understand,
anyway." "Sure, I forgot--guess I was getting in deeper than is necessary,
especially since this whole thing of beam transmission is pretty crude
yet and is bound to change a lot before long. There is so much loss
that when we get more than a few hundred million kilometers away from
a power-plant we lose reception entirely. But to get going again,
the receptors receive the beam and from them the power is sent to the
accumulators, where it is stored. These accumulators are an outgrowth
of the storage battery. The theory of the accumulator is...."

"Lay off the theory, please!" the listener interrupted. "I understand
perfectly without it. Energy is stored in the accumulators--you put it
in and take it out. That's all that is necessary." *       *       *       *       *

"I'd like to give you some of the theory--but, after all, it wouldn't
add much to your understanding of the working of things, and it might
mix you up, as some of it is pretty deep stuff. Then, too, it would
take a lot of time, and the rest of your friends would squawk if I
kept you here indefinitely. From the accumulators, then, the power
is fed to the converters, each of which is backed by a projector. The converters simply change the aspect of the rays, from the
energy aspect to the material aspect. As soon as this is done, the
highly-charged particles--or whatever they are--thus formed are
repelled by the terrific stationary force maintained in the projector
backing the converter. Each particle departs with a velocity supposed
to be that of light, and the recoil upon the projector drives the
vessel, or car, or whatever it is attached to. Still with me?" "Struggling a little, but my nose is still above the surface. These
particles, being so infinitesimally small that they cannot even be
detected, go right through any substance without any effect--they are
not even harmful." "Exactly. Now we are in position to go ahead with the lights, detectors,
and so on. The energy aspect of the rays you can best understand as
simply a vibration in the ether--an extremely high frequency one. While not rigidly scientific, that is close enough for you and me. Nobody knows what the stuff really is, and it cannot be explained or
demonstrated by any model or concept in three-dimensional space. Its
physical-mathematical interpretation, the only way in which it can be
grasped at all, requires sixteen coordinates in four dimensions, and
I don't suppose you'd care to go into that." "I'll say I wouldn't!" she exclaimed, feelingly. "Well, anyway, by the use of suitable fields of force it can be used
as a carrier wave. Most of this stuff of the fields of force--how to
carry the modulation up and down through all the frequency changes
necessary--was figured out by the Martians ages ago. Used as a pure
carrier wave, with a sender and a receiver at each end, it isn't so
bad--that's why our communicator and radio systems work as well as they
do. They are pretty good, really, but the ultra-light vision system
is something else again. Sending the heterodyned wave through steel
is easy, but breaking it up, so as to view an object and return the
impulses, was an awful job and one that isn't half done yet. We see
things, after a fashion and at a distance of a few kilometers, by
sending an almost parallel wave from a twin-projector to disintegrate
and double back the viewing wave. That's the way the lookout plates and
lenses work, all over the ship--from the master-screens in the control
room to the plates of the staterooms and lifeboats and the viewing-areas
of the promenades. But the whole system is a rotten makeshift, and...."

"Just a minute!" exclaimed the girl. "I and everybody else have been
thinking that everything is absolutely perfect; and yet every single
thing you have talked about, you have ended up by describing as
'unknown,' 'rudimentary,' 'temporary,' or a 'makeshift.' You speak as
though the entire system were a poor thing that will have to do until
something better has been found, and that nobody knows anything about
anything! How do you get that way?" "By working with Brandon and Westfall. Those birds have got real brains
and they're on the track of something that will, in all probability, be
as far ahead of Roeser's Rays as our present system is ahead of the
science of the seventeenth century." "Really?" she looked at him in astonishment. "Tell me about it." "Can't be done," he refused. "I don't know much about it--even they
didn't know any too much about some of it when I had to come in. And
what little I do know I can't tell, because it isn't mine." "But you're working with them, aren't you?" "Yes, in the sense that a small boy helps his father build a house. They're the brains--I simply do some figuring that they don't want to
waste time doing." Nadia, having no belief whatever in his modest disclaimer, but in secret
greatly pleased by his attitude, replied:

"Of course you couldn't say anything about an unfinished project--I
shouldn't have asked. Where do we go from here?" "Down the lining of the hull, outside the passengers' quarters to the
upper dirigible projectors," and he led the way down a series of steep
steel stairways, through bulkheads and partitions of steel. "One thing
I forgot to tell you about--the detectors. They're worked on the same
principle as the lights, and are just about as efficient. Instead, of
light, though, they send out cones of electro-magnetic waves, which set
up induced currents in any conductor encountered beyond our own shell. Since all dangerous meteorites have been shown to contain conducting
material, that is enough to locate them, for radio finders automatically
determine the direction, distance, and magnitude of the disturbance, and
swing a light on it. That was what happened when that light swung toward
us, back there in the prow." "Are there any of those life-boats, that I've heard discussed so much
lately, near here?" asked the girl. "Lots of 'em--here's one right here," and at the next landing he opened
a vacuum-insulated steel door, snapped on a light, and waved his hand. "You can't see much of it from here, but it's a complete space-ship
in itself, capable of maintaining a dozen or fifteen persons during
a two-weeks' cruise in space." "Why isn't it a good idea to retain them? Accidents are still possible,
are they not?" "Of course, and there is no question of doing away with them entirely. Modern ships, however, have only enough of them to take care of the
largest number of persons ever to be carried by the vessel." "Has the _Arcturus_ more than she needs?" "I'll say she has, and more of everything else, except room for
pay-load." "I've heard them talking about junking her. I think it's a shame." "So do I, in a way--you see, I helped design her and her sister-ship,
the _Sirius_, which Brandon and Westfall are using as a floating
laboratory. But times change, and the inefficient must go. She's a good
old tub, but she was built when everybody was afraid of space, and we
had to put every safety factor into her that we could think of. As a
result, she is four times as heavy as she should be, and that takes a
lot of extra power. Her skin is too thick. She has too many batteries of
accumulators, too many life-boats, too many bulkheads and air-breaks,
too many and too much of everything. She is so built that if she should
break up out in space, nobody would die if they lived through the
shock--there are so many bulkheads, air-breaks, and life-boats that
no matter how many pieces she broke up into, the survivors would find
themselves in something able to navigate. That excessive construction
is no longer necessary. Modern ships carry ten times the pay-load on
one-quarter of the power that this old battle-wagon uses. Even though
she's only four years old, she's a relic of the days when we used to
slam through on the ecliptic route, right through all the meteoric
stuff that is always there--trusting to heavy armor to ward off
anything too small for the observers and detectors to locate. Now, with
the observatories and check-stations out in space, fairly light armor
is sufficient, as we route ourselves well away from the ecliptic and so
miss all the heavy stuff. So, badly as I hate to see her go there, the
old tub is bound for the junk-yard." *       *       *       *       *

A few more flights of stairs brought them to the upper band of dirigible
projectors, which encircled the hull outside the passengers' quarters,
some sixty feet below the prow. They were heavy, search-light-like
affairs mounted upon massive universal bearings, free to turn in any
direction, and each having its converter nestling inside its prodigious
field of force. Stevens explained that these projectors were used in
turning the vessel and in dodging meteorites when necessary, and they
went on through another almost invisible door into a hall and took an
elevator down to the main corridor. "Well, you've seen it, Miss Newton," Stevens said regretfully, as he
led her toward the captain's office. "The lower half is full of heavy
stuff--accumulators, machinery, driving projectors, and such junk, so
that the center of gravity is below the center of action of the driving
projectors. That makes stable flight possible. It's all more or less
like what we've just seen, and I don't suppose you want to miss the
dance--anyway, a lot of people want to dance with you." "Wouldn't you just as soon show me through the lower half as dance?" "Rather, lots!" "So would I. I can dance any time, and I want to see everything. Let's go!" Down they went, past battery after battery of accumulators; climbing
over and around the ever-increasing number of huge steel girders and
bracers; through mazes of heavily insulated wiring and conduits; past
mass after mass of automatic machinery which Stevens explained to his
eager listener. They inspected one of the great driving projectors,
which, built rigidly parallel to the axis of the ship and held immovably
in place by enormous trusses of steel, revealed neither to the eye nor
to the ear any sign of the terrific force it was exerting. Still lower
they went, until the girl had been shown everything, even down to the
bottom ultra-lights and stern braces. "Tired?" Stevens asked, as the inspection was completed. "Not very. It's been quite a climb, but I've had a wonderful time." "So have I," he declared, positively. "I know what--we'll crawl up into
one of these stern lifeboats and make us a cup of coffee before we climb
back. With me?" "'Way ahead of you!" Nadia accepted the invitation enthusiastically,
and they made their way to the nearest of the miniature space-cruisers. Here, although no emergency had been encountered in all the four years
of the vessel's life, they found everything in readiness, and the two
soon had prepared and eaten a hearty luncheon. "Well, I can't think of any more excuses for monopolizing you, Miss
Newton, so I suppose I'll have to take you back. Believe me, I've
enjoyed this more than you can realize--I've...."

He broke off and listened, every nerve taut. "What was that?" he
exclaimed. "What was what? I didn't hear anything?" "Something screwy somewhere! I felt a vibration, and anything that'd
make this mountain of steel even quiver must have given us one
gosh-awful nudge. There's another!" The girl, painfully tense, felt only a barely perceptible tremor, but
the computer, knowing far better than she the inconceivable strength and
mass of that enormous structure of solidly braced hardened steel, sprang
into action. Leaping to the small dirigible look-out plate, he turned on
the power and swung it upward. *       *       *       *       *

"Great suffering snakes!" he ejaculated, then stood mute, for the
plate revealed a terrible sight. The entire nose of the gigantic craft
had been sheared off in two immense slices as though clipped off by a
gigantic sword, and even as they stared, fascinated, at the sight, the
severed slices were drifting slowly away. Swinging the view along the
plane of cleavage, Stevens made out a relatively tiny ball of metal,
only fifty feet or so in diameter, at a distance of perhaps a mile. From this ball there shot a blinding plane of light, and the _Arcturus_
fell apart at the midsection, the lower half separating clean from
the upper portion, which held the passengers. Leaving the upper half
intact, the attacker began slicing the lower, driving half into thin,
disk-shaped sections. As that incandescent plane of destruction made
its first flashing cut through the body of the _Arcturus_, accompanied
by an additional pyrotechnic display of severed and short-circuited
high-tension leads, Stevens and Nadia suddenly found themselves floating
weightless in the air of the room. Still gripping the controls of the
look-out plate, Stevens caught the white-faced girl with one hand, drew
her down beside him, and held her motionless while his keen mind flashed
over all the possibilities of the situation and planned his course
of action. "They're apparently slicing us pretty evenly, and by the looks of
things, one cut is coming right about here," he explained rapidly, as
he found a flashlight and drew his companion through the door and along
a narrow passage. Soon he opened another door and led her into a tiny
compartment so low that they could not stand upright--a mere cubicle of
steel. Carefully closing the door, he fingered dials upon each of the
walls of the cell, then folded himself up into a comfortable position,
instructed Nadia to do the same, and snapped off the light. "Please leave it on," the shaken girl asked. "It's so ghastly!" "We'd better save it, Nadia," he advised, pressing her arm reassuringly,
"it's the only light we've got, and we may need it worse later on--its
life is limited, you know." "Later on? Do you think we'll need anything--later on?" "Sure! Of course they may get us, Nadia, but this little tertiary
air-break is a mighty small target for them to hit. And if they miss us,
as I think they will, there's a larger room opening off each wall of
this one--at least one of which will certainly be left intact. From any
one of those rooms we can reach a life-boat. Of course, it's a little
too much to expect that any one of the life-boats will be left whole,
but they're bulkheaded, too, you know, so that we can be sure of finding
something able to navigate--providing we can make our get-away. Believe
me, ace, I'm sure glad we're aboard the old _Arcturus_ right now, with
all her safety-devices, instead of on one of the modern liners. We'd be
sunk right." "I felt sunk enough for a minute--I'm feeling better now, though, since
you are taking it so calmly." "Sure--why not? A man's not dead until his heart stops beating, you
know--our turn'll come next, when they let up a little." "But suppose they change the width of their slices, and hit this cubby,
small as it is?" "It'd be just too bad," he shrugged. "In that case, we'd never know
what hit us, so it's no good worrying about it. But say, we might do
something at that, if they didn't hit us square. I can move fairly fast,
and might be able to get a door open before the loss of pressure seals
it. We'll light the flash ... here, you hold it, so that I can have both
hands free. Put both arms around me, just under the arms, and stick to
me like a porous plaster, because if I have to move at all, I'll have
to jump like chain lightning. Shine the beam right over there, so it'll
reflect and light up all the dials at once. There ... hold on tight! Here they come!" As he spoke, a jarring shudder shook one side of their hiding-place,
then, a moment later, the phenomenon was repeated, but with much less
force, upon the other side. Stevens sighed with relief, took the light,
and extinguished it. "Missed us clean!" he exulted. "Now, if they don't find us, we're all
set." "How can they possibly find us? I seem to be always worried about the
wrong things, but I should think that their finding us would be the
least of our troubles." "Don't judge their vision system by ours--they've got everything,
apparently. However, their apparatus may not be delicate enough to spot
us in a space this small when their projectors flash through it, as they
probably will. Then, too, there's a couple of other big items in our
favor--nobody else is in the entire lower half, since all this machinery
down here is either automatic or else controlled from up above, so they
won't be expecting to see anybody when they get down this far; and we
aren't at all conspicuous. We're both dressed in gray--your clothes in
particular are almost exactly the color of this armor-plate--so
altogether we stand a good chance of being missed." "What shall we do now?" "Nothing whatever--wish we could sleep for a couple of hours, but of
course there's no hope of that. Stretch out here, like that--you can't
rest folded up like an accordion--and I'll lie down diagonally across
the room. There's just room for me that way. That's one advantage of
weightlessness--you can lie down standing on your head, and go to sleep
and like it. But I forgot--you've never been weightless before, have
you? Does it make you sick?" "Not so much, now, except that I feel awfully weird inside. I was
horribly dizzy and nauseated at first, but it's going away." *       *       *       *       *

"That's good--it makes lots of people pretty sick. In fact, some folks
get awfully sick and can't seem to get used to it at all. It's the
canals in the inner ear that do most of it, you know. However, if you're
as well as that already, you'll be a regular spacehound in half an hour. I've been weightless for weeks at a stretch, out in the _Sirius_, and
now I've got so I really like it. Here, we'd better keep in touch." He found her hand and tucked it under his arm. "Stabilize our positions
more, besides keeping us from getting too lonesome, here in the dark,"
he concluded, in a matter-of-fact voice. "Thanks for saying 'us'--but you would, wouldn't you?" and a wave of
admiration went through her for the real and chivalrous manhood of the
man with whom she had been forced by circumstances to cast her lot. "How long must we stay here?" "As long as the air lasts, and I'd like to stay here longer than that. We don't want to move around any more than we absolutely have to until
their rays are off of us, and we have no way of knowing how long that
will be. Also, we'd better keep still. I don't know what kind of an
audio system they've got, but there's no use taking unnecessary
chances." "All x--I'm an oyster's little sister," and for many minutes the
two remained motionless and silent. Now and then Nadia twitched and
started at some vague real or imaginary sound--now and then her fingers
tightened upon his biceps--and he pressed her hand with his great arm in
reassurance and understanding. Once a wall of their cell resounded under
the impact of a fierce blow and Stevens instantly threw his arm around
the girl, twisting himself between her and the threatened wall, ready
for any emergency. But nothing more happened; the door remained closed,
the cell stayed bottle-tight, and time wore slowly on. All too soon the
unmistakable symptoms of breathing an unfit atmosphere made themselves
apparent and Stevens, after testing each of the doors, drew the girl
into a larger room, where they breathed deeply of the fresh, cool air. "How did you know that this room was whole?" asked Nadia. "We might have
stepped out into space, mightn't we?" "No; if this room had lost its tightness, the door wouldn't have opened. They won't open if there's a difference of one kilogram pressure on the
two sides. That's how I knew that the room we were in at first was cut
in two--the door into that air-break wouldn't move." "What comes next?" "I don't know exactly what to do--we'd better hold a little council of
war. They may have gone..." Stevens broke off as the structure began
to move, and they settled down upon what had been one of the side-walls. Greater and greater became the acceleration, until their apparent weight
was almost as much as it would have been upon the Earth, at which point
it became constant. "... but they haven't," he continued the interrupted
sentence. "This seems to be a capture and seizure, as well as an attack,
so we'll have to take the risk of looking at them. Besides, it's getting
cold in here. One or two of the adjoining cells have apparently been
ruptured and we're radiating our heat out into space, so we'll have to
get into a life-boat or freeze. I'll go pick out the best one. Wonder
if I'd better take you with me, or hide you and come back after you?" "Don't worry about that--I'm coming with you," Nadia declared, positively. "Just as well, probably," he assented, and they set out. A thorough
exploration of all the tight connecting cells revealed that not a
lifeboat within their reach remained intact, but that habitable and
navigable portions of three such craft were available. Selecting the
most completely equipped of these, they took up their residence therein
by entering it and closing the massive insulating door. Stevens
disconnected all the lights save one, and so shielded that one before
turning it on that it merely lightened the utter darkness into a
semi-permeable gloom. He then stepped up to the lookout plate, and with
his hand upon the control, pondered long the possible consequences of
what he wished to do. "What harm would it do to take just a little peek?" "I don't know--that's the dickens of it. Maybe none, and then again,
maybe a lot. You see, we don't know who or what we are up against. The
only thing we know is that they've got us beat a hundred ways, and we've
got to act accordingly. We've got to chance it sometime, though, if we
can ever get away, so we might as well do it now. I'll put it on very
short range first, and see what we can see. By the small number of cells
we've got here I'm afraid they've split us up lengthwise, too--so that
instead of having a whole slice of the old watermelon to live in, we've
got only about a sixth of one--shaped about like a piece of restaurant
pie. One thing I can do, though. I'll turn on the communicator receiver
and put it on full coverage--maybe we can hear something useful." Putting a little power upon the visiray plate, he moved the point of
projection a short distance from their hiding-place, so that the plate
showed a view of the wreckage. The upper half of the vessel was still
intact, the lower half a jumble of sharply-cut fragments. From each of
the larger pieces a brilliant ray of tangible force stretched outward. Suddenly their receiver sounded behind them, as the high-powered
transmitter in the telegraph room tried to notify headquarters of
their plight. "_Arcturus_ attacked and cut up being taken tow...."

Rapidly as the message was uttered the transmitter died with a rattle
in the middle of a word, and Nadia looked at Stevens with foreboding in
her eyes. "They've got something, that's one thing sure, to be able to neutralize
our communicator beams that way," he admitted. "Not so good--we'll have
to play this close to our vests, girl!" "Are you just trying to cheer me up, or do you really think we have a
chance?" she demanded. "I want to know just where we stand." "I'm coming clean with you, no kidding. If we can get away, we'll be all
x, because I'll bet a farm that by this time Brandon's got everything
those birds have, and maybe more. They beat us to it, that's all. I'm
kind of afraid, though, that getting away isn't going to be quite as
simple as shooting fish down a well." *       *       *       *       *

Far ahead of them a port opened, a lifeboat shot out at its full power,
and again their receiver tried to burst into sound, but it was a vain
attempt. The sound died before one complete word could be uttered, and
the lifeboat, its power completely neutralized by the rays of the tiny
craft of the enemy, floated gently back toward the mass of its parent
and accompanied it in its headlong flight. Several more lifeboats made
the attempt, as the courageous officers of the _Arcturus_, some of
whom had apparently succeeded in eluding the vigilance of the captors,
launched the little shells from various ports; but as each boat issued,
its power was neutralized and it found itself dragged helplessly along
in the grip of one of those mysterious, brilliant rays of force. At
least one hidden officer must have been watching the fruitless efforts,
for the next lifeboat to issue made no attempt, either to talk or to
flee, but from it there flamed out into space a concentrated beam of
destruction--the terrible ray of annihilation, against which no known
substance could endure for a moment; the ray which had definitely
outlawed war. But even that frightful weapon was useless--it spent
its force harmlessly upon an impalpable, invisible barrier, a hundred
yards from its source, and the bold lifeboat disappeared in one blinding
explosion of incandescence as the captor showed its real power in
retaliation. Stevens, jaw hard-set, leaped from the screen, then brought
himself up so quickly that he skated across the smooth steel floor. Shutting off the lookout plate, he led the half-fainting girl across
the room to a comfortable seat and sat down beside her--raging, but
thoughtful. Nadia soon recovered. "Why are you acting so contrary to your nature--is it because of _me_?" she demanded. "A dozen times I've seen you start to do something and
then change your mind. I _will not_ be a load on you nor hinder you in
anything you want to do." "I told your father I'd look after you, and I'm going to do it," he
replied, indirectly. "I would do it anyway, of course--even if you are
ten or twelve years older than I thought you were." "Yes, Dad never has realized that I'm more than eight years old. I
see--you were going out there and be slaughtered?" He flushed, but made
no reply. "In that case I'm glad I'm here--that would have been silly. I think we'd better hold that council of war you mentioned a while ago,
don't you?" "I need a smoke--do you indulge?" "No thanks. I tried it a few times at school, but never liked it." He searched his pockets, bringing to light an unopened package and a
tattered remnant which proved to contain one dilapidated cigarette. He studied it thoughtfully. "I'll smoke this wreck," he decided, "while
it's still smokable. We'll save the rest of them--I'm afraid it'll be
a long time between smokes. Well, let's confer!" "This will have to be a one-sided conference. I don't imagine that any
of my ideas will prove particularly helpful. You talk and I'll listen. "You can't tell what ideas may be useful--chip in any time you feel the
urge. Here's the dope, as I see it. They're highly intelligent creatures
and are in all probability neither Martians nor Venerians. If any of
them had any such stuff as that, some of us would have known about it
and, besides, I don't believe they would have used it in just that way. Mercury is not habitable, at least for organic beings; and we have never
seen any sign of any other kind of inhabitants who could work with
metals and rays. They're probably from Jupiter, although possibly from
further away. I say Jupiter, because I would think, judging from the
small size of the ship, that it may still be in the experimental stage,
so that they probably didn't come from any further away than Jupiter. Then, too, if they were very numerous, somebody would have sighted one
before. I'd give my left leg and four fingers for one good look at the
inside of that ship." "Why didn't you take it, then? You never even looked toward it, after
that one first glimpse." "I'll say I didn't--the reason being that they may have automatic
detectors, and as I have suggested before, our system of vision is so
crude that its use could be detected with a clothesline or a basket
full of scrap iron. But to resume: Their aim is to capture, not destroy,
since they haven't killed anybody except the one crew that attacked
them. Apparently they want to study us or something. However, they don't
intend that any of us shall get away, nor even send out a word of what
has happened to us. Therefore it looks as though our best bet is to hide
now, and try to sneak away on them after a while--direct methods won't
work. Right?" "You sound lucid. Is there any possibility of getting back, though, if
we got anywhere near Jupiter? It's so far away!" "It's a long stretch from Jupiter to any of the planets where we have
power-plants, all right--particularly now, when Mars and Tellus are
subtending an angle of something more than ninety degrees at the sun,
and Venus is between the two, while Jupiter is clear across the sun from
all three of them. Even when Jupiter is in mean opposition to Mars, it
is still some five hundred and fifty million kilometers away, so you
can form some idea as to how far it is from our nearest planet now. No, if we expect to get back under our own power, we've got to break away
pretty quick--these lifeboats have very little accumulator capacity, and
the receptors are useless above about three hundred million
kilometers...."

"But it'll take us a long time to go that far, won't it?" "Not very. Our own ships, using only the acceleration of gravity, and
both plus and minus at that, make the better than four hundred million
kilometers of the long route to Mars in five days. These birds are using
almost that much acceleration, and I don't see how they do it. They must
have a tractor ray. Brandon claimed that such a thing was theoretically
possible, but Westfall and I couldn't see it. We ragged him about it a
lot--and he was right. I thought, of course, they'd drift with us, but
they are using power steadily. They've got _some_ system!" "Suppose they could be using intra-atomic energy? We were taught that it
was impossible, but you've shattered a lot of my knowledge today." "I wouldn't want to say definitely that it is absolutely impossible,
but the deeper we go into that line, the more unlikely intra-atomic
energy power-plants become. No, they've got a real power-transmission
system--one that can hold a tight beam together a lot farther than
anything we have been able to develop, that's all. Well, we've given
them quite a lot of time to get over any suspicion of us, let's see
if we can sneak away from them." *       *       *       *       *

By short and infrequent applications of power to the dirigible
projectors of the life-boat, Stevens slowly shifted the position of
the fragment which bore their craft until it was well clear of the
other components of the mass of wreckage. He then exerted a very small
retarding force, so that their bit would lag behind the procession, as
though it had accidently been separated. But the crew of the captor was
alert, and no sooner did a clear space show itself between them and the
mass than a ray picked them up and herded them back into place. Stevens
then nudged other pieces so that they fell out, only to see them also
rounded up. Hour after hour he kept trying--doing nothing sufficiently
energetic to create any suspicion, but attempting everything he could
think of that offered any chance of escape from the clutches of their
captors. Immovable at the plate, his hands upon the controls, he
performed every insidious maneuver his agile brain could devise, but
he could not succeed in separating their vehicle from its fellows. Finally, after a last attempt, which was foiled as easily as were its
predecessors, he shut off his controls and turned to his companion
with a grin. "I didn't think I could get away with it--they're keen, that gang--but
I had to keep at it as long as it would have done us any good." "Wouldn't it do us any good now?" "Not a bit--we're going so fast that we couldn't stop--we're out of even
radio range of our closest power-plant. We'll have to put off any more
attempts until they slow us down. They're fairly close to at least one
of the moons of Jupiter, we'll have our best chance--so good, in fact,
that I really think we can make it." "But what good would that do us, if we couldn't get back?" Dire
foreboding showed in her glorious eyes. "Lots of things not tried yet, girl, and we'll try them all. First, we
get away. Second, we try to get in touch with Norman Brandon...."

"How? No known radio will carry half that far." "No, but I think that a radio as yet unknown may be able to--and there
is a bare possibility that I'll be able to communicate." "Oh wonderful--that lifts a frightful load off my mind," she breathed. "But just a minute--I said I'd come clean with you, and I will. The odds
are all against us, no matter what we do. If that unknown radio won't
work--and it probably won't--there are several other things we can try,
but they're all pretty slim chances. Even if we get away, it'll probably
be about the same thing as though you were to be marooned on a desert
island without any tools, and with your rescue depending upon your
ability to build a high-powered radio station with which to call to
a mainland for help. However, if we don't try to get away, our only
alternative is letting them know we're here, and joining our friends
in captivity." "And then what?" "You know as much as I do. Imprisonment and restraint, certain; death,
possible; return to Earth, almost certainly impossible--life as guests,
highly improbable." "I'm with you, Steve, all the way." "Well, it's time to spring off--we've both been awake better than fifty
hours. Personally, I'm all in, and you're so near dead that you're a
physical wreck. We'll get us a bite of supper and turn in." An appetizing supper was prepared from the abundant stores and each
ate a heartier meal than either would have believed possible. Stevens
considered his unopened package of cigarettes, then regretfully put it
back into his pocket still unopened and turned to Nadia. "Well, little fellow, it's time to shove off, and then some. You might
as well sleep here, and I'll go in there. If anything scares you, yell. Good-night, old trapper!" "Wait a minute, Steve." Nadia flushed, and her brown eyes and black
eyebrows, in comparison with her golden-blond hair, lent her face a
quizzical, elfin expression that far belied her feelings as she stared
straight into his eyes. "I've never even been away from the Earth
before, and with all this happening I'm simply scared to death. I've
been trying to hide it, but I couldn't stand it alone, and we're going
to be together too long and too close for senseless conventions to
affect us. There's two bunks over there--why don't you sleep in one
of them?" He returned her steadfast gaze for a moment in silence. "All x with me, Nadia," he answered, keeping out of his voice all
signs of the tenderness he felt for her, and of his very real admiration
for her straightforward conduct in a terrifying situation. "You trust
me, then?" "_Trust_ you! Don't be silly--I know you! I know you, and I know Brandon
and Westfall--I know what you've done, and exactly the kind of men you
are. _Trust_ you!" "Thanks, old golf-shootist," and promises were made and received
in a clasp from which Nadia's right hand, strong as it was, emerged
slightly damaged. "By the way, what is your first name, fellow-traveller?" she asked in
lighter vein. "Nobody, not even Dad or Breckie, ever seems to call you
anything but 'Steve' when they talk about you." She was amazed at the
effect of her innocent question, for Stevens flushed to his hair and
spluttered. "It's _Percy_!" He finally, snorted. "Percival Van Schravendyck Stevens. Wouldn't that tear it?" "Why, I think Percival's a real nice name!" "Silence!" he hissed in burlesque style. "Young woman, I have revealed
to you a secret known to but few living creatures. On your life, keep
it inviolate!" "Oh, very well, if you insist. Good-night--Steve!" and she gave him a
radiant and honest smile: the first smile he had seen since the moment
of the attack. CHAPTER III

Castaways Upon Ganymede


Upon awakening, the man's first care was to instruct the girl in the
operation of the projectors, so that she could keep the heavily-armored
edge of their small section, which she had promptly christened "The
Forlorn Hope," between them and the grinding, clashing mass of wreckage,
and thus, if it should become necessary, protect the relatively frail
inner portions of their craft from damage. "Keep an eye on things for a while, Nadia," he instructed, as soon as
she could handle the controls, "and don't use any more power than is
absolutely necessary. We'll need it all, and besides, they can probably
detect anything we can use. There's probably enough leakage from the
ruptured accumulator cells to mask quite a little emission, but don't
use much. I'm going to see what I can do about making this whole wedge
navigable." "Why not just launch what's left of this lifeboat? It's space-worthy,
isn't it?" "Yes, but it's too small. Two or three of the big dirigible projectors
of the lower band are on the rim of this piece-of-pie-shaped section
we're riding, I think. If so, and if enough batteries of accumulators
are left intact to give them anywhere nearly full power, we can get an
acceleration that will make a lifeboat look sick. Those main dirigibles,
you know, are able to swing the whole mass of the _Arcturus_, and what
they'll do to this one chunk of it--we've got only a few thousand tons
of mass in this piece--will be something pretty. Also, having the metal
may save us months of time in mining it." He found the projectors, repaired or cut out the damaged accumulator
cells, and reconnected them through the controls of the lifeboat. He moved into the "engine-room" the airtanks, stores, and equipment
from all the other fragments which, by means of a space-suit, he could
reach without too much difficulty. From the battery rooms of those
fragments--open shelves, after being sliced open by the shearing ray--he
helped himself to banks of accumulator cells from the enormous driving
batteries of the ill-fated _Arcturus_, bolting them down and connecting
them solidly until almost every compartment of their craft was one mass
of stored-up energy. Days fled like hours, so furiously busy were they in preparing their
peculiar vessel for a cruise of indefinite duration. Stevens cut himself
short on sleep and snatched his meals in passing; and Nadia, when not
busy at her own tasks of observing, housekeeping, and doing what little
piloting was required, was rapidly learning to wield most effectively
the spanner and pliers of the mechanic and electrician. "I'm afraid our time is getting short, Steve," she announced, after
making an observation. "It looks as though we're getting wherever it
is we're going." "Well, I've got only two more jobs to do, but they're the hardest of the
lot. It is Jupiter, or can you tell yet?" "Jupiter or one of its satellites, I think, from the point where they
reversed their power. Here's the observation you told me to take." "Looks like Jupiter," he agreed, after he had rapidly checked her
figures. "We'll pass very close to one of those two satellites--probably
Ganymede--which is fine for our scheme. All four of the major satellites
have water and atmosphere, but Ganymede, being largest, is best for our
purposes. We've got a couple of days yet--just about time to finish up. Let's get going--you know what to do." "Steve, I'm afraid of it. It's too dangerous--isn't there some other
way?" "None that I can see. The close watch they're keeping on every bit of
this junk makes it our only chance for a get-away. I'm pretty sure I
can do it--but if I should happen to get nipped, just use enough power
to let them know you're here, and you won't be any worse off than if
I hadn't tried to pull off this stunt." He donned a space-suit, filled a looped belt with tools, picked up a
portable power-drill, and stepped into the tiny air-lock. Nadia deftly
guided their segment against one of the larger fragments and held it
there with a gentle, steady pressure, while Stevens, a light cable
paying out behind him, clambered carefully over the wreckage, brought
his drill into play, and disappeared inside the huge wedge. In less than
an hour he returned without mishap and reported to the glowing girl. "Just like shooting fish down a well! Most of the accumulator cells were
tight, and installing the relays wasn't a bad job at all. Believe me,
girl, there'll be junk filling all the space between here and Saturn
when we touch them off!" "Wonderful, Steve!" Nadia exclaimed. "It won't be so bad seeing you go
into the others, now that you have this one all rigged up." *       *       *       *       *

Around and around the mass of wreckage they crept, and in each of the
larger sections Stevens connected up the enormous fixed or dirigible
projectors to whatever accumulator cells were available through
sensitive relays, all of which he could close by means of one radio
impulse. The long and dangerous task done, he stood at the lookout
plate, studying the huge disk which had been the upper portion of the
lower half of the _Arcturus_ and frowning in thought. Nadia reached over
his shoulder and switched off the plate. "Nix on that second job, big fellow!" she declared. "They aren't really
necessary, and you're altogether too apt to be killed trying to get
them. It's too ghastly--I won't stand for your trying it, so that
ends it." "We ought to have them, really," he protested. "With those special
tools, cutting torches, and all the stuff, we'd be sitting pretty. We'll lose weeks of time by not having them." "We'll just have to lose it, then. You can't get 'em, any more than
a baby can get the moon, so stop crying about it," she went over the
familiar argument for the twentieth time. "That stuff up there is all
grinding together like cakes of ice in a floe; the particular section
you want is in plain sight of whoever is on watch; and those tools and
things are altogether too heavy to handle. You're a husky brute, I know,
but even you couldn't begin to handle them, even if you had good going. I couldn't help you very much, even if you'd let me try; and the fact
that you so positively refuse to let me come along shows how dangerous
you know the attempt is bound to be. You'd probably never even get up
there alive, to say nothing of getting back here. No, Steve, that's out
like a light." "I sure wish they'd left us weightless for a while, sometime, if only
for an hour or two," he mourned. "But they didn't!" she retorted, practically. "So we're just out of luck
to that extent. Our time is about up, too. It's time you worked us back
to the tail end of this procession--or rather, the head end, since we're
traveling 'down' now." Stevens took the controls and slowly worked along the outer edge of the
mass, down toward its extremity. Nadia put one hand upon his shoulder
and he glanced around. "Thanks, Steve. We have a perfectly wonderful chance as it is, and we've
gone so far with our scheme together that it would be a crying shame not
to be able to go through with it. I'd hate like sin to have to surrender
to them now, and that's all I could do if anything should become of you. Besides..." her voice died away into silence. "Sure, you're right," he hastily replied, dodging the implication of
that unfinished sentence. "I couldn't figure out anything that looked
particularly feasible anyway--that's why I didn't try it. We'll pass
it up." Soon they arrived at their objective and maintained a position well in
the van, but not sufficiently far ahead of the rest to call forth a
restraining ray from their captors. Already strongly affected by the
gravitational pull of the mass of the satellite, many of the smaller
portions of the wreck, not directly held by the tractors, began to
separate from the main mass. As each bit left its place another beam
leaped out, until it became apparent that no more were available, and
Stevens strapped the girl and himself down before two lookout plates. "Now for it, Nadia!" he exclaimed, and simultaneously threw on the power
of his own projectors and sent out the radio impulse which closed the
relays he had so carefully set. They were thrown against the restraining
straps savagely and held there by an enormous weight as the gigantic
dirigible projectors shot their fragment of the wreck away from the
comparatively slight force which had been acting upon it, but they
braced themselves and strained their muscles in order to watch what
was happening. As the relays in the various fragments closed, the
massed power of the accumulators was shorted dead across the converters
and projectors instead of being fed into them gradually through the
controls of the pilot, with a result comparable to that of the explosion
of an ammunition dump. Most of the masses, whose projectors were fed
by comparatively few accumulator cells, darted away entirely with a
stupendous acceleration. A few of them, however, received the unimpeded
flow of complete batteries. Those projectors tore loose from even
their massive supports and crashed through anything opposing them like
a huge, armor-piercing projectile. It was a spectacle to stagger the
imagination, and Stevens grinned as he turned to the girl, who was
staring in wide-eyed amazement. "Well, ace, I think they're busy enough now so that it'll be safe
to take that long-wanted look at their controls," and he flashed
the twin beams of his lookout light out beyond the upper half of the
_Arcturus_--only to see them stop abruptly in mid-space. Even the
extremely short carrier-wave of Roeser's Rays could not go through the
invisible barrier thrown out by the tiny, but powerful globe of space. "No penetration?" Nadia asked. "Flattened them out cold. 'However,' as the fox once remarked about the
grapes, 'I'll bet they're sour, anyway.' We'll have some stuff of our
own, one of these days. I sure hope the fireworks we started back there
keep those birds amused until we get out of sight, because if I use much
more power on these projectors we may not have juice enough left to stop
with." "You're using enough now to suit me--I'm so heavy I can hardly lift
a finger!" "You'd better lift 'em! You must watch what's going on back there while
I navigate around this moon." "All x, chief.... They've got their hands full, apparently. Those rays
are shooting around all over the sky. It looks as though they were
trying to capture four or five things at once with each one." "Good! Tell me when the moon cuts them off." *       *       *       *       *

At the awful acceleration they were using, which constantly increased
the terrific velocity with which they had been traveling when they made
good their escape, it was not long until they had placed the satellite
between them and the enemy; then Stevens cut down and reversed his
power. Such was their speed, however, that a long detour was necessary
in order to reduce it to a safe landing rate. As soon as this could be
done, Stevens headed for the morning zone and dropped the "Hope" rapidly
toward the surface of that new, strange world. Details could not be
distinguished at first because of an all-enshrouding layer of cloud, but
the rising sun dispelled the mist, and when they had descended to within
a few thousand feet of the surface, their vision was unobstructed. Immediately below them the terrain was mountainous and heavily wooded;
while far to the east the rays of a small, pale sun glinted upon a vast
body of water. No signs of habitation were visible as far as the eye
could reach. "Now to pick out a location for our power-plant. We must have a
waterfall for power, a good place to hide our ship from observation, and
I'd like to have a little seam of coal. We can use wood if we have to,
but I think we can find some coal. This is all sedimentary rock--it
looks a lot like the country along the North Fork of the Flathead, in
Montana. There are a lot of coal outcrops, usually, in such topography
as this is." "We want to hide in a hurry, though, don't we?" "Not particularly, I think. If they had missed us at all, they would
have had us long ago, and with all the damage we did with those
projectors they won't be surprised at one piece being missing--I imagine
they lost a good many." "But they'll know that somebody caused all that disturbance. Won't they
hunt for us?" "Maybe, and maybe not--no telling what they'll do. However, by the time
they can land and get checked up and ready to hunt for us, we'll be a
mighty small needle, well hidden in a good big haystack." For several hours they roamed over the mountainous region at high
velocity, seeking the best possible location, and finally they found
one that was almost ideal--a narrow canyon overhung with heavy trees,
opening into a wide, deep gorge upon a level with its floor. A mighty
waterfall cascaded into the gorge just above the canyon, and here
and there could be seen black outcrops which Stevens, after a close
scrutiny, declared to be coal. He deftly guided their cumbersome wedge
of steel into the retreat, allowed it to settle gently to the ground,
and shut off the power. "Well, little fellow-conspirator against the peace and dignity of the
Jovians, I don't know just where we are, but wherever it is, we're here. We got away clean, and as long as we don't use any high-tension stuff or
anything else that they can trace, I think we're as safe as money in a
bank." "I suppose that I ought to be scared to death, Steve, but I'm not--I'm
just too thrilled for words," Nadia answered, and the eager sparkle in
her eyes bore out her words. "Can we go out now? How about air? Shall we
wear suits or go out as we are? Have you got a weapon of any kind? Hurry
up--let's do something!" "Pipe down, ace! Remember that we don't know any more about anything
around here than a pig does about Sunday, and conduct yourself
accordingly. Take it easy. I'm surprised at the gravity here. This is
certainly Ganymede, and it has a diameter of only about fifty seven
hundred kilometers. If I remember correctly, Damoiseau estimated its
mass at about three one-hundredths that of the Earth, which would make
its surface gravity about one-sixth. However, it is actually almost a
half, as you see by this spring-balance here. Therefore it is quite a
little more massive than has been...."

"What of it? Let's go places and do things!" "Calm yourself, Ginger, you've got lots of time--we'll be here for quite
a while, I'm afraid. We can't go out until we analyze the air--we're
sure lucky there's as much as there is. I'm not exactly the world's
foremost chemist, but fortunately an air-analysis isn't much of a job
with the apparatus we carry." While Nadia controlled her impatience as best she could, Stevens
manipulated the bulbs and pipettes of the gas apparatus. "Pressure, fifty-two centimeters--more than I dared hope for--and
analysis all x, I believe. Oxygen concentration a little high, but
not much." "We won't have to wear the space-suits, then?" "Not unless I missed something in the analysis. The pressure corresponds
to our own at a height of about three thousand meters, which we can get
used to without too much trouble. Good thing, too. I brought along all
the air I could get hold of, but as I told you back there, if we had to
depend on it altogether, we might be out of luck. I'm going to pump some
of our air back into a cylinder to equalize our pressure--don't want
to waste any of it until we're sure the outside air suits us without
treatment." *       *       *       *       *

When the pressure inside had been gradually reduced to that outside and
they had become accustomed to breathing the rarefied medium, Stevens
opened the airlock and the outside doors, and for some time cautiously
sniffed the atmosphere of the satellite. He could detect nothing harmful
or unusual in it--it was apparently the same as earthly air--and he
became jubilant. "All x, Nadia--luck is perched right on our banner. Freedom, air, water,
power, and coal! Now as you suggested, we'll go places and do things!" "Suppose it's safe?" Her first eagerness to explore their surroundings
had abated noticeably. "You aren't armed, are you?" "No, and I don't believe that there was a gun of any kind aboard the
_Arcturus_. That kind of thing went out quite a while ago, you know. We'll take a look, anyway--we've got to find out about that coal before
we decide to settle down here. Remember this half-gravity stuff, and
control your leg-muscles accordingly." Leaping lightly to the ground, they saw that the severed section of
fifty-inch armor, which was the rim of their conveyance, almost blocked
the entrance to the narrow canyon which they had selected for their
retreat. Upon one side that wall of steel actually touched the almost
perpendicular wall or rock; upon the other side there was left only a
narrow passage. They stepped through it, so that they could see the
waterfall and the gorge, and stopped silent. The sun, now fairly high,
was in no sense the familiar orb of day, but was a pale, insipid thing,
only one-fifth the diameter of the sun to which they were accustomed,
and which could almost be studied with the unshielded eye. From their
feet a grassy meadow a few hundred feet wide sloped gently down to the
river, from whose farther bank a precipice sprang upward for perhaps
a thousand feet--merging into towering hills whose rugged grandeur was
reminiscent of the topography of the moon. At their backs the wall of
the gorge was steep, but not precipitous, and was covered with shrubs
and trees--some of which leaned out over the little canyon, completely
screening it, and among whose branches birds could now and then be seen
flitting about. In that direction no mountains were visible, indicating
that upon their side of the river there was an upland plateau or bench. To their right the river, the gorge, and the strip of meadow extended
for a mile or more, then curved away and were lost to sight. To their
left, almost too close for comfort, was the stupendous cataract,
towering above them to a terror-inspiring height. Nadia studied it
with awe, which changed to puzzled wonder. "What's the matter with it, Steve? It looks like a picture in slow
motion, like the kind they take of your dives--or am I seeing things?" "No, it's really slow, compared to what we're used to. Remember that
one-half gravity stuff!" "Oh, that's right, but it certainly does look funny. It gives me the
creeps." "You'll get used to it pretty quick--just as you'll get used to all the
rest of the things having only half their earthly weight and falling
only half as fast as they ought to when you drop them. Well, I don't see
anything that looks dangerous yet--let's go up toward the falls a few
meters and prospect that outcrop." With a few brisk strokes of an improvised shovel he cleared the outcrop
of detritus and broke off several samples of the black substance, with
which they went back to the "Forlorn Hope." "It's real coal," Stevens announced after a series of tests. "I've seen
better, but on the other hand, there's lots worse. It'll make good gas,
and a kind of a coke. Not so hot, but it'll do. Now we'd better get
organized old partner, for a long campaign." "Go ahead and organize--I'm only the cheap help in this enterprise." "Cheap help! You're apt to be the life of the party. Can you make and
shoot a bow and arrow?" "I'll say I can--I've belonged to an archery club for five years." "What did I tell you? You're a life saver! Here's the dope--we've got
to save our own supplies as much as possible until we know exactly what
we're up against, and to do that, we've got to live off the country. I'll fake up something to knock over some of those birds and small game,
then we can make real bow-strings and feathered arrows and I'll forge
some steel arrow-heads while you're making yourself a real bow. We'd
better make me about a hundred-pound war bow, too...."

"A _hundred_!" interrupted Nadia. "That's a lot of bow, big boy--think
you can bend it?" "You'd be surprised," he grinned. "I'm not quite like Robin Hood--I've
been known to miss a finger-thick wand at a hundred paces--but I'm not
exactly a beginner." "Oh, of course--I should have known by your language that you're an
archer, otherwise you'd never have used such an old-fashioned word as
'pounds.' I shoot a thirty-five-pound bow ordinarily, but for game I
should have the heaviest one I can hold accurately--about a forty-five,
probably." "All x. And as soon as I can I'll make us a couple of suits of fairly
heavy steel armor, so that we'll have real protection if we should need
it. You see, we don't know what we are apt to run up against out here. Then, with that much done, it'll be up to you to provide, since I'll
have to work tooth and nail at the forges. You'll have to bring home the
bacon, do the cooking and so on, and see what you can find along the
line of edible roots, grains, fruits, and what-not. Sort of reverse the
Indian idea--you be the hunter and I'll keep the home fires burning. Can do?" "What it takes to do that, I've got," Nadia assured him, her eyes
sparkling. "Have you your job planned out as well and as fittingly as
you have mine?" "And then some. We've got just two methods of getting away from
here--one is to get in touch with Brandon, so that he'll come after us;
the other is to recharge our accumulators and try to make it under our
own power. Either course will need power and lots of it...."

"I never thought of going back in the 'Hope.' Suppose we could?" "About as doubtful as the radio--I think that I could build a pair of
matched-frequency auto-dirigible transmitter and receptor units, such as
are necessary for space-ships fed by stationary power-plants, but after
I got them built, they'd take us less than half way there. Then we'd
have only what power we can carry, and I hate even to think of what
probably would happen to us. We'd certainly have to drift for months
before we could get close enough to any of our plants to radio for help,
and we'd be taking awful chances. You see, we'd have to take a very
peculiar orbit, and if we should miss connections passing the inner
planets, what the sun would do to us at the closest point and where
what's left of us would go on the back-swing, would be just too bad! Besides, if we can get hold of the _Sirius_, they'll come loaded for
bear, and we may be able to do something about the rest of the folks
out here." *       *       *       *       *

"Oh!" breathed the girl. "Wouldn't it be wonderful if we could! I thought, of course, they'd all be...." her voice died away. "Not necessarily--there's always a chance. That's why I'm trying the
ultra-radio first. However, either course will take lots of power,
so the first thing I've got to do is to build a power plant. I'm
going to run a penstock up those falls, and put in a turbine, driving
a high-tension alternator. Then, while I'm trying to build the
ultra-radio, I'll be charging our accumulators, so that no time will
be lost in case the radio fails. If it does fail--and remember I'm not
counting on its working--of course I'll tackle the transmission and
receptor units before we start out to drift it." "You say it easy, Steve, but how can you build all those things, with
nothing to work with?" "It's going to be a real job--I'm not try to kid you into thinking it'll
be either easy or quick. Here's the way everything will go. Before I can
even lay the first length of the penstock, I've got to have the pipe--to
make which I've got to have flat steel--to get which I'll have to cut
some of the partitions out of this ship of ours--to do which I'll have
to have a cutting torch--to make which I'll have to forge nozzles out of
block metal and to run which I'll have to have gas--to get which I'll
have to mine coal and build a gas-plant--to do which...."

"Good heavens, Steve, are you going back to the Stone Age? I never
thought of half those things. Why, it's impossible!" "Not quite, guy. Things could be a lot worse--that's why I brought along
the whole 'Forlorn Hope,' instead of just the lifeboat. As it is, we've
got several thousand tons of spare steel and lots of copper. We've got
ordinary tools and a few light motors, blowers, and such stuff. That
gives me a great big start--I won't have to mine the ores and smelt the
metals, as would have been necessary otherwise. However, it'll be plenty
bad. I'll have to start out in a pretty crude fashion, and for some of
the stuff I'll need I'll have to make, not only the machine that makes
the part I want, but also the machine that makes the machine that
makes the machine that makes it--and so on, just how far down the line,
I haven't dared to think." "You must be a regular jack-of-all-trades, to think you can get away
with such a program as that?" "I am--nothing else but. You see, while most of my school training
was in advanced physics and mathematics, I worked my way through by
computing and designing, and I've done a lot of truck-horse labor of
various kinds besides. I can calculate and design almost anything, and
I can make a pretty good stab at translating a design into fabricated
material. I wouldn't wonder if Brandon's ultra-radio would stop me,
since nobody had even started to build one when I saw him last--but I
helped compute it, know the forces involved as well as he did at that
time, and it so happens that I know more about the design of coils and
fields of force than I do about anything else. So I may be able to work
it out eventually. 