



Produced by Greg Weeks, Karina Aleksandrova and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Transcriber's Notes:

  1. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
copyright on this publication was renewed. 2. Several misprints corrected. The complete list may be found
at the end of the file.] "Yes sir. Well, there are three men outside trying to kill me...."

"Quite right," Mr. Frendlyer said. "And today is Landing Day. You came
off the ship that landed today, and have been classified a peon.... I'm
happy to say that everything is in order. The Landing Day Hunt ends at
sundown. You can leave here with the knowledge that everything is
correct and that your rights have not been violated." "Leave here? After sundown, you mean." Mr. Frendlyer shook his head and smiled sadly. "I'm afraid not. According to the law you must leave here at once." "But they'll kill me!" "That's very true. Unfortunately it can't be helped. A victim by
definition is one who is to be killed.... We protect rights, not
victims." OMEGA: PRISON PLANET
             LIFE EXPECTANCY: THREE YEARS
                       MAXIMUM
                   MOST PEOPLE ARE
                  LUCKIER THAN THAT....




     Books by
     ROBERT SHECKLEY:

     CITIZEN IN SPACE
     IMMORTALITY, INC.
     MINDSWAP
     PILGRIMAGE TO EARTH
     THE 10TH VICTIM
     UNTOUCHED BY HUMAN HANDS
     DIMENSION OF MIRACLES
     THE JOURNEY OF JOENES
     THE STATUS CIVILIZATION/NOTIONS: UNLIMITED


       _From ACE Science Fiction_




                   THE STATUS
                  CIVILIZATION

                ROBERT SHECKLEY


                   ace books

  A Division of Charter Communications Inc.
          A GROSSET & DUNLAP COMPANY

            360 Park Avenue South
          New York, New York 10010




THE STATUS CIVILIZATION

Copyright (C) 1960 by Robert Sheckley

First appeared under the title _Omega in Amazing Science Fiction
Stories_, published by Ziff-Davis. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form
or by any means, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a
review, without permission in writing from the publisher. All characters in this book are fictitious. Any resemblance to actual
persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental. An ACE Book

_Cover art by David Bergen_

First Ace printing: November 1979

2468097531

Manufactured in the United States of America




CONTENTS

     THE STATUS CIVILIZATION    1




TO ANYA




THE STATUS CIVILIZATION




Chapter One


His return to consciousness was a slow and painful process. It was a
journey in which he traversed all time. He dreamed. He rose through
thick layers of sleep, out of the imaginary beginnings of all things. He
lifted a pseudopod from primordial ooze, and the pseudopod was _him_. He
became an amoeba which contained _his_ essence; then a fish marked with
his own peculiar individuality; then an ape unlike all other apes. And
finally, he became a man. What kind of man? Dimly he saw himself, faceless, a beamer gripped tight
on one hand, a corpse at his feet. _That_ kind of man. He awoke, rubbed his eyes, and waited for further memories to come. No memories came. Not even his name. He sat up hastily and willed memory to return. When it didn't, he looked
around, seeking in his surroundings some clue to his identity. He was sitting on a bed in a small gray room. There was a closed door
on one side. On the other, through a curtained alcove, he could see a
tiny lavatory. Light came into the room from some hidden source, perhaps
from the ceiling itself. The room had a bed and a single chair, and
nothing else. He held his chin in his hand and closed his eyes. He tried to catalogue
all his knowledge, and the implications of that knowledge. He knew that
he was a man, species Homo sapiens, an inhabitant of the planet Earth. He spoke a language which he knew was English. (Did that mean that there
were other languages?) He knew the commonplace names for things: room,
light, chair. He possessed in addition a limited amount of general
knowledge. He knew that there were many important things which he did
not know, which he once had known. _Something must have happened to me._

That something could have been worse. If it had gone a little further,
he might have been left a mindless creature without a language, unaware
of being human, of being a man, of being of Earth. A certain amount had
been left to him. But when he tried to think beyond the basic facts in his possession, he
came to a dark and horror-filled area. _Do Not Enter._ Exploration into
his own mind was as dangerous as a journey to--what? He couldn't find an
analogue, though he suspected that many existed. _I must have been sick._

That was the only reasonable explanation. He was a man with the
recollection of memories. He must at one time have had that priceless
wealth of recall which now he could only deduce from the limited
evidence at his disposal. At one time he must have had specific memories
of birds, trees, friends, family, status, a wife perhaps. Now he could
only theorize about them. Once he had been able to say, this is like,
or, that reminds me of. Now nothing reminded him of anything, and things
were only like themselves. He had lost his powers of contrast and
comparison. He could no longer analyze the present in terms of the
experienced past. _This must be a hospital._

Of course. He was being cared for in this place. Kindly doctors were
working to restore his memory, to replace his identity, to restore his
judgment apparatus, to tell him who and what he was. It was very good of
them; he felt tears of gratitude start in his eyes. He stood up and walked slowly around his small room. He went to the door
and found it locked. That locked door gave him a moment of panic which
he sternly controlled. Perhaps he had been violent. Well, he wouldn't be violent any more. They'd see. They would award him
all possible patient privileges. He would speak about that with the
doctor. He waited. After a long time, he heard footsteps coming down the
corridor outside his door. He sat on the edge of the cot and listened,
trying to control his excitement. The footsteps stopped beside his door. A panel slid open, and a face
peered in. "How are you feeling?" the man asked. He walked up to the panel, and saw that the man who questioned him was
dressed in a brown uniform. He had an object on his waist which could
be identified, after a moment, as a weapon. This man was undoubtedly a
guard. He had a blunt, unreadable face. "Could you tell me my name?" he asked the guard. "Call yourself 402," the guard said. "That's your cell number." He didn't like it. But 402 was better than nothing at all. He asked the
guard, "Have I been sick for long? Am I getting better?" "Yes," the guard said, in a voice that carried no conviction. "The
important thing is, stay quiet. Obey the rules. That's the best way." "Certainly," said 402. "But why can't I remember anything?" "Well, that's the way it goes," the guard said. He started to walk away. 402 called after him, "Wait! You can't just leave me like this, you have
to tell me something. What happened to me? Why am I in this hospital?" "Hospital?" the guard said. He turned toward 402 and grinned. "What gave
you the idea this was a hospital?" "I assumed it," 402 said. "You assumed wrong. This is a prison." 402 remembered his dream of the murdered man. Dream or memory? Desperately he called after the guard. "What was my offense? What did I
do?" "You'll find out," the guard said. "When?" "After we land," the guard said. "Now get ready for assembly." He walked away. 402 sat down on the bed and tried to think. He had
learned a few things. He was in a prison, and the prison was going to
land. What did that mean? Why did a prison have to land? And what was an
assembly? *       *       *       *       *

402 had only a confused idea of what happened next. An unmeasurable
amount of time passed. He was sitting on his bed, trying to piece
together facts about himself. He had an impression of bells ringing. And
then the door of his cell flew open. Why was that? What did it mean? 402 walked to the door and peered into the corridor. He was very
excited, but he didn't want to leave the security of his cell. He
waited, and the guard came up. "All right, now," the guard said, "No one's going to hurt you. Go
straight down the corridor." The guard pushed him gently. 402 walked down the corridor. He saw other
cell doors opening, other men coming into the corridor. It was a thin
stream at first; but as he continued walking, more and more men crowded
into the passageway. Most of them looked bewildered, and none of them
talked. The only words were from the guards:

"Move along now, keep on moving, straight ahead." They were headed into a large circular auditorium. Looking around, 402
saw that a balcony ran around the room, and armed guards were stationed
every few yards along it. Their presence seemed unnecessary; these cowed
and bewildered men weren't going to stage a revolt. Still, he supposed
the grim-faced guards had a symbolic value. They reminded the newly
awakened men of the most important fact of their lives: that they were
prisoners. After a few minutes, a man in a somber uniform stepped out on the
balcony. He held up his hand for attention, although the prisoners were
already watching him fixedly. Then, though he had no visible means of
amplification, his voice boomed hollowly through the auditorium. "This is an indoctrination talk," he said. "Listen carefully and try to
absorb what I am about to tell you. These facts will be very important
for your existence." The prisoners watched him. The speaker said, "All of you have, within
the last hour, awakened in your cells. You have discovered that you
cannot remember your former lives--not even your names. All you possess
is a meager store of generalized knowledge; enough to keep you in touch
with reality. "I will not add to your knowledge. All of you, back on Earth, were
vicious and depraved criminals. You were people of the worst sort, men
who had forfeited any right to consideration by the State. In a less
enlightened age, you would have been executed. In our age, you have been
deported." The speaker held out his hands to quiet the murmur that ran through the
auditorium. He said, "All of you are criminals. And all of you have one
thing in common: an inability to obey the basic obligatory rules of
human society. Those rules are necessary for civilization to function. By disobeying them, you have committed crimes against all mankind. Therefore mankind rejects you. You are grit in the machinery of
civilization, and you have been sent to a world where your own sort is
king. Here you can make your own rules, and die by them. Here is the
freedom you lusted for; the uncontained and self-destroying freedom of a
cancerous growth." The speaker wiped his forehead and glared earnestly at the prisoners. "But perhaps," he said, "a rehabilitation is possible for some of you. Omega, the planet to which we are going, is _your_ planet, a place ruled
entirely by prisoners. It is a world where you could begin again, with
no prejudices against you, with a clean record! Your past lives are
forgotten. Don't try to remember them. Such memories would serve only to
restimulate your criminal tendencies. Consider yourselves born afresh as
of the moment of awakening in your cells." The speaker's slow, measured words had a certain hypnotic quality. 402
listened, his eyes slightly unfocused and fixed upon the speaker's pale
forehead. "A new world," the speaker was saying. "You are reborn--but with the
necessary consciousness of sin. Without it, you would be unable to
combat the evil inherent in your personalities. Remember that. Remember
that there is no escape and no return. Guardships armed with the latest
beam weapons patrol the skies of Omega day and night. These ships are
designed to obliterate anything that rises more than five hundred feet
above the surface of the planet--an invincible barrier through which no
prisoner can ever pass. Accommodate yourselves to these facts. They
constitute the rules which must govern your lives. Think about what
I've said. And now stand by for landing." The speaker left the balcony. For a while, the prisoners simply stared
at the spot where he had been. Then, tentatively, a murmur of
conversation began. After a while it died away. There was nothing to
talk about. The prisoners, without memory of the past, had nothing upon
which to base a speculation of the future. Personalities could not be
exchanged, for those personalities were newly emerged and still
undefined. They sat in silence, uncommunicative men who had been too long in
solitary confinement. The guards on the balcony stood like statues,
remote and impersonal. And then the faintest tremor ran through the
floor of the auditorium. The tremor came again; then it changed into a definite vibration. 402
felt heavier, as though an invisible weight were pressing against his
head and shoulders. A loudspeaker voice called out, "Attention! The ship is now landing on
Omega. We will disembark shortly." *       *       *       *       *

The last vibration died away, and the floor beneath them gave a slight
lurch. The prisoners, still silent and dazed, were formed into a long
line and marched out of the auditorium. Flanked by guards, they went
down a corridor which stretched on interminably. From it, 402 began to
get some idea of the size of the ship. Far ahead, he could see a patch of sunlight which shone brightly against
the pale illumination of the corridor. His section of the long shuffling
line reached the sunlight, and 402 saw that it came from an open
hatchway through which the prisoners were passing. In his turn, 402 went through the hatchway, climbed down a long
stairway, and found himself on solid ground. He was standing in an open,
sunlit square. Guards were forming the disembarked prisoners into files;
on all sides, 402 could see a crowd of spectators watching. A loudspeaker voice boomed, "Answer when your number is called. Your
identity will now be revealed to you. Answer promptly when your number
is called." 402 felt weak and very tired. Not even his identity could interest him
now. All he wanted to do was lie down, to sleep, to have a chance to
think about his situation. He looked around and took casual note of the
huge starcraft behind him, of the guards, the spectators. Overhead, he
saw black dots moving against a blue sky. At first he thought they were
birds. Then, looking closer, he saw they were guardships. He wasn't
particularly interested in them. "Number 1! Speak out!" "Here," a voice answered. "Number 1, your name is Wayn Southholder. Age 34, blood type A-L2, Index
AR-431-C. Guilty of treason." When the voice had finished, a loud cheer came up from the crowd. They
were applauding the prisoner's traitorous actions, and welcoming him to
Omega. The names were read down the list, and 402, drowsy in the sunshine,
dozed on his feet and listened to the crimes of murder, credit theft,
deviationalism, and mutantism. At last his number was called. "Number 402." "Here." "Number 402, your name is Will Barrent. Age 27, blood type O-L3, Index
JX-221-R. Guilty of murder." The crowd cheered, but 402 scarcely heard them. He was trying to
accustom himself to the idea of having a name. A real name instead of a
number. Will Barrent. He hoped he wouldn't forget it. He repeated the
name to himself over and over again, and almost missed the last
announcement from the ship's loudspeaker. "The new men are now released upon Omega. You will be given temporary
housing at Square A-2. Be cautious and circumspect in your words and
actions. Watch, listen, and learn. The law requires me to tell you that
the average life expectancy on Omega is approximately three Earth
years." It took a while for those last words to take effect on Barrent. He was
still contemplating the novelty of having a name. He hadn't considered
any of the implications of being a murderer on an underworld planet. Chapter Two


The new prisoners were led to a row of barracks at Square A-2. There
were nearly five hundred of them. They were not yet men; they were
entities whose true memories extended barely an hour in time. Sitting on
their bunks, the newborns looked curiously at their bodies, examined
with sharp interest their hands and feet. They stared at each other, and
saw their formlessness mirrored in each other's eyes. They were not yet
men; but they were not children either. Certain abstractions remained,
and the ghosts of memories. Maturation came quickly, born of old habit
patterns and personality traits, retained in the broken threads of their
former lives on Earth. The new men clung to the vague recollections of concepts, ideas, rules. Within a few hours, their phlegmatic blandness had begun to pass. They
were becoming men now. Individuals. Out of a dazed and superficial
conformity, sharp differences began to emerge. Character reasserted
itself, and the five hundred began to discover what they were. Will Barrent stood in line for a look at himself in the barracks mirror. When his turn came, he saw the reflection of a thin-faced, narrow-nosed,
pleasant-looking young man with straight brown hair. The young man had a
resolute, honest, unexceptional face, unmarked by any strong passion. Barrent turned away disappointed; it was the face of a stranger. Later, examining himself more closely, he could find no scars or
anything else to distinguish his body from a thousand other bodies. His
hands were uncallused. He was wiry rather than muscular. He wondered
what sort of work he had done on Earth. Murder? He frowned. He wasn't ready to accept that. A man tapped him on the shoulder. "How you feeling?" Barrent turned and saw a large, thick-shouldered red-haired man standing
beside him. "Pretty good," Barrent said. "You were in line behind me, weren't you?" "That's right. Number 401. Name's Danis Foeren." Barrent introduced himself. "Your crime?" Foeren asked. "Murder." Foeren nodded, looking impressed. "Me, I'm a forger. Wouldn't think it
to look at my hands." He held out two massive paws covered with sparse
red hair. "But the skill's there. My hands remembered before any other
part of me. On the ship I sat in my cell and looked at my hands. They
itched. They wanted to be off and doing things. But the rest of me
couldn't remember what." "What did you do?" Barrent asked. "I closed my eyes and let my hands take over," Foeren said. "First thing
I knew, they were up and picking the lock of the cell." He held up his
huge hands and looked at them admiringly. "Clever little devils!" "Picking the lock?" Barrent asked. "But I thought you were a forger." "Well, now," Foeren said, "forgery was my main line. But a pair of
skilled hands can do almost anything. I suspect that I was only _caught_
for forgery; but I might also have been a safeman. My hands know too
much for just a forger." "You've found out more about yourself than I have," Barrent said. "All I
have to start with is a dream." "Well, that's a start," Foeren said. "There must be ways of finding out
more. The important thing is, we're on Omega." "Agreed," Barrent said sourly. "Nothing wrong with that," Foeren said. "Didn't you hear what the man
said? This is our planet!" "With an average life expectancy of three Earth years," Barrent reminded
him. "That's probably just scare talk," Foeren said. "I wouldn't believe
stuff like that from a guard. The big thing is, we have our own planet. You heard what they said. 'Earth rejects us.' Nova Earth! Who needs her? We've our own planet here. A whole planet, Barrent! We're free!" *       *       *       *       *

Another man said, "That's right, friend." He was small, furtive-eyed,
and ingratiatingly friendly. "My name is Joe," he told them. "Actually,
the name is Joao; but I prefer the archaic form with its flavor of more
gracious times. Gentlemen, I couldn't help overhearing your
conversation, and I agree most heartily with our red-haired friend. Consider the possibilities! Earth has cast us aside? Excellent! We are
better off without her. We are all equal here, free men in a free
society. No uniforms, no guards, no soldiers. Just repentant former
criminals who want to live in peace." "What did they get you for?" Barrent asked. "They said I was a credit thief," Joe said. "I'm ashamed to admit that I
can't remember what a credit thief is. But perhaps it'll come back to
me." "Maybe the authorities have some sort of memory retraining system,"
Foeren said. "Authorities?" Joe said indignantly. "What do you mean, authorities? This is _our_ planet. We're all equal here. By definition, there can't
be any authorities. No, friends, we left all that nonsense behind on
Earth. Here we--"

He stopped abruptly. The barracks' door had opened and a man walked in. He was evidently an older resident of Omega since he lacked the gray
prison uniform. He was fat, and dressed in garish yellow and blue
clothing. On a belt around his ample waist he carried a holstered pistol
and a knife. He stood just inside the doorway, his hands on his hips,
glaring at the new arrivals. "Well?" he said. "Don't you new men recognize a Quaestor? Stand up!" None of the men moved. The Quaestor's face went scarlet. "I guess I'll have to teach you a
little respect." Even before he had taken his weapon from its holster, the new arrivals
had scrambled to their feet. The Quaestor looked at them with a faintly
regretful air and pushed the weapon back in its holster. "The first thing you men better learn," the Quaestor said, "is your
status on Omega. Your status is _nowhere_. You're peons, and that means
you're _nothing_." He waited a moment and then said, "Now pay attention, peons. You are
about to be instructed in your duties." Chapter Three


"The first thing you new men should understand," the Quaestor said, "is
just exactly what you are. That's very important. And I'll tell you what
you are. You're _peons_. You're the lowest of the low. You're
_statusless_. There's nothing lower except mutants, and they aren't
really human. Any questions?" The Quaestor waited. When there were no questions, he said, "I've
defined what _you_ are. From that, we'll proceed to a basic
understanding of what everybody else on Omega is. First of all,
_everybody_ is more important than you; but some are more important than
others. Next above you in rank is the Resident, who hardly counts for
more than any of you, and then there's the Free Citizen. He wears a gray
finger ring of status, and his clothes are black. He isn't important
either, but he's much more important than you. With luck, some of you
may become Free Citizens. "Next are the Privileged Classes, all distinguished by various
recognition symbols according to rank--such as the golden earrings, for
example, of the Hadji class. Eventually you'll learn all the marks and
prerogatives of the various ranks and degrees. I might also mention the
priests. Even though they're not of Privileged rank, they're granted
certain immunities and rights. Have I made myself clear?" Everyone in the barracks mumbled assent. The Quaestor continued, "Now we
come to the subject of deportment when meeting anyone of superior rank. As peons, you are obliged to greet a Free Citizen by his full title, in
a respectful manner. With Privileged ranks such as Hadjis you speak only
when spoken to, and then you stand with eyes downcast and hands clasped
in front of you. You do not leave the presence of a Privileged Citizen
until permission has been granted. You do not sit in his company under
any circumstances. Understood? There is much more to be learned. My
office of Quaestor, for example, comes under the classification of Free
Citizen, but carries certain of the prerogatives of Privilege." The Quaestor glared at the men to make sure they understood. "This
barracks is your temporary home. I have drawn up a chart to show which
men sweep, which wash, and so forth. You may question me at anytime; but
foolish or impertinent questions can be punished by mutilation or death. Just remember that you are the lowest of the low. If you bear that in
mind, you might be able to stay alive." The Quaestor stood in silence for a few moments. Then he said, "Over the
next few days, you'll all be given various assignments. Some of you
will go to the germanium mines, some to the fishing fleet, some will be
apprenticed to various trades. In the meantime, you're free to look
around Tetrahyde." When the men looked blank, the Quaestor explained, "Tetrahyde is the
name of the city you're in. It's the largest city on Omega." He thought
for a moment. "In fact, it's the only city on Omega." "What does the name Tetrahyde mean?" Joe asked. "How should I know?" the Quaestor said, scowling. "I suppose it's one of
those old Earth names the skrenners are always coming up with. Anyhow,
just watch your step when you enter it." "Why?" Barrent asked. The Quaestor grinned. "That, peon, is something you'll have to find out
for yourself." He turned and strode from the barracks. When he had gone, Barrent went to the window. From it he could see a
deserted square and, beyond, the streets of Tetrahyde. "You thinking of going out there?" Joe asked. "Certainly I am," Barrent said. "Coming with me?" The little credit thief shook his head. "I don't think it's safe." "Foeren, how about you?" "I don't like it either," Foeren said. "Might be better to stay around
the barracks for a while." "That's ridiculous," Barrent said. "It's _our_ city now. Isn't anyone
coming with me?" Looking uncomfortable, Foeren hunched his big shoulders and shook his
head. Joe shrugged and lay back on his cot. The rest of the new men
didn't even look up. "Very well," Barrent said. "I'll give you a full report later." He
waited a moment longer in case someone changed his mind, then went out
the door. *       *       *       *       *

The city of Tetrahyde was a collection of buildings sprawled along a
narrow peninsula which jutted into a sluggish gray sea. The peninsula's
landward side was contained by a high stone wall, pierced with gates and
guarded by sentries. Its largest building was the Arena, used once a
year for the Games. Near the Arena was a small cluster of government
buildings. Barrent walked along the narrow streets, staring around him, trying to
get some idea of what his new home was like. The winding, unpaved roads
and dark, weatherbeaten houses stirred an elusive tag-end of memory in
him. He had seen a place like this on Earth, but he couldn't remember
anything about it. The recollection was as tantalizing as an itch; but
he couldn't locate its source. Past the Arena, he came into the main business district of Tetrahyde. Fascinated, he read the store signs: UNLICENSED DOCTOR--ABORTIONS
PERFORMED WHILE-U-WAIT. Further on, DISBARRED LAWYER. POLITICAL PULL! This seemed vaguely wrong to Barrent. He walked further, past stores
advertising stolen goods, past a little shop that announced: MIND
READING! FULL STAFF OF SKRENNING MUTANTS! YOUR PAST ON EARTH REVEALED! Barrent was tempted to go in. But he remembered that he hadn't any
money; and Omega seemed like the sort of place that put a high value on
money. He turned down a side street, walked by several restaurants, and came to
a large building called THE POISON INSTITUTE (_Easy Terms. Up to 3 Years
to Pay. Satisfaction Guaranteed or Your Money Back_). Next door to it
was THE ASSASSIN'S GUILD, _Local 452_. On the basis of the indoctrination talk on the prison ship, Barrent had
expected Omega to be dedicated to the rehabilitation of criminals. To
judge by the store signs, this simply wasn't so; or if it was,
rehabilitation took some very strange forms. He walked on more slowly,
deep in thought. Then he noticed that people were moving out of his way. They glanced at
him and ducked in doorways and stores. An elderly woman took one look at
him and ran. What was wrong? Could it be his prison uniform? No, the people of Omega
had seen many of those. What was it, then? The street was almost deserted. A shopkeeper near him was hurriedly
swinging steel shutters over his display of fencing equipment. "What's the matter?" Barrent asked him. "What's going on?" "Are you out of your head?" the shopkeeper said. "It's Landing Day!" "I beg your pardon?" "Landing Day!" the shopkeeper said. "The day the prison ship landed. Get
back to your barracks, you idiot!" He slammed the last steel shutter into place and locked it. Barrent felt
a sudden cold touch of fear. Something was very wrong. He had better get
back in a hurry. It had been stupid of him not to find out more about
Omegan customs before....

Three men were walking down the street toward him. They were well
dressed, and each wore the small golden Hadji earring in his left ear. All three men carried sidearms. Barrent started to walk away from them. One of the men shouted, "Stop,
peon!" Barrent saw that the man's hand was dangling near his gun. He stopped
and said, "What's the matter?" "It's Landing Day," the man said. He looked at his friends. "Well, who
gets him first?" "We'll choose." "Here's a coin." "No, a show of fingers." "Ready? One, two, three!" "He's mine," said the Hadji on the left. His friends moved back as he
drew his sidearm. "Wait!" Barrent called out. "What are you doing?" "I'm going to shoot you," the man said. "But why?" The man smiled. "Because it's a Hadji privilege. On every Landing Day,
we have the right to shoot down any new peon who leaves his barracks
area." "But I wasn't told!" "Of course not," the man said. "If you new men were told, none of you
would leave your barracks on Landing Day. And that would spoil all the
fun." He took aim. Barrent reacted instantaneously. He threw himself to the ground as the
Hadji fired, heard a hiss, and saw a jagged heatburn score the brick
building next to which he had been standing. "My turn now," one of the men said. "Sorry, old man, I believe it's mine." "Seniority, dear friend, has its privileges. Stand clear." Before the next man could take aim, Barrent was on his feet and running. The sharply winding street protected him for the moment, but he could
hear the sounds of his pursuers behind him. They were running at an easy
stride, almost a fast walk, as if they were completely sure of their
prey. Barrent put on a burst of speed, turned down a side street, and
knew immediately he had made a mistake. He was facing a dead end. The
Hadjis, moving at an easy pace, were coming up behind him. Barrent looked wildly around. Store fronts here were all locked and
shuttered. There was nowhere he could climb to, no place to hide. And then he saw an open door halfway down the block in the direction of
his pursuers. He had run right by it. A sign protruding from the
building above the doorway said THE VICTIM'S PROTECTIVE SOCIETY. That's
for me, Barrent thought. He sprinted for it, running almost under the noses of the startled
Hadjis. A single gun blast scorched the ground under his heels; then he
had reached the doorway and flung himself inside. He scrambled to his feet. His pursuers had not followed him; he could
still hear their voices in the street, amiably arguing questions of
precedence. Barrent realized he had entered some sort of sanctuary. He was in a large, brightly lighted room. Several ragged men were
sitting on a bench near the door, laughing at a private joke. A little
further down, a dark-haired girl sat and watched Barrent with wide,
unblinking green eyes. At the far end of the room was a desk with a man
sitting behind it. The man beckoned to Barrent. He walked up to the desk. The man behind it was short and bespectacled. He smiled encouragingly, waiting for Barrent to speak. "This is the Victim's Protective Society?" Barrent asked. "Quite correct, sir," the man said. "I am Rondolp Frendlyer, president
of this nonprofit organization. Could I be of service?" "You certainly could," Barrent said. "I'm practically a victim." "I knew that just by looking at you," Frendlyer said, smiling warmly. "You have a certain _victim_ look; a mixture of fear and uncertainty
with just a suggestion of vulnerability thrown in. It's quite
unmistakable." "That's very interesting," Barrent said, glancing toward the door and
wondering how long his sanctuary would be respected. "Mr. Frendlyer, I'm
not a member of your organization--"

"That doesn't matter," Frendlyer said. "Membership in our group is
necessarily spontaneous. One joins when the occasion arises. Our
intention is to protect the inalienable rights of all victims." "Yes, sir. Well, there are three men outside trying to kill me." "I see," Mr. Frendlyer said. He opened a drawer and took out a large
book. He flipped through it quickly and found the reference he wanted. "Tell me, did you ascertain the status of these men?" "I believe they were Hadjis," Barrent said. "Each of them had a little
gold earring in his left ear." "Quite right," Mr. Frendlyer said. "And today is Landing Day. You came
off the ship that landed today, and have been classified a peon. Is that
correct?" "Yes, it is," Barrent said. "Then I'm happy to say that everything is in order. The Landing Day Hunt
ends at sundown. You can leave here with knowledge that everything is
correct and that your rights are in no way being violated." "Leave here? After sundown, you mean." Mr. Frendlyer shook his head and smiled sadly. "I'm afraid not. According to the law, you must leave here at once." "But they'll kill me!" "That's very true," Frendlyer said. "Unfortunately, it can't be helped. A victim, by definition, is one who is to be killed." "I thought this was a protective organization." "It is. But we protect _rights_, not victims. Your rights are not being
violated. The Hadjis have the privilege of killing you on Landing Day,
at any time before sundown, if you are not in your barracks area. You, I
might add, have the right to kill anyone who tries to kill you." "I don't have a weapon," Barrent said. "Victims never do," Frendlyer said. "It makes all the difference,
doesn't it? But weapon or not, I'm afraid you'll have to leave now." Barrent could still hear the Hadjis' lazy voices in the street. He
asked, "Have you a rear door?" "Sorry." "Then I'll simply not leave." Still smiling, Mr. Frendlyer opened a drawer and took out a gun. He
pointed it at Barrent, and said, "You really must leave. You can take
your chances with the Hadjis, or you can die right here with no chance
at all." "Lend me your gun," Barrent said. "It isn't allowed," Frendlyer told him. "Can't have victims running
around with weapons, you know. It would upset things." He clicked off
the safety. "Are you leaving?" Barrent calculated his chances of diving across the desk for the gun,
and decided he would never make it. He turned and walked slowly to the
door. The ragged men were still laughing together. The dark-haired girl
had risen from the bench and was standing near the doorway. As he came
close to her, Barrent noticed that she was very lovely. He wondered what
crime had dictated her expulsion from Earth. As he passed her, he felt something hard pressed into his ribs. He
reached for it, and found he was holding a small, efficient-looking gun. "Luck," the girl said. "I hope you know how to use it." Barrent nodded his thanks. He wasn't sure he knew how; but he was going
to find out. Chapter Four


The street was deserted except for the three Hadjis, who stood about
twenty yards away, conversing quietly. As Barrent came through the
doorway, two of the men moved back; the third, his sidearm negligently
lowered, stepped forward. When he saw that Barrent was armed he quickly
brought his gun into firing position. Barrent flung himself to the ground and pressed the trigger of his
unfamiliar weapon. He felt it vibrate in his hand, and saw the Hadji's
head and shoulders turn black and begin to crumble. Before he could take
aim at the other men, Barrent's gun was wrenched violently from his
hand. The Hadji's dying shot had creased the end of the muzzle. Desperately Barrent dived for the gun, knowing he could never reach it
in time. His skin pricked in expectation of the killing shot. He rolled
to his gun, still miraculously alive, and took aim at the nearest
Hadji. Just in time, he checked himself from firing. The Hadjis had holstered
their weapons. One of them was saying, "Poor old Draken. He simply could
not learn to take quick aim." "Lack of practice," the other man said. "Draken never spent much time on
the firing range." "Well, if you ask me, it's a very good object lesson. One mustn't get
out of practice." "And," the other man said, "one mustn't underestimate even a peon." He
looked at Barrent. "Nice shooting, fellow." "Yes, very nice indeed," the other man said. "It's difficult to fire a
handgun accurately while in motion." Barrent got to his feet shakily, still holding the girl's weapon,
prepared to fire at the first suspicious movement from the Hadjis. But
they weren't moving suspiciously. They seemed to regard the entire
incident as closed. "What happens now?" Barrent asked. "Nothing," one of the Hadjis said. "On Landing Day, one kill is all that
any man or hunting party is allowed. After that, you're out of the
hunt." "It's really a very unimportant holiday," the other man said. "Not like
the Games or the Lottery." "All that remains for you to do," the first man said, "is to go to the
Registration Office and collect your inheritance." "My _what_?" "Your inheritance," the Hadji said patiently. "You're entitled to the
entire estate of your victim. In Draken's case, I'm sorry to say, it
doesn't amount to very much." "He never was a good businessman," the other said sadly. "Still, it'll
give you a little something to start life with. And since you've made an
authorized kill--even though a highly unusual one--you move upward in
status. You become a Free Citizen." People had come back into the streets, and shopkeepers were unlocking
their steel shutters. A truck marked BODY DISPOSAL UNIT 5 drove up, and
four uniformed men took away Draken's body. The normal life of Tetrahyde
had begun again. This, more than any assurances from the Hadjis, told
Barrent that the moment for murder was over. He put the girl's weapon in
his pocket. "The Registration Office is over this way," one of the Hadjis told him. "We'll act as your witnesses." Barrent still had only a limited understanding of the situation. But
since things were suddenly going his way, he decided to accept whatever
happened without question. There would be plenty of time later to find
out where he stood. Accompanied by the Hadjis, he went to the Registration Office on
Gunpoint Square. There a bored clerk heard the entire story, produced
Draken's business papers, and pasted Barrent's name over Draken's. Barrent noticed that several other names had been pasted over. There
seemed to be a fast turnover of businesses in Tetrahyde. He found that he was now the owner of an antidote shop at 3 Blazer
Boulevard. The business papers also officially recognized Barrent's new rank as a
Free Citizen. The clerk gave him a ring of status, made of gunmetal, and
advised him to change into Citizen's clothing as soon as possible if he
wished to avoid unpleasant incidents. Outside, the Hadjis wished him luck. Barrent decided to see what his new
business was like. *       *       *       *       *

Blazer Boulevard was a short alley running between two streets. Near the
middle of it was a store front with a sign which read: ANTIDOTE SHOP. Beneath that it read: _Specifics for every poison, whether animal,
vegetable, or mineral. Carry our handy Do It Yourself Survival Kit. Twenty-three antidotes in one pocket-sized container!_

Barrent opened the door and went in. Behind a low counter he saw
ceiling-high shelves stocked with labeled bottles, cans and cartons, and
square glass jars containing odd bits of leaves, twigs, and fungus. In
back of the counter was a small shelf of books with titles like _Quick
Diagnosis in Acute Poisoning Cases_; _The Arsenic Family_; and _The
Permutations of Henbane_. It was quite obvious that poisoning played a large part in the daily
life of Omega. Here was a store--and presumably there were others--whose
sole purpose was to dispense antidotes. Barrent thought about this and
decided that he had inherited a strange but honorable business. He would
study the books and find out how an antidote shop was run. The store had a back apartment with a living room, bedroom, and kitchen. In one of the closets, Barrent found a badly made suit of Citizen black,
into which he changed. He took the girl's weapon from the pocket of his
prison ship uniform, weighed it in his hand for a moment, then put it
into a pocket of his new suit. He left the store and found his way back
to the Victim's Protective Society. *       *       *       *       *

The door was still open, and the three ragged men were still sitting on
the bench. They weren't laughing now. Their long wait seemed to have
tired them. At the other end of the room, Mr. Frendlyer was seated
behind his desk, reading through a thick pile of papers. There was no
sign of the girl. Barrent walked to the desk, and Frendlyer stood up to greet him. "My congratulations!" Frendlyer said. "Dear fellow, my very warmest
congratulations. That was a splendid bit of shooting. And in motion,
too!" "Thank you," Barrent said. "The reason I came back here--"

"I know why," Frendlyer said. "You wished to be advised of your rights
and obligations as a Free Citizen. What could be more natural? If you
take a seat on that bench, I'll be with you in--"

"I didn't come here for that," Barrent said. "I want to find out about
my rights and obligations, of course. But right now, I want to find that
girl." "Girl?" "She was sitting on the bench when I came in. She was the one who gave
me the gun." Mr. Frendlyer looked astonished. "Citizen, you must be laboring under a
misapprehension. There has been no woman in this office all day." "She was sitting on the bench near those three men. A very attractive
dark-haired girl. You must have noticed her." "I would certainly have noticed her if she had been here," Frendlyer
said, winking. "But as I said before, no woman has entered these
premises today." Barrent glared at him and pulled the gun out of his pocket. "In that
case, how did I get this?" "I lent it to you," Frendlyer said. "I'm glad you were able to use it
successfully, but now I would appreciate its return." "You're lying," Barrent said, taking a firm grip on the weapon. "Let's
ask those men." He walked over to the bench with Frendlyer close behind him. He caught
the attention of the man who had been sitting nearest the girl and asked
him, "Where did the girl go?" The man lifted a sullen, unshaven face and said, "What girl you talking
about, Citizen?" "The one who was sitting right here." "I didn't notice nobody. Rafeel, you see a female on this bench?" "Not me," Rafeel said. "And I been sitting here continuous since ten
this morning." "I didn't see her neither," the third man said. "And I got sharp eyes." Barrent turned back to Frendlyer. "Why are you lying to me?" "I've told you the simple truth," Frendlyer said. "There has been no
girl in here all day. I lent you the gun, as is my privilege as
President of the Victim's Protective Society. I would now appreciate its
return." "No," Barrent said. "I'm keeping the gun until I find the girl." "That might not be wise," Frendlyer said. He hastily added, "Thievery, I
mean, is not condoned under these circumstances." "I'll take my chances on that," Barrent said. He turned and left the
Victim's Protective Society. Chapter Five


Barrent needed time to recuperate from his violent entry into Omegan
life. Starting from the helpless state of a newborn, he had moved
through murder to the ownership of an antidote shop. From a forgotten
past on a planet called Earth, he had been catapulted into a dubious
present in a world full of criminals. He had gotten a glimpse of a
complex class structure, and a hint of an institutionalized program of
murder. He had discovered in himself a certain measure of self-reliance,
and a surprising quickness with a gun. He knew there was a great deal
more to find out about Omega, Earth, and himself. He hoped he would live
long enough to make the necessary discoveries. First things first. He had to earn a living. To do so, he had to find
out about poisons and antidotes. He moved into the apartment in back of his store and began reading the
books left by the late Hadji Draken. The literature on poisons was fascinating. There were the vegetable
poisons known on Earth, such as hellebore, setterwort, deadly
nightshade, and the yew tree. He learned about the action of
hemlock--its preliminary intoxication and its final convulsions. There
was prussic acid poisoning from almonds and digitalin poisoning from
purple foxglove. There was the awesome efficiency of wolfsbane with its
deadly store of aconite. There were the fungi such as the amanita
toadstools and fly agaric, not to mention the purely Omegan vegetable
poisons like redcup, flowering lily, and amortalis. But the vegetable poisons, although dismayingly numerous, were only
one part of his studies. He had to consider the animals of Earth,
sea, and air, the several species of deadly spiders, the snakes,
scorpions, and giant wasps. There was an imposing array of metallic
poisons such as arsenic, mercury, and bismuth. There were the commoner
corrosives--nitric, hydrochloric, phosphoric, and sulphuric acid. And
there were the poisons distilled or extracted from various sources,
among which were strychnine, formic acid, hyoscyamine, and belladonna. Each of the poisons had one or more antidotes listed; but those
complicated, cautiously worded formulas, Barrent suspected, were
frequently unsuccessful. To make matters more difficult, the efficacy of
an antidote seemed to depend upon a correct diagnosis of the poisoning
agent. And too often the symptoms produced by one poison resembled those
of another. Barrent pondered these problems while he studied his books. In the
meantime, with considerable nervousness, he served his first customers. He found that many of his fears were ungrounded. In spite of the dozens
of lethal substances recommended by the Poison Institute, most poisoners
stuck single-mindedly to arsenic or strychnine. They were cheap, sure,
and very painful. Prussic acid had a readily discernible odor, mercury
was difficult to introduce into the system, and the corrosives, although
gratifyingly spectacular, were dangerous to the user. Wolfsbane and fly
agaric were excellent, of course; deadly nightshade could not be
discounted, and the amanita toadstool had its own macabre charm. But
these were the poisons of an older, more leisurely age. The impatient
younger generation--and especially the women, who made up nearly 90 per
cent of the poisoners on Omega--were satisfied with plain arsenic or
strychnine, as the occasion and opportunity demanded. Omegan women were conservatives. They simply weren't interested in the
never-ending refinements of the poisoner's art. Means didn't interest
them; only ends, as quickly and as cheaply as possible. Omegan women
were noted for their common sense. Although the eager theoreticians at
the Poison Institute tried to sell dubious mixtures of Contact Poison or
Three Day Mold, and worked hard to put across complex, haywire schemes
involving wasps, concealed needles, and double glasses, they found few
takers among women. Simple arsenic and fast-acting strychnine continued
to be the mainstays of the poison trade. This quite naturally simplified Barrent's work. His remedies--immediate
regurgitation, lavage, neutralizing agent--were easy enough to master. He encountered some difficulty with men who refused to believe they had
been poisoned by anything so commonplace as arsenic or strychnine. For
those cases, Barrent prescribed a variety of roots, herbs, twigs,
leaves, and a minute homeopathic dose of poison. But he invariably
preceded these with regurgitation, lavage, and neutralizing agent. After he was settled, Barrent received a visit from Danis Foeren and
Joe. Foeren had a temporary job on the docks unloading fishing boats. Joe had organized a nightly pokra game among the government workers of
Tetrahyde. Neither man had moved much in status; with no kills to their
credit, they had progressed only as far as Second Class Resident. They
were nervous about meeting socially with a Free Citizen, but Barrent put
them at ease. They were the only friends he had on Omega, and he had no
intention of losing them over a question of social position. Barrent was unable to learn very much from them about the laws and
customs of Tetrahyde. Even Joe hadn't been able to find out anything
definite from his friends in government service. On Omega, the law was
kept secret. Older residents used their knowledge of the law to enforce
their rule over the newcomers. This system was condoned and reinforced
by the doctrine of the inequality of all men, which lay at the heart of
the Omegan legal system. Through planned inequality and enforced
ignorance, power and status remained in the hands of the older
residents. Of course, all social movement upward couldn't be stopped. But it could
be retarded, discouraged, and made exceedingly dangerous. The way one
encountered the laws and customs of Omega was through a risky process of
trial and error. Although the Antidote Shop took up most of his time, Barrent persisted
in his efforts to locate the girl. He was unable to find a hint that she
even existed. He became friendly with the shopkeepers on either side of him. One of
them, Demond Harrisbourg, was a jaunty, moustached young man who
operated a food store. It was a mundane and slightly ridiculous line of
work; but, as Harrisbourg explained, even criminals must eat. And this
necessitated farmers, processors, packagers, and food stores. Harrisbourg contended that his business was in no way inferior to the
more indigenous Omegan industries centered around violent death. Besides, Harrisbourg's wife's uncle was a Minister of Public Works. Through him, Harrisbourg expected to receive a murder certificate. With
this all-important document, he could make his six-months kill and move
upward to the status of Privileged Citizen. Barrent nodded his agreement. But he wondered if Harrisbourg's wife, a
thin, restless woman, wouldn't decide to poison him first. She appeared
to be dissatisfied with her husband; and divorce was forbidden on Omega. His other neighbor, Tem Rend, was a lanky, cheerful man in his early
forties. He had a heat scar which ran from just beneath his left ear
down almost to the corner of his mouth, a souvenir given him by a
status-seeking hopeful. The hopeful had picked on the wrong man. Tem
Rend owned a weapon shop, practiced constantly, and always carried the
articles of his trade with him. According to witnesses, he had performed
the counterkill in exemplary fashion. Tem's dream was to become a member
of the Assassin's Guild. His application was on file with that ancient
and austere organization, and he had a chance of being accepted within
the month. Barrent bought a sidearm from him. On Rend's advice, he chose a
Jamiason-Tyre needlebeam. It was faster and more accurate than any
projectile weapon, and it transmitted the same shock-power as a heavy
caliber bullet. To be sure, it hadn't the spread of heat weapons such as
the Hadjis used, which could kill within six inches of their target. But
wide-range beamers encouraged inaccuracy. They were messy, careless
weapons which reinforced careless traits. Anyone could fire a heat gun;
but to use a needlebeam effectively, you had to practice constantly. And
practice paid off. A good needlebeam man was more than a match for any
two widebeam gunmen. Barrent took this advice to heart, coming, as it did, from an apprentice
assassin and the owner of a weapon shop. He put in long hours on Rend's
cellar firing range, sharpening his reflexes, getting used to the
Quik-Thro holster. There was a lot to do and a tremendous amount to learn, just in order to
survive. Barrent didn't mind hard work as long as it was for a
worthwhile goal. He hoped things would stay quiet for a while so he
could catch up to the older inhabitants. But things never stayed quiet in Omega. One day, late in the afternoon as he was closing up, Barrent received an
unusual-looking caller. He was a man in his fifties, heavy-set, with a
stern, swarthy face. He wore a red ankle-length robe and sandals. Around
his waist was a rawhide belt from which dangled a small black book and a
red-handled dagger. There was an air of unusual force and authority
about him. Barrent was unable to tell his status. Barrent said, "I was just closing up, sir. But if there's anything you
wish to buy--"

"I did not come here to buy," the caller said. He permitted himself a
faint smile. "I came here to sell." "Sell?" "I am a priest," the man said. "You are a newcomer to my district. I
haven't noticed you at services." "I hadn't known anything about--"

The priest held up his hand. "Under both the sacred and the profane law,
ignorance is no excuse for nonperformance of one's duties. Indeed,
ignorance can be punished as an act of willful neglect, based upon the
Total Personal Responsibility Act of '23, to say nothing of the Lesser
Codicil." He smiled again. "However, there is no question of
chastisement for you as yet." "I'm glad to hear that, sir," Barrent said. "'Uncle' is the proper form of address," the priest said. "I am Uncle
Ingemar, and I have come to tell you about the orthodox religion of
Omega, which is the worship of that pure and transcendent spirit of Evil
which is our inspiration and our comfort." Barrent said, "I'll be very happy to hear about the religion of Evil,
Uncle. Shall we go into the living room?" "By all means, Nephew," the priest said, and followed Barrent to the
apartment in back of the store. Chapter Six


"Evil," the priest said, after he had settled comfortably into Barrent's
best chair, "is that force within us which inspires men to acts of
strength and endurance. The worship of Evil is essentially the worship
of oneself, and therefore the only true worship. The self which one
worships is the ideal social being; the man content in his niche in
society, yet ready to grasp any opportunity for advancement; the man who
meets death with dignity, who kills without the demeaning vice of pity. Evil is cruel, since it is a true reflection of the uncaring and
insensate universe. Evil is eternal and unchanging, although it comes to
us in the many forms of protean life." "Would you care for a little wine, Uncle?" Barrent asked. "Thank you, that's very thoughtful," Uncle Ingemar said. "How is
business?" "Fair. A little slow this week." "People don't take the same interest in poisoning," the priest said,
moodily sipping his drink. "Not like when I was a boy, newly unfrocked
and shipped out from Earth. However. I was speaking to you about Evil." "Yes, Uncle." "We worship Evil," Uncle Ingemar said, "in the incarnate form of The
Black One, that horned and horrid specter of our days and nights. In The
Black One we find the seven cardinal sins, the forty felonies, and the
hundred and one misdemeanors. There is no crime that The Black One has
not performed--faultlessly, as befits his nature. Therefore we imperfect
beings model ourselves upon his perfections. And sometimes, The Black
One rewards us by appearing before us in the awful beauty of his fiery
flesh. Yes, Nephew, I have actually been privileged to see him. Two
years ago he appeared at the conclusion of the Games, and he also
appeared the year before that." The priest brooded for a moment over the divine appearance. Then he
said, "Since we recognize in the State man's highest potential for Evil,
we also worship the State as a suprahuman, though less than divine,
creation." Barrent nodded. He was having a difficult time staying awake. Uncle
Ingemar's low, monotonous voice lecturing about so commonplace a thing
as Evil had a soporific effect on him. He struggled to keep his eyes
open. "One might well ask," Uncle Ingemar droned on, "if Evil is the highest
attainment of the nature of man, why then did The Black One allow any
Good to exist in the universe? The problem of Good has bothered the
unenlightened for ages. I will now answer it for you." "Yes, Uncle?" Barrent said, surreptitiously pinching himself on the
inside of the thigh in an effort to stay awake. "But first," Uncle Ingemar said, "let us define our terms. Let us
examine the nature of Good. Let us boldly and fearlessly stare our great
opponent in the face and discover the true lineaments of his features." "Yes," Barrent said, wondering if he should open a window. His eyes felt
incredibly heavy. He rubbed them hard and tried to pay attention. "Good is a state of illusion," said Uncle Ingemar in his even,
monotonous voice, "which ascribes to man the nonexistent attributes of
altruism, humility, and piety. How can we recognize Good as being an
illusion? Because there is only man and The Black One in the universe,
and to worship The Black One is to worship the ultimate expression of
oneself. Thus, since we have proven Good to be an illusion, we
necessarily recognize its attributes as nonexistent. Understood?" Barrent didn't answer. "Do you understand?" the priest asked more sharply. "Eh?" Barrent said. He had been dozing with his eyes open. He forced
himself awake and managed to say, "Yes, Uncle, I understand." "Excellent. Understanding that, we ask, why did The Black One allow even
the illusion of Good to exist in an Evil universe? And the answer is
found in the Law of Necessary Opposites; for Evil could not be
recognized as such without something to contrast it with. The best
contrast is an opposite. And the opposite of Evil is Good." The priest
smiled triumphantly. "It's so simple and clear-cut, isn't it?" "It certainly is, Uncle," Barrent said. "Would you like a little more
wine?" "Just the tiniest drop," the priest said. He talked to Barrent for another ten minutes about the natural and
charming Evil inherent in the beasts of the field and forest, and
counseled Barrent to pattern his behavior on those simple-minded
creatures. At last he rose to leave. "I'm very glad we could have this little chat," the priest said, warmly
shaking Barrent's hand. "Can I count on your appearance at our Monday
night services?" "Services?" "Of course," Uncle Ingemar said. "Every Monday night--at midnight--we
hold Black Mass at the Wee Coven on Kirkwood Drive. After services, the
Ladies Auxiliary usually puts out a snack, and we have community dancing
and choir singing. It's all very jolly." He smiled broadly. "You see,
the worship of evil _can_ be fun." "I'm sure it can," Barrent said. "I'll be there, Uncle." He showed the priest to the door. After locking up, he thought carefully
about what Uncle Ingemar had said. No doubt about it, attendance at
services was necessary. Compulsory, in fact. He just hoped that the
Black Mass wouldn't be as infernally dull as Ingemar's exposition of
Evil. That was Friday. Barrent was kept busy over the next two days. He
received a shipment of homeopathic herbs and roots from his agent in the
Bloodpit district. It took the better part of a day to sort and classify
them, and another day to store them in the proper jars. On Monday, returning to his shop after lunch, Barrent thought he saw
the girl. He hurried after her, but lost her in the crowd. When he got back to his store, Barrent found that a letter had been
slipped under his door. It was an invitation from his neighborhood Dream
Shop. The letter read:

     Dear Citizen, We take this opportunity of welcoming you into
     the neighborhood and extending to you the services of what we
     believe to be the finest Dream on Omega. All manner and type of dreams are available to you--and at a
     surprisingly low cost. We specialize in memory-resurrecting
     dreams of Earth. You can be assured that your neighborhood
     Dream Shop offers you only the finest in vicarious living. As a Free Citizen, you will surely wish to avail yourself of
     these services. May we hope that you do so within the week? The Proprietors. Barrent put down the letter. 