



Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 COMPLETE
 BOOK-LENGTH NOVEL


 LONG AGO,
 FAR AWAY

 By MURRAY LEINSTER


 ILLUSTRATOR FINLAY




CHAPTER 1


The sky was black, with myriads of stars. The ground was white. But it
was not really ground at all, it was ice that covered everything--twenty
miles north to the Barrier, and southward to the Pole itself, past
towering mountains and howling emptiness and cold beyond imagining. The base was almost buried in snow. Off to one side of the main building
a faint yellowish glow was the plastic dome of the meteor-watch radar
instrument. Inside Brad Soames displayed his special equipment to a girl
reporter flown down to the Antarctic to do human-interest articles for
not-too-much-interested women readers. [Illustration: The children huddled together to protect themselves and
their ship from the inquisitive strangers.] All was quiet. This seemed the most unlikely of all possible places for
anything of importance to happen. There was one man awake, on stand-by watch. A radio glowed beside him--a
short-wave unit, tuned to the frequency used by all the bases of all the
nations on Antarctica--English, French, Belgian, Danish, Russian. The
stand-by man yawned. There was nothing to do. *       *       *       *       *

"There's no story in my work," said Soames politely. "I work with this
wave-guide radar. It's set to explore the sky instead of the horizon. It
spots meteors coming in from space, records their height and course and
speed, and follows them down until they burn up in the air. From its
record we can figure out the orbits they followed before Earth's gravity
pulled them down." The girl reporter was Gail Haynes. She nodded, but she looked at Soames
instead of the complex instrument. She wore the multi-layer cold-weather
garments issued for Antarctica, but somehow she did not look grotesque
in them. Now her expression was faintly vexed. The third person in the
dome was Captain Estelle Moggs, W. A. C., in charge of Gail's journey
and the public-relations angle generally. "I just chart the courses of meteors," repeated Soames. "That's all. There is nothing else to it." Gail shook her head, watching him. "Can't you give me a human angle?" she asked. "I'm a woman. I'd like to
be interested." He shrugged, and she said somehow disconsolately:

"What will knowing the orbits of meteors lead to?" "Finding out some special meteor-orbits," he said drily, "might lead to
finding out when the Fifth Planet blew itself up.--According to Bode's
Law there ought to be a planet like ours between Mars and Jupiter. If
there was, it blew itself to pieces, or maybe the people on it had an
atomic war." Gail cocked her head to one side. "Now, that promises!" she said. "Keep on!" "There ought to be a planet between Mars and Jupiter, in a certain
orbit," he told her. "There isn't. Instead, there's a lot of debris
floating around. Some is as far out as Jupiter. Some is as far in as
Earth. It's mostly between Mars and Jupiter, though, and it's hunks of
rock and metal of all shapes and sizes. We call the big ones asteroids. There's no proof so far, but it's respectable to believe that there used
to be a Fifth Planet, and that it blew itself up or was blown up by its
inhabitants. I'm checking meteor-orbits to see if some meteors are
really tiny asteroids." "Hmmm," said Gail. She displayed one of those surprising, unconnected
bits of information a person in the newspaper business picks up. "Don't
they say that the mountains on the moon were made by asteroids falling
on it?" "It's at least possible that the moon was smashed up by fragments of the
Fifth Planet," agreed Soames. "In fact, that's a more or less accepted
explanation." She looked at him expectantly. "I have to think of my readers," insisted
Gail. "It's interesting enough, but how can I make it something they'll
be concerned about? When the moon was smashed, why wasn't Earth?" "It's assumed that it was," Soames told her. "But on Earth we have
weather, and it happened a long, long time ago, back in the days of
three-toed horses and ganoid fish. Undoubtedly once the Earth was
devastated like the moon. But the ring-mountains were worn away by rain
and snow. New mountain-ranges rose up. Continents changed. Now there's
no way to find even the traces of a disaster so long past. But the moon
has no weather. Nothing ever changes on it. Its wounds have never
healed." Gail frowned in concentration. "A bombardment like that would be something to live through," she said
vexedly. "An atomic war would be trivial by comparison. But it happened
millions and millions of years ago. We women want to know about things
that are happening now!" Soames opened his mouth to speak. But he didn't. The flickering, wavering, silver-plated wave-guide tube of the radar
suddenly steadied. It ceased to hunt restlessly among all places
overhead for a tiny object headed for Earth. It stopped dead. It
pointed, trembling a little as if with eagerness. It pointed somewhere
east of due south, and above the horizon. "Here's a meteor. It's falling now," said Soames. Then he looked again. The radar's twin screens should have shown two
dots of light, one to register the detected object's height, and another
its angle and distance. But both screens were empty. They showed nothing
at all. There was nothing where the radar had stopped itself and where
it aimed. But all of the two screens glowed faintly. The graph-pens
wrote wholly meaningless indications on their tape. A radar, and
especially a meteor-tracking radar, is an instrument of high precision. It either detects something and pin-points its place, or it doesn't,
because an object either reflects radar-pulses or not. Usually it does. *       *       *       *       *

The radar here, then, gave an impossible reading. It was as if it did
not receive the reflections of the pulses it sent out, but only parts of
them. It was as if something were intermittently in existence, or was
partly real and partly not. Or as if the radar had encountered an
almost-something which was on the verge of becoming real, and didn't
quite make it. "What the--"

The inter-base radio screamed. At the same instant the twin
radar-screens flashed bright all over. The twin pens of the tape-writing
machine scrambled crazy lines on the paper. The noise was monstrous. A
screaming, shrieking uproar such as no radio ever gave out. There was
horror in it. And what Soames could not know now was that at this same
instant the same sound came out of every radio and television set in use
in all the world. *       *       *       *       *

The noise stopped. Now a bright spot showed on each of the meteor-watch
radar's twin screens. The screen indicating height said that the source
of the dot was four miles high. The screen indicating line and distance
said that it bore 167 deg. true, and was eighty miles distant. The radar
said that some object had come into being from nothingness, out of
nowhere. It had not arrived. It had become. It was twenty thousand feet
high, eighty miles 167 deg. from the base, and its appearance had been
accompanied by such a burst of radio-noise as neither storm nor
lightning nor atomic explosion had ever made before. And the thing which came from nowhere and therefore was quite
impossible, now moved toward the east at roughly three times the speed
of sound. All manner of foreign voices came startledly out of the inter-base radio
speaker, asking what could it be? A Russian voice snapped suspiciously
that the Americans should be queried. And the wave-guide radar followed a large object which had come out of
nowhere at all. The sheer impossibility of the thing was only part of the problem it
presented. The radar followed it. Moving eastward, far away in the
frigid night, it seemed suddenly to put on brakes. According to the
radar, its original speed was close to mach 3, thirty-nine miles a
minute. Then it checked swiftly. It came to a complete stop. Then it
hurtled backward along the line it had followed. It wabbled momentarily
as if it had done a flip-flop four miles above the ground. It dived. It
stopped dead in mid-air for a full second and abruptly began to rise
once more in an insane, corkscrew course which ended abruptly in a
headlong fall toward the ground. It dropped like a stone. It fell for long, long seconds. Once it
wavered, as if it made a final effort to continue its frenzy in the air. But again it fell like a stone. It reached the horizon. It dropped
behind it. Seconds later the ground trembled very, very slightly. Soames hit the
graph-machine case. The pens jiggled. He'd made a time-recording of an
earth-shock somewhere. Now he read off the interval between the burst of screaming static and
the jog he'd made by striking the instrument. Earth-shock surface waves
travel at four miles per second. The radar had said the thing which
appeared in mid-air did so eighty miles away. The static-burst was
simultaneous. There was a twenty-second interval between the static and
the arrival of the earth-tremor waves. The static and the appearance of
something from nowhere and the point of origin of the earth-shock
matched up. They were one event. The event was timed with the outburst
of radio noise, not the impact of the falling object, which was a minute
later. *       *       *       *       *

Soames struggled to imagine what that event could be. The inter-base
radio babbled. Somebody discovered that the static had been on all
wave-lengths at the same time. Voices argued about it. In the radar-dome Captain Moggs said indignantly:

"This is monstrous! I shall report this to Washington! What was that
thing, Mr. Soames?" Soames shrugged. "There isn't anything it could be," he told her. "It was impossible. There couldn't be anything like that." Gail cocked her head on one side. "D'you mean it's something new to science?" Soames realized how much he liked Gail. Too much. So he spoke with great
formality. The radar had tried to detect and range on something that
wasn't there. The nearest accurate statement would be that the radar had
detected something just before it became something the radar could
detect, which did not begin to make sense. Planes didn't appear in mid-sky without previously having been somewhere
else; it wasn't a plane. There could be meteors, but it wasn't a meteor
because it went too slowly and changed course and stood still in the air
and went upward. Nor was it a missile. A ballistic missile couldn't
change course, a rocket-missile would show on the radar. He looked at his watch. "Six minutes and a half from the static," he said grimly. "Eighty miles. Sound travels a mile every five seconds. Let's listen. Ten
seconds--eight--six--four--"

Now the wave-guide radar had gone back to normal operation. Its
silver-plated square tube flickered and quivered and spun quickly in
this direction and that, searching all the sky. There was a booming sound. It was infinitely low-pitched. It was
long-continued. It was so low in frequency that it seemed more a
vibration of the air than a sound. It died away. "It's a concussion-wave," said Soames soberly. "It arrived four hundred
odd seconds after the static. Eighty miles.... A noise has to be pretty
loud to travel so far! A ground-shock has to be rather sharp to be felt
as an earth-tremor at eighty miles. Even a spark has to be very, very
fierce to mess up radio and radar reception at eighty miles....
Something very remarkable happened down yonder tonight--something
somebody ought to look into." Gail said quickly, "How about a spaceship from another world?" "It would have come in from outer space," said Soames. "It didn't." "A secret weapon," said Captain Moggs firmly. "I shall report to
Washington and ask orders to investigate." "I wouldn't," said Soames. "If you ask orders you promise to wait for
them. If you wait for orders, whatever fell will be covered by snow past
discovery by the time your orders come." Gail looked at him interestedly, confidently. "What will you do, then?" "I think," said Soames, "we'll find it and then report. "You were planning a cosey little article on Housewives of the
Antarctic; The Care and Feeding of One's Penguin Husband. Right?" Gail grinned suddenly. "I see. Yes." "We take off in the 'copter," said Soames. "We start out ostensibly to
gather material for an article on Can This Penguin Marriage Be Saved. But we'll be blown off course. We'll find ourselves quite accidentally
where the radar said there was the great-grandfather of static bursts,
with a ground-shock and a concussion-wave to boot. We may even be blown
farther, to where something dived downward for four or five miles and
vanished below the horizon." Captain Moggs said uneasily:

"Most irregular. But it might be wise." "Of course," said Soames. "It's always safer to report something you've
found than not find something you've reported." "We start at sunrise," said Captain Moggs authoritatively. *       *       *       *       *

Soames went back to the radar. As he looked at it, it picked out
something rather smaller than a marble at a height of seventy-nine miles
and followed that unthinkably ancient small wanderer of space down to
its spectacular suicide by fire at a height of thirty-four miles. He went painstakingly over the radar. It worked perfectly. The taped
record of its observations carried the story of all that Gail and
Captain Moggs had seen when he saw it. Machinery may err, but it does
not have delusions. It would have to be subject to systematic
hallucination to have reported and recorded what this radar insisted was
the truth. When dawn came, he went out to the helicopter's hangar. There was a
supply-plane on the runway, but the helicopter belonged at the base. He
found himself excessively conscientious in his check-over. Though he
hated to admit it, he knew it was because Gail would be in the plane. When he headed back toward the main building one of the geophysics gang
beckoned to him. He followed to the small, far-spaced hut--now
snow-buried to its eaves--in which the seismograph ticked away to
itself. "I think I'm going crazy," said the geophysics man. "Did you ever hear
of a ground-shock starting inside out?" He pointed to the graph-paper that fed very, very slowly past the
seismograph's pens. The recording did look odd. "If you put your hand just under the surface of the water in a bathtub,"
said the geophysics man harassedly, "and jerk it downward, you get a
hollow that spreads out with a wave behind it. It's the exact opposite
of dropping a pebble into water, which makes a wave that spreads out
with a hollow--a trough--behind it. But except for that one way of
making it, all waves--absolutely all wave-systems--start out with a
crest and a trough behind it. Everywhere, all the time, unless you do
what I said in a bathtub." "I'm a shower man, myself," observed Soames. "But go on." "This," said the geophysics man bitterly, "is like a bathtub wave. See? The ground was jerked away, and then pushed back. Normal shock-waves
push away and then spring back! An ice-crack, a rock-slide, an explosion
of any sort, all of them make the same kind of waves! All have
compression phases, then rarefaction phases, then compression phases,
and so on. What--" his voice was plaintive--"what in hell is this?" "Are you saying," Soames asked after a moment, "that ordinary
earth-tremors record like explosion-waves, but that you'd have to have
an implosion to make a record like this?" "Sure!" said the geophysics man. "But how can you have an implosion that
will make an earth-shock? I'm going to have to take this whole damned
wabble-bucket apart to find out what's the matter with it! But there's
nothing the matter! It registered what it got! But what did it get?" "An implosion," said Soames. "And if you have trouble imagining that,
I'm right there with you." He went back to the main building to get Gail and Captain Moggs. They
went out to the 'copter hangar together. "I've talked to the radar and loran operator," said Soames. "I explained
that you wanted to see some crevasses from the air, and I'd be wandering
around looking for them on the way to the rookery. He will check on us
every fifteen minutes, anyhow." *       *       *       *       *

The 'copter went up the long, sloping, bulldozed snow-ramp. Soames
checked his radio contact. He nodded. The engines hummed and roared and
bellowed, and the ship lifted deliberately and floated away over the
icy waste. The little helicopter was very much alone above a landscape which had
never known a growing thing. Soames kept in radar contact and when he was ready he told the base,
"I'm going down now, hunting crevasses." He let the 'copter descend. The waste was featureless, then and for a
seemingly interminable time afterward. Then his estimated position
matched the site of the static-earth-shock-concussion-wave-occurrence. There seemed nothing about this part of the snow-desert which was
different from any other part. No. Over to the left. A wind-pattern
showed in the snow. It was already being blown away; its edges dulled. But it was rather far from a probable thing. There were
lines--hollows--where gusts had blown at the snow's surface. They were
spiral lines, tending toward a center. They had not the faintest
resemblance to the crater of an explosion which might have made an
earth-shock. Soames took a camera out of its place in the 'copter. Gail stared down. "I've seen something like that," she said puzzledly. "Not a picture. Certainly not a snow-field. I think it looks like a diagram of some
sort." "Try a storm-wind diagram," said Soames drily. "The way a cyclone ought
to look from directly overhead. The meteorology boys will break down and
cry when they see this picture!" He took pictures. The shadows of the wind-made indentations would come
out clearly in the film. "Unless," said Soames, "unless somebody got a snap of a whirlwind
touching a snow-field and bouncing up again, this will be a photographic
first. It's not an explosion-pattern, you'll notice. Wind and snow
weren't thrown away from the center. They were drawn toward it. Momentarily. It's an explosion inside out, an implosion-pattern to be
more exact." "I don't understand," said Gail. "An explosion," said Soames grimly, "is a bursting-out of a suddenly
present mass of gas. An implosion is a bursting-in of a suddenly present
vacuum. Set off a firecracker and you have an explosion. Break an
electric bulb and you have an implosion. That pattern behind us is an
implosion-pattern." "But how could such a thing be?" "If we knew," said Soames wrily, "maybe we'd be running away. Maybe we
should." The 'copter droned on and on and on. The ice-sheet continued unbroken. *       *       *       *       *

"There!" cried Gail, suddenly. She pointed. Blowing snow hid everything. Then there was a hole in the
whiteness, a shadow. The shadow stirred and an object too dark to be
snow appeared. It vanished again. "There's a sheltered place!" said Gail, "and there's something dark in
it!" Soames pulled the microphone to his lips. "Calling base," he said briefly. "Calling base.... Hello! I'm well
beyond the last radar-fix. I think I'm bearing about one seven oh
degrees from base. Get a loran fix on me. Make it quick. I may have to
land." He listened, pressing a button to activate the loran-relay which would
transmit a signal on signal from the base, so the bearing and distance
could be computed back at base. It was wiser to have such computations
done aground. He readied the camera again. Gail looked through the 'copter's binoculars. The peculiar
shadow--hole--opening in the blowing snow reappeared. Something in it
looked like a missile, only it was bright metal and much too large. It
lay askew on the ice. A part of it--a large part--was smashed. "Spaceship?" asked Gail, "do you think that's it?" "Heaven forbid!" said Soames. There was movement. One--two--three figures stared up from beside the
metal shape. A fourth appeared. Soames grimly took pictures. Gail gasped
suddenly:

"They're not men!" she said shakily. "Brad, they're children! Queerly
dressed children, with bare arms and legs! They're out there on the
snow! They'll freeze! We've got to help them!" "Calling base," said Soames into the microphone. "I'm landing. I have
to. If I don't report in twenty minutes come with caution--repeat with
caution--to see what's happened. I repeat. If I do not report in twenty
minutes come with caution, caution, caution to see what is the matter." The 'copter made a loud, loud noise as it went skittering down toward
the object--and the children--on the ice. CHAPTER 2


The snow-mist blew aside and there was plainly a ship lying partly
crushed upon the snow. Half its length was smashed, but he could see
that it had never flown with wings. There weren't any. "It _looks_ like a spaceship," said Gail breathlessly. Soames spoke between set teeth. "That would finish things for all of us!" And it would, without any qualifications. On a world already squabbling
and divided into two main power-groups and embittered neutrals; on a
world armed with weapons so deadly that only the fear of retaliation
kept the peace.... Contact with a farther-advanced race would not unite
humanity, either for defense or for the advantages such a contact might
reasonably bring. Instead, it would detonate hatred and suspicion into
madness. A higher civilization could very well tip the scales, if it gave one
side weapons. The world outside the Iron Curtain could not risk that the
Iron Curtain nations become best friends of possible invaders. The
communist leaders could not risk letting the free nations make alliance
with a higher technology and a greater science. So actual contact with a
more-advanced race would be the most deadly happening that could take
place on the world as it was today. *       *       *       *       *

Soames jumped out. He looked at the ship and felt sick. But he snapped a
quick photograph. It had no wings and had never owned any. It had been
probably a hundred feet long, all bright metal. Now nearly half of it
was crushed or crumpled by its fall. It must have been brought partly
under control before the impact, though, enough to keep it from total
destruction. And Soames, regarding it, saw that there had been no
propellers to support it or pull it through the air. There were no
air-ducts for jet-motors. It wasn't a jet. There were no rockets, either. The drive was of a kind so far unimagined
by men of here and now. Gail stood beside Soames, her eyes bright. She exclaimed, "Brad! It
isn't cold here!" The children looked at her interestedly. One of the girls spoke
politely, in wholly unintelligible syllables. The girls might be
thirteen or thereabouts. The boys were possibly a year older, sturdier
and perhaps more muscular than most boys of that age. All four were
wholly composed. They looked curious but not in the least alarmed, and
not in the least upset, as they'd have been had older companions been
injured or killed in the ship's landing. They wore brief garments that
would have been quite suitable for a children's beach-party in
mid-summer, but did not belong on the Antarctic ice-cap at any time. Each wore a belt with moderately large metal insets placed on either
side of its fastening. "Brad!" repeated Gail. "It's warm here! Do you realize it? And there's
no wind!" Soames swallowed. The camera hung from his hand. It either was or it
could be a spaceship that lay partly smashed upon the ice. He looked
about him with a sort of total grimness. There was a metal girder, quite
separate from the ship, which had apparently been set up slantingly in
the ice since the landing. It had no apparent purpose. Captain Moggs said peremptorily:

"Children! We insist on speaking to your parents! At once!" Gail moved forward. Soames saw, now, a small tripod near the ship. Something spun swiftly at its top. It had plainly been brought out from
inside the strange vessel. For a hundred yards in every direction there
was no wind or snow. More than that, the calm air was also warm. It was
unbelievable. "Do you hear me?" demanded Captain Moggs. "Children!" Gail said in a friendly fashion, smiling at the girls:

"I'm sure you don't understand a word I say, but won't you invite us to
visit?" Her tone and manner were plainly familiar to the children. One of the
two girls smiled and stood aside for Gail to enter the ship. Soames and
Captain Moggs followed. *       *       *       *       *

It was quite as bright inside the ship as out-of-doors. There were no
lights. It was simply bright. A part of the floor had buckled upward,
and the rest was not level, but the first impression was of brilliance
and the second was of a kind of simplicity which was bewildering. And
there was a third. It was of haste. The ship seemed to have been put
together with such urgent haste that nothing had been done for mere
finish or decoration. "I want to speak to the parents of these children!" said Captain Moggs
firmly. "I insist upon it!" "I suspect," said Soames grimly, "that in the culture these children
came from, the proper place for parents is the home. This is a
child-size spaceship, you'll notice." The size of the door and chairs proved it. He saw through a crumpled,
open doorway into the crushed part of the ship. There was machinery in
view, but no shafts or gears or power-leads. He guessed it to be
machinery because it could not be anything else. He saw a dented case of
metal, with an opened top. The boys had apparently dragged it into the
relatively undamaged part of the ship to work upon its contents. He
could see coils of bare metal, and arrangements which might have been
inductances. He took a sort of forlorn pride in guessing that the thing
was some sort of communication-device. There was a board with buttons on it. It might be a control-board, but
it didn't look like it. There was a metal box with a transparent plastic
front. One could see cryptic shapes of metal inside. Two bright-metal
balls mounted on a side-wall. They had holes in them, about the right
size for the hands of children like these to enter. There was a
two-foot, carefully machined spiral of metal, intruding into and
lessening the living-space of the ship. These things had functions he
could not even guess at. He found himself resentful of things which were
obviously the developments of science, and he could not even guess what
they were for. But alien? He looked at the boys. They were human children. They had
absolutely nothing of strangeness about them. Their hair, their eyes and
eyelashes were normal. Their noses. Their lips. Their teeth. In every
respect they were as human as he was, or Gail. He looked to the most urgent problem of the moment. He snapped pictures,
before anything else. One of the boys turned to the dented metal case. He began to arrange its
contents in a somehow final fashion. Soames guessed that it had been
damaged in the landing, and they'd made a repair. The second boy touched Soames' elbow and showed him the box with the
clear plastic front. He touched it, and an image appeared in the
plastic. It was an image of the landscape outside. He shifted the box,
and the landscape image flashed sidewise. He touched another control. The landscape flowed swiftly toward the viewer. It raced. Presently the
ground seemed to drop away and Soames found himself staring at a picture
which showed the ice-sheet and the sky and--very far away--the dark blue
line which was the sea, now a hundred miles distant. The boy nodded and made delicate adjustments. Then Soames looked at an
image of the Gissell Bay base from which he and the others had set out
an hour before. It was a remarkably clear image. Soames could even see
the supply-plane waiting on the runway until it was time for take-off. He knew unhappily that the box was something which was not a radar, but
performed all the functions of one and so many others that it was a
different thing entirely. Then Gail said:

"Brad! Look at this!" She held out two necklaces that the girls had given her. She showed him
the ornaments at their ends. One was a very tiny horse. It was
beautifully done, and obviously from life. The head was larger than an
ordinary horse's head would be. The body was lightly built. Each of its
tiny feet had three toes. Gail watched Soames' face. "You see? How about this?" The ornament of the other necklace was a tiny metal fish. It had fins
and a tail, but no scales. Instead, its body was protected by bony
armor. It was a ganoid fish, like a sturgeon. But it was not a sturgeon,
though sturgeons are now the main representatives of what once were
innumerable ganoid species. Soames shook his head, then spoke to Gail and Captain Moggs. "The ship
was built for children to operate, I can't imagine why. But there's
nothing like a weapon in view. I'm going to call Base before they get
alarmed." *       *       *       *       *

He made a report which sounded as if there were some minor trouble with
the 'copter and he'd landed. It did not check with his last call
speaking insistently of caution, but he couldn't help it. Other bases
were on the same wave-length. He said he'd call back. He intended to
call for help--in handling the matter of the children--as soon as it
would seem plausible that he needed help to get off the ground again. But he felt shaky, inside. The radar-report and the static and
earth-shock and concussion-wave of the night before had been improbable
enough. But this was more incredible still. The children's ship must
have appeared in the middle of all those unlikely phenomena. It was
reasonable for it to have crashed amid such violence. But where had it
come from, and why? They were human and they were members of a culture beside which the
current culture on Earth was barbaric. It could not be an Earth
civilization. On a world where for thousands of years men had killed
each other untidily in wars, and where they now prepared to destroy
themselves wholly in a final one, there was no possibility of such a
civilization existing in secret. But where was it? Soames stood by the 'copter, staring bemusedly at the ship. The two boys
came out. They went briskly to the shattered part of the ship and picked
up a metal girder neatly matching the one that leaned absurdly where it
was fixed in the icy surface. By the ease of their movements, it could
not be heavy. It would have to be aluminum or magnesium to be so light. Magnesium alloy, at a guess. One boy held it upright by the slanting beam. The other produced a small
object Soames could not see. He bent over the ice and moved his hand to
and fro. The new girder sank into the ice. They slanted it to meet the
one already fixed. They held it fast for a moment. They went back to the
wrecked ship. The second girder remained fixed, like the first one. Soames went to look. The metal beam was deeply imbedded in the ice which
somehow did not chill the air above it. He heard a small sound. One of the boys, the one in the brown,
tunic-like shirt, swept something across the plating of the crumpled
vessel. The plating parted like wet paper. Soames watched in a sort of
neither believing nor unbelieving detachment. A whole section of plating
came away. The boy in the brown tunic very briskly trimmed plating away
from a strength-member and had a third metal beam. Whatever instrument
he used, it cut metal as if it were butter. Both boys brought the third beam to where the others leaned to form a
tripod. But this third bit of metal was curved. They lowered it, and the
boy in the brown tunic matter-of-factly sliced through the metal, took
out a V-shaped piece, and obviously made the rest of the metal whole
once more. They raised it again, the boy moved his hand over the ice, it
sank into it, they held it a moment only, and went off to the ship. Soames went numbly to see what had happened. He picked up scraps of the
trimmed-away metal. Soames puzzled over the metal scraps. They did not look cut. They had
mirror-bright surfaces, as if melted apart. But there'd been no
flame.... The boys reappeared with the dented case that Soames guessed was a
communication device of some sort. They carried it to the new tripod. One of them carried, also, a complicated structure of small rods which
could be an antenna-system to transmit radiation of a type that Soames
could not conceive of. Captain Moggs came towards him from the 'copter. "I called Base," she said. "Two snow-weasels will start here within the
hour. Another 'copter is due in from an advanced observation post at any
moment. It will be sent here as soon as it arrives." Soames wondered numbly just how indiscreet she'd been, in a short-wave
conversation that could be picked up by any of the other-nation bases
that cared to listen in. But, just then, Gail came out of the ship. "Brad," she said anxiously, "what are the boys doing?" Soames knew only too well. If the dented case contained a communicator,
which would use so complicated an antenna as lay ready for use, there
could only be one answer. And there could be only one thing for him to
do, considering everything. "They're shipwrecked. They're setting up something to signal for help
with. They've landed on a world of rather primitive savages and they
want somebody to come and take them away." "It mustn't be permitted!" said Captain Moggs firmly. "The ship must be
examined! In our modern world, with the military situation what it
is...."

Soames looked at her ironically. *       *       *       *       *

He had metal scraps in his hand, those he'd picked up to examine as a
savage might examine sawdust. There was a threadlike extension of metal
from one scrap. He twisted it off and put it on his sleeve. He struck a
light with his cigarette lighter. He touched it to the fibre of metal. There was a burst of flame. His sleeve was singed. "Mostly magnesium," he said detachedly. "It's possible that they don't
think of fire as a danger. They may not use fire any more. We don't
light our houses with open flames any longer. They may not use flames at
all. But I'm a savage. I do." He sorted through the bits of silvery metal. Another morsel had a
wire-like projection. He saw the boy with the green tunic laying
something on the snow, from the ship to the tripod. "A power-line," he said appalled. "They've got to signal nobody knows
how far, with nobody can guess how much power in the signal. And they
use power-leads the size of sewing-thread! But of course the people who
built this ship would have superconductors!" Then he said, "I may be
committing suicide, but I think I ought to, rather than let ..."

He moved forward. His throat was dry. He struck his lighter and touched
the flame to the thread of metal on the second scrap. It flared. He
threw the whole piece just as all the flammable alloy caught fire. In
mid-air it became a ball of savage white incandescence that grew larger
and fiercer as it flew. It was a full yard in diameter when it fell upon
the dented case the boys had brought here. That burst into flame. The new-made tripod caught. Flame leaped thirty
feet into the air. Soames was scorched and blinded by the glare. Then
the fire died swiftly and snow-white ash-particles drifted down on every
hand. The boy in the brown tunic cried out fiercely. He held out his hand with
the thing that had cut metal glittering in it. Soames faced the fourteen-year-old grimly. The boy's face was contorted. There was more than anger in it. The boy in the green tunic clenched and
unclenched his hands. His expression was purest horror. One of the girls
sobbed. The other spoke in a tone of despair so great and grief so acute
that Soames was almost ashamed. Then the boy in the brown tunic spoke very, very bitterly to the girl
who'd evidently said something to restrain him. He turned his eyes from
Soames. He went into the ship, stumbling a little. The whole air of the three remaining children changed utterly. They had
been composed and confident and even zestful. They'd acted as if the
wrecking of their ship were an adventure rather than a catastrophe. But
now they were dazed by disaster. First one of the girls, and then the
second boy, and then the other girl went despairingly into the ship. *       *       *       *       *

Soames looked at Gail. The boy in the brown tunic had pointed at him
with the object that cut metal plates in half. He'd been stopped, most
likely, by the girl's grief-stricken words. Soames had a profound
conviction that the boy could easily have killed him. He had an equally
strong conviction that it could have been a low price to pay for
preventing the rest of these children's race from finding Earth. "I suppose," said Gail, "that you feel pretty badly." "I'm a savage. I've destroyed their signalling device. I may have kept
their civilization from destroying ours. I feel like a murderer," he
told her grimly. "And of children, at that. With luck, I may have kept
them from ever seeing their families again." After a long time Gail said with a curiously mirthless attempt at humor:

"Do you know, this is the biggest news story that's ever happened? And
do you know that nobody would believe it?" "But this," said Captain Moggs firmly, "is a matter of such military
importance that nothing must be said about it at all! Nothing!" Soames made no comment, but he didn't think the matter could be kept
secret. They waited. The children stayed in the ship. After a very long time the children appeared again. The girls' faces
were tear-streaked. They brought small possessions and placed them
neatly in the snow. They went back for more. "At a guess," said Soames, "that super-radar of theirs has shown them a
'copter on the way. They know they can't stay here. I've made it
impossible for them to hope to be found. They've got to let themselves
be taken away and they want to keep these things." The bringing-out of small objects ended. The boy in the brown tunic went
back in the ship. When he re-emerged, he said something in the bitterest of bitter voices. The girls turned their backs to the ship. The girl with brown eyes began
to weep. The boy in the green tunic shifted the small tripod to a new
position. As he carried it, the calmness and the warmth of the air
changed remarkably. There was a monstrous gust of icy wind, and warm
calm, and another gust. But when he put the tripod down again there was
only calm once more. Soames heard the droning of another 'copter, far away. The boy in the green tunic held out his hand. It had the glittering tiny
object in it. From a fifty-foot distance, he swept his hand from one end
to the other of the wrecked ship. Flame leaped up. The magnesium-alloy
vessel burned with a brightness that stung and dazzled the eyes. A
monstrous, a colossal flaming flare leaped and soared ... and died. Too
late, Soames fumbled for his camera. There was no longer a wrecked ship
on the ice. There were only a few, smoking, steaming fragments. When the second 'copter landed beside the first, the four children were
waiting composedly to be taken away. CHAPTER 3


The world's affairs went on as usual. There were the customary number of
international crises. The current diplomacy preferred blackmail by
threat of atomic war. Naturally, even Antarctica could be used to create turmoil. The
population of the continent was confined to the staffs of research-bases
established during the International Geophysical Year. In theory the
bases were an object-lesson in co-operation for a constructive purpose,
which splendid spirit of mutual trust and confidence must spread through
the world and some day lead to an era of blissful and unsuspicious
peacefulness. But that time was not yet. There'd been an outburst of static of an unprecedented kind. It had covered the globe on all wave-lengths, everywhere of absolute
maximum volume. It had used millions of times as much power as any
signal ever heard before. No atom bomb could have made it. Science and
governments, together, raised three very urgent questions. Who did it? How did they do it? And, why did they do it? Each major nation suspected the others. Scientific progress had become
the most urgent need of every nation, and was expected to be the end of
all of them. At Gissell Bay, however, the two 'copters came droning in, and settled
down, and Gail and Soames and Captain Moggs got out, and instantly
picked up a boy or a girl and hurried to get them out of the bitter
cold. The staff reacted immediately to the children. They tried to be
reassuring. They tried to find a language the children could understand. They failed. Then when the children spoke slowly and carefully, they
searched at least for familiar root-sounds. They found nothing. But
certainly the children felt themselves surrounded by people who wished
them well. *       *       *       *       *

The base photographer developed and printed Soames' pictures. The design
of the ship was clear and the children before it gave it scale. The
interior pictures were not so good, wrongly focused. Still, there was
plenty to substantiate Soames' report. Aside from the pictures there were the things the children had selected
to be brought. There was a cooking-pot. Its substance conducted heat in
one direction only. Heat could enter its outside surface, but not leave
it. Heat could leave its inside surface, but not enter it. Consequently,
when the lid was on, the outer surface absorbed heat from the air around
it and the inner surface released it, and the contents of the pot boiled
merrily without fuel, while the outside became coated with frost. Some of the physicists went about in a state of shock, trying to figure
out how it happened. Others, starry-eyed, pointed out that if the
cooking-pot had been a pipe, it could be submerged under a running
river, yield live steam by cooling off the water that flowed past it,
and that water would regain normal river temperature in the course of a
few miles of sunlit flow. In such a case, what price coal and petroleum? In fact, what price atomic power? The small tripod went up outside the base's main building. Instantly the
spinner began to turn, the wind ceased. In minutes the air ceased to be
biting. In tens of minutes it was warm. Meteorologists, refusing to
believe their senses, explored the boundaries of the calm area. They
came back, frost-bitten, swearing that there was a drop of eighty
degrees beyond the calm area, and a rise of temperature beyond the cold
belt. The tripod-spinner was a different application of the principle of
the cooking-pot. Somehow the spinning thing made an area that heat could
enter but not leave, and wind could not blow through. If the device
could be reversed, deserts would become temperate zones. As it was, the
Arctic and Antarctic could be made to bloom. The gadget was an
out-of-doors heat-pump. There was the box with the plastic sheet in it. One of the boys, very
composed, operated it. On request, he opened it up. There was nothing in
the case but a few curiously shaped bits of metal. The thing was too
simple to be comprehensible when one did not know the principle by which
it worked. The same trouble showed up with every device examined. These were important matters. Captain Moggs visibly grew in her own
estimation. She commandeered a supply plane and took off immediately for
Washington with the news of the event she'd witnessed, prints of Soames'
photographs, and samples of the children's possessions which could be
carried on her person. *       *       *       *       *

Back at the base the most urgent problem was communication with the
children. So Gail began gently to teach the taller girl some few English
words. Very shortly she greeted Soames anxiously when he came to see how
the process went. "Her name," said Gail, "is Zani. The other girl--the one with blue
eyes--is Mal, and the boy in the brown tunic is Fran and the one in the
green is Hod. She understands that there's a language to be learned. She's writing down words in some sort of writing of her own. She was
bewildered when I handed her a ball-point pen, but she understood as
soon as I demonstrated. They must write with something else. "But--what happens next? What's going to happen to the children? They've
no friends, no family, nobody to care what happens to them! They're in a
terrible fix, Brad!" "For which I'm responsible," said Soames grimly, "and about which I'm
already jittering." "I'm responsible too!" said Gail quickly. "I helped! What are you
worrying about?" "They burned up their ship," said Soames more grimly still. "Why?" She shook her head, watching his expression. "They treated us like harmless savages in the beginning," he said. "Then
I destroyed their only hope of getting in touch with their families and
friends. So one of the boys destroyed their ship. But the others knew,
and got ready for it by bringing some possessions out of it. Why?" "I'm not sure ..." said Gail. "If we'd captured their ship intact," Soames told her, "we'd have
studied it. Either we'd have come to understand it, so we could build
one too, or if we couldn't--being savages--we'd have given up entirely. In either case the children wouldn't matter to us. They'd simply have
been castaways. As it is, they've got us where they want us. I suspect
they've got some trinkets to trade with us, as we might offer beads to
bushmen. Let them or help them signal to their families, they'll say,
and their parents will make us all rich." Gail considered. Then she shook her head. "It won't work. We've got newspapers and news broadcasts. People will be
too scared to allow it." "Scared of four children?" demanded Soames. "You don't realize what newspapers are," Gail said with a trace of
wryness. "They don't live by printing news. They print 'true' stories,
serials. 'True' crime stories, to be continued tomorrow. 'True'
international-crisis suspense stories, for the next thrilling chapter
read tomorrow's paper or tune in to this station! That's what's printed
and broadcast, Brad. It's what people want and insist on. Don't you
realize how the children will be served up in the news? 'Creatures From
Space in Antarctica! Earth Helpless!'" She grimaced. "There won't be any
demand for human-interest stories by Gail Haynes, telling about four
nicely-raised children who need to be helped to get back to their
parents. The public wouldn't like that so much. "You'll see," Gail continued, "I'm very much afraid, Brad, that
presently you and I will be the only people in the world who don't think
the children had better be killed, for safety. You did the right thing
for us, in not letting them signal to their families. But you don't need
to worry about too much sympathy for the children!" "And I got them into it," said Soames, morosely. "We did," insisted Gail. "And we did right. But I'm going to do what I
can to keep it from being worse for them than I can help. If you'll join
me--"

"Naturally!" said Soames. *       *       *       *       *

He went moodily away. He was unaware of Gail's expression as she looked
after him. She turned slowly to the girl with her. He found the other three children. They were the center of an agitated
group of staff-members, trying to communicate by words and gestures,
while the children tried not to show disturbance at their vehemence. A
cosmic-particle specialist told Soames the trouble. Among the children's
possessions there was a coil of thread-fine copper wire. Somebody had
snipped off a bit of it for test, and discovered that the wire was
superconductive. A superconductor is a material which has no electrical
resistance whatever. In current Earth science tin and mercury and a few
alloys could be made into superconductors by being cooled below 18 deg. Kelvin, or four hundred odd degrees Fahrenheit below zero. Above that
temperature, superconductivity did not exist. But the children's wire
was a superconductor at room temperature. A thread the size of a cobweb
could carry all the current turned out by Niagara without heating up. A
heavy-duty dynamo could be replaced by a superconductive dynamo that
would almost fit in one's pocket. A thousand-horse-power motor would
need to be hardly larger than the shaft it would turn. It would mean ...

"Let 'em alone!" snapped Soames. "They couldn't tell you how it was
made, even if they could talk English! Give them a chance to learn how
to talk! They've had a bad time anyhow." He took the boys and the other girl away. He led them to his own
quarters. He whistled for his dog, Rex, and showed the children how to
play with him. They began to relax and enjoy the fun heretofore unknown
to them. *       *       *       *       *

Soames left his quarters and held his head. There was much to worry
about. For example, Captain Moggs in Washington, there to pass on
information perfectly calculated to bring about confusion. And at the
base itself a completely natural routine event took place to make the
confusion twice confounded. The director of the Gissell Bay base made his normal, regular,
short-wave report to the scientific organization which controlled and
co-ordinated the base's activities and kept it supplied and equipped. The Gissell Bay director was an eminent scientist. He talked comfortably
to an even more eminent scientist in the capital of the United States. Naturally, the static scream was mentioned in Washington. As naturally,
the discovery of a crashed spaceship came up. It was important. It
should be reported. It was. The Gissell Bay director went into details
about the children and about the gadgets they'd selected to be salvaged
when they destroyed their ship. A complete account preceded Captain
Moggs to Washington, but not to the military. She was in charge of that
angle. The eminent scientist in Washington naturally discussed the report with
other scientists who would naturally be as much concerned as himself. Later in the morning, one of those scientists received a reporter. The
reporter asked various routine questions. In all innocence, the
scientist who had been told by the scientist who had been told by the
director at Gissell Bay, told the reporter. And therefore, as Captain Moggs rode toward the Pentagon she did not
notice the headlines, but they had already been seen in the Pentagon. "SPACESHIP LANDS IN ANTARCTICA! _Alien Life Forms Aboard_
       Scientists Alarmed." No newspaper would spoil a good story by underplaying it. Wire services
wasted no time. There were other similar headlines all over the United
States. It should be added that the first editions of the first newspapers to
print the story did mention that the invaders were in appearance like
human children, but somehow it did not sound plausible. Also, other
sorts of descriptions were more exciting. The description of children as
invaders was classed as a guess. Then as a bad guess. Then as something
so preposterous that it wasn't worth relating. Anyhow the point of the
story was that a ship from off the Earth had landed, with intelligent
beings in it, equipped with marvellous devices. And marvellous devices
would naturally--in the state of the world at that time--be weapons. So
rewrite men expanded the news service dispatches by the sound
business-like rule that the public is entitled to get what it wants. The
public likes to be scared. A lieutenant-general greeted Captain Moggs at the Pentagon. "This business is true?" he demanded. "A spaceship from off Earth has
landed? It had a crew? The crew's still alive? Hell and damnation! What
weapons have they got?" *       *       *       *       *

Captain Moggs stammered but managed to give answers. They did not give
an impression of a properly complete investigation of the landing of an
alien spaceship. In particular, her statement that the crew of the ship
was human children simply did not register. "Hah!" said the lieutenant-general, bitterly. "Nothing to go on! You,
Captain whatever-your-name-is, you were there when the ship was found,
you say. Very well. Keep your mouth shut. Get a plane and go back." He addressed his men, "Bring up all their stuff, the stuff they brought
from their ship. Get the stray unburned parts of their ship. Get our
guided missile men set to work on them and find out how the drive
worked. They ought to come up with something! Round up some
special-weapons men to investigate those fragments too. See what they've
got! Work from these pictures until we've got the samples." He swung
back to Captain Moggs. "You go back and bring those aliens and
everything that can be brought! Bring everything! And in the meantime,"
he looked around his office, "a lid goes on this! Top secret--top-top
secret! The newspapers have to be choked off. Deny everything!" He waved his hand. She left the office. Her plane was barely south of Virginia when a spokesman for the Pentagon
assured a news conference that the Defense Department had no information
about an alleged non-terrestrial spaceship landing in Antarctica. The
newspaper reporters pulled newspapers from their pockets. The Pentagon
had been denying things right and left, in obedience to orders. Now the
newspapers printed reproductions of United Nations records, showing that
at the request of the Defense Department four United Nations passports
had been issued. The records said that the passports were for Jane and
John Doe, and Ruth and Richard Roe, who obviously could not enter the
United States without proper documents. The UN information on those
persons was: birthplace, unknown; nationality, unknown; age, unknown;
description, not given; race, unknown; occupation, unknown. And all the
newspapers carried headlines about "SPACESHIP CREW US-BOUND." Or:

      "TAKE US TO YOUR PRESIDENT"--ALIENS

 _Spaceship Crew Demands Top-Level Conference._
              Ultimatum Hinted At

It was not, of course, exclusively an American affair. The London
_Times_ pointed out the remarkable amount of detailed speculation in the
air, as compared with the minute amount of admitted facts. But
elsewhere: _Pravda_ insisted that the aliens had refused to enter into
discussions with America after learning of its capitalistic social
system and tyrannical government. _Ce Soir_ claimed exclusive private
information that the crew of the spaceship--which was twelve hundred
metres long--were winged monsters of repellant aspect. The official
newspaper in Bucharest, to the contrary, said that they were intelligent
reptiles. In Cairo it was believed and printed that the spacecraft was
manned by creatures of protean structure, remarkably resembling
legendary _djinns_. There were other descriptions, all attributing monstrous qualities and
brutally aggressive actions to the aliens. And at Gissell Bay the staff became rather fond of four young people
whose names were Zani, Fran, Hod and Mal, because they had been very
well brought up by their parents and were thoroughly nice children. *       *       *       *       *

They were tense, and they were desperately anxious and uneasy. But they
displayed a resolute courage that made moderately decent people like
them very much. Most of the research-staff wanted very badly to ask them
questions, but that was impossible, so they studied the rather fuzzy
photographs of the inside of the ship--the base photographer had run
off several sets of extra prints--and poked helplessly at the things the
children had brought with them, and racked their brains to imagine how
such things work. The spinning thing atop the tripod made it quite
pleasant to be out-of-doors around the Gissell Bay base, though there
were forty-mile winds and thermometers read ten below zero two hundred
yards from the thing Hod had set up. The cooking-pot boiled merrily
without fuel, with an increasingly thick layer of frost on its outside. The thing Soames had called a super-radar allowed a penguin rookery to
be watched in detail without disturbing the penguins, and Fran
obligingly loaned his pocket instrument--the one that cut metal like
butter--to the physicists of the staff. He had to show them how to use it, though. It was a flat metal case
about the size of a pocket cigarette lighter. It had two very simple
controls, and a highly ingenious gimmick which kept it from turning
itself on by accident. In an oblique fashion, it was a heat-pump. One control turned it on and
intensified or diminished its effect. The other controlled the area it
worked on. In any material but iron, it made heat flow together toward
the center of its projected field. Pointed at a metal bar, the heat from
both ends flowed to the center, where the pocket device was aimed. The
center became intensely hot. The rest went intensely cold. In seconds a
bronze bar turned red-hot along a line a hundredth of an inch thick. Then it melted, a layer the thickness of tissue-paper turned liquid and
one could pull the bar apart or slide it sidewise to separate it. But
one needed to hold the bar in thick gloves, because liquid air could
drip off if one were not careful. And it did not work on iron or steel. Soames took Fran with Mal and Hod, to the improvised schoolroom where
Gail labored to give Zani a minimum vocabulary of English words. Rex
went happily along with the others. Zani greeted the dog rapturously. She got down on the floor with him and
tussled with him, her face beaming. Soames' mouth dropped open. The other children hadn't known there was
such a thing as a dog. They'd had to learn to play with Rex. But Zani
knew about dogs and how to play with them on sight. "I suppose," said Gail, not knowing of Soames' astonishment, "Zani will
help me teach the other children some words." But the boy Hod had picked up the ball-point pen Gail had needed to show
Zani the use of. He didn't need to be shown. Without a glance at it, he
began to write. A moment later he read off, slowly and clumsily and from
the completely cryptic marks he'd made, the English words that Gail had
taught Zani. Fran and Mal joined him. They painstakingly practiced the
pronunciation of words Gail had taught Zani but not them. It was another development that did not make sense. CHAPTER 4


Captain Moggs landed and went directly to the main building of the base. The children were playing with Rex. "Children," she said with authority, "go inside and pack up. We are
going back to the United States." The girl Mal seemed to understand and went to tell the others. Captain Moggs came upon Soames, feverishly making up bundles of objects
the children had brought out of their ship before Fran--in the brown
tunic--had burned it. Captain Moggs said approvingly:

"You must have anticipated my orders! But I thought it unwise to tell
you by radio on the inter-base wave-length." Soames said curtly:

"I don't know anything about your orders. They're refuelling your ship
now. We need to get it aloft with Gail and the kids inside of fifteen
minutes. "We were clearing away a snow-weasel to take to the woods," he growled. "Not the woods, but the wilds. We've got company coming." "Impossible!" said Captain Moggs. "I have top-level orders for this
whole affair to be hushed up. The existence of the children is to be
denied. Everybody is to deny everything. Visitors cannot be permitted! It's absolutely unthinkable!" Soames grinned mirthlessly. "It's six hours since the French asked if they might come over for a
social call. We stalled them. The English suggested a conference about
the extrawd'n'ry burst of static the other night. They were stalled off
too. But just about an hour ago the Russians pulled their stunt. Emergency S.O.S. One of their planes with engine trouble. Can't get
home. It's heading this way for an emergency landing, convoyed by
another plane. Can you imagine us refusing permission for a ship in
trouble to land?" "I don't believe it's in trouble!" said Captain Moggs angrily. "Neither do I," said Soames. He passed a wrapped parcel to one side. "They must be acting on orders," he said coldly. "And we don't know what
their orders are. Until we realized you'd get here first, we were making
ready to take the kids off in a snow-weasel. If we kept to soft snow, no
plane could land near them. It's just possible somebody could claim the
kids asked protection from us decadent, warmongering Americans, and they
might be equipped to shoot it out. We aren't." Some of the base specialists appeared to help Soames carry the parcels
to the transport. Gail appeared, muffled up for travel. Fran and Zani were with her,
similarly clothed. They carried garments for the others. Captain Moggs fled to the communications room to demand radio contact to
Washington. But the radio was busy. The French, having been stalled off
when they suggested a visit, were now urged to call immediately. The
English, similarly put off, were now invited to drop in for tea. As
Captain Moggs sputtered, the radio went on to organize a full-scale
conference on common observational problems, plus a seminar on Antarctic
scientific research in general. It would be a beautiful example of
whole-hearted co-operation among scientific groups of different
nationalities. It should set a charming example for the rest of the
world. But members of the staff, arranging this swift block of possible
trouble-making by unwelcome visitors, wore the unpleasant expression of
people who are preparing to be very polite to people attempting to put
something over on them. It was notable that the few sporting weapons at
the base were passed out to those who could use them most effectively if
the need arose. The transport's fuel-tanks were topped. The remaining two children
struggled into flying garments. The boy Hod took down the small tripod
with its spinning thing on top. Instantly the area about the base main
building became bitter cold. The children climbed into the transport
after Gail. Soames, swearing, climbed in after a still expostulating Captain Moggs. He did not like the idea of leaving while any chance of trouble stayed
behind. But as a matter of fact, his leaving with the others removed
nearly the last chance of it. *       *       *       *       *

It was, though, the rational thing to do. Representatives of the other nations would land at the American base,
and assure themselves that there were no extraterrestrials in hiding nor
any signs of a spaceship anywhere about. And there would result a
scientific conference that would do some good. The extraordinary burst
of static would be discussed, with no conclusion whatever. But the
Americans would be able to make an agreement on methods of observation
with the other bases so that observations in the future would yield a
little more information than had been secured before. Gail kept a quasi-maternal eye on the children until they dozed off. But
she watched Soames' expression, too. She and Soames and Captain Moggs
rode in the passenger section of the transport a few seats behind the
children. "I wish I could understand," said Gail, in a low tone to Soames. "The
other children know everything I've taught Zani, and there's been no way
for them to know! They know things they weren't in the room to learn,
and Zani didn't have time to tell them! Yet it doesn't seem like
telepathy. If they were telepaths they could exchange thoughts without
speaking. But they chatter all the time!" "If they'd been telepaths," said Soames, "they'd have known I was going
to burn their signalling apparatus. They could have stopped me, or tried
to, anyhow." 