



Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction October 1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed. LION

                                LOOSE


                         By JAMES H. SCHMITZ


     _The most dangerous of animals is not the biggest and
      fiercest--but the one that's hardest to stop. Add
      intelligence to that ... and you may come to a wrong
      conclusion as to what the worst menace is...._


                     _Illustrated by Schoenherr_

       *       *       *       *       *




For twelve years at a point where three major shipping routes of the
Federation of the Hub crossed within a few hours' flight of one
another, the Seventh Star Hotel had floated in space, a great golden
sphere, gleaming softly in the void through its translucent shells of
battle plastic. The Star had been designed to be much more than a
convenient transfer station for travelers and freight; for some years
after it was opened to the public, it retained a high rating among
the more exotic pleasure resorts of the Hub. The Seventh Star Hotel
was the place to have been that season, and the celebrities and fat
cats converged on it with their pals and hangers-on. The Star blazed
with life, excitement, interstellar scandals, tinkled with streams of
credits dancing in from a thousand worlds. In short, it had started
out as a paying proposition. But gradually things changed. The Star's entertainment remained as
delightfully outrageous as ever, the cuisine as excellent; the
accommodations and service were still above reproach. The fleecing, in
general, became no less expertly painless. But one had _been_ there. By its eighth year, the Star was dated. Now, in its twelfth, it lived
soberly off the liner and freighter trade, four fifths of the guest
suites shut down, the remainder irregularly occupied between ship
departures. And in another seven hours, if the plans of certain men went through,
the Seventh Star Hotel would abruptly wink out of existence. *       *       *       *       *

Some fifty or sixty early diners were scattered about the tables on
the garden terraces of Phalagon House, the Seventh Star Hotel's most
exclusive eatery. One of them had just finished his meal, sat smoking
and regarding a spiraling flow of exquisitely indicated female figures
across the garden's skyscape with an air of friendly approval. He was
a large and muscular young man, deeply tanned, with shoulders of
impressive thickness, an aquiline nose, and dark, reflective eyes. After a minute or two, he yawned comfortably, put out the cigarette,
and pushed his chair back from the table. As he came to his feet,
there was a soft bell-note from the table ComWeb. He hesitated, said,
"Go ahead." "Is intrusion permitted?" the ComWeb inquired. "Depends," the guest said. "Who's calling?" "The name is Reetal Destone." He grinned, appeared pleasantly surprised. "Put the lady through." There was a brief silence. Then a woman's voice inquired softly,
"Quillan?" "Right here, doll! Where--"

"Seal the ComWeb, Quillan." He reached down to the instrument, tapped the seal button, said, "All
right. We're private." "Probably," the woman's voice said. "But better scramble this, too. I
want to be very sure no one's listening." Quillan grunted, slid his left hand into an inner coat pocket, briefly
fingered a device of the approximate size and shape of a cigarette,
drew his hand out again. "Scrambling!" he announced. "Now, what--"

"Mayday, Quillan," the soft voice said. "Can you come immediately?" Quillan's face went expressionless. "Of course. Is it urgent?" "I'm in no present danger. But we'd better waste no time." "Is it going to take real hardware? I'm carrying a finger gun at the
moment." "Then go to your rooms and pick up something useful," Reetal said. "This should take real hardware, all right." "All right. Then where do I go?" "I'll meet you at your door. I know where it is." When Quillan arrived, she was standing before the door to his suite, a
tall blonde in a sleeveless black and gold sheath; a beautiful body, a
warm, lovely, humorous face. The warmth and humor were real, but
masked a mind as impersonally efficient as a computer, and a taste for
high and dangerous living. When Quillan had last met Reetal Destone, a
year and a half before, the taste was being satisfied in industrial
espionage. He hadn't heard of her activities since then. She smiled thoughtfully at him as he came up. "I'll wait outside," she
said. "We're not talking here." Quillan nodded, went on into his living room, selected a gun belt and
holstered gun from a suitcase, fastened the belt around his waist
under the coat, and came out. "Now what?" "First a little portal-hopping--"

He followed her across the corridor and into a tube portal, watched as
she tapped out a setting. The exit light flashed a moment later; they
stepped out into a vacant lounge elsewhere in the same building,
crossed it, entered another portal. After three more shifts, they
emerged into a long hall, dimly lit, heavily carpeted. There was no
one in sight. "Last stop," Reetal said. She glanced up at his face. "We're on the
other side of the Star now, in one of the sections they've closed up. I've established a kind of emergency headquarters here. The Star's
nearly broke, did you know?" "I'd heard of it." "That appears to be part of the reason for what's going on." Quillan said, "What's going on?" Reetal slid her arm through his, said, "Come on. That's my, hm-m-m,
unregistered suite over there. Big boy, it's very, very selfish of me,
but I was extremely glad to detect your name on the list of newly
arrived guests just now! As to what's going on ... the _Camelot_
berths here at midnight, you know." Quillan nodded. "I've some business with one of her passengers." Reetal bent to unlock the entrance door to the indicated suite. "The
way it looks now," she remarked, "the odds are pretty high that you're
not going to keep that appointment." "Why not?" "Because shortly after the _Camelot_ docks and something's been
unloaded from her, the _Camelot_ and the Seventh Star Hotel are
scheduled to go _poof!_ together. Along with you, me, and some twelve
thousand other people. And, so far, I haven't been able to think of a
good way to keep it from happening." Quillan was silent a moment. "Who's scheduling the poof?" he asked. "Some old acquaintances of ours are among them. Come on in. What
they're doing comes under the heading of destroying the evidence." *       *       *       *       *

She locked the door behind them, said, "Just a moment," went over to
the paneled wall, turned down a tiny silver switch. "Room portal," she
said, nodding at the wall. "It might come in handy. I keep it turned
off most of the time." "Why are you turning it on now?" Quillan asked. "One of the Star's stewards is working on this with me. He'll be along
as soon as he can get away. Now I'll give you the whole thing as
briefly as I can. The old acquaintances I mentioned are some boys of
the Brotherhood of Beldon. Movaine's here; he's got Marras Cooms and
Fluel with him, and around thirty of the Brotherhood's top guns. Nome
Lancion's coming in on the _Camelot_ in person tonight to take charge. Obviously, with all that brass on the job, they're after something
very big. Just what it is, I don't yet know. I've got one clue, but a
rather puzzling one. Tell you about that later. Do you know Velladon?" "The commodore here?" Quillan nodded. "I've never met him but I know
who he is." Reetal said, "He's been manager of the Seventh Star Hotel for the past
nine years. He's involved in the Beldon outfit's operation. So is the
chief of the Star's private security force--his name's Ryter--and half
a dozen other Star executives. They've got plenty of firepower, too;
close to half the entire security force, I understand, including all
the officers. That would come to nearly seventy men. There's reason to
believe the rest of the force was disarmed and murdered by them in the
subspace section of the Star about twelve hours ago. They haven't been
seen since then. "Now, Velladon, aside from his share in whatever they're after, has
another reason for wanting to wipe out the Star in an unexplained
blowup. There I have definite information. Did you know the Mooley
brothers owned the Star?" "Yes." "I've been working for the Mooleys the past eight months," Reetal
said, "checking up on employees at Velladon's level for indications of
graft. And it appears the commodore had been robbing them blind here
for at least several years." "Sort of risky thing to try with the Mooleys, from what I hear,"
Quillan remarked. "Yes. Very. Velladon had reason to be getting a little desperate about
that. Two men were planted here a month ago. One of them is Sher
Heraga, the steward I told you about. The other man came in as a
bookkeeper. Two weeks ago, Heraga got word out that the bookkeeper had
disappeared. Velladon and Ryter apparently got wise to what he was
trying to do. So the Mooleys sent me here to find out exactly what was
going on before they took action. I arrived four days ago." She gave a regretful little headshake. "I waited almost a day before
contacting Heraga. It seemed advisable to move very cautiously in the
matter. But that made it a little too late to do anything. Quillan,
for the past three days, the Seventh Star Hotel has been locked up
like a bank vault. And except for ourselves, only the people who are
in on the plot are aware of it." "The message transmitters are inoperative?" he asked. Reetal nodded. "The story is that a gravitic storm center in the area
has disrupted transmissions completely for the time being." "What about incoming ships?" "Yours was the only one scheduled before the _Camelot_ arrives. It
left again eight hours ago. Nobody here had been let on board. The
guests who wanted to apply for outgoing berths were told there were
none open, that they'd have to wait for the _Camelot_." She went over to a desk, unlocked a drawer, took out a sheaf of
papers, and handed one of them to Quillan. "That's the layout of the
Star," she said. "This five-level building over by the shell is the
Executive Block. The Brotherhood and the commodore's men moved in
there this morning. The Block is the Star's defense center. It's
raid-proofed, contains the control officers and the transmitter and
armament rooms. About the standard arrangement. While they hold the
Executive Block, they have absolute control of the Star." "If it's the defense center, it should be practically impossible to do
anything about them there," Quillan agreed. "They could close it up,
and dump the air out of the rest of the Star in a minute, if they had
to. But there must be ... well, what about the lifeboats in the
subspace section--and our pals must have a getaway ship stashed away
somewhere?" "They have two ships," Reetal said. "A souped-up armed freighter the
Brotherhood came in on, and a large armed yacht which seems to be the
commodore's personal property. Unfortunately, they're both in subspace
locks." "Why unfortunately?" "Because they've sealed off subspace. Try portaling down there, and
you'll find yourself looking at a battle-plastic bulkhead. There's no
way of getting either to those ships or to the lifeboats." Quillan lifted his eyebrows. "And _that_ hasn't caused any comment? What about the maintenance crews, the warehouse men, the--"

"All the work crews were hauled out of subspace this morning," Reetal
said. "On the quiet, the Star's employees have been told that a gang
of raiders was spotted in the warehouse area, and is at present
cornered there. Naturally, the matter isn't to be mentioned to the
guests, to avoid arousing unnecessary concern. And that explains
everything very neatly. The absence of the security men, and why
subspace is sealed off. Why the Executive Block is under guard, and
can't be entered--and why the technical and office personnel in there
don't come out, and don't communicate out. They've been put on
emergency status, officially." *       *       *       *       *

"Yunk," Quillan said disgustedly after a moment. "This begins to look
like a hopeless situation, doll!" "True." "Let's see now--"

Reetal interrupted, "There is one portal still open to subspace. That's in the Executive Block, of course, and Heraga reports it's
heavily guarded." "How does he know?" "The Block's getting its meals from Phalagon House. He floated a diner
in there a few hours ago." "Well," Quillan said, brightening, "perhaps a deft flavoring of
poison--"

Reetal shook her head. "I checked over the hospital stocks. Not a
thing there that wouldn't be spotted at once. Unless we can clobber
them thoroughly, we can't afford to make them suspicious with a trick
like that." "Poison would be a bit rough on the office help, too," Quillan
conceded. "They wouldn't be in on the deal." "No, they're not. They're working under guard." "Gas ... no, I suppose not. It would take too long to whip up
something that could turn the trick." Quillan glanced at his watch. "If the _Camelot_ docks at midnight, we've around six and a half hours
left, doll! And I don't find myself coming up with any brilliant
ideas. What have you thought of?" Reetal hesitated a moment. "Nothing very brilliant either," she said
then. "But there are two things we might try as a last resort." "Let's hear them." "I know a number of people registered in the Star at present who'd be
carrying personal weapons. If they were told the facts, I could
probably line up around twenty who'd be willing to make a try to get
into the Executive Block, and take over either the control offices or
the transmitter room. If we got a warning out to the _Camelot_, that
would break up the plot. Of course, it wouldn't necessarily save the
Star." "No," Quillan said, "but it's worth trying if we can't think of
something better. How would you get them inside?" "We could crowd twenty men into one of those diner trucks, and Heraga
could take us in." "What kind of people are your pals?" "A few smugglers and confidence men I've had connections with. Fairly
good boys for this sort of thing. Then there's an old millionaire
sportsman, with a party of six, waiting to transfer to the _Camelot_
for a safari on Jontarou. Old Philmarron isn't all there, in my
opinion, but he's dead game and loves any kind of a ruckus. We can
count on him and his friends, if they're not too drunk at the moment. Still ... that's not too many to set against something less than a
hundred professional guns, even though some of them must be down on
the two ships." "No, not enough." Quillan looked thoughtful. "What's the other idea?" "Let the cat out of the bag generally. Tell the guests and the
employees out here what's going on, and see if somebody can think of
something that might be done." He shook his head. "What you'd set off with that would be anywhere
between a riot and a panic. The boys in the Executive Block would
simply give us the breathless treatment. Apparently, they prefer to
have everything looking quiet and normal when the _Camelot_ gets
here--"

"But they don't have to play it that way," Reetal agreed. "We might be
dead for hours before the liner docks. If they keep the landing lock
closed until what they want has been unloaded, nobody on the _Camelot_
would realize what had happened before it was too late." *       *       *       *       *

There was a moment's silence. Then Quillan said, "You mentioned you'd
picked up a clue to what they're after. What was that?" "Well, that's a curious thing," Reetal said. "On the trip out here, a
young girl name of Solvey Kinmarten attached herself to me. She didn't
want to talk much, but I gathered she was newly married, and that her
husband was on board and was neglecting her. She's an appealing little
thing, and she seemed so forlorn and upset that I adopted her for the
rest of the run. After we arrived, of course, I pretty well forgot
about the Kinmartens and their troubles. "A few hours ago, Solvey suddenly came bursting into the suite where
I'm registered. She was shaking all over. After I calmed her down a
bit, she spilled out her story. She and her husband, Brock Kinmarten,
are rest wardens. With another man named Eltak, whom Solvey describes
as 'some sort of crazy old coot,' they're assigned to escort two
deluxe private rest cubicles to a very exclusive sanatorium on
Mezmiali. But Brock told Solvey at the beginning of the trip that this
was a very unusual assignment, that he didn't want her even to come
near the cubicles. That wouldn't have bothered her so much, she says,
but on the way here Brock became increasingly irritable and
absent-minded. She knew he was worrying about the cubicles, and she
began to wonder whether they weren't involved in something illegal. The pay was very high; they're both getting almost twice the regular
warden fee for the job. One day, she found an opportunity to do a
little investigating. "The cubicles are registered respectively to a Lady Pendrake and a
Major Pendrake. Lady Pendrake appears to be genuine; the cubicle is
unusually large and constructed somewhat differently from the ones
with which Solvey was familiar, but it was clear that it had an
occupant. However, the life indicator on 'Major Pendrake's cubicle
registered zero when she switched it on. If there was something inside
it, it wasn't a living human being. "That was all she learned at the time, because she was afraid Brock
might catch her in the cubicle room. Here in the Star, the cubicles
were taken to a suite reserved for Lady Pendrake. The other man,
Eltak, stayed in the suite with the cubicles, while the Kinmartens
were given other quarters. However, Brock was still acting oddly and
spending most of his time in the Pendrake suite. So this morning,
Solvey swiped his key to the suite and slipped in when she knew the
two men had left it." [Illustration]

"She'd barely got there when she heard Brock and Eltak at the door
again. She ran into the next room, and hid in a closet. Suddenly there
was a commotion in the front room, and Solvey realized that men from
the Star's security force had arrived and were arresting Brock and
Eltak. They hauled both of them away, then floated the cubicles out
and on a carrier and took them off too, locking the suite behind them. "Solvey was in a complete panic, sure that she and Brock had become
involved in some serious breach of the Warden Code. She waited a few
minutes, then slipped out of the Pendrake suite, and looked me up to
see if I couldn't help them. I had Heraga check, and he reported that
the Kinmarten suite was under observation. Evidently, they wanted to
pick up the girl, too. So I tucked her away in one of the suites in
this section, and gave her something to put her to sleep. She's there
now." *       *       *       *       *

Quillan said, "And where are the prisoners and the cubicles?" "In the Executive Block." "How do you know?" Reetal smiled briefly. "The Duke of Fluel told me." "Huh? The Brotherhood knows you're here?" "Relax," Reetal said. "Nobody but Heraga knows I'm working for the
Mooleys. I told the Duke I had a big con deal set up when the
_Camelot_ came in--I even suggested he might like to get in on it. He
laughed, and said he had other plans. But he won't mention to anyone
that I'm here." "Why not?" "Because," Reetal said dryly, "what the Duke is planning to get in on
is an hour of tender dalliance. Before the _Camelot_ arrives,
necessarily. The cold-blooded little skunk!" She hesitated a moment;
when she spoke again, her voice had turned harsh and nasal, wicked
amusement sounding through it. "Sort of busy at the moment,
sweetheart, but we might find time for a drink or two later on in the
evening, eh?" Quillan grunted. "You're as good at the voice imitations as ever. How
did you find out about the cubicles?" "I took a chance and fed him a Moment of Truth." "With Fluel," Quillan said thoughtfully, "that was taking a chance!" "Believe me, I was aware of it! I've run into card-carrying sadists
before, but the Duke's the only one who scares me silly. But it did
work. He dropped in for a about a minute and a half, and came out
without noticing a thing. Meanwhile, I'd got the answers to a few
questions. The bomb with which they're planning to mop up behind them
already has been planted up here in the normspace section. Fluel
didn't know where; armaments experts took care of it. It's armed now. There's a firing switch on each of their ships, and both switches have
to be tripped before the thing goes off. Part of what they're after is
in those Pendrake rest cubicles--"

"Part of it?" Quillan asked. "Uh-huh. An even hundred similar cubicles will be unloaded from the
_Camelot_--the bulk of the haul; which is why Nome Lancion is
supervising things on the liner. I started to ask what was in the
cubicles, but I saw Fluel was beginning to lose that blank look they
have under Truth, and switched back to light chitchat just before he
woke up. Yaco's paying for the job--or rather, it _will_ pay for the
stuff, on delivery, and no questions asked." "That's not very much help, is it?" Quillan said after a moment. "Something a big crooked industrial combine like Yaco thinks it can
use--"

"It must expect to be able to use it to extremely good advantage,"
Reetal said. "The Brotherhood will collect thirty million credits for
their part of the operation. The commodore's group presumably won't do
any worse." She glanced past Quillan toward the room portal. "It's
O.K., Heraga! Come in." *       *       *       *       *

Sher Heraga was a lean, dark-skinned little man with a badly bent
nose, black curly hair, and a nervous look. He regretted, he said,
that he hadn't been able to uncover anything which might be a lead to
the location of the bomb. Apparently, it wasn't even being guarded. And, of course, a bomb of the size required here would be quite easy
to conceal. "If they haven't placed guards over it," Reetal agreed, "it'll take
blind luck to spot it! Unless we can get hold of one of the men who
knows where it's planted--"

There was silence for some seconds. Then Quillan said, "Well, if we
can't work out a good plan, we'd better see what we can do with one of
the bad ones. Are the commodore's security men wearing uniforms?" Heraga shook his head, "Not the ones I saw." "Then here's an idea," Quillan said. "As things stand, barging into
the Executive Block with a small armed group can't accomplish much. It
might be more interesting than sitting around and waiting to be blown
up, but it still would be suicide. However, if we could get things
softened up and disorganized in there first--"

"Softened up and disorganized how?" Reetal asked. "We can use that notion you had of having Heraga float in another
diner. This time, I'm on board--in a steward's uniform, in case the
guards check." "They didn't the first time," Heraga said. "Sloppy of them. Well, they're just gun hands. Anyway, once we're
inside I shuck off the uniform and get out. Heraga delivers his
goodies, and leaves again--"

Reetal gave him a look. "You'll get shot down the instant you're seen,
dope!" "I think not. There're two groups in there--around a hundred men in
all--and they haven't had time to get well acquainted yet. I'll have
my gun in sight, and anyone who sees me should figure I belong to the
other group, until I run into one of the Brotherhood boys who knows me
personally." "Then that's when you get shot down. I understand the last time you
and the Duke of Fluel met, he woke up with lumps." "The Duke doesn't love me," Quillan admitted. "But there's nothing
personal between me and Movaine or Marras Cooms--and I'll have a
message for Movaine." "What kind of a message?" "I'll have to play that by ear a little. It depends on how things
look in there. But I have a few ideas, based on what you've learned of
the operation. Now, just what I can do when I get that far, I don't
know yet. I'll simply try to louse the deal up as much as I can. That
may take time, and, of course, it might turn out to be impossible to
get word out to you." "So what do we do meanwhile?" Reetal asked. "If we start lining up our
attack group immediately, and then there's no action for another five
or six hours, there's always the chance of a leak, with around twenty
people in the know." "And if there's a leak," Quillan agreed, "we've probably had it. No,
you'd better wait with that! If I'm not out, and you haven't heard
from me before the _Camelot_'s actually due to dock, Heraga can still
take the group--everyone but yourself--in as scheduled." "Why everyone but me?" Reetal asked. "If nothing else works, you might find some way of getting a warning
to the liner's security force after they've docked. It isn't much of a
possibility, but we can't afford to throw it away." "Yes, I see." Reetal looked reflective. "What do you think, Heraga?" The little man shrugged. "You told me that Mr. Quillan is not
inexperienced in dealing with, ah, his enemies. If he feels he might
accomplish something in the Executive Block, I'm in favor of the plan. The situation certainly could hardly become worse." "That's the spirit!" Quillan approved. "The positive outlook--that's
what a think like this mainly takes. Can you arrange for the diner and
the uniform?" "Oh, yes," Heraga said, "I've had myself put in charge of that detail,
naturally." "Then what can you tell me about the Executive Block's layout?" Reetal stood up. "Come over to the desk," she said. "We've got
diagrams." *       *       *       *       *

"The five levels, as you see," Heraga was explaining a few moments
later, "are built directly into the curve of the Star's shells. Level
Five, on the top, is therefore quite small. The other levels are
fairly extensive. Two, Three, and Four could each accommodate a
hundred men comfortably. These levels contain mainly living quarters,
private offices, and the like. The Brotherhood men appear to be
occupying the fourth level, Velladon's group the second. The third may
be reserved for meetings between representatives of the two groups. All three of these levels are connected by single-exit portals to the
large entrance area on the ground level. "The portals stood open when I went in earlier today, and there were
about twenty armed men lounging about the entrance hall. I recognized
approximately half of them as being members of the Star's security
force. The others were unfamiliar." Heraga cleared his throat. "There
is a possibility that the two groups do not entirely trust each
other." Quillan nodded. "If they're playing around with something like sixty
million CR, anybody would have to be crazy to trust the Brotherhood of
Beldon. The transmitter room and the control officers are guarded,
too?" "Yes, but not heavily," Heraga said. "There seem to be only a few men
stationed at each of those points. Ostensibly, they're there as a
safe-guard--in case the imaginary raiders attempt to break out of the
subspace section." "What's the arrangement of the ordinary walk-in tube portals in the
Executive Block?" "There is one which interconnects the five levels. On each of the
lower levels, there are, in addition, several portals which lead out
to various points in the Seventh Star Hotel. On the fifth level, there
is only one portal of this kind. Except for the portal which operates
between the different levels in the Executive Block, all of them have
been rendered unusable at present." "Unusable in what way?" "They have been sealed off on the Executive Block side." "Can you get me a diagram of the entry and exit systems those outgoing
portals connect with?" Quillan asked. "I might turn one of them usable
again." "Yes, I can do that." "How about the communication possibilities?" "The ComWeb system is functioning normally on the second, third, and
fourth levels. It has been shut off on the first level--to avoid the
spread of 'alarming rumors' by office personnel. There is no ComWeb on
the fifth level." Reetal said, "We'll shift our operating headquarters back to my
registered suite then. The ComWebs are turned off in these vacant
sections. I'll stay in the other suite in case you find a chance to
signal in." Heraga left a few minutes later to make his arrangements. Reetal
smiled at Quillan, a little dubiously. "Good luck, guy," she said. "Anything else to settle before you start
off?" Quillan nodded. "Couple of details. If you're going to be in your
regular suite, and Fluel finds himself with some idle time on hand, he
might show up for the dalliance you mentioned." Reetal's smile changed slightly. Her left hand fluffed the hair at the
back of her head, flicked down again. There was a tiny click, and
Quillan looked at a small jeweled hair-clasp in her palm, its needle
beak pointing at him. "It hasn't got much range," Reetal said, "but within ten feet it will
scramble the Duke's brains just as thoroughly as they need to be
scrambled." "Good enough," Quillan said. "Just don't give that boy the ghost of a
chance, doll. He has a rep for playing very unnice games with the
ladies." "I know his reputation." Reetal replaced the tiny gun in her hair. "Anything else?" "Yes. Let's look in on the Kinmarten chick for a moment. If she's
awake, she may have remembered something or other by now that she
didn't think to tell you." They found Solvey Kinmarten awake, and tearfully glad to see Reetal. Quillan was introduced as a member of the legal profession who would
do what he could for Solvey and her husband. Solvey frowned prettily,
trying very hard to remember anything that might be of use. But it
appeared that she had told Reetal all she knew. *       *       *       *       *

The blue and white Phalagon House diner, driven by Heraga, was
admitted without comment into the Executive Block. It floated on
unchallenged through the big entry hall and into a corridor. Immediately behind the first turn of the corridor, the diner paused a
few seconds. Its side door opened and closed. The diner moved on. Quillan, coatless and with the well-worn butt of a big Miam Devil
Special protruding from the holster on his right hip, came briskly
back along the corridor. Between fifteen and twenty men, their guns
also conspicuously in evidence, were scattered about the entrance
hall, expressions and attitudes indicating a curious mixture of
boredom and uneasy tension. The eyes of about half of them swiveled
around to Quillan when he came into the hall; then, with one
exception, they looked indifferently away again. The exception, leaning against the wall near the three open portals to
the upper levels, continued to stare as Quillan came toward him,
forehead creased in a deep scowl as if he were painfully ransacking
his mind for something. Quillan stopped in front of him. "Chum," he asked, "any idea where Movaine is at the moment? They just
give me this message for him--"

Still scowling, the other scratched his chin and blinked. "Uh ...
dunno for sure," he said after a moment. "He oughta be in the third
level conference room with the rest of 'em. Uh ... dunno you oughta
barge in there right now, pal! The commodore's _reee-lly_ hot about
somethin'!" Quillan looked worried. "Gotta chance it, I guess! Message is pretty
important, they say--" He turned, went through the center portal of
the three, abruptly found himself walking along a wide, well-lit hall. Nobody in sight here, or in the first intersecting passage he came to. When he reached the next passage, he heard voices on the right, turned
toward them, went by a string of closed doors on both sides until,
forty feet on, the passage angled again and opened into a long,
high-ceilinged room. The voices came through an open door on the right
side of the room. Standing against the wall beside the door were two
men whose heads turned sharply toward Quillan as he appeared in the
passage. The short, chunky one scowled. The big man next to him, the
top of whose head had been permanently seared clear of hair years
before by a near miss from a blaster, dropped his jaw slowly. His eyes
popped. "My God!" he said. "Movaine in there, Baldy?" Quillan inquired, coming up. "Movaine! He ... you ... how--"

The chunky man took out his gun, waved it negligently at Quillan. "Tell the ape to blow, Perk. He isn't wanted here." "Ape?" Quillan asked softly. His right hand moved, had the gun by the
barrel, twisted, reversed the gun, jammed it back with some violence
into the chunky man's stomach. "Ape?" he repeated. The chunky man went
white. "Bad News--" Baldy Perk breathed. "Take it easy! That's Orca. He's the
commodore's torpedo. How--"

"Where's Movaine?" "Movaine ... he ... uh--"

"All right, he's not here. And Lancion can't have arrived yet. Is
Cooms in there?" "Yeah," Baldy Perk said weakly. "Cooms is in there, Quillan." "Let's go in." Quillan withdrew the gun, slid it into a pocket, smiled
down at Orca. "Get it back from your boss, slob. Be seeing you!" Orca's voice was a husky whisper. "You will, friend! You will!" *       *       *       *       *

The conference room was big and sparsely furnished. Four men sat at
the long table in its center. Quillan knew two of them--Marras Cooms,
second in command of the Beldon Brotherhood's detachment here, and the
Duke of Fluel, Movaine's personal gun. Going by Heraga's
descriptions, the big, florid-faced man with white hair and flowing
white mustaches who was doing the talking was Velladon, the commodore;
while the fourth man, younger, wiry, with thinning black hair
plastered back across his skull, would be Ryter, chief of the Star's
security force. "What I object to primarily is that the attempt was made without
obtaining my consent, and secretly," Velladon was saying, with a
toothy grin but in a voice that shook with open fury. "And now it's
been made and bungled, you have a nerve asking for our help. The
problem is yours--and you better take care of it fast! I can't spare
Ryter. If--"

"Cooms," Baldy Perk broke in desperately from the door, "Bad News
Quillan's here an'--"

The heads of the four men at the table came around simultaneously. The
eyes of two of them widened for an instant. Then Marras Cooms began
laughing softly. "Now everything's happened!" he said. "Cooms," the commodore said testily, "I prefer not to be interrupted. Now--"

"Can't be helped, commodore," Quillan said, moving forward, Perk
shuffling along unhappily beside him. "I've got news for Movaine, and
the news can't wait." "Movaine?" the commodore repeated, blue eyes bulging at Quillan. "Movaine! Cooms, who _is_ this man?" "You're looking at Bad News Quillan," Cooms said. "A highjacking
specialist, with somewhat numerous sidelines. But the point right now
is that he isn't a member of the Brotherhood." "_What! "_ Velladon's big fist smashed down on the table. "_Now_ what
kind of a game ... how did he get _in_ here?" "Well," Quillan said mildly, "I oozed in through the north wall about
a minute ago. I--"

He checked, conscious of having created some kind of sensation. The
four men at the table were staring up at him without moving. Baldy
Perk appeared to be holding his breath. Then the commodore coughed,
cleared his throat, drummed his fingers on the table. He said reflectively: "He could have news--good or bad--at that! For
all of us." He chewed on one of his mustache tips, grinned suddenly up
at Quillan. "Well, sit down, friend! Let's talk. You can't talk to
Movaine, you see. Movaine's um, had an accident. Passed away suddenly
half an hour ago." "Sorry to hear it," Quillan said. "That's the sort of thing that
happens so often in the Brotherhood." He swung a chair around, sat
down facing the table. "You're looking well tonight, Fluel," he
observed. The Duke of Fluel, lean and dapper in silver jacket and tight-fitting
silver trousers, gave him a wintry smile, said nothing. *       *       *       *       *

"Now, then, friend," Velladon inquired confidentially, "just what was
your business with Movaine?" "Well, it will come to around twenty per cent of the take," Quillan
informed him. "We won't argue about a half-million CR more or less. But around twenty per." The faces thoughtful. After some seconds, the commodore asked, "And
who's we?" "A number of citizens," Quillan said, "who have been rather unhappy
since discovering that you, too, are interested in Lady Pendrake and
her pals. We'd gone to considerable expense and trouble to ... well,
her ladyship was scheduled to show up in Mezmiali, you know. And now
she isn't going to show up there. All right, that's business. Twenty
per--no hard feelings. Otherwise, it won't do you a bit of good to
blow up the Star and the liner. There'd still be loose talk--maybe
other complications, too. You know how it goes. You wouldn't be happy,
and neither would Yaco. Right?" The commodore's massive head turned back to Cooms. "How well do you
know this man, Marras?" Cooms grinned dryly. "Well enough." "Is he leveling?" "He'd be nuts to be here if he wasn't. And he isn't nuts--at least,
not that way." "There might be a question about that," Fluel observed. He looked at
the commodore. "Why not ask him for a couple of the names that are in
it with him?" "Hagready and Boltan," Quillan said. Velladon chewed the other mustache tip. "I know Hagready. If he--"

"I know both of them," Cooms said. "Boltan works highjacking crews out
of Orado. Quillan operates there occasionally." "Pappy Boltan's an old business associate," Quillan agreed. "Reliable
sort of a guy. Doesn't mind taking a few chances either." Velladon's protruding blue eyes measured him a moment. "We can check
on those two, you know--"

"Check away," Quillan said. Velladon nodded. "We will." He was silent for a second or two, then
glanced over at Cooms. "There've been no leaks on our side," he
remarked. "And they must have known about this for weeks! Of all the
inept, bungling--"

"Ah, don't be too hard on the Brotherhood, commodore," Quillan said. "Leaks happen. You ought to know." "What do you mean?" Velladon snapped. "From what we heard, the Brotherhood's pulling you out of a hole here. You should feel rather kindly toward them." The commodore stared at him reflectively. Then he grinned. "Could be I
should," he said, "Did you come here alone?" "Yes." The commodore nodded. "If you're bluffing, God help you. If you're
not, your group's in. Twenty per. No time for haggling--we can raise
Yaco's price to cover it." He stood up, and Ryter stood up with him. "Marras," the commodore went on, "tell him what's happened. If he's
half as hot as he sounds, he's the boy to put on that job. Let him get
in on a little of the work for the twenty per cent. Ryter, come on. We--"

"One moment, sir," Quillan interrupted. He took Orca's gun by the
muzzle from his pocket, held it out to Velladon. "One of your men lost
this thing. The one outside the door. If you don't mind--he might pout
if he doesn't get it back." *       *       *       *       *

The fifth level of the Executive Block appeared to be, as Heraga had
said, quite small. The tiny entry hall, on which two walk-in portals
opened, led directly into the large room where the two Pendrake rest
cubicles had been placed. One of the cubicles now stood open. To right
and left, a narrow passage stretched away from the room, ending
apparently in smaller rooms. Baldy Perk was perspiring profusely. "Now right here," he said in a low voice, "was where I was standing. Movaine was over there, on the right of the cubicle, and Cooms was
beside him. Rubero was a little behind me, hanging on to the
punk--that Kinmarten. An' the Duke"--he nodded back at the wide
doorspace to the hall--"was standing back there. "All right. The punk's opened the cubicle a crack, looking like he's
about to pass out while he's doin' it. This bearded guy, Eltak, stands
in front of the cubicle, holding the gadget he controls the thing
with--"

"Where's the gadget now?" Quillan asked. "Marras Cooms' got it." "How does it work?" Baldy shook his head. "We can't figure it out. It's got all kinds of
little knobs and dials on it. Push this one an' it squeaks, turn that
one an' it buzzes. Like that." Quillan nodded. "All right. What happened?" "Well, Movaine tells the old guy to go ahead an' do the demonstrating. The old guy sort of grins and fiddles with the gadget. The cubicle
door pops open an' this thing comes pouring out. I never seen nothin'
like it! It's like a barn door with dirty fur on it! It swirls up an'
around an'--it wraps its upper end clean around poor Movaine. He never
even screeches. "Then everything pops at once. The old guy is laughing like crazy, an'
that half-smart Rubero drills him right through the head. I take one
shot at the thing, low so's not to hit Movaine, an' then we're all
running, I'm halfway to the hall when Cooms tears past me like a
rocket. The Duke an' the others are already piling out through the
portal. I get to the hall, and there's this terrific smack of sound in
the room. I look back ... an' ... an'--" Baldy paused and gulped. "And what?" Quillan asked. "There, behind the cubicles, I see poor Movaine stickin' halfway out
o' the wall!" Baldy reported in a hushed whisper. "_Half_way out of the wall?" "From the waist up he's in it! From the waist down he's dangling into
the room! I tell you, I never seen nothin' like it." "And this Hlat creature--"

"That's gone. I figure the smack I heard was when it hit the wall
flat, carrying Movaine. It went on into it. Movaine didn't--at least,
the last half of him didn't." "Well," Quillan said after a pause, "in a way, Movaine got his
demonstration. The Hlats can move through solid matter and carry other
objects along with them, as advertised. If Yaco can work out how it's
done and build a gadget that does the same thing, they're getting the
Hlats cheap. What happened then?" "I told Marras Cooms about Movaine, and he sent me and a half dozen
other boys back up here with riot guns to see what we could do for
him. Which was nothin', of course." Baldy gulped again. "We finally
cut this end of him off with a beam and took it back down." "The thing didn't show up while you were here?" Baldy shuddered and said, "Naw." "And the technician ... Eltak ... was dead?" "Sure. Hole in his head you could shove your fist through." "Somebody," Quillan observed, "ought to drill Rubero for that stupid
trick!" "The Duke did--first thing after we got back to the fourth level." "So the Hlat's on the loose, and all we really have at the moment are
the cubicles ... and Rest Warden Kinmarten. Where's he, by the way?" "He tried to take off when we got down to Level Four, and somebody
cold-cocked him. The doc says he ought to be coming around again
pretty soon." Quillan grunted, shoved the Miam Devil Special into its holster, said,
"O.K., you stay here where you can watch the room and those passages
and the hall. If you feel the floor start moving under, scream. I'll
take a look at the cubicle." *       *       *       *       *

Lady Pendrake's cubicle was about half as big again as a standard one;
but, aside from one detail, its outer settings, instruments, and
operating devices appeared normal. The modification was a recess
almost six feet long and a foot wide and deep, in one side, which
could be opened either to the room or to the interior of the rest
cubicle, but not simultaneously to both. Quillan already knew its
purpose; the supposed other cubicle was a camouflaged food locker,
containing fifty-pound slabs of sea beef, each of which represented a
meal for the Hlat. The recess made it possible to feed it without
allowing it to be seen, or, possibly, attempting to emerge. Kinmarten's nervousness, as reported by his wife, seemed
understandable. Any rest warden might get disturbed over such a
charge. Quillan asked over his shoulder, "Anyone find out yet why the things
can't get out of the closed rest cubicle?" "Yeah," Baldy Perk said. "Kinmarten says it's the cubicle's defense
fields. They could get through the material. They can't get through
the field." "Someone think to energize the Executive Block's battle fields?" Quillan inquired. "Yeah. Velladon took care of that before he came screaming up to the
third level to argue with Cooms and Fluel." [Illustration]

"So it can't slip out of the Block unless it shows itself down on the
ground level when the entry lock's open." "Yeah," Baldy muttered. "But I dunno. Is that good?" Quillan looked at him. "Well, we _would_ like it back." "Why? There's fifty more coming in on the liner tonight." "We don't have the fifty yet. If someone louses up the detail--"

"Yawk!" Baldy said faintly. There was a crash of sound as his riot gun
went off. Quillan spun about, hair bristling, gun out. "What
happened?" "I'll swear," Baldy said, white-faced, "I saw something moving along
that passage!" Quillan looked, saw nothing, slowly replaced the gun. "Baldy," he
said, "if you think you see it again, just say so. That's an order! If
it comes at us, we get out of this level fast. But we don't shoot
before we have to. If we kill it, it's no good to us. Got that?" "Yeah," Baldy said. "But I got an idea now, Bad News." He nodded at
the other cubicle. "Let's leave that meat box open." "Why?" "If it's hungry," Baldy explained simply, "I'd sooner it wrapped
itself around a few chunks of sea beef, an' not around me." Quillan punched him encouragingly in the shoulder. "Baldy," he said,
"in your own way, you _have_ had an idea! But we won't leave the meat
box open. When Kinmarten wakes up, I want him to show me how to bait
this cubicle with a piece of sea beef, so it'll snap shut if the Hlat
goes inside. Meanwhile it won't hurt if it gets a little hungry." "That," said Baldy, "isn't the way _I_ feel about it." "There must be around a hundred and fifty people in the Executive
Block at present," Quillan said. "Look at it that way! Even if the
thing keeps stuffing away, your odds are pretty good, Baldy." Baldy shuddered. *       *       *       *       *

Aside from a dark bruise high on his forehead, Brock Kinmarten showed
no direct effects of having been knocked out. However, his face was
strained and his voice not entirely steady. It was obvious that the
young rest warden had never been in a similarly unnerving situation
before. But he was making a valiant effort not to appear frightened
and, at the same time, to indicate that he would co-operate to the
best of his ability with his captors. He'd regained consciousness by the time Quillan and Perk returned to
the fourth level, and Quillan suggested bringing him to Marras Cooms'
private quarters for questioning. The Brotherhood chief agreed; he was
primarily interested in finding out how the Hlat-control device
functioned. Kinmarten shook his head. He knew nothing about the instrument, he
said, except that it was called a Hlat-talker. It was very unfortunate
that Eltak had been shot, because Eltak undoubtedly could have told
them all they wanted to know about it. If what he had told Kinmarten
was true, Eltak had been directly involved in the development of the
device. "Was he some Federation scientist?" Cooms asked, fiddling absently
with the mysterious cylindrical object. "No, sir," the young man said. "But--again if what he told me was the
truth--he was the man who actually discovered these Hlats. At least,
he was the first man to discover them who wasn't immediately killed by
them." Cooms glanced thoughtfully at Quillan, then asked, "And where was
that?" Kinmarten shook his head again. "He didn't tell me. And I didn't
really want to know. I was anxious to get our convoy to its
destination, and then to be relieved of the assignment. I ... well,
I've been trained to act as Rest Warden to human beings, after all,
not to monstrosities!" He produced an uncertain smile, glancing from
one to the other of his interrogators. The smile promptly faded out
again. "You've no idea at all then about the place they came from?" Cooms
asked expressionlessly. "Oh, yes," Kinmarten said hastily. "Eltak talked a great deal about
the Hlats, and actually--except for its location--gave me a fairly
good picture of what the planet must be like. For one thing, it's an
uncolonized world, of course. It must be terratype or very nearly so,
because Eltak lived there for fifteen years with apparently only a
minimum of equipment. The Hlats are confined to a single large
island. He discovered them by accident and--"

"What was he doing there?" "Well, sir, he came from Hyles-Frisian. He was a crim ... he'd been
engaged in some form of piracy, and when the authorities began looking
for him, he decided it would be best to get clean out of the Hub. He
cracked up his ship on this world and couldn't leave again. When he
discovered the Hlats and realized their peculiar ability, he kept out
of their way and observed them. He found out they had a means of
communicating with each other, and that he could duplicate it. That
stopped them from harming him, and eventually, he said, he was using
them like hunting dogs. They were accustomed to co-operating with one
another, because when there was some animal around that was too large
for one of them to handle, they would attack, it in a group...."

He went on for another minute or two on the subject. The Hlats--the
word meant "rock lion" in one of the Hyles-Frisian dialects,
describing a carnivorous animal which had some superficial resemblance
to the creatures Eltak had happened on--frequented the seacoast and
submerged themselves in sand, rocks and debris, whipping up out of it
to seize some food animal, and taking it down with them again to
devour it at leisure. Quillan interrupted, "You heard what happened to the man it attacked
on the fifth level?" "Yes, sir." "Why would the thing have left him half outside the wall as it did?" Kinmarten said that it must simply have been moving too fast. It could
slip into and out of solid substances without a pause itself, but it
needed a little time to restructure an object it was carrying in the same
manner. No more time, however, than two or three seconds--depending more
on the nature of the object than on its size, according to Eltak. "It can restructure _anything_ in that manner?" Quillan asked. Kinmarten hesitated. "Well, sir, I don't know. I suppose there might
be limitations on its ability. Eltak told me the one we were escorting
had been the subject of extensive experimentation during the past
year, and that the results are very satisfactory." "Suppose it carries a living man through a wall. Will the man still be
alive when he comes out on the other side, assuming the Hlat doesn't
kill him deliberately?" "Yes, sir. The process itself wouldn't hurt him." *       *       *       *       *

Quillan glanced at Cooms. "You know," he said, "we might be letting
Yaco off too cheaply!" Cooms raised an eyebrow warningly, and Quillan grinned. "Our friend
will be learning about Yaco soon enough. Why did Eltak tell the
creature to attack, Kinmarten?" "Sir, I don't know," Kinmarten said. "He was a man of rather violent
habits. My impression, however, was that he was simply attempting to
obtain a hostage." "How did he get off that island with the Hlat?" "A University League explorer was investigating the planet. Eltak
contacted them and obtained the guarantee of a full pardon and a large
cash settlement in return for what he could tell them about the Hlats. They took him and this one specimen along for experimentation." "What about the Hlats on the _Camelot_?" "Eltak said those had been quite recently trapped on the island." Cooms ran his fingers over the cylinder, producing a rapid series of
squeaks and whistles. "That's one thing Yaco may not like," he
observed. "They won't have a monopoly on the thing." Quillan shook his head. "Their scientists don't have to work through
red tape like the U-League. By the time the news breaks--if the
Federation ever intends to break it--Yaco will have at least a
five-year start on everyone else. That's all an outfit like that
needs." He looked at Kinmarten. "Any little thing you haven't thought
to tell us, friend?" he inquired pleasantly. A thin film of sweat showed suddenly on Kinmarten's forehead. "No, sir," he said. "I've really told you everything I know. I--"

"Might try him under dope," Cooms said absently. "Uh-uh!" Quillan said, "I want him wide awake to help me bait the
cubicle for the thing. Has Velladon shown any indication of becoming
willing to co-operate in hunting it?" Cooms gestured with his head. "Ask Fluel! I sent him down to try to
patch things up with the commodore. He just showed up again." Quillan glanced around. The Duke was lounging in the doorway. He
grinned slightly, said, "Velladon's still sore at us. But he'll talk
to Quillan. Kinmarten here ... did he tell you his wife's on the
Star?" Brock Kinmarten went utterly white. Cooms looked at him, said softly,
"No, that must have slipped his mind." Fluel said, "Yeah, Well, she is. And Ryter says they'll have her
picked up inside half an hour. When they bring her in, we really
should check on how candid Kinmarten's been about everything." The rest warden said in a voice that shook uncontrollably, "Gentlemen,
my wife knows absolutely nothing about these matters! I swear it! She--"

Quillan stood up. "Well, I'll go see if I can't get Velladon in a
better mood. Are you keeping that Hlat-talker, Cooms?" Cooms smiled. "I am." "Marras figures," the Duke's flat voice explained, "that if the thing
comes into the room and he squeaks at it a few times, he won't get
hurt." "That's possible," Cooms said, unruffled. "At any rate, I intend to
hang on to it." "Well, I wouldn't play around with those buttons too much," Quillan
observed. "Why not?" "You might get lucky and tap out some pattern that spells 'Come to
chow' in the Hlat's vocabulary." *       *       *       *       *

There were considerably more men in evidence on Level Two than on the
fourth, and fewer signs of nervousness. The Star men had been told of
the Hlat's escape from its cubicle, but weren't taking it too
seriously. Quillan was conducted to the commodore and favored with an
alarmingly toothy grin. Ryter, the security chief, joined them a few
seconds later. Apparently, Velladon had summoned him. Velladon said, "Ryter here's made a few transmitter calls. We hear
Pappy Boltan pulled his outfit out of the Orado area about a month
ago. Present whereabouts unknown. Hagready went off on some hush-hush
job at around the same time." Quillan smiled. "Uh-huh! So he did." "We also," said Ryter, "learned a number of things about you
personally." He produced a thin smile. "You lead a busy
and--apparently--profitable life." "Business is fair," Quillan agreed. "But it can always be improved." The commodore turned on the toothy grin. "So all right," he growled,
"you're clear. We rather liked what we learned. Eh, Ryter?" Ryter nodded. "This Brotherhood of Beldon, now--" The commodore shook his head
heavily. Quillan was silent a moment. "They might be getting sloppy," he said. "I don't know. It's one possibility. They used to be a rather sharp
outfit, you know." "That's what I'd heard!" Velladon chewed savagely on his mustache,
asked finally, "What's another possibility?" Quillan leaned back in his chair. "Just a feeling, so far. But the
business with the cubicle upstairs might have angles that weren't
mentioned." They looked at him thoughtfully. Ryter said, "Mind amplifying that?" "Cooms told me," Quillan said, "that Nome Lancion had given Movaine
instructions to make a test with Lady Pendrake on the quiet and find
out if those creatures actually can do what they're supposed to do. I
think he was telling the truth. Nome tends to be overcautious when
it's a really big deal. Unless he's sure of the Hlats, he wouldn't
want to be involved in a thing like blowing up the Star and the
liner." The commodore scowled absently. "Uh-huh," he said. "He knows we can't
back out of it--"

"All right. The Brotherhood's full of ambitious men. Behind Lancion,
Movaine was top man. Cooms behind him; Fluel behind Cooms. Suppose
that Hlat-control device Cooms is hanging on to so tightly isn't as
entirely incomprehensible as they make it out to be. Suppose Cooms
makes a deal with Eltak. Eltak tickles the gadget, and the Hlat kills
Movaine. Rubero immediately guns down Eltak--and is killed by Fluel a
couple of minutes later, supposedly for blowing his top and killing
the man who knew how to control the Hlat." Ryter cleared his throat. "Fluel was Movaine's gun," he observed. "So he was," Quillan said. "Would you like the Duke to be yours?" Ryter grinned, shook his head. "No, thanks!" Quillan looked back at Velladon. "How well are you actually covered
against the Brotherhood?" "Well, _that_'s air-tight," the commodore said. "We've got 'em
outgunned here. When the liner lands, we'll be about even. But Lancion
won't start anything. We're too even. Once we're clear of the Star, we
don't meet again. We deal with Yaco individually. The Brotherhood has
the Hlats, and we have the trained Federation technicians accompanying
them, who ... who--"

"Who alone are supposed to be able to inform Yaco how to control the
Hlats," Ryter finished for him. The security chief's face was
expressionless. "By God!" the commodore said softly. "Well, it's only a possibility that somebody's playing dirty," Quillan
remarked. "We'd want to be sure of it. But if anyone can handle a Hlat
with the control instrument, the Brotherhood has an advantage now that
it isn't talking about--it can offer Yaco everything Yaco needs in one
package. Of course, Yaco might still be willing to pay for the Hlat
technicians. If it didn't, you and Ryter could make the same kind of
trouble for it that my friends can." *       *       *       *       *

The color was draining slowly from Velladon's face. "There's a
difference," he said. "If we threaten to make trouble for Yaco, they'd
see to it that our present employers learn that Ryter and I are still
alive." "That's the Mooleys, eh?" "Yes." "Tough." Quillan knuckled his chin thoughtfully. "Well, let's put it
this way then," he said. "My group doesn't have _that_ kind of
problem, but if things worked out so that we'd have something more
substantial than nuisance value to offer Yaco, we'd prefer it, of
course." Velladon nodded. "Very understandable! Under the circumstances,
co-operation appears to be indicated, eh?" "That's what I had in mind." "You've made a deal," Velladon said. "Any immediate suggestions?" Quillan looked at his watch. "A couple. We don't want to make any
mistake about this. It's still almost five hours before the _Camelot_
pulls in, and until she does you're way ahead on firepower. I wouldn't
make any accusations just now. But you might mention to Cooms you'd
like to borrow the Hlat gadget to have it examined by some of your
technical experts. The way he reacts might tell us something. If he
balks, the matter shouldn't be pushed too hard at the moment--it's a
tossup whether you or the Brotherhood has a better claim to the thing. "But then there's Kinmarten, the rest warden in charge of the cubicle. I talked with him while Cooms and Fluel were around, but he may have
been briefed on what to say. Cooms mentioned doping him, which could
be a convenient way to keeping him shut up, assuming he knows more
than he's told. He's one of the personnel you're to offer Yaco. I
think you can insist on having Kinmarten handed over to you
immediately. It should be interesting again to see how Cooms reacts." Velladon's big head nodded vigorously. "Good idea!" "By the way," Quillan said, "Fluel mentioned you've been looking for
Kinmarten's wife, the second rest warden on the Pendrake convoy. Found
her yet?" "Not a trace, so far," Ryter said. "That's a little surprising, too, isn't it?" "Under the circumstances," the commodore said, "it might not be
surprising at all!" He had regained his color, was beginning to look
angry. "If they--"

"Well," Quillan said soothingly, "we don't _know_. It's just that
things do seem to be adding up a little. Now, there's one other point. We should do something immediately about catching that Hlat." Velladon grunted and picked at his teeth with his thumbnail. "It would
be best to get it back in its cubicle, of course. But I'm not worrying
about it--just an animal, after all. Even the light hardware those
Beldon fancy Dans carry should handle it. You use a man-sized gun, I
see. So do I. If it shows up around here, it gets smeared, that's all. There're fifty more of the beasts on the _Camelot_." Quillan nodded. "You're right on that. But there's the possibility
that it is being controlled by the Brotherhood at present. If it is,
it isn't just an animal any more. It could be turned into a thoroughly
dangerous nuisance." The commodore thought a moment, nodded. "You're right, I suppose. What
do you want to do about it?" "Baiting the cubicle on the fifth level might work. Then there should
be life-detectors in the Star's security supplies--"

Ryter nodded. "We have a couple of dozen of them, but not in the
Executive Block. They were left in the security building." The commodore stood up. "You stay here with Ryter," he told Quillan. "There're a couple of other things I want to go over with you two. I'll order the life-detectors from the office here--second passage
down, isn't it, Ryter?... And, Ryter, I have another idea. I'm pulling
the man in space-armor off the subspace portal and detailing him to
Level Five." He grinned at Quillan. "That boy's got a brace of
grenades and built-in spray guns! If Cooms is thinking of pulling any
funny stunts up there, he'll think again." *       *       *       *       *

The commodore headed briskly down the narrow passageway, his big
holstered gun slapping his thigh with every step. The two security
guards stationed at the door to the second level office came to
attention as he approached, saluted smartly. He grunted, went in
without returning the salutes, and started over toward the ComWeb on a
desk at the far end of the big room, skirting the long, dusty-looking
black rug beside one wall. Velladon unbuckled his gun belt, placed the gun on the desk, sat down
and switched on the ComWeb. Behind him, the black rug stirred silently and rose up. *       *       *       *       *

"You called that one," Ryter was saying seven or eight minutes later,
"almost too well!" Quillan shook his head, poked at the commodore's gun on the desk with
his finger, looked about the silent office and back at the door where
a small group of security men stood staring in at them. "Three men gone without a sound!" he said. He indicated the glowing
disk of the ComWeb. "He had time enough to turn it on, not time enough
to make his call. Any chance of camouflaged portals in this section?" "No," Ryter said. "I know the location of every portal in the
Executive Block. No number of men could have taken Velladon and the
two guards without a fight anyway. 