



Produced by Judith Boss. Out of Time's Abyss


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs


JTABLE 5 5 1


Chapter I

This is the tale of Bradley after he left Fort Dinosaur upon the west
coast of the great lake that is in the center of the island. Upon the fourth day of September, 1916, he set out with four
companions, Sinclair, Brady, James, and Tippet, to search along the
base of the barrier cliffs for a point at which they might be scaled. Through the heavy Caspakian air, beneath the swollen sun, the five men
marched northwest from Fort Dinosaur, now waist-deep in lush, jungle
grasses starred with myriad gorgeous blooms, now across open
meadow-land and parklike expanses and again plunging into dense forests
of eucalyptus and acacia and giant arboreous ferns with feathered
fronds waving gently a hundred feet above their heads. About them upon the ground, among the trees and in the air over them
moved and swung and soared the countless forms of Caspak's teeming
life. Always were they menaced by some frightful thing and seldom were
their rifles cool, yet even in the brief time they had dwelt upon
Caprona they had become callous to danger, so that they swung along
laughing and chatting like soldiers on a summer hike. "This reminds me of South Clark Street," remarked Brady, who had once
served on the traffic squad in Chicago; and as no one asked him why, he
volunteered that it was "because it's no place for an Irishman." "South Clark Street and heaven have something in common, then,"
suggested Sinclair. James and Tippet laughed, and then a hideous growl
broke from a dense thicket ahead and diverted their attention to other
matters. "One of them behemoths of 'Oly Writ," muttered Tippet as they came to a
halt and with guns ready awaited the almost inevitable charge. "Hungry lot o' beggars, these," said Bradley; "always trying to eat
everything they see." For a moment no further sound came from the thicket. "He may be
feeding now," suggested Bradley. "We'll try to go around him. Can't
waste ammunition. Won't last forever. Follow me." And he set off at
right angles to their former course, hoping to avert a charge. They
had taken a dozen steps, perhaps, when the thicket moved to the advance
of the thing within it, the leafy branches parted, and the hideous head
of a gigantic bear emerged. "Pick your trees," whispered Bradley. "Can't waste ammunition." The men looked about them. The bear took a couple of steps forward,
still growling menacingly. He was exposed to the shoulders now. Tippet took one look at the monster and bolted for the nearest tree;
and then the bear charged. He charged straight for Tippet. The other
men scattered for the various trees they had selected--all except
Bradley. He stood watching Tippet and the bear. The man had a good
start and the tree was not far away; but the speed of the enormous
creature behind him was something to marvel at, yet Tippet was in a
fair way to make his sanctuary when his foot caught in a tangle of
roots and down he went, his rifle flying from his hand and falling
several yards away. Instantly Bradley's piece was at his shoulder,
there was a sharp report answered by a roar of mingled rage and pain
from the carnivore. Tippet attempted to scramble to his feet. "Lie still!" shouted Bradley. "Can't waste ammunition." The bear halted in its tracks, wheeled toward Bradley and then back
again toward Tippet. Again the former's rifle spit angrily, and the
bear turned again in his direction. Bradley shouted loudly. "Come on,
you behemoth of Holy Writ!" he cried. "Come on, you duffer! Can't
waste ammunition." And as he saw the bear apparently upon the verge of
deciding to charge him, he encouraged the idea by backing rapidly away,
knowing that an angry beast will more often charge one who moves than
one who lies still. And the bear did charge. Like a bolt of lightning he flashed down upon
the Englishman. "Now run!" Bradley called to Tippet and himself
turned in flight toward a nearby tree. The other men, now safely
ensconced upon various branches, watched the race with breathless
interest. Would Bradley make it? It seemed scarce possible. And if
he didn't! James gasped at the thought. Six feet at the shoulder
stood the frightful mountain of blood-mad flesh and bone and sinew that
was bearing down with the speed of an express train upon the seemingly
slow-moving man. It all happened in a few seconds; but they were seconds that seemed
like hours to the men who watched. They saw Tippet leap to his feet at
Bradley's shouted warning. They saw him run, stooping to recover his
rifle as he passed the spot where it had fallen. They saw him glance
back toward Bradley, and then they saw him stop short of the tree that
might have given him safety and turn back in the direction of the bear. Firing as he ran, Tippet raced after the great cave bear--the monstrous
thing that should have been extinct ages before--ran for it and fired
even as the beast was almost upon Bradley. The men in the trees
scarcely breathed. It seemed to them such a futile thing for Tippet to
do, and Tippet of all men! They had never looked upon Tippet as a
coward--there seemed to be no cowards among that strangely assorted
company that Fate had gathered together from the four corners of the
earth--but Tippet was considered a cautious man. Overcautious, some
thought him. How futile he and his little pop-gun appeared as he
dashed after that living engine of destruction! But, oh, how glorious! It was some such thought as this that ran through Brady's mind, though
articulated it might have been expressed otherwise, albeit more
forcefully. Just then it occurred to Brady to fire and he, too, opened upon the
bear, but at the same instant the animal stumbled and fell forward,
though still growling most fearsomely. Tippet never stopped running or
firing until he stood within a foot of the brute, which lay almost
touching Bradley and was already struggling to regain its feet. Placing the muzzle of his gun against the bear's ear, Tippet pulled the
trigger. The creature sank limply to the ground and Bradley scrambled
to his feet. "Good work, Tippet," he said. "Mightily obliged to you--awful waste of
ammunition, really." And then they resumed the march and in fifteen minutes the encounter
had ceased even to be a topic of conversation. For two days they continued upon their perilous way. Already the
cliffs loomed high and forbidding close ahead without sign of break to
encourage hope that somewhere they might be scaled. Late in the
afternoon the party crossed a small stream of warm water upon the
sluggishly moving surface of which floated countless millions of tiny
green eggs surrounded by a light scum of the same color, though of a
darker shade. Their past experience of Caspak had taught them that
they might expect to come upon a stagnant pool of warm water if they
followed the stream to its source; but there they were almost certain
to find some of Caspak's grotesque, manlike creatures. Already since
they had disembarked from the U-33 after its perilous trip through the
subterranean channel beneath the barrier cliffs had brought them into
the inland sea of Caspak, had they encountered what had appeared to be
three distinct types of these creatures. There had been the pure
apes--huge, gorillalike beasts--and those who walked, a trifle more
erect and had features with just a shade more of the human cast about
them. Then there were men like Ahm, whom they had captured and
confined at the fort--Ahm, the club-man. "Well-known club-man," Tyler
had called him. Ahm and his people had knowledge of a speech. They
had a language, in which they were unlike the race just inferior to
them, and they walked much more erect and were less hairy: but it was
principally the fact that they possessed a spoken language and carried
a weapon that differentiated them from the others. All of these peoples had proven belligerent in the extreme. In common
with the rest of the fauna of Caprona the first law of nature as they
seemed to understand it was to kill--kill--kill. And so it was that
Bradley had no desire to follow up the little stream toward the pool
near which were sure to be the caves of some savage tribe, but fortune
played him an unkind trick, for the pool was much closer than he
imagined, its southern end reaching fully a mile south of the point at
which they crossed the stream, and so it was that after forcing their
way through a tangle of jungle vegetation they came out upon the edge
of the pool which they had wished to avoid. Almost simultaneously there appeared south of them a party of naked men
armed with clubs and hatchets. Both parties halted as they caught
sight of one another. The men from the fort saw before them a hunting
party evidently returning to its caves or village laden with meat. They were large men with features closely resembling those of the
African Negro though their skins were white. Short hair grew upon a
large portion of their limbs and bodies, which still retained a
considerable trace of apish progenitors. They were, however, a
distinctly higher type than the Bo-lu, or club-men. Bradley would have been glad to have averted a meeting; but as he
desired to lead his party south around the end of the pool, and as it
was hemmed in by the jungle on one side and the water on the other,
there seemed no escape from an encounter. On the chance that he might avoid a clash, Bradley stepped forward with
upraised hand. "We are friends," he called in the tongue of Ahm, the
Bolu, who had been held a prisoner at the fort; "permit us to pass in
peace. We will not harm you." At this the hatchet-men set up a great jabbering with much laughter,
loud and boisterous. "No," shouted one, "you will not harm us, for we
shall kill you. Come! We kill! We kill!" And with hideous shouts
they charged down upon the Europeans. "Sinclair, you may fire," said Bradley quietly. "Pick off the leader. Can't waste ammunition." The Englishman raised his piece to his shoulder and took quick aim at
the breast of the yelling savage leaping toward them. Directly behind
the leader came another hatchet-man, and with the report of Sinclair's
rifle both warriors lunged forward in the tall grass, pierced by the
same bullet. The effect upon the rest of the band was electrical. As
one man they came to a sudden halt, wheeled to the east and dashed into
the jungle, where the men could hear them forcing their way in an
effort to put as much distance as possible between themselves and the
authors of this new and frightful noise that killed warriors at a great
distance. Both the savages were dead when Bradley approached to examine them, and
as the Europeans gathered around, other eyes were bent upon them with
greater curiosity than they displayed for the victim of Sinclair's
bullet. When the party again took up the march around the southern end
of the pool the owner of the eyes followed them--large, round eyes,
almost expressionless except for a certain cold cruelty which glinted
malignly from under their pale gray irises. All unconscious of the stalker, the men came, late in the afternoon, to
a spot which seemed favorable as a campsite. A cold spring bubbled
from the base of a rocky formation which overhung and partially
encircled a small inclosure. At Bradley's command, the men took up the
duties assigned them--gathering wood, building a cook-fire and
preparing the evening meal. It was while they were thus engaged that
Brady's attention was attracted by the dismal flapping of huge wings. He glanced up, expecting to see one of the great flying reptiles of a
bygone age, his rifle ready in his hand. Brady was a brave man. He
had groped his way up narrow tenement stairs and taken an armed maniac
from a dark room without turning a hair; but now as he looked up, he
went white and staggered back. "Gawd!" he almost screamed. "What is it?" Attracted by Brady's cry the others seized their rifles as they
followed his wide-eyed, frozen gaze, nor was there one of them that was
not moved by some species of terror or awe. Then Brady spoke again in
an almost inaudible voice. "Holy Mother protect us--it's a banshee!" Bradley, always cool almost to indifference in the face of danger, felt
a strange, creeping sensation run over his flesh, as slowly, not a
hundred feet above them, the thing flapped itself across the sky, its
huge, round eyes glaring down upon them. And until it disappeared over
the tops of the trees of a near-by wood the five men stood as though
paralyzed, their eyes never leaving the weird shape; nor never one of
them appearing to recall that he grasped a loaded rifle in his hands. With the passing of the thing, came the reaction. Tippet sank to the
ground and buried his face in his hands. "Oh, Gord," he moaned. "Tyke
me awy from this orful plice." Brady, recovered from the first shock,
swore loud and luridly. He called upon all the saints to witness that
he was unafraid and that anybody with half an eye could have seen that
the creature was nothing more than "one av thim flyin' alligators" that
they all were familiar with. "Yes," said Sinclair with fine sarcasm, "we've saw so many of them with
white shrouds on 'em." "Shut up, you fool!" growled Brady. "If you know so much, tell us what
it was after bein' then." Then he turned toward Bradley. "What was it, sor, do you think?" he
asked. Bradley shook his head. "I don't know," he said. "It looked like a
winged human being clothed in a flowing white robe. Its face was more
human than otherwise. That is the way it looked to me; but what it
really was I can't even guess, for such a creature is as far beyond my
experience or knowledge as it is beyond yours. All that I am sure of
is that whatever else it may have been, it was quite material--it was
no ghost; rather just another of the strange forms of life which we
have met here and with which we should be accustomed by this time." Tippet looked up. His face was still ashy. "Yer cawn't tell me," he
cried. "Hi seen hit. Blime, Hi seen hit. Hit was ha dead man flyin'
through the hair. Didn't Hi see 'is heyes? Oh, Gord! Didn't Hi see
'em?" "It didn't look like any beast or reptile to me," spoke up Sinclair. "It was lookin' right down at me when I looked up and I saw its face
plain as I see yours. It had big round eyes that looked all cold and
dead, and its cheeks were sunken in deep, and I could see its yellow
teeth behind thin, tight-drawn lips--like a man who had been dead a
long while, sir," he added, turning toward Bradley. "Yes!" James had not spoken since the apparition had passed over them,
and now it was scarce speech which he uttered--rather a series of
articulate gasps. "Yes--dead--a--long--while. It--means something. It--come--for some--one. For one--of us. One--of us is goin'--to die. I'm goin' to die!" he ended in a wail. "Come! Come!" snapped Bradley. "Won't do. Won't do at all. Get to
work, all of you. Waste of time. Can't waste time." His authoritative tones brought them all up standing, and presently
each was occupied with his own duties; but each worked in silence and
there was no singing and no bantering such as had marked the making of
previous camps. Not until they had eaten and to each had been issued
the little ration of smoking tobacco allowed after each evening meal
did any sign of a relaxation of taut nerves appear. It was Brady who
showed the first signs of returning good spirits. He commenced humming
"It's a Long Way to Tipperary" and presently to voice the words, but he
was well into his third song before anyone joined him, and even then
there seemed a dismal note in even the gayest of tunes. A huge fire blazed in the opening of their rocky shelter that the
prowling carnivora might be kept at bay; and always one man stood on
guard, watchfully alert against a sudden rush by some maddened beast of
the jungle. Beyond the fire, yellow-green spots of flame appeared,
moved restlessly about, disappeared and reappeared, accompanied by a
hideous chorus of screams and growls and roars as the hungry
meat-eaters hunting through the night were attracted by the light or
the scent of possible prey. But to such sights and sounds as these the five men had become callous. They sang or talked as unconcernedly as they might have done in the
bar-room of some publichouse at home. Sinclair was standing guard. The others were listening to Brady's
description of traffic congestion at the Rush Street bridge during the
rush hour at night. The fire crackled cheerily. The owners of the
yellow-green eyes raised their frightful chorus to the heavens. Conditions seemed again to have returned to normal. And then, as
though the hand of Death had reached out and touched them all, the five
men tensed into sudden rigidity. Above the nocturnal diapason of the teeming jungle sounded a dismal
flapping of wings and over head, through the thick night, a shadowy
form passed across the diffused light of the flaring camp-fire. Sinclair raised his rifle and fired. An eerie wail floated down from
above and the apparition, whatever it might have been, was swallowed by
the darkness. For several seconds the listening men heard the sound of
those dismally flapping wings lessening in the distance until they
could no longer be heard. Bradley was the first to speak. "Shouldn't have fired, Sinclair," he
said; "can't waste ammunition." But there was no note of censure in
his tone. It was as though he understood the nervous reaction that had
compelled the other's act. "I couldn't help it, sir," said Sinclair. "Lord, it would take an iron
man to keep from shootin' at that awful thing. Do you believe in
ghosts, sir?" "No," replied Bradley. "No such things." "I don't know about that," said Brady. "There was a woman murdered
over on the prairie near Brighton--her throat was cut from ear to ear,
and--"

"Shut up," snapped Bradley. "My grandaddy used to live down Coppington wy," said Tippet. "They
were a hold ruined castle on a 'ill near by, hand at midnight they used
to see pale blue lights through the windows an 'ear--"

"Will you close your hatch!" demanded Bradley. "You fools will have
yourselves scared to death in a minute. Now go to sleep." But there was little sleep in camp that night until utter exhaustion
overtook the harassed men toward morning; nor was there any return of
the weird creature that had set the nerves of each of them on edge. The following forenoon the party reached the base of the barrier cliffs
and for two days marched northward in an effort to discover a break in
the frowning abutment that raised its rocky face almost perpendicularly
above them, yet nowhere was there the slightest indication that the
cliffs were scalable. Disheartened, Bradley determined to turn back toward the fort, as he
already had exceeded the time decided upon by Bowen Tyler and himself
for the expedition. The cliffs for many miles had been trending in a
northeasterly direction, indicating to Bradley that they were
approaching the northern extremity of the island. According to the
best of his calculations they had made sufficient easting during the
past two days to have brought them to a point almost directly north of
Fort Dinosaur and as nothing could be gained by retracing their steps
along the base of the cliffs he decided to strike due south through the
unexplored country between them and the fort. That night (September 9, 1916), they made camp a short distance from
the cliffs beside one of the numerous cool springs that are to be found
within Caspak, oftentimes close beside the still more numerous warm and
hot springs which feed the many pools. After supper the men lay
smoking and chatting among themselves. Tippet was on guard. Fewer
night prowlers threatened them, and the men were commenting upon the
fact that the farther north they had traveled the smaller the number of
all species of animals became, though it was still present in what
would have seemed appalling plenitude in any other part of the world. The diminution in reptilian life was the most noticeable change in the
fauna of northern Caspak. Here, however, were forms they had not met
elsewhere, several of which were of gigantic proportions. According to their custom all, with the exception of the man on guard,
sought sleep early, nor, once disposed upon the ground for slumber,
were they long in finding it. It seemed to Bradley that he had
scarcely closed his eyes when he was brought to his feet, wide awake,
by a piercing scream which was punctuated by the sharp report of a
rifle from the direction of the fire where Tippet stood guard. As he
ran toward the man, Bradley heard above him the same uncanny wail that
had set every nerve on edge several nights before, and the dismal
flapping of huge wings. He did not need to look up at the
white-shrouded figure winging slowly away into the night to know that
their grim visitor had returned. The muscles of his arm, reacting to the sight and sound of the menacing
form, carried his hand to the butt of his pistol; but after he had
drawn the weapon, he immediately returned it to its holster with a
shrug. "What for?" he muttered. "Can't waste ammunition." Then he walked
quickly to where Tippet lay sprawled upon his face. By this time
James, Brady and Sinclair were at his heels, each with his rifle in
readiness. "Is he dead, sir?" whispered James as Bradley kneeled beside the
prostrate form. Bradley turned Tippet over on his back and pressed an ear close to the
other's heart. In a moment he raised his head. "Fainted," he
announced. "Get water. Hurry!" Then he loosened Tippet's shirt at
the throat and when the water was brought, threw a cupful in the man's
face. Slowly Tippet regained consciousness and sat up. At first he
looked curiously into the faces of the men about him; then an
expression of terror overspread his features. He shot a startled
glance up into the black void above and then burying his face in his
arms began to sob like a child. "What's wrong, man?" demanded Bradley. "Buck up! Can't play cry-baby. Waste of energy. What happened?" "Wot 'appened, sir!" wailed Tippet. "Oh, Gord, sir! Hit came back. Hit came for me, sir. Right hit did, sir; strite hat me, sir; hand
with long w'ite 'ands it clawed for me. Oh, Gord! Hit almost caught
me, sir. Hi'm has good as dead; Hi'm a marked man; that's wot Hi ham. Hit was a-goin' for to carry me horf, sir." "Stuff and nonsense," snapped Bradley. "Did you get a good look at it?" Tippet said that he did--a much better look than he wanted. The thing
had almost clutched him, and he had looked straight into its
eyes--"dead heyes in a dead face," he had described them. "Wot was it after bein', do you think?" inquired Brady. "Hit was Death," moaned Tippet, shuddering, and again a pall of gloom
fell upon the little party. The following day Tippet walked as one in a trance. He never spoke
except in reply to a direct question, which more often than not had to
be repeated before it could attract his attention. He insisted that he
was already a dead man, for if the thing didn't come for him during the
day he would never live through another night of agonized apprehension,
waiting for the frightful end that he was positive was in store for
him. "I'll see to that," he said, and they all knew that Tippet meant
to take his own life before darkness set in. Bradley tried to reason with him, in his short, crisp way, but soon saw
the futility of it; nor could he take the man's weapons from him
without subjecting him to almost certain death from any of the
numberless dangers that beset their way. The entire party was moody and glum. There was none of the bantering
that had marked their intercourse before, even in the face of blighting
hardships and hideous danger. This was a new menace that threatened
them, something that they couldn't explain; and so, naturally, it
aroused within them superstitious fear which Tippet's attitude only
tended to augment. To add further to their gloom, their way led
through a dense forest, where, on account of the underbrush, it was
difficult to make even a mile an hour. Constant watchfulness was
required to avoid the many snakes of various degrees of repulsiveness
and enormity that infested the wood; and the only ray of hope they had
to cling to was that the forest would, like the majority of Caspakian
forests, prove to be of no considerable extent. Bradley was in the lead when he came suddenly upon a grotesque creature
of Titanic proportions. Crouching among the trees, which here
commenced to thin out slightly, Bradley saw what appeared to be an
enormous dragon devouring the carcass of a mammoth. From frightful
jaws to the tip of its long tail it was fully forty feet in length. Its body was covered with plates of thick skin which bore a striking
resemblance to armor-plate. The creature saw Bradley almost at the
same instant that he saw it and reared up on its enormous hind legs
until its head towered a full twenty-five feet above the ground. From
the cavernous jaws issued a hissing sound of a volume equal to the
escaping steam from the safety-valves of half a dozen locomotives, and
then the creature came for the man. "Scatter!" shouted Bradley to those behind him; and all but Tippet
heeded the warning. The man stood as though dazed, and when Bradley
saw the other's danger, he too stopped and wheeling about sent a bullet
into the massive body forcing its way through the trees toward him. The shot struck the creature in the belly where there was no protecting
armor, eliciting a new note which rose in a shrill whistle and ended in
a wail. It was then that Tippet appeared to come out of his trance,
for with a cry of terror he turned and fled to the left. Bradley,
seeing that he had as good an opportunity as the others to escape, now
turned his attention to extricating himself; and as the woods seemed
dense on the right, he ran in that direction, hoping that the close-set
boles would prevent pursuit on the part of the great reptile. The
dragon paid no further attention to him, however, for Tippet's sudden
break for liberty had attracted its attention; and after Tippet it
went, bowling over small trees, uprooting underbrush and leaving a wake
behind it like that of a small tornado. Bradley, the moment he had discovered the thing was pursuing Tippet,
had followed it. He was afraid to fire for fear of hitting the man,
and so it was that he came upon them at the very moment that the
monster lunged its great weight forward upon the doomed man. The
sharp, three-toed talons of the forelimbs seized poor Tippet, and
Bradley saw the unfortunate fellow lifted high above the ground as the
creature again reared up on its hind legs, immediately transferring
Tippet's body to its gaping jaws, which closed with a sickening,
crunching sound as Tippet's bones cracked beneath the great teeth. Bradley half raised his rifle to fire again and then lowered it with a
shake of his head. Tippet was beyond succor--why waste a bullet that
Caspak could never replace? If he could now escape the further notice
of the monster it would be a wiser act than to throw his life away in
futile revenge. He saw that the reptile was not looking in his
direction, and so he slipped noiselessly behind the bole of a large
tree and thence quietly faded away in the direction he believed the
others to have taken. At what he considered a safe distance he halted
and looked back. Half hidden by the intervening trees he still could
see the huge head and the massive jaws from which protrude the limp
legs of the dead man. Then, as though struck by the hammer of Thor,
the creature collapsed and crumpled to the ground. Bradley's single
bullet, penetrating the body through the soft skin of the belly, had
slain the Titan. A few minutes later, Bradley found the others of the party. The four
returned cautiously to the spot where the creature lay and after
convincing themselves that it was quite dead, came close to it. It was
an arduous and gruesome job extricating Tippet's mangled remains from
the powerful jaws, the men working for the most part silently. "It was the work of the banshee all right," muttered Brady. "It warned
poor Tippet, it did." "Hit killed him, that's wot hit did, hand hit'll kill some more of us,"
said James, his lower lip trembling. "If it was a ghost," interjected Sinclair, "and I don't say as it was;
but if it was, why, it could take on any form it wanted to. It might
have turned itself into this thing, which ain't no natural thing at
all, just to get poor Tippet. If it had of been a lion or something
else humanlike it wouldn't look so strange; but this here thing ain't
humanlike. There ain't no such thing an' never was." "Bullets don't kill ghosts," said Bradley, "so this couldn't have been
a ghost. Furthermore, there are no such things. I've been trying to
place this creature. Just succeeded. It's a tyrannosaurus. Saw
picture of skeleton in magazine. There's one in New York Natural
History Museum. Seems to me it said it was found in place called Hell
Creek somewhere in western North America. Supposed to have lived about
six million years ago." "Hell Creek's in Montana," said Sinclair. "I used to punch cows in
Wyoming, an' I've heard of Hell Creek. Do you s'pose that there
thing's six million years old?" His tone was skeptical. "No," replied Bradley; "But it would indicate that the island of
Caprona has stood almost without change for more than six million
years." The conversation and Bradley's assurance that the creature was not of
supernatural origin helped to raise a trifle the spirits of the men;
and then came another diversion in the form of ravenous meat-eaters
attracted to the spot by the uncanny sense of smell which had apprised
them of the presence of flesh, killed and ready for the eating. It was a constant battle while they dug a grave and consigned all that
was mortal of John Tippet to his last, lonely resting-place. Nor would
they leave then; but remained to fashion a rude headstone from a
crumbling out-cropping of sandstone and to gather a mass of the
gorgeous flowers growing in such great profusion around them and heap
the new-made grave with bright blooms. Upon the headstone Sinclair
scratched in rude characters the words:

  HERE LIES JOHN TIPPET
       ENGLISHMAN
  KILLED BY TYRANNOSAURUS
    10 SEPT. A.D. 1916
         R.I.P. and Bradley repeated a short prayer before they left their comrade
forever. For three days the party marched due south through forests and
meadow-land and great park-like areas where countless herbivorous
animals grazed--deer and antelope and bos and the little ecca, the
smallest species of Caspakian horse, about the size of a rabbit. There
were other horses too; but all were small, the largest being not above
eight hands in height. Preying continually upon the herbivora were the
meat-eaters, large and small--wolves, hyaenadons, panthers, lions,
tigers, and bear as well as several large and ferocious species of
reptilian life. On September twelfth the party scaled a line of sandstone cliffs which
crossed their route toward the south; but they crossed them only after
an encounter with the tribe that inhabited the numerous caves which
pitted the face of the escarpment. That night they camped upon a rocky
plateau which was sparsely wooded with jarrah, and here once again they
were visited by the weird, nocturnal apparition that had already filled
them with a nameless terror. As on the night of September ninth the first warning came from the
sentinel standing guard over his sleeping companions. A
terror-stricken cry punctuated by the crack of a rifle brought Bradley,
Sinclair and Brady to their feet in time to see James, with clubbed
rifle, battling with a white-robed figure that hovered on widespread
wings on a level with the Englishman's head. As they ran, shouting,
forward, it was obvious to them that the weird and terrible apparition
was attempting to seize James; but when it saw the others coming to his
rescue, it desisted, flapping rapidly upward and away, its long, ragged
wings giving forth the peculiarly dismal notes which always
characterized the sound of its flying. Bradley fired at the vanishing menacer of their peace and safety; but
whether he scored a hit or not, none could tell, though, following the
shot, there was wafted back to them the same piercing wail that had on
other occasions frozen their marrow. Then they turned toward James, who lay face downward upon the ground,
trembling as with ague. For a time he could not even speak, but at
last regained sufficient composure to tell them how the thing must have
swooped silently upon him from above and behind as the first
premonition of danger he had received was when the long, clawlike
fingers had clutched him beneath either arm. In the melee his rifle
had been discharged and he had broken away at the same instant and
turned to defend himself with the butt. The rest they had seen. From that instant James was an absolutely broken man. He maintained
with shaking lips that his doom was sealed, that the thing had marked
him for its own, and that he was as good as dead, nor could any amount
of argument or raillery convince him to the contrary. He had seen
Tippet marked and claimed and now he had been marked. Nor were his
constant reiterations of this belief without effect upon the rest of
the party. Even Bradley felt depressed, though for the sake of the
others he managed to hide it beneath a show of confidence he was far
from feeling. And on the following day William James was killed by a saber-tooth
tiger--September 13, 1916. Beneath a jarrah tree on the stony plateau
on the northern edge of the Sto-lu country in the land that Time
forgot, he lies in a lonely grave marked by a rough headstone. Southward from his grave marched three grim and silent men. To the
best of Bradley's reckoning they were some twenty-five miles north of
Fort Dinosaur, and that they might reach the fort on the following day,
they plodded on until darkness overtook them. With comparative safety
fifteen miles away, they made camp at last; but there was no singing
now and no joking. In the bottom of his heart each prayed that they
might come safely through just this night, for they knew that during
the morrow they would make the final stretch, yet the nerves of each
were taut with strained anticipation of what gruesome thing might flap
down upon them from the black sky, marking another for its own. Who
would be the next? As was their custom, they took turns at guard, each man doing two hours
and then arousing the next. Brady had gone on from eight to ten,
followed by Sinclair from ten to twelve, then Bradley had been
awakened. Brady would stand the last guard from two to four, as they
had determined to start the moment that it became light enough to
insure comparative safety upon the trail. The snapping of a twig aroused Brady out of a dead sleep, and as he
opened his eyes, he saw that it was broad daylight and that at twenty
paces from him stood a huge lion. As the man sprang to his feet, his
rifle ready in his hand, Sinclair awoke and took in the scene in a
single swift glance. The fire was out and Bradley was nowhere in
sight. For a long moment the lion and the men eyed one another. The
latter had no mind to fire if the beast minded its own affairs--they
were only too glad to let it go its way if it would; but the lion was
of a different mind. Suddenly the long tail snapped stiffly erect, and as though it had been
attached to two trigger fingers the two rifles spoke in unison, for
both men knew this signal only too well--the immediate forerunner of a
deadly charge. As the brute's head had been raised, his spine had not
been visible; and so they did what they had learned by long experience
was best to do. Each covered a front leg, and as the tail snapped
aloft, fired. With a hideous roar the mighty flesh-eater lurched
forward to the ground with both front legs broken. It was an easy
accomplishment in the instant before the beast charged--after, it would
have been well-nigh an impossible feat. Brady stepped close in and
finished him with a shot in the base of the brain lest his terrific
roarings should attract his mate or others of their kind. Then the two men turned and looked at one another. "Where is
Lieutenant Bradley?" asked Sinclair. They walked to the fire. Only a
few smoking embers remained. A few feet away lay Bradley's rifle. There was no evidence of a struggle. The two men circled about the
camp twice and on the last lap Brady stooped and picked up an object
which had lain about ten yards beyond the fire--it was Bradley's cap. Again the two looked questioningly at one another, and then,
simultaneously, both pairs of eyes swung upward and searched the sky. A moment later Brady was examining the ground about the spot where
Bradley's cap had lain. It was one of those little barren, sandy
stretches that they had found only upon this stony plateau. Brady's
own footsteps showed as plainly as black ink upon white paper; but his
was the only foot that had marred the smooth, windswept surface--there
was no sign that Bradley had crossed the spot upon the surface of the
ground, and yet his cap lay well toward the center of it. Breakfastless and with shaken nerves the two survivors plunged madly
into the long day's march. Both were strong, courageous, resourceful
men; but each had reached the limit of human nerve endurance and each
felt that he would rather die than spend another night in the hideous
open of that frightful land. Vivid in the mind of each was a picture
of Bradley's end, for though neither had witnessed the tragedy, both
could imagine almost precisely what had occurred. They did not discuss
it--they did not even mention it--yet all day long the thing was
uppermost in the mind of each and mingled with it a similar picture
with himself as victim should they fail to make Fort Dinosaur before
dark. And so they plunged forward at reckless speed, their clothes, their
hands, their faces torn by the retarding underbrush that reached forth
to hinder them. Again and again they fell; but be it to their credit
that the one always waited and helped the other and that into the mind
of neither entered the thought or the temptation to desert his
companion--they would reach the fort together if both survived, or
neither would reach it. They encountered the usual number of savage beasts and reptiles; but
they met them with a courageous recklessness born of desperation, and
by virtue of the very madness of the chances they took, they came
through unscathed and with the minimum of delay. Shortly after noon they reached the end of the plateau. Before them
was a drop of two hundred feet to the valley beneath. To the left, in
the distance, they could see the waters of the great inland sea that
covers a considerable portion of the area of the crater island of
Caprona and at a little lesser distance to the south of the cliffs they
saw a thin spiral of smoke arising above the tree-tops. The landscape was familiar--each recognized it immediately and knew
that that smoky column marked the spot where Dinosaur had stood. Was
the fort still there, or did the smoke arise from the smoldering embers
of the building they had helped to fashion for the housing of their
party? Who could say! Thirty precious minutes that seemed as many hours to the impatient men
were consumed in locating a precarious way from the summit to the base
of the cliffs that bounded the plateau upon the south, and then once
again they struck off upon level ground toward their goal. The closer
they approached the fort the greater became their apprehension that all
would not be well. They pictured the barracks deserted or the small
company massacred and the buildings in ashes. It was almost in a
frenzy of fear that they broke through the final fringe of jungle and
stood at last upon the verge of the open meadow a half-mile from Fort
Dinosaur. "Lord!" ejaculated Sinclair. "They are still there!" And he fell to
his knees, sobbing. Brady trembled like a leaf as he crossed himself and gave silent
thanks, for there before them stood the sturdy ramparts of Dinosaur and
from inside the inclosure rose a thin spiral of smoke that marked the
location of the cook-house. All was well, then, and their comrades
were preparing the evening meal! Across the clearing they raced as though they had not already covered
in a single day a trackless, primeval country that might easily have
required two days by fresh and untired men. Within hailing distance
they set up such a loud shouting that presently heads appeared above
the top of the parapet and soon answering shouts were rising from
within Fort Dinosaur. A moment later three men issued from the
inclosure and came forward to meet the survivors and listen to the
hurried story of the eleven eventful days since they had set out upon
their expedition to the barrier cliffs. They heard of the deaths of
Tippet and James and of the disappearance of Lieutenant Bradley, and a
new terror settled upon Dinosaur. Olson, the Irish engineer, with Whitely and Wilson constituted the
remnants of Dinosaur's defenders, and to Brady and Sinclair they
narrated the salient events that had transpired since Bradley and his
party had marched away on September 4th. They told them of the
infamous act of Baron Friedrich von Schoenvorts and his German crew who
had stolen the U-33, breaking their parole, and steaming away toward
the subterranean opening through the barrier cliffs that carried the
waters of the inland sea into the open Pacific beyond; and of the
cowardly shelling of the fort. They told of the disappearance of Miss La Rue in the night of September
11th, and of the departure of Bowen Tyler in search of her, accompanied
only by his Airedale, Nobs. Thus of the original party of eleven
Allies and nine Germans that had constituted the company of the U-33
when she left English waters after her capture by the crew of the
English tug there were but five now to be accounted for at Fort
Dinosaur. Benson, Tippet, James, and one of the Germans were known to
be dead. It was assumed that Bradley, Tyler and the girl had already
succumbed to some of the savage denizens of Caspak, while the fate of
the Germans was equally unknown, though it might readily be believed
that they had made good their escape. They had had ample time to
provision the ship and the refining of the crude oil they had
discovered north of the fort could have insured them an ample supply to
carry them back to Germany. Chapter 2

When bradley went on guard at midnight, September 14th, his thoughts
were largely occupied with rejoicing that the night was almost spent
without serious mishap and that the morrow would doubtless see them all
safely returned to Fort Dinosaur. The hopefulness of his mood was
tinged with sorrow by recollection of the two members of his party who
lay back there in the savage wilderness and for whom there would never
again be a homecoming. No premonition of impending ill cast gloom over his anticipations for
the coming day, for Bradley was a man who, while taking every
precaution against possible danger, permitted no gloomy forebodings to
weigh down his spirit. When danger threatened, he was prepared; but he
was not forever courting disaster, and so it was that when about one
o'clock in the morning of the fifteenth, he heard the dismal flapping
of giant wings overhead, he was neither surprised nor frightened but
idly prepared for an attack he had known might reasonably be expected. The sound seemed to come from the south, and presently, low above the
trees in that direction, the man made out a dim, shadowy form circling
slowly about. Bradley was a brave man, yet so keen was the feeling of
revulsion engendered by the sight and sound of that grim, uncanny shape
that he distinctly felt the gooseflesh rise over the surface of his
body, and it was with difficulty that he refrained from following an
instinctive urge to fire upon the nocturnal intruder. Better, far
better would it have been had he given in to the insistent demand of
his subconscious mentor; but his almost fanatical obsession to save
ammunition proved now his undoing, for while his attention was riveted
upon the thing circling before him and while his ears were filled with
the beating of its wings, there swooped silently out of the black night
behind him another weird and ghostly shape. With its huge wings partly
closed for the dive and its white robe fluttering in its wake, the
apparition swooped down upon the Englishman. So great was the force of the impact when the thing struck Bradley
between the shoulders that the man was half stunned. His rifle flew
from his grasp; he felt clawlike talons of great strength seize him
beneath his arms and sweep him off his feet; and then the thing rose
swiftly with him, so swiftly that his cap was blown from his head by
the rush of air as he was borne rapidly upward into the inky sky and
the cry of warning to his companions was forced back into his lungs. The creature wheeled immediately toward the east and was at once joined
by its fellow, who circled them once and then fell in behind them. Bradley now realized the strategy that the pair had used to capture him
and at once concluded that he was in the power of reasoning beings
closely related to the human race if not actually of it. Past experience suggested that the great wings were a part of some
ingenious mechanical device, for the limitations of the human mind,
which is always loath to accept aught beyond its own little experience,
would not permit him to entertain the idea that the creatures might be
naturally winged and at the same time of human origin. From his
position Bradley could not see the wings of his captor, nor in the
darkness had he been able to examine those of the second creature
closely when it circled before him. He listened for the puff of a
motor or some other telltale sound that would prove the correctness of
his theory. However, he was rewarded with nothing more than the
constant flap-flap. Presently, far below and ahead, he saw the waters of the inland sea,
and a moment later he was borne over them. Then his captor did that
which proved beyond doubt to Bradley that he was in the hands of human
beings who had devised an almost perfect scheme of duplicating,
mechanically, the wings of a bird--the thing spoke to its companion and
in a language that Bradley partially understood, since he recognized
words that he had learned from the savage races of Caspak. From this
he judged that they were human, and being human, he knew that they
could have no natural wings--for who had ever seen a human being so
adorned! Therefore their wings must be mechanical. Thus Bradley
reasoned--thus most of us reason; not by what might be possible; but by
what has fallen within the range of our experience. What he heard them say was to the effect that having covered half the
distance the burden would now be transferred from one to the other. Bradley wondered how the exchange was to be accomplished. He knew that
those giant wings would not permit the creatures to approach one
another closely enough to effect the transfer in this manner; but he
was soon to discover that they had other means of doing it. He felt the thing that carried him rise to a greater altitude, and
below he glimpsed momentarily the second white-robed figure; then the
creature above sounded a low call, it was answered from below, and
instantly Bradley felt the clutching talons release him; gasping for
breath, he hurtled downward through space. For a terrifying instant, pregnant with horror, Bradley fell; then
something swooped for him from behind, another pair of talons clutched
him beneath the arms, his downward rush was checked, within another
hundred feet, and close to the surface of the sea he was again borne
upward. As a hawk dives for a songbird on the wing, so this great,
human bird dived for Bradley. It was a harrowing experience, but soon
over, and once again the captive was being carried swiftly toward the
east and what fate he could not even guess. It was immediately following his transfer in mid-air that Bradley made
out the shadowy form of a large island far ahead, and not long after,
he realized that this must be the intended destination of his captors. Nor was he mistaken. Three quarters of an hour from the time of his
seizure his captors dropped gently to earth in the strangest city that
human eye had ever rested upon. Just a brief glimpse of his immediate
surroundings vouchsafed Bradley before he was whisked into the interior
of one of the buildings; but in that momentary glance he saw strange
piles of stone and wood and mud fashioned into buildings of all
conceivable sizes and shapes, sometimes piled high on top of one
another, sometimes standing alone in an open court-way, but usually
crowded and jammed together, so that there were no streets or alleys
between them other than a few which ended almost as soon as they began. The principal doorways appeared to be in the roofs, and it was through
one of these that Bradley was inducted into the dark interior of a
low-ceiled room. Here he was pushed roughly into a corner where he
tripped over a thick mat, and there his captors left him. He heard
them moving about in the darkness for a moment, and several times he
saw their large luminous eyes glowing in the dark. Finally, these
disappeared and silence reigned, broken only by the breathing of the
creature which indicated to the Englishman that they were sleeping
somewhere in the same apartment. It was now evident that the mat upon the floor was intended for
sleeping purposes and that the rough shove that had sent him to it had
been a rude invitation to repose. After taking stock of himself and
finding that he still had his pistol and ammunition, some matches, a
little tobacco, a canteen full of water and a razor, Bradley made
himself comfortable upon the mat and was soon asleep, knowing that an
attempted escape in the darkness without knowledge of his surroundings
would be predoomed to failure. When he awoke, it was broad daylight, and the sight that met his eyes
made him rub them again and again to assure himself that they were
really open and that he was not dreaming. A broad shaft of morning
light poured through the open doorway in the ceiling of the room which
was about thirty feet square, or roughly square, being irregular in
shape, one side curving outward, another being indented by what might
have been the corner of another building jutting into it, another
alcoved by three sides of an octagon, while the fourth was serpentine
in contour. Two windows let in more daylight, while two doors
evidently gave ingress to other rooms. The walls were partially ceiled
with thin strips of wood, nicely fitted and finished, partially
plastered and the rest covered with a fine, woven cloth. Figures of
reptiles and beasts were painted without regard to any uniform scheme
here and there upon the walls. A striking feature of the decorations
consisted of several engaged columns set into the walls at no regular
intervals, the capitals of each supporting a human skull the cranium of
which touched the ceiling, as though the latter was supported by these
grim reminders either of departed relatives or of some hideous tribal
rite--Bradley could not but wonder which. Yet it was none of these things that filled him with greatest
wonder--no, it was the figures of the two creatures that had captured
him and brought him hither. At one end of the room a stout pole about
two inches in diameter ran horizontally from wall to wall some six or
seven feet from the floor, its ends securely set in two of the columns. Hanging by their knees from this perch, their heads downward and their
bodies wrapped in their huge wings, slept the creatures of the night
before--like two great, horrid bats they hung, asleep. As Bradley gazed upon them in wide-eyed astonishment, he saw plainly
that all his intelligence, all his acquired knowledge through years of
observation and experience were set at naught by the simple evidence of
the fact that stood out glaringly before his eyes--the creatures' wings
were not mechanical devices but as natural appendages, growing from
their shoulderblades, as were their arms and legs. He saw, too, that
except for their wings the pair bore a strong resemblance to human
beings, though fashioned in a most grotesque mold. As he sat gazing at them, one of the two awoke, separated his wings to
release his arms that had been folded across his breast, placed his
hands upon the floor, dropped his feet and stood erect. For a moment
he stretched his great wings slowly, solemnly blinking his large round
eyes. Then his gaze fell upon Bradley. The thin lips drew back
tightly against yellow teeth in a grimace that was nothing but hideous. It could not have been termed a smile, and what emotion it registered
the Englishman was at a loss to guess. No expression whatever altered
the steady gaze of those large, round eyes; there was no color upon the
pasty, sunken cheeks. A death's head grimaced as though a man long
dead raised his parchment-covered skull from an old grave. The creature stood about the height of an average man but appeared much
taller from the fact that the joints of his long wings rose fully a
foot above his hairless head. The bare arms were long and sinewy,
ending in strong, bony hands with clawlike fingers--almost talonlike in
their suggestiveness. The white robe was separated in front, revealing
skinny legs and the further fact that the thing wore but the single
garment, which was of fine, woven cloth. From crown to sole the
portions of the body exposed were entirely hairless, and as he noted
this, Bradley also noted for the first time the cause of much of the
seeming expressionlessness of the creature's countenance--it had
neither eye-brows or lashes. The ears were small and rested flat
against the skull, which was noticeably round, though the face was
quite flat. The creature had small feet, beautifully arched and plump,
but so out of keeping with every other physical attribute it possessed
as to appear ridiculous. After eyeing Bradley for a moment the thing approached him. "Where
from?" it asked. "England," replied Bradley, as briefly. "Where is England and what?" pursued the questioner. "It is a country far from here," answered the Englishman. "Are your people cor-sva-jo or cos-ata-lu?" "I do not understand you," said Bradley; "and now suppose you answer a
few questions. Who are you? What country is this? Why did you bring
me here?" Again the sepulchral grimace. "We are Wieroos--Luata is our father. Caspak is ours. This, our country, is called Oo-oh. We brought you
here for (literally) Him Who Speaks for Luata to gaze upon and
question. He would know from whence you came and why; but principally
if you be cos-ata-lu." "And if I am not cos--whatever you call the bloomin' beast--what of it?" The Wieroo raised his wings in a very human shrug and waved his bony
claws toward the human skulls supporting the ceiling. His gesture was
eloquent; but he embellished it by remarking, "And possibly if you are." "I'm hungry," snapped Bradley. The Wieroo motioned him to one of the doors which he threw open,
permitting Bradley to pass out onto another roof on a level lower than
that upon which they had landed earlier in the morning. By daylight
the city appeared even more remarkable than in the moonlight, though
less weird and unreal. The houses of all shapes and sizes were piled
about as a child might pile blocks of various forms and colors. He saw
now that there were what might be called streets or alleys, but they
ran in baffling turns and twists, nor ever reached a destination,
always ending in a dead wall where some Wieroo had built a house across
them. Upon each house was a slender column supporting a human skull. Sometimes the columns were at one corner of the roof, sometimes at
another, or again they rose from the center or near the center, and the
columns were of varying heights, from that of a man to those which rose
twenty feet above their roofs. The skulls were, as a rule,
painted--blue or white, or in combinations of both colors. The most
effective were painted blue with the teeth white and the eye-sockets
rimmed with white. There were other skulls--thousands of them--tens, hundreds of
thousands. They rimmed the eaves of every house, they were set in the
plaster of the outer walls and at no great distance from where Bradley
stood rose a round tower built entirely of human skulls. And the city
extended in every direction as far as the Englishman could see. All about him Wieroos were moving across the roofs or winging through
the air. The sad sound of their flapping wings rose and fell like a
solemn dirge. Most of them were appareled all in white, like his
captors; but others had markings of red or blue or yellow slashed
across the front of their robes. His guide pointed toward a doorway in an alley below them. "Go there
and eat," he commanded, "and then come back. You cannot escape. If
any question you, say that you belong to Fosh-bal-soj. There is the
way." And this time he pointed to the top of a ladder which protruded
above the eaves of the roof near-by. Then he turned and reentered the
house. Bradley looked about him. No, he could not escape--that seemed
evident. The city appeared interminable, and beyond the city, if not a
savage wilderness filled with wild beasts, there was the broad inland
sea infested with horrid monsters. No wonder his captor felt safe in
turning him loose in Oo-oh--he wondered if that was the name of the
country or the city and if there were other cities like this upon the
island. Slowly he descended the ladder to the seemingly deserted alley which
was paved with what appeared to be large, round cobblestones. He
looked again at the smooth, worn pavement, and a rueful grin crossed
his features--the alley was paved with skulls. "The City of Human
Skulls," mused Bradley. "They must have been collectin' 'em since
Adam," he thought, and then he crossed and entered the building through
the doorway that had been pointed out to him. Inside he found a large room in which were many Wieroos seated before
pedestals the tops of which were hollowed out so that they resembled
the ordinary bird drinking- and bathing-fonts so commonly seen on
suburban lawns. A seat protruded from each of the four sides of the
pedestals--just a flat board with a support running from its outer end
diagonally to the base of the pedestal. As Bradley entered, some of the Wieroos espied him, and a dismal wail
arose. Whether it was a greeting or a threat, Bradley did not know. Suddenly from a dark alcove another Wieroo rushed out toward him. "Who
are you?" he cried. "What do you want?" "Fosh-bal-soj sent me here to eat," replied Bradley. "Do you belong to Fosh-bal-soj?" asked the other. "That appears to be what he thinks," answered the Englishman. "Are you cos-ata-lu?" demanded the Wieroo. "Give me something to eat or I'll be all of that," replied Bradley. The Wieroo looked puzzled. "Sit here, jaal-lu," he snapped, and
Bradley sat down unconscious of the fact that he had been insulted by
being called a hyena-man, an appellation of contempt in Caspak. The Wieroo had seated him at a pedestal by himself, and as he sat
waiting for what was next to transpire, he looked about him at the
Wieroo in his immediate vicinity. He saw that in each font was a
quantity of food, and that each Wieroo was armed with a wooden skewer,
sharpened at one end; with which they carried solid portions of food to
their mouths. At the other end of the skewer was fastened a small
clam-shell. This was used to scoop up the smaller and softer portions
of the repast into which all four of the occupants of each table dipped
impartially. The Wieroo leaned far over their food, scooping it up
rapidly and with much noise, and so great was their haste that a part
of each mouthful always fell back into the common dish; and when they
choked, by reason of the rapidity with which they attempted to bolt
their food, they often lost it all. Bradley was glad that he had a
pedestal all to himself. Soon the keeper of the place returned with a wooden bowl filled with
food. This he dumped into Bradley's "trough," as he already thought of
it. The Englishman was glad that he could not see into the dark alcove
or know what were all the ingredients that constituted the mess before
him, for he was very hungry. After the first mouthful he cared even less to investigate the
antecedents of the dish, for he found it peculiarly palatable. It
seemed to consist of a combination of meat, fruits, vegetables, small
fish and other undistinguishable articles of food all seasoned to
produce a gastronomic effect that was at once baffling and delicious. When he had finished, his trough was empty, and then he commenced to
wonder who was to settle for his meal. As he waited for the proprietor
to return, he fell to examining the dish from which he had eaten and
the pedestal upon which it rested. The font was of stone worn smooth
by long-continued use, the four outer edges hollowed and polished by
the contact of the countless Wieroo bodies that had leaned against them
for how long a period of time Bradley could not even guess. Everything
about the place carried the impression of hoary age. The carved
pedestals were black with use, the wooden seats were worn hollow, the
floor of stone slabs was polished by the contact of possibly millions
of naked feet and worn away in the aisles between the pedestals so that
the latter rested upon little mounds of stone several inches above the
general level of the floor. Finally, seeing that no one came to collect, Bradley arose and started
for the doorway. He had covered half the distance when he heard the
voice of mine host calling to him:  "Come back, jaal-lu," screamed the
Wieroo; and Bradley did as he was bid. As he approached the creature
which stood now behind a large, flat-topped pedestal beside the alcove,
he saw lying upon the smooth surface something that almost elicited a
gasp of astonishment from him--a simple, common thing it was, or would
have been almost anywhere in the world but Caspak--a square bit of
paper! And on it, in a fine hand, written compactly, were many strange
hieroglyphics! These remarkable creatures, then, had a written as well
as a spoken language and besides the art of weaving cloth possessed
that of paper-making. Could it be that such grotesque beings
represented the high culture of the human race within the boundaries of
Caspak? Had natural selection produced during the countless ages of
Caspakian life a winged monstrosity that represented the earthly
pinnacle of man's evolution? Bradley had noted something of the obvious indications of a gradual
evolution from ape to spearman as exemplified by the several
overlapping races of Alalus, club-men and hatchet-men that formed the
connecting links between the two extremes with which he, had come in
contact. He had heard of the Krolus and the Galus--reputed to be still
higher in the plane of evolution--and now he had indisputable evidence
of a race possessing refinements of civilization eons in advance of the
spear-men. The conjectures awakened by even a momentary consideration
of the possibilities involved became at once as wildly bizarre as the
insane imagings of a drug addict. As these thoughts flashed through his mind, the Wieroo held out a pen
of bone fixed to a wooden holder and at the same time made a sign that
Bradley was to write upon the paper. It was difficult to judge from
the expressionless features of the Wieroo what was passing in the
creature's mind, but Bradley could not but feel that the thing cast a
supercilious glance upon him as much as to say, "Of course you do not
know how to write, you poor, low creature; but you can make your mark." Bradley seized the pen and in a clear, bold hand wrote:  "John Bradley,
England." The Wieroo showed evidences of consternation as it seized
the piece of paper and examined the writing with every mark of
incredulity and surprise. Of course it could make nothing of the
strange characters; but it evidently accepted them as proof that
Bradley possessed knowledge of a written language of his own, for
following the Englishman's entry it made a few characters of its own. "You will come here again just before Lua hides his face behind the
great cliff," announced the creature, "unless before that you are
summoned by Him Who Speaks for Luata, in which case you will not have
to eat any more." "Reassuring cuss," thought Bradley as he turned and left the building. Outside were several Wieroos that had been eating at the pedestals
within. They immediately surrounded him, asking all sorts of
questions, plucking at his garments, his ammunition-belt and his
pistol. Their demeanor was entirely different from what it had been
within the eating-place and Bradley was to learn that a house of food
was sanctuary for him, since the stern laws of the Wieroos forbade
altercations within such walls. Now they were rough and threatening,
as with wings half spread they hovered about him in menacing attitudes,
barring his way to the ladder leading to the roof from whence he had
descended; but the Englishman was not one to brook interference for
long. He attempted at first to push his way past them, and then when
one seized his arm and jerked him roughly back, Bradley swung upon the
creature and with a heavy blow to the jaw felled it. Instantly pandemonium reigned. Loud wails arose, great wings opened
and closed with a loud, beating noise and many clawlike hands reached
forth to clutch him. Bradley struck to right and left. He dared not
use his pistol for fear that once they discovered its power he would be
overcome by weight of numbers and relieved of possession of what he
considered his trump card, to be reserved until the last moment that it
might be used to aid in his escape, for already the Englishman was
planning, though almost hopelessly, such an attempt. A few blows convinced Bradley that the Wieroos were arrant cowards and
that they bore no weapons, for after two or three had fallen beneath
his fists the others formed a circle about him, but at a safe distance
and contented themselves with threatening and blustering, while those
whom he had felled lay upon the pavement without trying to arise, the
while they moaned and wailed in lugubrious chorus. Again Bradley strode toward the ladder, and this time the circle parted
before him; but no sooner had he ascended a few rungs than he was
seized by one foot and an effort made to drag him down. With a quick
backward glance the Englishman, clinging firmly to the ladder with both
hands, drew up his free foot and with all the strength of a powerful
leg, planted a heavy shoe squarely in the flat face of the Wieroo that
held him. Shrieking horribly, the creature clapped both hands to its
face and sank to the ground while Bradley clambered quickly the
remaining distance to the roof, though no sooner did he reach the top
of the ladder than a great flapping of wings beneath him warned him
that the Wieroos were rising after him. A moment later they swarmed
about his head as he ran for the apartment in which he had spent the
early hours of the morning after his arrival. It was but a short distance from the top of the ladder to the doorway,
and Bradley had almost reached his goal when the door flew open and
Fosh-bal-soj stepped out. Immediately the pursuing Wieroos demanded
punishment of the jaal-lu who had so grievously maltreated them. Fosh-bal-soj listened to their complaints and then with a sudden sweep
of his right hand seized Bradley by the scruff of the neck and hurled
him sprawling through the doorway upon the floor of the chamber. So sudden was the assault and so surprising the strength of the Wieroo
that the Englishman was taken completely off his guard. When he arose,
the door was closed, and Fosh-bal-soj was standing over him, his
hideous face contorted into an expression of rage and hatred. "Hyena, snake, lizard!" he screamed. "You would dare lay your low,
vile, profaning hands upon even the lowliest of the Wieroos--the sacred
chosen of Luata!" Bradley was mad, and so he spoke in a very low, calm voice while a
half-smile played across his lips but his cold, gray eyes were
unsmiling. "What you did to me just now," he said, "--I am going to kill you for
that," and even as he spoke, he launched himself at the throat of
Fosh-bal-soj. The other Wieroo that had been asleep when Bradley left
the chamber had departed, and the two were alone. Fosh-bal-soj
displayed little of the cowardice of those that had attacked Bradley in
the alleyway, but that may have been because he had so slight
opportunity, for Bradley had him by the throat before he could utter a
cry and with his right hand struck him heavily and repeatedly upon his
face and over his heart--ugly, smashing, short-arm jabs of the sort
that take the fight out of a man in quick time. But Fosh-bal-soj was of no mind to die passively. He clawed and struck
at Bradley while with his great wings he attempted to shield himself
from the merciless rain of blows, at the same time searching for a hold
upon his antagonist's throat. Presently he succeeded in tripping the
Englishman, and together the two fell heavily to the floor, Bradley
underneath, and at the same instant the Wieroo fastened his long talons
about the other's windpipe. Fosh-bal-soj was possessed of enormous strength and he was fighting for
his life. The Englishman soon realized that the battle was going
against him. Already his lungs were pounding painfully for air as he
reached for his pistol. It was with difficulty that he drew it from
its holster, and even then, with death staring him in the face, he
thought of his precious ammunition. "Can't waste it," he thought; and
slipping his fingers to the barrel he raised the weapon and struck
Fosh-bal-soj a terrific blow between the eyes. Instantly the clawlike
fingers released their hold, and the creature sank limply to the floor
beside Bradley, who lay for several minutes gasping painfully in an
effort to regain his breath. When he was able, he rose, and leaned close over the Wieroo, lying
silent and motionless, his wings dropping limply and his great, round
eyes staring blankly toward the ceiling. A brief examination convinced
Bradley that the thing was dead, and with the conviction came an
overwhelming sense of the dangers which must now confront him; but how
was he to escape? His first thought was to find some means for concealing the evidence of
his deed and then to make a bold effort to escape. Stepping to the
second door he pushed it gently open and peered in upon what seemed to
be a store room. In it was a litter of cloth such as the Wieroos'
robes were fashioned from, a number of chests painted blue and white,
with white hieroglyphics painted in bold strokes upon the blue and blue
hieroglyphics upon the white. In one corner was a pile of human skulls
reaching almost to the ceiling and in another a stack of dried Wieroo
wings. The chamber was as irregularly shaped as the other and had but
a single window and a second door at the further end, but was without
the exit through the roof and, most important of all, there was no
creature of any sort in it. As quickly as possible Bradley dragged the dead Wieroo through the
doorway and closed the door; then he looked about for a place to
conceal the corpse. One of the chests was large enough to hold the
body if the knees were bent well up, and with this idea in view Bradley
approached the chest to open it. The lid was made in two pieces, each
being hinged at an opposite end of the chest and joining nicely where
they met in the center of the chest, making a snug, well-fitting joint. There was no lock. Bradley raised one half the cover and looked in. With a smothered "By Jove!" he bent closer to examine the contents--the
chest was about half filled with an assortment of golden trinkets. There were what appeared to be bracelets, anklets and brooches of
virgin gold. Realizing that there was no room in the chest for the body of the
Wieroo, Bradley turned to seek another means of concealing the evidence
of his crime. There was a space between the chests and the wall, and
into this he forced the corpse, piling the discarded robes upon it
until it was entirely hidden from sight; but now how was he to make
good his escape in the bright glare of that early Spring day? He walked to the door at the far end of the apartment and cautiously
opened it an inch. Before him and about two feet away was the blank
wall of another building. Bradley opened the door a little farther and
looked in both directions. There was no one in sight to the left over
a considerable expanse of roof-top, and to the right another building
shut off his line of vision at about twenty feet. Slipping out, he
turned to the right and in a few steps found a narrow passageway
between two buildings. Turning into this he passed about half its
length when he saw a Wieroo appear at the opposite end and halt. The
creature was not looking down the passageway; but at any moment it
might turn its eyes toward him, when he would be immediately discovered. To Bradley's left was a triangular niche in the wall of one of the
houses and into this he dodged, thus concealing himself from the sight
of the Wieroo. Beside him was a door painted a vivid yellow and
constructed after the same fashion as the other Wieroo doors he had
seen, being made up of countless narrow strips of wood from four to six
inches in length laid on in patches of about the same width, the strips
in adjacent patches never running in the same direction. The result
bore some resemblance to a crazy patchwork quilt, which was heightened
when, as in one of the doors he had seen, contiguous patches were
painted different colors. The strips appeared to have been bound
together and to the underlying framework of the door with gut or fiber
and also glued, after which a thick coating of paint had been applied. One edge of the door was formed of a straight, round pole about two
inches in diameter that protruded at top and bottom, the projections
setting in round holes in both lintel and sill forming the axis upon
which the door swung. An eccentric disk upon the inside face of the
door engaged a slot in the frame when it was desired to secure the door
against intruders. As Bradley stood flattened against the wall waiting for the Wieroo to
move on, he heard the creature's wings brushing against the sides of
the buildings as it made its way down the narrow passage in his
direction. As the yellow door offered the only means of escape without
detection, the Englishman decided to risk whatever might lie beyond it,
and so, boldly pushing it in, he crossed the threshold and entered a
small apartment. As he did so, he heard a muffled ejaculation of surprise, and turning
his eyes in the direction from whence the sound had come, he beheld a
wide-eyed girl standing flattened against the opposite wall, an
expression of incredulity upon her face. At a glance he saw that she
was of no race of humans that he had come in contact with since his
arrival upon Caprona--there was no trace about her form or features of
any relationship to those low orders of men, nor was she appareled as
they--or, rather, she did not entirely lack apparel as did most of them. A soft hide fell from her left shoulder to just below her left hip on
one side and almost to her right knee on the other, a loose girdle was
about her waist, and golden ornaments such as he had seen in the
blue-and-white chest encircled her arms and legs, while a golden fillet
with a triangular diadem bound her heavy hair above her brows. Her
skin was white as from long confinement within doors; but it was clear
and fine. Her figure, but partially concealed by the soft deerskin,
was all curves of symmetry and youthful grace, while her features might
easily have been the envy of the most feted of Continental beauties. If the girl was surprised by the sudden appearance of Bradley, the
latter was absolutely astounded to discover so wondrous a creature
among the hideous inhabitants of the City of Human Skulls. For a
moment the two looked at one another in unconcealed consternation, and
then Bradley spoke, using to the best of his poor ability, the common
tongue of Caspak. "Who are you," he asked, "and from where do you come? Do not tell me
that you are a Wieroo." "No," she replied, "I am no Wieroo." And she shuddered slightly as she
pronounced the word. "I am a Galu; but who and what are you? I am
sure that you are no Galu, from your garments; but you are like the
Galus in other respects. I know that you are not of this frightful
city, for I have been here for almost ten moons, and never have I seen
a male Galu brought hither before, nor are there such as you and I,
other than prisoners in the land of Oo-oh, and these are all females. Are you a prisoner, then?" He told her briefly who and what he was, though he doubted if she
understood, and from her he learned that she had been a prisoner there
for many months; but for what purpose he did not then learn, as in the
midst of their conversation the yellow door swung open and a Wieroo
with a robe slashed with yellow entered. At sight of Bradley the creature became furious. "Whence came this
reptile?" it demanded of the girl. "How long has it been here with
you?" "It came through the doorway just ahead of you," Bradley answered for
the girl. The Wieroo looked relieved. "It is well for the girl that this is so,"
it said, "for now only you will have to die." And stepping to the door
the creature raised its voice in one of those uncanny, depressing wails. The Englishman looked toward the girl. "Shall I kill it?" he asked,
half drawing his pistol. "What is best to do?--I do not wish to
endanger you." The Wieroo backed toward the door. "Defiler!" it screamed. "You dare
to threaten one of the sacred chosen of Luata!" "Do not kill him," cried the girl, "for then there could be no hope for
you. That you are here, alive, shows that they may not intend to kill
you at all, and so there is a chance for you if you do not anger them;
but touch him in violence and your bleached skull will top the loftiest
pedestal of Oo-oh." "And what of you?" asked Bradley. "I am already doomed," replied the girl; "I am cos-ata-lo." "Cos-ata-lo! cos-ata-lu!" What did these phrases mean that they were
so oft repeated by the denizens of Oo-oh? Lu and lo, Bradley knew to
mean man and woman; ata; was employed variously to indicate life, eggs,
young, reproduction and kindred subject; cos was a negative; but in
combination they were meaningless to the European. "Do you mean they will kill you?" asked Bradley. "I but wish that they would," replied the girl. "My fate is to be
worse than death--in just a few nights more, with the coming of the new
moon." "Poor she-snake!" snapped the Wieroo. "You are to become sacred above
all other shes. He Who Speaks for Luata has chosen you for himself. Today you go to his temple--" the Wieroo used a phrase meaning
literally High Place--"where you will receive the sacred commands." The girl shuddered and cast a sorrowful glance toward Bradley. "Ah,"
she sighed, "if I could but see my beloved country once again!" The man stepped suddenly close to her side before the Wieroo could
interpose and in a low voice asked her if there was no way by which he
might encompass her escape. She shook her head sorrowfully. "Even if
we escaped the city," she replied, "there is the big water between the
island of Oo-oh and the Galu shore." "And what is beyond the city, if we could leave it?" pursued Bradley. "I  may only guess from what I have heard since I was brought here,"
she answered; "but by reports and chance remarks I take it to be a
beautiful land in which there are but few wild beasts and no men, for
only the Wieroos live upon this island and they dwell always in cities
of which there are three, this being the largest. The others are at
the far end of the island, which is about three marches from end to end
and at its widest point about one march." From his own experience and from what the natives on the mainland had
told him, Bradley knew that ten miles was a good day's march in Caspak,
owing to the fact that at most points it was a trackless wilderness and
at all times travelers were beset by hideous beasts and reptiles that
greatly impeded rapid progress. The two had spoken rapidly but were now interrupted by the advent
through the opening in the roof of several Wieroos who had come in
answer to the alarm it of the yellow slashing had uttered. "This jaal-lu,"  cried the offended one, "has threatened me. Take its
hatchet from it and make it fast where it can do no harm until He Who
Speaks for Luata has said what shall be done with it. It is one of
those strange creatures that Fosh-bal-soj discovered first above the
Band-lu country and followed back toward the beginning. He Who Speaks
for Luata sent Fosh-bal-soj to fetch him one of the creatures, and here
it is. It is hoped that it may be from another world and hold the
secret of the cos-ata-lus." The Wieroos approached boldly to take Bradley's "hatchet" from him,
their leader having indicated the pistol hanging in its holster at the
Englishman's hip, but the first one went reeling backward against his
fellows from the blow to the chin which Bradley followed up with a rush
and the intention to clean up the room in record time; but he had
reckoned without the opening in the roof. Two were down and a great
wailing and moaning was arising when reinforcements appeared from
above. Bradley did not see them; but the girl did, and though she
cried out a warning, it came too late for him to avoid a large Wieroo
who dived headforemost for him, striking him between the shoulders and
bearing him to the floor. Instantly a dozen more were piling on top of
him. His pistol was wrenched from its holster and he was securely
pinioned down by the weight of numbers. At a word from the Wieroo of the yellow slashing who evidently was a
person of authority, one left and presently returned with fiber ropes
with which Bradley was tightly bound. "Now bear him to the Blue Place of Seven Skulls," directed the chief
Wieroo, "and one take the word of all that has passed to Him Who Speaks
for Luata." Each of the creatures raised a hand, the back against its face, as
though in salute. One seized Bradley and carried him through the
yellow doorway to the roof from whence it rose upon its wide-spread
wings and flapped off across the roof-tops of Oo-oh with its heavy
burden clutched in its long talons. Below him Bradley could see the city stretching away to a distance on
every hand. It was not as large as he had imagined, though he judged
that it was at least three miles square. The houses were piled in
indescribable heaps, sometimes to a height of a hundred feet. The
streets and alleys were short and crooked and there were many areas
where buildings had been wedged in so closely that no light could
possibly reach the lowest tiers, the entire surface of the ground being
packed solidly with them. The colors were varied and startling, the architecture amazing. Many
roofs were cup or saucer-shaped with a small hole in the center of
each, as though they had been constructed to catch rain-water and
conduct it to a reservoir beneath; but nearly all the others had the
large opening in the top that Bradley had seen used by these flying men
in lieu of doorways. At all levels were the myriad poles surmounted by
grinning skulls; but the two most prominent features of the city were
the round tower of human skulls that Bradley had noted earlier in the
day and another and much larger edifice near the center of the city. As they approached it, Bradley saw that it was a huge building rising a
hundred feet in height from the ground and that it stood alone in the
center of what might have been called a plaza in some other part of the
world. Its various parts, however, were set together with the same
strange irregularity that marked the architecture of the city as a
whole; and it was capped by an enormous saucer-shaped roof which
projected far beyond the eaves, having the appearance of a colossal
Chinese coolie hat, inverted. The Wieroo bearing Bradley passed over one corner of the open space
about the large building, revealing to the Englishman grass and trees
and running water beneath. They passed the building and about five
hundred yards beyond the creature alighted on the roof of a square,
blue building surmounted by seven poles bearing seven skulls. This
then, thought Bradley, is the Blue Place of Seven Skulls. Over the opening in the roof was a grated covering, and this the Wieroo
removed. The thing then tied a piece of fiber rope to one of Bradley's
ankles and rolled him over the edge of the opening. All was dark below
and for an instant the Englishman came as near to experiencing real
terror as he had ever come in his life before. As he rolled off into
the black abyss he felt the rope tighten about his ankle and an instant
later he was stopped with a sudden jerk to swing pendulumlike, head
downward. Then the creature lowered away until Bradley's head came in
sudden and painful contact with the floor below, after which the Wieroo
let loose of the rope entirely and the Englishman's body crashed to the
wooden planking. He felt the free end of the rope dropped upon him and
heard the grating being slid into place above him. Chapter 3

Half-stunned, Bradley lay for a minute as he had fallen and then slowly
and painfully wriggled into a less uncomfortable position. He could
see nothing of his surroundings in the gloom about him until after a
few minutes his eyes became accustomed to the dark interior when he
rolled them from side to side in survey of his prison. He discovered himself to be in a bare room which was windowless, nor
could he see any other opening than that through which he had been
lowered. In one corner was a huddled mass that might have been almost
anything from a bundle of rags to a dead body. Almost immediately after he had taken his bearings Bradley commenced
working with his bonds. He was a man of powerful physique, and as from
the first he had been imbued with a belief that the fiber ropes were
too weak to hold him, he worked on with a firm conviction that sooner
or later they would part to his strainings. After a matter of five
minutes he was positive that the strands about his wrists were
beginning to give; but he was compelled to rest then from exhaustion. As he lay, his eyes rested upon the bundle in the corner, and presently
he could have sworn that the thing moved. With eyes straining through
the gloom the man lay watching the grim and sinister thing in the
corner. Perhaps his overwrought nerves were playing a sorry joke upon
him. He thought of this and also that his condition of utter
helplessness might still further have stimulated his imagination. He
closed his eyes and sought to relax his muscles and his nerves; but
when he looked again, he knew that he had not been mistaken--the thing
had moved; now it lay in a slightly altered form and farther from the
wall. It was nearer him. With renewed strength Bradley strained at his bonds, his fascinated
gaze still glued upon the shapeless bundle. No longer was there any
doubt that it moved--he saw it rise in the center several inches and
then creep closer to him. It sank and arose again--a headless,
hideous, monstrous thing of menace. Its very silence rendered it the
more terrible. Bradley was a brave man; ordinarily his nerves were of steel; but to be
at the mercy of some unknown and nameless horror, to be unable to
defend himself--it was these things that almost unstrung him, for at
best he was only human. To stand in the open, even with the odds all
against him; to be able to use his fists, to put up some sort of
defense, to inflict punishment upon his adversary--then he could face
death with a smile. It was not death that he feared now--it was that
horror of the unknown that is part of the fiber of every son of woman. Closer and closer came the shapeless mass. Bradley lay motionless and
listened. What was that he heard! Breathing? He could not be
mistaken--and then from out of the bundle of rags issued a hollow
groan. Bradley felt his hair rise upon his head. He struggled with
the slowly parting strands that held him. The thing beside him rose up
higher than before and the Englishman could have sworn that he saw a
single eye peering at him from among the tumbled cloth. For a moment
the bundle remained motionless--only the sound of breathing issued from
it, then there broke from it a maniacal laugh. Cold sweat stood upon Bradley's brow as he tugged for liberation. He
saw the rags rise higher and higher above him until at last they
tumbled upon the floor from the body of a naked man--a thin, a bony, a
hideous caricature of man, that mouthed and mummed and, wabbling upon
its weak and shaking legs, crumpled to the floor again, still
laughing--laughing horribly. It crawled toward Bradley. "Food! Food!" it screamed. "There is a
way out! There is a way out!" Dragging itself to his side the creature slumped upon the Englishman's
breast. "Food!" it shrilled as with its bony fingers and its teeth, it
sought the man's bare throat. "Food! There is a way out!" Bradley felt teeth upon his jugular. He
turned and twisted, shaking himself free for an instant; but once more
with hideous persistence the thing fastened itself upon him. The weak
jaws were unable to send the dull teeth through the victim's flesh; but
Bradley felt it pawing, pawing, pawing, like a monstrous rat, seeking
his life's blood. The skinny arms now embraced his neck, holding the teeth to his throat
against all his efforts to dislodge the thing. Weak as it was it had
strength enough for this in its mad efforts to eat. Mumbling as it
worked, it repeated again and again, "Food! Food! There is a way
out!" until Bradley thought those two expressions alone would drive him
mad. And all but mad he was as with a final effort backed by almost maniacal
strength he tore his wrists from the confining bonds and grasping the
repulsive thing upon his breast hurled it halfway across the room. Panting like a spent hound Bradley worked at the thongs about his
ankles while the maniac lay quivering and mumbling where it had fallen. Presently the Englishman leaped to his feet--freer than he had ever
before felt in all his life, though he was still hopelessly a prisoner
in the Blue Place of Seven Skulls. With his back against the wall for support, so weak the reaction left
him, Bradley stood watching the creature upon the floor. He saw it
move and slowly raise itself to its hands and knees, where it swayed to
and fro as its eyes roved about in search of him; and when at last they
found him, there broke from the drawn lips the mumbled words:  "Food! Food! There is a way out!" The pitiful supplication in the tones
touched the Englishman's heart. He knew that this could be no Wieroo,
but possibly once a man like himself who had been cast into this pit of
solitary confinement with this hideous result that might in time be his
fate, also. And then, too, there was the suggestion of hope held out by the
constant reiteration of the phrase, "There is a way out." Was there a
way out? What did this poor thing know? "Who are you and how long have you been here?" Bradley suddenly
demanded. For a moment the man upon the floor made no response, then mumblingly
came the words:  "Food! Food!" "Stop!" commanded the Englishman--the injunction might have been barked
from the muzzle of a pistol. It brought the man to a sitting posture,
his hands off the ground. He stopped swaying to and fro and appeared
to be startled into an attempt to master his faculties of concentration
and thought. Bradley repeated his questions sharply. "I am An-Tak, the Galu," replied the man. "Luata alone knows how long
I have been here--maybe ten moons, maybe ten moons three times"--it was
the Caspakian equivalent of thirty. "I was young and strong when they
brought me here. Now I am old and very weak. I am cos-ata-lu--that is
why they have not killed me. If I tell them the secret of becoming
cos-ata-lu they will take me out; but how can I tell them that which
Luata alone knows? "What is cos-ata-lu?" demanded Bradley. "Food! Food! There is a way out!" mumbled the Galu. Bradley strode across the floor, seized the man by his shoulders and
shook him. "Tell me," he cried, "what is cos-ata-lu?" "Food!" whimpered An-Tak. Bradley bethought himself. His haversack had not been taken from him. In it besides his razor and knife were odds and ends of equipment and a
small quantity of dried meat. He tossed a small strip of the latter to
the starving Galu. An-Tak seized upon it and devoured it ravenously. It instilled new life in the man. "What is cos-ata-lu?" insisted Bradley again. An-Tak tried to explain. His narrative was often broken by lapses of
concentration during which he reverted to his plaintive mumbling for
food and recurrence to the statement that there was a way out; but by
firmness and patience the Englishman drew out piece-meal a more or less
lucid exposition of the remarkable scheme of evolution that rules in
Caspak. In it he found explanations of the hitherto inexplicable. He
discovered why he had seen no babes or children among the Caspakian
tribes with which he had come in contact; why each more northerly tribe
evinced a higher state of development than those south of them; why
each tribe included individuals ranging in physical and mental
characteristics from the highest of the next lower race to the lowest
of the next higher, and why the women of each tribe immersed themselves
morning for an hour or more in the warm pools near which the
habitations of their people always were located; and, too, he
discovered why those pools were almost immune from the attacks of
carnivorous animals and reptiles. He learned that all but those who were cos-ata-lu came up cor-sva-jo,
or from the beginning. The egg from which they first developed into
tadpole form was deposited, with millions of others, in one of the warm
pools and with it a poisonous serum that the carnivora instinctively
shunned. Down the warm stream from the pool floated the countless
billions of eggs and tadpoles, developing as they drifted slowly toward
the sea. Some became tadpoles in the pool, some in the sluggish stream
and some not until they reached the great inland sea. In the next
stage they became fishes or reptiles, An-Tak was not positive which,
and in this form, always developing, they swam far to the south, where,
amid the rank and teeming jungles, some of them evolved into
amphibians. Always there were those whose development stopped at the
first stage, others whose development ceased when they became reptiles,
while by far the greater proportion formed the food supply of the
ravenous creatures of the deep. Few indeed were those that eventually developed into baboons and then
apes, which was considered by Caspakians the real beginning of
evolution. From the egg, then, the individual developed slowly into a
higher form, just as the frog's egg develops through various stages
from a fish with gills to a frog with lungs. With that thought in mind
Bradley discovered that it was not difficult to believe in the
possibility of such a scheme--there was nothing new in it. From the ape the individual, if it survived, slowly developed into the
lowest order of man--the Alu--and then by degrees to Bo-lu, Sto-lu,
Band-lu, Kro-lu and finally Galu. And in each stage countless millions
of other eggs were deposited in the warm pools of the various races and
floated down to the great sea to go through a similar process of
evolution outside the womb as develops our own young within; but in
Caspak the scheme is much more inclusive, for it combines not only
individual development but the evolution of species and genera. If an
egg survives it goes through all the stages of development that man has
passed through during the unthinkable eons since life first moved upon
the earth's face. The final stage--that which the Galus have almost attained and for
which all hope--is cos-ata-lu, which literally, means no-egg-man, or
one who is born directly as are the young of the outer world of
mammals. Some of the Galus produce cos-ata-lu and cos-ata-lo both; the
Weiroos only cos-ata-lu--in other words all Wieroos are born male, and
so they prey upon the Galus for their women and sometimes capture and
torture the Galu men who are cos-ata-lu in an endeavor to learn the
secret which they believe will give them unlimited power over all other
denizens of Caspak. No Wieroos come up from the beginning--all are born of the Wieroo
fathers and Galu mothers who are cos-ata-lo, and there are very few of
the latter owing to the long and precarious stages of development. Seven generations of the same ancestor must come up from the beginning
before a cos-ata-lu child may be born; and when one considers the
frightful dangers that surround the vital spark from the moment it
leaves the warm pool where it has been deposited to float down to the
sea amid the voracious creatures that swarm the surface and the deeps
and the almost equally unthinkable trials of its effort to survive
after it once becomes a land animal and starts northward through the
horrors of the Caspakian jungles and forests, it is plainly a wonder
that even a single babe has ever been born to a Galu woman. Seven cycles it requires before the seventh Galu can complete the
seventh danger-infested circle since its first Galu ancestor achieved
the state of Galu. For ages before, the ancestors of this first Galu
may have developed from a Band-lu or Bo-lu egg without ever once
completing the whole circle--that is from a Galu egg, back to a fully
developed Galu. Bradley's head was whirling before he even commenced to grasp the
complexities of Caspakian evolution; but as the truth slowly filtered
into his understanding--as gradually it became possible for him to
visualize the scheme, it appeared simpler. In fact, it seemed even
less difficult of comprehension than that with which he was familiar. For several minutes after An-Tak ceased speaking, his voice having
trailed off weakly into silence, neither spoke again. Then the Galu
recommenced his, "Food! Food! There is a way out!" Bradley tossed him
another bit of dried meat, waiting patiently until he had eaten it,
this time more slowly. "What do you mean by saying there is a way out?" he asked. "He who died here just after I came, told me," replied An-Tak. "He
said there was a way out, that he had discovered it but was too weak to
use his knowledge. He was trying to tell me how to find it when he
died. Oh, Luata, if he had lived but a moment more!" "They do not feed you here?" asked Bradley. "No, they give me water once a day--that is all." "But how have you lived, then?" "The lizards and the rats," replied An-Tak. "The lizards are not so
bad; but the rats are foul to taste. However, I must eat them or they
would eat me, and they are better than nothing; but of late they do not
come so often, and I have not had a lizard for a long time. I shall
eat though," he mumbled. "I shall eat now, for you cannot remain awake
forever." He laughed, a cackling, dry laugh. "When you sleep, An-Tak
will eat." It was horrible. Bradley shuddered. For a long time each sat in
silence. The Englishman could guess why the other made no sound--he
awaited the moment that sleep should overcome his victim. In the long
silence there was born upon Bradley's ears a faint, monotonous sound as
of running water. He listened intently. It seemed to come from far
beneath the floor. "What is that noise?" he asked. "That sounds like water running
through a narrow channel." "It is the river," replied An-Tak. "Why do you not go to sleep? It
passes directly beneath the Blue Place of Seven Skulls. It runs
through the temple grounds, beneath the temple and under the city. When we die, they will cut off our heads and throw our bodies into the
river. At the mouth of the river await many large reptiles. Thus do
they feed. The Wieroos do likewise with their own dead, keeping only
the skulls and the wings. Come, let us sleep." "Do the reptiles come up the river into the city?" asked Bradley. "The water is too cold--they never leave the warm water of the great
pool," replied An-Tak. "Let us search for the way out," suggested Bradley. An-Tak shook his head. "I have searched for it all these moons," he
said. "If I could not find it, how would you?" Bradley made no reply but commenced a diligent examination of the walls
and floor of the room, pressing over each square foot and tapping with
his knuckles. About six feet from the floor he discovered a
sleeping-perch near one end of the apartment. He asked An-Tak about
it, but the Galu said that no Weiroo had occupied the place since he
had been incarcerated there. Again and again Bradley went over the
floor and walls as high up as he could reach. Finally he swung himself
to the perch, that he might examine at least one end of the room all
the way to the ceiling. In the center of the wall close to the top, an area about three feet
square gave forth a hollow sound when he rapped upon it. Bradley felt
over every square inch of that area with the tips of his fingers. Near
the top he found a small round hole a trifle larger in diameter than
his forefinger, which he immediately stuck into it. The panel, if such
it was, seemed about an inch thick, and beyond it his finger
encountered nothing. Bradley crooked his finger upon the opposite side
of the panel and pulled toward him, steadily but with considerable
force. Suddenly the panel flew inward, nearly precipitating the man to
the floor. It was hinged at the bottom, and when lowered the outer
edge rested upon the perch, making a little platform parallel with the
floor of the room. Beyond the opening was an utterly dark void. The Englishman leaned
through it and reached his arm as far as possible into the blackness
but touched nothing. Then he fumbled in his haversack for a match, a
few of which remained to him. When he struck it, An-Tak gave a cry of
terror. Bradley held the light far into the opening before him and in
its flickering rays saw the top of a ladder descending into a black
abyss below. How far down it extended he could not guess; but that he
should soon know definitely he was positive. "You have found it! You have found the way out!" screamed An-Tak. "Oh, Luata! And now I am too weak to go. Take me with you! Take me
with you!" "Shut up!" admonished Bradley. "You will have the whole flock of birds
around our heads in a minute, and neither of us will escape. Be quiet,
and I'll go ahead. If I find a way out, I'll come back and help you,
if you'll promise not to try to eat me up again." "I promise," cried An-Tak. "Oh, Luata! How could you blame me? I am
half crazed of hunger and long confinement and the horror of the
lizards and the rats and the constant waiting for death." "I know," said Bradley simply. "I'm sorry for you, old top. Keep a
stiff upper lip." And he slipped through the opening, found the ladder
with his feet, closed the panel behind him, and started downward into
the darkness. Below him rose more and more distinctly the sound of running water. The air felt damp and cool. He could see nothing of his surroundings
and felt nothing but the smooth, worn sides and rungs of the ladder
down which he felt his way cautiously lest a broken rung or a misstep
should hurl him downward. As he descended thus slowly, the ladder seemed interminable and the pit
bottomless, yet he realized when at last he reached the bottom that he
could not have descended more than fifty feet. The bottom of the
ladder rested on a narrow ledge paved with what felt like large round
stones, but what he knew from experience to be human skulls. He could
not but marvel as to where so many countless thousands of the things
had come from, until he paused to consider that the infancy of Caspak
dated doubtlessly back into remote ages, far beyond what the outer
world considered the beginning of earthly time. For all these eons the
Wieroos might have been collecting human skulls from their enemies and
their own dead--enough to have built an entire city of them. Feeling his way along the narrow ledge, Bradley came presently to a
blank wall that stretched out over the water swirling beneath him, as
far as he could reach. Stooping, he groped about with one hand,
reaching down toward the surface of the water, and discovered that the
bottom of the wall arched above the stream. How much space there was
between the water and the arch he could not tell, nor how deep the
former. There was only one way in which he might learn these things,
and that was to lower himself into the stream. For only an instant he
hesitated weighing his chances. Behind him lay almost certainly the
horrid fate of An-Tak; before him nothing worse than a comparatively
painless death by drowning. Holding his haversack above his head with
one hand he lowered his feet slowly over the edge of the narrow
platform. Almost immediately he felt the swirling of cold water about
his ankles, and then with a silent prayer he let himself drop gently
into the stream. Great was Bradley's relief when he found the water no more than waist
deep and beneath his feet a firm, gravel bottom. Feeling his way
cautiously he moved downward with the current, which was not so strong
as he had imagined from the noise of the running water. Beneath the first arch he made his way, following the winding
curvatures of the right-hand wall. After a few yards of progress his
hand came suddenly in contact with a slimy thing clinging to the
wall--a thing that hissed and scuttled out of reach. What it was, the
man could not know; but almost instantly there was a splash in the
water just ahead of him and then another. On he went, passing beneath other arches at varying distances, and
always in utter darkness. Unseen denizens of this great sewer,
disturbed by the intruder, splashed into the water ahead of him and
wriggled away. Time and again his hand touched them and never for an
instant could he be sure that at the next step some gruesome thing
might not attack him. He had strapped his haversack about his neck,
well above the surface of the water, and in his left hand he carried
his knife. Other precautions there were none to take. The monotony of the blind trail was increased by the fact that from the
moment he had started from the foot of the ladder he had counted his
every step. He had promised to return for An-Tak if it proved humanly
possible to do so, and he knew that in the blackness of the tunnel he
could locate the foot of the ladder in no other way. He had taken two hundred and sixty-nine steps--afterward he knew that
he should never forget that number--when something bumped gently
against him from behind. Instantly he wheeled about and with knife
ready to defend himself stretched forth his right hand to push away the
object that now had lodged against his body. His fingers feeling
through the darkness came in contact with something cold and
clammy--they passed to and fro over the thing until Bradley knew that
it was the face of a dead man floating upon the surface of the stream. With an oath he pushed his gruesome companion out into mid-stream to
float on down toward the great pool and the awaiting scavengers of the
deep. At his four hundred and thirteenth step another corpse bumped against
him--how many had passed him without touching he could not guess; but
suddenly he experienced the sensation of being surrounded by dead faces
floating along with him, all set in hideous grimaces, their dead eyes
glaring at this profaning alien who dared intrude upon the waters of
this river of the dead--a horrid escort, pregnant with dire forebodings
and with menace. Though he advanced very slowly, he tried always to take steps of about
the same length; so that he knew that though considerable time had
elapsed, yet he had really advanced no more than four hundred yards
when ahead he saw a lessening of the pitch-darkness, and at the next
turn of the stream his surroundings became vaguely discernible. Above
him was an arched roof and on either hand walls pierced at intervals by
apertures covered with wooden doors. Just ahead of him in the roof of
the aqueduct was a round, black hole about thirty inches in diameter. His eyes still rested upon the opening when there shot downward from it
to the water below the naked body of a human being which almost
immediately rose to the surface again and floated off down the stream. In the dim light Bradley saw that it was a dead Wieroo from which the
wings and head had been removed. A moment later another headless body
floated past, recalling what An-Tak had told him of the
skull-collecting customs of the Wieroo. Bradley wondered how it
happened that the first corpse he had encountered in the stream had not
been similarly mutilated. The farther he advanced now, the lighter it became. The number of
corpses was much smaller than he had imagined, only two more passing
him before, at six hundred steps, or about five hundred yards, from the
point he had taken to the stream, he came to the end of the tunnel and
looked out upon sunlit water, running between grassy banks. One of the last corpses to pass him was still clothed in the white robe
of a Wieroo, blood-stained over the headless neck that it concealed. Drawing closer to the opening leading into the bright daylight, Bradley
surveyed what lay beyond. A short distance before him a large building
stood in the center of several acres of grass and tree-covered ground,
spanning the stream which disappeared through an opening in its
foundation wall. From the large saucer-shaped roof and the vivid
colorings of the various heterogeneous parts of the structure he
recognized it as the temple past which he had been borne to the Blue
Place of Seven Skulls. To and fro flew Wieroos, going to and from the temple. Others passed
on foot across the open grounds, assisting themselves with their great
wings, so that they barely skimmed the earth. To leave the mouth of
the tunnel would have been to court instant discovery and capture; but
by what other avenue he might escape, Bradley could not guess, unless
he retraced his steps up the stream and sought egress from the other
end of the city. The thought of traversing that dark and horror-ridden
tunnel for perhaps miles he could not entertain--there must be some
other way. Perhaps after dark he could steal through the temple
grounds and continue on downstream until he had come beyond the city;
and so he stood and waited until his limbs became almost paralyzed with
cold, and he knew that he must find some other plan for escape. A half-formed decision to risk an attempt to swim under water to the
temple was crystallizing in spite of the fact that any chance Wieroo
flying above the stream might easily see him, when again a floating
object bumped against him from behind and lodged across his back. Turning quickly he saw that the thing was what he had immediately
guessed it to be--a headless and wingless Wieroo corpse. With a grunt
of disgust he was about to push it from him when the white garment
enshrouding it suggested a bold plan to his resourceful brain. Grasping the corpse by an arm he tore the garment from it and then let
the body float downward toward the temple. With great care he draped
the robe about him; the bloody blotch that had covered the severed neck
he arranged about his own head. His haversack he rolled as tightly as
possible and stuffed beneath his coat over his breast. Then he fell
gently to the surface of the stream and lying upon his back floated
downward with the current and out into the open sunlight. Through the weave of the cloth he could distinguish large objects. He
saw a Wieroo flap dismally above him; he saw the banks of the stream
float slowly past; he heard a sudden wail upon the right-hand shore,
and his heart stood still lest his ruse had been discovered; but never
by a move of a muscle did he betray that aught but a cold lump of clay
floated there upon the bosom of the water, and soon, though it seemed
an eternity to him, the direct sunlight was blotted out, and he knew
that he had entered beneath the temple. Quickly he felt for bottom with his feet and as quickly stood erect,
snatching the bloody, clammy cloth from his face. On both sides were
blank walls and before him the river turned a sharp corner and
disappeared. Feeling his way cautiously forward he approached the turn
and looked around the corner. 