



Produced by Janet Kegg and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team







[Illustration: frontispiece]


ROMANCE ISLAND


By

ZONA GALE


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
HERMANN C. WALL



INDIANAPOLIS
THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY
1906





  "Who that remembers the first kind glance of her
   whom he loves can fail to believe in magic?" --NOVALIS




CONTENTS


CHAPTER
      I DINNER TIME
     II A SCRAP OF PAPER
    III ST. GEORGE AND THE LADY
     IV THE PRINCE OF FAR-AWAY
      V OLIVIA PROPOSES
     VI TWO LITTLE MEN
    VII DUSK, AND SO ON
   VIII THE PORCH OF THE MORNING
     IX THE LADY OF KINGDOMS
      X TYRIAN PURPLE
     XI THE END OF THE EVENING
    XII BETWEEN-WORLDS
   XIII THE LINES LEAD UP
    XIV THE ISLE OF HEARTS
     XV A VIGIL
    XVI GLAMOURIE
   XVII BENEATH THE SURFACE
  XVIII A MORNING VISIT
    XIX IN THE HALL OF KINGS
     XX OUT OF THE HALL OF KINGS
    XXI OPEN SECRETS




ROMANCE ISLAND




CHAPTER I

DINNER TIME


As _The Aloha_ rode gently to her buoy among the crafts in the
harbour, St. George longed to proclaim in the megaphone's monstrous
parody upon capital letters:

"Cat-boats and house-boats and yawls, look here. You're bound to
observe that this is my steam yacht. I own her--do you see? She
belongs to me, St. George, who never before owned so much as a piece
of rope." Instead--mindful, perhaps, that "a man should not communicate his
own glorie"--he stepped sedately down to the trim green skiff and
was rowed ashore by a boy who, for aught that either knew, might
three months before have jostled him at some ill-favoured lunch
counter. For in America, dreams of gold--not, alas, golden
dreams--do prevalently come true; and of all the butterfly
happenings in this pleasant land of larvae, few are so spectacular as
the process by which, without warning, a man is converted from a
toiler and bearer of loads to a taker of his _bien_. However, to
none, one must believe, is the changeling such gazing-stock as to
himself. Although countless times, waking and sleeping, St. George had
humoured himself in the outworn pastime of dreaming what he would do
if he were to inherit a million dollars, his imagination had never
marveled its way to the situation's less poignant advantages. Chief
among his satisfactions had been that with which he had lately seen
his mother--an exquisite woman, looking like the old lace and Roman
mosaic pins which she had saved from the wreck of her fortune--set
off for Europe in the exceptional company of her brother, Bishop
Arthur Touchett, gentlest of dignitaries. The bishop, only to look
upon whose portrait was a benediction, had at sacrifice of certain
of his charities seen St. George through college; and it made the
million worth while to his nephew merely to send him to Tuebingen to
set his soul at rest concerning the date of one of the canonical
gospels. Next to the rich delight of planning that voyage, St.
George placed the buying of his yacht. In the dusty, inky office of the _New York Evening Sentinel_ he had
been wont three months before to sit at a long green table fitting
words about the yachts of others to the dreary music of his
typewriter, the while vaguely conscious of a blur of eight telephone
bells, and the sound of voices used merely to communicate thought
and not to please the ear. In the last three months he had sometimes
remembered that black day when from his high window he had looked
toward the harbour and glimpsed a trim craft of white and brass
slipping to the river's mouth; whereupon he had been seized by such
a passion to work hard and earn a white-and-brass craft of his own
that the story which he was hurrying for the first edition was quite
ruined. "Good heavens, St. George," Chillingworth, the city editor, had
gnarled, "we don't carry wooden type. And nothing else would set up
this wooden stuff of yours. Where's some snap? Your first paragraph
reads like a recipe. Now put your soul into it, and you've got less
than fifteen minutes to do it in." St. George recalled that his friend Amory, as "one hackneyed in the
ways of life," had gravely lifted an eyebrow at him, and the new men
had turned different colours at the thought of being addressed like
that before the staff; and St. George had recast the story and had
received for his diligence a New Jersey assignment which had kept
him until midnight. Haunting the homes of the club-women and the
common council of that little Jersey town, the trim white-and-brass
craft slipping down to the river's mouth had not ceased to lure him. He had found himself estimating the value--in money--of the
bric-a-brac of every house, and the self-importance of every
alderman, and reflecting that these people, if they liked, might own
yachts of white and brass; yet they preferred to crouch among the
bric-a-brac and to discourse to him of one another's violations and
interferences. By the time that he had reached home that dripping
night and had put captions upon the backs of the unexpectant-looking
photographs which were his trophies, he was in that state of
comparative anarchy to be effected only by imaginative youth and a
disagreeable task. Next day, suddenly as its sun, had come the news which had
transformed him from a discontented grappler with social problems to
the owner of stocks and bonds and shares in a busy mine and other
things soothing to enumerate. The first thing which he had added
unto these, after the departure of his mother and the bishop, had
been _The Aloha_, which only that day had slipped to the river's
mouth in the view from his old window at the _Sentinel_ office. St.
George had the grace to be ashamed to remember how smoothly the
social ills had adjusted themselves. Now they were past, those days of feverish work and unexpected
triumph and unaccountable failure; and in the dreariest of them St.
George, dreaming wildly, had not dreamed all the unobvious joys
which his fortune had brought to him. For although he had accurately
painted, for example, the delight of a cruise in a sea-going yacht
of his own, yet to step into his dory in the sunset, to watch _The
Aloha's_ sides shine in the late light as he was rowed ashore past
the lesser crafts in the harbour; to see the man touch his cap and
put back to make the yacht trim for the night, and then to turn his
own face to his apartment where virtually the entire day-staff of
the _Evening Sentinel_ was that night to dine--these were among the
pastimes of the lesser angels which his fancy had never compassed. A glow of firelight greeted St. George as he entered his apartment,
and the rooms wore a pleasant air of festivity. A table, with covers
for twelve, was spread in the living-room, a fire of cones was
tossing on the hearth, the curtains were drawn, and the sideboard
was a thing of intimation. Rollo, his man--St. George had easily
fallen in all the habits which he had longed to assume--was just
closing the little ice-box sunk behind a panel of the wall, and he
came forward with dignified deference. "Everything is ready, Rollo?" St. George asked. "No one has
telephoned to beg off?" "Yes, sir," answered Rollo, "and no, sir." St. George had sometimes told himself that the man looked like an
oval grey stone with a face cut upon it. "Is the claret warmed?" St. George demanded, handing his hat. "Did
the big glasses come for the liqueur--and the little ones will set
inside without tipping? Then take the cigars to the den--you'll have
to get some cigarettes for Mr. Provin. Keep up the fire. Light the
candles in ten minutes. I say, how jolly the table looks." "Yes, sir," returned Rollo, "an' the candles 'll make a great
difference, sir. Candles do give out an air, sir." One month of service had accustomed St. George to his valet's gift
of the Articulate Simplicity. Rollo's thoughts were doubtless
contrived in the cuticle and knew no deeper operance; but he always
uttered his impressions with, under his mask, an air of keen and
seasoned personal observation. In his first interview with St.
George, Rollo had said: "I always enjoy being kep' busy, sir. _To
me_, the busy man is a grand sight," and St. George had at once
appreciated his possibilities. Rollo was like the fine print in an
almanac. When the candles were burning and the lights had been turned on in
the little ochre den where the billiard-table stood, St. George
emerged--a well-made figure, his buoyant, clear-cut face accurately
bespeaking both health and cleverness. Of a family represented by
the gentle old bishop and his own exquisite mother, himself
university-bred and fresh from two years' hard, hand-to-hand
fighting to earn an honourable livelihood, St. George, of sound body
and fine intelligence, had that temper of stability within vast
range which goes pleasantly into the mind that meets it. A symbol of
this was his prodigious popularity with those who had been his
fellow-workers--a test beside which old-world traditions of the
urban touchstones are of secondary advantage. It was deeply
significant that in spite of the gulf which Chance had digged the
day-staff of the _Sentinel_, all save two or three of which were not
of his estate, had with flattering alacrity obeyed his summons to
dine. But, as he heard in the hall the voice of Chillingworth, the
difficulty of his task for the first time swept over him. It was
Chillingworth who had advocated to him the need of wooden type to
suit his literary style and who had long ordered and bullied him
about; and how was he to play the host to Chillingworth, not to
speak of the others, with the news between them of that million? When the bell rang, St. George somewhat gruffly superseded Rollo. "I'll go," he said briefly, "and keep out of sight for a few
minutes. Get in the bath-room or somewhere, will you?" he added
nervously, and opened the door. At one stroke Chillingworth settled his own position by dominating
the situation as he dominated the city room. He chose the best chair
and told a good story and found fault with the way the fire burned,
all with immediate ease and abandon. Chillingworth's men loved to
remember that he had once carried copy. They also understood all the
legitimate devices by which he persuaded from them their best
effort, yet these devices never failed, and the city room agreed
that Chillingworth's fashion of giving an assignment to a new man
would force him to write a readable account of his own entertainment
in the dark meadows. Largely by personal magnetism he had fought his
way upward, and this quality was not less a social gift. Mr. Toby Amory, who had been on the Eleven with St. George at
Harvard, looked along his pipe at his host and smiled, with
flattering content, his slow smile. Amory's father had lately had a
conspicuous quarter of an hour in Wall Street, as a result of which
Amory, instead of taking St. George to the cemetery at Clusium as he
had talked, himself drifted to Park Row; and although he now knew
considerably less than he had hoped about certain inscriptions, he
was supporting himself and two sisters by really brilliant work, so
that the balance of his power was creditably maintained. Surely the
inscriptions did not suffer, and what then was Amory that he should
object? Presently Holt, the middle-aged marine man, and Harding
who, since he had lost a lightweight sparring championship, was
sporting editor, solemnly entered together and sat down with the
social caution of their class. So did Provin, the "elder giant," who
gathered news as he breathed and could not intelligibly put six
words together. Horace, who would listen to four lines over the
telephone and therefrom make a half-column of American newspaper
humour or American newspaper tears, came in roaring pacifically and
marshaling little Bud, that day in the seventh heaven of his first
"beat." Then followed Crass, the feature man, whose interviews were
known to the new men as literature, although he was not above
publicly admitting that he was not a reporter, but a special writer. Mr. Crass read nothing in the paper that he had not written, and St.
George had once prophesied that in old age he would use his
scrap-book for a manual of devotions, as Klopstock used his
_Messiah_. With him arrived Carbury, the telegraph editor, and later
Benfy, who had a carpet in his office and wrote editorials and who
came in evening clothes, thus moving Harding and Holt to instant
private conversation. The last to appear was Little Cawthorne who
wrote the fiction page and made enchanting limericks about every one
on the staff and went about singing one song and behaving, the
dramatic man flattered him, like a motif. Little Cawthorne entered
backward, wrestling with some wiry matter which, when he had
executed a manoeuvre and banged the door, was thrust through the
passage in the form of Bennie Todd, the head office boy,
affectionately known as Bennietod. Bennietod was in every one's
secret, clipped every one's space and knew every one's salary, and
he had lately covered a baseball game when the man whose copy he was
to carry had, outside the fence, become implicated in allurements. He was greeted with noise, and St. George told him heartily that he
was glad he had come. "He made me," defensively claimed Bennietod; frowning deferentially
at Little Cawthorne. "Hello, St. George," said the latter, "come on back to the office. Crass sits in your place and he wears cravats the colour of goblin's
blood. Come back." "Not he," said Chillingworth, smoking; "the Dead-and-Done-with
editor is too keen for that; I won't give him a job. He's ruined. Egg sandwiches will never stimulate him now." St. George joined in the relieved laugh that followed. They were
remembering his young Sing Sing convict who had completed his
sentence in time to step in a cab and follow his mother to the
grave, where his stepfather refused to have her coffin opened. And
St. George, fresh from his Alma Mater, had weighted the winged words
of his story with allusions to the tears celestial of Thetis, shed
for Achilles, and Creon's grief for Haemon, and the Unnatural Combat
of Massinger's father and son; so that Chillingworth had said things
in languages that are not dead (albeit a bit Elizabethan) and the
composing room had shaken mailed fists. "Hi, you!" said Little Cawthorne, who was born in the South, "this
is a mellow minute. I could wish they came often. This shall be a
weekly occurrence--not so, St. George?" "Cawthorne," Chillingworth warned, "mind your manners, or they'll
make you city editor." A momentary shadow was cast by the appearance of Rollo, who was
manifestly a symbol of the world Philistine about which these guests
knew more and in which they played a smaller part than any other
class of men. But the tray which Rollo bore was his passport. Thereafter, they all trooped to the table, and Chillingworth sat at
the head, and from the foot St. George watched the city editor break
bread with the familiar nervous gesture with which he was wont to
strip off yards of copy-paper and eat it. There was a tacit
assumption that he be the conversational sun of the hour, and in
fostering this understanding the host took grateful refuge. "This is shameful," Chillingworth began contentedly. "Every one of
you ought to be out on the Boris story." "What is the Boris story?" asked St. George with interest. But in
all talk St. George had a restful, host-like way of playing the role
of opposite to every one who preferred being heard. "I'll wager the boy hasn't been reading the papers these three
months," Amory opined in his pleasant drawl. "No," St. George confessed; "no, I haven't. They make me homesick." "Don't maunder," said Chillingworth in polite criticism. "This is
Amory's story, and only about a quarter of the facts yet," he added
in a resentful growl. "It's up at the Boris, in West Fifty-ninth
Street--you know the apartment house? A Miss Holland, an heiress,
living there with her aunt, was attacked and nearly murdered by a
mulatto woman. The woman followed her to the elevator and came
uncomfortably near stabbing her from the back. The elevator boy was
too quick for her. And at the station they couldn't get the woman to
say a word; she pretends not to understand or to speak anything
they've tried. She's got Amory hypnotized too--he thinks she can't. And when they searched her," went on Chillingworth with enjoyment,
"they found her dressed in silk and cloth of gold, and loaded down
with all sorts of barbarous ornaments, with almost priceless jewels. Miss Holland claims that she never saw or heard of the woman before. Now, what do you make of it?" he demanded, unconcernedly draining
his glass. "Splendid," cried St. George in unfeigned interest. "I say,
splendid. Did you see the woman?" he asked Amory. Amory nodded. "Yes," he said, "Andy fixed that for me. But she never said a word. I _parlez-voused_ her, and _verstehen-Sied_ her, and she sighed and
turned her head." "Did you see the heiress?" St. George asked. "Not I," mourned Amory, "not to talk with, that is. I happened to be
hanging up in the hall there the afternoon it occurred;" he modestly
explained. "What luck," St. George commented with genuine envy. "It's a
stunning story. Who is Miss Holland?" "She's lived there for a year or more with her aunt," said
Chillingworth. "She is a New Yorker and an heiress and a great
beauty--oh, all the properties are there, but they're all we've got. What do you make of it?" he repeated. St. George did not answer, and every one else did. "Mistaken identity," said Little Cawthorne. "Do you remember
Provin's story of the woman whose maid shot a masseuse whom she took
to be her mistress; and the woman forgave the shooting and seemed to
have her arrested chiefly because she had mistaken her for a
masseuse?" "Too easy, Cawthorne," said Chillingworth. "The woman is probably an Italian," said the telegraph editor,
"doing one of her Mafia stunts. It's time they left the politicians
alone and threw bombs at the bonds that back them." "Hey, Carbury. Stop writing heads," said Chillingworth. "Has Miss Holland lived abroad?" asked Crass, the feature man. "Maybe this woman was her nurse or ayah or something who got fond of
her charge, and when they took it away years ago, she devoted her
life to trying to find it in America. And when she got here she
wasn't able to make herself known to her, and rather than let any
one else--"

"No more space-grabbing, Crass," warned Chillingworth. "Maybe," ventured Horace, "the young lady did settlement work and
read to the woman's kid, and the kid died, and the woman thought
she'd said a charm over it." Chillingworth grinned affectionately. "Hold up," he commanded, "or you'll recall the very words of the
charm." Bennietod gasped and stared. "Now, Bennietod?" Amory encouraged him. "I t'ink," said the lad, "if she's a heiress, dis yere
dagger-plunger is her mudder dat's been shut up in a mad-house to a
fare-you-well." Chillingworth nodded approvingly. "Your imagination is toning down wonderfully," he flattered him. "A
month ago you would have guessed that the mulatto lady was an
Egyptian princess' messenger sent over here to get the heart from an
American heiress as an ingredient for a complexion lotion. You're
coming on famously, Todd." "The German poet Wieland," began Benfy, clearing his throat, "has,
in his epic of the _Oberon_ made admirable use of much the same
idea, Mr. Chillingworth--"

Yells interrupted him. Mr. Benfy was too "well-read" to be wholly
popular with the staff. "Oh, well, the woman was crazy. That's about all," suggested
Harding, and blushed to the line of his hair. "Yes, I guess so," assented Holt, who lifted and lowered one
shoulder as he talked, "or doped." Chillingworth sighed and looked at them both with pursed lips. "You two," he commented, "would get out a paper that everybody would
know to be full of reliable facts, and that nobody would buy. To be
born with a riotous imagination and then hardly ever to let it riot
is to be a born newspaper man. Provin?" The elder giant leaned back, his eyes partly closed. "Is she engaged to be married?" he asked. "Is Miss Holland engaged?" Chillingworth shook his head. "No," he said, "not engaged. We knew that by tea-time the same day,
Provin. Well, St. George?" St. George drew a long breath. "By Jove, I don't know," he said, "it's a stunning story. It's the
best story I ever remember, excepting those two or three that have
hung fire for so long. Next to knowing just why old Ennis
disinherited his son at his marriage, I would like to ferret out
this." "Now, tut, St. George," Amory put in tolerantly, "next to doing
exactly what you will be doing all this week you'd rather ferret out
this." "On my honour, no," St. George protested eagerly, "I mean quite what
I say. I might go on fearfully about it. Lord knows I'm going to see
the day when I'll do it, too, and cut my troubles for the luck of
chasing down a bully thing like this." If there was anything to forgive, every one forgave him. "But give up ten minutes on _The Aloha_," Amory skeptically put it,
adjusting his pince-nez, "for anything less than ten minutes on _The
Aloha_?" "I'll do it now--now!" cried St. George. "If Mr. Chillingworth will
put me on this story in your place and will give you a week off on
_The Aloha_, you may have her and welcome." Little Cawthorne pounded on the table. "Where do I come in?" he wailed. "But no, all I get is another wad
o' woe." "What do you say, Mr. Chillingworth?" St. George asked eagerly. "I don't know," said Chillingworth, meditatively turning his glass. "St. George is rested and fresh, and he feels the story. And
Amory--here, touch glasses with me." Amory obeyed. His chief's hand was steady, but the two glasses
jingled together until, with a smile, Amory dropped his arm. "I _am_ about all in, I fancy," he admitted apologetically. "A week's rest on the water," said Chillingworth, "would set you on
your feet for the convention. All right, St. George," he nodded. St. George leaped to his feet. "Hooray!" he shouted like a boy. "Jove, won't it be good to get
back?" He smiled as he set down his glass, remembering the day at his desk
when he had seen the white-and-brass craft slip to the river's
mouth. Rollo, discreet and without wonder, footed softly about the table,
keeping the glasses filled and betraying no other sign of life. For
more than four hours he was in attendance, until, last of the
guests, Little Cawthorne and Bennietod departed together, trying to
remember the dates of the English kings. Finally Chillingworth and
Amory, having turned outdoors the dramatic critic who had arrived
at midnight and was disposed to stay, stood for a moment by the fire
and talked it over. "Remember, St. George," Chillingworth said, "I'll have no
monkey-work. You'll report to me at the old hour, you won't be late;
and you'll take orders--"

"As usual, sir," St. George rejoined quietly. "I beg your pardon," Chillingworth said quickly, "but you see this
is such a deuced unnatural arrangement." "I understand," St. George assented, "and I'll do my best not to get
thrown down. Amory has told me all he knows about it--by the way,
where is the mulatto woman now?" "Why," said Chillingworth, "some physician got interested in the
case, and he's managed to hurry her up to the Bitley Reformatory in
Westchester for the present. She's there; and that means, we need
not disguise, that nobody can see her. Those Bitley people are like
a rabble of wild eagles." "Right," said St. George. "I'll report at eight o'clock. Amory can
board _The Aloha_ when he gets ready and take down whom he likes." "On my life, old chap, it's a private view of Kedar's tents to me,"
said Amory, his eyes shining behind his pince-nez. "I'll probably
win wide disrespect by my inability to tell a mainsail from a
cockpit, but I'm a grateful dog, in spite of that." When they were gone St. George sat by the fire. He read Amory's
story of the Boris affair in the paper, which somewhere in the
apartment Rollo had unearthed, and the man took off his master's
shoes and brought his slippers and made ready his bath. St. George
glanced over his shoulder at the attractively-dismantled table, with
its dying candles and slanted shades. "Gad!" he said in sheer enjoyment as he clipped the story and saw
Rollo pass with the towels. It was so absurdly like a city room's dream of Arcady. CHAPTER II

A SCRAP OF PAPER


To be awakened by Rollo, to be served in bed with an appetizing
breakfast and to catch a hansom to the nearest elevated station were
novel preparations for work in the _Sentinel_ office. The
impossibility of it all delighted St. George rather more than the
reality, for there is no pastime, as all the world knows, quite like
that of practising the impossible. The days when, "like a man
unfree," he had fared forth from his unlovely lodgings clandestinely
to partake of an evil omelette, seemed enchantingly far away. It
was, St. George reflected, the experience of having been released
from prison, minus the disgrace. Yet when he opened the door of the city room the odour of the
printers' ink somehow fused his elation in his liberty with the
elation of the return. This was like wearing fetters for bracelets. When he had been obliged to breathe this air he had scoffed at its
fascination, but now he understood. "A newspaper office," so a
revered American of letters who had begun his life there had once
imparted to St. George, "is a place where a man with the
temperament of a savant and a recluse may bring his American vice of
commercialism and worship of the uncommon, and let them have it out. Newspapers have no other use--except the one I began on." When St.
George entered the city room, Crass, of the goblin's blood cravats,
had vacated his old place, and Provin was just uncovering his
typewriter and banging the tin cover upon everything within reach,
and Bennietod was writhing over a rewrite, and Chillingworth was
discharging an office boy in a fashion that warmed St. George's
heart. But Chillingworth, the city editor, was an italicized form of
Chillingworth, the guest. He waved both arms at the foreman who
ventured to tell him of a head that had one letter too many, and he
frowned a greeting at St. George. "Get right out on the Boris story," he said. "I depend on you. The
chief is interested in this too--telephoned to know whom I had on
it." St. George knew perfectly that "the chief" was playing golf at Lenox
and no doubt had read no more than the head-lines of the Holland
story, for he was a close friend of the bishop's, and St. George
knew his ways; but Chillingworth's methods always told, and St.
George turned away with all the old glow of his first assignment. St. George, calling up the Bitley Reformatory, knew that the Chances
and the Fates were all allied against his seeing the mulatto woman;
but he had learned that it is the one unexpected Fate and the one
apostate Chance who open great good luck of any sort. So, though the
journey to Westchester County was almost certain to result in
refusal, he meant to be confronted by that certainty before he
assumed it. To the warden on the wire St. George put his inquiry. "What are your visitors' days up there, Mr. Jeffrey?" "Thursdays," came the reply, and the warden's voice suggested
handcuffs by way of hospitality. "This is St. George of the _Sentinel_. I want very much to see one
of your people--a mulatto woman. Can you fix it for me?" "Certainly not," returned the warden promptly. "The _Sentinel_ knows
perfectly that newspaper men can not be admitted here." "Ah, well now, of course," St. George conceded, "but if you have a
mysterious boarder who talks Patagonian or something, and we think
that perhaps we can talk with her, why then--"

"It doesn't matter whether you can talk every language in South
America," said the warden bruskly. "I'm very busy now, and--"

"See here, Mr. Jeffrey," said St. George, "is no one allowed there
but relatives of the guests?" "Nobody,"--crisply. "I beg your pardon, that is literal?" "Relatives, with a permit," divulged the warden, who, if he had had
a sceptre would have used it at table, he was so fond of his little
power, "and the Readers' Guild." "Ah--the Readers' Guild," said St. George. "What days, Mr. Jeffrey?" "To-day and Saturdays, ten o'clock. I'm sorry, Mr. St. George, but
I'm a very busy man and now--"

"Good-by," St. George cried triumphantly. In half an hour he was at the Grand Central station, boarding a
train for the Reformatory town. It was a little after ten o'clock
when he rang the bell at the house presided over by Chillingworth's
"rabble of wild eagles." The Reformatory, a boastful, brick building set in grounds that
seemed freshly starched and ironed, had a discoloured door that
would have frowned and threatened of its own accord, even without
the printed warnings pasted to its panels stating that no
application for admission, with or without permits, would be
honoured upon any day save Thursday. This was Tuesday. Presently, the chains having fallen within after a feudal rattling,
an old man who looked born to the business of snapping up a
drawbridge in lieu of a taste for any other exclusiveness peered at
St. George through absurd smoked glasses, cracked quite across so
that his eyes resembled buckles. "Good morning," said St. George; "has the Readers' Guild arrived
yet?" The old man grated out an assent and swung open the door, which
creaked in the pitch of his voice. The bare hall was cut by a wall
of steel bars whose gate was padlocked, and outside this wall the
door to the warden's office stood open. St. George saw that a
meeting was in progress there, and the sight disturbed him. Then the
click of a key caught his attention, and he turned to find the old
man quietly and surprisingly swinging open the door of steel bars. "This way, sir," he said hoarsely, fixing St. George with his buckle
eyes, and shambled through the door after him locking it behind
them. If St. George had found awaiting him a gold throne encircled by
kneeling elephants he could have been no more amazed. Not a word had
been said about the purpose of his visit, and not a word to the
warden; there was simply this miraculous opening of the barred door. St. George breathlessly footed across the rotunda and down the dim
opposite hall. There was a mistake, that was evident; but for the
moment St. George was going to propose no reform. Their steps echoed
in the empty corridor that extended the entire length of the great
building in an odour of unspeakable soap and superior disinfectants;
and it was not until they reached a stair at the far end that the
old man halted. "Top o' the steps," he hoarsely volunteered, blinking his little
buckle eyes, "first door to the left. My back's bad. I won't go up." St. George, inhumanely blessing the circumstance, slipped something
in the old man's hand and sprang up the stairs. The first door at the left stood ajar. St. George looked in and saw
a circle of bonnets and white curls clouded around the edge of the
room, like witnesses. The Readers' Guild was about leaving; almost
in the same instant, with that soft lift and touch which makes a
woman's gown seem sewed with vowels and sibilants, they all arose
and came tapping across the bare floor. At their head marched a
woman with such a bright bonnet, and such a tinkle of ornaments on
her gown that at first sight she quite looked like a lamp. It was
she whom St. George approached. "I beg your pardon, madame," he said, "is this the Readers' Guild?" There was nothing in St. George's grave face and deferential
stooping of shoulders to betray how his heart was beating or what a
bound it gave at her amazing reply. "Ah," she said, "how do you do?" --and her manner had that violent
absent-mindedness which almost always proves that its possessor has
trained a large family of children--"I am so glad that you can be
with us to-day. I am Mrs. Manners--forgive me," she besought with
perfectly self-possessed distractedness, "I'm afraid that I've
forgotten your name." "My name is St. George," he answered as well as he could for virtual
speechlessness. The other members of the Guild were issuing from the room, and Mrs. Manners turned. She had a fashion of smiling enchantingly, as if to
compensate her total lack of attention. "Ladies," she said, "this is Mr. St. George, at last." Then she went through their names to him, and St. George bowed and
caught at the flying end of the name of the woman nearest him, and
muttered to them all. The one nearest was a Miss Bella Bliss Utter,
a little brown nut of a woman with bead eyes. "Ah, Mr. St. George," said Miss Utter rapidly, "it has been a
wonderful meeting. I wish you might have been with us. Fortunately
for us you are just in time for our third floor council." It had been said of St. George that when he was writing on space and
was in need, buildings fell down before him to give him two columns
on the first page; but any architectural manoeuvre could not have
amazed him as did this. And too, though there had been occasions
when silence or an evasion would have meant bread to him, the
temptation to both was never so strong as at that moment. It cost
St. George an effort, which he was afterward glad to remember having
made, to turn to Mrs. Manners, who had that air of appointing
committees and announcing the programme by which we always recognize
a leader, and try to explain. "I am afraid," St. George said as they reached the stairs, "that you
have mistaken me, Mrs. Manners. I am not--"

"Pray, pray do not mention it," cried Mrs. Manners, shaking her
little lamp-shade of a hat at him, "we make every allowance, and I
am sure that none will be necessary." "But I am with the _Evening Sentinel_," St. George persisted, "I am
afraid that--"

"As if one's profession made any difference!" cried Mrs. Manners
warmly. "No, indeed, I perfectly understand. We all understand," she
assured him, going over some papers in one hand and preparing to
mount the stairs. "Indeed, we appreciate it," she murmured, "do we
not, Miss Utter?" The little brown nut seemed to crack in a capacious smile. "Indeed, indeed!" she said fervently, accenting her emphasis by
briefly-closed eyes. "Hymn books. Now, have we hymn books enough?" plaintively broke in
Mrs. Manners. "I declare, those new hymn books don't seem to have
the spirit of the old ones, no matter what _any one_ says," she
informed St. George earnestly as they reached an open door. In the
next moment he stood aside and the Readers' Guild filed past him. He
followed them. This was pleasantly like magic. They entered a large chamber carpeted and walled in the garish
flowers which many boards of directors suppose will joy the
cheerless breast. There were present a dozen women inmates,--sullen,
weary-looking beings who seemed to have made abject resignation
their latest vice. They turned their lustreless eyes upon the
visitors, and a portly woman in a red waist with a little American
flag in a buttonhole issued to them a nasal command to rise. They
got to their feet with a starched noise, like dead leaves blowing,
and St. George eagerly scanned their faces. There were women of
several nationalities, though they all looked raceless in the ugly
uniforms which those same boards of directors consider _de rigueur_
for the soul that is to be won back to the normal. A little negress,
with a spirit that soared free of boards of directors, had tried to
tie her closely-clipped wool with bits of coloured string; an
Italian woman had a geranium over her ear; and at the end of the
last row of chairs, towering above the others, was a creature of a
kind of challenging, unforgetable beauty whom, with a thrill of
certainty, St. George realized to be her whom he had come to see. So strong was his conviction that, as he afterward recalled, he even
asked no question concerning her. She looked as manifestly not one
of the canaille of incorrigibles as, in her place, Lucrezia Borgia
would have looked. The woman was powerfully built with astonishing breadth of shoulder
and length of limb, but perfectly proportioned. She was young,
hardly more than twenty, St. George fancied, and of the peculiar
litheness which needs no motion to be manifest. Her clear skin was
of wonderful brown; and her eyes, large and dark, with something of
the oriental watchfulness, were like opaque gems and not more
penetrable. Her look was immovably fixed upon St. George as if she
divined that in some way his coming affected her. "We will have our hymn first." Mrs. Manners' words were buzzing and
pecking in the air. "What can I have done with that list of numbers? We have to select our pieces most carefully," she confided to St.
George, "so to be sure that _Soul's Prison_ or _Hands Red as
Crimson_, or, _Do You See the Hebrew Captive Kneeling?_ or anything
personal like that doesn't occur. Now what can I have done with that
list?" Her words reached St. George but vaguely. He was in a fever of
anticipation and enthusiasm. He turned quickly to Mrs. Manners. "During the hymn," he said simply, "I would like to speak with one
of the women. Have I your permission?" Mrs. Manners looked momentarily perplexed; but her eyes at that
instant chancing upon her lost list of hymns, she let fall an
abstracted assent and hurried to the waiting organist. Immediately
St. George stepped quietly down among the women already fluttering
the leaves of their hymn books, and sat beside the mulatto woman. Her eyes met his in eager questioning, but she had that temper of
unsurprise of many of the eastern peoples and of some animals. Yet
she was under some strong excitement, for her hands, large but
faultlessly modeled, were pressed tensely together. And St. George
saw that she was by no means a mulatto, or of any race that he was
able to name. Her features were classic and of exceeding fineness,
and her face was sensitive and highly-bred and filled with repose,
like the surprising repose of breathing arrested in marble. There
was that about her, however, which would have made one, constituted
to perceive only the arbitrary balance of things, feel almost
afraid; while one of high organization would inevitably have been
smitten by some sense of the incalculably higher organization of her
nature, a nature which breathed forth an influence, laid a
spell--did something indefinable. Sometimes one stands too closely
to a statue and is frightened by the nearness, as by the nearness
of one of an alien region. St. George felt this directly he spoke to
her. He shook off the impression and set himself practically to the
matter in hand. He had never had greater need of his faculty for
directness. His low tone was quite matter-of-fact, his manner
deferentially reassuring. "I think," he said softly and without preface, "that I can help you. Will you let me help you? Will you tell me quickly your name?" The woman's beautiful eyes were filled with distress, but she shook
her head. "Your name--name--name?" St. George repeated earnestly, but she had
only the same answer. "Can you not tell me where you live?" St.
George persisted, and she made no other sign. "New York?" went on St. George patiently. "New York? Do you live in
New York?" There was a sudden gleam in the woman's eyes. She extended her hands
quickly in unmistakable appeal. Then swiftly she caught up a hymn
book, tore at its fly-leaf, and made the movement of writing. In an
instant St. George had thrust a pencil in her hand and she was
tracing something. He waited feverishly. The organ had droned through the hymn and the
women broke into song, with loose lips and without restraint, as
street boys sing. He saw them casting curious, sullen glances, and
the Readers' Guild whispering among themselves. Miss Bella Bliss
Utter, looking as distressed as a nut can look, nodded, and Mrs. Manners shook her head and they meant the same thing. Then St.
George saw the attendant in the red waist descend from the platform
and make her way toward him, the little American flag rising and
falling on her breast. He unhesitatingly stepped in the aisle to
meet her, determined to prevent, if possible, her suspicion of the
message. "Is it the barbarism of a gentleman," Amory had once
propounded, "or is it the gentleman-like manners of a barbarian
which makes both enjoy over-stepping a prohibition?" "I compliment you," St. George said gravely, with his deferential
stooping of the shoulders. "The women are perfectly trained. This,
of course, is due to you." The hard face of the woman softened, but St. George thought that one
might call her very facial expression nasal; she smiled with evident
pleasure, though her purpose remained unshaken. "They do pretty good," she admitted, "but visitors ain't best for
'em. I'll have to request you"--St. George vaguely wished that she
would say "ask"--"not to talk to any of 'em." St. George bowed. "It is a great privilege," he said warmly if a bit incoherently,
and held her in talk about an institution of the sort in Canada
where the women inmates wore white, the managers claiming that the
effect upon their conduct was perceptible, that they were far more
self-respecting, and so on in a labyrinth of defensive detail. "What
do you think of the idea?" he concluded anxiously, manfully holding
his ground in the aisle. "I think it's mostly nonsense," returned the woman tartly, "a big
expense and a sight of work for nothing. And now permit me to say--"

St. George vaguely wished that she would say "let." "I agree with you," he said earnestly, "nothing could be simpler and
neater than these calico gowns." The attendant looked curiously at him. "They are gingham," she rejoined, "and you'll excuse me, I hope, but
visitors ain't supposed to converse with the inmates." St. George was vanquished by "converse." "I beg your pardon," he said, "pray forgive me. I will say good-by
to my friend." He turned swiftly and extended his hand to the strange woman behind
him. With the cunning upon which he had counted she gave her own
hand, slipping in his the folded paper. Her eyes, with their
haunting watchfulness, held his for a moment as she mutely bent
forward when he left her. The hymn was done and the women were seating themselves, as St.
George with beating heart took his way up the aisle. What the paper
contained he could not even conjecture; but there _was_ a paper and
it _did_ contain something which he had a pleasant premonition would
be invaluable to him. Yet he was still utterly at loss to account
for his own presence there, and this he coolly meant to do. He was spared the necessity. On the platform Mrs. Manners had risen
to make an announcement; and St. George fancied that she must
preside at her tea-urn and try on her bonnets with just that same
formal little "announcement" air. "My friends," she said, "I have now an unexpected pleasure for you
and for us all. We have with us to-day Mr. St. George, of New York. Mr. St. George is going to sing for us." St. George stood still for a moment, looking into the expectant
faces of Mrs. Manners and the other women of the Readers' Guild, a
spark of understanding kindling the mirth in his eyes. This then
accounted both for his admittance to the home and for his welcome by
the women upon their errand of mercy. He had simply been very
naturally mistaken for a stranger from New York who had not arrived. But since he had accomplished something, though he did not know
what, inasmuch as the slip of paper lay crushed in his hand unread,
he must, he decided, pay for it. Without ado he stepped to the
platform. "I have explained to Mrs. Manners and to these ladies," he said
gravely, "that I am not the gentleman who was to sing for you. However, since he is detained, I will do what I can." This, mistaken for a merely perfunctory speech of self-depreciation,
was received in polite, contradicting silence by the Guild. St.
George, who had a rich, true barytone, quickly ran over his little
list of possible songs, none of which he had ever sung to an
audience that a canoe would not hold, or to other accompaniment than
that of a mandolin. Partly in memory of those old canoe-evenings St.
George broke into a low, crooning plantation melody. The song, like
much of the Southern music, had in it a semi-barbaric chord that the
college men had loved, something--or so one might have said who took
the canoe-music seriously--of the wildness and fierceness of old
tribal loves and plaints and unremembered wooings with a desert
background: a gallop of hoof-beats, a quiver of noon light above
saffron sand--these had been, more or less, in the music when St.
George had been wont to lie in a boat and pick at the strings while
Amory paddled; and these he must have reechoed before the crowd of
curious and sullen and commonplace, lighted by that one wild,
strange face. When he had finished the dark woman sat with bowed
head, and St. George himself was more moved by his own effort than
was strictly professional. "Dear Mr. St. George," said Mrs. Manners, going distractedly through
her hand-bag for something unknown, "our secretary will thank you
formally. It was she who sent you our request, was it not? She
_will_ so regret being absent to-day." "She did not send me a request, Mrs. Manners," persisted St. George
pleasantly, "but I've been uncommonly glad to do what I could. I am
here simply on a mission for the _Evening Sentinel_." Mrs. Manners drew something indefinite from her bag and put it back
again, and looked vaguely at St. George. "Your voice reminds me so much of my brother, younger," she
observed, her eyes already straying to the literature for
distribution. With soft exclamatory twitters the Readers' Guild thanked St.
George, and Miss Bella Bliss Utter, who was of womankind who clasp
their hands when they praise, stood thus beside him until he took
his leave. The woman in the red waist summoned an attendant to show
him back down the long corridor. At the grated door within the entrance St. George found the warden
in stormy conference with a pale blond youth in spectacles. "Impossible," the warden was saying bluntly, "I know you. I know
your voice. You called me up this morning from the _New York
Sentinel_ office, and I told you then--"

"But, my dear sir," expostulated the pale blond youth, waving a
music roll, "I do assure you--"

"What he says is quite true, Warden," St. George interposed
courteously, "I will vouch for him. I have just been singing for the
Readers' Guild myself." The warden dropped back with a grudging apology and brows of tardy
suspicion, and the old man blinked his buckle eyes. "Gentlemen," said St. George, "good morning." Outside the door, with its panels decorated in positive
prohibitions, he eagerly unfolded the precious paper. It bore a
single name and address: Tabnit, 19 McDougle Street, New York. CHAPTER III

ST. GEORGE AND THE LADY


St. George lunched leisurely at his hotel. Upon his return from
Westchester he had gone directly to McDougle Street to be assured
that there was a house numbered 19. Without difficulty he had found
the place; it was in the row of old iron-balconied apartment houses
a few blocks south of Washington Square, and No. 19 differed in no
way from its neighbours even to the noisy children, without toys,
tumbling about the sunken steps and dark basement door. St. George
contented himself with walking past the house, for the mere
assurance that the place existed dictated his next step. This was to write a note to Mrs. Medora Hastings, Miss Holland's
aunt. The note set forth that for reasons which he would, if he
might, explain later, he was interested in the woman who had
recently made an attempt upon her niece's life; that he had seen the
woman and had obtained an address which he was confident would lead
to further information about her. This address, he added, he
preferred not to disclose to the police, but to Mrs. Hastings or
Miss Holland herself, and he begged leave to call upon them if
possible that day. He despatched the note by Rollo, whom he
instructed to deliver it, not at the desk, but at the door of Mrs.
Hastings' apartment, and to wait for an answer. He watched with
pleasure Rollo's soft departure, recalling the days when he had sent
a messenger boy to some inaccessible threshold, himself stamping up
and down in the cold a block or so away to await the boy's return. Rollo was back almost immediately. Mrs. Hastings and Miss Holland
were not at home. St. George eyed his servant severely. "Rollo," he said, "did you go to the door of their apartment?" "No, sir," said Rollo stiffly, "the elevator boy told me they was
out, sir." "Showing," thought St. George, "that a valet and a gentleman is a
very poor newspaper man." "Now go back," he said pleasantly, "go up in the elevator to their
door. If they are not in, wait in the lower hallway until they
return. Do you get that? Until they return." "You'll want me back by tea-time, sir?" ventured Rollo. "Wait," St. George repeated, "until they return. At three. Or six. Or nine o'clock. Or midnight." "Very good, sir," said Rollo impassively, "it ain't always wise,
sir, for a man to trust to his own judgment, sir, asking your
pardon. His judgment," he added, "may be a bit of the ape left in
him, sir." St. George smiled at this evolutionary pearl and settled himself
comfortably by the open fire to await Rollo's return. It was after
three o'clock when he reappeared. He brought a note and St. George
feverishly tore it open. "Whom did you see? Were they civil to you?" he demanded. "I saw a old lady, sir," said Rollo irreverently. "She didn't say a
word to me, sir, but what she didn't say was civiler than many
people's language. There's a great deal in manner, sir," declaimed
Rollo, brushing his hat with his sleeve, and his sleeve with his
handkerchief, and shaking the handkerchief meditatively over the
coals. St. George read the note at a glance and with unspeakable relief. They would see him. A refusal would have delayed and annoyed him
just then, in the flood-tide of his hope. "My Dear Mr. St. George," the note ran. "My niece is not at
     home, and I can not tell how your suggestion will be received
     by her, though it is most kind. I may, however, answer for
     myself that I shall be glad to see you at four o'clock this
     afternoon. "Very truly yours,
                               "MEDORA HASTINGS." Grateful for her evident intention to waste no time, St. George
dressed and drove to the Boris, punctually sending up his card at
four o'clock. At once he was ushered to Mrs. Hastings' apartment. St. George entered her drawing-room incuriously. Three years of
entering drawing-rooms which he never thereafter was to see had
robbed him of that sensation of indefinable charm which for many a
strange room never ceases to yield. He had found far too many tables
upholding nothing which one could remember, far too many pictures
that returned his look, and rugs that seemed to have been selected
arbitrarily and because there was none in stock that the owner
really liked. He was therefore pleasantly surprised and puzzled by
the room which welcomed him. The floor was tiled in curious blocks,
strangely hieroglyphed, as if they had been taken from old tombs. Over the fireplace was set a panel of the same stone, which, by the
thickness of the tiles, formed a low shelf. On this shelf and on
tables and in a high window was the strangest array of objects that
St. George had ever seen. There were small busts of soft rose stone,
like blocks of coral. There was a statue or two of some indefinable
white material, glistening like marble and yet so soft that it had
been indented in several places by accidental pressure. There were
fans of strangely-woven silk, with sticks of carven rock-crystal,
and hand mirrors of polished copper set in frames of gems that he
did not recognize. Upon the wall were mended bits of purple
tapestry, embroidered or painted or woven in singular patterns of
flora and birds that St. George could not name. There were rolls of
parchment, and vases of rock-crystal, and a little apparatus, most
delicately poised, for weighing unknown, delicate things; and jars
and cups without handles, all baked of a soft pottery having a nap
like the down of a peach. Over the windows hung curtains of lace,
woven by hands which St. George could not guess, in patterns of such
freedom and beauty as western looms never may know. On the floor and
on the divans were spread strange skins, some marked like peacocks,
some patterned like feathers and like seaweed, all in a soft fur
that was like silk. Mingled with these curios were the ordinary articles of a cultivated
household. There were many books, good pictures, furniture with
simple lines, a tea-table that almost ministered of itself, a
work-basket filled with "violet-weaving" needle-work, and a gossipy
clock with well-bred chimes. St. George was enormously attracted by
the room which could harbour so many pagan delights without itself
falling their victim. The air was fresh and cool and smelled of the
window primroses. [Illustration]

In a few moments Mrs. Hastings entered, and if St. George had been
bewildered by the room he was still more amazed by the appearance
of his hostess. She was utterly unlike the atmosphere of her
drawing-room. She was a bustling, commonplace little creature, with
an expressionless face, indented rather than molded in features. Her
plump hands were covered with jewels, but for all the richness of
her gown she gave the impression of being very badly dressed; things
of jet and metal bobbed and ticked upon her, and her side-combs were
continually falling about. She sat on the sofa and looked at the
seat which St. George was to have and began to talk--all without
taking the slightest heed of him or permitting him to mention the
_Evening Sentinel_ or his errand. If St. George had been painted
purple he felt sure that she would have acted quite the same. Personality meant nothing to her. "Now this distressing matter, Mr. St. George," began Mrs. Hastings,
"of this frightful mulatto woman. I didn't see her myself--no, I had
stopped in on the first floor to visit my lawyer's wife who was ill
with neuralgia, and I didn't see the creature. If I had been with my
niece I dare say it wouldn't have occurred. That's what I always say
to my niece. I always say, 'Olivia, nothing _need_ occur to vex one. It always happens because of pure heedlessness.' Not that I accuse
my own niece of heedlessness in this particular. It was the elevator
boy who was heedless. That is the trouble with life in a great
city. Every breath you draw is always dependent on somebody else's
doing his duty, and when you consider how many people habitually
neglect their duty it is a wonder--I always say that to Olivia--it
is a wonder that anybody is alive to _do_ a duty when it presents
itself. 'Olivia,' I always say, 'nobody needs to die.' And I really
believe that they nearly all do die out of pure heedlessness. Well,
and so this frightful mulatto creature: you know her, I understand?" Mrs. Hastings leaned back and consulted St. George through her
tortoise-shell glasses, tilting her head high to keep them on her
nose and perpetually putting their gold chain over her ear, which
perpetually pulled out her side-combs. "I saw her this morning," St. George said. "I went up to the
Reformatory in Westchester, and I spoke with her." "Mercy!" ejaculated Mrs. Hastings, "I wonder she didn't tear your
eyes out. Did they have her in a cage or in a cell? What was the
creature about?" "She was in a missionary meeting at the moment," St. George
explained, smiling. "Mercy!" said Mrs. Hastings in exactly the same tone. "Some trick, I
expect. That's what I warn Olivia: 'So few things nowadays are done
through necessity or design.' Nearly everything is a trick. Every
invention is a trick--a cultured trick, one might say. Murder is a
trick, I suppose, to a murderer. That's why civilization is bad for
morals, don't you think? Well, and so she talked with you?" "No, Mrs. Hastings," said St. George, "she did not say one word. But
she wrote something, and that is what I have come to bring you." "What was it--some charm?" cried Mrs. Hastings. "Oh, nobody knows
what that kind of people may do. I'll meet any one face to face, but
these juggling, incantation individuals appal me. I have a brother
who travels in the Orient, and he tells me about hideous things they
do--raising wheat and things," she vaguely concluded. "Ah!" said St. George quickly, "you have a brother--in the Orient?" "Oh, yes. My brother Otho has traveled abroad I don't know how many
years. We have a great many stamps. I can't begin to pronounce all
the names," the lady assured him. "And this brother--is he your niece, Miss Holland's father?" St.
George asked eagerly. "Certainly," said Mrs. Hastings severely; "I have only one brother,
and it has been three years since I have seen him." "Pardon me, Mrs. Hastings," said St. George, "this may be most
important. Will you tell me when you last heard from him and where
he was?" "I should have to look up the place," she answered, "I couldn't
begin to pronounce the name, I dare say. It was somewhere in the
South Atlantic, ten months or more ago." "Ah," St. George quietly commented. "Well, and now this frightful creature," resumed Mrs. Hastings, "do,
pray, tell me what it was she wrote." St. George produced the paper. "That is it," he said. "I fancy you will not know the street. It is
19 McDougle Street, and the name is simply Tabnit." "Yes. And is it a letter?" his hostess demanded, "and whatever does
it say?" "It is not a letter," St. George explained patiently, "and this is
all that it says. The name is, I suppose, the name of a person. I
have made sure that there is such a number in the street. I have
seen the house. But I have waited to consult you before going
there." "Why, what is it you think?" Mrs. Hastings besought him. "Do you
think this person, whoever it is, can do something? And whatever can
he do? Oh dear," she ended, "I do want to act the way poor dear Mr.
Hastings would have acted. Only I know that he would have gone
straight to Bitley, or wherever she is, and held a revolver at that
mulatto creature's head, and _commanded_ her to talk English. Mr.
Hastings was a very determined character. If you could have seen the
poor dear man's chin! But of course I can't do that, can I? And
that's what I say to Olivia. 'Olivia, one doesn't _need_ a man's
judgment if one will only use judgment oneself.' What is it you
think, Mr. St. George?" Before St. George could reply there entered the room, behind a low
announcement of his name, a man of sixty-odd years, nervous,
slightly stooped, his smooth pale face unlighted by little deep-set
eyes. "Ah, Mr. Frothingham!" said Mrs. Hastings in evident relief, "you
are just in time. Mr. St. John was just telling me horrible things
about this frightful mulatto creature. This is Mr. St. John. Mr.
Frothingham is my lawyer and my brother Otho's lawyer. And so I
telephoned him to come in and hear all about this. And now do go on,
Mr. St. John, about this hideous woman. What is it you think?" "How do you do, Mr. St. John?" said the lawyer portentously. His
greeting was almost a warning, and reminded St. George of the way in
which certain brakemen call out stations. St. George responded as
blithely to this name as to his own and did not correct it. "And
what," went on the lawyer, sitting down with long unclosed hands
laid trimly along his knees, "have you to contribute to this most
remarkable occurrence, Mr. St. John?" St. George briefly narrated the events of the morning and placed the
slip of paper in the lawyer's hands. "Ah! We have here a communication in the nature of a confession,"
the lawyer observed, adjusting his gold pince-nez, head thrown back,
eyebrows lifted. "Only the address, sir," said St. George, "and I was just saying to
Mrs. Hastings that some one ought to go to this address at once and
find out whatever is to be got there. Whoever goes I will very
gladly accompany." Mr. Frothingham had a fashion of making ready to speak and
soliciting attention by the act, and then collapsing suddenly with
no explosion, like a bad Roman candle. He did this now, and whatever
he meant to say was lost to the race; but he looked very wise the
while. It was rather as if he discarded you as a fit listener, than
that he discarded his own comment. "I don't know but I ought to go myself," rambled Mrs. Hastings,
"perhaps Mr. Hastings would think I ought. Suppose, Mr. Frothingham,
that we both go. Dear, dear! Olivia always sees to my shopping and
flowers and everything executive, but I can't let her go into these
frightful places, can I?" There was a rustling at the far end of the room, and some one
entered. St. George did not turn, but as her soft skirts touched and
lifted along the floor he was tinglingly aware of her presence. Even
before Mrs. Hastings heard her light footfall, even before the clear
voice spoke, St. George knew that he was at last in the presence of
the arbiter of his enterprise, and of how much else he did not know. He was silent, breathlessly waiting for her to speak. "May I come in, Aunt Dora?" she said. "I want to know to what place
it is impossible for me to go?" She came from the long room's boundary shadow. There was about her a
sense of white and gray with a knot of pale colour in her hat and an
orchid on her white coat. Mrs. Hastings, taking no more account of
her presence than she had of St. George's, tilted back her head and
looked at the primroses in the window as closely as at anything, and
absently presented him. "Olivia," she said, "this is Mr. St. John, who knows about that
frightful mulatto creature. Mr. St. George," she went on, correcting
the name entirely unintentionally, "my niece, Miss Holland. And I'm
sure I wish I knew what the necessary thing to be done _is_. That is
what I always tell you, you know, Olivia. 'Find out the necessary
thing and do it, and let the rest go.'" "It reminds me very much," said the lawyer, clearing his throat, "of
a case that I had on the April calendar--"

Miss Holland had turned swiftly to St. George:

"You know the mulatto woman?" she asked, and the lawyer passed by
the April calendar and listened. "I went to the Bitley Reformatory this morning to see her," St.
George replied. "She gave me this name and address. We have been
saying that some one ought to go there to learn what is to be
learned." Mr. Frothingham in a silence of pursed lips offered the paper. Miss
Holland glanced at it and returned it. "Will you tell us what your interest is in this woman?" she asked
evenly. "Why you went to see her?" "Yes, Miss Holland," St. George replied, "you know of course that
the police have done their best to run this matter down. You know it
because you have courteously given them every assistance in your
power. But the police have also been very ably assisted by every
newspaper in town. I am fortunate to be acting in the interests of
one of these--the _Sentinel_. This clue was put in my hands. I came
to you confident of your cooeperation." Mrs. Hastings threw up her hands with a gesture that caught away the
chain of her eye-glass and sent it dangling in her lap, and her
side-combs tinkling to the tiled floor. "Mercy!" she said, "a reporter!" St. George bowed. "But I never receive reporters!" she cried, "Olivia--don't you
know? A newspaper reporter like that fearful man at Palm Beach, who
put me in the Courtney's ball list in a blue silk when I never wear
colours." "Now really, really, this intrusion--" began Mr. Frothingham, his
long, unclosed hands working forward on his knees in undulations, as
a worm travels. Miss Holland turned to St. George, the colour dyeing her face and
throat, her manner a bewildering mingling of graciousness and
hauteur. "My aunt is right," she said tranquilly, "we never have received any
newspaper representative. Therefore, we are unfortunate never to
have met one. You were saying that we should send some one to
McDougle Street?" St. George was aware of his heart-beats. It was all so unexpected
and so dangerous, and she was so perfectly equal to the
circumstance. "I was asking to be allowed to go myself, Miss Holland," he said
simply, "with whoever makes the investigation." Mrs. Hastings was looking mutely from one to another, her forehead
in horizons of wrinkles. "I'm sure, Olivia, I think you ought to be careful what you say,"
she plaintively began. "Mr. Hastings never allowed his name to go in
any printed lists even, he was so particular. Our telephone had a
private number, and all the papers had instructions never to mention
him, even if he was murdered, unless he took down the notice
himself. Then if anything important did happen, he often did take it
down, nicely typewritten, and sometimes even then they didn't use
it, because they knew how very particular he was. And of course we
don't know how--"

St. George's eyes blazed, but he did not lift them. The affront was
unstudied and, indeed, unconscious. But Miss Holland understood how
grave it was, for there are women whose intuition would tell them
the etiquette due upon meeting the First Syndic of Andorra or a
noble from Gambodia. "We want the truth about this as much as Mr. St. George does," she
said quickly, smiling for the first time. St. George liked her
smile. It was as if she were amused, not absent-minded nor yet a
prey to the feminine immorality of ingratiation. "Besides," she
continued, "I wish to know a great many things. How did the mulatto
woman impress you, Mr. St. George?" Miss Holland loosened her coat, revealing a little flowery waist,
and leaned forward with parted lips. She was very beautiful, with
the beauty of perfect, blooming, colourful youth, without line or
shadow. She was in the very noon of youth, but her eyes did not
wander after the habit of youth; they were direct and steady and a
bit critical, and she spoke slowly and with graceful sanity in a
voice that was without nationality. She might have been the
cultivated English-speaking daughter of almost any land of high
civilization, or she might have been its princess. Her face showed
her imaginative; her serene manner reassured one that she had not,
in consequence, to pay the usury of lack of judgment; she seemed
reflective, tender, and of a fine independence, tempered, however,
by tradition and unerring taste. Above all, she seemed alive,
receptive, like a woman with ten senses. And--above all again--she
had charm. Finally, St. George could talk with her; he did not
analyze why; he only knew that this woman understood what he said in
precisely the way that he said it, which is, perhaps, the fifth
essence in nature. "May I tell you?" asked St. George eagerly. "She seemed to me a very
wonderful woman, Miss Holland; almost a woman of another world. She
is not mulatto--her features are quite classic; and she is not a
fanatic or a mad-woman. She is, of her race, a strangely superior
creature, and I fancy, of high cultivation; and I am convinced that
at the foundation of her attempt to take your life there is some
tremendous secret. I think we must find out what that is, first, for
your own sake; next, because this is the sort of thing that is worth
while." "Ah," cried Miss Holland, "delightful. I begin to be glad that it
happened. The police said that she was a great brutal negress, and I
thought she must be insane. The cloth-of-gold and the jewels did
make me wonder, but I hardly believed that." "The newspapers," Mr. Frothingham said acidly, "became very much
involved in their statements concerning this matter." "This 'Tabnit,'" said Miss Holland, and flashed a smile of pretty
deference at the lawyer to console him for her total neglect of his
comment, "in McDougle Street. Who can he be?--he _is_ a man, I
suppose. And where is McDougle Street?" St. George explained the location, and Mrs. Hastings fretfully
commented. "I'm sure, Olivia," she said, "I think it is frightfully unwomanly
in you--"

"To take so much interest in my own murder?" Miss Holland asked in
amusement. "Aunt Dora, I'm going to do more: I suggest that you and
Mr. Frothingham and I go with Mr. St. George to this address in
McDougle Street--"

"My dear Olivia!" shrilled Mrs. Hastings, "it's in the very heart of
the Bowery--isn't it, Mr. St. John? And only think--"

It was as if Mrs. Hastings' frustrate words emerged in the fantastic
guise of her facial changes. "No, it isn't quite the Bowery, Mrs. Hastings," St. George
explained, "though it won't look unlike." "I wish I knew what Mr. Hastings would have done," his widow
mourned, "he always said to me: 'Medora, do only the necessary
thing.' Do you think this _is_ the necessary thing--with all the
frightful smells?" "It is perfectly safe," ventured St. George, "is it not, Mr. Frothingham?" Mr. Frothingham bowed and tried to make non-partisanship seem a
tasteful resignation of his own will. "I am at Mrs. Hastings' command," he said, waving both hands, once,
from the wrist. "You know the place is really only a few blocks from Washington
Square," St. George submitted. Mrs. Hastings brightened. "Well, I have some friends in Washington Square," she said, "people
whom I think a great deal of, and always have. If you really feel,
Olivia--"

"I do," said Miss Holland simply, "and let us go now, Aunt Dora. The
brougham has been at the door since I came in. We may as well drive
there as anywhere, if Mr. St. George is willing." "I shall be happy," said St. George sedately, longing to cry:
"Willing! Willing! Oh, Mrs. Hastings and Miss Holland--_willing_!" Miss Holland and St. George and the lawyer were alone for a few
minutes while Mrs. Hastings rustled away for her bonnet. Miss
Holland sat where the afternoon light, falling through the corner
window, smote her hair to a glory of pale colour, and St. George's
eyes wandered to the glass through which the sun fell. It was a thin
pane of irregular pieces set in a design of quaint, meaningless
characters, in the centre of which was the figure of a sphinx,
crucified upon an upright cross and surrounded by a border of coiled
asps with winged heads. The window glittered like a sheet of gems. "What wonderful glass," involuntarily said St. George. "Is it not?" Miss Holland said enthusiastically. "My father sent it. He sent nearly all these things from abroad." "I wonder where such glass is made," observed St. George; "it is
like lace and precious stones--hardly more painted than carved." She bent upon him such a sudden, searching look that St. George felt
his eyes held by her own. "Do you know anything of my father?" she demanded suddenly. "Only that Mrs. Hastings has just told me that he is abroad--in the
South Atlantic," St. George wonderingly replied. "Why, I am very foolish," said Miss Holland quickly, "we have not
heard from him in ten months now, and I am frightfully worried. Ah
yes, the glass is beautiful. It was made in one of the South
Atlantic islands, I believe--so were all these things," she added;
"the same figure of the crucified sphinx is on many of them." "Do you know what it means?" he asked. "It is the symbol used by the people in one of the islands, my
father said," she answered. "These symbols usually, I believe," volunteered Mr. Frothingham,
frowning at the glass, "have little significance, standing merely
for the loose barbaric ideas of a loose barbaric nation." St. George thought of the ladies of Doctor Johnson's Amicable
Society who walked from the town hall to the Cathedral in Lichfield,
"in linen gowns, and each has a stick with an acorn; but for the
acorn they could give no reason." He looked long at the glass. "She," he said finally, "our false mulatto, ought to stand before
just such glass." Miss Holland laughed. She nodded her head a little, once, every time
she laughed, and St. George was learning to watch for that. "The glass would suit any style of beauty better than steel bars,"
she said lightly as Mrs. Hastings came fluttering back. Mrs.
Hastings fluttered ponderously, as humblebees fly. Indeed, when one
considered, there was really a "blunt-faced bee" look about the
woman. The brougham had on the box two men in smart livery; the footman,
closing the door, received St. George's reply to Mrs. Hastings'
appeal to "tell the man the number of this frightful place." "I dare say I haven't been careful," Mrs. Hastings kept anxiously
observing, "I have been heedless, I dare say. And I always think
that what one must avoid is heedlessness, don't you think? Didn't
Napoleon say that if only Caesar had been first in killing the men
who wanted to kill him--something about Pompey's statue being kept
clean. What was it--why should they blame Caesar for the condition of
the public statues?" "My dear Mrs. Hastings," Mr. Frothingham reminded her, his long
gloved hands laid trimly along his knees as before, "you are in my
care." The statue problem faded from the lady's eyes. "Poor, dear Mr. Hastings always said you were so admirable at
cross-questioning," she recalled, partly reassured. "Ah," cried Miss Holland protestingly, "Aunt Dora, this is an
adventure. We are going to see 'Tabnit.'" St. George was silent, ecstatically reviewing the events of the last
six hours and thinking unenviously of Amory, rocking somewhere with
_The Aloha_ on a mere stretch of green water:

"If Chillingworth could see me now," he thought victoriously, as the
carriage turned smartly into McDougle Street. CHAPTER IV

THE PRINCE OF FAR-AWAY


No. 19 McDougle Street had been chosen as a likely market by a
"hokey-pokey" man, who had wheeled his cart to the curb before the
entrance. There, despite Mrs. Hastings' coach-man's peremptory
appeal, he continued to dispense stained ice-cream to the little
denizens of No. 19 and the other houses in the row. The brougham,
however, at once proved a counter-attraction and immediately an
opposition group formed about the carriage step and exchanged
penetrating comments upon the livery. "Mrs. Hastings, you and Miss Holland would better sit here,
perhaps," suggested St. George, alighting hurriedly, "until I see if
this man is to be found." "Please," said Miss Holland, "I've always been longing to go into
one of these houses, and now I'm going. Aren't we, Aunt Dora?" "If you think--" ventured Mr. Frothingham in perplexity; but Mr.
Frothingham's perplexity always impressed one as duty-born rather
than judicious, and Miss Holland had already risen. "Olivia!" protested Mrs. Hastings faintly, accepting St. George's
hand, "do look at those children's aprons. I'm afraid we'll all
contract fever after fever, just coming this far." Unkempt women were occupying the doorstep of No. 19. St. George
accosted them and asked the way to the rooms of a Mr. Tabnit. They
smiled, displaying their wonderful teeth, consulted together, and
finally with many labials and uncouth pointings of shapely hands
they indicated the door of the "first floor front," whose wooden
shutters were closely barred. St. George led the way and entered the
bare, unclean passage where discordant voices and the odours of
cooking wrought together to poison the air. He tapped smartly at the
door. Immediately it was opened by a graceful boy, dressed in a long,
belted coat of dun-colour. He had straight black hair, and eyes
which one saw before one saw his face, and he gravely bowed to each
of the party in turn before answering St. George's question. "Assuredly," said the youth in perfect English, "enter." They found themselves in an ample room extending the full depth of
the house; and partly because the light was dim and partly in sheer
amazement they involuntarily paused as the door clicked behind them. The room's contrast to the squalid neighbourhood was complete. The
apartment was carpeted in soft rugs laid one upon another so that
footfalls were silenced. The walls and ceiling were smoothly covered
with a neutral-tinted silk, patterned in dim figures; and from a
fluted pillar of exceeding lightness an enormous candelabrum shed
clear radiance upon the objects in the room. The couches and divans
were woven of some light reed, made with high fantastic backs, in
perfect purity of line however, and laid with white mattresses. A
little reed table showed slender pipes above its surface and these,
at a touch from the boy, sent to a great height tiny columns of
water that tinkled back to the square of metal upon which the table
was set. A huge fan of blanched grasses automatically swayed from
above. On a side-table were decanters and cups and platters of a
material frail and transparent. Before the shuttered window stood an
observable plant with coloured leaves. On a great table in the
room's centre were scattered objects which confused the eye. A light
curtain stirring in the fan's faint breeze hung at the far end of
the room. In a career which had held many surprises, some of which St. George
would never be at liberty to reveal to the paper in whose service he
had come upon them, this was one of the most alluring. The mere
existence of this strange and luxurious habitation in the heart of
such a neighbourhood would, past expression, delight Mr. Crass, the
feature man, and no doubt move even Chillingworth to approval. Chillingworth and Crass! Already they seemed strangers. St. George
glanced at Miss Holland; she was looking from side to side, like a
bird alighted among strange flowers; she met his eyes and dimpled
in frank delight. Mrs. Hastings sat erectly beside her, her
tortoise-rimmed glasses expressing bland approval. The improbability
of her surroundings had quite escaped her in her satisfied discovery
that the place was habitable. The lawyer, his thin lips parted, his
head thrown back so that his hair rested upon his coat collar,
remained standing, one long hand upon a coat lapel. "Ah," said Miss Holland softly, "it _is_ an adventure, Aunt Dora." St. George liked that. It irritated him, he had once admitted, to
see a woman live as if living were a matter of life and death. He
wished her to be alive to everything, but without suspiciously
scrutinizing details, like a census-taker. To appreciate did not
seem to him properly to mean to assess. Miss Holland, he would have
said, seemed to live by the beats of her heart and not by the waves
of her hair--but another proof, perhaps, of "if thou likest her
opinions thou wilt praise her virtues." It was but a moment before the curtain was lifted, and there
approached a youth, apparently in the twenties, slender and
delicately formed as a woman, his dark face surmounted by a great
deal of snow-white hair. He was wearing garments of grey, cut in
unusual and graceful lines, and his throat was closely wound in
folds of soft white, fastened by a rectangular green jewel of
notable size and brilliance. His eyes, large and of exceeding beauty
and gentleness, were fixed upon St. George. "Sir," said St. George, "we have been given this address as one
where we may be assisted in some inquiries of the utmost importance. The name which we have is simply 'Tabnit.' Have I the honour--"

Their host bowed. "I am Prince Tabnit," he said quietly. St. George, filled with fresh amazement, gravely named himself and,
making presentation of the others, purposely omitted the name of
Miss Holland. However, hardly had he finished before their host
bowed before Miss Holland herself. "And you," he said, "you to whom I owe an expiation which I can
never make,--do you know it is my servant who would have taken your
life?" In the brief interval following this naive assertion, his guests
were not unnaturally speechless. Miss Holland, bending slightly
forward, looked at the prince breathlessly. "I have suffered," he went on, "I have suffered indescribably since
that terrible morning when I missed her and understood her mission. I followed quickly--I was without when you entered, but I came too
late. Since then I have waited, unwilling to go to you, certain that
the gods would permit the possible. And now--what shall I say?" He hesitated, his eyes meeting Miss Holland's. And in that moment
Mrs. Hastings found her voice. She curved the chain of her
eye-glasses over her ear, threw back her head until the
tortoise-rims included her host, and spoke her mind. "Well, Prince Tabnit," she said sharply--quite as if, St. George
thought, she had been nursery governess to princes all her life--"I
must say that I think your regret comes somewhat late in the day. It's all very well to suffer as you say over what your servant has
tried to do. But what kind of man must you be to have such a
servant, in the first place? Didn't you know that she was dangerous
and blood-thirsty, and very likely a maniac-born?" Her voice, never modulated in her excitements, was so full that no
one heard at that instant a quick, indrawn breath from St. George,
having something of triumph and something of terror. Even as he
listened he had been running swiftly over the objects in the room to
fasten every one in his memory, and his eyes had rested upon the
table at his side. A disc of bronze, supported upon a carven tripod,
caught the light and challenged attention to its delicate traceries;
and within its border of asps and goat's horns he saw cut in the
dull metal a sphinx crucified upon an upright cross--an exact
facsimile of the device upon that strange opalized glass from some
far-away island which he had lately noted in the window in Mrs.
Hastings' drawing-room. Instantly his mind was besieged by a volley
of suppositions and imaginings, but even in his intense excitement
as to what this simple discovery might bode, he heard the prince's
soft reply to Mrs. Hastings:

"Madame," said the prince, "she is a loyal creature. Whatever she
does, she believes herself to be doing in my service. I trusted her. I believed that such error was impossible to her." "Error!" shrilled Mrs. Hastings, looking about her for support and
finding little in the aspect of Mr. Augustus Frothingham, who
appeared to be regarding the whole proceeding as one from which he
was to extract data to be thought out at some future infinitely
removed. As for St. George, he had never had great traffic with a future
infinitely removed; he had a youthful and somewhat imaginative
fashion of striking before the iron was well in the fire. "Your servant believed, then, your Highness," he said clearly,
"that in taking Miss Holland's life she was serving you?" "I must regretfully conclude so." St. George rose, holding the little brazen disc which he had taken
from the table, and confronted his host, compelling his eyes. "Perhaps you will tell us, Prince Tabnit," he said coolly, "what it
is that the people who use this device find against Miss Holland's
father?" St. George heard Olivia's little broken cry. "It is the same!" she exclaimed. "Aunt Dora--Mr. Frothingham--it is
the crucified sphinx that was on so many of the things that father
sent. Oh," she cried to the prince, "can it be possible that you
know him--that you know anything of my father?" To St. George's amazement the face of the prince softened and glowed
as if with peculiar delight, and he looked at St. George with
admiration. "Is it possible," he murmured, half to himself, "that your race has
already developed intuition? Are you indeed so near to the Unknown?" He took quick steps away and back, and turned again to St. George, a
strange joy dawning in his face. "If there be some who are ready to know!" he said. "Ah," he recalled
himself penitently to Miss Holland, "your father--Otho Holland, I
have seen him many times." "_Seen Otho_!" shrilled Mrs. Hastings, as pink and trembling and
expressionless as a disturbed mold of jelly. "Oh, poor, dear Otho! Did he live where there are people like your frightful servant? Olivia, think! Maybe he is lying at the bottom of a gorge, all
wounded and bloody, with a dagger in his back! Oh, my poor, dear
Otho, who used to wheel me about!" Mrs. Hastings collapsed softly on the divan, her glasses fallen in
her lap, her side-combs slipping silently to the rug. Olivia had
risen and was standing before Prince Tabnit. "Tell me," she said trembling, "when have you seen him? Is he well?" Prince Tabnit swept the faces of the others and his eyes returned to
Miss Holland and dropped to the floor. "The last time that I saw him, Miss Holland," he answered, "was
three months ago. He was then alive and well." Something in his tone chilled St. George and sent a sudden thrill of
fear to his heart. "He was then alive and well?" St. George repeated slowly. "Will you
tell us more, your Highness? Will you tell us why the death of his
daughter should be considered a service to the prince of a country
which he had visited?" "You are very wonderful," observed the prince, smiling meditatively
at St. George, "and your penetration gives me good news--news that
I had not hoped for, yet. I can not tell you all that you ask, but I
can tell you much. Will you sit down?" He turned and glanced at the curtain at the far end of the room. Instantly the boy servant appeared, bearing a tray on which were
placed, in dishes of delicate-coloured filigree, strange dainties
not to be classified even by a cosmopolitan, with his Flemish and
Finnish and all but Icelandic cafes in every block. "Pray do me the honour," the prince besought, taking the dishes from
the hands of the boy. "It gives me pleasure, Miss Holland, to tell
you that your father has no doubt had these very plates set before
him." Upon a little table he deftly arranged the dishes with all the
smiling ease of one to whom afternoon tea is the only business
toward, and to whom an attempted murder is wholly alien. He
impressed St. George vaguely as one who seemed to have risen from
the dead of the crudities of mere events and to be living in a rarer
atmosphere. The lawyer's face was a study. Mr. Augustus Frothingham
never went to the theatre because he did not believe that a man of
affairs should unduly stimulate the imagination. There was set before them honey made by bees fed only upon a
tropical flower of rare fragrance; cakes flavoured with wine that
had been long buried; a paste of cream, thick with rich nuts and
with the preserved buds of certain flowers; and little white
berries, such as the Japanese call "pinedews"; there was a tea
distilled from the roots of rare exotics, and other things savoury
and fantastic. So potent was the spell of the prince's hospitality,
and so gracious the insistence with which he set before them the
strange and odourous dishes, that even Olivia, eager almost to tears
for news of her father, and Mrs. Hastings, as critical and
suspicious as some beetle with long antennae, might not refuse them. As for Mr. Augustus Frothingham, although this might be Cagliostro's
spagiric food, or "extract of Saturn," for aught that his previous
experience equipped him to deny, yet he nibbled, and gazed, and was
constrained to nibble again. When they had been served, Prince Tabnit abruptly began speaking,
the while turning the fine stem of his glass in his delicate
fingers. "You do not know," he said simply, "where the island of Yaque lies?" Mrs. Hastings sat erect. "Yaque!" she exclaimed. "That was the name of the place where your
father was, Olivia. I know I remembered it because it wasn't like
the man What's-his-name in _As You Like It_, and because it didn't
begin with a J." "The island is my home," Prince Tabnit continued, "and now, for the
first time, I find myself absent from it. I have come a long
journey. It is many miles to that little land in the eastern seas,
that exquisite bit of the world, as yet unknown to any save the
island-men. We have guarded its existence, but I have no fear to
tell you, for no mariner, unaided by an islander, could steer a
course to its coasts. And I can tell you little about the island for
reasons which, if you will forgive me, you would hardly understand. I must tell you something of it, however, that you may know the
remarkable conditions which led to the introduction of Mr. Holland
to Yaque. "The island of Yaque," continued the prince, "or Arqua, as the name
was written by the ancient Phoenicians, has been ruled by hereditary
monarchs since 1050 B.C., when it was settled." "What date did I understand you to say, sir?" demanded Mr. Augustus
Frothingham. The prince smiled faintly. "I am well aware," he said, "that to the western mind--indeed, to
any modern mind save our own--I shall seem to be speaking in
mockery. None the less, what I am saying is exact. It is believed
that the enterprises of the Phoenicians in the early ages took them
but a short distance, if at all, beyond the confines of the
Mediterranean. It is merely known that, in the period of which I
speak, a more adventurous spirit began to be manifested, and the
Straits of Gibraltar were passed and settlements were made in
Iberia. But how far these adventurers actually penetrated has been
recorded only in those documents that are in the hands of my
people--descendants of the boldest of these mariners who pushed
their galleys out into the Atlantic. At this time the king of Tyre
was Abibaal, soon to be succeeded by his son Hiram, the friend, you
will remember, of King David,--"

Mr. Frothingham, who did not go to the theatre for fear of exciting
his imagination, uttered the soft non-explosion which should have
been speech. "King Abibaal," continued the prince, "who maintained his court in
great pomp, had a younger and favourite son who bore his own name. He was a wild youth of great daring, and upon the accession of
Hiram to the throne he left Tyre and took command of a galley of
adventuresome spirits, who were among the first to pass the
straits and gain the open sea. The story of their wild voyage I
need not detail; it is enough to say that their trireme was
wrecked upon the coast of Yaque; and Abibaal and those who joined
him--among them many members of the court circle and even of the
royal family--settled and developed the island. And there the race
has remained without taint of admixture, down to the present day. Of what was wrought on the island I can tell you little, though
the time will come when the eyes of the whole world will be
turned upon Yaque as the forerunner of mighty things. Ruled over
by the descendants of Abibaal, the islanders have dwelt in peace
and plenty for nearly three thousand years--until, in fact, less
than a year ago. Then the line thus traceable to King Hiram
himself abruptly terminated with the death of King Chelbes,
without issue." Again Mr. Frothingham attempted to speak, and again he collapsed
softly, without expression, according to his custom. As for St.
George, he was remembering how, when he first went to the paper, he
had invariably been sent to the anteroom to listen to the daily
tales of invention, oppression and projects for which a continual
procession of the more or less mentally deficient wished the
_Sentinel_ to stand sponsor. St. George remembered in particular one
young student who soberly claimed to have invented wireless
telegraphy and who molested the staff for months. Was this olive
prince, he wondered, going to prove himself worth only a half-column
on a back page, after all? "I understand you to say," said St. George, with the weary
self-restraint of one who deals with lunatics, "that the line of
King Hiram, the friend of King David of Israel, became extinct less
than a year ago?" The prince smiled. "Do not conceal your incredulity," he said liberally, "for I
forgive it. You see, then," he went on serenely, "how in Yaque the
question of the succession became engrossing. The matter was not
merely one of ascendancy, for the Yaquians are singularly free from
ambition. But their pride in their island is boundless. They see in
her the advance guard of civilization, the peculiar people to whom
have come to be intrusted many of the secrets of being. For I should
tell you that my people live a life that is utterly beyond the ken
of all, save a few rare minds in each generation. My people live
what others dream about, what scientists struggle to fathom, what
the keenest philosophers and economists among you can not formulate. We are," said Prince Tabnit serenely, "what the world will be a
thousand years from now." "Well, I'm sure," Mrs. Hastings broke in plaintively, "that I hope
your servant, for instance, is not a sample of what the world is
coming to!" The prince smiled indulgently, as if a child had laid a little,
detaining hand upon his sleeve. "Be that as it may," he said evenly, "the throne of Yaque was still
empty. Many stood near to the crown, but there seemed no reason for
choosing one more than another. One party wished to name the head of
the House of the Litany, in Med, the King's city, who was the chief
administrator of justice. Another, more democratic than these,
wished to elevate to the throne a man from whose family we had won
knowledge of both perpetual motion and the Fourth Dimension--"

St. George smiled angelically, as one who resignedly sees the last
fragments of a shining hope float away. This quite settled it. The
olive prince was crazy. Did not St. George remember the old man in
the frayed neckerchief and bagging pockets who had brought to the
office of the _Sentinel_ chart after chart about perpetual motion,
until St. George and Amory had one day told him gravely that they
had a machine inside the office then that could make more things go
for ever than he had ever dreamed of, though they had _not_ said
that the machine was named Chillingworth. "You have knowledge of both these things?" asked St. George
indulgently. "Yaque understood both those laws," said the prince quietly, "when
William the Conqueror came to England." He hesitated for a moment and then, regardless of another soft
explosion from Mr. Frothingham's lips, he added:

"Do you not see? Will you not understand? It is our knowledge of the
Fourth Dimension which has enabled us to keep our island a secret." St. George suddenly thrilled from head to foot. What if he were
speaking the truth? What if this man were speaking the truth? "Moreover," resumed the prince, "there were those among us who had
long believed that new strength would come to my people by the
introduction of an inhabitant of one of the continents. His coming
would, however, necessitate his sovereignty among us, in fulfilment
of an ancient Phoenician law, providing that the state, and every
satrapy therein, shall receive no service, either of blood or of
bond, nor enter into the marriage contract with an alien; from which
law only the royal house is exempt. Thus were the two needs of our
land to be served by the means to which we had recourse. For there
being no way to settle the difficulty, we vowed to leave the matter
to Chance, that great patient arbiter of destinies of which your
civilization takes no account, save to reduce it to slavery. Accordingly each inhabitant of the island took a solemn oath to
await, with an open mind free from choice or prejudice, the
settlement of the event, certain that the gods would permit the
possible. Five days after this decision our watchers upon the hills
sighted a South African transport bound for the Azores to coal. A
hundred miles from our coast she was wrecked, and it was thought
that all on board had been lost. A submarine was ordered to the
spot--"

"Do you mean," interrupted St. George, "that you were able to see
the wreck at that distance?" "Certainly," said the prince. "Pray forgive me," he added winningly,
"if I seem to boast. It is difficult for me to believe that your
appliances are so immature. We were using steamship navigation and
limiting our vision at the time of Pericles, but the futility of
these was among our first discoveries." Involuntarily St. George turned to Miss Holland. What would she
think, he found himself wondering. Her eyes were luminous and her
breath was coming quickly; he was relieved to find that she had not
the infectious vulgarity to doubt the possibility of what seemed
impossible. This was one of the qualities of Mr. Augustus
Frothingham, who had assumed an air of polite interest and an
accurately cynical smile, and the manner of generously lending his
professional attention to any of the vagaries of the client. Mrs.
Hastings stirred uneasily. "I'm sure," she said fretfully, "that I must be very stupid, but I
simply can _not_ follow you. Why, you talk about things that don't
exist! My husband, who was a very practical and advanced man, would
have shown you at once that what you say is impossible." Here was the attitude of the Commonplace the world over, thought St.
George: to believe in wireless telegraphy simply because it has
been found out, and to disbelieve in the Fourth Dimension because it
has not been. "I can not explain these things," admitted the prince gravely, "and
I dare say that you could prove that they do not exist, just as a
man from another planet could show us to his own satisfaction that
there are no such things as music or colour." "Go on, please," said Olivia eagerly. "Olivia, I'm sure," protested Mrs. Hastings, "I think it's very
unwomanly of you to show such an interest in these things." "Will you bear with me for one moment, Mrs. Hastings?" 