

E-text prepared by Audrey Longhurst, Gregory Smith, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE LAMP IN THE DESERT

by

ETHEL M. DELL

Author of _The Way of an Eagle_, _The Knave of Diamonds_,
_The Rocks of Valpre_, _The Swindler, and Other Stories_,
_The Keeper of the Door_, _The Bars of Iron_, _The Hundredth
Chance_, _The Safety Curtain, and Other Stories_, _Greatheart_

1919






[Illustration: "He knelt beside her, his arms comfortingly around her."] Drawn by D.C. Hutchinson




I DEDICATE THIS BOOK TO

MY DEARLY-LOVED

ELIZABETH

AND TO THE MEMORY OF HER GREAT GOODNESS

WHEN SHE WALKED IN THE

DESERT WITH ME

_"He led them all the night through with a light of fire. "_

PSALM lxxviii, 14. Lamps that gleam in the city,
      Lamps that flare on the wall,
    Lamps that shine on the ways of men,
      Kindled by men are all. But the desert of burnt-out ashes,
      Which only the lost have trod,
    Dark and barren and flowerless,
      Is lit by the Hand of God. To lighten the outer darkness,
      To hasten the halting feet,
    He lifts a lamp in the desert
      Like the lamps of men in the street. Only the wanderers know it,
      The lost with those who mourn,
    That lamp in the desert darkness,
      And the joy that comes in the dawn. That the lost may come into safety,
      And the mourners may cease to doubt,
    The Lamp of God will be shining still
      When the lamps of men go out. CHAPTER

PART I

   I.--BEGGAR'S CHOICE
  II.--THE PRISONER AT THE BAR
 III.--THE TRIUMPH
  IV.--THE BRIDE
   V.--THE DREAM
  VI.--THE GARDEN
 VII.--THE SERPENT IN THE GARDEN
VIII.--THE FORBIDDEN PARADISE

PART II

   I.--THE MINISTERING ANGEL
  II.--THE RETURN
 III.--THE BARREN SOIL
  IV.--THE SUMMONS
   V.--THE MORNING
  VI.--THE NIGHT-WATCH
 VII.--SERVICE RENDERED
VIII.--THE TRUCE
  IX.--THE OASIS
   X.--THE SURRENDER

PART III

   I.--BLUEBEARD'S CHAMBER
  II.--EVIL TIDINGS
 III.--THE BEAST OF PREY
  IV.--THE FLAMING SWORD
   V.--TESSA
  VI.--THE ARRIVAL
 VII.--FALSE PRETENCES
VIII.--THE WRATH OF THE GODS

PART IV

   I.--DEVIL'S DICE
  II.--OUT OF THE DARKNESS
 III.--BLUEBELL
  IV.--THE SERPENT IN THE DESERT
   V.--THE WOMAN'S WAY
  VI.--THE SURPRISE PARTY
 VII.--RUSTAM KARIN
VIII.--PETER
  IX.--THE CONSUMING FIRE
   X.--THE DESERT PLACE

PART V

   I.--GREATER THAN DEATH
  II.--THE LAMP
 III.--TESSA'S MOTHER
  IV.--THE BROAD ROAD
   V.--THE DARK NIGHT
  VI.--THE FIRST GLIMMER
 VII.--THE FIRST VICTIM
VIII.--THE FIERY VORTEX
  IX.--THE DESERT OF ASHES
   X.--THE ANGEL
  XI.--THE DAWN
 XII.--THE BLUE JAY




PART I

CHAPTER I

BEGGAR'S CHOICE


A great roar of British voices pierced the jewelled curtain of the
Indian night. A toast with musical honours was being drunk in the
sweltering dining-room of the officers' mess. The enthusiastic hubbub
spread far, for every door and window was flung wide. Though the season
was yet in its infancy, the heat was intense. Markestan had the
reputation in the Indian Army for being one of the hottest corners in
the Empire in more senses than one, and Kurrumpore, the military centre,
had not been chosen for any especial advantages of climate. So few
indeed did it possess in the eyes of Europeans that none ever went there
save those whom an inexorable fate compelled. The rickety, wooden
bungalows scattered about the cantonment were temporary lodgings, not
abiding-places. The women of the community, like migratory birds, dwelt
in them for barely four months in the year, flitting with the coming of
the pitiless heat to Bhulwana, their little paradise in the Hills. But
that was a twenty-four hours' journey away, and the men had to be
content with an occasional week's leave from the depths of their
inferno, unless, as Tommy Denvers put it, they were lucky enough to go
sick, in which case their sojourn in paradise was prolonged, much to the
delight of the angels. But on that hot night the annual flitting of the angels had not yet come
to pass, and notwithstanding the heat the last dance of the season was
to take place at the Club House. The occasion was an exceptional one, as
the jovial sounds that issued from the officers' mess-house testified. Round after round of cheers followed the noisy toast, filling the night
with the merry uproar that echoed far and wide. A confusion of voices
succeeded these; and then by degrees the babel died down, and a single
voice made itself heard. It spoke with easy fluency to the evident
appreciation of its listeners, and when it ceased there came another
hearty cheer. Then with jokes and careless laughter the little company
of British officers began to disperse. They came forth in lounging
groups on to the steps of the mess-house, the foremost of them--Tommy
Denvers--holding the arm of his captain, who suffered the familiarity as
he suffered most things, with the utmost indifference. None but Tommy
ever attempted to get on familiar terms with Everard Monck. He was
essentially a man who stood alone. But the slim, fair-haired young
subaltern worshipped him openly and with reason. For Monck it was who,
grimly resolute, had pulled him through the worst illness he had ever
known, accomplishing by sheer force of will what Ralston, the doctor,
had failed to accomplish by any other means. And in consequence and for
all time the youngest subaltern in the mess had become Monck's devoted
adherent. They stood together for a moment at the top of the steps while Monck,
his dark, lean face wholly unresponsive and inscrutable, took out a
cigar. The night was a wonderland of deep spaces and glittering stars. Somewhere far away a native _tom-tom_ throbbed like the beating of a
fevered pulse, quickening spasmodically at intervals and then dying away
again into mere monotony. The air was scentless, still, and heavy. "It's going to be deuced warm," said Tommy. "Have a smoke?" said Monck, proffering his case. The boy smiled with swift gratification. "Oh, thanks awfully! But it's a
shame to hurry over a good cigar, and I promised Stella to go straight
back." "A promise is a promise," said Monck. "Have it later!" He added rather
curtly, "I'm going your way myself." "Good!" said Tommy heartily. "But aren't you going to show at the Club
House? Aren't you going to dance?" Monck tossed down his lighted match and set his heel on it. "I'm keeping
my dancing for to-morrow," he said. "The best man always has more than
enough of that." Tommy made a gloomy sound that was like a groan and began to descend the
steps by his side. They walked several paces along the dim road in
silence; then quite suddenly he burst into impulsive speech. "I'll tell you what it is, Monck!" "I shouldn't," said Monck. Tommy checked abruptly, looking at him oddly, uncertainly. "How do you
know what I was going to say?" he demanded. "I don't," said Monck. "I believe you do," said Tommy, unconvinced. Monck blew forth a cloud of smoke and laughed in his brief, rather
grudging way. "You're getting quite clever for a child of your age," he
observed. "But don't overdo it, my son! Don't get precocious!" Tommy's hand grasped his arm confidentially. "Monck, if I don't speak
out to someone, I shall bust! Surely you don't mind my speaking out to
you!" "Not if there's anything to be gained by it," said Monck. He ignored the friendly, persuasive hand on his arm, but yet in some
fashion Tommy knew that it was not unwelcome. He kept it there as he
made reply. "There isn't. Only, you know, old chap, it does a fellow good to
unburden himself. And I'm bothered to death about this business." "A bit late in the day, isn't it?" suggested Monck. "Oh yes, I know; too late to do anything. But," Tommy spoke with force,
"the nearer it gets, the worse I feel. I'm downright sick about it, and
that's the truth. How would you feel, I wonder, if you knew your one and
only sister was going to marry a rotter? Would you be satisfied to let
things drift?" Monck was silent for a space. They walked on over the dusty road with
the free swing of the conquering race. One or two 'rickshaws met them as
they went, and a woman's voice called a greeting; but though they both
responded, it scarcely served as a diversion. The silence between them
remained. Monck spoke at last, briefly, with grim restraint. "That's rather a
sweeping assertion of yours. I shouldn't repeat it if I were you." "It's true all the same," maintained Tommy. "You know it's true." "I know nothing," said Monck. "I've nothing whatever against Dacre." "You've nothing in favour of him anyway," growled Tommy. "Nothing particular; but I presume your sister has." There was just a
hint of irony in the quiet rejoinder. Tommy winced. "Stella! Great Scott, no! She doesn't care the toss of a
halfpenny for him. I know that now. She only accepted him because she
found herself in such a beastly anomalous position, with all the
spiteful cats of the regiment arrayed against her, treating her like a
pariah." "Did she tell you so?" There was no irony in Monck's tone this time. It
fell short and stern. Again Tommy glanced at him as one uncertain. "Not likely," he said. "Then why do you make the assertion? What grounds have you for making
the assertion?" Monck spoke with insistence as one who meant to have an
answer. And the boy answered him, albeit shamefacedly. "I really can't say,
Monck. I'm the sort of fool that sees things without being able to
explain how. But that Stella has the faintest spark of real love for
that fellow Dacre,--well, I'd take my dying oath that she hasn't." "Some women don't go in for that sort of thing," commented Monck dryly. "Stella isn't that sort of woman." Hotly came Tommy's defence. "You
don't know her. She's a lot deeper than I am." Monck laughed a little. "Oh, you're deep enough, Tommy. But you're
transparent as well. Now your sister on the other hand is quite
inscrutable. But it is not for us to interfere. She probably knows what
she is doing--very well indeed." "That's just it. Does she know? Isn't she taking a most awful leap in
the dark?" Keen anxiety sounded in Tommy's voice. "It's been such
horribly quick work, you know. Why, she hasn't been out here six weeks. It's a shame for any girl to marry on such short notice as that. I said
so to her, and she--she laughed and said, 'Oh, that's beggar's choice! Do you think I could enjoy life with your angels in paradise in
unmarried bliss? I'd sooner stay down in hell with you.' And she'd have
done it too, Monck. And it would probably have killed her. That's partly
how I came to know." "Haven't the women been decent to her?" Monck's question fell curtly, as
if the subject were one which he was reluctant to discuss. Tommy looked at him through the starlight. "You know what they are," he
said bluntly. "They'd hunt anybody if once Lady Harriet gave tongue. She
chose to eye Stella askance from the very outset, and of course all the
rest followed suit. Mrs. Ralston is the only one in the whole crowd who
has ever treated her decently, but of course she's nobody. Everyone sits
on her. As if," he spoke with heat, "Stella weren't as good as the best
of 'em--and better! What right have they to treat her like a social
outcast just because she came out here to me on her own? It's hateful! It's iniquitous! What else could she have done?" "It seems reasonable--from a man's point of view," said Monck. "It was reasonable. It was the only thing possible. And just for that
they chose to turn the cold shoulder on her,--to ostracize her
practically. What had she done to them? What right had they to treat her
like that?" Fierce resentment sounded in Tommy's voice. "I'll tell you if you want to know," said Monck abruptly. "It's the law
of the pack to rend an outsider. And your sister will always be
that--married or otherwise. They may fawn upon her later, Dacre being
one to hold his own with women. But they will always hate her in their
hearts. You see, she is beautiful." "Is she?" said Tommy in surprise. "Do you know, I never thought of
that!" Monck laughed--a cold, sardonic laugh. "Quite so! You wouldn't! But
Dacre has--and a few more of us." "Oh, confound Dacre!" Tommy's irritation returned with a rush. "I detest
the man! He behaves as if he were conferring a favour. When he was
making that speech to-night, I wanted to fling my glass at him." "Ah, but you mustn't do those things." Monck spoke reprovingly. "You may
be young, but you're past the schoolboy stage. Dacre is more of a
woman's favourite than a man's, you must remember. If your sister is not
in love with him, she is about the only woman in the station who isn't." "That's the disgusting part of it," fumed Tommy. "He makes love to
every woman he meets." They had reached a shadowy compound that bordered the dusty road for a
few yards. A little eddying wind made a mysterious whisper among its
thirsty shrubs. The bungalow it surrounded showed dimly in the
starlight, a wooden structure with a raised verandah and a flight of
steps leading up to it. A light thrown by a red-shaded lamp shone out
from one of the rooms, casting a shaft of ruddy brilliance into the
night as though it defied the splendour without. It shone upon Tommy's
face as he paused, showing it troubled and anxious. "You may as well come in," he said. "She is sure to be ready. Come in
and have a drink!" Monck stood still. His dark face was in shadow. He seemed to be debating
some point with himself. Finally, "All right. Just for a minute," he said. "But, look here,
Tommy! Don't you let your sister suspect that you've been making a
confidant of me! I don't fancy it would please her. Put on a grin, man! Don't look bowed down with family cares! She is probably quite capable
of looking after herself--like the rest of 'em." He clapped a careless hand on the lad's shoulder as they turned up the
path together towards the streaming red light. "You're a bit of a woman-hater, aren't you?" said Tommy. And Monck laughed again his short, rather bitter laugh; but he said no
word in answer. CHAPTER II

THE PRISONER AT THE BAR


In the room with the crimson-shaded lamp Stella Denvers sat waiting. The
red glow compassed her warmly, striking wonderful copper gleams in the
burnished coils of her hair. Her face was bent over the long white
gloves that she was pulling over her wrists, a pale face that yet was
extraordinarily vivid, with features that were delicate and proud, and
lips that had the exquisite softness and purity of a flower. She raised her eyes from her task at sound of the steps below the
window, and their starry brightness under her straight black brows gave
her an infinite allurement. Certainly a beautiful woman, as Monck had
said, and possessing the brilliance and the wonder of youth to an almost
dazzling degree! Perhaps it was not altogether surprising that the
ladies of the regiment had not been too enthusiastic in their welcome of
this sister of Tommy's who had come so suddenly into their midst,
defying convention. Her advent had been utterly unexpected--a total
surprise even to Tommy, who, returning one day from the polo-ground,
had found her awaiting him in the bachelor quarters which he had shared
with three other subalterns. And her arrival had set the whole station
buzzing. Led by the Colonel's wife, Lady Harriet Mansfield, the women of the
regiment had--with the single exception of Mrs. Ralston whose opinion
was of no account--risen and condemned the splendid stranger who had
come amongst them with such supreme audacity and eclipsed the fairest of
them. Stella's own simple explanation that she had, upon attaining her
majority and fifty pounds a year, decided to quit the home of some
distant relatives who did not want her and join Tommy who was the only
near relation she had, had satisfied no one. She was an interloper, and
as such they united to treat her. As Lady Harriet said, no nice girl
would have dreamed of taking such an extraordinary step, and she had not
the smallest intention of offering her the chaperonage that she so
conspicuously lacked. If Mrs. Ralston chose to do so, that was her own
affair. Such action on the part of the surgeon's very ordinary wife
would make no difference to any one. She was glad to think that all the
other ladies were too well-bred to accept without reservation so
unconventional a type. The fact that she was Tommy's sister was the only consideration in her
favour. Tommy was quite a nice boy, and they could not for his sake
entirely exclude her from the regimental society, but to no intimate
gathering was she ever invited, nor from the female portion of the
community was there any welcome for her at the Club. The attitude of the officers of the regiment was of a totally different
nature. They had accepted her with enthusiasm, possibly all the more
marked on account of the aloofness of their women folk, and in a very
short time they were paying her homage as one man. The subalterns who
had shared their quarters with Tommy turned out to make room for her,
treating her like a queen suddenly come into her own, and like a queen
she entered into possession, accepting all courtesy just as she ignored
all slights with a delicate self-possession that yet knew how to be
gracious when occasion demanded. Mrs. Ralston would have offered her harbourage had she desired it, but
there was pride in Stella--a pride that surged and rebelled very far
below her serenity. She received favours from none. And so, unshackled and unchaperoned, she had gone her way among her
critics, and no one--not even Tommy--suspected how deep was the wound
that their barely-veiled hostility had inflicted. In bitterness of soul
she hid it from all the world, and only her brother and her brother's
grim and somewhat unapproachable captain were even vaguely aware of its
existence. Everard Monck was one of the very few men who had not laid themselves
down before her dainty feet, and she had gradually come to believe that
this man shared the silent, side-long disapproval manifested by the
women. Very strangely that belief hurt her even more deeply, in a
subtle, incomprehensible fashion, than any slights inflicted by her own
sex. Possibly Tommy's warm enthusiasm for the man had made her more
sensitive regarding his good opinion. And possibly she was over ready to
read condemnation in his grave eyes. But--whatever the reason--she would
have given much to have had him on her side. Somehow it mattered to her,
and mattered vitally. But Monck had never joined her retinue of courtiers. He was never other
than courteous to her, but he did not seek her out. Perhaps he had
better things to do. Aloof, impenetrable, cold, he passed her by, and
she would have been even more amazed than Tommy had she heard him
describe her as beautiful, so convinced was she that he saw in her no
charm. It had been a disheartening struggle, this hewing for herself a way
along the rocky paths of prejudice, and many had been the thorns under
her feet. Though she kept a brave heart and never faltered, she had
tired inevitably of the perpetual effort it entailed. Three weeks after
her arrival, when the annual exodus of the ladies of the regiment to the
Hills was drawing near, she became engaged to Ralph Dacre, the
handsomest and most irresponsible man in the mess. With him at least her power to attract was paramount. He was blindly,
almost fulsomely, in love. Her beauty went to his head from the outset;
it fired his blood. He worshipped her hotly, and pursued her untiringly,
caring little whether she returned his devotion so long as he ultimately
took possession. And when finally, half-disdainfully, she yielded to his
insistence, his one all-mastering thought became to clinch the bargain
before she could repent of it. It was a mad and headlong passion that
drove him--not for the first time in his life; and the subtle pride of
her and the soft reserve made her all the more desirable in his eyes. He had won her; he did not stop to ask himself how. The women said that
the luck was all on her side. The men forebore to express an opinion. Dacre had attained his captaincy, but he was not regarded with great
respect by any one. His fellow-officers shrugged their shoulders over
him, and the commanding officer, Colonel Mansfield, had been heard to
call him "the craziest madman it had ever been his fate to meet." No
one, except Tommy, actively disliked him, and he had no grounds for so
doing, as Monck had pointed out. Monck, who till then had occupied the
same bungalow, declared he had nothing against him, and he was surely in
a position to form a very shrewd opinion. For Monck was neither fool nor
madman, and there was very little that escaped his silent observation. He was acting as best man at the morrow's ceremony, the function having
been almost thrust upon him by Dacre who, oddly enough, shared
something of Tommy's veneration for his very reticent brother-officer. There was scant friendship between them. Each had been accustomed to go
his own way wholly independent of the other. They were no more than
casual acquaintances, and they were content to remain such. But
undoubtedly Dacre entertained a certain respect for Monck and observed a
wariness of behaviour in his presence that he never troubled to assume
for any other man. He was careful in his dealings with him, being at all
times not wholly certain of his ground. Other men felt the same uncertainty in connection with Monck. None--save
Tommy--was sure what manner of man he was. Tommy alone took him for
granted with whole-hearted admiration, and at his earnest wish it had
been arranged between them that Monck should take up his abode with him
when the forthcoming marriage had deprived each of a companion. Tommy
was delighted with the idea, and he had a gratifying suspicion that
Monck himself was inclined to be pleased with it also. The Green Bungalow had become considerably more homelike since Stella's
arrival, and Tommy meant to keep it so. He was sure that Monck and he
would have the same tastes. And so on that eve of his sister's wedding, the thought of their coming
companionship was the sole redeeming feature of the whole affair, and
he turned in his impulsive fashion to say so just as they reached the
verandah steps. But the words did not leave his lips, for the red glow flung from the
lamp had found Monck's upturned face, and something--something about
it--checked all speech for the moment. He was looking straight up at the
lighted window and the face of a beautiful woman who gazed forth into
the night. And his eyes were no longer cold and unresponsive, but
burning, ardent, intensely alive. Tommy forgot what he was going to say
and only stared. The moment passed; it was scarcely so much as a moment. And Monck moved
on in his calm, unfaltering way. "Your sister is ready and waiting," he said. They ascended the steps together, and the girl who sat by the open
window rose with a stately movement and stepped forward to meet them. "Hullo, Stella!" was Tommy's greeting. "Hope I'm not awfully late. They
wasted such a confounded time over toasts at mess to-night. Yours was
one of 'em, and I had to reply. I hadn't a notion what to say. Captain
Monck thinks I made an awful hash of it though he is too considerate to
say so." "On the contrary I said 'Hear, hear!' to every stutter," said Monck,
bowing slightly as he took the hand she offered. She was wearing a black lace dress with a glittering spangled scarf of
Indian gauze floating about her. Her neck and shoulders gleamed in the
soft red glow. She was superb that night. She smiled at Monck, and her smile was as a shining cloak hiding her
soul. "So you have started upon your official duties already!" she said. "It is the best man's business to encourage and console everyone
concerned, isn't it?" The faint cynicism of her speech was like her smile. It held back all
intrusive curiosity. And the man's answering smile had something of the
same quality. Reserve met reserve. "I hope I shall not find it very arduous in that respect," he said. "I
did not come here in that capacity." "I am glad of that," she said. "Won't you come in and sit down?" She motioned him within with a queenly gesture, but her invitation was
wholly lacking in warmth. It was Tommy who pressed forward with eager
hospitality. "Yes, and have a drink! It's a thirsty right. It's getting infernally
hot. Stella, you're lucky to be going out of it." "Oh, I am very lucky," Stella said. They entered the lighted room, and Tommy went in search of refreshment. "Won't you sit down?" said Stella. Her voice was deep and pure, and the music in it made him wonder if she
sang. He sat facing her while she returned with apparent absorption to
the fastening of her gloves. She spoke again after a moment without
raising her eyes. "Are you proposing to take up your abode here
to-morrow?" "That's the idea," said Monck. "I hope you and Tommy will be quite comfortable," she said. "No doubt he
will be a good deal happier with you than he has been for the past few
weeks with me." "I don't know why he should be," said Monck. "No?" She was frowning slightly over her glove. "You see, my sojourn
here has not been--a great success. I think poor Tommy has felt it
rather badly. He likes a genial atmosphere." "He won't get much of that in my company," observed Monck. She smiled momentarily. "Perhaps not. But I think he will not be sorry
to be relieved of family cares. They have weighed rather heavily upon
him." "He will be sorry to lose you," said Monck. "Oh, of course, in a way. But he will soon get over that." She looked up
at him suddenly. "You will all be rather thankful when I am safely
married, Captain Monck," she said. There was a second or two of silence. Monck's eyes looked straight back
into hers while it lasted, but they held no warmth, scarcely even
interest. "I really don't know why you should say that, Miss Denvers," he said
stiffly at length. Stella's gloved hands clasped each other. She was breathing somewhat
hard, yet her bearing was wholly regal, even disdainful. "Only because I realize that I have been a great anxiety to all the
respectable portion of the community," she made careless reply. "I think
I am right in classing you under that heading, am I not?" He heard the challenge in her tone, delicately though she presented it,
and something in him that was fierce and unrestrained sprang up to meet
it. But he forced it back. His expression remained wholly inscrutable. "I don't think I can claim to be anything else," he said. "But that fact
scarcely makes me in any sense one of a community. I think I prefer to
stand alone." Her blue eyes sparkled a little. "Strangely, I have the same
preference," she said. "It has never appealed to me to be one of a
crowd. I like independence--whatever the crowd may say. But I am quite
aware that in a woman that is considered a dangerous taste. A woman
should always conform to rule." "I have never studied the subject," said Monck. He spoke briefly. Tommy's confidences had stirred within him that which
could not be expressed. The whole soul of him shrank with an almost
angry repugnance from discussing the matter with her. No discussion
could make any difference at this stage. Again for a second he saw her slight frown. Then she leaned back in her
chair, stretching up her arms as if weary of the matter. "In fact you
avoid all things feminine," she said. "How discreet of you!" A large white moth floated suddenly in and began to beat itself against
the lamp-shade. Monck's eyes watched it with a grim concentration. Stella's were half-closed. She seemed to have dismissed him from her
mind as an unimportant detail. The silence widened between them. Suddenly there was a movement. The fluttering creature had found the
flame and fallen dazed upon the table. Almost in the same second Monck
stooped forward swiftly and silently, and crushed the thing with his
closed fist. Stella drew a quick breath. Her eyes were wide open again. She sat up. "Why did you do that?" He looked at her again, a smouldering gleam in his eyes. "It was on its
way to destruction," he said. "And so you helped it!" He nodded. "Yes. Long-drawn-out agonies don't attract me." Stella laughed softly, yet with a touch of mockery. "Oh, it was an act
of mercy, was it? You didn't look particularly merciful. In fact, that
is about the last quality I should have attributed to you." "I don't think," Monck said very quietly, "that you are in a position to
judge me." She leaned forward. He saw that her bosom was heaving. "That
is your prerogative, isn't it?" she said. "I--I am just the prisoner at
the bar, and--like the moth--I have been condemned--without mercy." He raised his brows sharply. For a second he had the look of a man who
has been stabbed in the back. Then with a swift effort he pulled himself
together. In the same moment Stella rose. She was smiling, and there was a red
flush in her cheeks. She took her fan from the table. "And now," she said, "I am going to dance--all night long. Every officer
in the mess--save one--has asked me for a dance." He was on his feet in an instant. He had checked one impulse, but even
to his endurance there were limits. He spoke as one goaded. "Will you give me one?" She looked him squarely in the eyes. "No, Captain Monck." His dark face looked suddenly stubborn. "I don't often dance," he said. "I wasn't going to dance to-night. But--I will have one--I must have
one--with you." "Why?" Her question fell with a crystal clearness. There was something
of crystal hardness in her eyes. But the man was undaunted. "Because you have wronged me, and you owe me
reparation." "I--have wronged--you!" She spoke the words slowly, still looking him in
the eyes. He made an abrupt gesture as of holding back some inner force that
strongly urged him. "I am not one of your persecutors," he said. "I have
never in my life presumed to judge you--far less condemn you." His voice vibrated as though some emotion fought fiercely for the
mastery. They stood facing each other in what might have been open
antagonism but for that deep quiver in the man's voice. Stella spoke after the lapse of seconds. She had begun to tremble. "Then why--why did you let me think so? Why did you always stand aloof?" There was a tremor in her voice also, but her eyes were shining with the
light half-eager, half-anxious, of one who seeks for buried treasure. Monck's answer was pitched very low. It was as if the soul of him gave
utterance to the words. "It is my nature to stand aloof. I was waiting." "Waiting?" Her two hands gripped suddenly hard upon her fan, but still
her shining eyes did not flinch from his. Still with a quivering heart
she searched. Almost in a whisper came his reply. "I was waiting--till my turn should
come." "Ah!" The fan snapped between her hands; she cast it from her with a
movement that was almost violent. Monck drew back sharply. With a smile that was grimly cynical he veiled
his soul. "I was a fool, of course, and I am quite aware that my
foolishness is nothing to you. But at least you know now how little
cause you have to hate me." She had turned from him and gone to the open window. She stood there
bending slightly forward, as one who strains for a last glimpse of
something that has passed from sight. Monck remained motionless, watching her. From another room near by there
came the sound of Tommy's humming and the cheery pop of a withdrawn
cork. Stella spoke at last, in a whisper, and as she spoke the strain went out
of her attitude and she drooped against the wood-work of the window as
if spent. "Yes; but I know--too late." The words reached him though he scarcely felt that they were intended to
do so. He suffered them to go into silence; the time for speech was
past. The seconds throbbed away between them. Stella did not move or speak
again, and at last Monck turned from her. He picked up the broken fan,
and with a curious reverence he laid it out of sight among some books on
the table. Then he stood immovable as granite and waited. There came the sound of Tommy's footsteps, and in a moment the door was
flung open. Tommy advanced with all a host's solicitude. "Oh, I say, I'm awfully sorry to have kept you waiting so long. That
silly ass of a _khit_ had cleared off and left us nothing to drink. Stella, we shall miss all the fun if we don't hurry up. Come on, Monck,
old chap, say when!" He stopped at the table, and Stella turned from the window and moved
forward. Her face was pale, but she was smiling. "Captain Monck is coming with us, Tommy," she said. "What?" Tommy looked up sharply. "Really? I say, Monck, I'm pleased. It'll do you good." Monck was smiling also, faintly, grimly. "Don't mix any strong waters
for me, Tommy!" he said. "And you had better not be too generous to
yourself! Remember, you will have to dance with Lady Harriet!" Tommy grimaced above the glasses. "All right. Have some lime-juice! You
will have to dance with her too. That's some consolation!" "I?" said Monck. He took the glass and handed it to Stella, then as she
shook her head he put it to his own lips and drank as a man drinks to a
memory. "No," he said then. "I am dancing only one dance to-night, and
that will not be with Lady Harriet Mansfield." "Who then?" questioned Tommy. It was Stella who answered him, in her voice a note that sounded
half-reckless, half-defiant. "It isn't given to every woman to dance at
her own funeral," she said: "Captain Monck has kindly consented to
assist at the orgy of mine." "Stella!" protested Tommy, flushing. "I hate to hear you talking like
that!" Stella laughed a little, softly, as though at the vagaries of a child. "Poor Tommy!" she said. "What it is to be so young!" "I'd sooner be a babe in arms than a cynic," said Tommy bluntly. CHAPTER III

THE TRIUMPH


Lady Harriet's lorgnettes were brought piercingly to bear upon the
bride-elect that night, and her thin, refined features never relaxed
during the operation. She was looking upon such youth and loveliness as
seldom came her way; but the sight gave her no pleasure. She deemed it
extremely unsuitable that Stella should dance at all on the eve of her
wedding, and when she realized that nearly every man in the room was
having his turn, her disapproval by no means diminished. She wondered
audibly to one after another of her followers what Captain Dacre was
about to permit such a thing. And when Monck--Everard Monck of all
people who usually avoided all gatherings at the Club and had never been
known to dance if he could find any legitimate means of excusing
himself--waltzed Stella through the throng, her indignation amounted
almost to anger. The mess had yielded to the last man. "I call it almost brazen," she said to Mrs. Burton, the Major's wife. "She flaunts her unconventionality in our faces." "A grave mistake," agreed Mrs. Burton. "It will not make us think any
the more highly of her when she is married." "I am in two minds about calling on her," declared Lady Harriet. "I am
very doubtful as to the advisability of inviting any one so obviously
unsuitable into our inner circle. Of course Mrs. Ralston," she raised
her long pointed chin upon the name, "will please herself in the matter. She will probably be the first to try and draw her in, but what Mrs.
Ralston does and what I do are two very different things. She is not
particular as to the society she keeps, and the result is that her
opinion is very justly regarded as worthless." "Oh, quite," agreed Mrs. Burton, sending an obviously false smile in the
direction of the lady last named who was approaching them in the company
of Mrs. Ermsted, the Adjutant's wife, a little smart woman whom Tommy
had long since surnamed "The Lizard." Mrs. Ralston, the surgeon's wife, had once been a pretty girl, and there
were occasions still on which her prettiness lingered like the gleams of
a fading sunset. She had a diffident manner in society, but yet she was
the only woman in the station who refused to follow Lady Harriet's lead. As Tommy had said, she was a nobody. Her influence was of no account,
but yet with unobtrusive insistence she took her own way, and none could
turn her therefrom. Mrs. Ermsted held her up to ridicule openly, and yet very strangely she
did not seem to dislike the Adjutant's sharp-tongued little wife. She
had been very good to her on more than one occasion, and the most
appreciative remark that Mrs. Ermsted had ever found to make regarding
her was that the poor thing was so fond of drudging for somebody that it
was a real kindness to let her. Mrs. Ermsted was quite willing to be
kind to any one in that respect. They approached now, and Lady Harriet gave to each her distinctive smile
of royal condescension. "I expected to see you dancing, Mrs. Ermsted," she said. "Oh, it's too hot," declared Mrs. Ermsted. "You want the temperament of
a salamander to dance on a night like this." She cast a barbed glance towards Stella as she spoke as Monck guided her
to the least crowded corner of the ball-room. Stella's delicate face was
flushed, but it was the exquisite flush of a blush-rose. Her eyes were
of a starry brightness; she had the radiant look of one who has achieved
her heart's desire. "What a vision of triumph!" commented Mrs. Ermsted. "It's soothing
anyway to know that that wild-rose complexion won't survive the summer. Captain Monck looks curiously out of his element. No doubt he prefers
the bazaars." "But Stella Denvers is enchanting to-night," murmured Mrs. Ralston. Lady Harriet overheard the murmur, and her aquiline nose was instantly
elevated a little higher. "So many people never see beyond the outer
husk," she said. Mrs. Burton smiled out of her slitty eyes. "I should scarcely imagine
Captain Monck to be one of them," she said. "He is obviously here as a
matter of form to-night. The best man must be civil to the
bride--whatever his feelings." Lady Harriet's face cleared a little, although her estimate of Mrs.
Burton's opinion was not a very high one. "That may account for Captain
Dacre's extremely complacent attitude," she said. "He regards the
attentions paid to his _fiancee_ as a tribute to himself." "He may change his point of view when he is married," laughed Mrs.
Ermsted. "It will be interesting to watch developments. We all know what
Captain Dacre is. I have never yet seen him satisfied to take a back
seat." Mrs. Burton laughed with her. "Nor content to occupy even a front one at
the same show for long," she observed. "I marvel to see him caught in
the noose so easily." "None but an adventuress could have done it," declared Mrs. Ermsted. "She has practised the art of slinging the lasso before now." "My dear," said Mrs. Ralston, "forgive me, but that is unworthy of you." Mrs. Ermsted flicked an eyelid in Mrs. Burton's direction with an
_insouciance_ that somehow robbed the act of any serious sting. "Poor
Mrs. Ralston holds such a high opinion of everybody," she said, "that
she must meet with a hundred disappointments in a day." Lady Harriet's down-turned lips said nothing, but they were none the
less eloquent on that account. Mrs. Ralston's eyes of faded blue watched Stella with a distressed look. She was not hurt on her own account, but she hated to hear the girl
criticized in so unfriendly a spirit. Stella was more brilliantly
beautiful that night than she had ever before seen her, and she longed
to hear a word of appreciation from that hostile group of women. But she
knew very well that the longing was vain, and it was with relief that
she saw Captain Dacre himself saunter up to claim Mrs. Ermsted for a
partner. Smiling, debonair, complacent, the morrow's bridegroom had a careless
quip for all and sundry on that last night. It was evident that his
_fiancee's_ defection was a matter of no moment to him. Stella was to
have her fling, and he, it seemed, meant to have his. He and Mrs.
Ermsted had had many a flirtation in the days that were past and it was
well known that Captain Ermsted heartily detested him in consequence. Some even hinted that matters had at one time approached very near to a
climax, but Ralph Dacre knew how to handle difficult situations, and
with considerable tact had managed to avoid it. Little Mrs. Ermsted,
though still willing to flirt, treated him with just a tinge of
disdain, now-a-days; no one knew wherefore. Perhaps it was more for
Stella's edification than her own that she condescended to dance with
him on that sweltering evening of Indian spring. But Stella was evidently too engrossed with her own affairs to pay much
attention to the doings of her _fiance_. His love-making was not of a
nature to be carried on in public. That would come later when they
walked home through the glittering night and parted in the shadowy
verandah while Tommy tramped restlessly about within the bungalow. He
would claim that as a right she knew, and once or twice remembering the
methods of his courtship a little shudder went through her as she
danced. Very willingly would she have left early and foregone all
intercourse with her lover that night. But there was no escape for her. She was pledged to the last dance, and for the sake of the pride that
she carried so high she would not shrink under the malicious eyes that
watched her so unsparingly. Her dance with Monck was quickly over, and
he left her with the briefest word of thanks. Afterwards she saw him no
more. The rest of the evening passed in a whirl of gaiety that meant very
little to her. Perhaps, on the whole, it was easier to bear than an
evening spent in solitude would have been. She knew that she would be
too utterly weary to lie awake when bedtime came at last. And the night
would be so short--ah, so short! And so she danced and laughed with the
gayest of the merrymakers, and when it was over at last even the
severest of her critics had to admit that her triumph was complete. She
had borne herself like a queen at a banquet of rejoicing, and like a
queen she finally quitted the festive scene in a 'rickshaw drawn by a
team of giddy subalterns, scattering her careless favours upon all who
cared to compete for them. As she had foreseen, Dacre accompanied the procession. He had no mind to
be cheated of his rights, and it was he who finally dispersed the
irresponsible throng at the steps of the verandah, handing her up them
with a royal air and drawing her away from the laughter and cheering
that followed her. With her hand pressed lightly against his side, he led her away to the
darkest corner, and there he pushed back the soft wrap from her
shoulders and gathered her into his arms. She stood almost stiffly in his embrace, neither yielding nor attempting
to avoid. But at the touch of his lips upon her neck she shivered. There
was something sensual in that touch that revolted her--in spite of
herself. "Ralph," she said, and her voice quivered a little, "I think you must
say good-bye to me. I am tired to-night. If I don't rest, I shall never
be ready for to-morrow." He made an inarticulate sound that in some fashion expressed what the
drawing of his lips had made her feel. "Sweetheart--to-morrow!" he
said, and kissed her again with a lingering persistence that to her
overwrought nerves had in it something that was almost unendurable. It
made her think of an epicurean tasting some favourite dish and smacking
his lips over it. A hint of irritation sounded in her voice as she said, drawing slightly
away from him, "Yes, I want to rest for the few hours that are left. Please say good night now, Ralph! Really I am tired." He laughed softly, his cheek laid to hers. "Ah, Stella!" he said. "What
a queen you have been to-night! I have been watching you with the rest
of the world, and I shouldn't mind laying pretty heavy odds that there
isn't a single man among 'em that doesn't envy me." Stella drew a deep breath as if she laboured against some oppression. "It's nice to be envied, isn't it?" she said. He kissed her again. "Ah! You're a prize!" he said. "It was just a
question of first in, and I never was one to let the grass grow. I
plucked the fruit while all the rest were just looking at it. Stella--mine! Stella--mine!" His lips pressed hers between the words closely, possessively, and again
involuntarily she shivered. She could not return his caresses that
night. His hold relaxed at last. "How cold you are, my Star of the North!" he
said. "What is it? Surely you are not nervous at the thought of
to-morrow after your triumph to-night! You will carry all before you,
never fear!" She answered him in a voice so flat and emotionless that it sounded
foreign even to herself. "Oh, no, I am not nervous. I'm too tired to
feel anything to-night." He took her face between his hands. "Ah, well, you will be all mine this
time to-morrow. One kiss and I will let you go. You witch--you
enchantress! I never thought you would draw old Monck too into your
toils." Again she drew that deep breath as of one borne down by some heavy
weight. "Nor I," she said, and gave him wearily the kiss for which he
bargained. He did not stay much longer, possibly realizing his inability to awake
any genuine response in her that night. Her remoteness must have chilled
any man less ardent. But he went from her too encompassed with blissful
anticipation to attach any importance to the obvious lack of
corresponding delight on her part. She was already in his estimation his
own property, and the thought of her happiness was one which scarcely
entered into his consideration. She had accepted him, and no doubt she
realized that she was doing very well for herself. He had no misgivings
on that point. Stella was a young woman who knew her own mind very
thoroughly. She had secured the finest catch within reach, and she was
not likely to repent of her bargain at this stage. So, unconcernedly, he went his way, throwing a couple of _annas_ with
careless generosity to a beggar who followed him along the road whining
for alms, well-satisfied with himself and with all the world on that
wonderful night that had witnessed the final triumph of the woman whom
he had chosen for his bride, asking nought of the gods save that which
they had deigned to bestow--Fortune's favourite whom every man must
envy. CHAPTER IV

THE BRIDE


It was remarked by Tommy's brother-officers on the following day that it
was he rather than the bride who displayed all the shyness that befitted
the occasion. As he walked up the aisle with his sister's hand on his arm, his face
was crimson and reluctant, and he stared straight before him as if
unwilling to meet all the watching eyes that followed their progress. But the bride walked proudly and firmly, her head held high with even
the suspicion of an upward, disdainful curve to her beautiful mouth, the
ghost of a defiant smile. To all who saw her she was a splendid
spectacle of bridal content. "Unparalleled effrontery!" whispered Lady Harriet, surveying the proud
young face through her lorgnettes. "Ah, but she is exquisite," murmured Mrs. Ralston with a wistful mist in
her faded eyes. "'Faultily faultless, icily regular, splendidly null,'" scoffed little
Mrs. Ermsted upon whose cheeks there bloomed a faint fixed glow. Yes, she was splendid. Even the most hostile had to admit it. On that,
the day of her final victory, she surpassed herself. She shone as a
queen with majestic self-assurance, wholly at her ease, sublimely
indifferent to all criticism. At the chancel-steps she bestowed a brief smile of greeting upon her
waiting bridegroom, and for a single moment her steady eyes rested,
though without any gleam of recognition, upon the dark face of the best
man. Then the service began, and with the utmost calmness of demeanour she
took her part. When the service was over, Tommy extended his hesitating invitation to
Lady Harriet and his commanding officer to follow the newly wedded pair
to the vestry. They went. Colonel Mansfield with a species of jocose
pomposity specially assumed for the occasion, his wife, upright,
thin-lipped, forbidding, instinct with wordless disapproval. The bride,--the veil thrown back from her beautiful face,--stood
laughing with her husband. There was no fixity in the soft flush of
those delicately rounded cheeks. Even Lady Harriet realized that, though
she had never seen so much colour in the girl's face before. She
advanced stiffly, and Ralph Dacre with smiling grace took his wife's arm
and drew her forward. "This is good of you, Lady Harriet," he declared. "I was hoping for your
support. Allow me to introduce--my wife!" His words had a pride of possession that rang clarion-like in every
syllable, and in response Lady Harriet was moved to offer a cold cheek
in salutation to the bride. Stella bent instantly and kissed it with a
quick graciousness that would have melted any one less austere, but in
Lady Harriet's opinion the act was marred by its very impulsiveness. She
did not like impulsive people. So, with chill repression, she accepted
the only overture from Stella that she was ever to receive. But if she were proof against the girl's ready charm, with her husband
it was quite otherwise. Stella broke through his pomposity without
effort, giving him both her hands with a simplicity that went straight
to his heart. He held them in a tight, paternal grasp. "God bless you, my dear!" he said. "I wish you both every happiness from
the bottom of my soul." She turned from him a few seconds later with a faintly tremulous laugh
to give her hand to the best man, but it did not linger in his, and to
his curtly proffered felicitations she made no verbal response whatever. Ten minutes later, as she left the vestry with her husband, Mrs. Ralston
pressed forward unexpectedly, and openly checked her progress in full
view of the whole assembly. "My dear," she murmured humbly, "my dear, you'll allow me I know. I
wanted just to tell you how beautiful you look, and how earnestly I pray
for your happiness." It was a daring move, and it had not been accomplished without courage. Lady Harriet in the background stiffened with displeasure, nearer to
actual anger than she had ever before permitted herself to be with any
one so contemptible as the surgeon's wife. Even Major Ralston himself,
most phlegmatic of men, looked momentarily disconcerted by his wife's
action. But Stella--Stella stopped dead with a new light in her eyes, and in a
moment dropped her husband's arm to fling both her own about the gentle,
faded woman who had dared thus openly to range herself on her side. "Dear Mrs. Ralston," she said, not very steadily, "how more than kind of
you to tell me that!" The tears were actually in her eyes as she kissed the surgeon's wife. That spontaneous act of sympathy had pierced straight through her armour
of reserve and found its way to her heart. Her face, as she passed on
down the aisle by her husband's side, was wonderfully softened, and even
Mrs. Ermsted found no gibe to fling after her. The smile that quivered
on Stella's lips was full of an unconscious pathos that disarmed all
criticism. The sunshine outside the church was blinding. It smote through the
awning with pitiless intensity. Around the carriage a curious crowd had
gathered to see the bridal procession. To Stella's dazzled eyes it
seemed a surging sea of unfamiliar faces. But one face stood out from
the rest--the calm countenance of Ralph Dacre's magnificent Sikh
servant clad in snowy linen, who stood at the carriage door and gravely
bowed himself before her, stretching an arm to protect her dress from
the wheel. "This is Peter the Great," said Dacre's careless voice, "a highly
honourable person, Stella, and a most efficient bodyguard." "How do you do?" said Stella, and held out her hand. She acted with the utmost simplicity. During her four weeks' sojourn in
India she had not learned to treat the native servant with contempt, and
the majestic presence of this man made her feel almost as if she were
dealing with a prince. He straightened himself swiftly at her action, and she saw a sudden,
gleaming smile flash across his grave face. Then he took the proffered
hand, bending low over it till his turbaned forehead for a moment
touched her fingers. "May the sun always shine on you, my _mem-sahib!_" he said. Stella realized afterwards that in action and in words there lay a tacit
acceptance of her as mistress which was to become the allegiance of a
lifelong service. She stepped into the carriage with a feeling of warmth at her heart
which was very different from the icy constriction that had bound it
when she had arrived at the church a brief half-hour before with Tommy. Her husband's arm was about her as they drove away. He pressed her to
his side. "Oh, Star of my heart, how superb you are!" he said. "I feel
as if I had married a queen. And you weren't even nervous." She bent her head, not looking at him. "Poor Tommy was," she said. He smiled tolerantly. "Tommy's such a youngster." She smiled also. "Exactly one year younger than I am." He drew her nearer, his eyes devouring her. "You, Stella!" he said. "You
are as ageless as the stars." She laughed faintly, not yielding herself to the closer pressure though
not actually resisting it. "That is merely a form of telling me that I
am much older than I seem," she said. "And you are quite right. I am." His arm compelled her. "You are you," he said. "And you are so divinely
young and beautiful that there is no measuring you by ordinary
standards. They all know it. That is why you weren't received into the
community with open arms. You are utterly above and beyond them all." She flinched slightly at the allusion. "I hope I am not so extraordinary
as all that," she said. His arm became insistent. "You are unique," he said. "You are superb." There was passion barely suppressed in his hold and a sudden swift
shiver went through her. "Oh, Ralph," she said, "don't--- don't worship
me too much!" Her voice quivered in its appeal, but somehow its pathos passed him by. He saw only her beauty, and it thrilled every pulse in his body. Fiercely almost, he strained her to him. And he did not so much as
notice that her lips trembled too piteously to return his kiss, or that
her submission to his embrace was eloquent of mute endurance rather than
glad surrender. He stood as a conqueror on the threshold of a newly
acquired kingdom and exulted over the splendour of its treasures because
it was all his own. It did not even occur to him to doubt that her happiness fully equalled
his. Stella was a woman and reserved; but she was happy enough, oh, she
was happy enough. With complacence he reflected that if every man in the
mess envied him, probably every woman in the station would have gladly
changed places with her. Was he not Fortune's favourite? What happier
fate could any woman desire than to be his bride? CHAPTER V

THE DREAM


It was a fortnight after the wedding, on an evening of intense heat,
that Everard Monck, now established with Tommy at The Green Bungalow,
came in from polo to find the mail awaiting him. He sauntered in through
the verandah in search of a drink which he expected to find in the room
which Stella during her brief sojourn had made more dainty and artistic
than the rest, albeit it had never been dignified by the name of
drawing-room. There was light green matting on the floor and there were
also light green cushions in each of the long wicker chairs. Curtains of
green gauze hung before the windows, and the fierce sunlight filtering
through gave the room a strangely translucent effect. It was like a
chamber under the sea. It had been Monck's intention to have his drink and pass straight on to
his own quarters for a bath, but the letters on the table caught his eye
and he stopped. Standing in the green dimness with a tumbler in one
hand, he sorted them out. There were two for himself and two for Tommy,
the latter obviously bills, and under these one more, also for Tommy in
a woman's clear round writing. It came from Srinagar, and Monck stood
for a second or two holding it in his hand and staring straight out
before him with eyes that saw not. Just for those seconds a mocking
vision danced gnomelike through his brain. Just at this moment probably
most of the other men were opening letters from their wives in the
Hills. And he saw the chance he had not taken like a flash of far,
elusive sunlight on the sky-line of a troubled sea. The vision passed. He laid down the letter and took up his own
correspondence. One of the letters was from England. He poured out his
drink and flung himself down to read it. It came from the only relation he possessed in the world--his brother. Bernard Monck was the elder by fifteen years--a man of brilliant
capabilities, who had long since relinquished all idea of worldly
advancement in the all-absorbing interest of a prison chaplaincy. They
had not met for over five years, but they maintained a regular
correspondence, and every month brought to Everard Monck the thin
envelope directed in the square, purposeful handwriting of the man who
had been during the whole of his life his nearest and best friend. Lying
back in the wicker-chair, relaxed and weary, he opened the letter and
began to read. Ten minutes later, Tommy Denvers, racing in, also in polo-kit, stopped
short upon the threshold and stared in shocked amazement as if some
sudden horror had caught him by the throat. "Great heavens above, Monck! What's the matter?" he ejaculated. Perhaps it was in part due to the green twilight of the room, but it
seemed to him in that first startled moment that Monck's face had the
look of a man who had received a deadly wound. The impression passed
almost immediately, but the memory of it was registered in his brain for
all time. Monck raised the tumbler to his lips and drank before replying, and as
he did so his customary grave composure became apparent, making Tommy
wonder if his senses had tricked him. He looked at the lad with sombre
eyes as he set down the glass. His brother's letter was still gripped in
his hand. "Hullo, Tommy!" he said, a shadowy smile about his mouth. "What are you
in such a deuce of a hurry about?" Tommy glanced down at the letters on the table and pounced upon the one
that lay uppermost. "A letter from Stella! And about time, too! She
isn't much of a correspondent now-a-days. Where are they now? Oh,
Srinagar. Lucky beggar--Dacre! Wish he'd taken me along as well as
Stella! What am I in such a hurry about? Well, my dear chap, look at the
time! You'll be late for mess yourself if you don't buck up." Tommy's treatment of his captain was ever of the airiest when they were
alone. He had never stood in awe of Monck since the days of his
illness; but even in his most familiar moments his manner was not
without a certain deference. His respect for him was unbounded, and his
pride in their intimacy was boyishly whole-hearted. There was no
sacrifice great or small that he would not willingly have offered at
Monck's behest. And Monck knew it, realized the lad's devotion as pure gold, and valued
it accordingly. But, that fact notwithstanding, his faith in Tommy's
discretion did not move him to bestow his unreserved confidence upon
him. Probably to no man in the world could he have opened his secret
soul. He was not of an expansive nature. But Tommy occupied an inner
place in his regard, and there were some things that he veiled from all
beside which he no longer attempted to hide from this faithful follower
of his. Thus far was Tommy privileged. He got to his feet in response to the boy's last remark. "Yes, you're
right. We ought to be going. I shall be interested to hear what your
sister thinks of Kashmir. I went up there on a shooting expedition two
years after I came out. It's a fine country." "Is there anywhere that you haven't been?" said Tommy. "I believe you'll
write a book one of these days." Monck looked ironical. "Not till I'm on the shelf, Tommy," he said,
"where there's nothing better to do." "You'll never be on the shelf," said Tommy quickly. "You'll be much too
valuable." Monck shrugged his shoulders slightly and turned to go. "I doubt if that
consideration would occur to any one but you, my boy," he said. They walked to the mess-house together a little later through the
airless dark, and there was nothing in Monck's manner either then or
during the evening to confirm the doubt in Tommy's mind. Spirits were
not very high at the mess just then. Nearly all the women had left for
the Hills, and the increasing heat was beginning to make life a burden. The younger officers did their best to be cheerful, and one of them,
Bertie Oakes, a merry, brainless youngster, even proposed an impromptu
dance to enliven the proceedings. But he did not find many supporters. Men were tired after the polo. Colonel Mansfield and Major Burton were
deeply engrossed with some news that had been brought by Barnes of the
Police, and no one mustered energy for more than talk. Tommy soon decided to leave early and return to his letters. Before
departing, he looked round for Monck as was his custom, but finding that
he and Captain Ermsted had also been drawn into the discussion with the
Colonel, he left the mess alone. Back in The Green Bungalow he flung off his coat and threw himself down
in his shirt-sleeves on the verandah to read his sister's letter. The
light from the red-shaded lamp streamed across the pages. Stella had
written very fully of their wanderings, but her companion she scarcely
mentioned. It was like a gorgeous dream, she said. Each day seemed to bring
greater beauties. They had spent the first two at Agra to see the
wonderful Taj which of course was wholly beyond description. Thence they
had made their way to Rawal Pindi where Ralph had several military
friends to be introduced to his bride. It was evident that he was
anxious to display his new possession, and Tommy frowned a little over
that episode, realizing fully why Stella touched so lightly upon it. For
some reason his dislike of Dacre was increasing rapidly, and he read the
letter very critically. It was the first with any detail that she had
written. From Rawal Pindi they had journeyed on to exquisite Murree set
in the midst of the pines where only to breathe was the keenest
pleasure. Stella spoke almost wistfully of this place; she would have
loved to linger there. "I could be happy there in perfect solitude," she wrote, "with just
Peter the Great to take care of me." She mentioned the Sikh bearer more
than once and each time with growing affection. "He is like an immense
and kindly watch-dog," she said in one place. "Every material comfort
that I could possibly wish for he manages somehow to procure, and he is
always on guard, always there when wanted, yet never in the way." Their time being limited and Ralph anxious to use it to the utmost, they
had left Murree after a very brief stay and pressed on into Kashmir,
travelling in a _tonga_ through the most glorious scenery that Stella
had ever beheld. "I only wished you could have been there to enjoy it with me," she
wrote, and passed on to a glowing description of the Hills amidst which
they had travelled, all grandly beautiful and many capped with the
eternal snows. She told of the River Jhelum, swift and splendid, that
flowed beside the way, of the flowers that bloomed in dazzling profusion
on every side--wild roses such as she had never dreamed of, purple
acacias, jessamine yellow and white, maiden-hair ferns that hung in
sprays of living green over the rushing waterfalls, and the vivid,
scarlet pomegranate blossom that grew like a spreading fire. And the air that blew through the mountains was as the very breath of
life. Physically, she declared, she had never felt so well; but she did
not speak of happiness, and again Tommy's brow contracted as he read. For all its enthusiasm, there was to him something wanting in that
letter--a lack that hurt him subtly. Why did she say so little of her
companion in the wilderness? No casual reader would have dreamed that
the narrative had been written by a bride upon her honeymoon. He read on, read of their journey up the river to Srinagar, punted by
native boatmen, and again, as she spoke of their sad, droning chant, she
compared it all to a dream. "I wonder if I am really asleep, Tommy," she
wrote, "if I shall wake up in the middle of a dark night and find that I
have never left England after all. That is what I feel like
sometimes--almost as if life had been suspended for awhile. This strange
existence cannot be real. I am sure that at the heart of me I must be
asleep." At Srinagar, a native _fete_ had been in progress, and the howling of
men and din of _tom-toms_ had somewhat marred the harmony of their
arrival. But it was all interesting, like an absorbing fairy-tale, she
said, but quite unreal. She felt sure it couldn't be true. Ralph had
been disgusted with the hubbub and confusion. He compared the place to
an asylum of filthy lunatics, and they had left it without delay. And so
at last they had come to their present abiding-place in the heart of the
wilderness with coolies, pack-horses, and tents, and were camped beside
a rushing stream that filled the air with its crystal music day and
night. "And this is Heaven," wrote Stella; "but it is the Heaven of the
Orient, and I am not sure that I have any part or lot in it. I believe I
shall feel myself an interloper for all time. I dread to turn each
corner lest I should meet the Angel with the Flaming Sword and be driven
forth into the desert. If only you were here, Tommy, it would be more
real to me. But Ralph is just a part of the dream. He is almost like an
Eastern potentate himself with his endless cigarettes and his wonderful
capacity for doing nothing all day long without being bored. Of course,
I am not bored, but then no one ever feels bored in a dream. The lazy
well-being of it all has the effect of a narcotic so far as I am
concerned. I cannot imagine ever feeling active in this lulling
atmosphere. Perhaps there is too much champagne in the air and I am
never wholly sober. Perhaps it is only in the desert that any one ever
lives to the utmost. The endless singing of the stream is hushing me
into a sweet drowsiness even as I write. By the way, I wonder if I have
written sense. If not, forgive me! But I am much too lazy to read it
through. I think I must have eaten of the lotus. Good-bye, Tommy dear! Write when you can and tell me that all is well with you, as I think it
must be--though I cannot tell--with your always loving, though for the
moment strangely bewitched, sister, Stella." Tommy put down the letter and lay still, peering forth under frowning
brows. He could hear Monck's footsteps coming through the gate of the
compound, but he was not paying any attention to Monck for once. His
troubled mind scarcely even registered the coming of his friend. Only when the latter mounted the steps on to the verandah and began to
move along it, did he turn his head and realize his presence. Monck came
to a stand beside him. "Well, Tommy," he said, "isn't it time to turn in?" Tommy sat up. "Oh, I suppose so. Infernally hot, isn't it? I've been
reading Stella's letter." Monck lodged his shoulder against the window-frame. "I hope she is all
right," he said formally. His voice sounded pre-occupied. It did not convey to Tommy the idea that
he was greatly interested in his reply. He answered with something of an effort. "I believe she is. She doesn't
really say. I wish they had been content to stay at Bhulwana. I could
have got leave to go over and see her there." "Where exactly are they now?" asked Monck. Tommy explained to the best of his ability. "Srinagar seems their
nearest point of civilization. They are camping in the wilderness, but
they will have to move before long. Dacre's leave will be up, and they
must allow time to get back. Stella talks as if they are fixed there for
ever and ever." "She is enjoying it then?" Monck's voice still sounded as if he were
thinking of something else. Tommy made grudging reply. "I suppose she is, after a fashion. I'm
pretty sure of one thing." He spoke with abrupt force. "She'd enjoy it a
deal more if I were with her instead of Dacre." Monck laughed, a curt, dry laugh. "Jealous, eh?" "No, I'm not such a fool." The boy spoke recklessly. "But I know--I
can't help knowing--that she doesn't care twopence about the man. What
woman with any brains could?" "There's no accounting for women's tastes or actions at any time," said
Monck. "She liked him well enough to marry him." Tommy made an indignant sound. "She was in a mood to marry any one. She'd probably have married you if you'd asked her." Monck made an abrupt movement as if he had lost his balance, but he
returned to his former position immediately. "Think so?" he said in a
voice that sounded very ironical. "Then possibly she has had a lucky
escape. I might have been moved to ask her if she had remained free much
longer." "I wish to Heaven you had!" said Tommy bluntly. And again Monck uttered his short, sardonic laugh. "Thank you, Tommy,"
he said. There fell a silence between them, and a hot draught eddied up through
the parched compound and rattled the scorched twigs of the creeping rose
on the verandah with a desolate sound, as if skeleton hands were feeling
along the trellis-work. Tommy suppressed a shudder and got to his feet. In the same moment Monck spoke again, deliberately, emotionlessly, with
a hint of grimness. "By the way, Tommy, I've a piece of news for you. That letter I had from my brother this, evening contained news of an
urgent business matter which only I can deal with. It has come at a
rather unfortunate moment as Barnes, the policeman, brought some
disturbing information this evening from Khanmulla and the Chief wanted
to make use of me in that quarter. They are sending a Mission to make
investigations and they wanted me to go in charge of it." "Oh, man!" Tommy's eyes suddenly shone with enthusiasm. "What a
chance!" "A chance I'm not going to take," rejoined Monck dryly. "I applied for
leave instead. In any case it is due to me, but Dacre had his turn
first. The Chief didn't want to grant it, but he gave way in the end. You boys will have to work a little harder than usual, that's all." Tommy was staring at him in amazement. "But, I say, Monck!" he
protested. "That Mission business! It's the very thing you'd most enjoy. Surely you can't be going to let such an opportunity slip!" "My own business is more pressing," Monck returned briefly. Then Tommy remembered the stricken look that he had surprised on his
friend's face that evening, and swift concern swallowed his
astonishment. "You had bad news from Home! I say, I'm awfully sorry. Is
your brother ill, or what?" "No. It's not that. I can't discuss it with you, Tommy. But I've got to
go. The Chief has granted me eight weeks and I am off at dawn." Monck
made as if he would turn inwards with the words. "You're going Home?" ejaculated Tommy. "By Jove, old fellow, it'll be
quick work." Then, his sympathy coming uppermost again, "I say, I'm
confoundedly sorry. You'll take care of yourself?" "Oh, every care." Monck paused to lay an unexpected hand upon the lad's
shoulder. "And you must take care of yourself, Tommy," he said. "Don't
get up to any tomfoolery while I am away! And if you get thirsty, stick
to lime-juice!" "I'll be as good as gold," Tommy promised, touched alike by action and
admonition. "But it will be pretty beastly without you. I hate a lonely
life, and Stella will be stuck at Bhulwana for the rest of the hot
weather when they get back." "Well, I shan't stay away for ever," Monck patted his shoulder and
turned away. "I'm not going for a pleasure trip, and the sooner it's
over, the better I shall be pleased." He passed into the room with the words, that room in which Stella had
sat on her wedding-eve, gazing forth into the night. And there came to
Tommy, all-unbidden, a curious, wandering memory of his friend's face on
that same night, with eyes alight and ardent, looking upwards as though
they saw a vision. Perplexed and vaguely troubled, he thrust her letter
away into his pocket and went to his own room. CHAPTER VI

THE GARDEN


The Heaven of the Orient! It was a week since Stella had penned those
words, and still the charm held her, the wonder grew. Never in her life
had she dreamed of a land so perfect, so subtly alluring, so
overwhelmingly full of enchantment. Day after day slipped by in what
seemed an endless succession. Night followed magic night, and the spell
wound closer and ever closer about her. She sometimes felt as if her
very individuality were being absorbed into the marvellous beauty about
her, as if she had been crystallized by it and must soon cease to be in
any sense a being apart from it. The siren-music of the torrent that dashed below their camping-ground
filled her brain day and night. It seemed to make active thought
impossible, to dull all her senses save the one luxurious sense of
enjoyment. That was always present, slumbrous, almost cloying in its
unfailing sweetness, the fruit of the lotus which assuredly she was
eating day by day. All her nerves seemed dormant, all her energies
lulled. Sometimes she wondered if the sound of running water had this
stultifying effect upon her, for wherever they went it followed them. The snow-fed streams ran everywhere, and since leaving Srinagar she
could not remember a single occasion on which they had been out of
earshot of their perpetual music. It haunted her like a ceaseless
refrain, but yet she never wearied of it. There was no thought of
weariness in this mazed, dream-world of hers. At the beginning of her married life, so far behind her now that she
scarcely remembered it, she had gone through pangs of suffering and
fierce regret. Her whole nature had revolted, and it had taken all her
strength to quell it. But that was long, long past. She had ceased to
feel anything now, but a dumb and even placid acquiescence in this
lethargic existence, and Ralph Dacre was amply satisfied therewith. He
had always been abundantly confident of his power to secure her
happiness, and he was blissfully unconscious of the wild impulse to
rebellion which she had barely stifled. He had no desire to sound the
deeps of her. He was quite content with life as he found it, content to
share with her the dreamy pleasures that lay in this fruitful
wilderness, and to look not beyond. He troubled himself but little about the future, though when he thought
of it that was with pleasure too. He liked, now and then, to look
forward to the days that were coming when Stella would shine as a
queen--his queen--among an envious crowd. Her position assured as his
wife, even Lady Harriet herself would have to lower her flag. And how
little Netta Ermsted would grit her teeth! He laughed to himself
whenever he thought of that. Netta had become too uppish of late. It
would be amusing to see how she took her lesson. And as for his brother-officers, even the taciturn Monck had already
shown that he was not proof against Stella's charms. 