

E-text prepared by Rick Niles, John Hagerson, Charlie Kirschner, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations. See 13967-h.htm or 13967-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/3/9/6/13967/13967-h/13967-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/3/9/6/13967/13967-h.zip)





NEDRA

by

GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON

Author of _Beverly of Graustark_, _Brewster's Millions_, etc. Illustrations by Harrison Fisher

1906







CONTENTS

Chapter

     I The Inspiration
    II The Beginning of Flight
   III The First Obstacle
    IV Ready for the Sea
     V Mr. and Miss Ridge Sail for Manila
    VI Henry Veath
   VII Glum Days for Mr. Ridge
  VIII The Beautiful Stranger
    IX Mr. Ridegway's Amazement
     X A Sharp Encounter
    XI Discovered
   XII The Harlequin's Errand
  XIII The Confession of Veath
   XIV One Love against Another
    XV The Wreck of the _Tempest Queen_
   XVI The Night and the Morning
  XVII Was the Sea Kind? XVIII The Wonderful Land
   XIX The First Day in the Wilds
    XX The Sign of Distress
   XXI Gods from the Sea
  XXII Flesh Succeeds Stone
 XXIII The Transformation Begins
  XXIV Nedra
   XXV The Coming of the Enemy
  XXVI On the Eve of Battle
 XXVII The Lady Tennys Reserve
XXVIII To the Victor Belongs--? XXIX The Other Surrender
   XXX Where There is No Minister
  XXXI The Wedding Ring
 XXXII The Cruiser _Winnetka_
XXXIII Apparitions
 XXXIV The Course of True Love
  XXXV History Repeats Itself




ILLUSTRATIONS


Lady Tennys (Frontispiece)

Grace Vernon

"'Lady Tennys ... You do not know how I thank God you are alive'"

"'Hey, there!' he yelled. 'How are you?'" "'They have killed you! Let them kill me!'" CHAPTER I

THE INSPIRATION

A tall young man sped swiftly up the wide stone steps leading to the
doorway of a mansion in one of Chicago's most fashionable avenues. After
pushing the button sharply he jerked out his watch and guessed at the
time by the dull red light from the panel in the door. Then he hastily
brushed from the sleeve of his coat the telltale billiard chalk, whose
presence reminded him that a general survey might be a wise precaution. He was rubbing a white streak from his trousers' leg when the door flew
open and the butler admitted him to the hallway. This personage relieved
him of his hat, coat and stick and announced:

"Miss Vernon is w'itin' for you, sir." "How the devil did I happen to let eight o'clock strike nine before I
knew it?" muttered the visitor. He was at the drawing-room door as he
concluded this self-addressed reproach, extending both hands toward the
young woman who came from the fireplace to meet him. "How late you are, Hugh," she cried, half resentfully. He bent forward
and kissed her. "Late? It isn't late, dear. I said I couldn't come before eight, didn't
I? Well, it's eight, isn't it?" "It's nearly seventy minutes past eight, sir. I've been waiting and
watching the hands on the clock for just sixty minutes." "I never saw such a perfect crank about keeping time as that
grandfatherly clock of yours. It hasn't skipped a second in two
centuries, I'll swear. You see, I was playing off the odd game with
Tom Ditton." He dropped lazily into a big arm-chair, drove his hands into his pockets
and stretched out his long legs toward the grate. "You might have come at eight, Hugh, on this night if no other. You knew
what important things we have to consider." Miss Vernon, tall and
graceful, stood before him with her back to the fire. She was
exceedingly pretty, this girl whom Hugh had kissed. "I'm awfully sorry, Grace; but you know how it is when a fellow's in a
close, hard game--especially with a blow-hard like Tom Ditton." "If I forgive you again, I'm afraid you'll prove a begging husband." "Never! Deliver me from a begging husband. I shall assert all kinds of
authority in my house, Miss Vernon, and you'll be in a constant state of
beggary yourself. You'll have to beg me to get up in the morning, beg
me to come home early every night, beg me to swear off divers things,
beg me to go to church, beg me to buy new hats for you, beg me to eat
things you cook, beg me to--"

"I suppose I shall even have to beg you to kiss me," she cried. "Not at all. That is one thing I'll beg of you. Lean over here, do, and
kiss me, please," he said invitingly. She placed a hand on each arm of the chair and leaned forward
obediently. Their lips met in a smile. "You lazy thing!" she exclaimed, her face slightly flushed. Then she
seated herself on one of the big arms, resting her elbow on the back of
the chair beside his head. For a few minutes both were silent, gazing at
the bright coals before them, the smile remaining upon their lips. Hugh
had been squinting between the toes of his shoes at a lonely black chunk
in the grate for some time before he finally spoke reflectively. "I can't afford to be lazy much longer, can I? Married men never have a
minute's rest, you know." "We're not married." "No; but we're going to be, let me remind you. We are to--to announce it
to-morrow night, are we not? It has come to that, you see." He did not
look very cheerful, nor did she. "Yes, I suppose it's imperative. That is why aunt is giving her
reception,--just to tell everybody we're engaged." "And then everybody will shake hands with us and say,
'Congratulations,' 'How lovely,' 'So surprised,' 'Howdy do,' and so
forth, and we say 'Thanks,' 'How good of you,' and more so forth. It
will be great!" Another silence and inspection of the fire, he taking an
altered aim at the black chunk. "Say!" he exclaimed, "wouldn't it do
just as well if I didn't put in an appearance to-morrow night? Your aunt
can announce the thing, as agreed, and you can tell 'em that I have a
sick uncle in Indianapolis, or have had my leg broken, or something like
that. Now, there's a good girl." "No," she said. "We fell in love because we couldn't help it, and this
is the penalty--an announcement party." "I'll never quite understand why _you_ fell," said he dubiously. "I think we were both too young to know," she responded. "It seems to me
that we've been in love ever since we were babies." "And it never hurts a baby to fall, you know," said he, with fine logic. "Of course it may cripple 'em permanently, but they don't know how it
happened." For some moments she caressed his brown hair in silence, the smile
lingering on her lips after it had left her eyes. His eyes closed
dreamily under the gentle touch of her fingers. "But, dear," she said,
"this is no joking matter. We have been engaged for nearly three months
and not a soul knows of it. We'll have to tell them how we managed to
keep it a secret for so long, and why,--and all that. And then
everybody will want to know who the bridesmaids are to be." "I believe I'd like to know that myself, as long as I'm to walk out of
the church ahead of them--provided I don't get lost." "Helen Grossman is to be the maid of honor. I believe I'll ask Jean
Robertson, Eloise Grant, Harriet Noble, Mayme McMurtrie, Ellen
Boyland--"

"Are we to have no guests?" "--and Effa Samuels. Won't it be a pretty set of girls?" "Couldn't be prettier." "And now, who is to be your best man?" "Well, I thought I'd have Tom Ditton," a trifle confusedly. "Tom Ditton! I thought you did not approve of him," she cried. "You
certainly did not when he came to see me so frequently." "Oh, he isn't such a bad sort, after all. I'd just as soon have him as
any one. Besides, he's an expert at it. If it was left to me, I'd much
rather sit behind the pulpit until it is all over. People won't miss me
while they've got you to look at." "We could be married so quietly and prettily if it were not for Aunt
Elizabeth," pouted Miss Vernon. "She insists on the church wedding, the
teas and receptions and--"

"All that sort of rot," he interjected, as if fearing she might not
express herself adequately. "I like your Aunt Elizabeth, Grace, but
she's--she's an awful--"

"Don't say it, Hugh. I know what you mean, but she can't help it. She
lives for society. She's perfectly crazy on the subject. Aunt Elizabeth
made up her mind we should be married in church. I have talked myself
black in the face--for your sake, dear--but it was like trying to
convert a stone wall. She is determined. You know what that means." "No wonder she's a widow," growled Hugh Ridgeway sourly. "Your father
served you a mighty mean trick, dear, when he gave you over to her
training. She might have spoiled you beyond redemption." "Poor father! He loathed display, too. I've no doubt that is why he left
me in her care until I reached the age of discretion. She was not always
like this. Father's money has wrought the change. Aunty was as poor as a
church mouse until father's death put her at the head of my
household--it was mine, Hugh, even if I was only six years old. You know
we could live pretty well on forty thousand a year." "You'll have a million or so when you're twenty-three, dear, and I'll
venture to say your aunt has saved something in all these years." "Oh, she had at least two hundred thousand dollars by the will. It has
cost her nothing to live all these years as my guardian and trustee. We
just had to do something with my income, you know." "I don't see why you should let this fortune stand in the way, Grace,"
growled he. "Haven't I enough of my own to take its place?" Hugh
Ridgeway had a million in his own right and he could well afford to be
unreasonable. "The will says you are not to have your father's money
until you are twenty-three years old. He evidently thought that was a
discreet age. You are not to marry before you have reached that age. I've been waiting for two years, Grace, and there still remains
two months--"

"One month and twenty-eight days, Hugh," she corrected. "And in the meantime we have to stay here and face all this ante-nuptial
wretchedness. It's sickening, Grace. We hate it, both of us. Don't we? I
knew you'd nod your head. That's why I can't help loving you. You've got
so much real good hard sense about things. If your confounded Aunt
Lizzie--Elizabeth, I should say--would let us get married as we
want--Hang it all, Grace, it's our affair anyhow, isn't it? Why should
we permit her to dictate? It's not her wedding. She's been married
twice; why can't she let well enough alone?" "She loves me, Hugh, after all," gently. "Well, so do I. I'm willing--not perfectly willing, of course--but
reasonably so, that we should wait until the twenty-third of May, but I
don't see why we should have the whole town waiting with us. Why don't
you assert yourself, dear, before it is too late? Once she pulls off
this announcement party, it's all off with peace of mind and contentment
so far as we are concerned. Of course, she'll be enjoying it, but what
of us? Are you afraid of her?" "Don't bully me, Hugh," she pleaded. He was contrite at once and
properly so. "She has lived for this time in her life. She never has
been crossed. I can't--honestly I can't go to her now and--quarrel. That's what it would mean--a quarrel. She would never give in." "Well, then, all hope is lost," he lamented. For some minutes Miss
Vernon gave no response, sitting upon the arm of the chair, a perplexed
pucker on her brow and a thoughtful swing to her slippered foot. These young people had known each other since earliest childhood. They
had played together with the same neighborly toys and they had grown up
together with the same neighborly ideals. Both had whirled in the social
swing until the sensation palled. The most exclusive set in town
regarded them as among its most popular members. It was quite natural
that their wedding should be the most brilliant and fashionable of the
year. Their position in society demanded the sacrifice, and her aunt saw
the urgent need for making it, notwithstanding the opposition of the
young people themselves. Ridgeway was a couple of years older than his affianced bride, and she
was just short of twenty-three. She, an orphan since early childhood,
lived with her widowed aunt--the social gourmand, to quote Hugh
Ridgeway--and he made his home next door with his sister and her
husband. The two brown stone houses were almost within arm's reach of
each other. She had painted dainty water colors for his rooms and he had
thrown thousands of roses from his windows into her boudoir. It had been
a merry courtship--the courtship of modern cavalier and lady fair. Ridgeway's parents died when he was in college, and he was left to
enlarge or despise a fortune that rated him as a millionaire and the
best catch in town--at that time. He was a member of the Board of Trade, but he was scarcely an operator
in the strictest sense of the word. If he won he whistled, if he lost he
whistled. It mattered little. Good looking, well dressed, generous to a
fault, tainted but moderately with scandal, he was a man whom everybody
admired, but who admired few in return--a perfectly natural and proper
condition if one but stops to consider. Miss Vernon was beautiful--of that there was no question. Tall, fair,
brown-eyed and full of the life that loves, she ruled the hearts of many
and--kept her hand for one. Her short, gay life had been one of luxury
and ease. She had known few of its cares; its vicissitudes belonged to
the charities she supported with loyal persistency. Her aunt, society
mad, was her only mentor, her only guide. A path had been made for her,
and she saw no other alternative than to travel it as designed. A
careless, buoyant heart, full of love and tenderness and warmth, allowed
itself to be tossed by all of the emotions, but always sank back safely
into the path of duty and rectitude. It was not of sufficient moment to
combat her aunt's stubborn authority; it was so much easier to do her
own sweet will without conflict and then smile down on the consequences. Possibly it is true that she did not love her aunt. If that were the
case, she kept it well to herself. She could not have been blamed,
however, for disliking the dictator. Hugh Ridgeway was more or less
right when he said that no one in town admired the old lady. She was
hard, devoid of humor, wrapped up in her own selfishness; shrewd,
capable and resourceful. Her brother, on his deathbed, signed the
instrument which made this arrogant relative the arbiter of the girl's
future for many years to come. She was appointed guardian and trustee
until legal age was attained, and as such she was absolute in her power. The large fortune was to be held in trust by this aunt, Mrs. Torrence,
and the Hon. Stanley Goodland, until Grace was twenty-three years of
age. The income from the investments in bonds, real estate and
high-class securities was to be handled by Mrs. Torrence as she saw fit
in the effort to better the young woman's mental and social estate. To
do her justice, she performed the duties well and honorably, even though
her measure of human nature was not full to overflowing. Grace, with a
mind and heart of her own, undertook to cultivate human nature from her
own point of view after years of tolerance, and she succeeded so well
that her aunt was none the wiser. On one point, however, the paragon was so firm and unassailable that
Grace was obliged to confess failure to her lover, after weeks and weeks
of splendid argument. Her aunt forced an issue. The marriage of her
niece was to be brilliant to the verge of confusion and the ante-nuptial
season was to be one which the city should not forget while its promoter
lived to enjoy the emoluments. She knew she was making her niece
unhappy, but she argued that her niece was too deeply in love to
appreciate the value of opportunity. Besides, on her wedding day, Grace
Vernon would be twenty-three years of age, mistress of herself, her
fortune, and her husband's home. That day would end the reign of
Elizabeth Torrence. The arbiter was determined that the reign should end
in a blaze of glory. As for Grace and Hugh, they were to be married. That had been decided
upon by destiny years and years ago and ratified after Hugh had reached
an age of discretion. He said that twenty-five was the year of
discretion, if not of reason. After the first transports, each began to consider the importance of the
union, not only to themselves, but to the world at large. In their
reflective moments they realized that the marriage would be the most
wonderful event in the whole history of the homes of Vernon and
Ridgeway. Never before had a Vernon married a Ridgeway, and--vice versa. Therefore, the whole world would visit upon such a union its undivided
attention. That is the view all engaged people take of marriage. Miss Vernon had employed six weeks of argument in convincing Mr.
Ridgeway that a church wedding was imperative, although she admittedly
preferred the simpler form, where the minister conducts the ceremony in
the presence of two witnesses and a ring. Society demanded the
exhibition. Mr. Ridgeway warned her that he could not survive the ordeal
and would leave her a widow at the altar. Their difficulties had at last resolved themselves into that condition
which confronts every engaged pair; and they, like others, were
preparing to inform the world of their intentions. "There's no way out of it, Hugh," she finally sighed, "unless we decide
to give up the hope of getting married. That would break my heart," she
said, with her rarest smile. "This would be the most delightful period of my life if it were not for
that distressing announcement, the two months of purgatory between now
and the day of the wedding, and then the--calamity. I know it will be a
calamity. I can't get through it alive." "You poor boy! I wish we could have a quiet little Wedding. It would be
so sweet, wouldn't it, dear?" she said plaintively, wistfully. "But instead we are to have a hippodrome. Bah!" he concluded spitefully. "I wouldn't talk this way, dear, if I didn't know that you feel just as
I do about it. But," and here he arose wearily, "this sort of talk
isn't helping matters. It's a case of church against choice. To-morrow
night we'll tell 'em, and then we'll quit sleeping for two months." "There's only one way out of it that I can see. We might elope," she
said laughingly, standing before him and rubbing the wrinkles from
between his eyes. Gradually his gray eyes fell until they looked into hers of brown. A
mutual thought sprang into the eyes of each like a flash of light
plainly comprehensive. He seized her hands, still staring into her eyes,
and an exultant hope leaped to his lips, bursting forth in these words:

"By George!" "Oh, we couldn't," she whispered, divining his thought. "We can! By all that's good and holy, we'll elope!" Hugh's voice was
quivering with enthusiasm, his face a picture of relief. "Honestly, do you--do you think we could?" The girl's eyes were wide
with excitement, her cheeks burning. "Can we? What's to prevent? Will you do it, Grace--will you?" cried he. "What will everybody say?" "Let 'em say. What do we care? Won't it be the greatest lark that ever
happened? You're the smartest woman in the world for thinking of it." "But I wasn't in earnest," she protested. "But you are now--we both are. Listen: We can slip away and get married
and nobody will be the wiser and then, when we come back, we can laugh
at everybody." "And get our pictures in the papers." "Then, by Hokey! we won't come back for five years! How's that? That'll
fool 'em, won't it? Say, this is great! Life is worth living after all. You'll go, won't you, Grace?" "I'd go to the end of the world with you, Hugh, but--"

"Oh, say you'll go! Now, listen to this," he urged, leaping to his feet. "We're going to be married anyway. We love one another. You can't be
married until the twenty-third of May. Lots of people elope--even in the
best of families. Why shouldn't we? If we stay here, we'll have to face
all the sort of thing we don't like--"

"Yes, but it won't take us two months to elope," she protested. "Sh! Don't speak above a whisper. Aunt Elizabeth has wonderful ears." "By Jove, darling, I believe you're two-thirds willing to try it on," he
whispered. "We must be sensible, Hugh. You see, I can't be married until the
twenty-third of May. Well, aunt is determined to announce the engagement
to-morrow night. Don't you see we couldn't elope until the twenty-second
at best, so we're doomed for two months of it in spite of ourselves. If
we get through the two months why should we elope at all? The worst
will be over?" "We can't escape the announcement party, I'll admit, but we can get
away from all the rest. My scheme is to elope to a place that will
require seven or eight weeks' time to reach. That's a fine way to kill
time, don't you see?" "My goodness!" "Why not? We can do as we like, can't we? And what a bully lark! I'd be
a downright cad to ask you to do this, Grace, if I didn't love you as I
do. We can use assumed names and all that!" "Oh, dear, dear, doesn't it sound lovely?" she cried, her cheeks red
with excitement. "The twenty-third of May isn't so far off after all, and it won't be
half so far if we're doing something like this. Will you go?" "If I only could! Do you really think we--we could?" "Whoop!" he shouted, as he seized her in his arms and rained kisses upon
her face. Then he held her off and looked into her eyes for a moment. Then he gave another whoop, kissed her, released her and did a wild
dance about the room. She stood beside the big chair, equally as
excited, laughing unrestrainedly at his hilarity. At last he brought up
at the other side of the chair. "But where could--I mean, shall we elope to?" she finally asked. "Anywhere. Bombay--Australia? Let's make it a stunner, dear--let's do it
up right." "And be married away over there? Oh, Hugh!" "Certainly. They can marry us over there as well as anywhere. Here,
I'll write the names of ten places and we'll draw one from my hat." He
sat down before a table and feverishly wrote upon the backs of a number
of his calling cards the names of as many cities, his companion looking
over his shoulder eagerly. Without ado he tossed the cards into a
jardiniere in lieu of a hat. "Draw!" he said tragically. "Wait a minute, Hugh. What have we to elope from? There isn't the
faintest objection in the world to our marriage." "There you go--backing out!" "No; I'm just as willing as you, but doesn't it seem rather absurd?" Her
hand hung over the jardiniere irresolutely. "It will be the greatest wedding tour that mortals ever took. Draw!" "Well, then, there's the card. Mercy!" she cried, dropping a card on the
table. "That's a long distance, Hugh." He picked up the card and his face paled a little as he read:

"Manila!" They sat down in the chair, she on the arm as before. After a moment he
glanced at her perplexed face, and asked:

"Are you afraid to go, Grace?" "It isn't that, Hugh. I was just wondering if we could reach Manila by
the twenty-third of May. It is unlucky to change the wedding day after
it has been once selected," she said softly. "Grace Vernon, you are an angel. I was afraid you would show the white
feather. It's a go, then--Manila! We can start next week and get there
in good time." "Next week? Impossible!" she cried in alarm. "Nonsense! You can get ready for a trip to New York, making your
preparations for a sea voyage secretly. I'll attend to all the details. It will be easy. No one will ever dream of what we are doing until we
cable the news home to your aunt." "Oh, I must tell Aunt Elizabeth!" "Not much! That's no way to elope. We must do it correctly or not at
all. Nobody is to know until we are really married. Can you get ready
in a week?" "If I really must." "Can't take any more time than that if we want to reach Manila in time
for the wedding." "Oh, Hugh! We can't go to Manila!" she cried, suddenly starting to her
feet in distress. "My Uncle Harry lives there. He is my mother's only
brother and he's been there since the close of the war. He's in the hemp
business. Oh, dear! How provoking!" she concluded almost piteously. "It's fine!" he exclaimed jubilantly. "We can be married at his home. I'm sure he'll be happy to have us. You can write and tell him we're
coming, dear. Lord!" with great relief in his voice, "that simplifies
matters immensely. Now we have an excuse for going to Manila. But above
all things don't cable to him. Write a nice long letter and mail it just
before we start." She was silent a long while, staring soberly at the blaze in the grate. "There'll be no bridesmaids and ushers over there, Hugh." "We don't want 'em." Silence for a few minutes. "In a week, did you say?" "Positively." "Well, I'll be ready," she said solemnly. He kissed her tenderly, lovingly, pressed her cold hand and said
encouragingly:

"We'll meet in New York next Monday afternoon. Leave everything to me,
dear. It will be much pleasanter to go by way of London and it will help
to kill a good deal of time." "Hugh," she said, smiling faintly, "I think we're proving that father
was right. I can't possibly arrive at the age of discretion until I am
twenty-three and past." CHAPTER II

THE BEGINNING OF FLIGHT

Mr. Ridgeway paced back and forth outside the iron gates in the Grand
Central Station on the afternoon of April 1st, 190--, a smile of
anticipation and a frown of impatience alternating in his fresh, young
face. Certain lines of care seemed to have disappeared since we saw him
last, nearly a week ago, and in their stead beamed the light of a
new-found interest in life. Now and then he took from his pocket a
telegram; spectators stared amusedly at him as he read and reread:

DETROIT, MICHIGAN, March 81, 190--. To H.B. Ridge:

Got away safely. Meet me Forty-second Street, New York, to-morrow at
three. Feel awfully queer and look a fright. Sympathetic lady, next
compartment, just offered condolences for loss of my husband. What are
the probabilities of storm? Be sure and find out before we start. SISTER GRACE. "Isn't that just like a girl!" he muttered to himself. "Where else would
Forty-second Street be but New York! London?" They had decided to travel as brother and sister and to adopt Ridge as
the surname. Hugh had taken passage for Liverpool on the liner _Saint
Cloud_, to sail on the second, having first examined the list of
passengers to ascertain if there were any among them who might know him
or his companion in the adventure. The list was now complete, and he,
assured that there was no danger of recognition, felt the greatest
weight of all lifted from his mind. He had also considerately inquired into the state of the weather and
learned that it promised well for the voyage. The whole affair was such
a glorious lark, such an original enterprise, that he could scarcely
restrain himself in his exhilaration from confiding in his chance hotel
acquaintances. Purposely, the night before, he had gone to an hotel where he was
unknown, keeping under cover during the day as much as possible. According to the prearranged plan, they were to go aboard ship that
evening, as the sailing hour was early in the morning. He was waiting for her train. Every now and then his glance would shoot
through the throng of people, somewhat apprehensively, as if he feared,
instead of hoped, that some one might be there. This searching glance
was to determine whether there might be any danger of Chicago or New
York acquaintances witnessing the arrival of the person for whom he
waited. Once he recognized a friend and dodged quickly behind a knot of
people, escaping notice. That is why he audibly muttered:

"Thank Heaven!" Every nerve was tingling with excitement; an indescribable desire to
fly, to shout, to race down the track to meet the train, swept through
him. His heart almost stopped beating, and he felt that his face was
bloodless. For the twentieth time in the last two hours Ridgeway looked
at his watch and frowningly exclaimed:

"Only five after two! Nearly an hour to wait!" He sat down for a moment, only to arise the next and walk to the board
announcing the arrival of trains. Almost immediately one pulled into the
station. Perceiving a bystander--one of the sort that always give the
impression of being well-informed--he inquired casually where it
was from. "Chicago," was the ready answer. "Great Scott! Lucky I came early! Grace's idea of time--oh, well, only
the small matter of an hour out of the way." Quickly he sprang forward, taking up a good position to watch. First
came a man hurriedly and alone. A bunch of people followed him. Hugh
peered unsuccessfully here and there among them. Another bunch; she was
not in it, and he began to feel a trifle nervous. Now came the
stragglers and he grew bewildered. Finally, the last one--a woman hove
in sight. With renewed hope he scanned her approach. It was not Grace! His brain was in a whirl. What could have happened? Where was she? Again he jerked out the telegram. "Meet me Forty-second Street, New York, at three," he read half-aloud. "Nothing could be plainer," he mused in perplexity. "No train at three;
another at--she must be on a later one." "What time is the next Chicago train due?" he inquired anxiously at the
Information Bureau. "Five-thirty, sir," politely answered the official. "Five-thirty!" he repeated disgustedly. Again the telegram was brought out and this time shown. "On what road did you expect the lady?" was the question put with
well-simulated interest that every few minutes was practised on
different individuals. "Road?" Hugh stared blankly at his questioner. "What road?" Then, like a
flash, the solution of the problem pierced his brain. "What an ass I am!" he burst out, and added sheepishly: "West Shore!" Purposely avoiding the other's face for confirmation of his
self-depreciatory exclamation, together with its unmistakable expression
of professional tolerance for the imbecilities of mankind, Hugh looked
at the time. It was two-thirty. Tearing out of the station, he hailed
a cab. Inside, and moving fast, he winced a little as he thought of his late
strictures on girls and their ways. What a shame to have abused Grace,
when he himself had told her to take the Wabash as essential to their
plan. What a blooming idiot he was! New York in the telegram meant, of
course, the New York side of the river. He recovered his equanimity; the
world was serene again. With a sharp pull the cabman brought up at the ferry and Hugh took his
stand among those waiting for the boat to disgorge its load of
passengers. At that moment a thought struck him, and acting on it, he called out:

"Hi! porter!" "Here, sir!" "Where can I get some note paper?" "All right, sir!" and in an instant a pad of paper was forthcoming. Hugh took out his pencil and wrote a brief note. Then, in a low voice,
he said:

"Here, porter! I want you to do something for me." "Yes, sir!" "I'll make it worth your while, but I won't hare you attending to any
one else--understand?" The porter demonstrated with a nod his perfect comprehension of what was
required, and there followed from his employer a minute description
of the lady. "Young, slight, tall, fair, black hat and veil, and--"

"In mourning, sir, undoubtedly?" "Mourning! No, of course not. Cannot a lady wear black without being in
mourning?" Hugh expostulated sharply. "Certainly, sir; but generally--"

Whatever costume the worldly-wise porter would have approved as _en
regle_ for a lady, under conditions to his thinking so obviously
indiscreet, the description was forestalled by the ingenuous young man,
who, dissimilarly apprehensive and oblivious to the innuendo, was heard
to grumble:

"What on earth is the matter with people? Everybody seems to delight in
painting this most delectable of undertakings in the most funereal
colors!" and went on anxiously: "You're sure you won't miss, her?" With an indulgent smile for the youth and inexperience of his patron,
and glancing surreptitiously at the size of the bill in his hand, the
attendant calmly announced that there was not the faintest possibility
of an error. He took his position a little to the right of and behind
Hugh, like an adjutant at dress parade. Through the ferry rushed the
weary, impatient travellers. Owing to the place Hugh had taken at one
side of the run, Grace, at first, did not perceive him. Anxiety, almost
fright, showed in her face; there passed through her a thrill of
consternation at the thought that perhaps he had not received her
telegram. The tense figure clasped the travelling-bag convulsively, and
her brown eyes flashed a look of alarm over the waiting throng. Another
moment and their gaze met; a voice ringing with happiness assailed her;
her heart throbbed again, and the blood rushed back to her
troubled face. Hugh started forward. "Hello, old man!" came suddenly from out of the crowd, and two heavy
bags plunked down on the floor; two strong hands grabbed Hugh by the
shoulders and their owner cried out boisterously: "What in the name of
all the gods are you doing here in New York?" Hugh's heart was in his mouth. His blood froze within him. For, shaking
him with the embrace of a playful bear, was his old friend McLane
Woods--his chum at Princeton. Dazed, and not daring to look up, the entangled man made a wild,
imploring gesture to the porter The latter caught it, stepped forward
and placed the note in the girl's hands. "In case I am held up, go to the Astor. Will follow," were the words she
read quickly. With ready wit and only one stealthy glance at the two
men, Grace speedily followed in the wake of the too obsequious porter,
who placed her in a cab. "To the Astor!" was the transferred instruction. The cabman, quick to
note the ambiguity in the direction given, prepared, with the subtlety
of his kind, for a long drive downtown. However, the little comedy had not quite escaped attention. There was a
note of banter in the strident voice that again addressed Hugh, the
speaker accompanying it with a resounding slap on the back. "Congratulations in order, old man? Come--you're caught--own up! Who is
she?" This with a crony-like dig in the ribs. "Runaway match, eh?" At the other's greeting, Ridgeway promptly assured himself that all was
lost, and was about to return the welcome as best he could, when the
danger in the final words checked him, compelled a subterfuge. Assuming a stony glare, an unnatural twist of the mouth, the "old man"
turned his bewildered glance upon the speaker, allowing it to resolve
itself into a sickening show of reproachfulness, and said in a voice
that almost made its owner laugh, it was so villainously artificial:

"You have the best of me, sir!" An amazed expression came over the face of Mr. Woods. His glowing smile
dwindled into an incredulous stare. "Don't you know me, Hugh?" he finally demanded, half indignantly. "I do not, sir. My name is not Hugh, by the way. It is evident that you
mistake me for some one else," answered Mr. Ridgeway solemnly and
gutturally. "Do you mean to say--oh, come now, old man, don't stand up there and try
to make a monkey of me. When did you get in?" cried Woods. "Pardon me," sharply responded the other, "but I must insist that you
are mistaken. I am Dr. James Morton of Baltimore. The resemblance must
be remarkable." Woods glared at Hugh, perfectly dumb with amazement. He passed his hand
over his eyes, cleared his throat a time or two, but seemed completely
at a loss for words to express himself. "Are you in earnest?" he stammered. "Are you not Hugh Ridgeway of
Princeton, ninety--" but Hugh interrupted him politely. "Assuredly not. Never was at Princeton in my life. Yale. Will you give
me your name and the address of your friend, please? By Jove, I'd like
to hunt him up some time!" Hugh was searching in his pockets as if for a
pencil and memorandum-book and waiting for his old chum to give him
his name. "Well, of all the--" muttered Woods, looking into the other's face
penetratingly. "I never heard of anything like it. My name is McLane
Woods, and the man who looks like you is Hugh Ridgeway of Chicago. I--I'll be hanged if it isn't too strange to be true." "Very strange, indeed," smiled Hugh, striving to maintain the expression
he had assumed at the beginning--a very difficult task. "But this isn't all. At Newburg, I boarded the train, and happening to
go through, I saw some one that I could have sworn was a Miss Vernon,
whom I met when visiting Ridgeway in Chicago. I started to speak to her;
but she gave me such a frigid stare that I sailed by, convinced that I
was mistaken. Two such likenesses in one day beats my time. Doesn't seem
possible, by George! it doesn't," exclaimed the puzzled New Yorker, his
eyes glued to the countenance of the man before him, who, by the way,
had almost betrayed himself at the mention of Miss Vernon's name. A
thrill of admiration ran through him when Woods announced his reception
by the clever girl who was running away with him. "I'll do my best to meet this Mr. Ridgeway. I am frequently in Chicago,"
said he. "Glad to have met you, Mr. Woods, anyhow. If you are ever in
Baltimore, hunt me up. I am in the E--- Building." "With pleasure, doctor; how long will you be in New York?" "I am going away to-morrow." "Won't you come with me to my club?" began Woods, but Hugh interrupted
by beckoning to the omnipresent porter. "Thanks! Much obliged! Like to, you know, but have an appointment!" And,
shaking his hand, "Good-by!" "Good-by!" gasped Woods reluctantly, as if desiring one word more. But
Hugh, with a grin on his face that awakened renewed expectations on the
part of the porter, was making, stiff and straight, for the
baggage-room. Once, looking back over his shoulder, he saw that Woods
was standing stock still; and again, with another smile, he watched his
mystified friend slowly depart. "Now, then, my man, tell me quickly--you gave her the note? What did she
do? Where did she go? Out with it--why don't you speak?" "All right, sir. Everything's all right. The lady has gone to the
hotel," replied the man as soon as Hugh gave him a chance to answer. "Good. Find me another cab, quick. And here," handing him a dollar. Meanwhile, Grace Vernon, quite sanguine of soon being with Hugh, was
approaching the lower part of the city, reasoning, quite logically, that
a downtown hotel was selected on account of the probable absence of the
ultra-fashionable set. There, their secret would be safe,--and also they
would be nearer the steamer. Arriving at her destination, Grace dismissed the disappointed cabman,
and entered the ladies' waiting-room, where she rang for the clerk. "Is there a Mr. Ridge staying here?" she asked of him with an assurance
that, she flattered herself, was admirably assumed. "No such person with us, madam. Were you expecting him?" "Why, yes," she replied, a little confused. "He should be here any
minute." And to his inquiry as to whether she would require anything in the
meantime, there came a reply in the negative and he departed. With a sigh of relief at being alone, she crossed over to a desk and
busied herself in writing a long letter. This accomplished, she arose,
moved over to the window and looked out. The waiting-room faced the main
artery of the city, and below her was the endless stream of humanity. Endeavoring to check a slight feeling of uneasiness that was fast coming
over her at Hugh's unexpected non-appearance, she tried to concentrate
her thoughts on the panorama of the streets. A half hour passed. Then,
in spite of herself, nervousness assailed her. What could be keeping
him? Had he met with an accident? Or, could she have made a mistake in
the name under which he was to register--could he be waiting for her all
the time? Back and forth, to and fro the girl paced. Thoroughly alarmed
and in spite of a sense of mortification at such an undertaking, she
again interviewed the clerk. "Will it be convenient for me to see the register?" she inquired, forced
to conceal her embarrassment. The clerk obligingly brought the book and eagerly she scanned the list. Unfortunately, for her, there was no mistake. Nothing like Ridgeway,
Ridge or Hugh's handwriting greeted her anxious eyes. A silence that seemed an inconceivably long one to the almost
overwrought girl was broken by the clerk asking would she register? Grace could hardly restrain her agitation. The critical moment had come. Something must be done. But what? Should she register and under what
name? Or, should she wait longer; and if not, where should she go? Finally, with a desperate effort, she looked imploringly at him, and
with heightened color, gasped:

"No, thank you; I'll wait a little longer for my--my--brother." It was out. The prevarication had been uttered, and Grace felt as if
she had committed a crime and punishment was at hand. Tears of distress
came to her eyes; the situation was becoming intolerable. It was just then that there came a shrill cry:

"Miss Ridge!" Grace remained immovable. The name she had inquired for a few minutes
ago was called without bringing a sign or change of expression to the
beautiful face, on which the wondering eyes of the clerk were fixed. He
started to speak, but was withheld by her impassibility. Again the same cry, and this time, the last word was accentuated. A boy
entered. As the clerk, slightly raising his eyebrows, turned toward her, Grace
gave a little start; an enlightened glance shot from her eyes; the
significance of the call gradually dawned upon her. "I am Miss Ridge!" came excitedly from her trembling lips, the hot blood
crimsoning her cheeks. "A telephone--"

"For me?" she asked uneasily. "From Mr. Ridge; wants you to wait," finished the boy. "Thank you! Oh, thank you!" The girl beamed her relief on the staring
bell-boy. And, the message having been delayed, the grateful words were
hardly spoken before Hugh, almost distracted, rushed into the room. Regardless of appearances or consequences, the tall young fellow seized
her and kissed her in a fashion that would have brought terrible
rebuke, under any other circumstance, and which certainly caused the
clerk to consider this Mr. Ridge the most demonstrative brother that in
a long experience in hotel life he had ever encountered. When Hugh held
her at arm's length to give his admiring gaze full scope, he saw tears
of joy swimming in her eyes. Her voice quivered as she sighed:

"I should have died in another moment!" "You are the dearest girl in all the world!" Then he explained to her
the cause of the delay. After getting rid of Woods, he had rushed to the
Hotel Astor, where he expected to find her waiting for him. All
inquiries as to whether any lady answering to her description had been
seen there had resulted in failure. He would have been there yet,
growing angrier all the while, had not a gentleman who had overheard his
troubles suggested that he telephone the Astor House, in the hope that
the lady might be waiting there. At the end of this recital of his vexatious experience Hugh seized her
travelling-bag, and together they made their way out of the hotel. "Oh, Hugh!" cried Grace, hanging back a little. "What did Mr. Woods say
to you? What did you say? Do you know he tried to speak with me on
the train?" "Honestly, I don't remember, dear--sister. He's the most muddled man,
though, in New York, I'll bet a dollar. And now that I think of it, it
wasn't absolutely necessary; but when he guyed me about a runaway
match, it paralyzed me, and I had to do something, so I swore that I had
never heard of such a person as Ridgeway." Grace was too astounded to speak. "Then he told me of meeting you," he continued, "and that settled it. Poor old Woods! What a trump you were, Grace!" "You wouldn't have thought so if you could have seen me when I first
boarded the train. My! I was blue! Fortunately, I did not see him until
we were nearly here. Hugh Ridgeway--Ridge, I mean--do you know what I
did? It will make you very angry!" she said as they waited for a cab. "Nothing could make me angry." This was said ten seconds later, when
they were inside the cab and a nervous, smiling young woman at his side
was squeezing his arm expressively. "Driver!" he called out, "go
uptown--anywhere--through the park until I tell you to stop!" and
turning to her, added: "We'll have a bit of dinner somewhere and then go
aboard. Now, what did you do?" "Well," she went on, "I actually tossed up a quarter in the compartment
to see whether I should go on or turn back." "You did? Really? Who won?" "I did," she answered naively. "No; I did. I am beginning to feel too lucky to be awake. And would you
have turned back if you had lost? Would you have left me here with all
this anticipation to dispose of?" he cried. "If it came tails, I was to turn back. It came tails." "What! And you came anyhow?" "Well, you see, after the first flip I concluded to make it two out of
three trials. So I flipped again, Hugh, and it came tails. Then I made
it three out of five. That was only fair, wasn't it?" "Certainly. Seven out of thirteen or eleven out of twenty, just so you
won." "I tossed that coin seventeen times, and the final count was nine for
New York and eight for Chicago. The train had started, so I didn't flip
again. Wasn't it a narrow majority, dear?" "If it were not for appearing ridiculous, I would kiss you seventeen
times right here. Oh, how about your baggage--luggage, I mean?" he cried. "The transfer man will take them to the dock. I have ten big ones--new
steamer trunks. You'll never know how much trouble I had in getting them
packed and out of the house." "Ten! Great Scott! I have but two!" "Don't worry, dear. You can pack some of your things in mine--coming
home, of course," she said laughingly. "Great, isn't it?" he chuckled. "Nobody on earth ever did anything like
it. But before I forget it, how did you leave your aunt?" "Poor Aunt Elizabeth! She will be so disappointed. I promised to do a
lot of shopping for her. But she's well and can endure the delay, I
fancy. To prepare her for the shock, I told her that I might stay East
for a couple of weeks, perhaps longer. She does not suspect a thing, but
she was awfully cut up about my leaving at this time." "I'm glad you quieted Aunt Elizabeth, for it would be just like her to
send detectives after us." Both laughed as he whispered this to her. As
the cab whirled away she said:

"What happy fools we are!" "Sit back, quick! Cover your face," he suddenly cried. "What--who is it?" she giggled. "We just passed a policeman, and he looked rather hard at the windows,"
he cried, with a broad grin. "Oh, you ninny!" "Well, we must elope with fear and trembling or it won't count," he
cried. "Is there anything you have to buy before we sail? If there is,
we must attend to it now, because we leave at a most outlandish hour in
the morning." Miss Vernon looked alarmed for a moment, the real enormity of the
escapade striking her with full force. But she smiled in the next and
said that she could make a few necessary purchases in a few minutes if
he would direct the cabman. "It's a long way to Manila, you know," she
said. "Hugh, I noticed in the paper the other day that this is the
season for typhoons, or whatever you call them, in the Indian Ocean. I
looked them up in the dictionary. There's a picture of one in action,
and they must be dreadful things. One of them could tear our ship to
pieces in a minute, I should judge. Wouldn't it be awful--if--if--"

"Pshaw! Typhoons are nothing! It's a simoon that you're thinking about,
and they happen only on the desert. In what dictionary did you
see that?" "Webster's, of course." Mr. Ridgeway did not continue along that line, but mentally resolved to
look into Webster's on the sly, and, furthermore, to ask the captain of
the _Saint Cloud_ to tell him all he knew about typhoons. "Have him drive to Arnold's, Hugh." She left him in the carriage in front of the store, promising to be gone
not more than five minutes. Ten minutes passed and Hugh resignedly
lighted a cigarette, stepping to the sidewalk to smoke. After he had
smoked four cigarettes a perceptible frown approached his brow. He
looked at the big doorway, then at his watch, then at the imperturbable
cabman. Her five minutes had grown to half an hour. His good nature was
going to the bad and he was about to follow in her footsteps when
suddenly he saw her emerging from the store. "I had to mail a letter," she explained as they drove off. "Oh, Hugh,
I'm so nervous, I know that I will do something silly before we sail." "A letter?" "Yes; I mailed one letter to Uncle Harry before I left Chicago, you
know, but I forgot something important, so I had to write again to-day." "What did you forget?" "I forgot to tell him you were coming out on the same ship and would
look after me as if I were your own sister, Hugh." Strange to say, neither of them smiled as their hands met in a warm,
confident clasp. CHAPTER III

THE FIRST OBSTACLE

A drizzling rain began to fall and an overcast sky, cold and bleak,
dropped lower and lower until it covered the dripping park like a sombre
mantle. The glass in the hood of the hansom kept out the biting rain,
but the drear approach of a wet evening was not to be denied. For nearly
three hours Hugh and Grace had been driven through the park and up the
Riverside, killing time with a nervous energy that was beginning to
tell. The electric lights were coming on; pavements glistened with the
glare from the globes; tiny volcanoes leaped up by thousands as the
patting, swishing raindrops flounced to the sidewalks. "Isn't it dismal?" murmured Grace, huddling closer to his side. "I
thought the weather man said it was to be nice? It's horrid!" "I think it's lovely!" said he beamingly. "Just the sort of weather for
a mystery like this. It begins like a novel." "I hope it ends as most of them do, commonplace as they are. Anyhow, it
will be fun to dine at Sherry's. If any one that we know should see us,
we can say--"

"No, dear; we'll not attempt to explain. In the face of what is to
follow, I don't believe an accounting is necessary. This is to be our
last dinner in good old America for many a day, dear. We'll have a good
one, just for history's sake. What kind of a bird will you have?" "A lark, I think," she said with a bright smile. "Oh, one doesn't eat the lark for dinner. He's a breakfast bird, you
know. One rises with him. Bedsides, we should try to keep our lark in
fine feather instead of subjecting it to the discomforts of a gridiron
in some--"

His observations came to an abrupt close as both he and his companion
pitched forward violently, barely saving themselves from projection
through the glass. The hansom had come to a sudden stop, and outside
there was a confused sound of shouting with the crunching of wood and
the scraping of wheels. The horse plunged, the cab rocked sharply and
then came to a standstill. "What is it?" gasped Grace, trying to straighten her hat and find her
bag at the same time. Hugh managed to raise the glass and peer dazedly
forth into the gathering night. A sweep of fine rain blew into their
faces. He saw a jumble of high vehicles, a small knot of men on the
sidewalk, gesticulating hands on every side, and then came the oaths and
sharp commands. "We've smashed into something!" he said to her. "Some one is hurt! Confound these reckless drivers! Why can't they
watch where--"

"Come down off that!" shouted a voice at the wheel, and he saw a huge
policeman brandishing his club at the driver above. "Come down, I say!" "Aw, the d---- fool backed into me," retorted the driver of Hugh's
hansom. His fare noticed that they were at the Sherry corner, and the
usual crowd of seven-o'clock cabs was in full evidence. "That'll do--that'll do," roared the officer. "I saw the whole thing. Ye've cracked his head, you dirty cur." Two men were holding the horse's head and other policemen were making
their way to the side of their fellow-officer. Evidently something
serious had happened. "What's the trouble?" Hugh called out to the officer. "You'll find out soon enough," answered the policeman. "Don't butt
in--don't butt in!" "Here, here, now!" exclaimed Mr. Ridgeway. "You've no right to talk like
that to--"

"Oh, I ain't, eh? Well, we'll see if somebody else has a right. You
dudes can't kill people and then get off with talk like that. Not much,
my Johnny. You go along, too, an' explain yer hurry to the captain." "But I've got a lady here--"

"Tush! tush! Don't chew the rag. Stay in there!" Other officers had dragged the driver from the cab, jostling him
roughly to the outer circle of wheels. The man was protesting loudly. Rain had no power to keep a curious crowd from collecting. Hugh,
indignant beyond expression, would have leaped to the ground had not a
second and superior officer stepped up and raised his hand. "Don't get down, sir," he said with gentle firmness. "I'm afraid you'll
have to go to the station for a few minutes." "But, confound it, officer--I have nothing to do with this row." "That may be true, sir. You can explain all that at the desk. We have to
get at the bottom of this. This is no place to argue." A moment later the hansom, with a bent axle, was hobbling its way down
the street engineered by bluecoats. Hugh, seeing that it was useless to
remonstrate, sank back in the seat and swore audibly. "Don't worry about it, Hugh," said a soft voice in his ear. "We can
explain, can't we?" "You can't explain anything to asses, Grace," he lamented, "especially
if they wear buttons." They lapsed into a mournful, regretful silence. For five full minutes the hansom wobbled painfully along and then pulled
up in front of a building which Hugh lugubriously recognized as a police
station. "We've got to make the best of it, dear. Did you ever hear of
such beastly luck? I'll see if they won't let me go in alone and square
things. You won't be afraid to sit out here alone for a few minutes,
will you? There's really nothing to be alarmed about. This driver of
ours is in trouble, that's all. We're not to blame. A word or two will
fix everything. I'll be out in a jiffy." But the bluecoats would not see it that way. Miss Vernon was compelled
to climb down from the seat and march indignantly into the desk
sergeant's presence. Hugh at once began to explain and to expostulate
against what he called an outrage. "What had we to do with it? The truth is, I don't know what has
happened," he was saying. "Neither do I," said the bewhiskered sergeant shortly. "Who are you,
sir?" "These people saw the whole thing, sir. They were in the hansom when
Bernhardt smashed him, an' this felly had ordered him to get to Sherry's
in five minutes if he had to kill some one," explained the officer who
had first addressed Hugh in the crowd. "That's a lie," cried Hugh. "I said if he had to kill the old plug. Who
is Bernhardt? What the deuce is it all about?" "I don't believe the gentleman saw the row," said the polite roundsman. "It happened in the crush there." "Somebody shall pay for this outrage," exclaimed Ridgeway. "It's beastly
to drag a lady and gentleman into a police station like common criminals
when they--"

"That will do, sir," commanded the sergeant sharply. "You'll talk when
you are asked to, sir." Turning to the patrolman, he asked, "Has that fellow been taken to the
hospital?" "The ambulance came up just as we left, sir." "Bernhardt says he didn't hit him. He says the guy fell off his own
cab." "Don't cry, dear," Hugh managed to whisper to Grace as they took the
seats designated by a brusque man in blue. "Never!" she whispered bravely. "It's a lark!" "Bravo! We'll have that bird yet--at Sherry's." Then he approached the
desk with determination in his eye. "Look here, officer, I demand
respectful attention. Whatever it was that happened between those
cabmen, I had nothing to do with it, and I am absolutely ignorant of the
trouble. We have a dinner engagement, and I want you to take our
statements, or whatever it is you want, and let us go our way." "What is your name?" shortly. "Why--er--that isn't necessary, is it?" floundered Hugh. "Of course it is. Name, please." "Will it get into the papers?" "That's nothin' to me. Will you answer now, or do you want to stay here
till mornin'?" "My name is Smith." "Place of residence?" "Brooklyn." "Who's the lady?" "My sister." "Step up here, lady, if you please!" Hugh felt the floor giving away beneath him. That Grace could not have
heard a word of the foregoing examination, he was perfectly aware. Vainly, and with a movement of his lips, he essayed to convey the name
she should answer. "Don't butt in, you!" was the instant warning given by the observant
officer, and then--

"Lady, what is _your_ name?" For a moment the question bewildered the girl. With considerable
misgiving she discerned that another occasion for prevarication was
unavoidable, and something like a sigh escaped her lips; but as suddenly
fear gave way to a feeling of elation. How clever Hugh would consider
her remembrance of his instructions! What felicity to extricate him from
this predicament! Alone, she would save the situation! Unblushingly, and with a glance at him for instant approval, she stepped
forward and pronounced jubilantly the alias agreed upon:

"Ridge--Miss Ridge is my name." A smothered exclamation of dismay burst from Hugh's lips. "Eh, what? Miss Ridge, and your brother's name--Smith?" ejaculated the
man of authority. For a brief moment there was a pause of embarrassment; and then with a
dazzling, bewitching smile directed at her questioner, she electrified
them both:

"Most assuredly. Mr. Smith is my half-brother." Hugh could have shouted for joy, as he watched the somewhat amused
discomfiture of the officer. "Where do you live?" "St. Louis," gasped she, with blind confidence in luck. "Oh, humph! Well, wait a minute," he said, and both were gratified to
see a good-natured grin on his face. "Buckley, see if there is a family
named Smith in Brooklyn with connection in St. Louis. Sit down, Miss
Ridge, please, and don't be worried. This is what we have to do. Your
driver slugged another of his kind and he's likely to die of the fall he
got. We'll have to use you as witnesses, that's all, an' we must have
you where we can put our hands on you in the mornin'. The captain will
be here in an hour or two and you can probably manage to give some kind
of bond for your appearance. People like you don't like to appear in
court, you see, so we've got to make sure of you." "But we must go to our--our dinner," she wailed so prettily that he
coughed to cover his official severity. "Can't be helped, ma'am. Duty, you know. The captain will soon be here. Would you like to telephone, sir?" Hugh stared and looked embarrassed. Who was there for him to talk to
over the 'phone? And that brought another ghastly thought to mind. Who
could he ask to give security for his or her appearance in the morning? He found words to say he would telephone to his friends, a bright idea
suddenly coming to the rescue. Grace looked her amazement and alarm as
he marched into the telephone booth. Bravely he called up Sherry's and,
with the sergeant listening, he sent word to the head waiter to inform
Mr. ---- (mentioning the name of a very prominent society leader) that
Mr. Smith and Miss Ridge were unavoidably detained and could not join
the party until quite late, if at all. He came from the booth very much
pleased with himself, and sat down beside Grace to await developments. "What are we to do?" she whispered. "Give me time to think, dear. I fooled him that time. Perhaps I can do
it again. Great bluff, wasn't it? What do you suppose Mr. ----
will think?" "But if they should insist upon holding us till morning," she cried, on
the verge of tears, trouble looming up like a mountain. "They won't dare do that. They'll probably send us to a hotel with a
plain-clothes man unless we give bond, but that's all. I'll try another
bluff and see how it works. There's no use kicking about it. We're not
in a position to stir up much of a row, you see, dear." He tried it when the captain came in unexpectedly a few minutes later,
and with the most gratifying results. He obtained consent to go with a
plain-clothes man to a nearby restaurant for a "bite to eat." In the
meantime he was to send a messenger boy with a note to an influential
friend in Brooklyn, requesting him to hurry over and give security for
their appearance. If this failed, they were to go to a hotel
under guard. "The only thing that sounds fishy about your story, Mr. Smith, is that
you say you are brother and sister," said the captain. "Driving all
afternoon in the park with your own sister? Queer." "She's from Missouri, you know," said Hugh with a fine inspiration. The
captain laughed, even though he was not convinced. "Now, Grace, dear," said Hugh as they waited for the cab to be called,
"our adventure is on in dead earnest. We have to give this plain-clothes
man the slip and get aboard the _Saint Cloud_ before they have time to
think. They won't look for us there and we're safe." "Hugh, I'm frightened half to death," she whispered. "Can we do it? Would it not be wiser to give up the whole plan, Hugh, and--"

"Oh, Grace!" he cried, deep regret in his voice. "What a cad I am to be
dragging you into all this sort of thing! Yes, dear. We'll give it up. We'll go back to Chicago. It's too much to ask of you. I'll--"

"No, no, Hugh! Forgive me. I'll be strong and firm. I wouldn't give it
up for all the world. I--I was just a bit weak for a second, you know. It does look pretty big and wild, dear,--all that is ahead of us. But,
after all, it's like any sea voyage, isn't it? Only we're going to be
married when it's over. We Wouldn't think anything of taking a trip to
Manila under ordinary circumstances, would we? It's all right, isn't
it?" He squeezed her hand cautiously but fervently. To their disgust the plain-clothes man took the seat opposite them in
the brougham, remarking as he did so that he had sense enough to get in
out of the rain. They had no opportunity to concoct a plan for escape,
and it was necessary for them to go on to the restaurant in Longacre
Square. It occurred to Hugh that it would be timely to explain why they
were not dressed for dinner. They were on their way to the hotel to
dress when the fracas took place. The plain-clothes man was not
interested. Evidently the authorities did not apprehend much trouble
from the two young people; their guardian performed his duties
perfunctorily and considerately. He even disappeared from view after
they entered the restaurant. "We'll have that bird," said Hugh, "before we do anything else. I'm
hungry. Haven't eaten since last night, dear. I've been too excited to
think of eating--or sleeping." In a quiet corner of the big cafe they had their bird and just enough
champagne to give them the courage that counts. With their heads close
together they planned and plotted until they forgot the rain that
pattered against the window panes, and dreariness turned to rosy
assurance. "Just a little nerve, dear," said he as they arose. "Do as I have told
you and trust to luck. It can't fail." The plain-clothes man was just outside the door. Scores of people were
hurrying past, umbrellas raised in the face of the drizzle. Down
Broadway the glare of lights was broken and left hazy in the fog like
rain. The sidewalks in the distance looked like a bobbing field of black
mushrooms, shiny and sleek. The air was chill with the wet shadows of a
night that hated to surrender to the light of man. "Where's the cab?" demanded Hugh. "Get it up here quick. I don't want to
keep my friend waiting at the station. Come in and have a drink,
officer. It's no fun standing around this kind of weather. No job for a
decent human being, I'd say. Especially when one's set to watch
respectable people and not criminals. This is a rattling good joke on
me--and my sister. I need about three good, stiff drinks? We'll go in
next door here. Get into the cab, Marian, We won't be inside
two minutes." If the plain-clothes man was willing to take the drink, all well and
good, but if he refused--but he did not refuse. He looked carefully
about, shivered appropriately, and said he "didn't care if he did." Grace urged them to hurry as she entered the cab and Hugh gave his
promise. Scarcely had the two men passed beyond the light screen doors
when Grace Vernon coolly stepped from the cab and hurriedly made her way
off through the crowd of umbrellas, first telling the driver to wait for
her in front of the drug store. A moment later she boarded a Broadway car, and excited, but intent only
on reaching a place where she could safely engage a cab to take her to
the dock. And all the time she was hoping and praying, not for herself,
but for the important young gentleman who was clicking his righteous
glass in a den of iniquity. CHAPTER IV

READY FOR THE SEA

Ridgeway, his nerves tense and his eyes gleaming, marched his thoroughly
chilled companion up to the bar. He manoeuvred so that the plain-clothes
man stood with his back toward the door, and he seemed to be in no
especial haste to attract the attention of the bartender. As they gave
their order for drinks, Hugh saw Grace, in his mind's eye, slipping from
the carriage and off into the crowd--and every fibre of his heart was
praying for success to attend her flight. He found himself talking
glibly, even volubly to the watcher, surprised that he could be doing it
with his mind so full of other thoughts. "Awful night to be out. I'd hate to have a job like yours," he was
rattling on, heaving intermittent breaths of relief as he saw the size
of the drink the other was pouring out for himself. 