



Produced by Suzanne Shell, Verity White and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







_Beyond the Rocks_


[Illustration: Rodolph Valentino, as Lord Bracondale and Elinor Glyn,
the author.] _Beyond the Rocks

A Love Story

by

Elinor Glyn

Author of
"Three Weeks"

With illustrations
From the Paramount Photo-Play

Produced by
Famous Players-Lasky Corp.

starring
Gloria Swanson with Rodolph Valentino

New York
The Macaulay Company_
Printed in the U.S.A.




ILLUSTRATIONS                                               FACING PAGE

Rodolph Valentino, as Lord Bracondale and Elinor Glyn, the
author                                                   _Frontispiece_

"She Wondered What Love Was--"                                        8

"Once Upon a Time There Was a Fairy Prince and Princess--"           96

What Could He Say to Her--                                          314




_Beyond the Rocks_




I


The hours were composed mostly of dull or rebellious moments during the
period of Theodora's engagement to Mr. Brown. From the very first she
had thought it hard that she should have had to take this situation,
instead of Sarah or Clementine, her elder step-sisters, so much nearer
his age than herself. To do them justice, either of these ladies would
have been glad to relieve her of the obligation to become Mrs. Brown,
but Mr. Brown thought otherwise. A young and beautiful wife was what he bargained for. To enter a family composed of three girls--two of the first family, one
almost thirty and a second very plain--a father with a habit of
accumulating debts and obliged to live at Bruges and inexpensive foreign
sea-side towns, required a strong motive; and this Josiah Brown found
in the deliciously rounded, white velvet cheek of Theodora, the third
daughter, to say nothing of her slender grace, the grace of a young
fawn, and a pair of gentian-blue eyes that said things to people in the
first glance. Poor, foolish, handsome Dominic Fitzgerald, light-hearted, debonair
Irish gentleman, gay and gallant on his miserable pension of a broken
and retired Guardsman, had had just sufficient sense to insist upon
magnificent settlements, certainly prompted thereto by Clementine, who
inherited the hard-headedness of the early defunct Scotch mother, as
well as her high cheek-bones. That affair had been a youthful
_mesalliance_. "You had better see we all gain something by it, papa," she had said. "Make the old bore give Theodora a huge allowance, and have it all fixed
and settled by law beforehand. She is such a fool about money--just like
you--she will shower it upon us; and you make him pay you a sum down as
well." Captain Fitzgerald fortunately consulted an honest solicitor, and so
things were arranged to the satisfaction of all parties concerned except
Theodora herself, who found the whole affair far from her taste. That one must marry a rich man if one got the chance, to help poor,
darling papa, had always been part of her creed, more or less inspired
by papa himself. But when it came to the scratch, and Josiah Brown was
offered as a husband, Theodora had had to use every bit of her nerve and
self-control to prevent herself from refusing. She had not seen many men in her nineteen years of out-at-elbows life,
but she had imagination, and the one or two peeps at smart old friends
of papa's, landed from stray yachts now and then, at out-of-the-way
French watering-places, had given her an ideal far, far removed from the
personality of Josiah Brown. But, as Sarah explained to her, such men could never be husbands. They
might be lovers, if one was fortunate enough to move in their sphere,
but husbands--never! and there was no use Theodora protesting this
violent devotion to darling papa, if she could not do a small thing like
marrying Josiah Brown for him! Theodora's beautiful mother, dead in the first year of her runaway
marriage, had been the daughter of a stiff-necked, unforgiving old earl;
she had bequeathed her child, besides these gentian eyes and wonderful,
silvery blond hair, a warm, generous heart and a more or less romantic
temperament. The heart was touched by darling papa's needs, and the romantic
temperament revolted by Josiah Brown's personality. However, there it was! The marriage took place at the Consulate at
Dieppe, and a perfectly miserable little bride got into the train for
Paris, accompanied by a fat, short, prosperous, middle-class English
husband, who had accumulated a large fortune in Australia, quite by
accident, in a comparatively few years. Josiah Brown was only fifty-two, though his head was bald and his figure
far from slight. He had a liver, a chest, and a temper, and he adored
Theodora. Captain Fitzgerald had felt a few qualms when he had wished his little
daughter good-bye on the platform and had seen the blue stars swimming
with tears. The two daughters left to him were so plain, and he hated
plain people about him; but, on the other hand, women must marry, and
what chance had he, poor, unlucky devil, of establishing his Theodora
better in life? Josiah Brown was a good fellow, and he, Dominic Fitzgerald, had for the
first time for many years a comfortable balance at his bankers, and
could run up to Paris himself in a few days, and who knows, the American
widow, fabulously rich--Jane Anastasia McBride--might take him
seriously! Captain Dominic Fitzgerald was irresistible, and had that fortunate
knack of looking like a gentleman in the oldest clothes. If married for
the third time--but this time prosperously, to a fabulously rich
American--his well-born relations would once more welcome him with open
arms, he felt sure, and visions of the best pheasant shoots at old
Beechleigh, and partridge drives at Rothering Castle floated before his
eyes, quite obscuring the fading smoke of the Paris train. "A pretty tough, dull affair marriage," he said to himself, reminded
once more of Theodora by treading on a white rose in the station. "Hope
to Heavens Sarah prepared her for it a bit." Then he got into a _fiacre_
and drove to the hotel, where he and the two remaining Misses Fitzgerald
were living in the style of their forefathers. Josiah Brown's valet, Mr. Toplington, who knew the world, had engaged
rooms for the happy couple at the Grand Hotel. "We'll go to the Ritz on
our way back," he decided, "but at first, in case there's scenes and
tears, it's better to be a number than a name." Mademoiselle Henriette,
the freshly engaged French maid, quite agreed with him. The Grand, she
said, was "_plus convenable pour une lune de Miel_--" Lune de Miel! II


It was a year later before Theodora saw her family again. A very severe
attack of bronchitis, complicated by internal catarrh, prostrated Josiah
Brown in the first days of their marriage, and had turned her into a
superintendent nurse for the next three months; by that time a winter at
Hyeres was recommended by the best physicians, and off they started. Hyeres, with a semi-invalid, a hospital nurse, and quantities of
medicine bottles and draught-protectors, is not the ideal place one
reads of in guide-books. Theodora grew to hate the sky and the blue
Mediterranean. She used to sit on her balcony at Costebelle and gaze at
the olive-trees, and the deep-green velvet patch of firs beyond, towards
the sea, and wonder at life. She longed to go to the islands--anywhere beyond--and one day she read
_Jean d'Agreve_; and after that she wondered what Love was. It took a
mighty hold upon her imagination. It seemed to her it must mean Life. It was the beginning of May before Josiah Brown thought of leaving for
Paris. England would be their destination, but the doctors assured him a
month of Paris would break the change of climate with more safety than
if they crossed the Channel at once. Costebelle was a fairyland of roses as they drove to the station, and
peace had descended upon Theodora. She had fallen into her place, a
place occupied by many wives before her with irritable, hypochondriacal
husbands. She had often been to Paris in her maiden days; she knew it from the
point of view of a cheap boarding-house and snatched meals. But the
unchecked gayety of the air and the _facon_ had not been tarnished by
that. She had played in the Tuilleries Gardens and watched Ponchinello
at the Rond Point, and later been taken once or twice to dine at a cheap
cafe in the Bois by papa. And once she had gone to Robinson on a coach
with him and some aristocratic acquaintances of his, and eaten luncheon
up the tree, and that was a day of the gods and to be remembered. But now they were going to an expensive, well-managed private hotel in
the Avenue du Bois, suitable to invalids, and it poured with rain as
they drove from the Gare de Lyon. [Illustration: "She Wondered What Love Was."] All this time something in Theodora was developing. Her beautiful face
had an air of dignity. The set of her little Greek head would have
driven a sculptor wild--and Josiah Brown was very generous in money
matters, and she had always known how to wear her clothes, so it was no
wonder people stopped and turned their heads when she passed. Josiah Brown possessed certainly not less than forty thousand a year,
and so felt he could afford a carriage in Paris, and any other fancy he
pleased. His nerves had been too shaken by his illness to appreciate the
joys of an automobile. Thus, daily might be seen in the Avenue des Acacias this ill-assorted
pair, seated in a smart victoria with stepping horses, driving slowly up
and down. And a number of people took an interest in them. Towards the middle of May Captain Fitzgerald arrived at the Continental,
and Theodora felt her heart beat with joy when she saw his handsome,
well-groomed head. Oh yes, it had been indeed worth while to make papa look so prosperous
as that--so prosperous and happy--dear, gay papa! He was about the same age as her husband, but no one would think of
taking him for more than forty. And what a figure he had! and what
manners! And when he patted her cheek Theodora felt at once that thrill
of pride and gratification she had always experienced when he was
pleased with her, from her youngest days. She was almost glad Sarah and Clementine should have remained at Dieppe. Thus she could have papa all to herself, and oh, what presents she would
send them back by him when he returned! Josiah Brown despised Dominic Fitzgerald, and yet stood in awe of him as
well. A man who could spend a fortune and be content to live on odds and
ends for the rest of his life must be a poor creature. But, on the other
hand, there was that uncomfortable sense of breeding about him which
once, when Captain Fitzgerald had risen to a situation of dignity during
their preliminary conversations about Theodora's hand, had made Josiah
Brown unconsciously say "Sir" to him. He had blushed and bitten his tongue for doing it, and had blustered and
patronized immoderately afterwards, but he never forgot the incident. They were not birds of a feather, and never would be, though the
exquisite manners of Dominic Fitzgerald could carry any situation. Josiah was not altogether pleased to see his father-in-law. He even
experienced a little jealousy. Theodora's face, which generally wore a
mask of gentle, solicitous meekness for him, suddenly sparkled and
rippled with laughter, as she pinched her papa's ears, and pulled his
mustache, and purred into his neck, with joy at their meeting. It was that purring sound and those caressing tricks that Josiah Brown
objected to. He had never received any of them himself, and so why
should Dominic Fitzgerald? Captain Fitzgerald, for his part, was enchanted to clasp his beautiful
daughter once more in his arms; he had always loved Theodora, and when
he saw her so quite too desirable-looking in her exquisite clothes, he
felt a very fine fellow himself, thinking what he had done for her. It was not an unnatural circumstance that he should look upon the idea
of a dinner at the respectable private hotel, with his son-in-law and
daughter, as a trifle dull for Paris, or that he should have suggested a
meal at the Ritz would do them both good. "Come and dine with me instead, my dear child," he said, with his grand
air. "Josiah, you must begin to go out a little and shake off your
illness, my dear fellow." But Josiah was peevish. Not to-night--certainly not to-night. It was the evening he was to take
the two doses of his new medicine, one half an hour after the other, and
he could not leave the hotel. Then he saw how poor Theodora's face fell,
and one of his sparks of consideration for the feelings of others came
to him, and he announced gruffly that his wife might go with her father,
if she pleased, provided she crept into her room, which was next door to
his own, without the least noise on her return. "I must not be disturbed in my first sleep," he said; and Theodora
thanked him rapturously. It was so good of him to let her go--she would, indeed, make not the
least noise, and she danced out of the room to get ready in a way Josiah
Brown had never seen her do before. And after she had gone--Captain
Fitzgerald came back to fetch her--this fact rankled with him and
prevented his sleep for more than twenty minutes. "My sweet child," said Captain Fitzgerald, when he was seated beside his
daughter in her brougham, rolling down the Champs-Elysees, "you must not
be so grateful; he won't let you out again if you are." "Oh, papa!" said Theodora. They arrived at the Ritz just at the right moment. It was a lovely
night, but rather cold, so there were no diners in the garden, and the
crowd from the restaurant extended even into the hall. It was an immense satisfaction to Dominic Fitzgerald to walk through
them all with this singularly beautiful young woman, and to remark the
effect she produced, and his cup of happiness was full when they came
upon a party at the lower end by the door; prominent, as hostess, being
Jane Anastasia McBride--the fabulously rich American widow. In a second of time he reviewed the situation; a faint coldness in his
manner would be the thing to draw--and it was; for when he had greeted
Mrs. McBride without gush, and presented his daughter with the air of
just passing on, the widow implored them with great cordiality to leave
their solitary meal and join her party. Nor would she hear of any
refusal. The whole scene was so novel and delightful to Theodora she cared not at
all whether her father accepted or no, so long as she might sit quietly
and observe the world. Mrs. McBride had perceived immediately that the string of pearls round
Mrs. Josiah Brown's neck could not have cost less than nine thousand
pounds, and that her frock, although so simple, was the last and most
expensive creation of Callot Soeurs. She had always been horribly
attracted by Captain Fitzgerald, ever since that race week at Trouville
two summers ago, and fate had sent them here to-night, and she meant to
enjoy herself. Captain Fitzgerald acceded to her request with his usual polished ease,
and the radiant widow presented the rest of her guests to the two
new-comers. The tall man with the fierce beard was Prince Worrzoff, married to her
niece, Saidie Butcher. Saidie Butcher was short, and had a voice you
could hear across the room. The sleek, fair youth with the twinkling
gray eyes was an Englishman from the Embassy. The disagreeable-looking
woman in the badly made mauve silk was his sister, Lady Hildon. The
stout, hook-nosed bird of prey with the heavy gold chain was a Western
millionaire, and the smiling girl was his daughter. Then, last of all,
came Lord Bracondale--and it was when he was presented that Theodora
first began to take an interest in the party. Hector, fourteenth Lord Bracondale of Bracondale (as she later that
night read in the _Peerage_) was aged thirty-one years. He had been
educated at Eton and Oxford, served for some time in the Fourth
Lifeguards, been unpaid attache at St. Petersburg, was patron of five
livings, and sat in the House of Lords as Baron Bracondale; creation,
1505; seat, Bracondale Chase. Brothers, none. Sister living, Anne
Charlotte, married to the fourth Earl of Anningford. Theodora read all this over twice, and also even the predecessors and
collateral branches--but that was while she burned the midnight oil and
listened to the snorts and coughs of Josiah Brown, slumbering next door. For the time being she raised her eyes and looked into Lord
Bracondale's, and something told her they were the nicest eyes she had
ever seen in this world. Then when a voluble French count had rushed up, with garrulous apologies
for being late, the party was complete, and they swept into the
restaurant. Theodora sat between the Western millionaire and the Russian Prince, but
beyond--it was a round table, only just big enough to hold them--came
her hostess and Lord Bracondale, and two or three times at dinner they
spoke, and very often she felt his eyes fixed upon her. Mrs. McBride, like all American widows, was an admirable hostess; the
conversation never flagged, or the gayety for one moment. The Western millionaire was shrewd, and announced some quaint truths
while he picked his teeth with an audible sound. "This is his first visit to Europe," Princess Worrzoff said afterwards
to Theodora by way of explanation. "He is so colossally rich he don't
need to worry about such things at his time of life; but it does make me
turn to hear him." Captain Fitzgerald was in his element. No guest shone so brilliantly as
he. His wit was delicate, his sallies were daring, his looks were
insinuating, and his appearance was perfection. Theodora had every reason to tingle with pride in him, and the widow
felt her heart beat. "Isn't he just too bright--your father, Mrs. Brown?" she said as they
left the restaurant to have their coffee in the hall. "You must let me
see quantities of you while we are all in Paris together. It is a lovely
city; don't you agree with me?" And Theodora did. Lord Bracondale was of the same breed as Captain Fitzgerald--that is,
they neither of them permitted themselves to be superseded by any other
man with the object of their wishes. When they wanted to talk to a woman
they did, if twenty French counts or Russian princes stood in the way! Thus it was that for the rest of the evening Theodora found herself
seated upon a sofa in close proximity to the man who had interested her
at dinner, and Mrs. McBride and Captain Fitzgerald occupied two
arm-chairs equally well placed, while the rest of the party made general
conversation. Hector Bracondale, among other attractions, had a charming voice; it was
deep and arresting, and he had a way of looking straight into the eyes
of the person he was talking to. Theodora knew at once he belonged to the tribe whom Sarah had told her
could never be husbands. She wondered vaguely why, all the time she was talking to him. Why had
husbands always to be bores and unattractive, and sometimes even simply
revolting, like hers? Was it because these beautiful creatures could not
be bound to any one woman? It seemed to her unsophisticated mind that
it could be very nice to be married to one of them; but there was no use
fighting against fate, and she personally was wedded to Josiah Brown. Lord Bracondale's conversation pleased her. He seemed to understand
exactly what she wanted to talk about; he saw all the things she saw
and--he had read _Jean d'Agreve_!--they got to that at the end of the
first half-hour, and then she froze up a little; some instinct told her
it was dangerous ground, so she spoke suddenly of the weather, in a
banal voice. Meanwhile, from the beginning of dinner, Lord Bracondale had been saying
to himself she was the loveliest white flower he had yet struck in a
path of varied experiences. Her eyes so innocent and true, with the
tender expression of a fawn; the perfect turn of her head and slender
pillar of a throat; her grace and gentleness, all appealed to him in a
maddening way. "She is asleep to the whole of life's possibilities," he thought. "What
can her husband be about, and _what_ an intoxicatingly agreeable task to
wake her up!" He had lived among the world where the awaking of young wives, or old
wives, or any woman who could please man, was the natural course of the
day. It never even struck him then it might be a cruel thing to do. A
woman once married was always fair game; if the husband could not retain
her affections that was his lookout. Hector Bracondale was not a brute, just an ordinary Englishman of the
world, who had lived and loved and seen many lands. He read Theodora like an open book: he knew exactly why she had talked
about the weather after _Jean d'Agreve_. It thrilled him to see her soft
eyes dreamy and luminous when they first spoke of the book, and it
flattered him when she changed the conversation. As for Theodora, she analyzed nothing, she only felt that perhaps she
ought not to speak about love to one of those people who could never be
husbands. Captain Fitzgerald, meanwhile, was making tremendous headway with the
widow. He flattered her vanity, he entertained her intelligence, and he
even ended by letting her see she was causing him, personally, great
emotion. At last this promising evening came to an end. The Russian Prince, with
his American Princess, got up to say good-night, and gradually the party
broke up, but not before Captain Fitzgerald had arranged to meet Mrs.
McBride at Doucet's in the morning, and give her the benefit of his
taste and experience in a further shopping expedition to buy old
bronzes. "We can all breakfast together at Henry's," he said, with his grand
manner, which included the whole party; and for one instant force of
habit made Theodora's heart sink with fear at the prospect of the bill,
as it had often had to do in olden days when her father gave these royal
invitations. Then she remembered she had not been sacrificed to Josiah
Brown for nothing, and that even if dear, generous papa should happen to
be a little hard up again, a few hundred francs would be nothing to her
to slip into his hand before starting. The rest of the party, however, declined. They were all busy elsewhere,
except Lord Bracondale and the French Count--they would come, with
pleasure, they said. Theodora wondered what Josiah would say. Would he go? and if not, would
he let her go? This was more important. "Then we shall meet at breakfast to-morrow," Lord Bracondale said, as he
helped her on with her cloak. "That will give me something to look
forward to." "Will it?" she said, and there was trouble in the two blue stars which
looked up at him. "Perhaps I shall not be able to come; my husband is
rather an invalid, and--"

But he interrupted her. "Something tells me you will come; it is fate," he said, and his voice
was grave and tender. And Theodora, who had never before had the opportunity of talking about
destiny, and other agreeable subjects, with beautiful Englishmen who
could only be--lovers--felt the red blood rush to her cheeks and a
thrill flutter her heart. So she quickened her steps and kept close to
her father, who could have dispensed with this mark of affection. "Dearest child," he said, when they were seated in the brougham, "you
are married now and should be able to look after yourself, without
staying glued to my side so much--it is rather bourgeois." Poor Theodora was crushed and did not try to excuse herself. "I am afraid Josiah won't go, papa dear," she said, timidly; "and in
case he does not allow me to either, I want you to have these few louis,
just for the breakfast. I know how generous you are, and how difficult
things have been made for you, darling." And she nestled to his side
and slipped about eight gold pieces, which she had fortunately found in
her purse, into his hand. Captain Fitzgerald was still a gentleman, although a good many edges of
his sensitive perceptions had been rubbed off. He kissed his daughter fondly while he murmured: "Merely a loan, my pet,
merely a loan. You were always a jewel to your old father!" Whenever her parent accused himself of being "old," Theodora knew he was
deeply touched, and her tender heart overflowed with gladness that she
was able to smooth the path of such a darling papa. "I will come and see you in the morning, my child," he said, as they
stopped at the door of her hotel, "and I will manage Josiah." So Theodora crept up to her apartment, comforted; and in the salon it
was she caught sight of the _Peerage_. Josiah Brown bought one every year and travelled with it, although until
he met the Fitzgerald family he had not known a single person connected
with it; but it pleased him to be able to look up his wife's name, and
to read that her mother was the daughter of a real live earl and her
father the brother of a baronet. "Hector! I like the name of Hector," were the last coherent thoughts
which floated through the brain of Theodora before sleep closed her
broad, white lids. Meanwhile, Lord Bracondale had gone on to sup at the Cafe de Paris, with
Marion de Beauvoison and Esclarmonde de Chartres; and among the diamonds
and pearls and scents and feathers he suddenly felt a burning disgust,
and a longing to be out again in the moonlight--alone with his thoughts. "Mais qu'as tu, mon vieux chou?" they said. "Ce bel Hector cheri--il a
un beguin pour quelqu'un--mais ce n'est pas pour nous autres!" III


Josiah Brown cut the top off his _oeuf a la coque_ with a knife at his
_premier dejeuner_ next day. The knife grated on the shell in a
determined way, and Theodora felt her heart sink at the prospect of
broaching the subject of the breakfast at the Cafe Henry. "I am so glad the rain has stopped," she said, nervously. "It was
raining when I woke this morning." "Indeed," replied Josiah. "And what kind of an evening did you pass with
that father of yours?" "A very pleasant one," said Theodora, crumbling her roll. "Papa met some
old friends, and we all dined together at the Ritz. I wish you had been
able to come, it might have done you good, it was so gay!" "I am not fit for gayety," said her husband, peevishly, scooping out
spoonfuls of yolk. "And who were the party, pray?" Theodora obediently enumerated them all, and the high-sounding title of
the Russian Prince, to say nothing of the English lord and lady, had a
mollifying effect on Josiah Brown. He even remembered the name of
Bracondale--had he not been a grocer's assistant in the small town of
Bracondale for a whole year in his apprenticeship days? "Papa wants us to breakfast to-day with him at Henry's for you to meet
some of them," Theodora said, with more confidence. Josiah had taken a second egg and his frown was gone. "We'll see about it, we'll see about it," he grunted; but his wife felt
more hopeful, and was even unusually solicitous of his wants in the way
of coffee and marmalade and cream. Josiah was shrewd if he did happen to
be deeply self-absorbed in his health, and he noticed that Theodora's
eyes were brighter and her step more elastic than usual. He knew he had bought "one of them there aristocrats," as his old aunt,
who had kept a public-house at New Norton, would have said. Bought her
with solid gold--he had no illusions on this subject, and he quite
realized if the solid gold had not been amassed out of England, so that
to her family he could be represented as "something from the
colonies--rather rough, but such a good fellow"--even Captain
Fitzgerald's impecuniosity and rapacity would not have risen to his
bait. He was also grateful to Theodora--she had been so meek always, and such
a kind and unselfish nurse. With his impaired constitution and delicate
chest he had given up all hopes of looking on her as a wife again, just
yet; but, as a nurse and an ornament--a peg to hang the evidences of his
wealth upon--she was little short of perfection. He could have been
frantically in love with her if she had only been the girl from the
station bar in Melbourne. Josiah Brown was not a bad fellow. By the time Mr. Toplington advanced in his dignified way with the
accurately measured tonic on a silver tray and the single acid drop to
remove the taste, Josiah Brown had decided to go and partake food with
his father-in-law at Henry's. If he had been good enough to entertain
the Governor of Australia, he was quite good enough for Russian princes
or English lords, he told himself. Thus it was that Captain Fitzgerald,
who came in person in a few minutes to indorse his invitation, found an
unusually cordial reception awaiting him. "I am too delighted, my dear Josiah," he said, "that you have decided to
come out of your shell. Moping would kill a cat; and I shall order you
the plainest chicken and souffle aux fraises." "Josiah can eat almost anything, papa. I don't think you need worry
about that," said Theodora, who hoped to make her husband enjoy himself. And then Captain Fitzgerald left to meet his widow. All the morning, while she walked up and down under the trees in the
Avenue du Bois beside her husband, who leaned upon her arm, Theodora's
thoughts were miles away. She felt stimulated, excited, intensely
interested in the hour, afraid they would be late. Twice she answered at
random, and Josiah got quite cross. "I asked you which you considered would do me most good when we return
to England, to continue seeing Sir Baldwin once a week or to have Dr.
Wilton permanently in the house with us, and you answer that you quite
agree with me! Agree with what? Agree with which? You are talking
nonsense, girl!" Theodora apologized gently, and her white velvet cheeks became tinged
with wild roses. It seemed as if the victoria, with its high-steppers,
would never come and pick them up; and it must be at least quarter of an
hour's drive to Henry's. She did not understand where it was exactly,
but papa had said the coachman would know. If some one had told her, as Clementine certainly would have done had
she been there, that she was simply thus interested and excited because
she wished to see again Lord Bracondale, she would have been horrified. She never had analyzed sensations herself, and the day had not yet
arrived when she would begin to do so. At last they were rolling down the Champs-Elysees. The mass of chestnut
blooms in full glory, the tender green still fresh and springlike, the
sky as blue as blue, and every creature in the street with an air of
gayety--that Paris alone seems to inspire in the human race. It entered
into her blood, this rush of spring and hope and laughter and life, and
a radiant creature got out of the carriage at Henry's door. The two men were waiting for them--Lord Bracondale and the French
Count--her father and Mrs. McBride had not yet appeared. Theodora introduced them to her husband, and Lord Bracondale said:

"Mrs. McBride is always late. I have found out which is your father's
table; don't you think we might go and sit down?" And they did. Theodora got well into the corner of the velvet sofa, the
Count on one side and Lord Bracondale on the other, with Josiah beyond
the Count. They made conversation. The Frenchman was voluble and agreeable, and the
next ten minutes passed without incident. Josiah, not quite at ease, perhaps, but on the whole not ill-pleased
with his situation. The Count took all ups and downs as of the day's
work, sure of a good breakfast, sooner or later, unpaid for by himself. And Lord Bracondale's thoughts ran somewhat thus:

"She is even more beautiful in daylight than at night. She can't be more
than twenty--what a skin! like a white gardenia petal--and, good Lord,
what a husband! How revolting, how infamous! I suppose that old schemer,
her father, sold her to him. Her eyes remind one of forgotten fairy
tales of angels. Can anything be so sweet as that little nose and those
baby-red lips. She has a soul, too, peeping out of the blue when she
looks up at one. She reminds me of Praxiteles' Psyche when she looks
down. Why did I not meet her long ago? I believe I ought not to stay
now--something tells me I shall fall deeply into this. And what a
voice!--as gentle and caressing as a tender dove. A man would give his
soul for such a woman. As guileless as an infant saint, too--and
sensitive and human and understanding. I wish to God I had the strength
of mind to get up and go this minute--but I haven't--it is fate." "Oh, how naughty of papa," said Theodora, "to be so late! Are you very
hungry, Josiah? Shall we begin without them?" But at that moment, with rustling silks and delicate perfume, the widow
and Captain Fitzgerald came in at the door and joined the party. "I am just too sorry," the lady said, gayly. "It is all Captain
Fitzgerald's fault--he would try to restrain me from buying what I
wanted, and so it made me obstinate and I had to stay right there and
order half the shop." "How I understand you!" sympathized Lord Bracondale. "I know just that
feeling of wanting forbidden fruit. It makes the zest of life." He had foreseen the disposition of the party, and by sitting in the
outside corner seat at the end knew he would have Theodora almost _en
tete-a-tete_, once they were all seated along the velvet sofa beyond
Josiah Brown. "What do you do with yourself all the time here?" he asked, lowering his
voice to that deep note which only carries to the ear it is intended
for. "May one ever see you again except at a chance meal like this?" "I don't know," said Theodora. "I walk up and down in the side allees of
the Bois in the morning with my husband, and when he has had his sleep,
after dejeuner, we drive nearly all the afternoon, and we have tea, at
the Pre Catalan and drive again until about seven, and then we come in
and dine, and I go to bed very early. Josiah is not strong enough yet
for late hours or theatres." "It sounds supernaturally gay for Paris!" said Lord Bracondale; and then
he felt a brute when he saw the cloud in the blue eyes. "No, it is not gay," she said, simply. "But the flowers are beautiful,
and the green trees and the chestnut blossoms and the fine air here, and
there is a little stream among the trees which laughs to itself as it
runs, and all these things say something to me." He felt rebuked--rebuked and interested. "I would like to see them all with you," he said. That was one of his charms--directness. He did not insinuate often; he
stated facts. "You would find it all much too monotonous," she answered. "You would
tire of them after the first time. And you could if you liked, too,
because I suppose you are free, being a man, and can choose your own
life," and she sighed unconsciously. And there came to Hector Bracondale the picture of her life--sacrificed,
no doubt, to others' needs. He seemed to see the long years tied to
Josiah Brown, the cramping of her soul, the dreary desolation of it. Then a tenderness came over him, a chivalrous tenderness unfelt by him
towards women now for many a long day. "I wonder if I can choose my life," he said, and he looked into her
eyes. "Why can you not?" She hesitated. "And may I ask you, too, what you do
with yourself here?" He evaded the question; he suddenly realized that his days were not more
amusing than hers, although they were filled up with racing and varied
employments--while the thought of his nights sickened him. "I think I am going to make an immense change and learn to take pleasure
in the running brooks," he said. "Will you help me?" "I know so little, and you know so much," and her sweet eyes became soft
and dreamy. "I could not help you in any way, I fear." "Yes, you could--you could teach me to see all things with fresh eyes. You could open the door into a new world." "Do you know," she said, irrelevantly, "Sarah--my eldest sister--Sarah
told me it was unwise ever to talk to strangers except in the
abstract--and here are you and I conversing about our own interests and
feelings--are not we foolish!" She laughed a little nervously. "No, we are not foolish because we are not strangers--we never were--and
we never will be." "Are not strangers--?" "No--do you not feel that sometimes in life one's friendships begin by
antipathy--sometimes by indifference--and sometimes by that sudden
magnetism of sympathy as if in some former life we had been very near
and dear, and were only picking up the threads again, and to such two
souls there is no feeling that they are strangers." Theodora was too entirely unsophisticated to remain unmoved by this
reasoning. She felt a little thrill--she longed to continue the subject,
and yet dared not. She turned hesitatingly to the Count, and for the
next ten minutes Lord Bracondale only saw the soft outline of her
cheek. He wondered if he had been too sudden. She was quite the youngest person
he had ever met--he realized that, and perhaps he had acted with too
much precipitation. He would change his tactics. The Count was only too pleased to engage the attention of Theodora. He
was voluble; she had very little to reply. Things went smoothly. Josiah
was appreciating an exceedingly good breakfast, and the playful sallies
of the fair widow. All, in fact, was _couleur de rose_. "Won't you talk to me any more?" Lord Bracondale said, after about a
quarter of an hour. He felt that was ample time for her to have become
calm, and, beautiful as the outline of her cheek was, he preferred her
full face. "But of course," said Theodora. She had not heard more than half what
the Count had been saying; she wished vaguely that she might continue
the subject of friendship, but she dared not. "Do you ever go to Versailles?" he asked. This, at least, was a safe
subject. "I have been there--but not since--not this time," she answered. "I
loved it: so full of memories and sentiment, and Old-World charm." "It would give me much pleasure to take you to see it again," he said,
with grave politeness. "I must devise some plan--that is, if you wish to
go." She smiled. "It is a favorite spot of mine, and there are some allees in the park
more full of the story of spring than your Bois even." "I do not see how we can go," said Theodora. "Josiah would find it too
long a day." "I must discuss it with your father; one can generally arrange what one
wishes," said Lord Bracondale. At this moment Mrs. McBride leaned over and spoke to Theodora. She had,
she said, quite converted Mr. Brown. He only wanted a little cheering up
to be perfectly well, and she had got him to promise to dine that
evening at Armenonville and listen to the Tziganes. It was going to be a
glorious night, but if they felt cold they could have their table inside
out of the draught. What did Theodora think about it? Theodora thought it would be a delicious plan. What else could she
think? "I have a large party coming," Mrs. McBride said, "and among them a
compatriot of mine who saw you last night and is dying to meet you." "Really," said Theodora, unmoved. Lord Bracondale experienced a sensation of annoyance. "I shall not ask you, Bracondale," the widow continued, playfully. "Just
to assert British superiority, you would try to monopolize Mrs. Brown,
and my poor Herryman Hoggenwater would have to come in a long, long
second!" Josiah felt a rush of pride. This brilliant woman was making much of his
meek little wife. Lord Bracondale smiled the most genial smile, with rage in his heart. "I could not have accepted in any case, dear lady," he said, "as I have
some people dining with me, and, oddly enough, they rather suggested
they wanted Armenonville too, so perhaps I shall have the pleasure of
looking at you from the distance." The conversation then became general, and soon after this coffee
arrived, and eventually the adieux were said. Mrs. McBride insisted upon Theodora accompanying her in her smart
automobile. "You leave your wife to me for an hour," she said, imperiously, to
Josiah, "and go and see the world with Captain Fitzgerald. He knows
Paris." "My dear, you are just the sweetest thing I have come across this side
of the Atlantic," she said, when they were whizzing along in her car. "But you look as if you wanted cheering too. I expect your husband's
illness has worried you a good deal." Theodora froze a little. Then she glanced at the widow's face and its
honest kindliness melted her. "Yes, I have been anxious about him," she said, simply, "but he is
nearly well now, and we shall soon be going to England." Mrs. McBride had not taken a companion on this drive for nothing, and
she obtained all the information she wanted during their tour in the
Bois. How Josiah Brown had bought a colossal place in the eastern
counties, and intended to have parties and shoot there in the autumn. How Theodora hoped to see more of her sisters than she had done since
her marriage. The question of these sisters interested Mrs. McBride a
good deal. For a man to have two unmarried daughters was rather an undertaking. What were their ages--their habits--their ambitions? Theodora told her
simply. She guessed why she was being interrogated. She wished to assist
her father, and to say the truth seemed to her the best way. Sarah was
kind and humorous, while Clementine had the brains. "And they are both dears," she said, lovingly, "and have always been so
good to me." Mrs. McBride was a shrewd woman, full of American quickness, lightning
deduction, and a phenomenal insight into character. Theodora seemed to
her to be too tender a flower for this world of east wind. She felt sure
she only thought good of every one, and how could one get on in life if
one took that view habitually! The appallingly hard knocks fate would
give one if one was so trusting! But as the drive went on that gentle
something that seemed to emanate from Theodora, the something of pure
sweetness and light, affected her, too, as it affected other people. She
felt she was looking into a deep pool of crystal water, so deep that she
could see no bottom or fathom the distance of it, but which reflected in
brilliant blue God's sky and the sun. "And she is by no means stupid," the widow summed up to herself. "Her
mind is as bright as an American's! And she is just too pretty and sweet
to be eaten up by these wolves of men she will meet in England, with
that unromantic, unattractive husband along. I must do what I can for
her." By the time she had dropped Theodora at her hotel the situation was
quite clear. Of course the girl had been sacrificed to Josiah Brown; she
was sound asleep in the great forces of life; she was bound to be
hideously unhappy, and it was all an abominable shame, and ought to have
been prevented. But Mrs. McBride never cried over spilled milk. "If I decide to marry her father," she thought, as she drove off, "I
shall keep my eye on her, and meanwhile I can make her life smile a
little perhaps!" IV


Theodora did not wonder why she felt in no exalted state of spirits as
she dressed for dinner. She seldom thought of herself at all, or what
her emotions were, but the fact remained there was none of the
excitement there had been over the prospect of breakfast. Her husband,
on the contrary, seemed quite fussy. "A devilish fine woman," he had described Mrs. McBride. "Acts like a
tonic upon me; does me more good than a pint of champagne!" "Is she not delightful?" agreed Theodora; "so very kind and gay. I am
sure the dinner will do you good, Josiah, and perhaps we might give one
in return. What do you say?" Josiah said, "Certainly!" He could give a meal with the best of them! They would consult that father of hers, who knew Paris so well, and ask
him to help them to arrange a regular "slap-up treat." And so they arrived at Armenonville. It was a divine night, quite warm,
and a soft three-quarter moon. Mrs. McBride had everything arranged to perfection. Their table was just
where it should be, the menu was all that heart of gourmet could desire,
and the company sparkling. Theodora found herself seated beside Mr. Harryman Hoggenwater and an
elderly Austrian, and before the _hors d'oeuvres_ were cleared away
both gentlemen had decided to make love to her. It was when the _bisque d'ecrevisses_ was being handed she became
conscious that, not two tables off, there was an empty one simply
arranged with flowers, and almost at the same instant Lord Bracondale
and his party arrived upon the scene. All Theodora's perceptions seemed to be sharpened. She knew without
turning her head the table was for them, and that they were advancing
towards it. She had felt their arrival almost before their automobile
stopped; and now she would not look up. A strange sensation, as of excitement, tingled through her. She longed
to ascertain if the woman was good-looking who made the third in this
party of three. She peeped eventually--with the corner of her eye. Lord
Bracondale had so placed his guests that he himself faced Theodora, and
the lady had her back turned to her. Thus Theodora's curiosity could not be gratified. "She is English," she decided; "that round shaped back always is--and
very well-bred looking, and not much taste in dress. I wonder if she is
old or young--and if that is the husband. Yes, he is unattractive--it
must be the husband--and oh, I wonder what they are talking about! Lord
Bracondale seems so interested!" And if she had known it was--

"Really, Monica, how fortunate to have secured you at short notice like
this," Lord Bracondale was saying. "I only found I had a free evening at
breakfast, and I met Jack on my way to the polo-ground just in the nick
of time." "We love coming," Mrs. Ellerwood replied. "For unsophisticated English
people it is a great treat. We go back on Saturday--every one will be
asking what is keeping you here so long." "My plans are vague," Lord Bracondale said, casually. "I might come back
any day, or I may stay until well into June--it quite depends upon how
amused I am. I rather love Paris." And to himself he was thinking--

"How I wish that atrocious woman over there with the paradise plume
would keep her hat out of the way. Ah, that is better! How lovely she
looks to-night! What an exquisite pose of head! And what are those two
damned foreigners saying to her, I wonder. Underbred brute, the
American, Herryman Hoggenwater! What a name! She is laughing--she
evidently finds him amusing. Abominably cattish of the widow not to ask
me. I wonder if she has seen me yet. I want to make her bow to me. Ah!" For just then magnetism was too strong for Theodora, and, in spite of
her determination, their eyes met. A thrill, little short of passion, ran through Lord Bracondale as he saw
the wild roses flushing her white cheeks--the exquisite flattery to his
vanity. Yes, she had seen him, and it already meant something to her. He raised his champagne glass and sipped a sip, while his eyes, more
ardent than they had ever been, sought her face. And Theodora, for her part, felt a flutter too. She was angry with
herself for blushing, such a school-girlish thing to do, Sarah had
always told her. She hoped he had not noticed it at that
distance--probably not. And what did he mean by drinking her health
like that? He--oh, he was--

"Now, truly, Mrs. Brown, you are cruel," Mr. Herryman Hoggenwater said,
pathetically, interrupting her thoughts. "I tell you I am simply longing
to know if you will come for a drive in my automobile, and you do not
answer, but stare into space." Theodora turned, and then the young American understood that for all her
gentle looks it would be wiser not to take this tone with her. He admired her frantically, he was just "crazy" about her, he told Mrs.
McBride later. And so now he exerted himself to please and amuse her
with all the vivacity of his brilliant nation. Theodora was enjoying herself. Environment and atmosphere affected her
strongly. The bright pink lights, the sense of night and the soft moon
beyond the wide open balcony windows, the scents of flowers, the gayety,
and, above all, the knowledge that Lord Bracondale was there, gazing at
her whenever opportunity offered, with eyes in which she, unlearned as
she was in such things, could read plainly admiration and unrest. It all went to her head a little, and she became quite animated and full
of repartee and sparkle, so that Josiah Brown could hardly believe his
eyes and ears when he glanced across at her. This his meek and quiet
mouse! His heart swelled with pride when Mrs. McBride leaned over and said to
him:

"You know, Mr. Brown, you have got the most beautiful wife in the world,
and I hope you value her properly." It was this daring quality in his hostess Josiah appreciated so much. "She's not afraid to say anything, 'pon my soul," he said to himself. "I
rather think I know my own possession's value!" he answered aloud, with
a pompous puffing out of chest, and a cough to clear the throat. The Austrian Prince on Theodora's right hand pleased her. He had a quiet
manner, and the freemasonry of breeding in two people, even of different
nations, drew her to talk naturally to him in a friendly way. He was a fatalist, he told her; what would be would be, and mortals like
himself and herself were just scattered leaves, like barks floating down
a current where were mostly rocks ahead. "Then must we strike the rocks whether we wish it or no?" asked
Theodora. "Cannot we help ourselves?" "Ah, madame, for that," he said, "we can strive a little and avoid this
one and that, but if it is our fate we will crash against them in the
end." "What a sad philosophy!" said Theodora. "I would rather believe that if
one does one's best some kind angel will guide one's bark past the rocks
and safely into the smooth waters of the pool beyond." "You are young," he said, "and I hope you will find it so, but I fear
you will have to try very hard, and circumstances may even then be too
strong for you." "In that case I must go under altogether," said Theodora; but her eyes
smiled, and that night at least such a possibility seemed far enough
away from her. The Austrian looked across at her husband. Such marriages were rare in
his country, and he had thought so too in England. He wondered what
their story could be. He wondered how soon she would take a lover--and
he realized how infinitely worth while that lover would find his
situation. He wished he were not so old. If she must break up her bark on the
rocks, he could take the place of steersman with pleasure. But he was a
courteous gentleman and he said none of these things aloud. Meanwhile, Lord Bracondale was not enjoying his dinner. For the first
time for several years he found himself jealous! He, unlike Theodora,
knew the meaning of every one of his sensations. "She is certainly interested in Prince Carolstein," he thought, as he
watched her; "he has a European reputation for fascination. She has not
looked this way once since the entrees. I wish I could hear what they
are talking about. As for that young puppy Hoggenwater, I would like to
kick him round the room! Lord, look how he is leaning over her! It
sickens me! The young fool!" Mrs. Ellerwood turned round in her seat and surveyed the room. They had
almost come to the end of dinner, and could move their chairs a little. She had the true Englishwoman's feeling when among foreigners--that they
were all there as puppets for her entertainment. "Look, Hector," she said--they were cousins--"did you ever see such a
lovely woman as that one over there among the large party, in the black
chiffon dress?" Then Hector committed a _betise_. "Where?" said he, his eyes persistently fixed in another direction. "There; you can't mistake her, she looks so pure white, and fair, among
all these Frenchwomen The one with the blue eyes and the lovely hat
with those sweeping feathers. She is exquisitely dressed, and both those
men look fearfully devoted to her. Can't you see? Oh, you are stupid!" "My dear Monica," said Jack Ellerwood, who joined rarely in the
conversation, "Hector has been sitting facing this way all through
dinner. He is a man who can appreciate what he sees, and I do not fancy
has missed much--have you, Hector?" and he smiled a quiet smile. Mrs. Ellerwood looked at Lord Bracondale and laughed. "It is I who am stupid," she said. "Naturally you have seen her all the
time, and know her probably. Are they cocottes, or Americans, or Russian
princesses, or what?--the whole collection?" "If you mean that large party in the corner, they are most of them
friends and acquaintances of mine," he said, rather icily--she had
annoyed him--"and they belong to the aristocracies of various nations. Does that satisfy you? I am afraid they are none of them demimondaines,
so you will be disappointed this time!" Mrs. Ellerwood looked at him; she understood now. "He is in love with the white woman," she thought; "that is why he was
so anxious to dine here to-night, when Jack suggested Madrid; that is
why he stays in Paris. It is not Esclarmonde de Chartres after all! How
excited Aunt Milly will be! I must find out her name." "She is a beautiful creature," said Jack Ellerwood, as if to himself,
while he carefully surveyed Theodora from his position at the side of
the table. Hector Bracondale's irritation rose. Relations were tactless, and he
felt sorry he had asked them. "You must tell me her name, Hector," pleaded Mrs. Ellerwood; "the very
white, pretty one I mean." "Now just to punish your curiosity I shall do no such thing." "Hector, you are a pig." "Probably." "And so selfish." "Possibly." "Why mayn't I know? You set a light to all sorts of suspicions." "Doubly interesting for you, then." "Provoking wretch!" "Don't you think you would like some coffee? The waiter is trying to
hand you a cup." Mrs. Ellerwood laughed. She knew there was no use teasing him further;
but there were other means, and she must employ them. Theodora had
become the pivot upon which some of her world might turn. The object of this solicitude was quite unconscious of the interest she
had created. She did not naturally think she could be of importance to
any one. Had she not been the youngest and snubbed always? The same thought came to her that was conjuring the brain of Lord
Bracondale: would there be a chance to speak to-night, or must they each
go their way in silence? He meant to assist fate if he could, but having
Monica Ellerwood there was a considerable drawback. Mrs. McBride's party were to take their coffee in one of the _bosquets_
outside, and all got up from their table in a few minutes to go out. They would have to pass the _partie a trois_, who were nearer the door. Monica would take her most searching look at them, Lord Bracondale
thought; now was the time for action. So as Mrs. McBride came past with
Captain Fitzgerald, he rose from his seat and greeted her. "You have been exceedingly mean," he whispered. "What are you going to
do for me to make up for it?" The widow had a very soft spot in her heart for "Ce beau Bracondale," as
she called him, and when he pleaded like that she found him hard to
resist. "Come and see me to-morrow at twelve, and we will talk about it," she
said. "To-morrow!" exclaimed Lord Bracondale; "but I want to talk to her
to-night!" "Get rid of your party, then, and join us for coffee," and the widow
smiled archly as she passed on. Theodora bowed with grave sweetness as she also went by, and most of the
others greeted Hector, while one woman stopped and told him she was
going to have an automobile party in a day or two, and she hoped he
would come. When they had all gone on Mrs. Ellerwood said:

"I wonder why Americans are so much smarter than we poor English? I
can't bear them as a nation though, can you?" "Yes," said Lord Bracondale. "I think the best friends I have in the
world are American. The women particularly are perfectly charming. You
feel all the time you are playing a game with really experienced
adversaries, and it makes it interesting. They are full of resource,
and you know underneath you could never break their hearts. I am not
sure if they have any in their own country, but if so they turn into the
most wonderful and exquisite bits of mechanism when they come to
Europe." "And you admire that." "Certainly--hearts are a great bore." "You were always a cynic, Hector; that is perhaps what makes you so
attractive." "Am I attractive?" "I can't judge," said Mrs. Ellerwood, nettled for a moment. "I have
known you too long, but I hear other women saying so." "That is comforting, at all events," said Lord Bracondale. "I always
have adored women." "No, you never have, that is just it. You have let them adore you, and
utterly spoil you; so now sometimes, Hector, you are insupportable." "You just said I was attractive." "I shall not argue further with you," said Mrs. Ellerwood, pettishly. "And I think we ought to be saying good-night, Hector," interrupted the
silent Jack. "We are making an early start for Fontainebleau to-morrow,
and Monica likes any amount of sleep." This did not suit Mrs. Ellerwood at all; but if Jack spoke seldom he
spoke to some purpose when he did, and she knew there was no use
arguing. So with a heart full of ungratified curiosity, she at last allowed
herself to be packed into Hector's automobile and driven away. "Of course he'll go and join that other party now, Jack! What _did_ you
make me come away for, you tiresome thing!" she said to her husband. "He has done me many a turn in the past," said Jack, laconically. "Then you think--?" But Jack refused to think. V


Theodora was sitting rather on the outskirts of the party in the
_bosquet_, her two devoted admirers still on either side of her. All the
chairs were arranged informally, and hers was against the opening, so
that it proved easy for Lord Bracondale to come up behind her
unperceived. She believed he had gone. She could not see distinctly from where she
was, but she had thought she saw the automobile whizzing by. She
recognized Mrs. Ellerwood's hat. An unconscious feeling of blankness
came over her. She grew more silent. A lady beyond the Prince spoke to him, and at that moment Mr.
Hoggenwater rose to put down her coffee-cup, and in this second of
loneliness a deep voice said in her ear:

"I could not go--I wanted to say good-night to you!" Then Theodora experienced a new emotion; she could not have told herself
what it was, but suddenly a gladness spread through her spirit; the
moon looked more softly bright, and her sweet eyes dilated and glowed,
while that voice, gentle as a dove's, trembled a little as she said:

"Lord Bracondale! Oh, you startled me!" He drew a chair and sat down behind her. "How shall we get rid of your Hogginheimer millionaire?" he whispered. "I feel as if I wanted to kill every one who speaks to you to-night." The half light, the moon, Paris, and the spring-time! Theodora spent the
next hour in a dream--a dream of bliss. Mrs. McBride, with her all-seeing eye, perceived the turn events had
taken. She was full of enjoyment herself; she had quite--almost
quite--decided to listen to the addresses of Captain Fitzgerald,
therefore her heart, not her common-sense, was uppermost this night. It could not hurt Theodora to have one evening of agreeable
conversation, and it would do Herryman Hoggenwater a great deal of good
to be obstacled; thus she expressed it to herself. That last success
with Princess Waldersheim had turned his empty head. So she called him
and planted him in a safe place by an American girl, who would know how
to keep him, and then turned to her own affairs again. The Prince was a man of the world, and understood life. So Theodora and
Lord Bracondale were left in peace. The latter soon moved his chair to a position where he could see her
face, rather behind her still, which entailed a slightly leaning over
attitude. They were beyond the radius of the lights in the _bosquet_. Lord Bracondale was perfectly conversant with all moves in the game; he
knew how to talk to a woman so that she alone could feel the strength of
his devotion, while his demeanor to the world seemed the least
compromising. Theodora had not spoken for a moment after his first speech. It made her
heart beat too fast. "I have been watching you all through dinner," he continued, with only a
little pause. "You look immensely beautiful to-night, and those two told
you so, I suppose." "Perhaps they did!" she said. This was her first gentle essay at
fencing. She would try to be as the rest were, gay and full of badinage. "And you liked it?" with resentment. "Of course I did; you see, I never have heard any of these nice things
much. Josiah has always been too ill to go out, and when I was a girl I
never saw any people who knew how to say them." She had turned to look at him as she said this, and his eyes spoke a
number of things to her. They were passionate, and resentful, and
jealous, and full of something disturbing. Thrills ran through poor
Theodora. His eyes had been capable of looking most of these things before to
other women, when he had not meant any of them, but she did not know
that. "Well," he said, "they had better not return or recommence their
compliments, because I am not in the mood to be polite to them
to-night." "What is your mood?" asked Theodora, and then felt a little frightened
at her own daring. "My mood is one of unrest--I would like to be away alone with you, where
we could talk in peace," and he leaned over her so that his lips were
fairly close to her ear. "These people jar upon me. I would like to be
sitting in the garden at Amalfi, or in a gondola in Venice, and I want
to talk about all your beautiful thoughts. You are a new white flower
for me, as different as an angel from the other women in the world." "Am I?" said she, in her tender tones. "I would wish that you should
always keep that good thought of me. We shall soon go our different
ways. Josiah has decided to leave next week, and we are not likely to
meet in England." "Yes, we are likely to meet--I will arrange it," he said. There was nothing hesitating about Hector Bracondale--his way with women
had always been masterful--and this quality, when mixed with a sudden
bending to their desires, was peculiarly attractive. To-night he was
drifting--drifting into a current which might carry him beyond his
control. It was now several years since he had been in love even slightly. His
position, his appearance, his personal charm, had all combined to spoil
a nature capable of great things. Life had always been too smooth. His
mother adored him. He had an ample fortune. Every marriageable girl in
his world almost had been flung at his head. Women of all classes with
one consent had done their best to turn him into a coxcomb and a beast. But he continued to be a man for all that, and went his own way; only as
no one can remain stationary, the crust of selfishness and cynicism was
perhaps thickening with years, and his soul was growing hidden still
deeper beneath it all. From the beginning something in Theodora had
spoken to the best in him. He was conscious of feelings of
dissatisfaction with himself when he left her, of disgust with the days
of unmeaning aims. He had begun out of idle admiration; he had continued from inclination;
but to-night it was _plus fort que lui_, and he knew he was in love. The habit of indulging any emotion which gave him pleasure was still
strong upon him; it was not yet he would begin to analyze where this
passion might lead him--might lead them both. It was too deliciously sweet to sit there and whisper to her sophistries
and reasonings, to take her sensitive fancy into new worlds, to play
upon her feelings--those feelings which he realized were as fine and as
full of tone as the sounds which could be drawn from a Stradivarius
violin. It was a night of new worlds for them both, for if Theodora had never
looked into any world at all, he also had never even imagined one which
could be so quite divine as this--this shared with her in the moonlight,
with the magic of the Tzigane music and the soft spring night. He had just sufficient mastery over himself left not to overstep the
bounds of respectful and deep interest in her. He did not speak a word
of love. There was no actual sentence which Theodora felt obliged to
resent--and yet through it all was the subtle insinuation that they were
more than friends--or would be more than friends. And when it was all over, and Theodora's pulses were calmer as she lay
alone on her pillow, she had a sudden thrill of fear. But she put it
aside--it was not her nature to think herself the object of passions. "I
would be a very silly woman to flatter myself so," she said to herself,
and then she went to sleep. Lord Bracondale stayed awake for hours, but he did not sup with
Esclarmonde de Chartres or Marion de Beauvoison. And the Cafe de
Paris--and Maxims--and the afterwards--saw him no more. Once again these houris asked each other, "Mais qu'est-ce qu'il a! Ce
bel Hector? Ou se cache-t-il?" VI


Before she went to bed in her hotel in the Rue de Rivoli, Monica
Ellerwood wrote to her aunt. "PARIS, _May 15th_. "MY DEAR AUNT MILLY,--We have had a delicious little week,
     Jack and I, quite like an old honeymoon pair--and to-day we ran
     across Hector, who has remained hidden until now. He is looking
     splendid, just as handsome and full of life as ever, so it does not
     tell upon his constitution, that is one mercy! Not like poor Ernest
     Bretherton, who, if you remember, was quite broken up by her last
     year. And I have one good piece of news for you, dear Aunt Milly. I
     do not believe he is so frantically wrapped up in this Esclarmonde
     de Chartres woman after all--in spite of that diamond chain at
     Monte Carlo. For to-night he took us to dine at
     Armenonville--although Jack particularly wanted to go to the
     Madrid--and when we got there we saw at once why! There was a most
     beautiful woman dining there with a party, and Hector never took
     his eyes off her the whole of dinner, Jack says--I had my back that
     way--and he got rid of us as soon as he could and went and joined
     them. Very young she looked, but I suppose married, from her pearls
     and clothes--American probably, as she was perhaps too well dressed
     for one of us; but quite a lady and awfully pretty. Hector was so
     snappish about it, and would not tell her name, that it makes me
     sure he is very much in love with her, and Jack thinks so too. So,
     dear Aunt Milly, you need have no more anxieties about him, as she
     can't have been married long, she looks so young, and so must be
     quite safe. Jack says Hector is thoroughly able to take care of
     himself, anyway, but I know how all these things worry you. If I
     can find out her name before I go I will, though perhaps you think
     it is out of the frying-pan into the fire, as it makes him no more
     in the mood to marry Morella Winmarleigh than before. Unless, of
     course, this new one is unkind to him. We shall be home on
     Saturday, dear Aunt Milly, and I will come round to lunch on Sunday
     and give you all my news. "Your affectionate niece,
                "MONICA ELLERWOOD." Which epistle jarred upon Hector's mother when she read it over coffee
at her solitary dinner on the following night. "Poor dear Monica!" she said to herself. "I wonder where she got this
strain from--her father's family, I suppose--I wish she would not be
so--bald." Then she sat down and wrote to her son--she was not even going to the
opera that night. And if she had looked up in the tall mirror opposite,
she would have seen a beautiful, stately lady with a puckered, plaintive
frown on her face. If a woman absolutely worships a man, even if she is only his mother,
she is bound to spend many moments of unhappiness, and Lady Bracondale
was no exception to the general rule. Hector had always gone his own
way, and there were several aspects of his life she disapproved of. These visits to Paris--his antipathy to matrimony--his boredom with
girls--such nice girls she knew, too, and had often thrown him
with!--his delight in big-game shooting in alarming and impossible
countries--and, above all, his absolute indifference to Morella
Winmarleigh, the only woman who really and truly in her heart of hearts
Lady Bracondale thought worthy of him, although she would have accepted
several other girls as choosing the lesser evil to bachelorhood. But
Morella Winmarleigh was perfection! She owned the enormous property
adjoining Bracondale; she was twenty-six years old, of unblemished
reputation, nice looking, and not--not one of those modern women who are
bound to cause anxieties. Under any circumstances one could count upon
Morella Winmarleigh behaving with absolute propriety. A girl born to be
a mother-in-law's joy. But Hector persistently remained at large. It was not that he openly
defied his mother--he simply made love to her whenever they were
together, twisted her round his finger, and was off again. "To see mother with Hector," Lady Annigford said, "is a wonderful sight. Although I adore him myself, I am not at the stage she is! She sits
there beaming on him exactly like an exceedingly proud and fond cat with
new kittens. He treats her as if she were a young and beautiful woman,
caresses her, pets her, pays not the least attention to anything she
says, and does absolutely what he pleases!" Hector and Lady Bracondale together had often made the women who were in
love with him jealous. When she had finished her letter the stately lady read it over
carefully--she had a certain tact, and Hector must be cajoled to return,
not irritated. Monica's epistle, in spite of that touch of vulgarity
which she had deplored, had held out some grains of comfort. She had
been getting really anxious over this affair with the--French person. Even to herself Lady Bracondale would not use any of the terms which
usually designate ladies of the type of Esclarmonde de Chartres. Since her brother-in-law Evermond had returned from Monte Carlo bringing
that disturbing story of the diamond chain, she had been on thorns--of
such a light mind and always so full of worldly gossip, Evermond! Hector had gone from Monte Carlo to Venice, and then to Paris, where he
had been for more than a month, and she had heard that men could become
quite infatuated and absolutely ruined by these creatures. So for him to
have taken a fancy to a married American was considerably better than
that. She had met several members of this nation herself in England, and
were they not always very discreet, with well-balanced heads! So
altogether the puckered frown soon left her smooth brow, and she was
able to resume the knitting of a tie she was doing for her son, with a
spirit more or less at rest, though she sighed now and then as she
remembered Morella Winmarleigh could not be expected to wait
forever--and her cherished vision of perfectly behaved, vigorously
healthy grandchildren was still a long way from being realized. For with
such a mother what perfect children they would be! This was always her
final reflection. VII


At twelve o'clock punctually Lord Bracondale was ushered into Mrs.
McBride's sitting-room at the Ritz, the day after her dinner-party at
Armenonville. He expected she would not be ready to receive him for at
least half an hour; having said twelve he might have known she meant
half-past, but he was in a mood of impatience, and felt obliged to be
punctual. He was suffering more or less from a reaction. He had begun towards
morning to realize the manner in which he had spent the evening was not
altogether wise. Not that he had the least intention of not repeating
his folly--indeed, he was where he was at this hour for no other purpose
than to enlist the widow's sympathy, and her co-operation in arranging
as many opportunities for similar evenings as together they could
devise. After all, she only kept him waiting twenty minutes, and he had been
rather amused looking at the piles of bric-a-brac obsequious art dealers
had left for this rich lady's inspection. A number of spurious bronzes warranted pure antique, clocks, brocades,
what not, lying about on all the available space. "And I wonder what it will look like in her marble palace halls," he
thought, as he passed from one article to another. "I am just too sorry to keep you, mon cher Bracondale," Mrs. McBride
said, presently, suddenly opening the adjoining door a few inches, "but
it is a quite exasperating hat which has delayed me. I can't get the
thing on at the angle I want. I--"

"Mayn't I come and help, dear lady?" interrupted Hector. "I know all
about the subject. I had to buy forty-seven at Monte Carlo, and see them
all tried on, too--and only lately! Do ask Marie to open that door a
little wider; I will decide in a minute how it should be." "Insolent!" said the widow, who spoke French with perfect fluency and a
quite marvellously pure American accent. But she permitted the giggling
and beaming Marie to open the door wide, and let Hector advance and kiss
her hand. He then took a chair by the dressing-table and inspected the situation. Seven or eight dainty bandboxes strewed the floor, some of their
contents peeping from them--feathers, aigrettes, flowers, impossible
birds--all had their place, and on the sofa were three _chef
d'oeuvres_ ruthlessly tossed aside. While in the widow's fair hands
was a gem of gray tulle and the most expensive feather heart of woman
could desire. "You see," she said, plaintively, "it is meant to go just so," and she
placed it once more upon her head, a handsome head of forty-five, fresh
and well preserved and comely. "But the vile-tempered thing refuses to
stay there once I let go, and no pin will correct it." "Base ingratitude," said Lord Bracondale, with feeling; "but couldn't
you stuff these in the hiatus," and he tenderly lifted a bunch of
nut-brown curls from the dressing-table. "They would fill up the gap and
keep the fractious thing steady." "Of course they would," said Mrs. McBride; "but I have a rooted
objection to auxiliary nature trimmings. That bunch was sent with the
hat, and Marie has been trying to persuade me to wear it ever since we
began this struggle. But I won't! My hair's my own, and I don't mean to
have any one else's alongside of it. There is my trouble." "If milor were to hold madame's 'at one side, while I de other, madame
might force her emerald parrot pin through him," suggested Marie, which
advice was followed, and the widow beamed with satisfaction at the
gratifying result. "There!" she exclaimed, with a sigh of relief, "that will do; and I am
just ready. Gloves, handkerchief--oh! and my purse, Marie." And in five
minutes more she was leading the way back into her sitting-room. "I have not ordered lunch until one o'clock," she said, "so we have
oceans of time to talk and tell each other secrets. Sit down, jeune
homme, and confess to me." She pointed to a _bergere_, but it was filled
with Italian embroideries. "Marie, take this rubbish away!" she called,
and presently some chairs were made clear. "And what must I confess?" asked Hector, when they were seated. "That I
am frantically in love with you, and your coldness is driving me wild?" "Certainly not!" said the widow, while she rose again and began to
arrange some giant roses in a wonderful basket which looked as if it had
just arrived--her shrewd eye had seen the card, "From Captain
Fitzgerald, with his best bonjour." "Certainly not! We are going to talk
truth, or, to punish you, I shall not ask you to meet her again, and I
shall warn her father of your strictly dishonorable intentions." "You would not be so cruel!" "Yes I would. And it is what I ought to do, anyway. She is as innocent
as a woolly lamb, and unsophisticated and guileless, and will probably
be falling in love with you. You take the wind out of the sails of that
husband of hers, you see!" "Do I?" said Hector, with overdone incredulity. She looked at him. His long, lithe limbs stretched out, every line
indicative of breeding and strength. She noted the shape of his head,
the perfect grooming, his lazy, insolent grace, his whimsical smile. Englishmen of this class were certainly the most provokingly beautiful
creatures in the world. "It is because they have done nothing but order men, kill beasts, and
subjugate women for generations," she said to herself. "Lazy, naughty
darlings! If they came to our country and worked their brains a little,
they would soon lose that look. But it would be a pity," she
added--"yes, a pity." "What are you thinking of?" asked Lord Bracondale, while she gazed at
him. "I was thinking you are a beautiful, useless creature. Just like all
your nation. You think the world is made for you; in any case, all the
women and animals to kill are." "What an abominable libel! But I am fond of both things--women and
animals to kill." "And you class them equally--or perhaps the animals are ahead." "Indeed not always," said Hector, reassuringly. "Some women have quite
the first place." "You are too flattering!" retorted the widow. "Those sentiments are all
very well for your own poor-spirited, down-trodden women, but they won't
do for Americans! A man has to learn a number of lessons before he is
fitted to cope with them." "Oh, tell me," said Hector. "He has got to learn to wait, for one thing, to wait about for hours if
necessary, and not to lose his temper, because the woman can't make up
her mind to be in time for things, or to change it often as to where she
will dine. Then he has to learn to give up any pleasure of his own for
hers--and travel when she wants to travel, or stay home when she wants
to go alone. If he is an Englishman he don't have brains enough to make
the money, but he must let her spend what he has got how she likes, and
not interfere with her own." "And in return he gets?" "The woman he happens to want, I suppose." And the widow laughed,
showing her wonderfully preserved brilliant white teeth. "You enunciate great truths, belle dame!" said Hector, "and your last
sentence is the greatest of all--'_The woman he happens to want._'"

"Which brings us back to our muttons--in this case only a defenceless
baby lamb. Now tell me what you are here for, trying to cajole me with
your good looks and mock humility." "I am here to ask you to help me to see her again, then," said Hector,
who knew when to be direct. "I have only met her three times, as you
know, but I have fallen in love, and she is going away next week, and
there is only one Paris in the world." "You can do a great deal of mischief in a week," Mrs. McBride said,
looking at him again critically. "I ought not to help you, but I can't
resist you--there! What can we devise?" It is possible the probability of Theodora's father making a fourth may
have had something thing to do with her complaisance. Anyway, it was
decided that if feasible the four should spend a day at Versailles. They should go in their two automobiles in time for breakfast at the
Reservoirs. They would start, Theodora in Mrs. McBride's with her, and
Captain Fitzgerald with Lord Bracondale, and each couple could spend the
afternoon as they pleased, dining again at the Reservoirs and whirling
back to Paris in the moonlight. A truly rural and refreshing programme,
good for the soul of man. "And I can rely upon you to get rid of the husband?" said Lord
Bracondale, finally. "I do not see the poetry of the affair with his
bald head and mutton-chop whiskers as an accessory." "Leave that to Captain Fitzgerald and myself," Mrs. McBride said,
proudly. "I have a scheme that Mr. Brown shall spend the day with
Clutterbuck R. Tubbs, examining some new machinery they are both
interested in. Leave it to me!" The part of _Deus ex machina_ was always
a role the widow loved. Then they descended to an agreeable lunch in the restaurant, with a
numerous party of her friends as usual, and Lord Bracondale felt
afterwards full of joy and hope, to continue his sinful path
unrepenting. The days that intervened before Theodora saw him again were uneventful
and full of blankness. The walks in the Bois appeared more tedious than
ever in the morning, the drives in the Acacias more exasperating. It was
a continual alertness to see if she caught sight of a familiar face, but
she never did. Fate was against them, as she sometimes is when she means
to compensate soon after by some glorious day of the gods. And although
Lord Bracondale called at her hotel and walked where he thought he
should see her, and even drove in the Acacias, they had no meeting. Josiah did not feel himself sufficiently strong to stand the air of
theatres, and they went nowhere in the evenings. He was keeping himself
for his own dinner-party, which was to take place at the Madrid on the
Monday. Captain Fitzgerald had arranged it, and besides Mrs. McBride several of
his friends were coming, and a special band of wonderfully talented
Tziganes, who were delighting Paris that year, had been engaged to play
to them. If only the weather should remain fine all would be well. A surprise awaited Theodora on Saturday morning. A friendly note from
Mrs. McBride arrived, asking her if she would spend the day with her at
Versailles, as she had asked her husband to do her a favor and lunch
with Mr. Clutterbuck R. Tubbs. Theodora awaited Josiah's presence at the _premier dejeuner_, which they
took in their salon, with absolute excitement. He came in, a pompous
smile on his face. "Good-day, my love," he said, blandly. "That charming widow writes me
this morning, asking if I will do her a favor, and take her friend, Mr.
Clutterbuck Tubbs, to examine that machinery for the separation of fats
we both have an interest in, and he suggests I should lunch with him, as
he is very anxious to have my opinion upon the merits of it." "Yes," said Theodora. "She also says," referring to the letter in his hand, "she will take
charge of you for the day, and take you to Versailles, which I know you
wish to go to. She wants an answer at once, as she will call for you at
twelve o'clock if we accept." "I have heard from her, too," said Theodora. "What shall you answer,
Josiah?" and she looked out of the window. "Oh, I may as well go, I think. There is money in the invention, or that
old gimlet-eye would not be so keen about it; I talked the matter over
with him at Armenonville the other night." "Then shall you write or shall I?" said Theodora, as evenly as she
could. "Her servant is waiting." VIII


Theodora hummed to herself a glad little _chansonnette_ as she changed
her breakfast negligee for the freshest and loveliest of her spring
frocks. She did not know why she was so happy. There had been no word of
any one else being of the party, only she and Mrs. McBride, but
Versailles would be exquisite on such a day, and something whispered to
her that she might not yawn. The most radiant vision awaited the widow, when, with unusual
punctuality, her automobile stopped at the hotel door. She came in. She
was voluble, she flattered Josiah. So good of him to take Mr. Tubbs--and
she hoped it would not tire him. Theodora should be well looked after. They might be late and even dine at Versailles, she said, and Mr. Brown
was not to be anxious--_she_ would be responsible for the safe return of
his beautiful little wife. (Theodora was five foot seven at least, but
her small head and extreme slenderness gave people the feeling she was
little--something to be protected and guarded always.) Josiah was affable. Mrs. McBride's words were so smooth and so many, he
had no time to feel Theodora was going to dine out without him, or that
anything had been arranged for ultimate ends. The automobile had almost reached Suresnes before the widow said to her
guest:

"Your father and Lord Bracondale have promised to meet us at the
Reservoirs. Captain Fitzgerald told me how you wanted to go to
Versailles, and how your husband is not strong enough to take these
excursions, so I thought we might have this little day out there, while
he is engaged with Mr. Clutterbuck Tubbs." "How sweet of you!" said Theodora. As they rushed through the smiling country, both women's spirits rose,
and Mrs. McBride's were the spirits of experience and did not mount
without due cause. Since she had been a girl in Dakota and passionately
in love with her first husband--the defunct McBride was a second
venture--she had not met a man who could quicken her pulse like Captain
Fitzgerald. It was a curious coincidence that they both had already two
partners to regret. It was an extra link between them, and Jane
McBride, who was superstitious, read the omen to mean that this time
each had met his true mate. "If he is irresistible to-day, I think I shall clinch matters," she was
saying to herself. While Theodora's musings ran:

"How beautiful Versailles will look, and I dare say he will know all
about its history, and be able to tell me interesting things; and oh! I
am so glad I put on this frock, and oh! I am so happy." And aloud they spoke of paradise plumes and the new gray, and the merits
and demerits of Callot and Doucet and Jeanne Valez. And the widow said
some bright American things about husbands and the world in general that
conveyed crisp truths. The drive seemed all too short, and there were their two cavaliers in
the court-yard awaiting them at the Reservoirs, having arrived just
before them. To the end of her life Theodora will remember that glorious May day. Its
even minutest detail, the color of the chestnut-trees, the tint of the
sky, the scent in the air, every line of his figure and turn of his
head, every look in his eyes--and they were many and varied--and also
and alas! every growing emotion in her own heart. But at the moment all
was gladness, and exquisite, young, irresponsible joy. _Sans
arriere-pensee_ or disquieting reflection. She wondered which of the two men was the handsomer as she got out of
the automobile--dear, darling papa or Lord Bracondale; both were quite
show creatures of their age, and both were of the same class and
knowledge of _savoir-vivre_. Every one said such polite and gracious
things, it was all so smooth and gay, and it seemed so natural that they
should take a turn up towards the chateau while breakfast was being
prepared. Half-past one o'clock was time enough to eat, the widow said. "I want to show you a number of spots I love," Hector announced,
choosing a different path to the other pair. "And it is a day we can be
happy in, can't we?" "I want to be happy," said Theodora. "Then we shall go no farther now; we shall sit on this seat and admire
the view. See, we are quite alone and undisturbed; all the world has
gone home to breakfast." Then he looked at her, and though he really did try at this stage to be
reasonable, something of the intense attraction he felt for her blazed
in his eyes. She was sufficiently delectable a picture to turn the sagest head. There
was something so absolutely pure white about that skin, it seemed good
to eat, flawless, unlined, unblemished, under this brilliant light. The way her silvery blond hair grew was just the right way a woman's
hair ought to grow, he thought; low on a high, broad brow, rippling and
soft, and quantities of it. What could it be like to caress it, to run
one's fingers through it, to bury one's face in it? Ah! and then there
were her tender eyes, dewy and shadowed with dark lashes, and so
intensely blue. His glance wandered farther afield. Such a figure! slender and graceful and fine. There was something almost childish about
it all; the innocent look of a very young girl, with the polish of the
woman, garbed by an artist. It seemed the great pearls in her ears were
not more milkily white than her throat, and he was sure were also her
little slender hands, that did not fidget, but lay idly in her lap,
holding her blue parasol. He would like to have taken off her gloves to
see. Passionate devotion was surging up in his breast. And he was an Englishman, and it was still the morning. There was no
moon now and he had not even breakfasted! This shows sufficiently to
what state he had come. "I want you to tell me all about Versailles," she said, looking to the
left and the gray wing beyond the chapel. "Its histories and its
meanings. I used to read about it all after Sarah brought me here once
for our treat, but you probably are learned upon the subject, and I want
to know." "I would much rather hear what you did when Sarah brought you here for
your treat," he said. "Oh! it was a very simple day," and she leaned back and laughed softly
at the recollection. "Papa was very hard up at that time, you know, and
we were rather poor, so we came as cheaply as we could, Sarah,
Clementine, and I, and I remember there were some very snuffy men in the
train--we could not go first-class, you see--and one of them rather
frightened me." "The brute!" said Hector. "I think I was about fourteen." "And even then perfectly beautiful, I expect," he commented to himself. "We walked up from the station, and oh! we saw all the galleries and we
ran all over the park, but we missed the way to Trianon somehow and
never saw that, and when we got back here we were too tired to start
again. We had only had sandwiches, you see, that we brought with us, and
some funny little drinks at a cafe down there," and she pointed vaguely
towards the lake, "because we found we had only one franc fifty between
us all. But we were so happy, and Clementine knows a great deal, and
told us many things which were quite different from what was in the
guide-books--but it seems so long, long ago. Do you know it must be six
years." And she looked at him seriously. "Half a lifetime!" agreed Hector, with a whimsical smile. "Oh! you are laughing at me!" she said, and there was a cloud in the
blue stars which looked up at him. He made a movement nearer her--while his deep voice took every tone of
tenderness. "Indeed, indeed I am not--you dear little girl! I love to hear of your
day. I was only smiling to think that six years ago you were a baby
child, and I was then an old man in feeling--let me see, I was
twenty-five, and I was in Russia." He stopped suddenly; there were some circumstances which, sitting there
beside her, he would rather not remember connected with Russia. This was one of the peculiarities of Theodora. There was something about
her which seemed to wither up all low or vicious things. It was not that
she filled people with ascetic thoughts of saints and angels and their
mother in heaven, only she seemed suddenly to enhance simple joys with
beauty and charm. They talked on for half an hour, and with every moment he discovered
fresh qualities of sweetness and light in her gentle heart. She was not ill educated either, but she had never speculated upon
things, she took them for granted just as they were, and _Jean d'Agreve_
was probably the only awakening book she had ever read. Hector all at once seemed to realize his mother's vision, and to
understand for the first time what marriage might mean. That to possess
this exquisite bit of God's finished work for his very own, to live with
her in the country, at old Bracondale, to see her honored and adored,
surrounded by little children--his children--would be a dream of bliss
far, far beyond any dream he had ever known. A domestic, tender dream of
sweetness that he had always laughed at before as a final thing when
life's other joys should be over, and now it seemed suddenly to be the
only heaven and completion of his soul's desire. Then he remembered Josiah Brown with a hideous pang of pain and
bitterness--and they went in to lunch. *       *       *       *       *

Theodora was so gay! Captain Fitzgerald and Mrs. McBride were already
seated when they joined them in the restaurant. Most of the other
visitors had finished--it was almost two o'clock. There was a good deal of black middle in the widow's eyes, Theodora
noticed, and wondered to herself if she had had a happy and exciting
hour too. Papa looked complacent and handsomer than ever, she thought. She did hope it was going well. And she wondered how they were to
dispose of their afternoon. The widow soon settled this. She had, she said, a wild desire to rush
through the air for a little--she _must_ have her chauffeur go at full
speed--somewhere--anywhere--her nerves needed calming! And Captain
Fitzgerald had agreed to accompany her. Their destination was unknown,
and they might not be back for tea, so Lord Bracondale must take the
greatest care of Theodora and give her some if they did not turn up. They certainly would for dinner, but eight o'clock would be time enough
for that. When your destination is unknown you can never say how many hours it
will take to get there and back, she pointed out. And no one felt
inclined to argue with her about this obvious truth! Now if Theodora had been a free unmarried girl, or a freer widow, it is
highly probable fate would not have arranged this long afternoon in
blissful surroundings undisturbed by any one. As it was, who knows if
the goddess settled it with a smile on her lip or a tear in her eye? It
was settled, at all events, and looked as if it were going to contain
some moments worth remembering. IX


"And what is your pleasure, fair queen?" Hector said, as they listened
to the diminishing noise of the widow's Mercedes. "We are alone, and we
have the world before us. Issue your commands." "No," said Theodora, and she pouted her red lips. "I want you to settle
that. I want you to arrange for whatever you think would give me the
greatest pleasure. Then I shall know if you understand me and guess what
I would like." This was the most daring speech she had ever made, and she was surprised
at her own temerity. "Very well," he said. "That means you belong to me until they return,"
and a thrill ran through him. "Has not your father, has not your
hostess, given you into my charge? And, now you yourself have sealed the
compact, we shall see if I can make you happy." As he said the words "you belong to me," Theodora thrilled too--a
sensation as of an electric shock almost quivered through her. Belonged
to him--ah!--what would that mean? He called his chauffeur, who started the automobile and drove under the
covered _porte cochere_ where they stood. Lord Bracondale had not spoken all the time he was helping her in and
arranging rugs with the tenderest solicitude, but when they were settled
and started--it was a coupe with a great deal of glass about it, so that
they got plenty of air--he turned to her. "Now, do you know what I am going to do with you, madame? I shall only
unfold my plans bit by bit, and watch your face to see if I have chosen
well. I am going to take you first to the Petit Trianon, and we are
going to walk leisurely through the rooms. I am not going to worry you
with much sight-seeing and tourists and lessons of history, but I want
you to glance at this setting of the life picture of poor Marie
Antoinette, because it is full of sentiment and it will make you
appreciate more the _hameau_ and her playground afterwards. Something
tells me you would rather see these things than all the fine pictures
and salons of the stiff chateau." "Oh yes," said Theodora; "you have guessed well this time." "Then here we are, almost arrived," he said, presently. They had been going very fast, and could see the square, white house in
front of them, and when they alighted at the gates she found the
guardian was an old friend of Lord Bracondale's, and they were left free
to wander alone in the rooms between the batches of tourists. But every one knows the Petit Trianon, and can surmise how its beauties
appealed to Theodora. "Oh, the poor, poor queen!" she said, with a sad ring in her expressive
voice, when they came to the large salon; "and she sat here and played
on her harpsichord--and I wonder if she and Fersen were ever alone--and
I wonder if she really loved him--"

Then she stopped suddenly; she had told herself she must never talk
about love to any one. It was a subject that she must have nothing to do
with. It could never come her way, now she was married to Josiah Brown,
and it would be unwise to discuss it, even in the abstract. The same beautiful, wild-rose tint tinged the white velvet as once
before when she had spoken of _Jean d'Agreve_, and again Lord Bracondale
experienced a sensation of satisfaction. But this time he would not let her talk about the weather. The subject
of love interested him, too. "Yes, I am sure she did," he said, "and I always shall believe Fersen
was her lover; no life, even a queen's, can escape one love." "I suppose not," said Theodora, very low, and she looked out of the
window. "Love is not a passion which asks our leave if he may come or no, you
see," Hector continued, trying to control his voice to sound
dispassionate and discursive--he knew he must not frighten her. "Love
comes in a thousand unknown, undreamed-of ways. And then he gilds the
world and makes it into heaven." "Does he?" almost whispered Theodora. "And think what it must have been to a queen, married to a tiresome,
unattractive Bourbon--and Fersen was young and gallant and thoughtful
for her slightest good, and, from what one hears and has read, he must
have understood her, and been her friend as well--and sometimes she must
have forgotten about being a queen for a few moments--in his arms--"

Theodora drew a long, long breath, but she did not speak. "And perhaps, if we knew, the remembrance of those moments may have
been her glory and consolation in the last dark hours." "Oh! I hope so!" said Theodora. Then she walked on quickly into the quaint, little, low-ceilinged
bedroom. Oh, she must get out into the air--or she must talk of
furniture, or curtain stuffs, or where the bath had been! Love, love, love! And did it mean life after all?--since even this
far-off love of this poor dead queen had such power to move her. And
perhaps Fersen was like--but this last thought caused her heart to beat
too wildly. 