



Produced by Suzanne Shell, Jeroen van Luin and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                         The Authors' Press Series
                              of the Works of
                                Elinor Glyn



                                 RED HAIR



                      THE AUTHORS' PRESS, PUBLISHERS
                               AUBURN, N. Y. Copyright, 1905, by
                                ELINOR GLYN

                  When copyrighted by Elinor Glyn in 1905,
                  this book was published under the title
                     "The Vicissitudes of Evangeline." BRANCHES PARK,

                                                         _November 3._


I wonder so much if it is amusing to be an adventuress, because that is
evidently what I shall become now. I read in a book all about it; it is
being nice looking and having nothing to live on, and getting a pleasant
time out of life--and I intend to do that! I have certainly nothing to
live on, for one cannot count L300 a year; and I am extremely pretty, and
I know it quite well, and how to do my hair, and put on my hats, and those
things--so, of course, I am an adventuress! I was not intended for this
role--in fact, Mrs. Carruthers adopted me on purpose to leave me her
fortune, as at that time she had quarrelled with her heir, who was bound
to get the place. Then she was so inconsequent as not to make a proper
will--thus it is that this creature gets everything, and I nothing! I am twenty, and up to the week before last, when Mrs. Carruthers got ill
and died in one day, I had had a fairly decent time at odd moments when
she was in a good temper. There is no use pretending even when people are dead, if one is writing
down one's real thoughts. I detested Mrs. Carruthers most of the time. A
person whom it was impossible to please. She had no idea of justice, or of
anything but her own comfort, and what amount of pleasure other people
could contribute to her day. How she came to do anything for me at all was because she had been in love
with papa, and when he married poor mamma--a person of no family--and then
died, she offered to take me, and bring me up, just to spite mamma, she
has often told me. As I was only four I had no say in the matter, and if
mamma liked to give me up that was her affair. Mamma's father was a lord,
and her mother I don't know who, and they had not worried to get married,
so that is how it is poor mamma came to have no relations. After papa was
dead, she married an Indian officer and went off to India, and died, too,
and I never saw her any more--so there it is; there is not a soul in the
world who matters to me, or I to them, so I can't help being an
adventuress, and thinking only of myself, can I? Mrs. Carruthers periodically quarrelled with all the neighbors, so beyond
frigid calls now and then in a friendly interval, we never saw them much. Several old, worldly ladies used to come and stay, but I liked none of
them, and I have no young friends. When it is getting dark, and I am up
here alone, I often wonder what it would be like if I had--but I believe I
am the kind of cat that would not have got on with them too nicely--so
perhaps it is just as well. Only, to have had a pretty--aunt, say--to love
one--that might have been nice. Mrs. Carruthers had no feelings like this; "stuff and nonsense,"
"sentimental rubbish," she would have called them. To get a suitable
husband is what she brought me up for, she said, and for the last years
had arranged that I should marry her detested heir, Christopher
Carruthers, as I should have the money and he the place. He is a diplomat, and lives in Paris, and Russia, and amusing places like
that, so he does not often come to England. I have never seen him. He is
quite old--over thirty--and has hair turning gray. Now he is master here, and I must leave--unless he proposes to marry me at
our meeting this afternoon, which he probably won't do. However, there can be no harm in my making myself look as attractive as
possible under the circumstances. As I am to be an adventuress, I must do
the best I can for myself. Nice feelings are for people who have money to
live as they please. If I had ten thousand a year, or even five, I would
snap my fingers at all men, and say, "No, I make my life as I choose, and
shall cultivate knowledge and books, and indulge in beautiful ideas of
honor and exalted sentiments, and perhaps one day succumb to a noble
passion." (What grand words the thought, even, is making me write!) But as
it is, if Mr. Carruthers asks me to marry him, as he has been told to do
by his aunt, I shall certainly say yes, and so stay on here, and have a
comfortable home. Until I have had this interview it is hardly worth while
packing anything. What a mercy black suits me! My skin is ridiculously white. I shall stick
a bunch of violets in my frock--that could not look heartless, I suppose. But if he asks me if I am sad about Mrs. Carruthers's death, I shall not
be able to tell a lie. I am sad, of course, because death is a terrible thing, and to die like
that, saying spiteful things to every one, must be horrid--but I can't, I
can't regret her. Not a day ever passed that she did not sting some part
of me; when I was little, it was not only with her tongue--she used to
pinch me, and box my ears until Dr. Garrison said it might make me deaf,
and then she stopped, because she said deaf people were a bore, and she
could not put up with them. I shall not go on looking back. There are numbers of things that even now
make me raging to remember. I have only been out for a year. Mrs. Carruthers got an attack of
bronchitis when I was eighteen, just as we were going up to town for the
season, and said she did not feel well enough for the fatigues, and off we
went to Switzerland. And in the autumn we travelled all over the place,
and in the winter she coughed and groaned, and the next season would not
go up until the last court, so I have only had a month of London. The
bronchitis got perfectly well--it was heart-failure that killed her,
brought on by an attack of temper because Thomas broke the Carruthers
vase. I shall not write of her death, or the finding of the will, or the
surprise that I was left nothing but a thousand pounds and a diamond ring. Now that I am an adventuress, instead of an heiress, of what good to
chronicle all that! Sufficient to say if Mr. Carruthers does not obey his
orders and offer me his hand this afternoon, I shall have to pack my
trunks and depart by Saturday, but where to is yet in the lap of the gods. He is coming by the 3.20 train, and will be in the house before four, an
ugly, dull time; one can't offer him tea, and it will be altogether
trying and exciting. He is coming ostensibly to take over his place, I suppose, but in reality
it is to look at me, and see if in any way he will be able to persuade
himself to carry out his aunt's wishes. I wonder what it will be like to
be married to some one you don't know and don't like? I am not greatly
acquainted yet with the ways of men. We have not had any that you could
call that here, much--only a lot of old wicked sort of things, in the
autumn, to shoot the pheasants, and play bridge with Mrs. Carruthers. The
marvel to me was how they ever killed anything, such antiques they were! Some politicians and ambassadors, and creatures of that sort; and mostly
as wicked as could be. They used to come trotting down the passage to the
school-room, and have tea with mademoiselle and me on the slightest
provocation, and say such things! I am sure lots of what they said meant
something else, mademoiselle used to giggle so. She was rather a
good-looking one I had the last four years, but I hated her. There was
never any one young and human who counted. I did look forward to coming out in London, but being so late, every one
was preoccupied when we got there, and no one got in love with me much. Indeed, we went out very little; a part of the time I had a swollen nose
from a tennis-ball at Ranelagh, and people don't look at girls with
swollen noses. I wonder where I shall go and live! Perhaps in Paris--unless, of course, I
marry Mr. Carruthers. I don't suppose it is dull being married. In London
all the married ones seemed to have a lovely time, and had not to bother
with their husbands much. Mrs. Carruthers always assured me love was a thing of absolutely no
consequence in marriage. You were bound to love some one some time, but
the very fact of being chained to him would dispel the feeling. It was a
thing to be looked upon like measles, or any other disease, and was better
to get it over and then turn to the solid affairs of life. But how she
expected me to get it over when she never arranged for me to see any one,
I don't know. I asked her one day what I should do if I got to like some one after I am
married to Mr. Carruthers, and she laughed one of her horrid laughs, and
said I should probably do as the rest of the world. And what do they do, I
wonder? Well, I suppose I shall find out some day. Of course there is the possibility that Christopher (do I like the name of
Christopher, I wonder?) --well, that Christopher may not want to follow her
will. He has known about it for years, I suppose, just as I have, but I believe
men are queer creatures, and he may take a dislike to me. I am not a type
that would please every one. My hair is too red--brilliant, dark, fiery
red, like a chestnut when it tumbles out of its shell, only burnished like
metal. If I had the usual white eyelashes I should be downright ugly, but,
thank goodness! by some freak of nature mine are black and thick, and
stick out when you look at me sideways, and I often think when I catch
sight of myself in the glass that I am really very pretty--all put
together--but, as I said before, not a type to please every one. A combination I am that Mrs. Carruthers assured me would cause anxieties. "With that mixture, Evangeline," she often said, "you would do well to
settle yourself in life as soon as possible. Good girls don't have your
coloring." So you see, as I am branded as bad from the beginning, it does
not much matter what I do. My eyes are as green as pale emeralds, and
long, and not going down at the corners with the Madonna expression of
Cicely Parker, the vicar's daughter. I do not know yet what is being good,
or being bad; perhaps I shall find out when I am an adventuress, or
married to Mr. Carruthers. All I know is that I want to _live_, and feel the blood rushing through my
veins. I want to do as I please, and not have to be polite when I am
burning with rage. I want to be late in the morning if I happen to fancy
sleeping, and I want to sit up at night if I don't want to go to bed! So,
as you can do what you like when you are married, I really hope Mr.
Carruthers will take a fancy to me, and then all will be well! I shall
stay up-stairs until I hear the carriage wheels, and leave Mr. Barton--the
lawyer--to receive him. Then I shall saunter down nonchalantly while they
are in the hall. It will be an effective entrance. My trailing black
garments, and the great broad stairs--this is a splendid house--and if he
has an eye in his head he must see my foot on each step! Even Mrs.
Carruthers said I have the best foot she had ever seen. I am getting quite
excited--I shall ring for Veronique and begin to dress!... I shall write
more presently. _Thursday evening._


It is evening, and the fire is burning brightly in my sitting-room, where
I am writing. _My_ sitting-room!--did I say? Mr. Carruthers's
sitting-room, I meant--for it is mine no longer, and on Saturday, the day
after to-morrow, I shall have to bid good-bye to it forever. For--yes, I may as well say it at once--the affair did not walk; Mr.
Carruthers quietly, but firmly, refused to obey his aunt's will, and thus
I am left an old maid! I must go back to this afternoon to make it clear, and I must say my ears
tingle as I think of it. I rang for Veronique, and put on my new black afternoon frock, which had
just been unpacked. I tucked in the violets in a careless way, saw that my
hair was curling as vigorously as usual, and not too rebelliously for a
demure appearance, and so, at exactly the right moment, began to descend
the stairs. There was Mr. Carruthers in the hall. A horribly nice-looking, tall man,
with a clean-shaven face and features cut out of stone, a square chin, and
a nasty twinkle in the corner of his eye. He has a very distinguished
look, and that air of never having had to worry for his things to fit;
they appear as if they had grown on him. He has a cold, reserved manner,
and something commanding and arrogant in it that makes one want to
contradict him at once; but his voice is charming--one of that cultivated,
refined kind, which sounds as if he spoke a number of languages, and so
does not slur his words. I believe this is diplomatic, for some of the old
ambassador people had this sort of voice. He was standing with his back to the fire, and the light of the big window
with the sun getting low was full on his face, so I had a good look at
him. I said in the beginning that there was no use pretending when one is
writing one's own thoughts for one's own self to read when one is old, and
keeping them in a locked-up journal, so I shall always tell the truth
here--quite different things to what I should say if I were talking to
some one and describing to them this scene. Then I should say I found him
utterly unattractive, and, in fact, I hardly noticed him! As it was, I
noticed him very much, and I have a tiresome inward conviction that he
could be very attractive indeed, if he liked. He looked up, and I came forward with my best demure air as Mr. Barton
nervously introduced us, and we shook hands. I left him to speak first. "Abominably cold day," he said, carelessly. That was English and
promising! "Yes, indeed," I said. "You have just arrived?" And so we continued in this _banal_ way, with Mr. Barton twirling his
thumbs, and hoping, one could see, that we should soon come to the
business of the day; interposing a remark here and there which added to
the _gene_ of the situation. At last Mr. Carruthers said to Mr. Barton that he would go round and see
the house, and I said tea would be ready when they got back. And so they
started. My cheeks would burn, and my hands were so cold, it was awkward and
annoying--not half the simple affair I had thought it would be up-stairs. When it was quite dark and the lamps were brought, they came back to the
hall, and Mr. Barton, saying he did not want any tea, left us to find
papers in the library. I gave Mr. Carruthers some tea, and asked the usual things about sugar and
cream. His eye had almost a look of contempt as he glanced at me, and I
felt an angry throb in my throat. When he had finished he got up and stood
before the fire again. Then, deliberately, as a man who has determined to
do his duty at any cost, he began to speak. "You know the wish, or, rather, I should say, the command, my aunt left
me," he said. "In fact, she states that she had always brought you up to
the idea. It is rather a tiresome thing to discuss with a stranger, but
perhaps we had better get it over as soon as possible, as that is what I
came down here to-day for. The command was I should marry you." He paused
a moment. I remained perfectly still, with my hands idly clasped in my
lap, and made myself keep my eyes on his face. He continued, finding I did not answer, just a faint tone of resentment
creeping into his voice--because I would not help him out, I suppose. I
should think not! I loved annoying him! "It is a preposterous idea in these days for any one to dispose of
people's destinies in this way, and I am sure you will agree with me that
such a marriage would be impossible." "Of course I agree," I replied, lying with a tone of careless sincerity. I
had to control all my real feelings of either anger or pleasure for so
long in Mrs. Carruthers's presence that I am now an adept. "I am so glad you put it so plainly," I went on, sweetly. "I was wondering
how I should write it to you, but now you are here it is quite easy for
us to finish the matter at once. Whatever Mrs. Carruthers may have
intended me to do, I had no intention of obeying her; but it would have
been useless for me to say so to her, and so I waited until the time for
speech should come. Won't you have some more tea?" He looked at me very straightly, almost angrily, for an instant;
presently, with a sigh of relief, he said, half laughing:

"Then we are agreed; we need say no more about it!" "No more," I answered; and I smiled, too, although a rage of anger was
clutching my throat. I do not know who I was angry with--Mrs. Carruthers
for procuring this situation, Christopher for being insensible to my
charms, or myself for ever having contemplated for a second the
possibility of his doing otherwise. Why, when one thinks of it calmly,
should he want to marry me, a penniless adventuress with green eyes and
red hair that he had never seen before in his life? I hoped he thought I
was a person of naturally high color, because my cheeks from the moment I
began to dress had been burning and burning. It might have given him the
idea the scene was causing me some emotion, and that he should never know! He took some more tea, but he did not drink it, and by this I guessed
that he also was not as calm as he looked! "There is something else," he said--and now there was almost an
awkwardness in his voice--"something else which I want to say, though
perhaps Mr. Barton could say it for me, but which I would rather say
straight to you, and that is, you must let me settle such a sum of money
on you as you had every right to expect from my aunt, after the promises I
understand she always made to you----"

This time I did not wait for him to finish. I bounded up from my seat,
some uncontrollable sensation of wounded pride throbbing and thrilling
through me. "Money! Money from you!" I exclaimed. "Not if I were starving." Then I sat
down again, ashamed of this vehemence. How would he interpret it! But it
galled me so--and yet I had been ready an hour ago to have accepted him as
my husband! Why, then, this revolt at the idea of receiving a fair
substitute in gold? Really, one is a goose, and I had time to realize,
even in this tumult of emotion, that there can be nothing so inconsistent
as the feelings of a girl. "You must not be foolish!" he said, coldly. "I intend to settle the money
whether you will or no, so do not make any further trouble about it!" There was something in his voice so commanding and arrogant, just as I
noticed at first, that every obstinate quality in my nature rose to answer
him. "I do not know anything about the law in the matter; you may settle what
you choose, but I shall never touch any of it," I said, as calmly as I
could. "So it seems ridiculous to waste the money, does it not? You may
not, perhaps, be aware I have enough of my own, and do not in any way
require yours." He became colder and more exasperated. "As you please, then," he said, snappishly, and Mr. Barton fortunately
entering at that moment, the conversation was cut short, and I left them. They are not going back to London until to-morrow morning, and dinner has
yet to be got through. Oh, I do feel in a temper! and I can never tell of
the emotions that were throbbing through me as I came up the great stairs
just now. A sudden awakening to the humiliation of the situation! How had
I ever been able to contemplate marrying a man I did not know, just to
secure myself a comfortable home! It seems preposterous now. I suppose it
was because I have always been brought up to the idea, and, until I came
face to face with the man, it did not strike me as odd. Fortunately he can
never guess that I had been willing to accept him; my dissimulation has
stood me in good stead. Now I am animated by only one idea--to appear as
agreeable and charming to Mr. Carruthers as possible. The aim and object
of my life shall be to make him regret his decision. When I hear him
imploring me to marry him, I shall regain a little of my self-respect! And
as for marriage, I shall have nothing to do with the horrid affair! Oh,
dear, no! I shall go away free and be a happy adventuress. I have read the
_Trois Mousquetaires_ and _Vingt Ans Apres_--mademoiselle had them--and I
remember milady had only three days to get round her jailer, starting with
his hating her; whereas Mr. Carruthers does not hate me, so that counts
against my only having one evening. I shall do my best! _Thursday night._


I was down in the library, innocently reading a book, when Mr. Carruthers
came in. He looked even better in evening dress, but he appeared
ill-tempered, and no doubt found the situation unpleasant. "Is not this a beautiful house?" I said, in a velvet voice, to break the
awkward silence, and show him I did not share his unease. "You had not
seen it before, for ages, had you?" "Not since I was a boy," he answered, trying to be polite. "My aunt
quarrelled with my father--she was the direct heiress of all this--and
married her cousin, my father's younger brother--but you know the family
history, of course----"

"Yes." "They hated each other, she and my father." "Mrs. Carruthers hated all her relations," I said, demurely. "Myself among them?" "Yes," I said, slowly, and bent forward so that the lamplight should fall
upon my hair. "She said you were too much like herself in character for
you ever to be friends." "Is that a compliment?" he asked, and there was a twinkle in his eye. "We must speak no ill of the dead," I said, evasively. He looked slightly annoyed--as much as these diplomats ever let themselves
look anything. "You are right," he said. "Let her rest in peace." There was silence for a moment. "What are you going to do with your life now?" he asked, presently. It was
a bald question. "I shall become an adventuress," I answered, deliberately. "A _what_?" he exclaimed, his black eyebrows contracting. "An adventuress. Is not that what it is called? A person who sees life,
and has to do the best she can for herself." He laughed. "You strange little lady!" he said, his irritation with me
melting. And when he laughs you can see how even his teeth are; but the
two side ones are sharp and pointed, like a wolf's. "Perhaps, after all, you had better have married me!" "No, that would clip my wings," I said, frankly, looking at him straight
in the face. "Mr. Barton tells me you propose leaving here on Saturday. I beg you will
not do so. Please consider it your home for so long as you wish--until
you can make some arrangements for yourself. You look so very young to be
going about the world alone!" He bent down and gazed at me closer--there was an odd tone in his voice. "I am twenty, and I have been often snubbed," I said, calmly. "That
prepares one for a good deal. I shall enjoy doing what I please." "And what are you going to please?" "I shall go to Claridge's until I can look about me." He moved uneasily. "But have you no relations--no one who will take care of you?" "I believe none. My mother was nobody particular, you know--a Miss Tonkins
by name." "But your father?" He sat down now on the sofa beside me; there was a
puzzled, amused look in his face; perhaps I was amazing him. "Papa? Oh, papa was the last of his family. They were decent people, but
there are no more of them." He pushed one of the cushions aside. "It is an impossible position for a girl--completely alone. I cannot allow
it. I feel responsible for you. After all, it would do very well if you
married me. I am not particularly domestic by nature, and should be very
little at home, so you could live here and have a certain position, and I
would come back now and then and see you were getting on all right." One could not say if he was mocking or no. "It is too good of you," I said, without any irony. "But I like freedom,
and when you were at home it might be such a bore----"

He leaned back and laughed merrily. "You are candid, at any rate!" he said. Mr. Barton came into the room at that moment, full of apologies at being
late. Immediately after, with the usual ceremony, the butler entered and
pompously announced, "Dinner is served, sir." How quickly they recognize
the new master! Mr. Carruthers gave me his arm, and we walked slowly down the
picture-gallery to the banqueting-hall, and there sat down at the small,
round table in the middle, that always looks like an island in a lake. I talked nicely at dinner. I was dignified and grave, and quite frank. Mr.
Carruthers was not bored. The chef had outdone himself, hoping to be kept
on. I never felt so excited in my life. I was apparently asleep under a big lamp, after dinner, in the library, a
book of silly poetry in my lap, when the door opened and he--Mr.
Carruthers--came in alone, and walked up the room. I did not open my
eyes. He looked for just a minute--how accurate I am! Then he said, "You
are very pretty when asleep!" His voice was not caressing or complimentary--merely as if the fact had
forced this utterance. I allowed myself to wake without a start. "Was the '47 port as good as you hoped?" I asked, sympathetically. He sat down. I had arranged my chair so that there was none other in its
immediate neighborhood. Thus he was some way off, and could realize my
whole silhouette. "The '47 port? Oh yes; but I am not going to talk of port. I want you to
tell me a lot more about yourself, and your plans----"

"I have no plans--except to see the world." He picked up a book and put it down again; he was not perfectly calm. "I don't think I shall let you. I am more than ever convinced you ought to
have some one to take care of you--you are not of the type that makes it
altogether safe to roam about alone." "Oh! as for my type," I said, languidly, "I know all about that. Mrs.
Carruthers said no one with this combination of color could be good, so I
am not going to try. It will be quite simple." He rose quickly from his chair and stood in front of the great log fire,
such a comical expression on his face. "You are the quaintest child I have ever met," he said. "I am not a child, and I mean to know everything I can." He went over towards the sofa again and arranged the cushions--great,
splendid, fat pillows of old Italian brocade, stiff with gold and silver. "Come!" he pleaded. "Sit here beside me, and let us talk; you are miles
away there, and I want to--make you see reason." I rose at once and came slowly to where he pointed. I settled myself
deliberately. There was one cushion of purple and silver right under the
light, and there I rested my head. "Now talk!" I said, and half closed my eyes. Oh, I was enjoying myself! The first time I have ever been alone with a
real man! They--the old ambassadors and politicians and generals--used
always to tell me I should grow into an attractive woman--now I meant to
try what I could do. Mr. Carruthers remained silent, but he sat down beside me, and looked and
looked right into my eyes. "Now talk, then," I said again. "Do you know, you are a very disturbing person," he said, at last, by way
of a beginning. "What is that?" I asked. "It is a woman who confuses one's thoughts when one looks at her. I do not
now seem to have anything to say, or too much----"

"You called me a child." "I should have called you an enigma." I assured him I was not the least complex, and that I only wanted
everything simple, and to be left in peace, without having to get married
or worry to obey people. We had a nice talk. "You won't leave here on Saturday," he said, presently, apropos of
nothing. "I do not think I shall go myself to-morrow. I want you to show
me all over the gardens, and your favorite haunts." "To-morrow I shall be busy packing," I said, gravely, "and I do not think
I want to show you the gardens; there are some corners I rather loved; I
believe it will hurt a little to say good-bye." Just then Mr. Barton came into the room, fussy and ill at ease. Mr.
Carruthers's face hardened again, and I rose to say good-night. As he opened the door for me--"Promise you will come down to give me my
coffee in the morning," he said. "Qui vivra verra," I answered, and sauntered out into the hall. He
followed me, and watched as I went up the staircase. "Good-night!" I called, softly, as I got to the top, and laughed a
little--I don't know why. He bounded up the stairs, three steps at a time, and before I could turn
the handle of my door he stood beside me. "I do not know what there is about you," he said, "but you drive me mad. I
shall insist upon carrying out my aunt's wish, after all! I shall marry
you, and never let you out of my sight--do you hear?" Oh, such a strange sense of exaltation crept over me--it is with me still! Of course, he probably will not mean all that to-morrow, but to have made
such a stiff block of stone rush up-stairs and say this much now is
perfectly delightful! I looked at him up from under my eyelashes. "No, you will not marry me," I
said, calmly, "or do anything else I don't like; and now, really,
good-night," and I slipped into my room and closed the door. I could hear
he did not stir for some seconds. Then he went off down the stairs again,
and I am alone with my thoughts! My thoughts! I wonder what they mean! What did I do that had this effect
upon him? I intended to do something, and I did it, but I am not quite
sure what it was. However, that is of no consequence. Sufficient for me to
know that my self-respect is restored and I can now go out and see the
world with a clear conscience. _He_ has asked me to marry him--and _I_ have said I won't! BRANCHES PARK,[1]

                                          Thursday night, _November 3._


    DEAR BOB,--

    A quaint thing has happened to me! Came down here to take over the
    place, and to say decidedly I would not marry Miss Travers, and I
    find her with red hair and a skin like milk, and a pair of green
    eyes that look at you from a forest of black eyelashes with a
    thousand unsaid challenges. I should not wonder if I commit some
    folly. One has read of women like this in the _cinque-cento_ time in
    Italy, but up to now I had never met one. She is not in the room ten
    minutes before one feels a sense of unrest, and desire for one
    hardly knows what--principally to touch her, I fancy. Good Lord! what a skin! pure milk and rare roses--and the reddest Cupid's bow
    of a mouth! You had better come down at once (these things are
    probably in your line) to save me from some sheer idiocy. The
    situation is exceptional--she and I practically alone in the house,
    for old Barton does not count. She had nowhere to go, and as far as
    I can make out has not a friend in the world. I suppose I ought to
    leave. I will try to on Monday; but come down to-morrow by the 4.00
    train. Yours,

                                           CHRISTOPHER. P. S.--'47 port A1, and two or three brands of the old aunt's
    champagne exceptional, Barton says--we can sample them. Shall send
    this up by express; you will get it in time for the 4.00 train. [Footnote 1: A letter from Mr. Carruthers which came into Evangeline's
possession later, and which she put into her journal at this
place.--EDITOR'S NOTE.] BRANCHES,

                                         Friday night, _November 4th._


This morning Mr. Carruthers had his coffee alone. Mr. Barton and I
breakfasted quite early, before nine o'clock, and just as I was calling
the dogs in the hall for a run, with my out-door things already on, Mr.
Carruthers came down the great stairs with a frown on his face. "Up so early!" he said. "Are you not going to pour out my tea for me,
then?" "I thought you said coffee! No, I am going out," and I went on down the
corridor, the wolf-hounds following me. "You are not a kind hostess!" he called after me. "I am not a hostess at all," I answered back--"only a guest." He followed me. "Then you are a very casual guest, not consulting the
pleasure of your host." I said nothing. I only looked at him over my shoulder as I went down the
marble steps--looked at him and laughed, as on the night before. He turned back into the house without a word, and I did not see him again
until just before luncheon. There is something unpleasant about saying good-bye to a place, and I
found I had all sorts of sensations rising in my throat at various points
in my walk. However, all that is ridiculous and must be forgotten. As I
was coming round the corner of the terrace, a great gust of wind nearly
blew me into Mr. Carruthers's arms. Odious weather we are having this
autumn! "Where have you been all the morning?" he said, when we had recovered
ourselves a little. "I have searched for you all over the place." "You do not know it all yet, or you would have found me," I said,
pretending to walk on. "No, you shall not go now!" he exclaimed, pacing beside me. "Why won't you
be amiable, and make me feel at home?" "I do apologize if I have been unamiable," I said, with great frankness. "Mrs. Carruthers always brought me up to have such good manners." After that he talked to me for half an hour about the place. He seemed to have forgotten his vehemence of the night before. He asked
all sorts of questions, and showed a sentiment and a delicacy I should not
have expected from his hard face. I was quite sorry when the gong sounded
for luncheon and we went in. I have no settled plan in my head. I seem to be drifting--tasting for the
first time some power over another human being. It gave me delicious
thrills to see his eagerness when contrasted with the dry refusal of my
hand only the day before. At lunch I addressed myself to Mr. Barton; he was too flattered at my
attention, and continued to chatter garrulously. The rain came on and poured and beat against the window-panes with a
sudden, angry thud. No chance of further walks abroad. I escaped up-stairs
while the butler was speaking to Mr. Carruthers, and began helping
Veronique to pack. Chaos and desolation it all seemed in my cosey rooms. While I was on my knees in front of a great wooden box, hopelessly trying
to stow away books, a crisp tap came to the door, and without more ado my
host--yes, he is that now--entered the room. "Good Lord! what is all this?" he exclaimed. "What are you doing?" "Packing," I said, not getting up. He made an impatient gesture. "Nonsense!" he said. "There is no need to pack. I tell you I will not let
you go. I am going to marry you and keep you here always." I sat down on the floor and began to laugh. "You think so, do you?" "Yes." "You can't force me to marry you, you know--can you? I want to see the
world. I don't want any tiresome man bothering after me. If I ever do
marry, it will be because--oh, because--" and I stopped and began fiddling
with the cover of a book. "What?" "Mrs. Carruthers said it was so foolish--but I believe I should prefer to
marry some one I liked. Oh, I know you think that silly--" and I stopped
him as he was about to speak--"but of course, as it does not last, anyway,
it might be good for a little to begin like that--don't you think so?" He looked round the room, and on through the wide-open double doors into
my dainty bedroom, where Veronique was still packing. "You are very cosey here; it is absurd of you to leave it," he said. I got up off the floor and went to the window and back. I don't know why I
felt moved--a sudden sense of the cosiness came over me. The world looked
wet and bleak outside. "Why do you say you want me to marry you, Mr. Carruthers?" I said. "You
are joking, of course." "I am not joking. I am perfectly serious. I am ready to carry out my
aunt's wishes. It can be no new idea to you, and you must have worldly
sense enough to realize it would be the best possible solution of your
future. I can show you the world, you know." He appeared to be extraordinarily good-looking as he stood there, his face
to the dying light. Supposing I took him at his word, after all! "But what has suddenly changed your ideas since yesterday? You told me you
had come down to make it clear to me that you could not possibly obey her
orders." "That was yesterday," he said. "I had not really seen you--to-day I think
differently." "It is just because you are sorry for me; I suppose I seem so lonely," I
whispered, demurely. "It is perfectly impossible, what you propose to do--to go and live by
yourself at a London hotel--the idea drives me mad." "It will be delightful--no one to order me about from day to night!" "Listen," he said, and he flung himself into an arm-chair. "You can marry
me, and I will take you to Paris, or where you want, and I won't order you
about--only I shall keep the other beasts of men from looking at you." But I told him at once that I thought that would be very dull. "I have
never had the chance of any one looking at me," I said, "and I want to
feel what it is like. Mrs. Carruthers always assured me I was very pretty,
you know, only she said that I was certain to come to a bad end, because
of my type, unless I got married at once, and then if my head was screwed
on it would not matter; but I don't agree with her." He walked up and down the room impatiently. "That is just it," he said. "I would rather be the first--I would rather
you began by me. I am strong enough to ward off the rest." "What does 'beginning by you' mean?" I asked, with great candor. "Old Lord
Bentworth said I should begin with him, when he was here to shoot
pheasants last autumn; he said it could not matter, he was so old; but I
didn't----"

Mr. Carruthers bounded up from his chair. "You didn't what! Good Lord! what did he want you to do?" he asked,
aghast. "Well," I said, and I looked down for a moment; I felt stupidly shy. "He
wanted me to kiss him." Mr. Carruthers looked almost relieved. It was strange. "The old wretch! Nice company my aunt seems to have kept!" he exclaimed. "Could she not take better care of you than that--to let you be insulted
by her guests?" "I don't think Lord Bentworth meant to insult me. He only said he had
never seen such a red, curly mouth as mine; and as I was bound to go to
the devil some day with that, and such hair, I might begin by kissing
him--he explained it all." "And were you not very angry?" his voice wrathful. "No, not very; I could not be, I was shaking so with laughter. If you
could have seen the silly old thing, like a wizened monkey, with dyed hair
and an eye-glass--it was too comic! I only told you because you said the
sentence 'begin with you,' and I wanted to know if it was the same
thing----"

Mr. Carruthers's eyes had such a strange expression--puzzle and amusement,
and something else. He came over close to me. "Because," I went on, "if so--I believe if that is always the beginning, I
don't want any beginnings. I haven't the slightest desire to kiss any one. I should simply hate it." Mr. Carruthers laughed. "Oh, you are only a baby child, after all!" he
said. This annoyed me. I got up with great dignity. "Tea will be ready in the
white drawing-room," I said, stiffly, and walked towards my bedroom door. He came after me. "Send your maid away, and let us have it up here," he said. "I like this
room." But I was not to be appeased thus easily, and deliberately called
Veronique and gave her fresh directions. "Poor old Mr. Barton will be feeling so lonely," I said, as I went out
into the passage. "I am going to see that he has a nice tea," and I looked
back at Mr. Carruthers over my shoulder. Of course, he followed me, and we
went together down the stairs. In the hall a footman with a telegram met us. He tore it open impatiently. Then he looked quite annoyed. "I hope you won't mind," he said, "but a friend of mine, Lord Robert
Vavasour, is arriving this afternoon. He is a--er--great judge of
pictures. I forgot I asked him to come down and look at them; it clean
went out of my head." I told him he was host, and why should I object to what guests he had. "Besides, I am going myself to-morrow," I said, "if Veronique can get the
packing done." "Nonsense! How can I make you understand that I do not mean to let you go
at all?" I did not answer--only looked at him defiantly. Mr. Barton was waiting patiently for us in the white drawing-room, and we
had not been munching muffins for five minutes when the sound of wheels
crunching the gravel of the great sweep--the windows of this room look out
that way--interrupted our made conversation. "This must be Bob arriving," Mr. Carruthers said, and went reluctantly
into the hall to meet his guest. They came back together presently, and he introduced Lord Robert to me. I felt at once he was rather a pet. Such a shape! Just like the Apollo
Belvedere! I do love that look, with a tiny waist and nice shoulders, and
looking as if he were as lithe as a snake, and yet could break pokers in
half like Mr. Rochester in _Jane Eyre_. He has great, big, sleepy eyes of blue, and rather a plaintive expression,
and a little fairish mustache turned up at the corners, and the nicest
mouth one ever saw; and when you see him moving, and the back of his head,
it makes you think all the time of a beautifully groomed thorough-bred
horse. I don't know why. At once--in a minute--when we looked at each
other, I felt I should like "Bob." He has none of Mr. Carruthers's
cynical, hard expression, and I am sure he can't be nearly as old--not
more than twenty-seven or so. He seemed perfectly at home--sat down and had tea, and talked in the most
casual, friendly way. Mr. Carruthers appeared to freeze up, Mr. Barton got
more _banal_, and the whole thing entertained me immensely. I often used to long for adventures in the old days with Mrs. Carruthers,
and here I am really having them! Such a situation! I am sure people would think it most improper! I alone
in the house with these three men! I felt I really would have to go--but
where? Meanwhile I have every intention of amusing myself. Lord Robert and I seemed to have a hundred things to say to each other. I
do like his voice--and he is so perfectly _sans gene_ it makes no
difficulties. By the end of tea we were as old friends. Mr. Carruthers got
more and more polite and stiff, and finally jumped up and hurried his
guest off to the smoking-room. I put on such a duck of a frock for dinner--one of the sweetest,
chastened simplicity, in black, showing peeps of skin through the thin
part at the top. Nothing could be more demure or becoming, and my hair
would not behave, and stuck out in rebellious waves and curls everywhere. I thought it would be advisable not to be in too good time, so sauntered
down after I knew dinner was announced. They were both standing on the hearth-rug. I always forget to count Mr.
Barton; he was in some chair, I suppose, but I did not notice him. Mr. Carruthers is the taller--about one inch. He must be a good deal over
six feet, because the other one is very tall, too; but now that one saw
them together, Mr. Carruthers's figure appeared stiff and set besides Lord
Robert's, and he hasn't got nearly such a little waist. But they really
are lovely creatures, both of them, and I don't yet know which I like
best. We had such an engaging time at dinner! I was as provoking as I could be
in the time, sympathetically, absorbingly interested in Mr. Barton's long
stories, and only looking at the other two now and then from under my
eyelashes; while I talked in the best demure fashion that I am sure even
Lady Katherine Montgomerie--a neighbor of ours--would have approved of. They should not be able to say I could not chaperone myself in any
situation. "Dam good port this, Christopher," Lord Robert said, when the '47 was
handed round. "Is this what you asked me down to sample?" "I thought it was to give your opinion about the pictures?" I exclaimed,
surprised. "Mr. Carruthers said you were a great judge." They looked at each other. "Oh--ah--yes," said Lord Robert, lying transparently. "Pictures are
awfully interesting. Will you show me them after dinner?" "The light is too dim for a connoisseur to investigate them properly," I
said. "I shall have it all lit by electricity as soon as possible; I wrote about
it to-day," Mr. Carruthers announced, sententiously. "But I will show you
the pictures myself, to-morrow, Bob." This at once decided me to take Lord Robert round to-night, and I told him
so in a velvet voice while Mr. Barton was engaging Christopher's
attention. They stayed such a long time in the dining-room after I left that I was on
my way to bed when they came out into the hall, and could with difficulty
be persuaded to remain--for a few moments. "I am too awfully sorry," Lord Robert said. "I could not get away. I do
not know what possessed Christopher; he would sample ports, and talked the
hind-leg off a donkey, till at last I said to him straight out I wanted to
come to you. So here I am. Now you won't go to bed, will you?--please,
please." He has such pleading blue eyes, imploring pathetically, like a baby in
distress, it is quite impossible to resist him--and we started down the
gallery. Of course, he did not know the difference between a Canaletto and a
Turner, and hardly made a pretence of being interested; in fact, when we
got to the end where the early Italians hang, and I was explaining the
wonderful texture of a Madonna, he said:

"They all look sea-sick and out of shape. Don't you think we might sit in
that comfy window-seat and talk of something else?" Then he told me he
loved pictures, but not this sort. "I like people to look human, you know, even on canvas," he said. "All
these ladies appear as if they were getting enteric, like people used in
Africa; and I don't like their halos and things; and all the men are old
and bald. But you must not think me a Goth. You will teach me their
points, won't you?--and then I shall love them." I said I did not care a great deal for them myself, except the color. "Oh, I am so glad!" he said. "I should like to find we admired the same
things; but no picture could interest me as much as your hair. It is the
loveliest thing I have ever seen, and you do it so beautifully." That did please me. He has the most engaging ways--Lord Robert--and he is
very well informed, not stupid a bit, or thick, only absolutely simple and
direct. We talked softly together, quite happy for a while. Then Mr. Carruthers got rid of Mr. Barton and came towards us. I settled
myself more comfortably on the velvet cushions. Purple velvet cushions and
curtains in this gallery, good old relics of early Victorian taste. Lots
of the house is awful, but these curtains always please me. Mr. Carruthers's face was as stern as a stone bust of Augustus Caesar. I am
sure the monks in the Inquisition looked like that. I do wonder what he
was going to say, but Lord Robert did not give him time. "Do go away, Christopher," he said. "Miss Travers is going to teach me
things about Italian Madonnas, and I can't keep my attention if there is a
third person about." I suppose if Mr. Carruthers had not been a diplomat he would have sworn,
but I believe that kind of education makes you able to put your face how
you like, so he smiled sweetly and took a chair near. "I shall not leave you, Bob," he said. "I do not consider you are a good
companion for Miss Evangeline. I am responsible for her, and I am going to
take care of her." "Then you should not have asked him here if he is not a respectable
person," I said, innocently. "But Italian Madonnas ought to chasten and
elevate his thoughts. Anyway, your responsibility towards me is
self-constituted. I am the only person whom I mean to obey," and I settled
myself deliberately in the velvet pillows. "Not a good companion!" exclaimed Lord Robert. "What dam cheek,
Christopher! I have not my equal in the whole Household Cavalry, as you
know." They both laughed, and we continued to talk in a sparring way--Mr.
Carruthers sharp and subtle, and fine as a sword-blade; Lord Robert
downright and simple, with an air of a puzzled baby. When I thought they were both wanting me very much to stay, I got up and
said good-night. They both came down the gallery with me, and insisted upon each lighting a
candle from the row of burnished silver candlesticks in the hall, which
they presented to me with great mock-homage. It annoyed me--I don't know
why--and I suddenly froze up and declined them both, while I said
good-night again stiffly, and walked in my most stately manner up the
stairs. I could see Lord Robert's eyebrows puckered into a more plaintive
expression than ever while he let the beautiful silver candlestick hang,
dropping the grease onto the polished oak floor. Mr. Carruthers stood quite still, and put his light back on the table. His
face was cynical and rather amused. I can't say what irritation I felt,
and immediately decided to leave on the morrow--but where to, fate or the
devil could only know. When I got to my room a lump came in my throat. Veronique had gone to bed,
tired out with her day's packing. I suddenly felt utterly alone--all the exaltation gone. For the moment I
hated the two down-stairs. I felt the situation equivocal and untenable,
and it had amused me so much an hour ago. It is stupid and silly, and makes one's nose red, but I felt like crying a
little before I got into bed. BRANCHES,

                                     Saturday afternoon, _November 5th._


This morning I woke with a headache, to see the rain beating against my
windows, and mist and fog--a fitting day for the 5th of November. I would
not go down to breakfast. Veronique brought me mine to my sitting-room
fire, and, with Spartan determination, I packed steadily all the morning. About twelve a note came up from Lord Robert. I put it in. DEAR MISS TRAVERS,--

    Why are you hiding? Was I a bore last night? Do forgive me
    and come down. Has Christopher locked you in your room? I will murder the brute if he has! Yours very sincerely,

                                ROBERT VAVASOUR. "Can't; I am packing," I scribbled in pencil on the envelope, and gave
it back to Charles, who was waiting in the hall for the answer. Two
minutes after, Lord Robert walked into the room, the door of which the
footman had left open. "I have come to help you," he said, in that voice of his that sounds so
sure of a welcome you can't snub him. "But where are you going?" "I don't know," I said, a little forlornly, and then bent down and
vigorously collected photographs. "Oh, but you can't go to London by yourself!" he said, aghast. "Look
here, I will come up with you, and take you to my aunt, Lady Merrenden. She is such a dear, and I am sure when I have told her all about you she
will be delighted to take care of you for some days until you can hunt
round." He looked such a boy, and his face was so kind, I was touched. "Oh no, Lord Robert! I cannot do that, but I thank you. I don't want to
be under an obligation to any one," I said, firmly. "Mr. Carruthers
suggests a way out of the difficulty--that I should marry him, and stay
here. I don't think he means it, really, but he pretends he does." He sat down on the edge of a table already laden with books, most of
which overbalanced and fell crash on the floor. "So Christopher wants you to marry him--the old fox?" he said,
apparently oblivious of the wreck of literature he had caused. "But you
won't do that, will you? And yet I have no business to say that. He is a
dam good friend, Christopher." "I am sure you ought not to swear so often, Lord Robert; it shocks me,
brought up as I have been," I said, with the air of a little angel. "Do I swear?" he asked, surprised. "Oh no, I don't think so--at least,
there is no 'n' to the end of the 'dams,' so they are only an innocent
ornament to conversation. But I won't do it, if you don't wish me to." After that he helped me with the books, and was so merry and kind I soon
felt cheered up, and by lunchtime all were finished and in the boxes
ready to be tied up and taken away. Veronique, too, had made great
progress in the adjoining room, and was standing stiff and _maussade_ by
my dressing-table when I came in. She spoke respectfully in French, and
asked me if I had made my plans yet, for, as she explained to me, her
own position seemed precarious, and yet, having been with me for five
years, she did not feel she could leave me at a juncture like this. At
the same time she hoped mademoiselle would make some suitable decision,
as she feared, respectfully, it was "une si drole de position pour une
demoiselle du monde," alone with "ces messieurs." I could not be angry; it was quite true what she said. "I shall go up this evening to Claridge's, Veronique," I assured
her--"by about the 5.15 train. We will wire to them after luncheon." She seemed comforted, but she added--in the abstract--that a rich
marriage was what was obviously mademoiselle's fate, and she felt sure
great happiness and many jewels would await mademoiselle if mademoiselle
could be persuaded to make up her mind. Nothing is sacred from one's
maid. She knew all about Mr. Carruthers, of course. Poor old Veronique! I have a big, warm corner for her in my heart. Sometimes she treats me
with the frigid respect one would pay to a queen, and at others I am
almost her _enfant_, so tender and motherly she is to me. And she puts
up with all my tempers and moods, and pets me like a baby just when I am
the worst of all. Lord Robert had left me reluctantly when the luncheon gong sounded. "Haven't we been happy?" he said, taking it for granted I felt the same
as he did. This is a very engaging quality of his, and makes one feel
sympathetic, especially when he looks into one's eyes with his sleepy
blue ones. He has lashes as long and curly as a gypsy's baby. Mr. Carruthers was alone in the dining-room when I got in; he was
looking out of the window, and turned round sharply as I came up the
room. I am sure he would like to have been killing flies on the panes if
he had been a boy. His eyes were steel. "Where have you been all the time?" he asked, when he had shaken hands
and said good-morning. "Up in my room, packing," I said, simply. "Lord Robert was so kind he
helped me. We have got everything done; and may I order the carriage for
the 5.15 train, please?" "Certainly not. Confound Lord Robert!" Mr. Carruthers said. "What
business is it of his? You are not to go. I won't let you. Dear, silly
little child!--" his voice was quite moved. "You can't possibly go out
into the world all alone. Evangeline, why won't you marry me? I--do you
know, I believe--I shall love you----"

"I should have to be _perfectly sure_ that the person I married loved
me, Mr. Carruthers," I said, demurely, "before I consented to finish up
my life like that." He had no time to answer, for Mr. Barton and Lord Robert came into the
room. There seemed a gloom over luncheon. There were pauses, and Lord Robert
had a more pathetic expression than ever. His hands are a nice
shape--but so are Mr. Carruthers's; they both look very much like
gentlemen. Before we had finished, a note was brought in to me. It was from Lady
Katherine Montgomerie. She was too sorry, she said, to hear of my lonely
position, and she was writing to ask if I would not come over and spend
a fortnight with them at Tryland Court. It was not well worded, and I had never cared much for Lady Katherine,
but it was fairly kind, and fitted in perfectly with my plans. She had probably heard of Mr. Carruthers's arrival, and was scandalized
at my being alone in the house with him. Both men had their eyes fixed on my face when I looked up, as I finished
reading the note. "Lady Katherine Montgomerie writes to ask me to Tryland," I said. "So if
you will excuse me I will answer it, and say I will come this
afternoon," and I got up. Mr. Carruthers rose, too, and followed me into the library. He
deliberately shut the door and came over to the writing-table where I
sat down. "Well, if I let you go, will you tell her then that you are engaged to
me, and I am going to marry you as soon as possible?" "No, indeed I won't," I said, decidedly. "I am not going to marry you,
or any one, Mr. Carruthers. What do you think of me? Fancy my consenting
to come back here forever, and live with you, when I don't know you a
bit! And having to put up with your--perhaps--kissing me,
and--and--things of that sort. It is perfectly dreadful to think of!" He laughed as if in spite of himself. "But supposing I promised not to
kiss you?" "Even so," I said, and I couldn't help biting the end of my pen. "It
could happen that I might get a feeling I wanted to kiss some one
else--and there it is! Once you're married, everything nice is wrong!" "Evangeline! I won't let you go--out of my life--you strange little
witch! You have upset me, disturbed me--I can settle to nothing. I seem
to want you so very much." "Pouf!" I said, and I pouted at him. "You have everything in your life to fill it--position, riches, friends. You don't want a green-eyed adventuress." I bent down and wrote steadily to Lady Katherine. I would be there about
six o'clock, I said, and thanked her in my best style. "If I let you go, it is only for the time," Mr. Carruthers said as I
signed my name. "I _intend_ you to marry me--do you hear?" "Again I say, 'Qui vivre verra!'" I laughed and rose with the note in my
hand. Lord Robert looked almost ready to cry when I told him I was off in the
afternoon. "I shall see you again," he said. "Lady Katherine is a relation of my
aunt's husband, Lord Merrenden. I don't know her myself, though." I do not believe him. How can he see me again? Young men do talk a lot
of nonsense! "I shall come over on Wednesday to see how you are getting on," Mr.
Carruthers said. "Please do be in." I promised I would, and then I came up-stairs. And so it has come to an end, my life at Branches. I am going to start a
new phase of existence, my first beginning as an adventuress! How completely all one's ideas can change in a few days! This day three
weeks ago Mrs. Carruthers was alive. This day two weeks ago I found
myself no longer a prospective heiress, and only three days ago I was
contemplating calmly the possibility of marrying Mr. Carruthers; and
now, for heaven, I would not marry any one! And so, for fresh woods and
pastures new! Oh, I want to see the world, and lots of different human
beings; I want to know what it is makes the clock go round--that great
big clock of life. I want to dance and to sing and to laugh, and to
_live_--and--and--yes, perhaps some day to kiss some one I love! TRYLAND COURT HEADINGTON,

                                             Wednesday, _November 9th._


Goodness gracious! I have been here four whole days, and I continually ask
myself how I shall be able to stand it for the rest of the fortnight. Before I left Branches, I began to have a sinking at the heart. There were
horribly touching farewells with housekeepers and people I have known
since a child, and one hates to have that choky feeling, especially as
just at the end of it, while tears were still in my eyes, Mr. Carruthers
came out into the hall and saw them; so did Lord Robert! I blinked and blinked, but one would trickle down my nose. It was a
horribly awkward moment. Mr. Carruthers made profuse inquiries as to my comforts for the drive, in
a tone colder than ever, and insisted upon my drinking some cherry brandy. Such fussing is quite unlike his usual manner, so I suppose he, too, felt
it was a tiresome _quart d'heure_. Lord Robert did not hide his concern;
he came up to me and took my hand while Christopher was speaking to the
footman who was going with me. "You are a dear," he said, "and a brick, and don't you forget I shall come
and stay with Lady Katherine before you leave, so you won't feel you are
all among strangers." I thanked him, and he squeezed my hand so kindly. I do like Lord Robert. Very soon I was gay again and _insouciante_, and the last they saw of me
was smiling out of the brougham window as I drove off in the dusk. They
both stood upon the steps and waved to me. Tea was over at Tryland when I arrived--such a long, damp drive! And I
explained to Lady Katherine how sorry I was to have had to come so late,
and that I could not think of troubling her to have up fresh for me; but
she insisted, and after a while a whole new lot came, made in a hurry with
the water not boiling, and I had to gulp down a nasty cup--Ceylon tea,
too! I hate Ceylon tea! Mr. Montgomerie warmed himself before the fire,
quite shielding it from us, who shivered on a row of high-backed chairs
beyond the radius of the hearth-rug. He has a way of puffing out his cheeks and making a noise like "Burrrr,"
which sounds very bluff and hearty until you find he has said a mean thing
about some one directly after. And while red hair looks very well on me, I
do think a man with it is the ugliest thing in creation. His face is red,
and his nose and cheeks almost purple, and fiery whiskers, fierce enough
to frighten a cat in a dark lane. He was a rich Scotch manufacturer, and poor Lady Katherine had to marry
him, I suppose; though, as she is Scotch herself, I dare say she does not
notice that he is rather coarse. There are two sons and six daughters--one married, four grown-up, and one
at school in Brussels--and all with red hair! But straight and coarse, and
with freckles and white eyelashes. So, really, it is very kind of Lady
Katherine to have asked me here. They are all as good as gold on top, and one does poker-work, and another
binds books, and a third embroiders altar-cloths, and the fourth knits
ties--all for charities, and they ask every one to subscribe to them
directly they come to the house. The tie and the altar-cloth ones were
sitting working hard in the drawing-room--Kirstie and Jean are their
names; Jessie and Maggie, the poker-worker and the bookbinder, have a
sitting-room to themselves--their work-shop they call it. They were there
still, I suppose, for I did not see them until dinner. We used to meet
once a year at Mrs. Carruthers's Christmas parties ever since ages and
ages, and I remember I hated their tartan sashes, and they generally had
colds in their heads, and one year they gave every one mumps, so they
were not asked the next. The altar-cloth one, Jean, is my age, the other
three are older. It was really very difficult to find something to say, and I can quite
understand common people fidgeting when they feel worried like this. I
have never fidgeted since eight years ago, the last time Mrs. Carruthers
boxed my ears for it. Just before going up to dress for dinner Mr.
Montgomerie asked blank out if it was true that Mr. Carruthers had
arrived. Lady Katherine had been skirting round this subject for a quarter
of an hour. I only said yes, but that was not enough, and, once started, he asked a
string of questions, with "Burrrr" several times in between. Was Mr.
Carruthers going to shoot the pheasants in November? Had he decided to
keep on the chef? Had he given up diplomacy? I said I really did not know
any of these things, I had seen so little of him. Lady Katherine nodded her head, while she measured a comforter she was
knitting, to see if it was long enough. "I am sure it must have been most awkward for you, his arriving at all; it
was not very good taste on his part, I am afraid, but I suppose he wished
to see his inheritance as soon as possible," she said. I nearly laughed, thinking what she would say if she knew which part of
his inheritance he had really come to see. I do wonder if she has ever
heard that Mrs. Carruthers left me to him, more or less, in her will! "I hope you had your old governess with you, at least," she continued, as
we went up the stairs, "so that you could feel less uncomfortable--really
a most shocking situation for a girl alone in the house with an unmarried
man!" I told her Mr. Barton was there, too, but I had not the courage to say
anything about Lord Robert; only that Mr. Carruthers had a friend of his
down who was a great judge of pictures, to see them. "Oh, a valuer, I suppose. I hope he is not going to sell the Correggios,"
she exclaimed. "No, I don't think so," I said, leaving the part about the valuer
unanswered. Mr. Carruthers's being unmarried seemed to worry her most; she went on
about it again before we got to my bedroom door. "I happened to hear a rumor at Miss Sheriton's" (the wool-shop in
Headington, our town) "this morning," she said, "and so I wrote at once to
you. I felt how terrible it would be for one of my own dear girls to be
left alone with a bachelor like that. I almost wonder you did not stay up
in your own rooms." I thanked her for her kind thought, and she left me at last. If she only knew! The unmarried ones who came down the passage to talk to
mademoiselle were not half so saucy as the old fellows with wives
somewhere. Lord Bentworth was married, and he wanted me to kiss him,
whereas Colonel Grimston had no wife, and he never said Bo! to a goose. And I do wonder what she thought Mr. Carruthers was going to do to me,
that it would have been wise for me to stay up in my rooms. Perhaps she
thinks diplomats, having lived in foreign places, are sort of wild beasts. My room is frightful after my pretty rosy chintzes at Branches. Nasty
yellowish wood furniture, and nothing much matching; however, there are
plenty of wardrobes, so Veronique is content. They were all in the drawing-room when I got down, and Malcolm, the eldest
son, who is in a Highland militia regiment, had arrived by a seven-o'clock
train. I had that dreadful feeling of being very late and Mr. Montgomerie wanting
to swear at me, though it was only a minute past a quarter to eight. He said "Burrrr" several times, and flew off to the dining-room with me
tucked under his arm, murmuring it gave no cook a chance to keep the
dinner waiting. So I expected something wonderful in the way of food, but
it is not half so good as our chef sent up at Branches. And the footmen
are not all the same height, and their liveries don't fit like Mrs.
Carruthers always insisted that ours should do. Malcolm _is_ a titsy pootsy man. Not as tall as I am, and thin as a rail,
with a look of his knees being too near together. He must be awful in a
kilt, and I am sure he shivers when the wind blows--he has that air. I
don't like kilts--unless men are big, strong, bronzed creatures that don't
seem ashamed of their bare bits. I saw some splendid specimens marching,
once, in Edinburgh, and they swung their skirts just like the beautiful
ladies in the Bois, when mademoiselle and I went out of the Allee Mrs.
Carruthers told us to try always to walk in. Lady Catherine talked a great deal at dinner about politics and her
different charities, and the four girls were so respectful and interested,
but Mr. Montgomerie contradicted her whenever he could. I was glad when we
went into the drawing-room. That first evening was the worst of all, because we were all so strange;
one seems to get acclimatized to whatever it is after a while. Lady Katherine asked me if I had not some fancy-work to do. Kirstie had
begun her ties, and Jean the altar-cloth, again. "Do let Maggie run to your room and fetch it for you," she said. I was obliged to tell her I never did any. "But I--I can trim hats," I
said; it really seemed awful not to be able to do anything like them, I
felt I must say this as a kind of defence for myself. However, she seemed to think that hardly a lady's employment. "How clever of you!" Kirstie exclaimed. "I wish I could, but don't you
find that intermittent? You can't trim them all the time. Don't you feel
the want of a constant employment?" I was obliged to say I had not felt like that yet, but I could not tell
them I particularly loved sitting perfectly still, doing nothing. Jessie and Maggie played Patience at two tables which folded up, and which
they brought out and sat down to with a deliberate accustomed look which
made me know at once they did this every night, and that I should see
those tables planted exactly on those two spots of carpet every evening
during my whole stay. I suppose it is because they cannot bring the
poker-work and the bookbinding into the drawing-room. "Won't you play us something?" Lady Katherine asked, plaintively. Evidently it was not permitted to do nothing, so I got up and went to the
piano. Fortunately I know heaps of things by heart, and I love them, and would
have gone on and on, so as to fill up the time, but they all said "Thank
you" in a chorus after each bit, and it rather put me off. Mr. Montgomerie and Malcolm did not come in for ages, and I could see Lady
Katherine getting uneasy. One or two things at dinner suggested to me that
these two were not on the best terms, perhaps she feared they had come to
blows in the dining-room. The Scotch, Mrs. Carruthers said, have all kinds
of rough customs that other nations do not keep up any longer. They did turn up at last, and Mr. Montgomerie was purple all over his
face, and Malcolm a pale green, but there were no bruises on him; only one
could see they had had a terrible quarrel. There is something in breeding, after all, even if one is of a barbarous
country. Lady Katherine behaved so well, and talked charities and politics
faster than ever, and did not give them time for any further outburst,
though I fancy I heard a few "damns" mixed with the "burrrrs," and not
without the "n" on just for ornament, like Lord Robert's. It was a frightful evening. Wednesday, _November 9th._
                                                (Continued.) Malcolm walked beside me going to church the next day. He looked a little
less depressed, and I tried to cheer him up. He did not tell me what his worries were, but Jean had said something
about it when she came into my room as I was getting ready. It appears he
has got into trouble over a horse called Angela Grey--Jean gathered this
from Lady Katherine; she said her father was very angry about it, as he
had spent so much money on it. To me it does not sound like a horse's name, and I told Jean so, but she
was perfectly horrified, and said it must be a horse, because they were
not acquainted with any Angela Grey, and did not even know any Greys at
all. So it must be a horse! I think that a ridiculous reason, as Mrs. Carruthers said all young men
knew people one wouldn't want to; and it was silly to make a fuss about
it, and that they couldn't help it, and they would be very dull if they
were as good as gold, like girls. But I expect Lady Katherine thinks differently about things to Mrs.
Carruthers, and the daughters the same. I shall ask Lord Robert when I see him again if it is a horse or not. Malcolm is not attractive, and I was glad the church was not far off. No carriages are allowed out on Sunday, so we had to walk; and coming back
it began to rain, and we could not go round the stables, which I
understand is the custom here every Sunday. Everything is done because it is the custom, not because you want to amuse
yourself. "When it rains and we can't go round the stables," Kirstie said, "we look
at the old _Illustrated London News_, and go on our way from afternoon
church." I did not particularly want to do that, so stayed in my room as long as I
could. The four girls were seated at a large table in the hall, each with
a volume in front of her when I got down at last. They must know every
picture by heart, if they do it every Sunday it rains--they stay in
England all the winter. Jean made room for me beside her. "I am at the 'Sixties,'" she said. "I finished the 'Fifties' last Easter." So they evidently do even this with a method. I asked her if there were not any new books they wanted to read, but she
said Lady Katherine did not care for their looking at magazines or novels
unless she had been through them first, and she had not time for many, so
they kept the few they had to read between tea and dinner on Sunday. By this time I felt I should do something wicked; and if the luncheon gong
had not sounded, I do not know what would have happened. Mr. Montgomerie said rather gallant things to me when the cheese and port
came along, while the girls looked shocked, and Lady Katherine had a stony
stare. I suppose he is like this because he is married. I wonder, though,
if young married men are the same. I have never met any yet. By Monday night I was beginning to feel the end of the world would come
soon. It is ten times worse than ever having had to conceal all my
feelings and abjectly obey Mrs. Carruthers. Because she did say cynical,
entertaining things sometimes to me, and to her friends, that made one
laugh. And one felt it was only she who made the people who were dependent
upon her do her way, because she herself was so selfish, and that the rest
of the world were free if once one got outside. But Lady Katherine and the whole Montgomerie _milieu_ give you the
impression that everything and everybody must be ruled by rules; and no
one could have a right to an individual opinion in any sphere of society. You simply can't laugh--they asphyxiate you. I am looking forward to this
afternoon and Mr. Carruthers coming over. I often think of the days at
Branches, and how exciting it was, with those two, and I wish I were back
again. I have tried to be polite and nice to them all here, and yet they don't
seem absolutely pleased. Malcolm gazes at me with sheep's eyes. They are a washy blue, with the
family white eyelashes (how different to Lord Robert's!). He has the most
precise, regulated manner, and never says a word of slang; he ought to
have been a young curate, and I can't imagine his spending money on any
Angela Greys, even if she is a horse or not. He speaks to me when he can, and asks me to go for walks round the golf
course. The four girls play for an hour and three-quarters every morning. They never seem to enjoy anything--the whole of life is a solid duty. I am
sitting up in my room, and Veronique has had the sense to have my fire
lighted early. I suppose Mr. Carruthers won't come until about four--an
hour more to be got through. I have said I must write letters, and so
have escaped from them and not had to go for the usual drive. I suppose he will have the sense to ask for me, even if Lady Katherine is
not back when he comes. This morning it was so fine and frosty a kind of devil seemed to creep
into me. I have been _so_ good since Saturday, so when Malcolm said, in
his usual prim, priggish voice, "Miss Travers, may I have the pleasure of
taking you for a little exercise," I jumped up without consulting Lady
Katherine, and went and put my things on, and we started. I had a feeling that they were all thinking I was doing something wrong,
and so, of course, it made me worse. I said every kind of simple thing I
could to Malcolm to make him jump, and looked at him now and then from
under my eyelashes. So when we got to a stile, he did want to help me, and
his eyes were quite wobblish. He has a giggle right up in the treble, and
it comes out at such unexpected moments, when there is nothing to laugh
at. I suppose it is being Scotch--he has just caught the meaning of some
former joke. There would never be any use in saying things to him like to
Lord Robert and Mr. Carruthers, because one would have left the place
before he understood, if even then. There was an old Sir Thomas Farquharson who came to Branches, and he
grasped the deepest jokes of Mrs. Carruthers--so deep that even I did not
understand them--and he was Scotch. It may be they are like that only when
they have red hair. When I was seated on top of a stile, Malcolm suddenly announced:

"I hear you are going to London when you go. I hope you will let me come
and see you; but I wish you lived here always." "I don't," I said, and then I remembered that sounded rather rude, and
they had been kind to me. "At least, you know, I think the country is
dull; don't you--for always?" "Yes," he replied, primly, "for men, but it is where I should always wish
to see the woman I respected." "Are towns so wicked?" I asked, in my little-angel voice. "Tell me of
their pitfalls, so that I may avoid them." "You must not believe everything people say to you, to begin with," he
said, seriously. "For one so young as you, I am afraid you will find your
path beset with temptations." "Oh, do tell me what!" I implored. "I have always wanted to know what
temptations were. Please tell me. If you come to see me--would you be a
temptation, or is temptation a thing and not a person?" I looked at him
so beseechingly he never for a second saw the twinkle in my eye. He coughed pompously. "I expect I should be," he said modestly. "Temptations are--er--er--Oh, I say, you know, I say--I don't know what to
say." "Oh, what a pity!" I said, regretfully. "I was hoping to hear all about it
from you, especially if you are one yourself; you must know." He looked gratified, but still confused. "You see, when you are quite alone in London, some man may make love to
you." "Oh, do you think so, _really_?" I asked, aghast. "That, I suppose, would
be frightful, if I were by myself in the room. Would it do, do you think,
if I left the sitting-room door open and kept Veronique on the other
side?" He looked at me hard, but he only saw the face of an unprotected angel,
and, becoming reassured, he said, gravely:

"Yes, it might be just as well." "You do surprise me about love," I said. "I had no idea it was a violent
kind of thing like that. I thought it began with grave reverence and
respect, and after years of offering flowers and humble compliments, and
bread-and-butter at tea-parties, the gentleman went down upon one knee and
made a declaration--'Clara Maria, I adore you; be mine'--and then one put
out a lily-white hand and, blushing, told him to rise; but that can't be
your sort, and you have not yet explained what temptation means." "It means more or less wanting to do what you ought not to." "Oh, then," I said, "I am having temptation all the time; aren't you? For
instance, I want to tear up Jean's altar-cloth, and rip Kirstie's ties,
and tool bad words on Jessie's bindings, and burn Maggie's wood-boxes." He looked horribly shocked and hurt, so I added at once:

"Of course, it must be lovely to be able to do these things; they are
perfect girls, and so clever, only it makes me feel like that because I
suppose I am--different." He looked at me critically. "Yes, you are different; I wish you would try
and be more like my sisters, then I should not feel so nervous about your
going to London." "It is too good of you to worry," I said, demurely. "But I don't think you
need, you know. I have rather a strong suspicion I am acquainted with the
way to take care of myself," and I bent down and laughed right in his
face, and jumped off the stile onto the other side. He did look such a teeny shrimp climbing after me! But it does not matter
what is their size, the vanity of men is just the same. I am sure he
thought he had only to begin making love to me himself and I would drop
like a ripe peach into his mouth. I teased him all the way back, until when we got in to lunch he did not
know whether he was on his head or his heels. Just as we came up to the
door he said:

"I thought your name was Evangeline; why did you say it was Clara Maria?" "Because it is not!" I laughed over my shoulder, and ran into the house. He stood on the steps, and if he had been one of the stable-boys he would
have scratched his head. Now I must stop and dress. I shall put on a black tea-frock I have. Mr.
Carruthers shall see I have not caught frumpdom from my hosts. _Night._


I do think men are the most horrid creatures--you can't believe what they
say or rely upon them for five minutes! Mrs. Carruthers was right; she
said, "Evangeline, remember, it is quite difficult enough to trust one's
self without trusting a man." Such an afternoon I have had! That annoying feeling of waiting for
something all the time and nothing happening. For Mr. Carruthers did not
turn up, after all. How I wish I had not dressed and expected him! He is probably saying to himself he is well out of the business, now I
have gone. I don't suppose he meant a word of his protestations to me. Well, he need not worry. I had no intention of jumping down his throat;
only I would have been glad to see him, because he is human, and not like
any one here. Of course, Lord Robert will be the same, and I shall probably never see
either of them again. How can Lord Robert get here when he does not know
Lady Katherine? No; it was just said to say something nice when I was
leaving, and he will be as horrid as Mr. Carruthers. I am thankful, at least, that I did not tell Lady Katherine; I should have
felt such a goose. Oh! I do wonder what I shall do next. I don't know at
all how much things cost; perhaps three hundred a year is very poor. I am
sure my best frocks always were five or six hundred francs each, and I
dare say hotels run away with money. But for the moment I am rich, as Mr.
Barton kindly advanced some of my legacy to me; and, oh, I am going to see
life! and it is absurd to be sad! I shall go to bed, and forget how cross
I feel. They are going to have a shoot here next week--pheasants. I wonder if they
will have a lot of old men. I have not heard all who are coming. Lady Katherine said to me after dinner this evening that she was sorry, as
she was afraid it would be most awkward for me their having a party, on
account of my deep mourning, and I, if I felt it dreadfully, I need not
consider they would find me the least rude if I preferred to have dinner
in my room. I don't want to have dinner in my room. Think of the stuffiness of it! And
perhaps hearing laughter going on down-stairs. I can always amuse myself watching faces, however dull they are. I thanked
her, and said it would not be at all necessary, as I must get accustomed
to seeing people. I could not count upon always meeting hostesses with
such kind thoughts as hers, and I might as well get used to it. She said "Yes," but not cordially. To-morrow Mrs. Mackintosh, the eldest daughter, is arriving with her four
children. I remember her wedding five years ago. I have never seen her
since. She was very tall and thin, and stooped dreadfully, and Mrs. Carruthers
said Providence had been very kind in giving her a husband at all. But
when Mr. Mackintosh tittuped down the aisle with her, I did not think so. A wee, sandy fellow about up to her shoulder! Oh, I would hate to be tied to that! I think to be tied to anything could
not be very nice. I wonder how I ever thought of marrying Mr. Carruthers
offhand! I feel now I shall never marry, for years. Of course one can't be an old
maid, but for a long time I mean to see life first. TRYLAND,

                                              Thursday, _November 10th._


                                                           BRANCHES,

                                                        _Wednesday._


    DEAR MISS TRAVERS,--

    I regret exceedingly I was unable to come over to Tryland
    to-day, but hope to do so before you leave. I trust you are
    well, and did not catch cold on the drive. Yours, very truly,

                                  CHRISTOPHER CARRUTHERS. _This_ is what I get this morning! Pig! Well, I sha'n't be in if he does come. I can just see him pulling
himself together once temptation (it makes me think of Malcolm!) is out
of his way; he no doubt feels he has had an escape, as I am nobody very
grand. The letters come early here, as everywhere, but in a bag which only Mr.
Montgomerie can open, and one has to wait until every one is seated at
breakfast before he produces the key and deals them all out. Mr. Carruthers's was the only one for me, and it had "Branches" on the
envelope, which attracted Mr. Montgomerie's attention, and he began to
"burrrr," and hardly gave me time to read it before he commenced to ask
questions apropos of the place, to get me to say what the letter was
about. He is a curious man. "Carruthers is a capital fellow, they tell me--er. You had better ask
him over quietly, Katherine, if he is all alone at Branches"--this with
one eye on me in a questioning way. I remained silent. "Perhaps he is off to London, though?" I pretended to be busy with my coffee. "Best pheasant-shoot in the county, and a close borough under the old
regime. Hope he will be more neighborly--Er--suppose he must shoot 'em
before November?" I buttered my toast. Then the "burrrrs" began. 