

E-text prepared by Janet Blenkinship and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/thirdviolet00cranarch





THE THIRD VIOLET

by

STEPHEN CRANE

Author of The Red Badge of Courage,
The Little Regiment, and Maggie







New York
D. Appleton and Company
1897

Copyright, 1897,
by D. Appleton and Company. Copyright, 1896, by Stephen Crane. THE THIRD VIOLET. CHAPTER I. The engine bellowed its way up the slanting, winding valley. Grey crags,
and trees with roots fastened cleverly to the steeps looked down at the
struggles of the black monster. When the train finally released its passengers they burst forth with the
enthusiasm of escaping convicts. A great bustle ensued on the platform
of the little mountain station. The idlers and philosophers from the
village were present to examine the consignment of people from the city. These latter, loaded with bundles and children, thronged at the stage
drivers. The stage drivers thronged at the people from the city. Hawker, with his clothes case, his paint-box, his easel, climbed
awkwardly down the steps of the car. The easel swung uncontrolled and
knocked against the head of a little boy who was disembarking backward
with fine caution. "Hello, little man," said Hawker, "did it hurt?" The
child regarded him in silence and with sudden interest, as if Hawker had
called his attention to a phenomenon. The young painter was politely
waiting until the little boy should conclude his examination, but a
voice behind him cried, "Roger, go on down!" A nursemaid was conducting
a little girl where she would probably be struck by the other end of the
easel. The boy resumed his cautious descent. The stage drivers made such great noise as a collection that as
individuals their identities were lost. With a highly important air, as
a man proud of being so busy, the baggageman of the train was thundering
trunks at the other employees on the platform. Hawker, prowling through
the crowd, heard a voice near his shoulder say, "Do you know where is
the stage for Hemlock Inn?" Hawker turned and found a young woman
regarding him. A wave of astonishment whirled into his hair, and he
turned his eyes quickly for fear that she would think that he had
looked at her. He said, "Yes, certainly, I think I can find it." At the
same time he was crying to himself: "Wouldn't I like to paint her,
though! What a glance--oh, murder! The--the--the distance in her eyes!" He went fiercely from one driver to another. That obdurate stage for
Hemlock Inn must appear at once. Finally he perceived a man who grinned
expectantly at him. "Oh," said Hawker, "you drive the stage for Hemlock
Inn?" The man admitted it. Hawker said, "Here is the stage." The young
woman smiled. The driver inserted Hawker and his luggage far into the end of the
vehicle. He sat there, crooked forward so that his eyes should see the
first coming of the girl into the frame of light at the other end of the
stage. Presently she appeared there. She was bringing the little boy,
the little girl, the nursemaid, and another young woman, who was at once
to be known as the mother of the two children. The girl indicated the
stage with a small gesture of triumph. When they were all seated
uncomfortably in the huge covered vehicle the little boy gave Hawker a
glance of recognition. "It hurted then, but it's all right now," he
informed him cheerfully. "Did it?" replied Hawker. "I'm sorry." "Oh, I didn't mind it much," continued the little boy, swinging his
long, red-leather leggings bravely to and fro. "I don't cry when I'm
hurt, anyhow." He cast a meaning look at his tiny sister, whose soft
lips set defensively. The driver climbed into his seat, and after a scrutiny of the group in
the gloom of the stage he chirped to his horses. They began a slow and
thoughtful trotting. Dust streamed out behind the vehicle. In front, the
green hills were still and serene in the evening air. A beam of gold
struck them aslant, and on the sky was lemon and pink information of the
sun's sinking. The driver knew many people along the road, and from time
to time he conversed with them in yells. The two children were opposite Hawker. They sat very correctly mucilaged
to their seats, but their large eyes were always upon Hawker, calmly
valuing him. "Do you think it nice to be in the country? I do," said the boy. "I like it very well," answered Hawker. "I shall go fishing, and hunting, and everything. Maybe I shall shoot a
bears." "I hope you may." "Did you ever shoot a bears?" "No." "Well, I didn't, too, but maybe I will. Mister Hollanden, he said he'd
look around for one. Where I live----"

"Roger," interrupted the mother from her seat at Hawker's side, "perhaps
every one is not interested in your conversation." The boy seemed
embarrassed at this interruption, for he leaned back in silence with an
apologetic look at Hawker. Presently the stage began to climb the hills,
and the two children were obliged to take grip upon the cushions for
fear of being precipitated upon the nursemaid. Fate had arranged it so that Hawker could not observe the girl with
the--the--the distance in her eyes without leaning forward and
discovering to her his interest. Secretly and impiously he wriggled in
his seat, and as the bumping stage swung its passengers this way and
that way, he obtained fleeting glances of a cheek, an arm, or a
shoulder. The driver's conversation tone to his passengers was also a yell. "Train
was an hour late t'night," he said, addressing the interior. "It'll be
nine o'clock before we git t' th' inn, an' it'll be perty dark
travellin'." Hawker waited decently, but at last he said, "Will it?" "Yes. No moon." He turned to face Hawker, and roared, "You're ol' Jim
Hawker's son, hain't yeh?" "Yes." "I thort I'd seen yeh b'fore. Live in the city now, don't yeh?" "Yes." "Want t' git off at th' cross-road?" "Yes." "Come up fer a little stay doorin' th' summer?" "Yes." "On'y charge yeh a quarter if yeh git off at cross-road. Useter charge
'em fifty cents, but I ses t' th' ol' man. 'Tain't no use. Goldern 'em,
they'll walk ruther'n put up fifty cents.' Yep. On'y a quarter." In the shadows Hawker's expression seemed assassinlike. He glanced
furtively down the stage. She was apparently deep in talk with the
mother of the children. CHAPTER II. When Hawker pushed at the old gate, it hesitated because of a broken
hinge. A dog barked with loud ferocity and came headlong over the grass. "Hello, Stanley, old man!" cried Hawker. The ardour for battle was
instantly smitten from the dog, and his barking swallowed in a gurgle of
delight. He was a large orange and white setter, and he partly expressed
his emotion by twisting his body into a fantastic curve and then dancing
over the ground with his head and his tail very near to each other. He
gave vent to little sobs in a wild attempt to vocally describe his
gladness. "Well, 'e was a dreat dod," said Hawker, and the setter,
overwhelmed, contorted himself wonderfully. There were lights in the kitchen, and at the first barking of the dog
the door had been thrown open. Hawker saw his two sisters shading their
eyes and peering down the yellow stream. Presently they shouted, "Here
he is!" They flung themselves out and upon him. "Why, Will! why, Will!" they panted. "We're awful glad to see you!" In a whirlwind of ejaculation and
unanswerable interrogation they grappled the clothes case, the
paint-box, the easel, and dragged him toward the house. He saw his old mother seated in a rocking-chair by the table. She had
laid aside her paper and was adjusting her glasses as she scanned the
darkness. "Hello, mother!" cried Hawker, as he entered. His eyes were
bright. The old mother reached her arms to his neck. She murmured soft
and half-articulate words. Meanwhile the dog writhed from one to
another. He raised his muzzle high to express his delight. He was always
fully convinced that he was taking a principal part in this ceremony of
welcome and that everybody was heeding him. "Have you had your supper?" asked the old mother as soon as she
recovered herself. The girls clamoured sentences at him. "Pa's out in
the barn, Will. What made you so late? He said maybe he'd go up to the
cross-roads to see if he could see the stage. Maybe he's gone. What
made you so late? And, oh, we got a new buggy!" The old mother repeated anxiously, "Have you had your supper?" "No," said Hawker, "but----"

The three women sprang to their feet. "Well, we'll git you something
right away." They bustled about the kitchen and dove from time to time
into the cellar. They called to each other in happy voices. Steps sounded on the line of stones that led from the door toward the
barn, and a shout came from the darkness. "Well, William, home again,
hey?" Hawker's grey father came stamping genially into the room. "I
thought maybe you got lost. I was comin' to hunt you," he said,
grinning, as they stood with gripped hands. "What made you so late?" While Hawker confronted the supper the family sat about and contemplated
him with shining eyes. His sisters noted his tie and propounded some
questions concerning it. His mother watched to make sure that he should
consume a notable quantity of the preserved cherries. "He used to be so
fond of 'em when he was little," she said. "Oh, Will," cried the younger sister, "do you remember Lil' Johnson? Yeh? She's married. Married las' June." "Is the boy's room all ready, mother?" asked the father. "We fixed it this mornin'," she said. "And do you remember Jeff Decker?" shouted the elder sister. "Well, he's
dead. Yep. Drowned, pickerel fishin'--poor feller!" "Well, how are you gitting along, William?" asked the father. "Sell many
pictures?" "An occasional one." "Saw your illustrations in the May number of Perkinson's." The old man
paused for a moment, and then added, quite weakly, "Pretty good." "How's everything about the place?" "Oh, just about the same--'bout the same. The colt run away with me last
week, but didn't break nothin', though. I was scared, because I had out
the new buggy--we got a new buggy--but it didn't break nothin'. I'm
goin' to sell the oxen in the fall; I don't want to winter 'em. And then
in the spring I'll get a good hoss team. I rented th' back five-acre to
John Westfall. I had more'n I could handle with only one hired hand. Times is pickin' up a little, but not much--not much." "And we got a new school-teacher," said one of the girls. "Will, you never noticed my new rocker," said the old mother, pointing. "I set it right where I thought you'd see it, and you never took no
notice. Ain't it nice? Father bought it at Monticello for my birthday. I
thought you'd notice it first thing." When Hawker had retired for the night, he raised a sash and sat by the
window smoking. The odour of the woods and the fields came sweetly to
his nostrils. The crickets chanted their hymn of the night. On the black
brow of the mountain he could see two long rows of twinkling dots which
marked the position of Hemlock Inn. CHAPTER III. Hawker had a writing friend named Hollanden. In New York Hollanden had
announced his resolution to spend the summer at Hemlock Inn. "I don't
like to see the world progressing," he had said; "I shall go to Sullivan
County for a time." In the morning Hawker took his painting equipment, and after
manoeuvring in the fields until he had proved to himself that he had
no desire to go toward the inn, he went toward it. The time was only
nine o'clock, and he knew that he could not hope to see Hollanden before
eleven, as it was only through rumour that Hollanden was aware that
there was a sunrise and an early morning. Hawker encamped in front of some fields of vivid yellow stubble on which
trees made olive shadows, and which was overhung by a china-blue sky and
sundry little white clouds. He fiddled away perfunctorily at it. A
spectator would have believed, probably, that he was sketching the
pines on the hill where shone the red porches of Hemlock Inn. Finally, a white-flannel young man walked into the landscape. Hawker
waved a brush. "Hi, Hollie, get out of the colour-scheme!" At this cry the white-flannel young man looked down at his feet
apprehensively. Finally he came forward grinning. "Why, hello, Hawker,
old boy! Glad to find you here." He perched on a boulder and began to
study Hawker's canvas and the vivid yellow stubble with the olive
shadows. He wheeled his eyes from one to the other. "Say, Hawker," he
said suddenly, "why don't you marry Miss Fanhall?" Hawker had a brush in his mouth, but he took it quickly out, and said,
"Marry Miss Fanhall? Who the devil is Miss Fanhall?" Hollanden clasped both hands about his knee and looked thoughtfully
away. "Oh, she's a girl." "She is?" said Hawker. "Yes. She came to the inn last night with her sister-in-law and a small
tribe of young Fanhalls. There's six of them, I think." "Two," said Hawker, "a boy and a girl." "How do you--oh, you must have come up with them. Of course. Why, then
you saw her." "Was that her?" asked Hawker listlessly. "Was that her?" cried Hollanden, with indignation. "Was that her?" "Oh!" said Hawker. Hollanden mused again. "She's got lots of money," he said. "Loads of it. And I think she would be fool enough to have sympathy for you in your
work. They are a tremendously wealthy crowd, although they treat it
simply. It would be a good thing for you. I believe--yes, I am sure she
could be fool enough to have sympathy for you in your work. And now, if
you weren't such a hopeless chump----"

"Oh, shut up, Hollie," said the painter. For a time Hollanden did as he was bid, but at last he talked again. "Can't think why they came up here. Must be her sister-in-law's health. Something like that. She----"

"Great heavens," said Hawker, "you speak of nothing else!" "Well, you saw her, didn't you?" demanded Hollanden. "What can you
expect, then, from a man of my sense? You--you old stick--you----"

"It was quite dark," protested the painter. "Quite dark," repeated Hollanden, in a wrathful voice. "What if it was?" "Well, that is bound to make a difference in a man's opinion, you know." "No, it isn't. It was light down at the railroad station, anyhow. If you
had any sand--thunder, but I did get up early this morning! Say, do you
play tennis?" "After a fashion," said Hawker. "Why?" "Oh, nothing," replied Hollanden sadly. "Only they are wearing me out at
the game. I had to get up and play before breakfast this morning with
the Worcester girls, and there is a lot more mad players who will be
down on me before long. It's a terrible thing to be a tennis player." "Why, you used to put yourself out so little for people," remarked
Hawker. "Yes, but up there"--Hollanden jerked his thumb in the direction of the
inn--"they think I'm so amiable." "Well, I'll come up and help you out." "Do," Hollanden laughed; "you and Miss Fanhall can team it against the
littlest Worcester girl and me." He regarded the landscape and
meditated. Hawker struggled for a grip on the thought of the stubble. "That colour of hair and eyes always knocks me kerplunk," observed
Hollanden softly. Hawker looked up irascibly. "What colour hair and eyes?" he demanded. "I
believe you're crazy." "What colour hair and eyes?" repeated Hollanden, with a savage gesture. "You've got no more appreciation than a post." "They are good enough for me," muttered Hawker, turning again to his
work. He scowled first at the canvas and then at the stubble. "Seems to
me you had best take care of yourself, instead of planning for me," he
said. "Me!" cried Hollanden. "Me! Take care of myself! My boy, I've got a past
of sorrow and gloom. I----"

"You're nothing but a kid," said Hawker, glaring at the other man. "Oh, of course," said Hollanden, wagging his head with midnight wisdom. "Oh, of course." "Well, Hollie," said Hawker, with sudden affability, "I didn't mean to
be unpleasant, but then you are rather ridiculous, you know, sitting up
there and howling about the colour of hair and eyes." "I'm not ridiculous." "Yes, you are, you know, Hollie." The writer waved his hand despairingly. "And you rode in the train with
her, and in the stage." "I didn't see her in the train," said Hawker. "Oh, then you saw her in the stage. Ha-ha, you old thief! I sat up here,
and you sat down there and lied." He jumped from his perch and
belaboured Hawker's shoulders. "Stop that!" said the painter. "Oh, you old thief, you lied to me! You lied---- Hold on--bless my life,
here she comes now!" CHAPTER IV. One day Hollanden said: "There are forty-two people at Hemlock Inn, I
think. Fifteen are middle-aged ladies of the most aggressive
respectability. They have come here for no discernible purpose save to
get where they can see people and be displeased at them. They sit in a
large group on that porch and take measurements of character as
importantly as if they constituted the jury of heaven. When I arrived at
Hemlock Inn I at once cast my eye searchingly about me. Perceiving this
assemblage, I cried, 'There they are!' Barely waiting to change my
clothes, I made for this formidable body and endeavoured to conciliate
it. Almost every day I sit down among them and lie like a machine. Privately I believe they should be hanged, but publicly I glisten with
admiration. Do you know, there is one of 'em who I know has not moved
from the inn in eight days, and this morning I said to her, 'These long
walks in the clear mountain air are doing you a world of good.' And I
keep continually saying, 'Your frankness is so charming!' Because of the
great law of universal balance, I know that this illustrious corps will
believe good of themselves with exactly the same readiness that they
will believe ill of others. So I ply them with it. In consequence, the
worst they ever say of me is, 'Isn't that Mr. Hollanden a peculiar man?' And you know, my boy, that's not so bad for a literary person." After
some thought he added: "Good people, too. Good wives, good mothers, and
everything of that kind, you know. But conservative, very conservative. Hate anything radical. Can not endure it. Were that way themselves once,
you know. They hit the mark, too, sometimes. Such general volleyings
can't fail to hit everything. May the devil fly away with them!" Hawker regarded the group nervously, and at last propounded a great
question: "Say, I wonder where they all are recruited? When you come to
think that almost every summer hotel----"

"Certainly," said Hollanden, "almost every summer hotel. I've studied
the question, and have nearly established the fact that almost every
summer hotel is furnished with a full corps of----"

"To be sure," said Hawker; "and if you search for them in the winter,
you can find barely a sign of them, until you examine the boarding
houses, and then you observe----"

"Certainly," said Hollanden, "of course. By the way," he added, "you
haven't got any obviously loose screws in your character, have you?" "No," said Hawker, after consideration, "only general poverty--that's
all." "Of course, of course," said Hollanden. "But that's bad. They'll get on
to you, sure. Particularly since you come up here to see Miss Fanhall so
much." Hawker glinted his eyes at his friend. "You've got a deuced open way of
speaking," he observed. "Deuced open, is it?" cried Hollanden. "It isn't near so open as your
devotion to Miss Fanhall, which is as plain as a red petticoat hung on a
hedge." Hawker's face gloomed, and he said, "Well, it might be plain to you, you
infernal cat, but that doesn't prove that all those old hens can see
it." "I tell you that if they look twice at you they can't fail to see it. And it's bad, too. Very bad. What's the matter with you? Haven't you
ever been in love before?" "None of your business," replied Hawker. Hollanden thought upon this point for a time. "Well," he admitted
finally, "that's true in a general way, but I hate to see you managing
your affairs so stupidly." Rage flamed into Hawker's face, and he cried passionately, "I tell you
it is none of your business!" He suddenly confronted the other man. Hollanden surveyed this outburst with a critical eye, and then slapped
his knee with emphasis. "You certainly have got it--a million times
worse than I thought. Why, you--you--you're heels over head." "What if I am?" said Hawker, with a gesture of defiance and despair. Hollanden saw a dramatic situation in the distance, and with a bright
smile he studied it. "Say," he exclaimed, "suppose she should not go to
the picnic to-morrow? She said this morning she did not know if she
could go. Somebody was expected from New York, I think. Wouldn't it
break you up, though! Eh?" "You're so dev'lish clever!" said Hawker, with sullen irony. Hollanden was still regarding the distant dramatic situation. "And
rivals, too! The woods must be crowded with them. A girl like that, you
know. And then all that money! Say, your rivals must number enough to
make a brigade of militia. Imagine them swarming around! But then it
doesn't matter so much," he went on cheerfully; "you've got a good play
there. You must appreciate them to her--you understand?--appreciate them
kindly, like a man in a watch-tower. You must laugh at them only about
once a week, and then very tolerantly--you understand?--and kindly,
and--and appreciatively." "You're a colossal ass, Hollie!" said Hawker. "You----"

"Yes, yes, I know," replied the other peacefully; "a colossal ass. Of
course." After looking into the distance again, he murmured: "I'm
worried about that picnic. I wish I knew she was going. By heavens, as a
matter of fact, she must be made to go!" "What have you got to do with it?" cried the painter, in another sudden
outburst. "There! there!" said Hollanden, waving his hand. "You fool! Only a
spectator, I assure you." Hawker seemed overcome then with a deep dislike of himself. "Oh, well,
you know, Hollie, this sort of thing----" He broke off and gazed at the
trees. "This sort of thing---- It----"

"How?" asked Hollanden. "Confound you for a meddling, gabbling idiot!" cried Hawker suddenly. Hollanden replied, "What did you do with that violet she dropped at the
side of the tennis court yesterday?" CHAPTER V.


Mrs. Fanhall, with the two children, the Worcester girls, and Hollanden,
clambered down the rocky path. Miss Fanhall and Hawker had remained on
top of the ledge. Hollanden showed much zeal in conducting his
contingent to the foot of the falls. Through the trees they could see
the cataract, a great shimmering white thing, booming and thundering
until all the leaves gently shuddered. "I wonder where Miss Fanhall and Mr. Hawker have gone?" said the younger
Miss Worcester. "I wonder where they've gone?" "Millicent," said Hollander, looking at her fondly, "you always had such
great thought for others." "Well, I wonder where they've gone?" At the foot of the falls, where the mist arose in silver clouds and the
green water swept into the pool, Miss Worcester, the elder, seated on
the moss, exclaimed, "Oh, Mr. Hollanden, what makes all literary men so
peculiar?" "And all that just because I said that I could have made better
digestive organs than Providence, if it is true that he made mine,"
replied Hollanden, with reproach. "Here, Roger," he cried, as he dragged
the child away from the brink, "don't fall in there, or you won't be the
full-back at Yale in 1907, as you have planned. I'm sure I don't know
how to answer you, Miss Worcester. I've inquired of innumerable literary
men, and none of 'em know. I may say I have chased that problem for
years. I might give you my personal history, and see if that would throw
any light on the subject." He looked about him with chin high until his
glance had noted the two vague figures at the top of the cliff. "I might
give you my personal history----"

Mrs. Fanhall looked at him curiously, and the elder Worcester girl
cried, "Oh, do!" After another scanning of the figures at the top of the cliff, Hollanden
established himself in an oratorical pose on a great weather-beaten
stone. "Well--you must understand--I started my career--my career, you
understand--with a determination to be a prophet, and, although I have
ended in being an acrobat, a trained bear of the magazines, and a
juggler of comic paragraphs, there was once carved upon my lips a smile
which made many people detest me, for it hung before them like a banshee
whenever they tried to be satisfied with themselves. I was informed from
time to time that I was making no great holes in the universal plan, and
I came to know that one person in every two thousand of the people I saw
had heard of me, and that four out of five of these had forgotten it. And then one in every two of those who remembered that they had heard of
me regarded the fact that I wrote as a great impertinence. I admitted
these things, and in defence merely builded a maxim that stated that
each wise man in this world is concealed amid some twenty thousand
fools. If you have eyes for mathematics, this conclusion should interest
you. Meanwhile I created a gigantic dignity, and when men saw this
dignity and heard that I was a literary man they respected me. I
concluded that the simple campaign of existence for me was to delude
the populace, or as much of it as would look at me. I did. I do. And now
I can make myself quite happy concocting sneers about it. Others may do
as they please, but as for me," he concluded ferociously, "I shall never
disclose to anybody that an acrobat, a trained bear of the magazines, a
juggler of comic paragraphs, is not a priceless pearl of art and
philosophy." "I don't believe a word of it is true," said Miss Worcester. "What do you expect of autobiography?" demanded Hollanden, with
asperity. "Well, anyhow, Hollie," exclaimed the younger sister, "you didn't
explain a thing about how literary men came to be so peculiar, and
that's what you started out to do, you know." "Well," said Hollanden crossly, "you must never expect a man to do what
he starts to do, Millicent. And besides," he went on, with the gleam of
a sudden idea in his eyes, "literary men are not peculiar, anyhow." The elder Worcester girl looked angrily at him. "Indeed? Not you, of
course, but the others." "They are all asses," said Hollanden genially. The elder Worcester girl reflected. "I believe you try to make us think
and then just tangle us up purposely!" The younger Worcester girl reflected. "You are an absurd old thing, you
know, Hollie!" Hollanden climbed offendedly from the great weather-beaten stone. "Well,
I shall go and see that the men have not spilled the luncheon while
breaking their necks over these rocks. Would you like to have it spread
here, Mrs. Fanhall? Never mind consulting the girls. I assure you I
shall spend a great deal of energy and temper in bullying them into
doing just as they please. Why, when I was in Brussels----"

"Oh, come now, Hollie, you never were in Brussels, you know," said the
younger Worcester girl. "What of that, Millicent?" demanded Hollanden. "This is autobiography." "Well, I don't care, Hollie. You tell such whoppers." With a gesture of despair he again started away; whereupon the
Worcester girls shouted in chorus, "Oh, I say, Hollie, come back! Don't
be angry. We didn't mean to tease you, Hollie--really, we didn't!" "Well, if you didn't," said Hollanden, "why did you----"

The elder Worcester girl was gazing fixedly at the top of the cliff. "Oh, there they are! I wonder why they don't come down?" CHAPTER VI. Stanley, the setter, walked to the edge of the precipice and, looking
over at the falls, wagged his tail in friendly greeting. He was braced
warily, so that if this howling white animal should reach up a hand for
him he could flee in time. The girl stared dreamily at the red-stained crags that projected from
the pines of the hill across the stream. Hawker lazily aimed bits of
moss at the oblivious dog and missed him. "It must be fine to have something to think of beyond just living," said
the girl to the crags. "I suppose you mean art?" said Hawker. "Yes, of course. It must be finer, at any rate, than the ordinary
thing." He mused for a time. "Yes. It is--it must be," he said. "But then--I'd
rather just lie here." The girl seemed aggrieved. "Oh, no, you wouldn't. You couldn't stop. It's dreadful to talk like that, isn't it? I always thought that
painters were----"

"Of course. They should be. Maybe they are. I don't know. Sometimes I
am. But not to-day." "Well, I should think you ought to be so much more contented than just
ordinary people. Now, I----"

"You!" he cried--"you are not 'just ordinary people.'" "Well, but when I try to recall what I have thought about in my life, I
can't remember, you know. That's what I mean." "You shouldn't talk that way," he told her. "But why do you insist that life should be so highly absorbing for me?" "You have everything you wish for," he answered, in a voice of deep
gloom. "Certainly not. I am a woman." "But----"

"A woman, to have everything she wishes for, would have to be
Providence. There are some things that are not in the world." "Well, what are they?" he asked of her. "That's just it," she said, nodding her head, "no one knows. That's
what makes the trouble." "Well, you are very unreasonable." "What?" "You are very unreasonable. If I were you--an heiress----"

The girl flushed and turned upon him angrily. "Well!" he glowered back at her. "You are, you know. You can't deny it." She looked at the red-stained crags. At last she said, "You seemed
really contemptuous." "Well, I assure you that I do not feel contemptuous. On the contrary, I
am filled with admiration. Thank Heaven, I am a man of the world. Whenever I meet heiresses I always have the deepest admiration." As he
said this he wore a brave hang-dog expression. The girl surveyed him
coldly from his chin to his eyebrows. "You have a handsome audacity,
too." He lay back in the long grass and contemplated the clouds. "You should have been a Chinese soldier of fortune," she said. He threw another little clod at Stanley and struck him on the head. "You are the most scientifically unbearable person in the world," she
said. Stanley came back to see his master and to assure himself that the clump
on the head was not intended as a sign of serious displeasure. Hawker
took the dog's long ears and tried to tie them into a knot. "And I don't see why you so delight in making people detest you," she
continued. Having failed to make a knot of the dog's ears, Hawker leaned back and
surveyed his failure admiringly. "Well, I don't," he said. "You do." "No, I don't." "Yes, you do. You just say the most terrible things as if you positively
enjoyed saying them." "Well, what did I say, now? What did I say?" "Why, you said that you always had the most extraordinary admiration for
heiresses whenever you met them." "Well, what's wrong with that sentiment?" he said. "You can't find
fault with that!" "It is utterly detestable." "Not at all," he answered sullenly. "I consider it a tribute--a graceful
tribute." Miss Fanhall arose and went forward to the edge of the cliff. She became
absorbed in the falls. Far below her a bough of a hemlock drooped to the
water, and each swirling, mad wave caught it and made it nod--nod--nod. Her back was half turned toward Hawker. After a time Stanley, the dog, discovered some ants scurrying in the
moss, and he at once began to watch them and wag his tail. "Isn't it curious," observed Hawker, "how an animal as large as a dog
will sometimes be so entertained by the very smallest things?" Stanley pawed gently at the moss, and then thrust his head forward to
see what the ants did under the circumstances. "In the hunting season," continued Hawker, having waited a moment, "this
dog knows nothing on earth but his master and the partridges. He is lost
to all other sound and movement. He moves through the woods like a
steel machine. And when he scents the bird--ah, it is beautiful! Shouldn't you like to see him then?" Some of the ants had perhaps made war-like motions, and Stanley was
pretending that this was a reason for excitement. He reared aback, and
made grumbling noises in his throat. After another pause Hawker went on: "And now see the precious old fool! He is deeply interested in the movements of the little ants, and as
childish and ridiculous over them as if they were highly
important.--There, you old blockhead, let them alone!" Stanley could not be induced to end his investigations, and he told his
master that the ants were the most thrilling and dramatic animals of his
experience. "Oh, by the way," said Hawker at last, as his glance caught upon the
crags across the river, "did you ever hear the legend of those rocks
yonder? Over there where I am pointing? Where I'm pointing? Did you ever
hear it? What? Yes? No? Well, I shall tell it to you." He settled
comfortably in the long grass. CHAPTER VII. "Once upon a time there was a beautiful Indian maiden, of course. And
she was, of course, beloved by a youth from another tribe who was very
handsome and stalwart and a mighty hunter, of course. But the maiden's
father was, of course, a stern old chief, and when the question of his
daughter's marriage came up, he, of course, declared that the maiden
should be wedded only to a warrior of her tribe. And, of course, when
the young man heard this he said that in such case he would, of course,
fling himself headlong from that crag. The old chief was, of course,
obdurate, and, of course, the youth did, of course, as he had said. And,
of course, the maiden wept." After Hawker had waited for some time, he
said with severity, "You seem to have no great appreciation of
folklore." The girl suddenly bent her head. "Listen," she said, "they're calling. Don't you hear Hollie's voice?" They went to another place, and, looking down over the shimmering
tree-tops, they saw Hollanden waving his arms. "It's luncheon," said
Hawker. "Look how frantic he is!" The path required that Hawker should assist the girl very often. His
eyes shone at her whenever he held forth his hand to help her down a
blessed steep place. She seemed rather pensive. The route to luncheon
was very long. Suddenly he took a seat on an old tree, and said: "Oh, I
don't know why it is, whenever I'm with you, I--I have no wits, nor good
nature, nor anything. It's the worst luck!" He had left her standing on a boulder, where she was provisionally
helpless. "Hurry!" she said; "they're waiting for us." Stanley, the setter, had been sliding down cautiously behind them. He
now stood wagging his tail and waiting for the way to be cleared. Hawker leaned his head on his hand and pondered dejectedly. "It's the
worst luck!" "Hurry!" she said; "they're waiting for us." At luncheon the girl was for the most part silent. Hawker was
superhumanly amiable. Somehow he gained the impression that they all
quite fancied him, and it followed that being clever was very easy. Hollanden listened, and approved him with a benign countenance. There was a little boat fastened to the willows at the edge of the black
pool. After the spread, Hollanden navigated various parties around to
where they could hear the great hollow roar of the falls beating against
the sheer rocks. Stanley swam after sticks at the request of little
Roger. Once Hollanden succeeded in making the others so engrossed in being
amused that Hawker and Miss Fanhall were left alone staring at the white
bubbles that floated solemnly on the black water. After Hawker had
stared at them a sufficient time, he said, "Well, you are an heiress,
you know." In return she chose to smile radiantly. Turning toward him, she said,
"If you will be good now--always--perhaps I'll forgive you." They drove home in the sombre shadows of the hills, with Stanley padding
along under the wagon. The Worcester girls tried to induce Hollanden to
sing, and in consequence there was quarrelling until the blinking lights
of the inn appeared above them as if a great lantern hung there. Hollanden conveyed his friend some distance on the way home from the inn
to the farm. "Good time at the picnic?" said the writer. "Yes." "Picnics are mainly places where the jam gets on the dead leaves, and
from thence to your trousers. But this was a good little picnic." He
glanced at Hawker. "But you don't look as if you had such a swell time." Hawker waved his hand tragically. "Yes--no--I don't know." "What's wrong with you?" asked Hollanden. "I tell you what it is, Hollie," said the painter darkly, "whenever I'm
with that girl I'm such a blockhead. I'm not so stupid, Hollie. You know
I'm not. But when I'm with her I can't be clever to save my life." Hollanden pulled contentedly at his pipe. "Maybe she don't notice it." "Notice it!" muttered Hawker, scornfully; "of course she notices it. In
conversation with her, I tell you, I am as interesting as an iron dog." His voice changed as he cried, "I don't know why it is. I don't know why
it is." Blowing a huge cloud of smoke into the air, Hollanden studied it
thoughtfully. "Hits some fellows that way," he said. "And, of course, it
must be deuced annoying. Strange thing, but now, under those
circumstances, I'm very glib. Very glib, I assure you." "I don't care what you are," answered Hawker. "All those confounded
affairs of yours--they were not----"

"No," said Hollanden, stolidly puffing, "of course not. I understand
that. But, look here, Billie," he added, with sudden brightness, "maybe
you are not a blockhead, after all. You are on the inside, you know, and
you can't see from there. Besides, you can't tell what a woman will
think. You can't tell what a woman will think." "No," said Hawker, grimly, "and you suppose that is my only chance?" "Oh, don't be such a chump!" said Hollanden, in a tone of vast
exasperation. They strode for some time in silence. The mystic pines swaying over the
narrow road made talk sibilantly to the wind. Stanley, the setter, took
it upon himself to discover some menacing presence in the woods. He
walked on his toes and with his eyes glinting sideways. He swore half
under his breath. "And work, too," burst out Hawker, at last. "I came up here this season
to work, and I haven't done a thing that ought not be shot at." "Don't you find that your love sets fire to your genius?" asked
Hollanden gravely. "No, I'm hanged if I do." Hollanden sighed then with an air of relief. "I was afraid that a
popular impression was true," he said, "but it's all right. You would
rather sit still and moon, wouldn't you?" "Moon--blast you! I couldn't moon to save my life." "Oh, well, I didn't mean moon exactly." CHAPTER VIII. The blue night of the lake was embroidered with black tree forms. Silver
drops sprinkled from the lifted oars. Somewhere in the gloom of the
shore there was a dog, who from time to time raised his sad voice to the
stars. "But still, the life of the studios----" began the girl. Hawker scoffed. "There were six of us. Mainly we smoked. Sometimes we
played hearts and at other times poker--on credit, you know--credit. And
when we had the materials and got something to do, we worked. Did you
ever see these beautiful red and green designs that surround the common
tomato can?" "Yes." "Well," he said proudly, "I have made them. Whenever you come upon
tomatoes, remember that they might once have been encompassed in my
design. When first I came back from Paris I began to paint, but nobody
wanted me to paint. Later, I got into green corn and asparagus----"

"Truly?" "Yes, indeed. It is true." "But still, the life of the studios----"

"There were six of us. Fate ordained that only one in the crowd could
have money at one time. The other five lived off him and despised
themselves. We despised ourselves five times as long as we had
admiration." "And was this just because you had no money?" "It was because we had no money in New York," said Hawker. "Well, after a while something happened----"

"Oh, no, it didn't. Something impended always, but it never happened." "In a case like that one's own people must be such a blessing. The
sympathy----"

"One's own people!" said Hawker. "Yes," she said, "one's own people and more intimate friends. The
appreciation----"

"'The appreciation!'" said Hawker. "Yes, indeed!" He seemed so ill-tempered that she became silent. The boat floated
through the shadows of the trees and out to where the water was like a
blue crystal. The dog on the shore thrashed about in the reeds and waded
in the shallows, mourning his unhappy state in an occasional cry. Hawker
stood up and sternly shouted. Thereafter silence was among the reeds. The moon slipped sharply through the little clouds. The girl said, "I liked that last picture of yours." "What?" "At the last exhibition, you know, you had that one with the cows--and
things--in the snow--and--and a haystack." "Yes," he said, "of course. Did you like it, really? I thought it about
my best. And you really remembered it? Oh," he cried, "Hollanden perhaps
recalled it to you." "Why, no," she said. "I remembered it, of course." "Well, what made you remember it?" he demanded, as if he had cause to be
indignant. "Why--I just remembered it because--I liked it, and because--well, the
people with me said--said it was about the best thing in the exhibit,
and they talked about it a good deal. And then I remember that Hollie
had spoken of you, and then I--I----"

"Never mind," he said. After a moment, he added, "The confounded picture
was no good, anyhow!" The girl started. "What makes you speak so of it? It was good. Of
course, I don't know--I can't talk about pictures, but," she said in
distress, "everybody said it was fine." "It wasn't any good," he persisted, with dogged shakes of the head. From off in the darkness they heard the sound of Hollanden's oars
splashing in the water. Sometimes there was squealing by the Worcester
girls, and at other times loud arguments on points of navigation. "Oh," said the girl suddenly, "Mr. Oglethorpe is coming to-morrow!" "Mr. Oglethorpe?" said Hawker. "Is he?" "Yes." She gazed off at the water. "He's an old friend of ours. He is always so good, and Roger and little
Helen simply adore him. He was my brother's chum in college, and they
were quite inseparable until Herbert's death. He always brings me
violets. But I know you will like him." "I shall expect to," said Hawker. "I'm so glad he is coming. What time does that morning stage get here?" "About eleven," said Hawker. "He wrote that he would come then. I hope he won't disappoint us." "Undoubtedly he will be here," said Hawker. The wind swept from the ridge top, where some great bare pines stood in
the moonlight. A loon called in its strange, unearthly note from the
lakeshore. As Hawker turned the boat toward the dock, the flashing rays
from the boat fell upon the head of the girl in the rear seat, and he
rowed very slowly. The girl was looking away somewhere with a mystic, shining glance. She
leaned her chin in her hand. Hawker, facing her, merely paddled
subconsciously. He seemed greatly impressed and expectant. At last she spoke very slowly. "I wish I knew Mr. Oglethorpe was not
going to disappoint us." Hawker said, "Why, no, I imagine not." "Well, he is a trifle uncertain in matters of time. The children--and
all of us--shall be anxious. I know you will like him." CHAPTER IX. "Eh?" said Hollanden. "Oglethorpe? Oglethorpe? Why, he's that friend of
the Fanhalls! Yes, of course, I know him! Deuced good fellow, too! What
about him?" "Oh, nothing, only he's coming here to-morrow," answered Hawker. "What
kind of a fellow did you say he was?" "Deuced good fellow! What are you so---- Say, by the nine mad
blacksmiths of Donawhiroo, he's your rival! Why, of course! Glory, but I
must be thick-headed to-night!" Hawker said, "Where's your tobacco?" "Yonder, in that jar. Got a pipe?" "Yes. How do you know he's my rival?" "Know it? Why, hasn't he been---- Say, this is getting thrilling!" Hollanden sprang to his feet and, filling a pipe, flung himself into the
chair and began to rock himself madly to and fro. He puffed clouds of
smoke. Hawker stood with his face in shadow. At last he said, in tones of deep
weariness, "Well, I think I'd better be going home and turning in." "Hold on!" Hollanden exclaimed, turning his eyes from a prolonged stare
at the ceiling, "don't go yet! Why, man, this is just the time when----
Say, who would ever think of Jem Oglethorpe's turning up to harrie you! Just at this time, too!" "Oh," cried Hawker suddenly, filled with rage, "you remind me of an
accursed duffer! Why can't you tell me something about the man, instead
of sitting there and gibbering those crazy things at the ceiling?" "By the piper----"

"Oh, shut up! Tell me something about Oglethorpe, can't you? I want to
hear about him. Quit all that other business!" "Why, Jem Oglethorpe, he--why, say, he's one of the best fellows going. If he were only an ass! If he were only an ass, now, you could feel easy
in your mind. But he isn't. No, indeed. Why, blast him, there isn't a
man that knows him who doesn't like Jem Oglethorpe! Excepting the
chumps!" The window of the little room was open, and the voices of the pines
could be heard as they sang of their long sorrow. Hawker pulled a chair
close and stared out into the darkness. The people on the porch of the
inn were frequently calling, "Good-night! Good-night!" Hawker said, "And of course he's got train loads of money?" "You bet he has! He can pave streets with it. Lordie, but this is a
situation!" A heavy scowl settled upon Hawker's brow, and he kicked at the dressing
case. "Say, Hollie, look here! Sometimes I think you regard me as a bug
and like to see me wriggle. But----"

"Oh, don't be a fool!" said Hollanden, glaring through the smoke. "Under
the circumstances, you are privileged to rave and ramp around like a
wounded lunatic, but for heaven's sake don't swoop down on me like that! Especially when I'm--when I'm doing all I can for you." "Doing all you can for me! Nobody asked you to. You talk as if I were an
infant." "There! That's right! Blaze up like a fire balloon just because I said
that, will you? A man in your condition--why, confound you, you are an
infant!" Hawker seemed again overwhelmed in a great dislike of himself. "Oh,
well, of course, Hollie, it----" He waved his hand. "A man feels
like--like----"

"Certainly he does," said Hollanden. "That's all right, old man." "And look now, Hollie, here's this Oglethorpe----"

"May the devil fly away with him!" "Well, here he is, coming along when I thought maybe--after a while, you
know--I might stand some show. And you are acquainted with him, so give
me a line on him." "Well, I should advise you to----"

"Blow your advice! I want to hear about Oglethorpe." "Well, in the first place, he is a rattling good fellow, as I told you
before, and this is what makes it so----"

"Oh, hang what it makes it! Go on." "He is a rattling good fellow and he has stacks of money. Of course, in
this case his having money doesn't affect the situation much. Miss
Fanhall----"

"Say, can you keep to the thread of the story, you infernal literary
man!" "Well, he's popular. He don't talk money--ever. And if he's wicked, he's
not sufficiently proud of it to be perpetually describing his sins. And
then he is not so hideously brilliant, either. That's great credit to a
man in these days. And then he--well, take it altogether, I should say
Jem Oglethorpe was a smashing good fellow." "I wonder how long he is going to stay?" murmured Hawker. During this conversation his pipe had often died out. It was out at this
time. He lit another match. Hollanden had watched the fingers of his
friend as the match was scratched. "You're nervous, Billie," he said. Hawker straightened in his chair. "No, I'm not." "I saw your fingers tremble when you lit that match." "Oh, you lie!" Hollanden mused again. "He's popular with women, too," he said
ultimately; "and often a woman will like a man and hunt his scalp just
because she knows other women like him and want his scalp." "Yes, but not----"

"Hold on! You were going to say that she was not like other women,
weren't you?" "Not exactly that, but----"

"Well, we will have all that understood." After a period of silence Hawker said, "I must be going." As the painter walked toward the door Hollanden cried to him: "Heavens! Of all pictures of a weary pilgrim!" His voice was very compassionate. Hawker wheeled, and an oath spun through the smoke clouds. CHAPTER X. "Where's Mr. Hawker this morning?" asked the younger Miss Worcester. "I
thought he was coming up to play tennis?" "I don't know. Confound him! I don't see why he didn't come," said
Hollanden, looking across the shining valley. He frowned questioningly
at the landscape. "I wonder where in the mischief he is?" The Worcester girls began also to stare at the great gleaming stretch of
green and gold. "Didn't he tell you he was coming?" they demanded. "He didn't say a word about it," answered Hollanden. "I supposed, of
course, he was coming. We will have to postpone the _melee_." Later he met Miss Fanhall. "You look as if you were going for a walk?" "I am," she said, swinging her parasol. "To meet the stage. Have you
seen Mr. Hawker to-day?" "No," he said. "He is not coming up this morning. He is in a great fret
about that field of stubble, and I suppose he is down there sketching
the life out of it. These artists--they take such a fiendish interest in
their work. I dare say we won't see much of him until he has finished
it. Where did you say you were going to walk?" "To meet the stage." "Oh, well, I won't have to play tennis for an hour, and if you
insist----"

"Of course." As they strolled slowly in the shade of the trees Hollanden began,
"Isn't that Hawker an ill-bred old thing?" "No, he is not." Then after a time she said, "Why?" "Oh, he gets so absorbed in a beastly smudge of paint that I really
suppose he cares nothing for anything else in the world. Men who are
really artists--I don't believe they are capable of deep human
affections. So much of them is occupied by art. There's not much left
over, you see." "I don't believe it at all," she exclaimed. "You don't, eh?" cried Hollanden scornfully. "Well, let me tell you,
young woman, there is a great deal of truth in it. Now, there's
Hawker--as good a fellow as ever lived, too, in a way, and yet he's an
artist. Why, look how he treats--look how he treats that poor setter
dog!" "Why, he's as kind to him as he can be," she declared. "And I tell you he is not!" cried Hollanden. "He is, Hollie. You--you are unspeakable when you get in these moods." "There--that's just you in an argument. I'm not in a mood at all. Now,
look--the dog loves him with simple, unquestioning devotion that fairly
brings tears to one's eyes----"

"Yes," she said. "And he--why, he's as cold and stern----"

"He isn't. He isn't, Holly. You are awf'ly unfair." "No, I'm not. I am simply a liberal observer. And Hawker, with his
people, too," he went on darkly; "you can't tell--you don't know
anything about it--but I tell you that what I have seen proves my
assertion that the artistic mind has no space left for the human
affections. And as for the dog----"

"I thought you were his friend, Hollie?" "Whose?" "No, not the dog's. And yet you--really, Hollie, there is something
unnatural in you. You are so stupidly keen in looking at people that you
do not possess common loyalty to your friends. It is because you are a
writer, I suppose. That has to explain so many things. Some of your
traits are very disagreeable." "There! there!" plaintively cried Hollanden. "This is only about the
treatment of a dog, mind you. Goodness, what an oration!" "It wasn't about the treatment of a dog. It was about your treatment of
your friends." "Well," he said sagely, "it only goes to show that there is nothing
impersonal in the mind of a woman. I undertook to discuss broadly----

"Oh, Hollie!" "At any rate, it was rather below you to do such scoffing at me." "Well, I didn't mean--not all of it, Hollie." "Well, I didn't mean what I said about the dog and all that, either." "You didn't?" She turned toward him, large-eyed. "No. Not a single word of it." "Well, what did you say it for, then?" she demanded indignantly. "I said it," answered Hollanden placidly, "just to tease you." He looked
abstractedly up to the trees. Presently she said slowly, "Just to tease me?" At this time Hollanden wore an unmistakable air of having a desire to
turn up his coat collar. "Oh, come now----" he began nervously. "George Hollanden," said the voice at his shoulder, "you are not only
disagreeable, but you are hopelessly ridiculous. I--I wish you would
never speak to me again!" "Oh, come now, Grace, don't--don't---- Look! There's the stage coming,
isn't it?" "No, the stage is not coming. I wish--I wish you were at the bottom of
the sea, George Hollanden. And--and Mr. Hawker, too. There!" "Oh, bless my soul! And all about an infernal dog," wailed Hollanden. "Look! Honest, now, there's the stage. See it? See it?" "It isn't there at all," she said. Gradually he seemed to recover his courage. "What made you so
tremendously angry? I don't see why." After consideration, she said decisively, "Well, because." "That's why I teased you," he rejoined. "Well, because--because----"

"Go on," he told her finally. "You are doing very well." He waited
patiently. "Well," she said, "it is dreadful to defend somebody so--so excitedly,
and then have it turned out just a tease. I don't know what he would
think." "Who would think?" "Why--he." "What could he think? Now, what could he think? Why," said Hollanden,
waxing eloquent, "he couldn't under any circumstances think--think
anything at all. Now, could he?" She made no reply. "Could he?" She was apparently reflecting. "Under any circumstances," persisted Hollanden, "he couldn't think
anything at all. Now, could he?" "No," she said. "Well, why are you angry at me, then?" CHAPTER XI. "John," said the old mother, from the profound mufflings of the pillow
and quilts. "What?" said the old man. He was tugging at his right boot, and his tone
was very irascible. "I think William's changed a good deal." "Well, what if he has?" replied the father, in another burst of
ill-temper. He was then tugging at his left boot. "Yes, I'm afraid he's changed a good deal," said the muffled voice from
the bed. "He's got a good many fine friends, now, John--folks what put
on a good many airs; and he don't care for his home like he did." "Oh, well, I don't guess he's changed very much," said the old man
cheerfully. He was now free of both boots. She raised herself on an elbow and looked out with a troubled face. "John, I think he likes that girl." "What girl?" said he. "What girl? Why, that awful handsome girl you see around--of course." "Do you think he likes 'er?" "I'm afraid so--I'm afraid so," murmured the mother mournfully. "Oh, well," said the old man, without alarm, or grief, or pleasure in
his tone. He turned the lamp's wick very low and carried the lamp to the head of
the stairs, where he perched it on the step. When he returned he said,
"She's mighty good-look-in'!" "Well, that ain't everything," she snapped. "How do we know she ain't
proud, and selfish, and--everything?" "How do you know she is?" returned the old man. "And she may just be leading him on." 