



Produced by Bruce Albrecht, Louise Pryor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











  Jerry Junior




  [Illustration: "Constance studied the mountains a moment"]




  Jerry Junior

  By
  Jean Webster
  Author of "When Patty Went to College," etc. With Illustrations
  by Orson Lowell

  New York
  The Century Co.
  1907




  Copyright, 1907, by
  THE CENTURY CO.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Copyright, 1906, 1907, by
  THE CROWELL PUBLISHING COMPANY

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Published April_, 1907


  THE DE VINNE PRESS




List of Illustrations

  FACING PAGE

  "Constance studied the mountains a moment"      _Frontispiece_

  "'Hello, Gustavo! Is that for me?'" 5

  "The fourth girl, with gray eyes and yellow-brown hair, was
  sitting at ease on the balustrade"                                   23

  "Giuseppe still made a feint of preoccupation"                       29

  "He had also shifted his position so that he might command the
  profile of the girl"                                                 45

  Beppo and the donkeys                                                67

  "Constance clasped her hands in an ecstasy of admiration"            71

  "Constance ahead on Fidilini, an officer marching at each side
  of her saddle"                                                       85

  "She seated herself in the deep embrasure of a window close
  beside Tony's parapet"                                               95

  "The man bowed with a gesture which made her free of the book"      119

  "She turned the pages and paused at the week's entries"             133

  "Constance ripped the letter open and read it aloud"                149

  "Nannie caught sight of the visitors first, and came running
  forward to meet them"                                               199

  "The two mounted the steps of the jail and jerked the bell"         253

  "Never before had he had such overwhelming reason to doubt his
  senses"                                                             273




Jerry Junior




CHAPTER I


The courtyard of the Hotel du Lac, furnished with half a dozen tables and
chairs, a red and green parrot chained to a perch, and a shady little
arbor covered with vines, is a pleasant enough place for morning coffee,
but decidedly too sunny for afternoon tea. It was close upon four of a
July day, when Gustavo, his inseparable napkin floating from his arm,
emerged from the cool dark doorway of the house and scanned the burning
vista of tables and chairs. He would never, under ordinary circumstances,
have interrupted his siesta for the mere delivery of a letter; but this
particular letter was addressed to the young American man, and young
American men, as every head waiter knows, are an unreasonably impatient
lot. The court-yard was empty, as he might have foreseen, and he was
turning with a patient sigh towards the long arbor that led to the lake,
when the sound of a rustling paper in the summer house deflected his
course. He approached the doorway and looked inside. The young American man, in white flannels with a red guide-book
protruding from his pocket, was comfortably stretched in a lounging chair
engaged with a cigarette and a copy of the Paris _Herald_. He glanced up
with a yawn--excusable under the circumstances--but as his eye fell upon
the letter he sprang to his feet. "Hello, Gustavo! Is that for me?" [Illustration: "'Hello, Gustavo! Is that for me?'"] Gustavo bowed. "_Ecco_! She is at last arrive, ze lettair for which you haf so moch
weesh." He bowed a second time and presented it. "Meestair Jayreen
Ailyar!" The young man laughed. "I don't wish to hurt your feelings, Gustavo, but I'm not sure I
should answer if my eyes were shut." He picked up the letter, glanced at the address to make sure--the name
was Jerymn Hilliard Jr.--and ripped it open with an exaggerated sigh of
relief. Then he glanced up and caught Gustavo's expression. Gustavo came
of a romantic race; there was a gleam of sympathetic interest in his eye. "Oh, you needn't look so knowing! I suppose you think this is a love
letter? Well it's not. It is, since you appear to be interested, a letter
from my sister informing me that they will arrive tonight, and that we
will pull out for Riva by the first boat tomorrow morning. Not that I
want to leave you, Gustavo, but--Oh, thunder!" He finished the reading in a frowning silence while the waiter stood at
polite attention, a shade of anxiety in his eye--there was usually
anxiety in his eye when it rested on Jerymn Hilliard Jr. One could never
foresee what the young man would call for next. Yesterday he had rung
the bell and demanded a partner to play lawn tennis, as if the hotel kept
partners laid away in drawers like so many sheets. He crumpled up the letter and stuffed it in his pocket. "I say, Gustavo, what do you think of this? They're going to stay in
Lucerne till the tenth--that's next week--and they hope I don't mind
waiting; it will be nice for me to have a rest. A _rest_, man, and I've
already spent three days in Valedolmo!" "_Si_, signore, you will desire ze same room?" was as much as Gustavo
thought. "Ze same room? Oh, I suppose so." He sank back into his chair and plunged his hands into his pockets with
an air of sombre resignation. The waiter hovered over him, divided
between a desire to return to his siesta, and a sympathetic interest in
the young man's troubles. Never before in the history of his connection
with the Hotel du Lac had Gustavo experienced such a munificent,
companionable, expansive, entertaining, thoroughly unique and
inexplicable guest. Even the fact that he was American scarcely accounted
for everything. The young man raised his head and eyed his companion gloomily. "Gustavo, have you a sister?" "A sister?" Gustavo's manner was uncomprehending but patient. "_Si_,
signore, I have eight sister." "Eight! Merciful saints. How do you manage to be so cheerful?" "Tree is married, signore, one uvver is betrofed, one is in a convent,
one is dead and two is babies." "I see--they're pretty well disposed of; but the babies will grow up,
Gustavo, and as for that betrothed one, I should still be a little
nervous if I were you; you can never be sure they are going to stay
betrothed. I hope she doesn't spend her time chasing over the map of
Europe making appointments with you to meet her in unheard of little
mountain villages where the only approach to Christian reading matter is
a Paris _Herald_ four days old, and then doesn't turn up to keep her
appointments?" Gustavo blinked. His supple back achieved another bow. "Sank you," he murmured. "And you don't happen to have an aunt?" "An aunt, signore?" There was vagueness in his tone. "Yes, Gustavo, an aunt. A female relative who reads you like an open
book, who sees your faults and skips your virtues, who remembers how dear
and good and obliging your father was at your age, who hoped great things
of you when you were a baby, who had intended to make you her heir but
has about decided to endow an orphan asylum--have you, Gustavo, by chance
an aunt?" "_Si_, signore." "I do not think you grasp my question. An _aunt_--the sister of your
father, or perhaps your mother." A gleam of illumination swept over Gustavo's troubled features. "_Ecco_! You would know if I haf a _zia_--a aunt--yes, zat is it. A aunt. _Sicuramente_, signore, I haf ten--leven aunt." "Eleven aunts! Before such a tragedy I am speechless; you need say no
more, Gustavo, from this moment we are friends." He held out his hand. Gustavo regarded it dazedly; then, since it seemed
to be expected, he gingerly presented his own. The result was a shining
newly-minted two-lire piece. He pocketed it with a fresh succession of
bows. "_Grazie tanto_! Has ze signore need of anysing?" "Have I need of anysing?" There was reproach, indignation, disgust in the
young man's tone. "How can you ask such a question, Gustavo? Here am I,
three days in Valedolmo, with seven more stretching before me. I have
plenty of towels and soap and soft-boiled eggs, if that is what you mean;
but a man's spirit cannot be nourished on soap and soft-boiled eggs. What I need is food for the mind--diversion, distraction, amusement--no,
Gustavo, you needn't offer me the Paris _Herald_ again. I already know by
heart the list of guests in every hotel in Switzerland." "Ah, it is diversion zat you wish? Have you seen zat ver' beautiful Luini
in ze chapel of San Bartolomeo? It is four hundred years old." "Yes, Gustavo, I have seen the Luini in the chapel of San Bartolomeo. I
derived all the pleasure to be got out of it the first afternoon I came." "Ze garden of Prince Sartonio-Crevelli? Has ze signore seen ze cedar of
Lebanon in ze garden of ze prince?" "Yes, Gustavo, the signore has seen the cedar of Lebanon in the garden of
the prince, also the ilex tree two hundred years old and the india-rubber
plant from South America. They are extremely beautiful but they don't
last a week." "Have you swimmed in ze lake?" "It is lukewarm, Gustavo." The waiter's eyes roved anxiously. They lighted on the lunette of
shimmering water and purple mountains visible at the farther end of the
arbor. "Zere is ze view," he suggested humbly. "Ze view from ze water front is
consider ver' beautiful, ver' nice. Many foreigners come entirely for
him. You can see Lago di Garda, Monte Brione, Monte Baldo wif ze ruin
castle of ze Scaliger, Monte Maggiore, ze Altissimo di Nago, ze snow
cover peak of Monte--"

Mr. Jerymn Hilliard Jr. stopped him with a gesture. "That will do; I read Baedeker myself, and I saw them all the first night
I came. You must know at your age, Gustavo, that a man can't enjoy a view
by himself; it takes two for that sort of thing--Yes, the truth is that I
am lonely. You can see yourself to what straits I am pushed for
conversation. If I had your command of language, now, I would talk to the
German Alpine climbers." An idea flashed over Gustavo's features. "Ah, zat is it! Why does not ze signore climb mountains? Ver' helful;
ver' diverting. I find guide." "You needn't bother. Your guide would be Italian, and it's too much of a
strain to talk to a man all day in dumb show." He folded his arms with a
weary sigh. "A week of Valedolmo! An eternity!" Gustavo echoed the sigh. Though he did not entirely comprehend the
trouble, still he was of a generously sympathetic nature. "It is a pity," he observed casually, "zat you are not acquaint wif ze
Signor Americano who lives in Villa Rosa. He also finds Valedolmo
undiverting. He comes--but often--to talk wif me. He has fear of
forgetting how to spik Angleesh, he says." The young man opened his eyes. "What are you talking about--a Signor Americano here in Valedolmo?" "_Sicuramente_, in zat rose-color villa wif ze cypress trees and ze
_terrazzo_ on ze lake. His daughter, la Signorina Costantina, she live
wif him--ver' yong, ver' beautiful--" Gustavo rolled his eyes and clasped
his hands--"beautiful like ze angels in Paradise--and she spik Italia
like I spik Angleesh." Jerymn Hilliard Jr. unfolded his arms and sat up alertly. "You mean to tell me that you had an American family up your sleeve all
this time and never said a word about it?" His tone was stern. "_Scusi_, signore, I have not known zat you have ze plaisir of zer
acquaintance." "The pleasure of their acquaintance! Good heavens, Gustavo, when one
ship-wrecked man meets another ship-wrecked man on a desert island must
they be introduced before they can speak?" "_Si_, signore." "And why, may I ask, should an intelligent American family be living in
Valedolmo?" "I do not know, signore. I have heard ze Signor Papa's healf was no good,
and ze doctors in Americk' zay say to heem, 'you need change, to breave
ze beautiful climate of Italia.' And he say, 'all right, I go to
Valedolmo.' It is small, signore, but ver' _famosa_. Oh, yes, _molto
famosa_. In ze autumn and ze spring foreigners come from all ze
world--Angleesh, French, German--_tutti_! Ze Hotel du Lac is full. Every
day we turn peoples away." "So! I seem to have struck the wrong season.--But about this American
family, what's their name?" "La familia Veeldair from Nuovo York." "Veeldair." He shook his head. "That's not American, Gustavo, at least
when you say it. But never mind, if they come from New York it's all
right. How many are there--just two?" "But no! Ze papa and ze signorina and ze--ze--" he rolled his eyes in
search of the word--"ze aunt!" "Another aunt! The sky appears to be raining aunts today. What does she
do for amusement--the signorina who is beautiful as the angels?" Gustavo spread out his hands. "Valedolmo, signore, is on ze frontier. It is--what you say--garrison
_citta_. Many soldiers, many officers--captains, lieutenants, wif
uniforms and swords. Zay take tea on ze _terrazzo_ wif ze Signor Papa and
ze Signora Aunt, and most _specialmente_ wif ze Signorina Costantina. Ze
Signor Papa say he come for his healf, but if you ask me, I sink maybe he
come to marry his daughter." "I see! And yet, Gustavo, American papas are generally not so keen as you
might suppose about marrying their daughters to foreign captains and
lieutenants even if they have got uniforms and swords. I shouldn't be
surprised if the Signor Papa were just a little nervous over the
situation. It seems to me there might be an opening for a likely young
fellow speaking the English language, even if he hasn't a uniform and
sword. How does he strike you?" "_Si_, signore." "I'm glad you agree with me. It is now five minutes past four; do you
think the American family would be taking a siesta?" "I do not know, signore." Gustavo's tone was still patient. "And whereabouts is the rose-colored villa with the terrace on the lake?" "It is a quarter of a hour beyond ze Porta Sant' Antonio. If ze gate is
shut you ring at ze bell and Giuseppe will open. But ze road is ver' hot
and ver' dusty. It is more cooler to take ze paf by ze lake. Straight to
ze left for ten minutes and step over ze wall; it is broken in zat place
and quite easy." "Thank you, that is a wise suggestion; I shall step over the wall by all
means." He jumped to his feet and looked about for his hat. "You turn to
the left and straight ahead for ten minutes? Good-bye then till dinner. I
go in search of the Signorina Costantina who is beautiful as the angels
in Paradise, and who lives in a rose-colored villa set in a cypress grove
on the shores of Lake Garda--not a bad setting for romance, is it,
Gustavo?--Dinner, I believe, is at seven o'clock?" "_Si_, signore, at seven; and would you like veal cooked Milanese
fashion?" "Nothing would please me more. We have only had veal Milanese fashion
five times since I came." He waved his hand jauntily and strolled whistling down the arbor that led
to the lake. Gustavo looked after him and shook his head. Then he took
out the two-lire piece and rang it on the table. The metal rang true. He
shrugged his shoulders and turned back indoors to order the veal. CHAPTER II


The terrace of Villa Rosa juts out into the lake, bordered on three sides
by a stone parapet, and shaded above by a yellow-ochre awning. Masses of
oleanders hang over the wall and drop pink petals into the blue waters
below. As a study in color the terrace is perfect, but, like the
court-yard of the Hotel du Lac, decidedly too hot for mid-afternoon. To
the right of the terrace, however, is a shady garden set in alleys of
cypress trees, and separated from the lake by a strip of beach and a low
balustrade. There could be no better resting place for a warm afternoon. It was close upon four--five minutes past to be accurate--and the usual
afternoon quiet that enveloped the garden had fled before the garrulous
advent of four girls. Three of them, with black eyes and blacker hair,
were kneeling on the beach thumping and scrubbing a pile of linen. In
spite of their chatter they were working busily, and the grass beyond the
water-wall was already white with bleaching sheets, while a lace trimmed
petticoat fluttered from a near-by oleander, and a row of silk stockings
stretched the length of the parapet. The most undeductive observer would
have guessed by this time that the pink villa, visible through the trees,
contained no such modern conveniences as stationary tubs. The fourth girl, with gray eyes and yellow-brown hair, was sitting at
ease on the balustrade, fanning herself with a wide brimmed hat and
dangling her feet, clad in white tennis shoes, over the edge. She wore a
suit of white linen cut sailor fashion, low at the throat and with
sleeves rolled to the elbows. She looked very cool and comfortable and
free as she talked, with the utmost friendliness, to the three girls
below. Her Italian, to an unaccustomed ear, was exactly as glib as
theirs. The washer-girls were dressed in the gayest of peasant clothes--green and
scarlet petticoats, flowered kerchiefs, coral beads and flashing
earrings; you would have to go far into the hills in these degenerate
days before meeting their match on an Italian highway. But the girl on
the wall, who was actual if not titular ruler of the domain of Villa
Rosa, possessed a keen eye for effect; and--she plausibly argued--since
one must have washer-women about, why not, in the name of all that is
beautiful, have them in harmony with tradition and the landscape? Accordingly, she designed and purchased their costumes herself. There drifted presently into sight from around the little promontory that
hid the village, a blue and white boat with yellow lateen sails. She was
propelled gondolier fashion, for the wind was a mere breath, by a
picturesque youth in a suit of dark blue with white sash and flaring
collar--the hand of the girl on the wall was here visible also. [Illustration: "The fourth girl, with gray eyes and yellow-brown hair,
was sitting at ease on the balustrade"]

The boat fluttering in toward shore, looked like a giant butterfly; and
her name, emblazoned in gold on her prow, was, appropriately, the
_Farfalla_. Earlier in the season, with a green hull and a dingy brown
sail, she had been prosaically enough, the _Maria_. But since the advent
of the girl all this had been changed. The _Farfalla_ dropped her yellow
wings with the air of a salute, and lighted at the foot of the
water-steps under the terrace. The girl on the parapet leaned forward
eagerly. "Did you get any mail, Giuseppe?" she called. "_Si_, signorina." He scrambled up the steps and presented a copy of the
London _Times_. She received it with a shrug. Clearly, she felt little interest in the
London _Times_. Giuseppe took himself back to his boat and commenced
fussing about its fittings, dusting the seats, plumping up the cushions,
with an air of absorption which deceived nobody. The signorina watched
him a moment with amused comprehension, then she called peremptorily:

"Giuseppe, you know you must spade the garden border." Poor Giuseppe, in spite of his nautical costume, was man of all work. He
glanced dismally toward the garden border which lay basking in the
sunshine under the wall that divided Villa Rosa from the rest of the
world. It contained every known flower which blossoms in July in the
kingdom of Italy from camellias and hydrangeas to heliotrope and wall
flowers. Its spading was a complicated business and it lay too far off to
permit of conversation. Giuseppe was not only a lazy, but also a social
soul. "Signorina," he suggested, "would you not like a sail?" She shook her head. "There is not wind enough and it is too hot and too
sunny." "But yes, there's a wind, and cool--when you get out on the lake. I will
put up the awning, signorina, the sun shall not touch you." She continued to shake her head and her eyes wandered suggestively to the
hydrangeas, but Giuseppe still made a feint of preoccupation. Not being a
cruel mistress, she dropped the subject, and turned back to her
conversation with the washer-girls. They were discussing--a pleasant
topic for a sultry summer afternoon--the probable content of Paradise. The three girls were of the opinion that it was made up of warm sunshine
and cool shade, of flowers and singing birds and sparkling waters, of
blue skies and cloud-capped mountains--not unlike, it will be observed,
the very scene which at the moment stretched before them. In so much they
were all agreed, but there were several debatable points. Whether the
stones were made of gold, and whether the houses were not gold too, and,
that being the case, whether it would not hurt your eyes to look at them. Marietta declared, blasphemously, as the others thought, that she
preferred a simple gray stone villa or at most one of pink stucco, to
all the golden edifices that Paradise contained. It was by now fifteen minutes past four, and a spectator had arrived,
though none of the five were aware of his presence. The spectator was
standing on the wall above the garden border examining with appreciation
the idyllic scene below him, and with most particular appreciation, the
dainty white-clad person of the girl on the balustrade. He was
wondering--anxiously--how he might make his presence known. For no very
tangible reason he had suddenly become conscious that the matter would be
easier if he carried in his pocket a letter of introduction. The purlieus
of Villa Rosa in no wise resembled a desert island; and in the face of
that very fluent Italian, the suspicion was forcing itself upon him that
after all, the mere fact of a common country was not a sufficient bond of
union. He had definitely decided to withdraw, when the matter was taken
from his hands. [Illustration: "Giuseppe still made a feint of preoccupation"]

The wall--as Gustavo had pointed out--was broken; it was owing to this
fact that he had been so easily able to climb it. Now, as he stealthily
turned, preparing to re-descend in the direction whence he had come, the
loose stone beneath his foot slipped and he slipped with it. Five
startled pairs of eyes were turned in his direction. What they saw, was a
young man in flannels suddenly throw up his arms, slide into an azalea
bush, from this to the balustrade, and finally land on all fours on the
narrow strip of beach, a shower of pink petals and crumbling masonry
falling about him. A momentary silence followed; then the washer-girls,
making sure that he was not injured, broke into a shrill chorus of
laughter, while the _Farfalla_ rocked under impact of Giuseppe's mirth. The girl on the wall alone remained grave. The young man picked himself up, restored his guide book to his pocket,
and blushingly stepped forward, hat in hand, to make an apology. One knee
bore a splash of mud, and his tumbled hair was sprinkled with azalea
blossoms. "I beg your pardon," he stammered, "I didn't mean to come so suddenly;
I'm afraid I broke your wall." The girl dismissed the matter with a polite gesture. "It was already broken," and then she waited with an air of grave
attention until he should state his errand. "I--I came--" He paused and glanced about vaguely; he could not at the
moment think of any adequate reason to account for his coming. "Yes?" Her eyes studied him with what appeared at once a cool and an amused
scrutiny. He felt himself growing red beneath it. "Can I do anything for you?" she prompted with the kind desire of putting
him at his ease. "Thank you--" He grasped at the first idea that presented itself. "I'm
stopping at the Hotel du Lac and Gustavo, you know, told me there was a
villa somewhere around here that belongs to Prince Someone or Other. If
you ring at the gate and give the gardener two francs and a visiting
card, he will let you walk around and look at the trees." "I see!" said the girl, "and so now you are looking for the gate?" Her
tone suggested that she suspected him of trying to avoid both it and the
two francs. "Prince Sartorio-Crevelli's villa is about half a mile
farther on." "Ah, thank you," he bowed a second time, and then added out of the
desperate need of saying something, "There's a cedar of Lebanon in it and
an India rubber plant from South America." "Indeed!" She continued to observe him with polite interest, though she made no
move to carry on the conversation. "You--are an American?" he asked at length. "Oh, yes," she agreed easily. "Gustavo knows that." He shifted his weight. "I am an American too," he observed. "Really?" The girl leaned forward and examined him more closely, an
innocent, candid, wholly detached look in her eyes. "From your appearance
I should have said you were German--most of the foreigners who visit
Valedolmo are German." "Well, I'm not," he said shortly. "I'm American." "It is a pity my father is not at home," she returned, "_he_ enjoys
meeting Americans." A gleam of anger replaced the embarrassment in the young man's eyes. He
glanced about for a dignified means of escape; they had him pretty well
penned in. Unless he wished to reclimb the wall--and he did not--he must
go by the terrace which retreat was cut off by the washer-women, or by
the parapet, already occupied by the girl in white and the washing. He
turned abruptly and his elbow brushed a stocking to the ground. He stooped to pick it up and then he blushed still a shade deeper. "This is washing day," observed the girl with a note of apology. She rose
to her feet and stood on the top of the parapet while she beckoned to
Giuseppe, then she turned and looked down upon the young man with an
expression of frank amusement. "I hope you will enjoy the cedar of
Lebanon and the India rubber tree. Good afternoon." She jumped to the ground and crossed to the water-steps where Giuseppe,
with a radiant smile, was steadying the boat against the landing. She
settled herself comfortably among the cushions and then for a moment
glanced back towards shore. "You would better go out by the gate," she called. "The wall on the
farther side is harder to climb than the one you came in by; and besides,
it has broken glass on the top." Giuseppe raised the yellow sail and the _Farfalla_ with a graceful dip,
glided out to sea. The young man stood eyeing its progress revengefully. Now that the girl was out of hearing, a number of pointed things occurred
to him which he might have said. His thoughts were interrupted by a fresh
giggle from behind and he found that the three washer-girls were laughing
at him. "Your mistress's manners are not the best in the world," said he,
severely, "and I am obliged to add that yours are no better." They giggled again, though there was no malice behind their humor; it was
merely that they found the lack of a language in common a mirth-provoking
circumstance. Marietta, with a flash of black eyes, murmured something
very kindly in Italian, as she shook out a linen sailor suit--the exact
twin of the one that had gone to sea--and spread it on the wall to dry. The young man did not linger for further words. Setting his hat firmly on
his head, he vaulted the parapet and strode off down the cypress alley
that stretched before him; he passed the pink villa without a glance. At
the gate he stood aside to admit a horse and rider. The horse was
prancing in spite of the heat; the rider wore a uniform and a shining
sword. There was a clank of accoutrements as he passed, and the wayfarer
caught a gleam of piercing black eyes and a slight black moustache turned
up at the ends. The rider saluted politely and indifferently, and jangled
on. The young man scowled after him maliciously until the cypresses hid
him from view; then he turned and took up the dusty road back towards the
Hotel du Lac. It was close upon five, and Gustavo was in the court-yard feeding the
parrot, when his eye fell upon the American guest scuffling down the road
in a cloud of white dust. Gustavo hastened to the gate to welcome him
back, his very eyebrows expressive of his eagerness for news. "You are returned, signore?" The young man paused and regarded him unemotionally. "Yes, Gustavo, I am returned--with thanks." "You have seen ze Signorina Costantina?" "Yes, I saw her." "And is it not as I have said, zat she is beautiful as ze holy angels?" "Yes, Gustavo, she is--and just about equally remote. You may make out my
bill." The waiter's face clouded. "You do not wish to remain longer, signore?" "Can't stand it, Gustavo; it's too infernally restful." Poor Gustavo saw a munificent shower of tips vanishing into nothing. His
face was rueful but his manner was undiminishingly polite. "_Si_, signore, sank you. When shall you wish ze omnibus?" "Tomorrow morning for the first boat." Gustavo bowed to the inevitable; and the young man passed on. He paused
half way across the court-yard. "What time does the first boat leave?" "At half past five, signore." "Er--no--I'll take the second." "_Si_, signore. At half-past ten." CHAPTER III


It was close upon ten when Jerymn Hilliard Jr., equipped for travel in
proper blue serge, appeared in the doorway of the Hotel du Lac. He looked
at his watch and discovered that he still had twenty minutes before the
omnibus meeting the second boat was due. He strolled across the
court-yard, paused for a moment to tease the parrot, and sauntered on to
his favorite seat in the summer house. He had barely established himself
with a cigarette when who should appear in the gateway but Miss Constance
Wilder of Villa Rosa and a middle-aged man--at a glance the Signor Papa. Jerymn Hilliard's heart doubled its beat. Why, he asked himself
excitedly, _why_ had they come? The Signor Papa closed his green umbrella, and having dropped into a
chair--obligingly near the summer house--took off his hat and fanned
himself. He had a tendency toward being stout and felt the heat. The
girl, meanwhile, crossed the court and jangled the bell; she waited
two--three--minutes, then she pulled the rope again. "Gustavo! Oh, Gustavo!" The bell might have been rung by any-one--the fisherman, the
omnibus-driver, Suor Celestina from the convent asking her everlasting
alms--and Gustavo took his time. But the voice was unmistakable; he
waited only to throw a clean napkin over his arm before hurrying to
answer. "_Buon giorno_, signorina! Good morning, signore. It is beautiful
wea-thir, but warm. _Gia_, it is warm." He bowed and smiled and rubbed his hands together. His moustaches, fairly
bristling with good will, turned up in a half circle until they caressed
his nose on either side. He bustled about placing table and chairs, and
recklessly dusting them with the clean napkin. The signorina laid her
fluffy white parasol on one chair and seated herself on another, her
profile turned to the summer house. Gustavo hovered over them, awaiting
their pleasure, the genius itself of respectful devotion. It was
Constance who gave the order--she, it might be noticed, gave most of the
orders that were given in her vicinity. She framed it in English out of
deference to Gustavo's pride in his knowledge of the language. "A glass of _vino santo_ for the Signore and _limonata_ for me. I wish to
put the sugar in myself, the last time you mixed it, Gustavo, it was all
sugar and no lemon. And bring a bowl of cracked ice--_fino_--_fino_--and
some pine nut cakes if you are sure they are fresh." "Sank you, signorina. _Subitissimo_!" He was off across the court, his black coat-tails, his white napkin
streaming behind, proclaiming to all the world that he was engaged on the
Signorina Americana's bidding; for persons of lesser note he still
preserved a measure of dignity. The young man in the summer house had meanwhile dropped his cigarette
upon the floor and noiselessly stepped on it. He had also--with the
utmost caution lest the chair creak--shifted his position so that he
might command the profile of the girl. The entrance to the summer house
was fortunately on the other side, and in all likelihood they would not
have occasion to look within. It was eavesdropping of course, but he had
already been convicted of that yesterday, and in any case it was not such
very bad eavesdropping. The court-yard of the Hotel du Lac was public
property; he had been there first, he was there by rights as a guest of
the house; if anything, they were the interlopers. Besides, nobody talked
secrets with a head waiter. His own long conversations with Gustavo were
as open and innocent as the day; the signorina was perfectly welcome to
listen to them as much as she chose. She was sitting with her chin in her hand, eyeing the flying coat-tails
of Gustavo, a touch of amusement in her face. Her father was eyeing her
severely. "Constance, it is disgraceful!" She laughed. Apparently she already knew or divined what it was that was
disgraceful, but the accusation did not appear to bother her much. Mr.
Wilder proceeded grumblingly. "It's bad enough with those five deluded officers, but they walked into
the trap with their eyes open and it's their own affair. But look at
Gustavo; he can scarcely carry a dish without breaking it when you are
watching him. And Giuseppe--that confounded _Farfalla_ with its yellow
sails floats back and forth in front of the terrace till I am on the
point of having it scuttled as a public nuisance; and those three
washer-women and the post-office clerk and the boy who brings milk, and
Luigi and--every man, woman and child in the village of Valedolmo!" "And my own dad as well?" Mr. Wilder shook his head. [Illustration: "He had also shifted his position so that he might
command the profile of the girl"]

"I came here at your instigation for rest and relaxation--to get rid of
nervous worries, and here I find a big new worry waiting for me that I'd
never thought of having before. What if my only daughter should take it
in her head to marry one of these infernally good-looking Italian
officers?" Constance reached over and patted his arm. "Don't let it bother you, Dad; I assure you I won't do anything of the
sort. I should think it my duty to learn the subjunctive mood, and that
is impossible." Gustavo came hurrying back with a tray. He arranged the glasses, the ice,
the sugar, the cakes, with loving, elaborate obsequiousness. The
signorina examined the ice doubtfully, then with approval. "It's exactly right to-day, Gustavo! You got it too large the last time,
you remember." She stirred in some sugar and tasted it tentatively, her head on one
side. Gustavo hung upon her expression in an agony of apprehension; one
would have thought it a matter for public mourning if the lemonade were
not mixed exactly right. But apparently it was right--she nodded and
smiled--and Gustavo's expression assumed relief. Constance broke open a
pine nut cake and settled herself for conversation. "Haven't you any guests, Gustavo?" Her eyes glanced over the empty
court-yard. "I am afraid the hotel is not having a very prosperous
season." "_Grazie_, signorina. Zer never are many in summer; it is ze dead time,
but still zay come and zay go. Seven arrive last night." "Seven! That's nice. What are they like?" "German mountain-climbers wif nails in zer shoes. Zey have gone to Riva
on ze first boat." "That's too bad--then the hotel is empty?" "But no! Zer is an Italian Signora wif two babies and a governess, and
two English ladies and an American gentleman--"

"An American gentleman?" Her tone was languidly interested. "How long has
he been here?" "Tree--four day." "Indeed--what is he like?" "Nice--ver' nice." (Gustavo might well say that; his pockets were lined
with the American gentleman's silver lire.) "He talk to me always. 'Gustavo,' he say, 'I am all alone; I wish to be 'mused. Come and talk
Angleesh.' Yes, it is true; I have no time to finish my work; I spend
whole day talking wif dis yong American gentleman. He is just a little--"
He touched his head significantly. "Really?" She raised her eyes with an air of awakened interest. "And how
did he happen to come to Valedolmo?" "He come to meet his family, his sister and his--his aunt, who are going
wif him to ze Tyrollo. But zay have not arrive. Zey are in Lucerne, he
says, where zer is a lion dying, and zey wish to wait until he is dead;
zen zey come.--Yes, it is true; he tell me zat." Gustavo tapped his head
a second time. The signorina glanced about apprehensively. "Is he safe, Gustavo--to be about?" "_Si_, signorina, _sicuramente_! He is just a little simple." Mr. Wilder chuckled. "Where is he, Gustavo? I think I'd like to make that young man's
acquaintance." "I sink, signore, he is packing his trunk. He go away today." "Today, Gustavo?" There was audible regret in Constance's tone. "Why is
he going?" "It is not possible for him to stand it, signorina. Valedolmo too dam
slow." "Gustavo! You mustn't say that; it is very, very bad. Nice men don't say
it." Gustavo held his ground. "_Si_, signorina, zat yong American gentleman say it--dam slow, no
_divertimento_." "He's just about right, Gustavo," Mr. Wilder broke in. "The next time a
young American gentleman blunders into the Hotel du Lac you send him
around to me." "_Si_, signore." Gustavo rolled his eyes toward the signorina; she continued to sip her
lemonade. "I have told him yesterday an American family live at Villa Rosa; he say
'All right, I go call,' but--but I sink maybe you were not at home." "Oh!" The signorina raised her head in apparent enlightenment. "So that
was the young man? Yes, to be sure, he came, but he said he was looking
for Prince Sartorio's villa. I am sorry you were away, Father, you would
have enjoyed him; his English was excellent.--Did he tell you he saw me,
Gustavo?" "_Si_, signorina, he tell me." "What did he say? Did he think I was nice?" Gustavo looked embarrassed. "I--I no remember, signorina." She laughed and to his relief changed the subject. "Those English ladies who are staying here--what do they look like? Are
they young?" Gustavo delivered himself of an inimitable gesture which suggested that
the English ladies had entered the bounds of that indefinite period when
the subject of age must be politely waived. "They are tall, signorina, and of a thinness--you would not believe it
possible." "I see! And so the poor young man was bored?" Gustavo bowed vaguely. He saw no connection. "He was awfully good-looking," she added with a sigh. "I'm afraid I made
a mistake. It would be rather fun, don't you think, Dad, to have an
entertaining young American gentleman about?" "Ump!" he grunted. "I thought you were so immensely satisfied with the
officers." "Oh, I am," she agreed with a shrug which dismissed forever the young
American gentleman. "Well, Gustavo," she added in a business-like tone, "I will tell you why
we called. The doctor says the Signor Papa is getting too fat--I don't
think he's too fat, do you? He seems to me just comfortably chubby; but
anyway, the doctor says he needs exercise, so we're going to begin
climbing mountains with nails in our shoes like the Germans. And we're
going to begin to-morrow because we've got two English people at the
villa who adore mountains. Do you think you can find us a guide and some
donkeys? We want a nice, gentle, lady-like donkey for my aunt, and
another for the English lady and a third to carry the things--and maybe
me, if I get tired. Then we want a man who will twist their tails and
make them go; and I am very particular about the man. I want him to be
picturesque--there's no use being in Italy if you can't have things
picturesque, is there, Gustavo?" "_Si_, signorina," he bowed and resumed his attitude of strained
attention. "He must have curly hair and black eyes and white teeth and a nice smile;
I should like him to wear a red sash and earrings. He must be obliging
and cheerful and deferential and speak good Italian--I won't have a man
who speaks only dialect. He must play the mandolin and sing Santa
Lucia--I believe that's all." "And I suppose since he is to act as guide he must know the region?" her
father mildly suggested. "Oh, no, that's immaterial; we can always ask our way." Mr. Wilder grunted, but offered no further suggestion. "We pay four lire a day and furnish his meals," she added munificently. "And we shall begin with the castle on Monte Baldo; then when we get very
proficient we'll climb Monte Maggiore. Do you understand?" "Ze signorina desires tree donkeys and a driver at seven o'clock
to-morrow morning to climb Monte Baldo?" "In brief, yes, but _please_ remember the earrings." *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile a commotion was going on behind them. The hotel omnibus had
rumbled into the court yard. A _fachino_ had dragged out a leather trunk,
an English hat box and a couple of valises and dumped them on the ground
while he ran back for the paste pot and a pile of labels. The two
under-waiters, the chamber-maid and the boy who cleaned boots had drifted
into the court. It was evident that the American gentleman's departure
was imminent. The luggage was labelled and hoisted to the roof of the omnibus; they all
drew up in a line with their eyes on the door; but still the young man
did not come. Gustavo, over his shoulder, dispatched a waiter to hunt him
up. The waiter returned breathless. The gentleman was nowhere. He had
searched the entire house; there was not a trace. Gustavo sent the
boot-boy flying down the arbor to search the garden; he was beginning to
feel anxious. What if the gentleman in a sudden fit of melancholia had
thrown himself into the lake? That would indeed be an unfortunate affair! Constance reassured him, and at the same time she arose. It occurred to
her suddenly that, since the young man was going, there was nothing to be
gained by waiting, and he might think--She picked up her parasol and
started for the gate, but Mr. Wilder hung back; he wanted to see the
matter out. "Father," said she reproachfully, "it's embarrassing enough for him to
fee all those people without our staying and watching him do it." "I suppose it is," he acknowledged regretfully, as he resumed his hat and
umbrella and palm leaf fan. She paused for a second in the gateway. "_Addio_, Gustavo," she called over her shoulder. "_Don't_ forget the
earrings." Gustavo bowed twice and turned back with a dazed air to direct the
business in hand. The boot-boy, reappearing, shook his head. No, the
gentleman was not to be found in the garden. The omnibus driver leaned
from his seat and swore. _Corpo di Bacco_! Did he think the boat would wait all day for the sake
of one passenger? As it was, they were ten minutes late and would have to
gallop every step of the way. The turmoil of ejaculation and gesture was approaching a climax; when
suddenly, who should come sauntering into the midst of it, but the young
American man himself! He paused to light a cigarette, then waved his hand
aloft toward his leather belongings. "Take 'em down, Gustavo. Changed my mind; not going to-day--it's too
hot." Gustavo gasped. "But, signore, you have paid for your ticket." "True, Gustavo, but there is no law compelling me to use it. To tell the
truth I find that I am fonder of Valedolmo than I had supposed. There is
something satisfying about the peace and tranquility of the place--one
doesn't realize it till the moment of parting comes. Do you think I can
obtain a room for a--well, an indefinite period?" Gustavo saw a dazzling vista of silver lire stretching into the future. With an all-inclusive gesture he placed the house, the lake, the
surrounding mountains, at the disposal of the American. "You shall have what you wish, signore. At dis season ze Hotel du Lac--"

"Is not crowded, and there are half a hundred rooms at my disposal? Very
well, I will keep the one I have which commands a very attractive view of
a rose-colored villa set in a grove of cypress trees." The others had waited in a state of suspension, dumbfounded at what was
going on. But as soon as the young man dipped into his pocket and fished
out a handful of silver, they broke into smiles; this at least was
intelligible. The silver was distributed, the luggage was hoisted down,
the omnibus was dismissed. The courtyard resumed its former quiet; just
the American gentleman, Gustavo and the parrot were left. Then suddenly a frightful suspicion dawned upon Gustavo--it was more than
a suspicion; it was an absolute certainty which in his excitement he had
overlooked. From where had the American gentleman dropped? Not the sky,
assuredly, and there was no place else possible, unless the door of the
summer house. Yes, he had been in the summer house, and not sleeping
either. An indefinable something about his manner informed Gustavo that
he was privy to the entire conversation. Gustavo, a picture of guilty
remorse, searched his memory for the words he had used. Why, oh why, had
he not piled up adjectives? It was the opportunity of a lifetime and he
had wantonly thrown it away. But--to his astonished relief--the young man appeared to be bearing no
malice. He appeared, on the contrary, quite unusually cheerful as he
sauntered whistling, across the court and seated himself in the exact
chair the signorina had occupied. He plunged his hand into his pocket
suggestively--Gustavo had been the only one omitted in the distribution
of silver--and drew forth a roll of bills. Having selected five crisp
five-lire notes, he placed them under the sugar bowl, and watched his
companion while he blew three meditative rings of smoke. "Gustavo," he inquired, "do you suppose you could find me some nice,
gentle, lady-like donkeys and a red sash and a pair of earrings?" Gustavo's fascinated gaze had been fixed upon the sugar bowl and he had
only half caught the words. "_Scusi_, signore, I no understand." "Just sit down, Gustavo, it makes me nervous to see you standing all the
time. I can't be comfortable, you know, unless everybody else is
comfortable. Now pay strict attention and see if you can grasp my
meaning." Gustavo dubiously accepted the edge of the indicated chair; he wished to
humor the signore's mood, however incomprehensible that mood might be. For half an hour he listened with strained attention while the gentleman
talked and toyed with the sugar bowl. Amazement, misgiving, amusement,
daring, flashed in succession across his face; in the end he leaned
forward with shining eyes. "_Si, si_," he whispered after a conspiratorial glance over his shoulder,
"I will do it all; you may trust to me." The young man rose, removed the sugar bowl, and sauntered on toward the
road. Gustavo pocketed the notes and gazed after him. "_Dio mio_," he murmured as he set about gathering up the glasses, "zese
Americans!" At the gate the young man paused to light another cigarette. "_Addio_, Gustavo," he called over his shoulder, "_don't_ forget the
earrings!" CHAPTER IV


The table was set on the terrace; breakfast was served and the company
was gathered. Breakfast consisted of the usual caffe-latte, rolls and
strained honey, and--since a journey was to the fore and something
sustaining needed--a soft-boiled egg apiece. There were four persons
present, though there should have been five. The two guests were an
Englishman and his wife, whom the chances of travel had brought over
night to Valedolmo. Between them, presiding over the coffee machine, was Mr. Wilder's sister,
"Miss Hazel"--never "Miss Wilder" except to the butcher and baker. It was
the cross of her life, she had always affirmed, that her name was not
Mary or Jane or Rebecca. "Hazel" does well enough when one is eighteen
and beautiful, but when one is fifty and no longer beautiful, it is
little short of absurd. But if anyone at fifty could carry such a name
gracefully, it was Miss Hazel Wilder; her fifty years sat as jauntily as
Constance's twenty-two. This morning she was very business-like in her
short skirt, belted jacket, and green felt Alpine hat with a feather in
the side. No one would mistake her for a cyclist or a golfer or a
motorist or anything in the world but an Alpine climber; whatever Miss
Hazel was or was not, she was always _game_. Across from Miss Hazel sat her brother in knickerbockers, his Alpine
stock at his elbow and also his fan. Since his domicile in Italy, Mr.
Wilder's fan had assumed the nature of a symbol; he could no more be
separated from it than St. Sebastian from his arrows or St. Laurence from
his gridiron. At Mr. Wilder's elbow was the empty chair where Constance
should have been--she who had insisted on six as a proper breakfast hour,
and had grudgingly consented to postpone it till half-past out of
deference to her sleepy-headed elders. Her father had finished his egg
and hers too, before she appeared, as nonchalant and smiling as if she
were out the earliest of all. "I think you might have waited!" was her greeting from the doorway. She advanced to the table, saluted in military fashion, dropped a kiss on
her father's bald spot, and possessed herself of the empty chair. She too
was clad in mountain-climbing costume, in so far as blouse and skirt and
leather leggings went, but above her face there fluttered the fluffy
white brim of a ruffled sun hat with a bunch of pink rosebuds set over
one ear. "I am sorry not to wear my own Alpine hat, Aunt Hazel; I look so
deliciously German in it, but I simply can't afford to burn all the skin
off my nose." "You can't make us believe that," said her father. "The reason is, that
Lieutenant di Ferara and Captain Coroloni are going with us today, and
that this hat is more becoming than the other." "It's one reason," Constance agreed imperturbably, "but, as I say, I
don't wish to burn the skin off my nose, because that is unbecoming too. You are ungrateful, Dad," she added as she helped herself to honey with a
liberal hand, "I invited them solely on your account because you like to
hear them talk English. Have the donkeys come?" "The donkeys are at the back door nibbling the buds off the rose-bushes." "And the driver?" "Is sitting on the kitchen doorstep drinking coffee and smiling over the
top of his cup at Elizabetta. There are two of him." "Two! I only ordered one." "One is the official driver and the other is a boy whom he has brought
along to do the work." Constance eyed her father sharply. There was something at once guilty and
triumphant about his expression. "What is it, Dad?" she inquired sternly. "I suppose he has not got a
sash and earrings." "On the contrary, he has." "Really? How clever of Gustavo! I hope," she added anxiously, "that he
talks good Italian?" "I don't know about his Italian, but he talks uncommonly good English." "English!" There was reproach, disgust, disillusionment, in her tone. "Not really, father?" "Yes, really and truly--almost as well as I do. He has lived in New York
and he speaks English like a dream--real English--not the
Gustavo--Lieutenant di Ferara kind. I can understand what he says." "How simply horrible!" "Very convenient, I should say." [Illustration: Beppo and the donkeys]

"If there's anything I detest, it's an Americanized Italian--and here in
Valedolmo of all places, where you have a right to demand something
unique and romantic and picturesque and real. It's too bad of Gustavo! I shall never place any faith in his judgment again. You may talk English
to the man if you like; I shall address him in nothing but Italian." As they rose from the table she suggested pessimistically, "Let's go and
look at the donkeys--I suppose they'll be horrid, scraggly, knock-kneed
little beasts." They turned out however to be unusually attractive, as donkeys go, and
they were innocently engaged in nibbling, not rose-leaves but grass,
under the tutelage of a barefoot boy. Constance patted their shaggy
mouse-colored noses, made the acquaintance of the boy, whose name was
Beppo, and looked about for the driver proper. He rose and bowed as she
approached. His appearance was even more violently spectacular than she
had ordered; Gustavo had given good measure. He wore a loose white shirt--immaculately white--with a red silk
handkerchief knotted about his throat, brown corduroy knee-breeches, and
a red cotton sash with the hilt of a knife conspicuously protruding. His
corduroy jacket was slung carelessly across his shoulders, his hat was
cocked jauntily, with a red heron feather stuck in the band; last,
perfect touch of all, in his ears--at his ears rather (a close
examination revealed the thread)--two golden hoops flashed in the
sunlight. His skin was dark--not too dark--just a good healthy out-door
tan: his brows level and heavy, his gaze candor itself. He wore a tiny
suggestion of a moustache which turned up at the corners (a suspicious
examination of this, might have revealed the fact that it was touched up
with burnt cork); there was no doubt but that he was a handsome fellow,
and his attire suggested that he knew it. Constance clasped her hands in an ecstasy of admiration. "He's perfect!" she cried. "Where on earth did Gustavo find him? Did you
ever see anything so beautiful?" she appealed to the others. "He looks
like a brigand in opera bouffe." [Illustration: "Constance clasped her hands in an ecstasy of
admiration"]

The donkey-man reddened visibly and fumbled with his hat. "My dear," her father warned, "he understands English." She continued to gaze with the open admiration one would bestow upon a
picture or a view or a blue-ribbon horse. The man flashed her a momentary
glance from a pair of searching gray eyes, then dropped his gaze humbly
to the ground. "_Buon giorno_," he said in glib Italian. Constance studied him more intently. There was something elusively
familiar about his expression; she was sure she had seen him before. "_Buon giorno_," she replied in Italian. "You have lived in the United
States?" "_Si_, signorina." "What is your name?" "I spik Angleesh," he observed. "I don't care if you do speak English; I prefer Italian--what is your
name?" She repeated the question in Italian. "_Si_, signorina," he ventured again. An anxious look had crept to his
face and he hastily turned away and commenced carrying parcels from the
kitchen. Constance looked after him, puzzled and suspicious. The one
insult which she could not brook was for an Italian to fail to understand
her when she talked Italian. As he returned and knelt to tighten the
strap of a hamper, she caught sight of the thread that held his earring. She looked a second longer, and a sudden smile of illumination flashed to
her face. She suppressed it quickly and turned away. "He seems rather slow about understanding," she remarked to the others,
"but I dare say he'll do." "The poor fellow is embarrassed," apologized her father. "His name is
Tony," he added--even he had understood that much Italian. "Was there ever an Italian who had been in America whose name was not
Tony? Why couldn't he have been Angelico or Felice or Pasquale or
something decently picturesque?" "My dear," Miss Hazel objected, "I think you are hypercritical. The man
is scarcely to blame for his name." "I suppose not," she agreed, "though I should have included that in my
order." Further discussion was precluded by the appearance of a station-carriage
which turned in at the gate and stopped before them. Two officers
descended and saluted. In summer uniforms of white linen with gold
shoulder-straps, and shining top-boots, they rivalled the donkey-man in
decorativeness. Constance received them with flattering acclaim, while
she noted from the corner of her eye the effect upon Tony. He had not
counted upon this addition to the party, and was as scowling as she could
have wished. While the officers were engaged in making their bow to the
others, Constance casually reapproached the donkeys. Tony feigned
immersion in the business of strapping hampers; he had no wish to be
drawn into any Italian tete-a-tete. But to his relief she addressed him
this time in English. "Are these donkeys used to mountain-climbing?" "But yes, signorina! _Sicuramente_. Zay are ver' strong, ver' good. Zat
donk', signorina, he go all day and never one little stumble." His English, she noted with amused appreciation, was an exact copy of
Gustavo's; he had learned his lesson well. But she allowed not the
slightest recognition of the fact to appear in her face. "And what are their names?" she inquired. "Dis is Fidilini, signorina, and zat one wif ze white nose is Macaroni,
and zat ovver is Cristoforo Colombo." Elizabetta appeared in the doorway with two rush-covered flasks, and Tony
hurried forward to receive them. There was a complaisant set to his
shoulders as he strode off, Constance noted delightedly; he was
felicitating himself upon the ease with which he had fooled her. Well! She would give him cause before the day was over for other than
felicitations. She stifled a laugh of prophetic triumph and sauntered
over to Beppo. "When Tony is engaged as a guide do you always go with him?" "Not always, signorina, but Carlo has wished me to go to-day to look
after the donkeys." "And who is Carlo?" "He is the guide who owns them." Beppo looked momentarily guilty; the answer had slipped out before he
thought. "Oh, indeed! But if Tony is a guide why doesn't he have donkeys of his
own?" "He used to, but one unfortunately fell into the lake and got drowned and
the other died of a sickness." He put forth this preposterous statement with a glance as grave and
innocent as that of a little cherub. "Is Tony a good guide?" "But yes, of the best!" There was growing anxiety in Beppo's tone. He divined suspicion behind
these persistent inquiries, and he knew that in case Tony were
dismissed, his own munificent pay would stop. "Do you understand any English?" she suddenly asked. He modestly repudiated any great knowledge. "A word here, a word there; I
learn it in school." "I see!" She paused for a moment and then inquired casually, "Have you
known Tony long?" "_Si_, signorina." "How long?" Beppo considered. Someone, clearly, must vouch for the man's
respectability. This was not in the lesson that had been taught him, but
he determined to branch out for himself. "He is my father, signorina." "Really! He looks young to be your father--have you any brothers and
sisters, Beppo?" "I have four brothers, signorina, and five sisters." He fell back upon
the truth with relief. "_Davvero_!" The signorina smiled upon him, a smile of such heavenly sweetness that
he instantly joined the already crowded ranks of her admirers. She drew
from her pocket a handful of coppers and dropped them into his grimy
little palm. "Here, Beppo, are some soldi for the brothers and sisters. I hope that
you will be good and obedient and _always_ tell me the truth." CHAPTER V


After some delay--owing to Tony's inability to balance the chafing-dish
on Cristoforo Colombo's back--they filed from the gateway, an imposing
cavalcade. The ladies were on foot, loftily oblivious to the fact that
three empty saddles awaited their pleasure. Constance, a gesticulating
officer at either hand, was vivaciously talking Italian, while Tony,
trudging behind, listened with a somber light in his eye. She now and
then cast a casual glance over her shoulder, and as she caught sight of
his gloomy face the animation of her Italian redoubled. The situation
held for her mischief-loving soul undreamed-of possibilities; and though
she ostensibly occupied herself with the officers, she by no means
neglected the donkey-man. During the first few miles of the journey he earned his four francs. Twice he reshifted the pack because Constance thought it insecure (it was
a disgracefully unprofessional pack; most guides would have blushed at
the making of it); once he retraced their path some two hundred yards in
search of a veil she thought she had dropped--it turned out that she had
had it in her pocket all of the time. He chased Fidilini over half the
mountainside while the others were resting, and he carried the
chafing-dish for a couple of miles because it refused to adjust itself
nicely to the pack. The morning ended by his being left behind with a
balking donkey, while the others completed the last ascent that led to
their halting-place for lunch. It was a small plateau shaded by oak trees with a broad view below them,
and a mountain stream foaming down from the rocks above. It was owing to
Beppo's knowledge of the mountain paths rather than Tony's which had
guided them to this agreeable spot; though no one in the party except
Constance appeared to have noted the fact. Tony arrived some ten minutes
after the others, hot but victorious, driving Cristoforo Colombo before
him. Constance welcomed his return with an off-hand nod and set him about
preparing lunch. He and Beppo served it and repacked the hampers,
entirely ignored by the others of the party. Poor Tony was beginning to
realize that a donkey-man lives on a desert island in so far as any
companionship goes. But his moment was coming. As they were about to
start on, Constance spied high above their heads where the stream burst
from the rocks, a clump of starry white blossoms. "Edelweiss!" she cried. "Oh, I must have it--it's the first I ever saw
growing; I hadn't supposed we were high enough." She glanced at the
officers. The ascent was not dangerous, but it was undeniably muddy, and they both
wore white; with very good cause they hesitated. And while they
hesitated, the opportunity was lost. Tony sprang forward, scrambled up
the precipice hand over hand, swung out across the stream by the aid of
an overhanging branch and secured the flowers. It was very gracefully and
easily done, and a burst of applause greeted his descent. He divided his
flowers into two equal parts, and sweeping off his hat, presented them
with a bow, not to Constance, but to the officers, who somewhat sulkily
passed them on. She received them with a smile; for an instant her eyes
met Tony's, and he fell back, rewarded. The captain and lieutenant for the first time regarded the donkey-man,
and they regarded him narrowly, red sash, earrings, stiletto and all. Constance caught the look and laughed. "Isn't he picturesque?" she inquired in Italian. "The head-waiter at the
Hotel du Lac found him for me. He has been in the United States and
speaks English, which is a great convenience." The two said nothing, but they looked at each other and shrugged. The donkeys were requisitioned for the rest of the journey; while Tony
led Miss Hazel's mount, he could watch Constance ahead on Fidilini, an
officer marching at each side of her saddle. She appeared to divide her
favors with nice discrimination; it was not her fault if the two were
jealous of one another. Tony could draw from that obvious fact what
consolation there was in it. [Illustration: "Constance ahead on Fidilini, an officer marching at each
side of her saddle."] The ruined fortress, their destination, was now exactly above their
heads. The last ascent boldly skirted the shoulder of the mountain, and
then doubled upward in a series of serpentine coils. Below them the whole
of Lake Garda was spread like a map. Mr. Wilder and the Englishman,
having paused at the edge of the declivity, were endeavoring to trace the
boundary line of Austria, and they called upon the officers for help. The
two relinquished their post at Constance's side, while the donkeys kept
on past them up the hill. The winding path was both stony and steep,
and, from a donkey's standpoint, thoroughly objectionable. Fidilini was
well in the lead, trotting sedately, when suddenly without the slightest
warning, he chose to revolt. Whether Constance pulled the wrong rein, or
whether, as she affirmed, it was merely his natural badness, in any case,
he suddenly veered from the path and took a cross cut down the rocky
slope below them. Donkeys are fortunately sure-footed beasts; otherwise
the two would have plunged together down the sheer face of the mountain. As it was it looked ghastly enough to the four men below; they shouted to
Constance to stick on, and commenced scrambling up the slope with
absolutely no hope of reaching her. It was Tony's chance a second time to show his agility--and this time to
some purpose. He was a dozen yards behind and much lower down, which gave
him a start. Leaping forward, he dropped over the precipice, a fall of
ten feet, to a narrow ledge below. Running toward them at an angle, he
succeeded in cutting off their flight. Before the frightened donkey could
swerve, Tony had seized him--by the tail--and had braced himself against
a boulder. It was not a dignified rescue, but at least it was effective;
Fidilini came to a halt. Constance, not expecting the sudden jolt,
toppled over sidewise, and Tony, being equally unprepared to receive her,
the two went down together rolling over and over on the grassy slope. "My dear, are you hurt?" Mr. Wilder, quite pale with anxiety, came scrambling to her side. Constance sat up and laughed hysterically, while she examined a bleeding
elbow. "N--no, not dangerously--but I think perhaps Tony is." Tony however was at least able to run, as he was again on his feet and
after the donkey. Captain Coroloni and her father helped Constance to her
feet while Lieutenant di Ferara recovered a side-comb and the white sun
hat. They all climbed down together to the path below, none the worse
for the averted tragedy. Tony rejoined them somewhat short of breath, but
leading a humbled Fidilini. Constance, beyond a brief glance, said
nothing; but her father, to the poor man's intense embarrassment, shook
him warmly by the hand with the repeated assurance that his bravery
should not go unrewarded. They completed their journey on foot; Tony following behind, quite
conscious that, if he had played the part of hero, he had done it with a
lamentable lack of grace. CHAPTER VI


Tony was stretched on the parapet that bordered the stone-paved platform
of the fortress. Above him the crumbling tower rose many feet higher,
below him a marvelous view stretched invitingly; but Tony had eyes
neither for medieval architecture nor picturesque scenery. He lay with
his coat doubled under his head for a pillow, in a frowning contemplation
of the cracked stone pavement. The four other men, after an hour or so of easy lounging under the pines
at the base of the tower, had organized a fresh expedition to the summit
a mile farther up. Mr. Wilder, since morning, had developed into an
enthusiastic mountain-climber--regret might come with the morrow, but as
yet ambition still burned high. The remainder of the party were less
energetic. The three ladies were resting on rugs spread under the pines;
Beppo was sleeping in the sun, his hat over his face, and the donkeys,
securely tethered (Tony had attended to that) were innocently nibbling
mountain herbs. There was no obvious reason why, as he lighted a cigarette and stretched
himself on the parapet, Tony should not have been the most self-satisfied
guide in the world. He had not only completed the expedition in safety,
but had saved the heroine's life by the way; and even if the heroine did
not appear as thankful as she might, still, her father had shown due
gratitude, and, what was to the point, had promised a reward. That should
have been enough for any reasonable donkey-driver. But it was distinctly not enough for Tony. He was in a fine temper as he
lay on the parapet and scowled at the pavement. Nothing was turning out
as he had planned. He had not counted on the officers or her
predilection for Italian. He had not counted on chasing donkeys in person
while she stood and looked on--Beppo was to have attended to that. He had
not counted on anything quite so absurd as his heroic capture of
Fidilini. Since she must let the donkey run away with her, why, in the
name of all that was romantic--could it not have occurred by moonlight? Why, when he caught the beast, could it not have been by the bridle
instead of the tail? And above all, why could she not have fallen into
his arms, instead of on top of him? The stage scenery was set for romance, but from the moment the curtain
rose the play had persisted in being farce. However, farce or romance, it
was all one to him so long as he could play leading-man; what he objected
to was the minor part. The fact was clear that sash and earrings could
never compete with uniform and sword and the Italian language. His mind
was made up; he would withdraw tonight before he was found out, and
leave Valedolmo tomorrow morning by the early boat. Miss Constance Wilder
should never have the satisfaction of knowing the truth. He was engaged in framing a dignified speech to Mr. Wilder--thanking him
for his generosity, but declining to accept a reward for what had been
merely a matter of duty--when his reflections were cut short by the sound
of footsteps on the stairs. They were by no means noiseless footsteps;
there were good strong nails all over the bottom of Constance's shoes. The next moment she appeared in the doorway. Her eyes were centered on
the view; she looked entirely over Tony. It was not until he rose to his
feet that she realized his presence with a start. "Dear me, is that you, Tony? You frightened me! Don't get up; I know you
must be tired." This with a sweetly solicitous smile. Tony smiled too and resumed his seat; it was the first time since morning
that she had condescended to consider his feelings. She sauntered over
to the opposite side and stood with her back to him examining the view. Tony turned his back and affected to be engaged with the view in the
other direction; he too could play at indifference. Constance finished with her view first, and crossing over, she seated
herself in the deep embrasure of a window close beside Tony's parapet. He
rose again at her approach, but there was no eagerness in the motion; it
was merely the necessary deference of a donkey-driver toward his
employer. "Oh, sit down," she insisted, "I want to talk to you." [Illustration: "She seated herself in the deep embrasure of a window
close beside Tony's parapet"]

He opened his eyes with a show of surprise; his hurt feelings insisted
that all the advances should be on her part. Constance seemed in no hurry
to begin; she removed her hat, pushed back her hair, and sat playing with
the bunch of edelweiss which was stuck in among the roses--flattening the
petals, rearranging the flowers with careful fingers; a touch, it
seemed to Tony's suddenly clamoring senses, that was almost a caress. Then she looked up quickly and caught his gaze. She leaned forward with a
laugh. "Tony," she said, "do you spik any language besides Angleesh?" He triumphantly concealed all sign of emotion. "_Si_, signorina, I spik my own language." "Would you mind my asking what that language is?" He indulged in a moment's deliberation. Italian was clearly out of the
question, and French she doubtless knew better than he--he deplored this
polyglot education girls were receiving nowadays. He had it! He would be Hungarian. His sole fellow guest in the hotel at
Verona the week before had been a Hungarian nobleman, who had informed
him that the Magyar language was one of the most difficult on the face of
the globe. There was at least little likelihood that she was acquainted
with that. "My own language, signorina, is Magyar." "Magyar?" She was clearly taken by surprise. "_Si_, signorina, I am Hungarian; I was born in Budapest." He met her
wide-opened eyes with a look of innocent candor. "Really!" She beamed upon him delightedly; he was playing up even better
than she had hoped. "But if you are Hungarian, what are you doing here in
Italy, and how does it happen that your name is Antonio?" "My movver was Italian. She name me Antonio after ze blessed Saint
Anthony of Padua. If you lose anysing, signorina, and you say a prayer to
Saint Anthony every day for nine days, on ze morning of ze tenth you will
find it again." "That is very interesting," she said politely. "How do you come to know
English so well, Tony?" "We go live in Amerik' when I li'l boy." "And you never learned Italian? I should think your mother would have
taught it to you." He imitated Beppo's gesture. "A word here, a word there. We spik Magyar at home." "Talk a little Magyar, Tony. I should like to hear it." "What shall I say, signorina?" "Oh, say anything you please." He affected to hesitate while he rehearsed the scraps of language at his
command. Latin--French--German--none of them any good--but, thank
goodness, he had elected Anglo-Saxon in college; and thank goodness again
the professor had made them learn passages by heart. He glanced up with
an air of flattered diffidence and rendered, in a conversational
inflection, an excerpt from the Anglo-Saxon Bible. "_Ealle gesceafta, heofonas and englas, sunnan and monan, steorran and
eorthan, he gesceop and geworhte on six dagum._"

"It is a very beautiful language. Say some more." He replied with glib promptness, with a passage from Beowulf. "_Hie dygel lond warigeath, wulfhleothu, windige naessas._"

"What does that mean?" Tony looked embarrassed. "I don't believe you know!" "It means--_scusi_, signorina, I no like to say." "You don't know." "It means--you make me say, signorina,--'I sink you ver' beautiful like
ze angels in Paradise.'" "Indeed! A donkey-driver, Tony, should not say anything like that." "But it is true." "The more reason you should not say it." "You asked me, signorina; I could not tell you a lie." The signorina smiled slightly and looked away at the view; Tony seized
the opportunity to look sidewise at her. She turned back and caught him;
he dropped his eyes humbly to the floor. "Does Beppo speak Magyar?" she inquired. "Beppo?" There was wonder in his tone at the turn her questions were
taking. "I sink not, signorina." "That must be very inconvenient. Why don't you teach it to him?" "_Si_, signorina." He was plainly nonplussed. "Yes, he says that you are his father and I should think--"

"His father?" Tony appeared momentarily startled; then he laughed. "He
did not mean his real father; he mean--how you say--his god-father. I
give to him his name when he get christened." "Oh, I see!" Her next question was also a surprise. "Tony," she inquired with startling suddenness, "why do you wear
earrings?" He reddened slightly. "Because--because--der's a girl I like ver' moch, signorina; she sink
earrings look nice. I wear zem for her." "Oh!--But why do you fasten them on with thread?" "Because I no wear zem always. In Italia, yes; in Amerik' no. When I
marry dis girl and go back home, zen I do as I please, now I haf to do as
she please." "H'm--" said Constance, ruminatingly. "Where does this girl live, Tony?" "In Valedolmo, signorina." "What does she look like?" "She look like--" His eyes searched the landscape and came back to her
face. "Oh, ver' beautiful, signorina. She have hair brown and gold, and
eyes--yes, eyes! Zay are sometimes black, signorina, and sometimes gray. Her laugh, it sounds like the song of a nightingale." He clasped his
hands and rolled his eyes in a fine imitation of Gustavo. "She is
beautiful, signorina, beautiful as ze angels in Paradise!" "There seem to be a good many people beautiful as the angels in
Paradise." "She is most beautiful of all." "What is her name?" "Costantina." He said it softly, his eyes on her face. "Ah," Constance rose and turned away with a shrug. Her manner suggested
that he had gone too far. "She wash clothes at ze Hotel du Lac," he called after her. Constance paused and glanced over her shoulder with a laugh. "Tony," she said, "the quality which I admire most in a donkey-driver,
besides truthfulness and picturesqueness, is imagination." CHAPTER VII


On the homeward journey Tony again trudged behind while the officers held
their post at Constance's side. But Tony's spirits were still singing
from the little encounter on the castle platform, and in spite of the
animated Italian which floated back, he was determined to look at the
sunny side of the adventure. It was Mr. Wilder who unconsciously supplied
him with a second opportunity for conversation. He and the Englishman,
being deep in a discussion involving statistics of the Italian army
budget, called on the two officers to set them straight. Tony, at their
order, took his place beside the saddle; Constance was not to be
abandoned again to Fidilini's caprice. Miss Hazel and the Englishwoman
were ambling on ahead in as matter-of-fact a fashion as if that were
their usual mode of travel. Their donkeys were of a sedater turn of mind
than Fidilini--a fact for which Tony offered thanks. They were by this time well over the worst part of the mountain and the
brief Italian twilight was already fading. Tony, with a sharp eye on the
path ahead and a ready hand for the bridle, was attending strictly to the
duties of a well-trained donkey-man. It was Constance again who opened
the conversation. "Ah, Tony?" "_Si_, signorina?" "Did you ever read any Angleesh books--or do you do most of your reading
in Magyar?" "I haf read one, two, Angleesh books." "Did you ever read--er--'The Lightning Conductor' for example?" "No, signorina; I haf never read heem." "I think it would interest you. It's about a man who pretends he's a
chauffeur in order to--to-- There are any number of books with the same
motive; 'She Stoops to Conquer,' 'Two Gentlemen of Verona,' 'Lalla
Rookh,' 'Monsieur Beaucaire'--Oh, dozens of them! It's an old plot; it
doesn't require the slightest originality to think of it." "_Si_, signorina? Sank you." Tony's tone was exactly like Gustavo's when
he has failed to get the point, but feels that a comment is necessary. Constance laughed and allowed a silence to follow, while Tony redirected
his attention to Fidilini's movements. His "Yip! Yip!" was an exact
imitation, though in a deeper guttural, of Beppo's cries before them. It
would have taken a close observer to suspect that he had not been bred to
the calling. "You have not always been a donkey-driver?" she inquired after an
interval of amused scrutiny. "Not always, signorina." "What did you do in New York?" "I play hand-organ, signorina." Tony removed his hand from the bridle and ground "Yankee Doodle" from an
imaginary instrument. "I make musica, signorina, wif--wif--how you say, monk, monka? His name
Vittorio Emanuele. Ver' nice monk--simpatica affezionata." "You've never been an actor?" "An actor? No, signorina." "You should try it; I fancy you might have some talent in that
direction." "_Si_, signorina. Sank you." She let the conversation drop, and Tony, after an interval of silence,
fell to humming Santa Lucia in a very presentable baritone. The tune,
Constance noted, was true enough, but the words were far astray. "That's a very pretty song, Tony, but you don't appear to know it." "I no understand Italian, signorina. I just learn ze tune because
Costantina like it." "You do everything that Costantina wishes?" "Everysing! But if you could see her you would not wonder. She has hair
brown and gold, and her eyes, signorina, are sometimes gray and sometimes
black, and her laugh sounds like--"

"Oh, yes, I know; you told me all that before." "When she goes out to work in ze morning, signorina, wif the sunlight
shining on her hair, and a smile on her lips, and a basket of clothes on
her head--Ah, _zen_ she is beautiful!" "When are you going to be married?" "I do not know, signorina. I have not asked her yet." "Then how do you know she wishes to marry you?" "I do not know; I just hope." He rolled his eyes toward the moon which was rising above the mountains
on the other side of the lake, and with a deep sigh he fell back into
Santa Lucia. Constance leaned forward and scanned his face. "Tony! Tell me your name." There was an undertone of meaning, a note of
persuasion in her voice. "Antonio, signorina." She shook her head with a show of impatience. "Your real name--your last name." "Yamhankeesh." "Oh!" she laughed. 