

E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Project Guenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Transcriber's note:

   No evidence was found to indicate the copyright on this
   book was renewed. THE GIRL IN THE GOLDEN ATOM

by

RAY CUMMINGS







TO
MY FRIEND AND MENTOR
ROBERT H. DAVIS
WITH GRATEFUL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF
HIS ENCOURAGEMENT AND PRACTICAL
ASSISTANCE TO WHICH I OWE MY
INITIAL SUCCESS





CONTENTS


       I. A Universe in an Atom

      II. Into the Ring

     III. After Forty-eight Hours

      IV. Lylda

       V. The World in the Ring

      VI. Strategy and Kisses

     VII. A Modern Gulliver

    VIII. "I Must Go Back"

      IX. After Five Years

       X. Testing the Drugs

      XI. The Escape of the Drug

     XII. The Start

    XIII. Perilous Ways

     XIV. Strange Experiences

      XV. The Valley of the Scratch

     XVI. The Pit of Darkness

    XVII. The Welcome of the Master

   XVIII. The Chemist and His Son

     XIX. The City of Arite

      XX. The World of the Ring

     XXI. A Life Worth Living

    XXII. The Trial

   XXIII. Lylda's Plan

    XXIV. Lylda Acts

     XXV. The Escape of Targo

    XXVI. The Abduction

   XXVII. Aura

  XXVIII. The Attack on the Palace

    XXIX. On the Lake

     XXX. Word Music

    XXXI. The Palace of Orlog

   XXXII. An Ant-hill Outraged

  XXXIII. The Rescue of Loto

   XXXIV. The Decision

    XXXV. Good-bye to Arite

   XXXVI. The Fight in the Tunnels

  XXXVII. A Combat of Titans

 XXXVIII. Lost in Size

   XXXIX. A Modern Dinosaur

      XL. The Adventurers' Return

     XLI. The First Christmas




THE GIRL IN THE GOLDEN ATOM




CHAPTER I

A UNIVERSE IN AN ATOM


"Then you mean to say there is no such thing as the _smallest_ particle
of matter?" asked the Doctor. "You can put it that way if you like," the Chemist replied. "In other
words, what I believe is that things can be infinitely small just as
well as they can be infinitely large. Astronomers tell us of the
immensity of space. I have tried to imagine space as finite. It is
impossible. How can you conceive the edge of space? Something must be
beyond--something or nothing, and even that would be more space,
wouldn't it?" "Gosh," said the Very Young Man, and lighted another cigarette. The Chemist resumed, smiling a little. "Now, if it seems probable that
there is no limit to the immensity of space, why should we make its
smallness finite? How can you say that the atom cannot be divided? As a
matter of fact, it already has been. The most powerful microscope will
show you realms of smallness to which you can penetrate no other way. Multiply that power a thousand times, or ten thousand times, and who
shall say what you will see?" The Chemist paused, and looked at the intent little group around him. He was a youngish man, with large features and horn-rimmed glasses, his
rough English-cut clothes hanging loosely over his broad, spare frame. The Banker drained his glass and rang for the waiter. "Very interesting," he remarked. "Don't be an ass, George," said the Big Business Man. "Just because you
don't understand, doesn't mean there is no sense to it." "What I don't get clearly"--began the Doctor. "None of it's clear to me," said the Very Young Man. The Doctor crossed under the light and took an easier chair. "You
intimated you had discovered something unusual in these realms of the
infinitely small," he suggested, sinking back luxuriously. "Will you
tell us about it?" "Yes, if you like," said the Chemist, turning from one to the other. A
nod of assent followed his glance, as each settled himself more
comfortably. "Well, gentlemen, when you say I have discovered something unusual in
another world--in the world of the infinitely small--you are right in a
way. I have seen something and lost it. You won't believe me probably,"
he glanced at the Banker an instant, "but that is not important. I am
going to tell you the facts, just as they happened." The Big Business Man filled up the glasses all around, and the Chemist
resumed:

"It was in 1910, this problem first came to interest me. I had never
gone in for microscopic work very much, but now I let it absorb all my
attention. I secured larger, more powerful instruments--I spent most of
my money," he smiled ruefully, "but never could I come to the end of the
space into which I was looking. Something was always hidden
beyond--something I could almost, but not quite, distinguish. "Then I realized that I was on the wrong track. My instrument was not
merely of insufficient power, it was not one-thousandth the power I
needed. "So I began to study the laws of optics and lenses. In 1913 I went
abroad, and with one of the most famous lens-makers of Europe I produced
a lens of an entirely different quality, a lens that I hoped would give
me what I wanted. So I returned here and fitted up my microscope that I
knew would prove vastly more powerful than any yet constructed. "It was finally completed and set up in my laboratory, and one night I
went in alone to look through it for the first time. It was in the fall
of 1914, I remember, just after the first declaration of war. "I can recall now my feelings at that moment. I was about to see into
another world, to behold what no man had ever looked on before. What
would I see? What new realms was I, first of all our human race, to
enter? With furiously beating heart, I sat down before the huge
instrument and adjusted the eyepiece. "Then I glanced around for some object to examine. On my finger I had a
ring, my mother's wedding-ring, and I decided to use that. I have it
here." He took a plain gold band from his little finger and laid it on
the table. "You will see a slight mark on the outside. That is the place into which
I looked." His friends crowded around the table and examined a scratch on one side
of the band. "What did you see?" asked the Very Young Man eagerly. "Gentlemen," resumed the Chemist, "what I saw staggered even my own
imagination. With trembling hands I put the ring in place, looking
directly down into that scratch. For a moment I saw nothing. I was like
a person coming suddenly out of the sunlight into a darkened room. I
knew there was something visible in my view, but my eyes did not seem
able to receive the impressions. I realize now they were not yet
adjusted to the new form of light. Gradually, as I looked, objects of
definite shape began to emerge from the blackness. "Gentlemen, I want to make clear to you now--as clear as I can--the
peculiar aspect of everything that I saw under this microscope. I seemed
to be inside an immense cave. One side, near at hand, I could now make
out quite clearly. The walls were extraordinarily rough and indented,
with a peculiar phosphorescent light on the projections and blackness in
the hollows. I say phosphorescent light, for that is the nearest word I
can find to describe it--a curious radiation, quite different from the
reflected light to which we are accustomed. "I said that the hollows inside of the cave were blackness. But not
blackness--the absence of light--as we know it. It was a blackness that
seemed also to radiate light, if you can imagine such a condition; a
blackness that seemed not empty, but merely withholding its contents
just beyond my vision. "Except for a dim suggestion of roof over the cave, and its floor, I
could distinguish nothing. After a moment this floor became clearer. It
seemed to be--well, perhaps I might call it black marble--smooth,
glossy, yet somewhat translucent. In the foreground the floor was
apparently liquid. In no way did it differ in appearance from the solid
part, except that its surface seemed to be in motion. "Another curious thing was the outlines of all the shapes in view. I
noticed that no outline held steady when I looked at it directly; it
seemed to quiver. You see something like it when looking at an object
through water--only, of course, there was no distortion. It was also
like looking at something with the radiation of heat between. "Of the back and other side of the cave, I could see nothing, except in
one place, where a narrow effulgence of light drifted out into the
immensity of the distance behind. "I do not know how long I sat looking at this scene; it may have been
several hours. Although I was obviously in a cave, I never felt shut
in--never got the impression of being in a narrow, confined space. "On the contrary, after a time I seemed to feel the vast immensity of
the blackness before me. I think perhaps it may have been that path of
light stretching out into the distance. As I looked it seemed like the
reversed tail of a comet, or the dim glow of the Milky Way, and
penetrating to equally remote realms of space. "Perhaps I fell asleep, or at least there was an interval of time during
which I was so absorbed in my own thoughts I was hardly conscious of the
scene before me. "Then I became aware of a dim shape in the foreground--a shape merged
with the outlines surrounding it. And as I looked, it gradually assumed
form, and I saw it was the figure of a young girl, sitting beside the
liquid pool. Except for the same waviness of outline and phosphorescent
glow, she had quite the normal aspect of a human being of our own world. She was beautiful, according to our own standards of beauty; her long
braided hair a glowing black, her face, delicate of feature and winsome
in expression. Her lips were a deep red, although I felt rather than saw
the colour. "She was dressed only in a short tunic of a substance I might describe
as gray opaque glass, and the pearly whiteness of her skin gleamed with
iridescence. "She seemed to be singing, although I heard no sound. Once she bent over
the pool and plunged her hand into it, laughing gaily. "Gentlemen, I cannot make you appreciate my emotions, when all at once I
remembered I was looking through a microscope. I had forgotten entirely
my situation, absorbed in the scene before me. And then, abruptly, a
great realization came upon me--the realization that everything I saw
was inside that ring. I was unnerved for the moment at the importance of
my discovery. "When I looked again, after the few moments my eye took to become
accustomed to the new form of light, the scene showed itself as before,
except that the girl had gone. "For over a week, each night at the same time I watched that cave. The
girl came always, and sat by the pool as I had first seen her. Once she
danced with the wild grace of a wood nymph, whirling in and out the
shadows, and falling at last in a little heap beside the pool. "It was on the tenth night after I had first seen her that the accident
happened. I had been watching, I remember, an unusually long time before
she appeared, gliding out of the shadows. She seemed in a different
mood, pensive and sad, as she bent down over the pool, staring into it
intently. Suddenly there was a tremendous cracking sound, sharp as an
explosion, and I was thrown backward upon the floor. "When I recovered consciousness--I must have struck my head on
something--I found the microscope in ruins. Upon examination I saw that
its larger lens had exploded--flown into fragments scattered around the
room. Why I was not killed I do not understand. The ring I picked up
from the floor; it was unharmed and unchanged. "Can I make you understand how I felt at this loss? Because of the war
in Europe I knew I could never replace my lens--for many years, at any
rate. And then, gentlemen, came the most terrible feeling of all; I knew
at last that the scientific achievement I had made and lost counted for
little with me. It was the girl. I realized then that the only being I
ever could care for was living out her life with her world, and, indeed,
her whole universe, in an atom of that ring." The Chemist stopped talking and looked from one to the other of the
tense faces of his companions. "It's almost too big an idea to grasp," murmured the Doctor. "What caused the explosion?" asked the Very Young Man. "I do not know." The Chemist addressed his reply to the Doctor, as the
most understanding of the group. "I can appreciate, though, that through
that lens I was magnifying tremendously those peculiar light-radiations
that I have described. I believe the molecules of the lens were
shattered by them--I had exposed it longer to them that evening than any
of the others." The Doctor nodded his comprehension of this theory. Impressed in spite of himself, the Banker took another drink and leaned
forward in his chair. "Then you really think that there is a girl now
inside the gold of that ring?" he asked. "He didn't say that necessarily," interrupted the Big Business Man. "Yes, he did." "As a matter of fact, I do believe that to be the case," said the
Chemist earnestly. "I believe that every particle of matter in our
universe contains within it an equally complex and complete a universe,
which to its inhabitants seems as large as ours. I think, also that the
whole realm of our interplanetary space, our solar system and all the
remote stars of the heavens are contained within the atom of some other
universe as gigantic to us as we are to the universe in that ring." "Gosh!" said the Very Young Man. "It doesn't make one feel very important in the scheme of things, does
it?" remarked the Big Business Man dryly. The Chemist smiled. "The existence of no individual, no nation, no
world, nor any one universe is of the least importance." "Then it would be possible," said the Doctor, "for this gigantic
universe that contains us in one of its atoms, to be itself contained
within the atom of another universe, still more gigantic, and so on." "That is my theory," said the Chemist. "And in each of the atoms of the rocks of that cave there may be other
worlds proportionately minute?" "I can see no reason to doubt it." "Well, there is no proof, anyway," said the Banker. "We might as well
believe it." "I intend to get proof," said the Chemist. "Do you believe all these innumerable universes, both larger and smaller
than ours, are inhabited?" asked the Doctor. "I should think probably most of them are. The existence of life, I
believe, is as fundamental as the existence of matter without life." "How do you suppose that girl got in there?" asked the Very Young Man,
coming out of a brown study. "What puzzled me," resumed the Chemist, ignoring the question, "is why
the girl should so resemble our own race. I have thought about it a good
deal, and I have reached the conclusion that the inhabitants of any
universe in the next smaller or larger plane to ours probably resemble
us fairly closely. That ring, you see, is in the same--shall we
say--environment as ourselves. The same forces control it that control
us. Now, if the ring had been created on Mars, for instance, I believe
that the universes within its atoms would be inhabited by beings like
the Martians--if Mars has any inhabitants. Of course, in planes beyond
those next to ours, either smaller or larger, changes would probably
occur, becoming greater as you go in or out from our own universe." "Good Lord! It makes one dizzy to think of it," said the Big Business
Man. "I wish I knew how that girl got in there," sighed the Very Young Man,
looking at the ring. "She probably didn't," retorted the Doctor. "Very likely she was created
there, the same as you were here." "I think that is probably so," said the Chemist. "And yet, sometimes I
am not at all sure. She was very human." The Very Young Man looked at
him sympathetically. "How are you going to prove your theories?" asked the Banker, in his
most irritatingly practical way. The Chemist picked up the ring and put it on his finger. "Gentlemen," he
said. "I have tried to tell you facts, not theories. What I saw through
that ultramicroscope was not an unproven theory, but a fact. My theories
you have brought out by your questions." "You are quite right," said the Doctor; "but you did mention yourself
that you hoped to provide proof." The Chemist hesitated a moment, then made his decision. "I will tell you
the rest," he said. "After the destruction of the microscope, I was quite at a loss how to
proceed. I thought about the problem for many weeks. Finally I decided
to work along another altogether different line--a theory about which I
am surprised you have not already questioned me." He paused, but no one spoke. "I am hardly ready with proof to-night," he resumed after a moment. "Will you all take dinner with me here at the club one week from
to-night?" He read affirmation in the glance of each. "Good. That's settled," he said, rising. "At seven, then." "But what was the theory you expected us to question you about?" asked
the Very Young Man. The Chemist leaned on the back of his chair. "The only solution I could see to the problem," he said slowly, "was to
find some way of making myself sufficiently small to be able to enter
that other universe. I have found such a way and one week from to-night,
gentlemen, with your assistance, I am going to enter the surface of that
ring at the point where it is scratched!" CHAPTER II

INTO THE RING


The cigars were lighted and dinner over before the Doctor broached the
subject uppermost in the minds of every member of the party. "A toast, gentlemen," he said, raising his glass. "To the greatest
research chemist in the world. May he be successful in his adventure
to-night." The Chemist bowed his acknowledgment. "You have not heard me yet," he said smiling. "But we want to," said the Very Young Man impulsively. "And you shall." He settled himself more comfortably in his chair. "Gentlemen, I am going to tell you, first, as simply as possible, just
what I have done in the past two years. You must draw your own
conclusions from the evidence I give you. "You will remember that I told you last week of my dilemma after the
destruction of the microscope. Its loss and the impossibility of
replacing it, led me into still bolder plans than merely the visual
examination of this minute world. I reasoned, as I have told you, that
because of its physical proximity, its similar environment, so to speak,
this outer world should be capable of supporting life identical with our
own. "By no process of reasoning can I find adequate refutation of this
theory. Then, again, I had the evidence of my own eyes to prove that a
being I could not tell from one of my own kind was living there. That
this girl, other than in size, differs radically from those of our race,
I cannot believe. "I saw then but one obstacle standing between me and this other
world--the discrepancy of size. The distance separating our world from
this other is infinitely great or infinitely small, according to the
viewpoint. In my present size it is only a few feet from here to the
ring on that plate. But to an inhabitant of that other world, we are as
remote as the faintest stars of the heavens, diminished a thousand
times." He paused a moment, signing the waiter to leave the room. "This reduction of bodily size, great as it is, involves no deeper
principle than does a light contraction of tissue, except that it must
be carried further. The problem, then, was to find a chemical,
sufficiently unharmful to life, that would so act upon the body cells as
to cause a reduction in bulk, without changing their shape. I had to
secure a uniform and also a proportionate rate of contraction of each
cell, in order not to have the body shape altered. "After a comparatively small amount of research work, I encountered an
apparently insurmountable obstacle. As you know, gentlemen, our living
human bodies are held together by the power of the central intelligence
we call the mind. Every instant during your lifetime your subconscious
mind is commanding and directing the individual life of each cell that
makes up your body. At death this power is withdrawn; each cell is
thrown under its own individual command, and dissolution of the body
takes place. "I found, therefore, that I could not act upon the cells separately, so
long as they were under control of the mind. On the other hand, I could
not withdraw this power of the subconscious mind without causing death. "I progressed no further than this for several months. Then came the
solution. I reasoned that after death the body does not immediately
disintegrate; far more time elapses than I expected to need for the
cell-contraction. I devoted my time, then to finding a chemical that
would temporarily withhold, during the period of cell-contraction, the
power of the subconscious mind, just as the power of the conscious mind
is withheld by hypnotism. "I am not going to weary you by trying to lead you through the maze of
chemical experiments into which I plunged. Only one of you," he
indicated the Doctor, "has the technical basis of knowledge to follow
me. No one had been before me along the path I traversed. I pursued the
method of pure theoretical deduction, drawing my conclusions from the
practical results obtained. "I worked on rabbits almost exclusively. After a few weeks I succeeded
in completely suspending animation in one of them for several hours. There was no life apparently existing during that period. It was not a
trance or coma, but the complete simulation of death. No harmful results
followed the revivifying of the animal. The contraction of the cells was
far more difficult to accomplish; I finished my last experiment less
than six months ago." "Then you really have been able to make an animal infinitely small?" asked the Big Business Man. The Chemist smiled. "I sent four rabbits into the unknown last week," he
said. "What did they look like going?" asked the Very Young Man. The Chemist
signed him to be patient. "The quantity of diminution to be obtained bothered me considerably. Exactly how small that other universe is, I had no means of knowing,
except by the computations I made of the magnifying power of my lens. These figures, I know, must necessarily be very inaccurate. Then, again,
I have no means of judging by the visual rate of diminution of these
rabbits, whether this contraction is at a uniform rate or accelerated. Nor can I tell how long it is prolonged, for the quantity of drug
administered, as only a fraction of the diminution has taken place when
the animal passes beyond the range of any microscope I now possess. "These questions were overshadowed, however, by a far more serious
problem that encompassed them all. "As I was planning to project myself into this unknown universe and to
reach the exact size proportionate to it, I soon realized such a result
could not be obtained were I in an unconscious state. Only by successive
doses of the drug, or its retardent about which I will tell you later,
could I hope to reach the proper size. Another necessity is that I place
myself on the exact spot on that ring where I wish to enter and to climb
down among its atoms when I have become sufficiently small to do so. Obviously, this would be impossible to one not possessing all his
faculties and physical strength." "And did you solve that problem, too?" asked the Banker. "I'd like to see it done," he added, reading his answer in the other's
confident smile. The Chemist produced two small paper packages from his wallet. "These
drugs are the result of my research," he said. "One of them causes
contraction, and the other expansion, by an exact reversal of the
process. Taken together, they produce no effect, and a lesser amount of
one retards the action of the other." He opened the papers, showing two
small vials. "I have made them as you see, in the form of tiny pills,
each containing a minute quantity of the drug. It is by taking them
successively in unequal amounts that I expect to reach the desired
size." "There's one point that you do not mention," said the Doctor. "Those
vials and their contents will have to change size as you do. How are you
going to manage that?" "By experimentation I have found," answered the Chemist, "that any
object held in close physical contact with the living body being
contracted is contracted itself at an equal rate. I believe that my
clothes will be affected also. These vials I will carry strapped under
my armpits." "Suppose you should die, or be killed, would the contraction cease?" asked the Doctor. "Yes, almost immediately," replied the Chemist. "Apparently, though I am
acting through the subconscious mind while its power is held in
abeyance, when this power is permanently withdrawn by death, the drug no
longer affects the individual cells. The contraction or expansion ceases
almost at once." The Chemist cleared a space before him on the table. "In a well-managed
club like this," he said, "there should be no flies, but I see several
around. Do you suppose we can catch one of them?" "I can," said the Very Young Man, and forthwith he did. The Chemist moistened a lump of sugar and laid it on the table before
him. Then, selecting one of the smallest of the pills, he ground it to
powder with the back of a spoon and sprinkled this powder on the sugar. "Will you give me the fly, please?" The Very Young Man gingerly did so. The Chemist held the insect by its
wings over the sugar. "Will someone lend me one of his shoes?" The Very Young Man hastily slipped off a dancing pump. "Thank you," said the Chemist, placing it on the table with a quizzical
smile. The rest of the company rose from their chairs and gathered around,
watching with interested faces what was about to happen. "I hope he is hungry," remarked the Chemist, and placed the fly gently
down on the sugar, still holding it by the wings. The insect, after a
moment, ate a little. Silence fell upon the group as each watched intently. For a few moments
nothing happened. Then, almost imperceptibly at first, the fly became
larger. In another minute it was the size of a large horse-fly,
struggling to release its wings from the Chemist's grasp. A minute more
and it was the size of a beetle. No one spoke. The Banker moistened his
lips, drained his glass hurriedly and moved slightly farther away. Still
the insect grew; now it was the size of a small chicken, the multiple
lens of its eyes presenting a most terrifying aspect, while its
ferocious droning reverberated through the room. Then suddenly the
Chemist threw it upon the table, covered it with a napkin, and beat it
violently with the slipper. When all movement had ceased he tossed its
quivering body into a corner of the room. "Good God!" ejaculated the Banker, as the white-faced men stared at each
other. The quiet voice of the Chemist brought them back to themselves. "That, gentlemen, you must understand, was only a fraction of the very
first stage of growth. As you may have noticed, it was constantly
accelerated. This acceleration attains a speed of possibly fifty
thousand times that you observed. Beyond that, it is my theory, the
change is at a uniform rate." He looked at the body of the fly, lying
inert on the floor. "You can appreciate now, gentlemen, the importance
of having this growth cease after death." "Good Lord, I should say so!" murmured the Big Business Man, mopping his
forehead. The Chemist took the lump of sugar and threw it into the open
fire. "Gosh!" said the Very Young Man, "suppose when we were not looking,
another fly had----"

"Shut up!" growled the Banker. "Not so skeptical now, eh, George?" said the Big Business Man. "Can you catch me another fly?" asked the Chemist. The Very Young Man
hastened to do so. "The second demonstration, gentlemen," said the
Chemist, "is less spectacular, but far more pertinent than the one you
have just witnessed." He took the fly by the wings, and prepared another
lump of sugar, sprinkling a crushed pill from the other vial upon it. "When he is small enough I am going to try to put him on the ring, if he
will stay still," said the Chemist. The Doctor pulled the plate containing the ring forward until it was
directly under the light, and every one crowded closer to watch; already
the fly was almost too small to be held. The Chemist tried to set it on
the ring, but could not; so with his other hand he brushed it lightly
into the plate, where it lay, a tiny black speck against the gleaming
whiteness of the china. "Watch it carefully, gentlemen," he said, as they bent closer. "It's gone," said the Big Business Man. "No, I can still see it," said the Doctor. Then he raised the plate
closer to his face. "Now it's gone," he said. The Chemist sat down in his chair. "It's probably still there, only too
small for you to see. In a few minutes, if it took a sufficient amount
of the drug, it will be small enough to fall between the molecules of
the plate." "Do you suppose it will find another inhabited universe down there?" asked the Very Young Man. "Who knows," smiled the Chemist. "Very possibly it will. But the one we
are interested in is here," he added, touching the ring. "Is it your intention to take this stuff yourself to-night?" asked the
Big Business Man. "If you will give me your help, I think so, yes. I have made all
arrangements. The club has given us this room in absolute privacy for
forty-eight hours. Your meals will be served here when you want them,
and I am going to ask you, gentlemen, to take turns watching and
guarding the ring during that time. Will you do it?" "I should say we would," cried the Doctor, and the others nodded assent. "It is because I wanted you to be convinced of my entire sincerity that
I have taken you so thoroughly into my confidence. Are those doors
locked?" The Very Young Man locked them. "Thank you," said the Chemist, starting to disrobe. In a moment he stood
before them attired in a woolen bathing-suit of pure white. Over his
shoulders was strapped tightly a narrow leather harness, supporting two
silken pockets, one under each armpit. Into each of these he placed one
of the vials, first laying four pills from one of them upon the table. At this point the Banker rose from his chair and selected another in the
further corner of the room. He sank into it a crumpled heap and wiped
the beads of perspiration from his face with a shaking hand. "I have every expectation," said the Chemist, "that this suit and
harness will contract in size uniformly with me. If the harness should
not, then I shall have to hold the vials in my hand." On the table, directly under the light, he spread a large silk
handkerchief, upon which he placed the ring. He then produced a
teaspoon, which he handed to the Doctor. "Please listen carefully," he said, "for perhaps the whole success of my
adventure, and my life itself, may depend upon your actions during the
next few minutes. You will realize, of course, that when I am still
large enough to be visible to you I shall be so small that my voice may
be inaudible. Therefore, I want you to know, now, just what to expect. "When I am something under a foot high, I shall step upon that
handkerchief, where you will see my white suit plainly against its black
surface. When I become less than an inch high, I shall run over to the
ring and stand beside it. When I have diminished to about a quarter of
an inch, I shall climb upon it, and, as I get smaller, will follow its
surface until I come to the scratch. "I want you to watch me very closely. I may miscalculate the time and
wait until I am too small to climb upon the ring. Or I may fall off. In
either case, you will place that spoon beside me and I will climb into
it. You will then do your best to help me get on the ring. Is all this
quite clear?" The Doctor nodded assent. "Very well, watch me as long as I remain visible. If I have an accident,
I shall take the other drug and endeavor to return to you at once. This
you must expect at any moment during the next forty-eight hours. Under
all circumstances, if I am alive, I shall return at the expiration of
that time. "And, gentlemen, let me caution you most solemnly, do not allow that
ring to be touched until that length of time has expired. Can I depend
on you?" "Yes," they answered breathlessly. "After I have taken the pills," the Chemist continued, "I shall not
speak unless it is absolutely necessary. I do not know what my
sensations will be, and I want to follow them as closely as possible." He then turned out all the lights in the room with the exception of the
center electrolier, that shone down directly on the handkerchief and
ring. The Chemist looked about him. "Good-by, gentlemen," he said, shaking
hands all round. "Wish me luck," and without hesitation he placed the
four pills in his mouth and washed them down with a swallow of water. Silence fell on the group as the Chemist seated himself and covered his
face with his hands. For perhaps two minutes the tenseness of the
silence was unbroken, save by the heavy breathing of the Banker as he
lay huddled in his chair. "Oh, my God! He _is_ growing smaller!" whispered the Big Business Man in
a horrified tone to the Doctor. The Chemist raised his head and smiled
at them. Then he stood up, steadying himself against a chair. He was
less than four feet high. Steadily he grew smaller before their
horrified eyes. Once he made, as if to speak, and the Doctor knelt down
beside him. "It's all right, good-by," he said in a tiny voice. Then he stepped upon the handkerchief. The Doctor knelt on the floor
beside it, the wooden spoon ready in his hand, while the others, except
the Banker, stood behind him. The figure of the Chemist, standing
motionless near the edge of the handkerchief, seemed now like a little
white wooden toy, hardly more than an inch in height. Waving his hand and smiling, he suddenly started to walk and then ran
swiftly over to the ring. By the time he reached it, somewhat out of
breath, he was little more than twice as high as the width of its band. Without pausing, he leaped up, and sat astraddle, leaning over and
holding to it tightly with his hands. In another moment he was on his
feet, on the upper edge of the ring, walking carefully along its
circumference towards the scratch. The Big Business Man touched the Doctor on the shoulder and tried to
smile. "He's making it," he whispered. As if in answer the little figure
turned and waved its arms. They could just distinguish its white outline
against the gold surface underneath. "I don't see him," said the Very Young Man in a scared voice. "He's right near the scratch," answered the Doctor, bending closer. Then, after a moment, "He's gone." He rose to his feet. "Good Lord! Why
haven't we a microscope!" "I never thought of that," said the Big Business Man, "we could have
watched him for a long time yet." "Well, he's gone now," returned the Doctor, "and there is nothing for us
to do but wait." "I hope he finds that girl," sighed the Very Young Man, as he sat chin
in hand beside the handkerchief. CHAPTER III

AFTER FORTY-EIGHT HOURS


The Banker snored stertorously from his mattress in a corner of the
room. In an easy-chair near by, with his feet on the table, lay the Very
Young Man, sleeping also. The Doctor and the Big Business Man sat by the handkerchief conversing
in low tones. "How long has it been now?" asked the latter. "Just forty hours," answered the Doctor; "and he said that forty-eight
hours was the limit. He should come back at about ten to-night." "I wonder if he _will_ come back," questioned the Big Business Man
nervously. "Lord, I wish _he_ wouldn't snore so loud," he added
irritably, nodding in the direction of the Banker. They were silent for a moment, and then he went on: "You'd better try to
sleep a little while, Frank. You're worn out. I'll watch here." "I suppose I should," answered the Doctor wearily. "Wake up that kid,
he's sleeping most of the time." "No, I'll watch," repeated the Big Business Man. "You lie down over
there." The Doctor did so while the other settled himself more comfortably on a
cushion beside the handkerchief, and prepared for his lonely watching. The Doctor apparently dropped off to sleep at once, for he did not speak
again. The Big Business Man sat staring steadily at the ring, bending
nearer to it occasionally. Every ten or fifteen minutes he looked at his
watch. Perhaps an hour passed in this way, when the Very Young Man suddenly sat
up and yawned. "Haven't they come back yet?" he asked in a sleepy voice. The Big Business Man answered in a much lower tone. "What do you
mean--they?" "I dreamed that he brought the girl back with him," said the Very Young
Man. "Well, if he did, they have not arrived. You'd better go back to sleep. We've got six or seven hours yet--maybe more." The Very Young Man rose and crossed the room. "No, I'll watch a while,"
he said, seating himself on the floor. "What time is it?" "Quarter to three." "He said he'd be back by ten to-night. I'm crazy to see that girl." The Big Business Man rose and went over to a dinner-tray, standing near
the door. "Lord, I'm hungry. I must have forgotten to eat to-day." He
lifted up one of the silver covers. What he saw evidently encouraged
him, for he drew up a chair and began his lunch. The Very Young Man lighted a cigarette. "It will be the tragedy of my
life," he said, "if he never comes back." The Big Business Man smiled. "How about _his_ life?" he answered, but
the Very Young Man had fallen into a reverie and did not reply. The Big Business Man finished his lunch in silence and was just about to
light a cigar when a sharp exclamation brought him hastily to his feet. "Come here, quick, I see something." The Very Young Man had his face
close to the ring and was trembling violently. The other pushed him back. "Let me see. Where?" "There, by the scratch; he's lying there; I can see him." The Big Business Man looked and then hurriedly woke the Doctor. "He's come back," he said briefly; "you can see him there." The Doctor
bent down over the ring while the others woke up the Banker. "He doesn't seem to be getting any bigger," said the Very Young Man;
"he's just lying there. Maybe he's dead." "What shall we do?" asked the Big Business Man, and made as if to pick
up the ring. The Doctor shoved him away. "Don't do that!" he said
sharply. "Do you want to kill him?" "He's sitting up," cried the Very Young Man. "He's all right." "He must have fainted," said the Doctor. "Probably he's taking more of
the drug now." "He's much larger," said the Very Young Man; "look at him!" The tiny figure was sitting sideways on the ring, with its feet hanging
over the outer edge. It was growing perceptibly larger each instant, and
in a moment it slipped down off the ring and sank in a heap on the
handkerchief. "Good Heavens! Look at him!" cried the Big Business Man. "He's all
covered with blood." The little figure presented a ghastly sight. As it steadily grew larger
they could see and recognize the Chemist's haggard face, his cheek and
neck stained with blood, and his white suit covered with dirt. "Look at his feet," whispered the Big Business Man. They were horribly
cut and bruised and greatly swollen. The Doctor bent over and whispered gently, "What can I do to help you?" The Chemist shook his head. His body, lying prone upon the handkerchief,
had torn it apart in growing. When he was about twelve inches in length
he raised his head. The Doctor bent closer. "Some brandy, please," said
a wraith of the Chemist's voice. It was barely audible. "He wants some brandy," called the Doctor. The Very Young Man looked
hastily around, then opened the door and dashed madly out of the room. When he returned, the Chemist had grown to nearly four feet. He was
sitting on the floor with his back against the Doctor's knees. The Big
Business Man was wiping the blood off his face with a damp napkin. "Here!" cried the Very Young Man, thrusting forth the brandy. The
Chemist drank a little of it. Then he sat up, evidently somewhat
revived. "I seem to have stopped growing," he said. "Let's finish it up now. God! how I want to be the right size again," he added fervently. The Doctor helped him extract the vials from under his arm, and the
Chemist touched one of the pills to his tongue. Then he sank back,
closing his eyes. "I think that should be about enough," he murmured. No one spoke for nearly ten minutes. Gradually the Chemist's body grew,
the Doctor shifting his position several times as it became larger. It
seemed finally to have stopped growing, and was apparently nearly its
former size. "Is he asleep?" whispered the Very Young Man. The Chemist opened his eyes. "No," he answered. "I'm all right now, I think." He rose to his feet,
the Doctor and the Big Business Man supporting him on either side. "Sit down and tell us about it," said the Very Young Man. "Did you find
the girl?" The Chemist smiled wearily. "Gentlemen, I cannot talk now. Let me have a bath and some dinner. Then
I will tell you all about it." The Doctor rang for an attendant, and led the Chemist to the door,
throwing a blanket around him as he did so. In the doorway the Chemist
paused and looked back with a wan smile over the wreck of the room. "Give me an hour," he said. "And eat something yourselves while I am
gone." Then he left, closing the door after him. When he returned, fully dressed in clothes that were ludicrously large
for him, the room had been straightened up, and his four friends were
finishing their meal. He took his place among them quietly and lighted a
cigar. "Well, gentlemen, I suppose that you are interested to hear what
happened to me," he began. The Very Young Man asked his usual question. "Let him alone," said the Doctor. "You will hear it all soon enough." "Was it all as you expected?" asked the Banker. It was his first remark
since the Chemist returned. "To a great extent, yes," answered the Chemist. "But I had better tell
you just what happened." The Very Young Man nodded his eager agreement. "When I took those first four pills," began the Chemist in a quiet, even
tone, "my immediate sensation was a sudden reeling of the senses,
combined with an extreme nausea. This latter feeling passed after a
moment. "You will remember that I seated myself upon the floor and closed my
eyes. When I opened them my head had steadied itself somewhat, but I was
oppressed by a curious feeling of drowsiness, impossible to shake off. "My first mental impression was one of wonderment when I saw you all
begin to increase in size. I remember standing up beside that chair,
which was then half again its normal size, and you"--indicating the
Doctor--"towered beside me as a giant of nine or ten feet high. "Steadily upward, with a curious crawling motion, grew the room and all
its contents. Except for the feeling of sleep that oppressed me, I felt
quite my usual self. No change appeared happening to me, but everything
else seemed growing to gigantic and terrifying proportions. "Can you imagine a human being a hundred feet high? That is how you
looked to me as I stepped upon that huge expanse of black silk and
shouted my last good-bye to you! "Over to my left lay the ring, apparently fifteen or twenty feet away. I
started to walk towards it, but although it grew rapidly larger, the
distance separating me from it seemed to increase rather than lessen. Then I ran, and by the time I arrived it stood higher than my waist--a
beautiful, shaggy, golden pit. "I jumped upon its rim and clung to it tightly. I could feel it growing
beneath me, as I sat. After a moment I climbed upon its top surface and
started to walk towards the point where I knew the scratch to be. "I found myself now, as I looked about, walking upon a narrow, though
ever broadening, curved path. The ground beneath my feet appeared to be
a rough, yellowish quartz. This path grew rougher as I advanced. Below
the bulging edges of the path, on both sides, lay a shining black plain,
ridged and indented, and with a sunlike sheen on the higher portions of
the ridges. On the one hand this black plain stretched in an unbroken
expanse to the horizon. On the other, it appeared as a circular valley,
enclosed by a shining yellow wall. "The way had now become extraordinarily rough. I bore to the left as I
advanced, keeping close to the outer edge. The other edge of the path I
could not see. I clambered along hastily, and after a few moments was
confronted by a row of rocks and bowlders lying directly across my line
of progress. I followed their course for a short distance, and finally
found a space through which I could pass. "This transverse ridge was perhaps a hundred feet deep. Behind it and
extending in a parallel direction lay a tremendous valley. I knew then I
had reached my first objective. "I sat down upon the brink of the precipice and watched the cavern
growing ever wider and deeper. Then I realized that I must begin my
descent if ever I was to reach the bottom. For perhaps six hours I
climbed steadily downwards. It was a fairly easy descent after the first
little while, for the ground seemed to open up before me as I advanced,
changing its contour so constantly that I was never at a loss for an
easy downward path. "My feet suffered cruelly from the shaggy, metallic ground, and I soon
had to stop and rig a sort of protection for the soles of them from a
portion of the harness over my shoulder. According to the stature I was
when I reached the bottom, I had descended perhaps twelve thousand feet
during this time. "The latter part of the journey found me nearing the bottom of the
canon. Objects around me no longer seemed to increase in size, as had
been constantly the case before, and I reasoned that probably my stature
was remaining constant. "I noticed, too, as I advanced, a curious alteration in the form of
light around me. The glare from above (the sky showed only as a narrow
dull ribbon of blue) barely penetrated to the depths of the canon's
floor. But all about me there was a soft radiance, seeming to emanate
from the rocks themselves. "The sides of the canon were shaggy and rough, beyond anything I had
ever seen. Huge bowlders, hundreds of feet in diameter, were embedded in
them. The bottom also was strewn with similar gigantic rocks. "I surveyed this lonely waste for some time in dismay, not knowing in
what direction lay my goal. I knew that I was at the bottom of the
scratch, and by the comparison of its size I realized I was well started
on my journey. "I have not told you, gentlemen, that at the time I marked the ring I
made a deeper indentation in one portion of the scratch and focused the
microscope upon that. This indentation I now searched for. Luckily I
found it, less than half a mile away--an almost circular pit, perhaps
five miles in diameter, with shining walls extending downwards into
blackness. There seemed no possible way of descending into it, so I sat
down near its edge to think out my plan of action. "I realized now that I was faint and hungry, and whatever I did must be
done quickly. I could turn back to you, or I could go on. I decided to
risk the latter course, and took twelve more of the pills--three times
my original dose." The Chemist paused for a moment, but his auditors were much too intent
to question him. Then he resumed in his former matter-of-fact tone. "After my vertigo had passed somewhat--it was much more severe this
time--I looked up and found my surroundings growing at a far more rapid
rate than before. I staggered to the edge of the pit. It was opening up
and widening out at an astounding rate. Already its sides were becoming
rough and broken, and I saw many places where a descent would be
possible. "The feeling of sleep that had formerly merely oppressed me, combined
now with my physical fatigue and the larger dose of the drug I had
taken, became almost intolerable. I yielded to it for a moment, lying
down on a crag near the edge of the pit. I must have become almost
immediately unconscious, and remained so for a considerable time. I can
remember a horrible sensation of sliding headlong for what seemed like
hours. I felt that I was sliding or falling downward. I tried to rouse
but could not. Then came absolute oblivion. "When I recovered my senses I was lying partly covered by a mass of
smooth, shining pebbles. I was bruised and battered from head to
foot--in a far worse condition than you first saw me when I returned. "I sat up and looked around. Beside me, sloped upward at an apparently
increasing angle a tremendous glossy plane. This extended, as far as I
could see, both to the right and left and upward into the blackness of
the sky overhead. It was this plane that had evidently broken my fall,
and I had been sliding down it, bringing with me a considerable mass of
rocks and bowlders. "As my senses became clearer I saw I was lying on a fairly level floor. I could see perhaps two miles in each direction. Beyond that there was
only darkness. The sky overhead was unbroken by stars or light of any
kind. I should have been in total darkness except, as I have told you
before, that everything, even the blackness itself, seemed to be
self-luminous. "The incline down which I had fallen was composed of some smooth
substance suggesting black marble. The floor underfoot was quite
different--more of a metallic quality with a curious corrugation. Before
me, in the dim distance, I could just make out a tiny range of hills. "I rose, after a time, and started weakly to walk towards these hills. Though I was faint and dizzy from my fall and the lack of food, I walked
for perhaps half an hour, following closely the edge of the incline. No
change in my visual surroundings occurred, except that I seemed
gradually to be approaching the line of hills. My situation at this
time, as I turned it over in my mind, appeared hopelessly desperate, and
I admit I neither expected to reach my destination nor to be able to
return to my own world. "A sudden change in the feeling of the ground underfoot brought me to
myself; I bent down and found I was treading on vegetation--a tiny
forest extending for quite a distance in front and to the side of me. A
few steps ahead a little silver ribbon threaded its way through the
trees. This I judged to be water. "New hope possessed me at this discovery. I sat down at once and took a
portion of another of the pills. "I must again have fallen asleep. When I awoke, somewhat refreshed, I
found myself lying beside the huge trunk of a fallen tree. I was in what
had evidently once been a deep forest, but which now was almost utterly
desolated. Only here and there were the trees left standing. For the
most part they were lying in a crushed and tangled mass, many of them
partially embedded in the ground. "I cannot express adequately to you, gentlemen, what an evidence of
tremendous superhuman power this scene presented. No storm, no
lightning, nor any attack of the elements could have produced more than
a fraction of the destruction I saw all around me. "I climbed cautiously upon the fallen tree-trunk, and from this
elevation had a much better view of my surroundings. I appeared to be
near one end of the desolated area, which extended in a path about half
a mile wide and several miles deep. In front, a thousand feet away,
perhaps, lay the unbroken forest. "Descending from the tree-trunk I walked in this direction, reaching the
edge of the woods after possibly an hour of the most arduous traveling
of my whole journey. "During this time almost my only thought was the necessity of obtaining
food. I looked about me as I advanced, and on one of the fallen
tree-trunks I found a sort of vine growing. This vine bore a profusion
of small gray berries, much like our huckleberries. They proved similar
in taste, and I sat down and ate a quantity. "When I reached the edge of the forest I felt somewhat stronger. I had
seen up to this time no sign of animal life whatever. Now, as I stood
silent, I could hear around me all the multitudinous tiny voices of the
woods. Insect life stirred underfoot, and in the trees above an
occasional bird flitted to and fro. "Perhaps I am giving you a picture of our own world. I do not mean to do
so. You must remember that above me there was no sky, just blackness. And yet so much light illuminated the scene that I could not believe it
was other than what we would call daytime. Objects in the forest were as
well lighted--better probably than they would be under similar
circumstances in our own world. "The trees were of huge size compared to my present stature; straight,
upstanding trunks, with no branches until very near the top. They were
bluish-gray in color, and many of them well covered with the berry-vine
I have mentioned. The leaves overhead seemed to be blue--in fact the
predominating color of all the vegetation was blue, just as in our world
it is green. The ground was covered with dead leaves, mould, and a sort
of gray moss. Fungus of a similar color appeared, but of this I did not
eat. "I had penetrated perhaps two miles into the forest when I came
unexpectedly to the bank of a broad, smooth-flowing river, its silver
surface seeming to radiate waves of the characteristic phosphorescent
light. I found it cold, pure-tasting water, and I drank long and deeply. Then I remember lying down upon the mossy bank, and in a moment, utterly
worn out, I again fell asleep." CHAPTER IV

LYLDA


"I was awakened by the feel of soft hands upon my head and face. With a
start I sat up abruptly; I rubbed my eyes confusedly for a moment, not
knowing where I was. When I collected my wits I found myself staring
into the face of a girl, who was kneeling on the ground before me. I
recognized her at once--she was the girl of the microscope. "To say I was startled would be to put it mildly, but I read no fear in
her expression, only wonderment at my springing so suddenly into life. She was dressed very much as I had seen her before. Her fragile beauty
was the same, and at this closer view infinitely more appealing, but I
was puzzled to account for her older, more mature look. She seemed to
have aged several years since the last evening I had seen her through
the microscope. Yet, undeniably, it was the same girl. "For some moments we sat looking at each other in wonderment. Then she
smiled and held out her hand, palm up, speaking a few words as she did
so. Her voice was soft and musical, and the words of a peculiar quality
that we generally describe as liquid, for want of a better term. What
she said was wholly unintelligible, but whether the words were strange
or the intonation different from anything I had ever heard I could not
determine. "Afterwards, during my stay in this other world, I found that the
language of its people resembled English quite closely, so far as the
words themselves went. But the intonation with which they were given,
and the gestures accompanying them, differed so widely from our own that
they conveyed no meaning. "The gap separating us, however, was very much less than you would
imagine. Strangely enough, though, it was not I who learned to speak her
tongue, but she who mastered mine." The Very Young Man sighed contentedly. "We became quite friendly after this greeting," resumed the Chemist,
"and it was apparent from her manner that she had already conceived her
own idea of who and what I was. "For some time we sat and tried to communicate with each other. My words
seemed almost as unintelligible to her as hers to me, except that
occasionally she would divine my meaning, clapping her hands in childish
delight. I made out that she lived at a considerable distance, and that
her name was Lylda. Finally she pulled me by the hand and led me away
with a proprietary air that amused and, I must admit, pleased me
tremendously. "We had progressed through the woods in this way, hardly more than a few
hundred yards, when suddenly I found that she was taking me into the
mouth of a cave or passageway, sloping downward at an angle of perhaps
twenty degrees. I noticed now, more graphically than ever before, a
truth that had been gradually forcing itself upon me. Darkness was
impossible in this new world. We were now shut in between narrow walls
of crystalline rock, with a roof hardly more than fifty feet above. "No artificial light of any kind was in evidence, yet the scene was
lighted quite brightly. This, I have explained, was caused by the
phosphorescent radiation that apparently emanated from every particle of
mineral matter in this universe. "As we advanced, many other tunnels crossed the one we were traveling. And now, occasionally, we passed other people, the men dressed similarly
to Lylda, but wearing their hair chopped off just above the shoulder
line. "Later, I found that the men were generally about five and a half feet
in stature: lean, muscular, and with a grayer, harder look to their skin
than the iridescent quality that characterized the women. "They were fine-looking chaps these we encountered. All of them stared
curiously at me, and several times we were held up by chattering groups. The intense whiteness of my skin, for it looked in this light the color
of chalk, seemed to both awe and amuse them. But they treated me with
great deference and respect, which I afterwards learned was because of
Lylda herself, and also what she told them about me. "At several of the intersections of the tunnels there were wide open
spaces. One of these we now approached. It was a vast amphitheater, so
broad its opposite wall was invisible, and it seemed crowded with
people. At the side, on a rocky niche in the wall, a speaker harangued
the crowd. "We skirted the edge of this crowd and plunged into another passageway,
sloping downward still more steeply. I was so much interested in the
strange scenes opening before me that I remarked little of the distance
we traveled. Nor did I question Lylda but seldom. I was absorbed in the
complete similarity between this and my own world in its general
characteristics, and yet its complete strangeness in details. "I felt not the slightest fear. Indeed the sincerity and kindliness of
these people seemed absolutely genuine, and the friendly, naive, manner
of my little guide put me wholly at my ease. Towards me Lylda's manner
was one of childish delight at a new-found possession. Towards those of
her own people with whom we talked, I found she preserved a dignity they
profoundly respected. "We had hardly more than entered this last tunnel when I heard the sound
of drums and a weird sort of piping music, followed by shouts and
cheers. Figures from behind us scurried past, hastening towards the
sound. Lylda's clasp on my hand tightened, and she pulled me forward
eagerly. As we advanced the crowd became denser, pushing and shoving us
about and paying little attention to me. "In close contact with these people I soon found I was stronger than
they, and for a time I had no difficulty in shoving them aside and
opening a path for us. They took my rough handling in all good part, in
fact, never have I met a more even-tempered, good-natured people than
these. "After a time the crowd became so dense we could advance no further. At
this Lylda signed me to bear to the side. As we approached the wall of
the cavern she suddenly clasped her hands high over her head and shouted
something in a clear, commanding voice. Instantly the crowd fell back,
and in a moment I found myself being pulled up a narrow flight of stone
steps in the wall and out upon a level space some twenty feet above the
heads of the people. "Several dignitaries occupied this platform. Lylda greeted them quietly,
and they made place for us beside the parapet. I could see now that we
were at the intersection of a transverse passageway, much broader than
the one we had been traversing. And now I received the greatest surprise
I had had in this new world, for down this latter tunnel was passing a
broad line of men who obviously were soldiers. "The uniformly straight lines they held; the glint of light on the
spears they carried upright before them; the weird, but rhythmic, music
that passed at intervals, with which they kept step; and, above all, the
cheering enthusiasm of the crowd, all seemed like an echo of my own
great world above. "This martial ardor and what it implied came as a distinct shock. All I
had seen before showed the gentle kindliness of a people whose life
seemed far removed from the struggle for existence to which our race is
subjected. I had come gradually to feel that this new world, at least,
had attained the golden age of security, and that fear, hate, and
wrongdoing had long since passed away, or had never been born. "Yet, here before my very eyes, made wholesome by the fires of
patriotism, stalked the grim God of War. Knowing nothing yet of the
motive that inspired these people, I could feel no enthusiasm, but only
disillusionment at this discovery of the omnipotence of strife. "For some time I must have stood in silence. Lylda, too, seemed to
divine my thoughts, for she did not applaud, but pensively watched the
cheering throng below. All at once, with an impulsively appealing
movement, she pulled me down towards her, and pressed her pretty cheek
to mine. It seemed almost as if she was asking me to help. "The line of marching men seemed now to have passed, and the crowd
surged over into the open space and began to disperse. As the men upon
the platform with us prepared to leave, Lylda led me over to one of
them. He was nearly as tall as I, and dressed in the characteristic
tunic that seemed universally worn by both sexes. The upper part of his
body was hung with beads, and across his chest was a thin, slightly
convex stone plate. "After a few words of explanation from Lylda, he laid his hands on my
shoulders near the base of the neck, smiling with his words of greeting. Then he held one hand before me, palm up, as Lylda had done, and I laid
mine in it, which seemed the correct thing to do. "I repeated this performance with two others who joined us, and then
Lylda pulled me away. We descended the steps and turned into the broader
tunnel, finding near at hand a sort of sleigh, which Lylda signed me to
enter. It was constructed evidently of wood, with a pile of leaves, or
similar dead vegetation, for cushions. It was balanced upon a single
runner of polished stone, about two feet broad, with a narrow, slightly
shorter outrider on each side. "Harnessed to the shaft were two animals, more resembling our reindeers
than anything else, except that they were gray in color and had no
horns. An attendant greeted Lylda respectfully as we approached, and
mounted a seat in front of us when we were comfortably settled. "We drove in this curious vehicle for over an hour. The floor of the
tunnel was quite smooth, and we glided down its incline with little
effort and at a good rate. Our driver preserved the balance of the
sleigh by shifting his body from side to side so that only at rare
intervals did the siderunners touch the ground. "Finally, we emerged into the open, and I found myself viewing a scene
of almost normal, earthly aspect. We were near the shore of a smooth,
shining lake. At the side a broad stretch of rolling country, dotted
here and there with trees, was visible. Near at hand, on the lake shore,
I saw a collection of houses, most of them low and flat, with one much
larger on a promontory near the lake. "Overhead arched a gray-blue, cloudless sky, faintly star-studded, and
reflected in the lake before me I saw that familiar gleaming trail of
star-dust, hanging like a huge straightened rainbow overhead, and ending
at my feet." CHAPTER V

THE WORLD IN THE RING


The Chemist paused and relighted his cigar. "Perhaps you have some
questions," he suggested. The Doctor shifted in his chair. "Did you have any theory at this time"--he wanted to know--"about the
physical conformation of this world? What I mean is, when you came out
of this tunnel were you on the inside or the outside of the world?" "Was it the same sky you saw overhead when you were in the forest?" asked the Big Business Man. "No, it was what he saw in the microscope, wasn't it?" said the Very
Young Man. "One at a time, gentlemen," laughed the Chemist. "No, I had no
particular theory at this time--I had too many other things to think of. But I do remember noticing one thing which gave me the clew to a fairly
complete understanding of this universe. From it I formed a definite
explanation, which I found was the belief held by the people
themselves." "What was that?" asked the Very Young Man. "I noticed, as I stood looking over this broad expanse of country before
me, one vital thing that made it different from any similar scene I had
ever beheld. If you will stop and think a moment, gentlemen, you will
realize that in our world here the horizon is caused by a curvature of
the earth below the straight line of vision. We are on a convex surface. But as I gazed over this landscape, and even with no appreciable light
from the sky I could see a distance of several miles, I saw at once that
quite the reverse was true. I seemed to be standing in the center of a
vast shallow bowl. The ground curved upward into the distance. There was
no distant horizon line, only the gradual fading into shadow of the
visual landscape. I was standing obviously on a concave surface, on the
inside, not the outside of the world. "The situation, as I now understand it, was this: According to the
smallest stature I reached, and calling my height at that time roughly
six feet, I had descended into the ring at the time I met Lylda several
thousand miles, at least. By the way, where is the ring?" "Here is it," said the Very Young Man, handing it to him. The Chemist
replaced it on his finger. "It's pretty important to me now," he said,
smiling. "You bet!" agreed the Very Young Man. "You can readily understand how I descended such a distance, if you
consider the comparative immensity of my stature during the first few
hours I was in the ring. It is my understanding that this country
through which I passed is a barren waste--merely the atoms of the
mineral we call gold. "Beyond that I entered the hitherto unexplored regions within the atom. The country at that point where I found the forest, I was told later, is
habitable for several hundred miles. Around it on all sides lies a
desert, across which no one has ever penetrated. "This surface is the outside of the Oroid world, for so they call their
earth. At this point the shell between the outer and inner surface is
only a few miles in thickness. The two surfaces do not parallel each
other here, so that in descending these tunnels we turned hardly more
than an eighth of a complete circle. "At the city of Arite, where Lylda first took me, and where I had my
first view of the inner surface, the curvature is slightly greater than
that of our own earth, although, as I have said, in the opposite
direction." "And the space within this curvature--the heavens you have
mentioned--how great do you estimate it to be?" asked the Doctor. "Based on the curvature at Arite it would be about six thousand miles in
diameter." "Has this entire inner surface been explored?" asked the Big Business
Man. "No, only a small portion. The Oroids are not an adventurous people. There are only two nations, less than twelve million people all
together, on a surface nearly as extensive as our own." "How about those stars?" suggested the Very Young Man. "I believe they comprise a complete universe similar to our own solar
system. There is a central sun-star, around which many of the others
revolve. You must understand, though, that these other worlds are
infinitely tiny compared to the Oroids, and, if inhabited, support
beings nearly as much smaller than the Oroids, as they are smaller than
you." "Great Caesar!" ejaculated the Banker. "Don't let's go into that any
deeper!" "Tell us more about Lylda," prompted the Very Young Man. "You are insatiable on that point," laughed the Chemist. "Well, when we
left the sleigh, Lylda took me directly into the city of Arite. I found
it an orderly collection of low houses, seemingly built of uniformly
cut, highly polished gray blocks. As we passed through the streets, some
of which were paved with similar blocks, I was reminded of nothing so
much as the old jingles of Spotless Town. Everything was immaculately,
inordinately clean. Indeed, the whole city seemed built of some curious
form of opaque glass, newly scrubbed and polished. "Children crowded from the doorways as we advanced, but Lylda dispersed
them with a gentle though firm, command. As we approached the sort of
castle I have mentioned, the reason for Lylda's authoritative manner
dawned upon me. She was, I soon learned, daughter of one of the most
learned men of the nation and was--handmaiden, do you call it?--to the
queen." "So it was a monarchy?" interrupted the Big Business Man. "I should
never have thought that." "Lylda called their leader a king. In reality he was the president,
chosen by the people, for a period of about what we would term twenty
years; I learned something about this republic during my stay, but not
as much as I would have liked. Politics was not Lylda's strong point,
and I had to get it all from her, you know. "For several days I was housed royally in the castle. Food was served me
by an attendant who evidently was assigned solely to look after my
needs. At first I was terribly confused by the constant, uniform light,
but when I found certain hours set aside for sleep, just as we have
them, when I began to eat regularly, I soon fell into the routine of
this new life. "The food was not greatly different from our own, although I found not a
single article I could identify. It consisted principally of vegetables
and fruits, the latter of an apparently inexhaustible variety. "Lylda visited me at intervals, and I learned I was awaiting an audience
with the king. During these days she made rapid progress with my
language--so rapid that I shortly gave up the idea of mastering hers. "And now, with the growing intimacy between us and our ability to
communicate more readily, I learned the simple, tragic story of her
race--new details, of course, but the old, old tale of might against
right, and the tragedy of a trusting, kindly people, blindly thinking
others as just as themselves. "For thousands of years, since the master life-giver had come from one
of the stars to populate the world, the Oroid nation had dwelt in peace
and security. These people cared nothing for adventure. No restless
thirst for knowledge led them to explore deeply the limitless land
surrounding them. Even from the earliest times no struggle for
existence, no doctrine of the survival of the fittest, hung over them as
with us. No wild animals harassed them; no savages menaced them. A
fertile boundless land, a perfect climate, nurtured them tenderly. "Under such conditions they developed only the softer, gentler qualities
of nature. Many laws among them were unnecessary, for life was so
simple, so pleasant to live, and the attainment of all the commonly
accepted standards of wealth so easy, that the incentive to wrongdoing
was almost non-existent. "Strangely enough, and fortunately, too, no individuals rose among them
with the desire for power. Those in command were respected and loved as
true workers for the people, and they accepted their authority in the
same spirit with which it was given. Indolence, in its highest sense the
wonderful art of doing nothing gracefully, played the greatest part in
their life. "Then, after centuries of ease and peaceful security, came the
awakening. Almost without warning another nation had come out of the
unknown to attack them. "With the hurt feeling that comes to a child unjustly treated, they all
but succumbed to this first onslaught. The abduction of numbers of their
women, for such seemed the principal purpose of the invaders, aroused
them sufficiently to repel this first crude attack. Their manhood
challenged, their anger as a nation awakened for the first time, they
sprang as one man into the horror we call war. "With the defeat of the Malites came another period of ease and
security. They had learned no lesson, but went their indolent way,
playing through life like the kindly children they were. During this
last period some intercourse between them and the Malites took place. The latter people, whose origin was probably nearly opposite them on the
inner surface, had by degrees pushed their frontiers closer and closer
to the Oroids. Trade between the two was carried on to some extent, but
the character of the Malites, their instinctive desire for power, for
its own sake, their consideration for themselves as superior beings,
caused them to be distrusted and feared by their more simple-minded
companion nation. "You can almost guess the rest, gentlemen. Lylda told me little about
the Malites, but the loathing disgust of her manner, her hesitancy, even
to bring herself to mention them, spoke more eloquently than words. "Four years ago, as they measure time, came the second attack, and now,
in a huge arc, only a few hundred miles from Arite, hung the opposing
armies." The Chemist paused. "That's the condition I found, gentlemen," he said. "Not a strikingly original or unfamiliar situation, was it?" "By Jove!" remarked the Doctor thoughtfully, "what a curious thing that
the environment of our earth should so affect that world inside the
ring. It does make you stop and think, doesn't it, to realize how those
infinitesimal creatures are actuated now by the identical motives that
inspire us?" "Yet it does seem very reasonable, I should say," the Big Business Man
put in. "Let's have another round of drinks," suggested the Banker--"this is dry
work!" "As a scientist you'd make a magnificent plumber, George!" retorted the
Big Business Man. "You're about as helpful in this little gathering as
an oyster!" The Very Young Man rang for a waiter. "I've been thinking----" began the Banker, and stopped at the smile of
his companion. "Shut up!" --he finished--"that's cheap wit, you know!" "Go on, George," encouraged the other, "you've been thinking----"

"I've been tremendously interested in this extraordinary story"--he
addressed himself to the Chemist--"but there's one point I don't get at
all. How many days were you in that ring do you make out?" "I believe about seven, all told," returned the Chemist. "But you were only away from us some forty hours. I ought to know, I've
been right here." He looked at his crumpled clothes somewhat ruefully. "The change of time-progress was one of the surprises of my adventure,"
said the Chemist. "It is easily explained in a general way, although I
cannot even attempt a scientific theory of its cause. But I must confess
that before I started the possibility of such a thing never even
occurred to me." "To get a conception of this change you must analyze definitely what
time is. We measure and mark it by years, months, and so forth, down to
minutes and seconds, all based upon the movements of our earth around
its sun. But that is the measurement of time, not time itself. How would
you describe time?" The Big Business Man smiled. "Time," he said, "is what keeps everything
from happening at once." "Very clever," laughed the Chemist. The Doctor leaned forward earnestly. "I should say," he began, "that
time is the rate at which we live--the speed at which we successively
pass through our existence from birth to death. It's very hard to put
intelligibly, but I think I know what I mean," he finished somewhat
lamely. "Exactly so. Time is a rate of life-progress, different for every
individual and only made standard because we take the time-duration of
the earth's revolution around the sun, which is constant, and
arbitrarily say: 'That is thirty-one million five hundred thousand odd
seconds.'" "Is time different for every individual?" asked the Banker
argumentatively. "Think a moment," returned the Chemist. "Suppose your brain were to work
twice as fast as mine. Suppose your heart beat twice as fast, and all
the functions of your body were accelerated in a like manner. What we
call a second would certainly seem to you twice as long. Further than
that, it actually would be twice as long, so far as you were concerned. Your digestion, instead of taking perhaps four hours, would take two. You would eat twice as often. The desire for sleep would overtake you
every twelve hours instead of twenty-four, and you would be satisfied
with four hours of unconsciousness instead of eight. In short, you would
soon be living a cycle of two days every twenty-four hours. Time then,
as we measure it, for you at least would have doubled--you would be
progressing through life at twice the rate that I am through mine." "That may be theoretically true," the Big Business Man put in. "Practically, though, it has never happened to any one." "Of course not, to such a great degree as the instance I put. No one,
except in disease, has ever doubled our average rate of life-progress,
and lived it out as a balanced, otherwise normal existence. But there is
no question that to some much smaller degree we all of us differ one
from the other. The difference, however, is so comparatively slight,
that we can each one reconcile it to the standard measurement of time. And so, outwardly, time is the same for all of us. But inwardly, why, we
none of us conceive a minute or an hour to be the same! How do you know
how long a minute is to me? More than that, time is not constant even in
the same individual. How many hours are shorter to you than others? How
many days have been almost interminable? No, instead of being constant,
there is nothing more inconstant than time." "Haven't you confused two different issues?" suggested the Big Business
Man. "Granted what you say about the slightly different rate at which
different individuals live, isn't it quite another thing, how long time
seems to you. A day when you have nothing to do seems long, or, on the
other hand, if you are very busy it seems short. But mind, it only
_seems_ short or long, according to the preoccupation of your mind. That
has nothing to do with the speed of your progress through life." "Ah, but I think it has," cried the Chemist. "You forget that we none of
us have all of the one thing to the exclusion of the other. Time seems
short; it seems long, and in the end it all averages up, and makes our
rate of progress what it is. Now if any of us were to go through life in
a calm, deliberate way, making time seem as long as possible, he would
live more years, as we measure them, than if he rushed headlong through
the days, accomplishing always as much as possible. I mean in neither
case to go to the extremes, but only so far as would be consistent with
the maintenance of a normal standard of health. How about it?" He turned
to the Doctor. "You ought to have an opinion on that." "I rather think you are right," said the latter thoughtfully, "although
I doubt very much if the man who took it easy would do as much during
his longer life as the other with his energy would accomplish in the
lesser time allotted to him." "Probably he wouldn't," smiled the Chemist; "but that does not alter the
point we are discussing." "How does this apply to the world in the ring?" ventured the Very Young
Man. "I believe there is a very close relationship between the dimensions of
length, breadth, and thickness, and time. Just what connection with them
it has, I have no idea. Yet, when size changes, time-rate changes; you
have only to look at our own universe to discover that." "How do you mean?" asked the Very Young Man. "Why, all life on our earth, in a general way, illustrates the
fundamental fact that the larger a thing is, the slower its
time-progress is. An elephant, for example, lives more years than we
humans. Yet how quickly a fly is born, matured, and aged! There are
exceptions, of course; but in a majority of cases it is true. "So I believe that as I diminished in stature, my time-progress became
faster and faster. I am seven days older than when I left you day before
yesterday. I have lived those seven days, gentlemen, there is no getting
around that fact." 