



Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





A College Girl

By Mrs George de Horne Vaizey
________________________________________________________________________
Here is a book about the young girl and her awakening to the world by
this talented author. Darsie, the heroine, is selected by an old aunt
to come and spend a year or so as her companion. The old woman tries
to coach Darsie in matters of deportment and behaviour. This would be
pretty odious if it were not for the presence locally of a young family
of boys and girls of Darsie's age, whom, being rich and living rather
grandly, the aunt allows Darsie to know. The first half of the book
describes the times they had. The old aunt promises Darsie that she
will make available the funds needed for Darsie to go up to Cambridge
as a student at Newnham, a girls' college. When the second half of the book begins the old aunt has just died, and
Darsie feels glad that the poor old lady will be relieved of all her
pains. The years of studentship are well described, and the friends
that  Darsie made come and go through the story. Finally we reach the
last exams. Darsie does quite well, but is not in the First Class. She
has a Second, which will be enough for her to be able to go and teach at
some less distinguished school. But her friend Dan, one of those whom
we met in the first half of the book, has obtained a First Class Honours
degree, and the book ends with him asking her to marry him. What he
doesn't know, and I suppose the author didn't either, is that young men
going to teach at a top-rate boys' school are expected to spend their
spare time coaching sports, and not to be married. In fact they would
be better to have achieved a "Blue" at Oxford or Cambridge than a good
degree. I have had to make a slightly strange and annoying change to the name of
one of the girls in the story. I changed Vi Vernon to Vie Vernon. The
reason was that otherwise the speech generator always read her name as
"Six Vernon". What we have now sounds correct, but if you read the book
you will see this mis-spelling two dozen times. My apologies for doing
this, but you will understand why I did it. It is a good read, and as always I recommend making an audiobook of it,
so that you can listen to it. NH
________________________________________________________________________

A COLLEGE GIRL

BY MRS GEORGE DE HORNE VAIZEY



CHAPTER ONE. BOYS AND GIRLS. This is the tale of two terraces, of two families who lived therein, of
several boys and many girls, and especially of one Darsie, her
education, adventures, and ultimate romance. Darsie was the second daughter in a family of six, and by reason of her
upsetting nature had won for herself that privilege of priority which by
all approved traditions should have belonged to Clemence, the elder
sister. Clemence was serene and blonde; in virtue of her seventeen
years her pigtail was now worn doubled up, and her skirts had reached
the discreet level of her ankles. She had a soft pink and white face,
and a pretty red mouth, the lips of which permanently fell apart,
disclosing two small white teeth in the centre of the upper gum, because
of which peculiarity her affectionate family had bestowed upon her the
nickname of "Bunnie." Perhaps the cognomen had something to do with her
subordinate position. It was impossible to imagine any one with the
name of "Bunnie" queening it over that will-o'-the-wisp, that electric
flash, that tantalising, audacious creature who is the heroine of these
pages. Darsie at fifteen! How shall one describe her to the unfortunates who
have never beheld her in the flesh? It is for most girls an awkward
age, an age of angles, of ungainly bulk, of awkward ways, self-conscious
speech, crass ignorance, and sublime conceit. Clemence had passed
through this stage with much suffering of spirits on her own part and
that of her relations; Lavender, the third daughter, showed at thirteen
preliminary symptoms of appalling violence; but Darsie remained as ever
that fascinating combination of a child and a woman of the world, which
had been her characteristic from earliest youth. Always graceful and
alert, she sailed triumphant through the trying years, with straight
back, graceful gait, and eyes a-shine with a happy self-confidence. "I
am here!" announced Darsie's eyes to an admiring world. "Let the band
strike up!" Some inherent quality in Darsie--some grace, some charm, some spell--
which she wove over the eyes of beholders, caused them to credit her
with a beauty which she did not possess. Even her family shared in this
delusion, and set her up as the superlative in degree, so that "as
pretty as Darsie" had come to be regarded a climax of praise. The glint
of her chestnut hair, the wide, bright eyes, the little oval face set on
a long, slim throat smote the onlooker with instant delight, and so
blinded him that he had no sight left with which to behold the blemishes
which walked hand in hand. Photographs valiantly strove to demonstrate
the truth; pointed out with cruel truth the stretching mouth, the small,
inadequate nose, but even the testimony of sunlight could not convince
the blind. They sniffed, and said: "What a travesty! Never again to
_that_ photographer! Next time we'll try the man in C-- Street," and
Darsie's beauty lived on, an uncontroverted legend. By a triumph of bad management, which the Garnett girls never ceased to
deplore, their three brothers came at the end instead of the beginning
of the family. Three grown-up brothers would have been a grand asset;
big boys who would have shown a manly tenderness towards the weaknesses
of little sisters; who would have helped and amused; big boys going to
school, young men going to college, coming home in the vacations,
bringing their friends, acting as squires and escorts to the girls at
home. Later on brothers at business, wealthy brothers, generous
brothers; brothers who understood how _long_ quarter-day was in coming
round, and how astonishingly quickly a girl's allowance vanishes into
space! Clemence, Darsie, and Lavender had read of such brothers in
books, and would have gladly welcomed their good offices in the flesh,
but three noisy, quarrelsome, more or less grimy schoolboys, superbly
indifferent to "those girls"--this was another, and a very different
tale! Harry was twelve--a fair, blunt-featured lad with a yawning
cavity in the front of his mouth, the result of one of the many
accidents which had punctuated his life. On the top story of the
Garnett house there ran a narrow passage, halfway along which, for want
of a better site, a swing depended from two great iron hooks. Harry, as
champion swinger, ever striving after fresh flights, had one day in a
frenzy of enthusiasm swung the rings free from their hold, and
descended, swing and all, in a crash on the oil-clothed floor. The
crash, the shrieks of the victim and his attendant sprites, smote upon
Mrs Garnett's ears as she sat wrestling with the "stocking basket" in a
room below, and as she credibly avowed, took years from her life. Almost the first objects which met her eye, when, in one bound, as it
seemed, she reached the scene of the disaster, was a selection of small
white teeth scattered over the oil-clothed floor. Henceforth for years
Harry pursued his way minus front teeth, and the nursery legend darkly
hinted that so injured had been the gums by his fall that no second
supply could be expected. Harry avowed a sincere aspiration that this
should be the case. "I can eat as much without them," he declared, "and
when I grow up I'll have them false, and be an explorer, and scare
savages like the man in Rider Haggard," so that teeth, or no teeth,
would appear to hold the secret of his destiny. Russell had adenoids, and snored. His peculiarities included a faculty
for breaking his bones, at frequent and inconvenient occasions, an
insatiable curiosity about matters with which he had no concern, and a
most engaging and delusive silkiness of manner. "Gentleman Russell," a
title bestowed by his elders, had an irritating effect on an elder
brother conscious of being condemned by the contrast, and when quoted
downstairs brought an unfailing echo of thumps in the seclusion of the
playroom. Tim played on his privileges as "littlest," and his mother's barely
concealed partiality, and was as irritating to his elders as a small
person can be, who is always present when he is not wanted, absent when
he is, in peace adopts the airs of a conqueror, and in warfare promptly
cries, and collapses into a curly-headed baby boy, whom the authorities
declare it is "cr-uel" to bully! For the rest, the house was of the high and narrow order common to town
terraces, inconveniently crowded by its many inmates, and viewed from
without, of a dark and grimy appearance. Sandon Terrace had no boast to make either from an architectural or a
luxurious point of view, and was so obviously inferior to its neighbour,
Napier Terrace, that it was lacerating to the Garnett pride to feel that
their sworn friends the Vernons were so much better domiciled than
themselves. Napier Terrace had a strip of garden between itself and the
rough outer world; big gateways stood at either end, and what Vie Vernon
grandiloquently spoke of as "a carriage sweep" curved broadly between. Divided accurately among the houses in the terrace, the space of ground
apportioned to each was limited to a few square yards, but the Vernons
were chronically superior on the subject of "the grounds," and in
springtime when three hawthorns, a lilac, and one spindly laburnum-tree
struggled into bloom, their airs were beyond endurance. The Vernons had also a second claim to superiority over the Garnetts,
inasmuch as they were the proud possessors of an elder brother, a remote
and learned person who gained scholarships, and was going to be Prime
Minister when he was grown up. Dan at eighteen, coaching with a tutor
preparatory to going up to Cambridge, was removed by continents of
superiority from day-school juniors. Occasionally in their disguise of
the deadly jealousy which in truth consumed them, the Garnett family
endeavoured to make light of the personality of this envied person. To
begin with, his name! "Dan" was well enough. "Dan" sounded a boy-like
boy, a manly man; of a "Dan" much might be expected in the way of sport
and mischief, but--oh, my goodness--_Daniel_! The Garnetts discussed
the cognomen over the play-room fire. "It must be so _embarrassing_ to have a Bible name!" Lavender opined. "Think of church! When they read about me I should be covered with
confusion, and imagine that every one was staring at our pew!" Clemence stared thoughtfully into space. "I, Clemence, take thee
Daniel," she recited slowly, and shuddered. "No--really, I couldn't!" "He wouldn't have you!" the three boys piped; even Tim, who plainly was
talking of matters he could not understand, added his note to the
chorus, but Darsie cocked her little head, and added eagerly--

"Couldn't you, really? What _could_ you, do you think?" Clemence stared again, more rapt than ever. "Lancelot, perhaps," she opined, "or Sigismund. Everard's nice too, or
Ronald or Guy--"

"Bah! Sugary. _I_ couldn't! Daniel is _ugly_," Darsie admitted, "but
it's strong. Dan Vernon will fight lions like the Bible one; they'll
roar about him, and his enemies will cast him in, but they'll not manage
to kill him. He'll trample them under foot, and leave them behind, like
milestones on the road." Darsie was nothing if not inaccurate, but in
the bosom of one's own family romantic flights are not allowed to atone
for discrepancies, and the elder sister was quick to correct. "Daniel didn't fight the lions! What's the use of being high falutin'
and making similes that aren't correct?" "Dear Clemence, you _are_ so literal!" Darsie tilted her head with an
air of superiority which reduced the elder to silence, the while she
cogitated painfully why such a charge should be cast as a reproach. To
be literal was to be correct. Daniel had _not_ fought the lions! Darsie had muddled up the fact in her usual scatterbrain fashion, and by
good right should have deplored her error. Darsie, however, was seldom
known to do anything so dull; she preferred by a nimble change of front
to put others in the wrong, and keep the honours to herself. Now, after
a momentary pause, she skimmed lightly on to another phase of the
subject. "What should you say was the character and life history of a
woman who could call her eldest child `Daniel,' the second `Viola
Imogen,' and the third and fourth `Hannah' and `John'?" Clemence had no inspiration on the subject. She said: "Don't be silly!" sharply, and left it to Lavender to supply the necessary stimulus. "_Tell_ us, Darsie, tell us! You make it up--"

"My dear, it is evident to the meanest intellect. She was the child of
a simple country household, who, on her marriage, went to live in a
town; and when her first-born son was born, she pined to have him
christened by her father's name in the grey old church beneath the ivy
tower; so they travelled there, and the white-haired sire held the
infant at the font, while the tears furrowed his aged cheeks. _But_--by
slow degrees the insidious effects of the great capital invaded the mind
of the sweet young wife, and the simple tastes of her girlhood turned to
vanity, so that when the second babe was born, and her husband wished to
call her Hannah after her sainted grandmother, she wept, and made an
awful fuss, and would not be consoled until he gave in to Viola Imogen,
and a christening cloak trimmed with plush. And she was christened in a
city church, and the organ pealed, and the godmothers wore rich array,
and the poor old father stayed at home and had a slice of christening
cake sent by the post. But the years passed on. Saddened and sobered
by the discipline of life, aged and worn, her thoughts turned once more
to her quiet youth, and when at last a third child--"

"There's only two years between them!" Darsie frowned, but continued her narrative in a heightened voice--

"--Was laid in her arms, and her husband suggested `Ermyntrude'; she
shuddered, and murmured softly, `Hannah--_plain_ Hannah!' and plain
Hannah she has been ever since!" A splutter of laughter greeted this _denouement_, for in truth Hannah
Vernon was not distinguished for her beauty, being one of the plainest,
and at the same time the most good-natured of girls. Lavender cried eagerly--

"Go on! Make up some more," but Clemence from the dignity of seventeen
years felt bound to protest--

"I don't think you--_ought_! It's not your business. Mrs Vernon's a
friend, and she wouldn't be pleased. To talk behind her back--"

"All right," agreed Darsie swiftly. "Let's crack nuts!" Positively she left one breathless! One moment poised on imaginary
flights, weaving stories from the baldest materials, drawing allegories
of the lives of her friends, the next--an irresponsible wisp, with no
thought in the world but the moment's frolic; but whatever might be the
fancy of the moment she drew her companions after her with the magnetism
of a born leader. In the twinkling of an eye the scene was changed, the Vernons with their
peculiarities were consigned to the limbo of forgotten things, while
boys and girls squatted on the rug scrambling for nuts out of a paper
bag, and cracking them with their teeth with monkey-like agility. "How many can you crack at a time? Bet you I can crack more than you!" cried Darsie loudly. CHAPTER TWO. THE TELEGRAPH STATION. The Garnetts' house stood at the corner of Sandon Terrace, and possessed
at once the advantages and drawbacks of its position. The advantages
were represented by three bay windows, belonging severally to the
drawing-room, mother's bedroom, and the play-room on the third floor. The bay windows at either end of the Terrace bestowed an architectural
finish to its flattened length, and from within allowed of extended
views up and down the street. The drawback lay in the position of the
front door, which stood round the corner in a side street, on which
abutted the gardens of the houses of its more aristocratic neighbour,
Napier Terrace. Once, in a moment of unbridled temper, Vie Vernon had
alluded to the Garnett residence as being located "at our back door,"
and though she had speedily repented, and apologised, even with tears,
the sting remained. Apart from the point of inferiority, however, the position had its
charm. From the eerie of the top landing window one could get a bird's-
eye view of the Napier Terrace gardens with their miniature grass plots,
their smutty flower-beds, and the dividing walls with their clothing of
blackened ivy. Some people were ambitious, and lavished unrequited
affection on struggling rose-trees in a centre bed, others contented
themselves with a blaze of homely nasturtiums; others, again, abandoned
the effort after beauty, hoisted wooden poles, and on Monday mornings
floated the week's washing unashamed. In Number Two the tenant kept
pigeons; Number Four owned a real Persian cat, who basked majestic on
the top of the wall, scorning his tortoiseshell neighbours. When the lamps were lit, it was possible also to obtain glimpses into
the dining-rooms of the two end houses, if the maids were not in too
great a hurry to draw down the blinds. A newly married couple had
recently come to live in the corner house--a couple who wore evening
clothes every night, and dined in incredible splendour at half-past
seven. It was thrilling to behold them seated at opposite sides of the
gay little table, all a-sparkle with glass and silver, to watch course
after course being handed round, the final dallying over dessert. On one never-to-be-forgotten occasion, suddenly and without the
slightest warning, bride and bridegroom had leaped from their seats and
begun chasing each other wildly round the table. She flew, he flew; he
dodged, she screamed (one could _see_ her scream!) dodged again, and
flew wildly in an opposite direction. The chase continued for several
breathless moments, then, to the desolation of the beholders, swept out
of sight into the fastnesses of the front hall. Never--no, never--could the bitterness of that disappointment be
outlived. To have been shut out from beholding the _denouement_--it was
_too_ piteous! In vain Darsie expended herself on flights of
imagination, in vain rendered in detail the conversation which had led
up to the thrilling chase--the provocation, the threat, the defiance--
nothing but the reality could have satisfied the thirst of curiosity of
the beholders. Would he kiss her? Would he beat her? Would she
triumph? Would she cry? Was it a frolic, or a fight? Would the morrow
find them smiling and happy as of yore, or driving off in separate cabs
to take refuge in the bosoms of their separate families? Darsie opined
that all would _seem_ the same on the surface, but darkly hinted at the
little rift within the lute, and somehow after that night the glamour
seemed to have departed from this honeymoon pair, and the fair seeming
was regarded with suspicion. As regards the matter of distance, it took an easy two minutes to cover
the space between the front doors of the two houses, and there seemed an
endless number of reasons why the members of the different families
should fly round to consult each other a dozen times a day. Darsie and
Lavender, Vie and plain Hannah attended the same High School; the
Garnett boys and John Vernon the same Royal Institute, but the fact that
they walked to and from school together, and spent the intervening hours
in the same class-rooms, by no means mitigated the necessity of meeting
again during luncheon and tea hours. In holiday times the necessity
naturally increased, and bells pealed incessantly in response to tugs
from youthful hands. Then came the time of the great servants' strike. That bell was a
perfect nuisance; ring, ring, ring the whole day long. Something else
to do than run about to open the door for a pack of children! The two mistresses, thus coerced, issued a fiat. Once a day, and no
oftener! All arrangements for the afternoon to be made in the morning
_seance_, the rendezvous to be _outside_, not _inside_ the house. After this came on the age of signals; whistlings outside the windows,
rattling of the railings, comes through letter-boxes and ventilation
grids, even--on occasions of special deafness--pebbles thrown against
the panes! A broken window, and a succession of whoops making the air
hideous during the progress of an extra special tea party, evoked the
displeasure of the mistresses in turns, and a second verdict went forth
against signals in all forms, whereupon the Garnetts and Vernons in
conclave deplored the hard-heartedness of grown-ups, and set their wits
to work to evolve a fresh means of communication. "S'pose," said Russell, snoring thoughtfully, "s'pose we had a
telegraph!" "S'pose we had an airship! One's just as easy as the other. Don't be a
juggins." But Russell snored on unperturbed. "I don't mean a _real_ telegraph, only a sort--of _pretend_! There's
our side window, and your back windows. If we could run a line across." "A line of _what_?" "String. Wire. Anything we like." "S'pose we _did_ fix it, what then?" "Send messages!" "How?" Russell pondered deeply. He was the member of the family who had a
natural aptitude for mechanism; the one who mended toys, and on occasion
was even consulted about mother's sewing-machine and escapes of gas,
therefore he filled the place of engineer-royal and was expected to take
all structural difficulties upon his own shoulders. He pondered,
blinking his pale blue eyes. "Can't send messages in the usual way--too difficult. If the cord were
double, we might have a bag and switch it across." Ha! the audience pricked its ears and sat alert, seeing in imagination
the tiny cord swung high in space above the dividing ground, stretching
from window to window, fastened securely on the sills, "somehow,"
according to the girls, the boys critically debating the question of
ways and means, strong iron hoops, for choice, clamped into the
framework of the windows. "How would the messages be sent?" "In a bag, of course. Put the letter in the bag; then we'd pull and
pull, and it would work round and round, till it arrived at the opposite
end." A stealthy exchange of glances testified to the general realisation of
the fact that it would take a _long_ time to pull, a much longer time,
for instance, than to run round by the road, and deposit the missive in
the letter-box, a still unforbidden means of communication. Every one
realised the fact, but every one scorned to put it into words. What was
a mere matter of time, compared with the glory and _eclat_ of owning a
real live telegraph of one's own? The first stage of the proceedings was to obtain the parental consent,
and this was secured with an ease and celerity which was positively
disconcerting. When mothers said, "Oh, yes, dears, certainly--certainly
you may try!" with a smile in their eyes, a twist on their lips, and a
barely concealed incredulity oozing out of every pore, it put the
youngsters on their mettle to succeed, or perish in the attempt. The
mothers obviously congratulated themselves on a project which would
provide innocent amusement for holiday afternoons, while they inwardly
derided the idea of permanent success. "We'll show 'em!" cried Harry darkly. "We'll let 'em see!" The next point was to decide on the window in each house which should
act as telegraph station. In the case of the Vernons there was
obviously no alternative, for the third-floor landing window possessed
qualifications far in excess of any other, but with the Garnetts two
rival factions fought a wordy combat in favour of the boys' room and the
little eerie inhabited by Lavender, each of which occupied equally good
sites. "Stick to it! Stick to it!" were Harry's instructions to his younger
brother. "They can't put the thing up without us, so they're bound to
come round in the end, and if we've got the telegraph station, it will
give us the whip hand over them for ever. It's our room, and they've
jolly well got to behave if they want to come in. If they turn rusty,
we'll lock the door, and they'll have to be civil, or do without the
telegraph. Let 'em talk till they're tired, and then they'll give in,
and we'll go out and buy the cord." And in the end the girls succumbed as predicted. Lavender's pride in
owning the site of the great enterprise weakened before the tragic
picture drawn for her warning, in which she saw herself roused from
slumber at unearthly hours of the night, leaning out of an opened window
to draw a frozen cord through bleeding hands. She decided that on the
whole it would be more agreeable to lie snugly in bed and receive the
messages from the boys over a warm and leisurely breakfast. These two great points arranged, nothing now remained but the erection
of the line itself, and two strong iron hoops having been fixed into the
outer sills of the respective windows a fine Saturday afternoon
witnessed the first struggle with the cord. Vie Vernon and plain Hannah unrolled one heavy skein, threaded it
through their own hoop, and lowered the two ends into the garden, where
John stood at attention ready to throw them over the wall. Darsie and
Lavender dropped their ends straight into the street, and then chased
madly downstairs to join the boys and witness the junction of the lines. Each line being long enough in itself to accomplish the double journey,
the plan was to pull the connected string into the Garnett station, cut
off the superfluous length, and tie the ends taut and firm. Nothing
could have seemed easier in theory, but in practice unexpected
difficulties presented themselves. The side street was as a rule
singularly free from traffic, but with the usual perversity of fate,
every tradesman's cart in the neighbourhood seemed bent on exercising
its horse up and down its length this Saturday afternoon. No sooner
were lines knotted together in the middle of the road than the
greengrocer came prancing round the corner, and they must needs be
hastily untied; secured a second time, the milkman appeared on
incredibly early rounds, reined his steed on its haunches, and scowled
fiercely around; before there was time to rally from his attack a
procession of coal-carts came trundling heavily past. By this time also
the frantic efforts of the two families had attracted the attention of
their enemies, a body of boys, scathingly designated "the Cads," who
inhabited the smaller streets around and waged an incessant war against
"the Softs," as they in return nicknamed their more luxurious
neighbours. The Cads rushed to the scene with hoots and howls of derision; white-
capped heads peered over bedroom blinds; even the tortoiseshell cats
stalked over the dividing walls to discover the cause of the unusual
excitement. Clemence, with the sensitiveness of seventeen years,
hurried round the corner, and walked hastily in an opposite direction,
striving to look as if she had no connection with the scrimmage in the
side street. Darsie read the Cads a lecture on nobility of conduct,
which they received with further hoots and sneers. Plain Hannah planked
herself squarely before the scene of action with intent to act as a
bulwark from the attack of the enemy. The three boys worked with
feverish energy, dreading the appearance of their parents and an edict
to cease operations forthwith. The first lull in the traffic was seized upon to secure the knots, when
presto! the line began to move, as Russell the nimble-minded hauled
vigorously from the upstairs station, whence he had been dispatched a
few moments before. The Cads yelled and booed as the first glimmering
knowledge of what was on foot penetrated their brains; they grouped
together and consulted as to means of frustration; but with every moment
that passed yards of line were disappearing from view, and the skeins in
the streets were rapidly diminishing in size. Presently there was not a
single coil left, and a cheer of delight burst from the onlookers as
they watched the cord rise slowly off the ground. Now with good luck
and the absence of vehicles for another two minutes the deed would be
done, and the Garnett-Vernon telegraph an accomplished fact; but alas! at this all-important moment one line of string caught in an ivy stem at
the top of a garden wall, and refused to be dislodged by tuggings and
pullings from below. The Cads raised a derisive cheer, and to add to
the annoyances of the moment a cab rounded the corner, the driver of
which pulled up in scandalised amaze on finding the road barricaded by
two stout lines of string. His strictures were strong and to the point, and though he finally
consented to drive over the hastily lowered line, he departed shaking
his whip in an ominous manner, and murmuring darkly concerning police. "On to the wall, John. Quick! Climb up and ease it over. If we don't
get it up in a jiffy we shall have the bobbies after us!" cried Harry
frantically, whereupon John doubled back into his own garden, and by
perilous graspings of ivy trunks and projecting bricks scaled to the top
and eased the line from its grip. "Right-ho!" he cried, lifting his face to the opposite window. "Pull,
Russell! _pull_ for your life!" Russell pulled; a second time the double thread rose in the air. Darsie
jumped with excitement; Lavender clasped her hands, all white and tense
with suspense, plain Hannah ran to and fro, emitting short, staccato
croaks of delight; Harry stood in manly calm, arms akimbo, a beam of
satisfaction broadening his face. That smile, alas! gave the last touch
of exasperation to the watching Cads. To stand still and behold the
line vanishing into space had been in itself an ordeal, but Harry's
lordly air, his strut, his smile--these were beyond their endurance! With a rallying shout of battle they plunged forward, grabbed at the
ascending cord, hung for a dizzy moment suspended on its length, then
with a final cheer felt it snap in twain and drag limply along the
ground. Alas for Harry and for John--what could they do, two men alone, against
a dozen? The girls screamed, declaimed, vowed shrill revenge, but in
the matter of practical force were worse than useless. Even with
Russell's aid the forces were hopelessly uneven. Harry stood looking on
gloomily while the Cads, chortling with triumph, galloped down the road,
trailing behind them the long lengths of cord; then, like a true
Englishman, being half-beaten, he set his teeth and vowed to conquer, or
to die. "They think we're sold, but they'll find their mistake! We'll get up at
five on Monday morning and have the thing in working trig before they
have opened their silly eyes." This programme being duly enacted, the telegraph stations remained for
years as an outward and visible sign of the only piece of work which
Harry Garnett was ever known to accomplish before the hour of his
belated breakfast. CHAPTER THREE. AUNT MARIA. Among the crowd of relations near and far most families possess one
relation _par excellence_, who stands out from all the rest by reason
either of generosity, aggravatingness, or strength of character. Sometimes this relation is an uncle; more often it is an aunt; almost
invariably he or she is unmarried or widowed, because the single state
naturally allows more time and energy for interests beyond the personal
household. The Garnetts' relation _par excellence_ was Aunt Maria--_Lady_ Maria as
they erroneously called her, being unsophisticated in the niceties of
the peerage. Her rightful cognomen was Lady Hayes, and she was the
elderly, very elderly, widow of an estimable gentleman who had been
created a Baronet in recognition of services rendered to his political
party. The Garnetts felt that it was very stylish to possess an aunt
with a title, and introduced her name with an air when the Vernons grew
superior on the subject of "the grounds." Lady Hayes was an eccentric
individual who inhabited a beautiful old country house in the Midlands,
from which base she was given to suddenly swooping down upon her
relations, choosing by preference for these visits the times when
carpets had been sent away to be cleaned, or the maids granted days off
to visit relations in the country. Then Lady Hayes would appear,
announce her intention of staying a couple of nights, declare her
unwillingness to give the slightest trouble, and proceed to request that
her maid should be accommodated with a room next to her own, and that
they should both be supplied with a vegetarian diet, supplemented by
glasses of sterilised milk at intervals of every two hours. Sometimes
the vegetarianism gave place to a diet of minced beef, but whatever
might be the diet of the moment it was invariably something which no one
else wanted to eat, and which took about three times as long to prepare
as the entire rations for the household dinner of ten. It was at the close of the Midsummer term, when the Garnett family were
blissfully preparing for the yearly migration to the sea, that a letter
from Aunt Maria fell like a bombshell upon the peaceful scene. This
year the holiday promised to be even more blissful than usual, for the
Vernons had secured a second farmhouse, not ten minutes' walk from their
own, and connected with the sea by the same fascinating field-paths. A
farm and the sea! Could there possibly exist a more fascinating
combination? The young people sniffed in advance the two dear,
distinctive odours which, more than anything else, presented the scenes
before them--the soft, cowy-milky scent of the farm, the salt, sharp
whiff of the brine. From morn till night, at every available moment,
they discussed the day's programme--feeding animals, calling the cows,
bathing, picnicking on the sands, crab-hunting, mountain climbing. Excitement grew until it really seemed impossible to exist through the
intervening days, and then the bombshell fell! A letter arrived by an
evening post, when Mr and Mrs Garnett were enjoying the one
undisturbed hour of the day. It bore the Hayes crest, and was written
in Aunt Maria's small, crabbed handwriting--

"My dear Emily,--

"I propose, all being well, to pay you a short visit from Tuesday to
Thursday next, twelfth to fifteenth instant. Please let me have the
same rooms as on my last visit. I am at present living on Benger's
food, and must ask you to see that it is made freshly for each meal, in
a _perfectly clean, enamelled saucepan_. "The chief object of my visit is to bring back one of your three
daughters to stay with me during the summer vacation. I have been
feeling somewhat lonely of late, and my doctor recommends young society,
so it has occurred to me that in obeying his instructions I might at the
same time afford pleasure and benefit to one of your family. Should I
become interested in the child it might be to her advantage hereafter,
but it must be understood that I can make no promises on this point. "The eighteen months which have elapsed since my last visit have
somewhat dimmed my remembrance of your girls, so that I must see them
again before deciding as to which of the three I should prefer as a
companion. "With love to William and yourself,--

"Believe me, my dear Emily,--

"Your affectionate Aunt,--

"Maria Hayes." Mrs Garnett read this communication in silence, handed it to her
husband, and watched him flush and frown over the perusal. "Does not even go through the form of asking our consent!" "No! That's Aunt Maria all over. You could hardly imagine that she
would. Oh dear! Oh dear! I'm afraid, Will--I'm _afraid_ she will have
to go!" "Poor little kiddie, yes! How she will hate it! Just at this moment
when they are all wild with joy at the thought of their holiday with the
Vernons. It seems positively brutal!" "Oh, it does. I am so sorry for her--whichever it may be--but one must
sometimes be cruel to be kind. We can't afford--I am not mercenary, as
you know--but with our means we _can't_ afford to refuse any possible
advantage for our girls! The sacrifice of a summer holiday ought not to
weigh against that." "No, you're right, quite right. So be it then. Write and tell her to
come, only I tell you plainly my holiday's spoiled...  With Darsie
gone--"

"Dear! she has not chosen yet." "Dear! you know perfectly well--"

They looked at each other, smiling, rueful, half-ashamed. It seemed
like treason to the other girls, this mutual acknowledgment that Darsie
was the flower of the flock, the child of the six to whom all strangers
were attracted as by a magnet. Clarence and Lavender were equally as
dear to the parents' hearts, but there was no denying the existence of a
special and individual pride in the fascinations of Darsie. Mr Garnett turned aside with an impatient shrug. "There's one thing, Emily, _you_ must tell her when it is settled! There'll be a tremendous scene. I flatly refuse--"

"Very well, dear, very well; I'll do it. But it's not decided yet,
remember, and one can never be sure. I'd better break the idea to the
girls before Aunt Maria comes, and let them get over the first
excitement. To-night would be a good opportunity. You will be out
late, so would be spared the scene!" "Bless you, Emily! I'm a coward, I know, but I _should_ be grateful. I
can't answer for what I should do if Darsie cried, and begged my
protection. Women have twice the pluck of men in these affairs!" Nevertheless it was with a quaking heart that Mrs Garnett broached the
object of Aunt Maria's proposition over the schoolroom tea that
afternoon, and her nervousness was not decreased by the smilingly
unperturbed manner in which it was received. Never, never for a moment
did it appear possible to the three girls that such a proposition could
be seriously discussed. "_So_ likely!" sneered Clemence with a fine disdain. "Give up all the
fun and excitement of the sea with the Vernons, to _browse_ with Aunt
Maria. _So_ likely, to be sure!" "Poor dear old love! She _is_ deluded. Thinks it would be a pleasure
and benefit, does she. I wouldn't take a thousand pounds--"

Thus Lavender. Darsie went a step farther in tragic declamation. "I'd drown myself first! To sit there--panting, in hot rooms, on
Benger's food, and know that all the others were bathing and running
wild on the shore--I'd burst! I'd run away in an hour--"

"Dears, it's a beautiful old place. There are gardens, and lawns, and
horses, and dogs. Cows, too! I am sure there are cows--she used to
keep a herd of Jerseys. You could see them being milked." "Welsh cows are good enough for me. I don't need Jerseys. _Or_ lawns! Give me the free, untrammelled countryside! "`And to see it reflected in eyes that I love.'" Darsie paraphrased a line of the sweet old ballad, singing it in a
clear, bell-like voice to a pantomime of clasped hands and rolling eyes. "It would be bad enough in an ordinary year, but to rend us apart from
the Vernons--oh, no, it's unthinkable!" "You have the Vernons near you all the year, dear. Aunt Maria only asks
for eight weeks. There are occasions in life when it does not do to
think only of our own pleasure." Silence. A note in the mother's voice had startled her hearers into the
conviction that the invitation must be regarded seriously, and not
tossed aside as a joke. A lacerating suspicion that the authorities
were in favour of an acceptance pierced like a dart. "Mother! What do you mean? You couldn't _possibly_ be so cruel--"

"Mother, you don't mean--." "Mother, what _do_ you mean?" "I mean that you ought to go, dears, which ever one of you is asked. Aunt Maria is an old lady, and she is lonely. Her doctor has ordered
cheerful companionship. Moreover, she has been a kind friend to father
in the past, and has a right to expect some consideration in return. If
you went in the right spirit, you could be of real use and comfort, and
would have the satisfaction of doing a kind deed." Darsie set her lips in a straight line, and tilted her chin in the air. "Couldn't pretend to go in the right spirit! I'd be in a tearing rage. Somebody else can have the `satisfaction,' and I'll go to the sea." "Darsie, dear, that's naughty!" "I _feel_ naughty, mother. `Naughty' is a mild word. _Savage_! I feel
savage. It's too appalling. What does father say? I'm sure he would
never--"

"Father feels as I do; very disappointed for our own sakes and for yours
that our happy party should be disturbed, but he never shirks a
disagreeable duty himself, and he expects his children to follow his
example." Lavender instantly burst into tears. "It's always the way--always the way! It was too good to be true. We
might have known that it was. She'll choose me, and Hannah will go
without me. We'd planned every day--fishing, and bathing, and making
hay, and I shall be mewed up in a close carriage, and have meals of
nuts--and n-n-nobody to talk to. Oh, I can't--I can't bear it! I wish
I could die and be buried--I _cannot_ bear it--"

"You won't have to bear it. She'll choose me. I'm the eldest, and the
most of a companion." Clemence spoke with the calmness of despair, her
plump cheeks whitening visibly, her pale eyes showing a flush of red
around the lids. "Of course, if it's my duty, I must go--but I'd as
soon be sent to prison! I'm feeling _very_ tired, and thought the
holiday would set me up. Now, of course, I shall be worse. Eight weeks
alone with Aunt Maria would try anybody's nerves. I shall be a wreck
all winter, and have neuralgia till I'm nearly mad." "Nonsense, darling! If you are so tired, the rest and quiet of The
Towers will be just what you need; and as we don't know yet which one of
you Aunt Maria will wish as a companion, it is a pity for you all to
make yourselves miserable at once. Why not try to forget, and hope for
the best! Surely that would be the wiser plan." The three girls looked at each other in eloquent silence. Easy to talk. Forget, indeed. As if they _could_! Mother didn't really believe what
she said. She was making the best of it, and there were occasions when
making the best of it seemed just the most aggravating thing one could
do. It was a relief to the girls when Mrs Garnett was summoned from the
room on household business, and they were left to themselves. A craving
for sympathy was the predominant sensation, and prompted the suggestion,
"Let's wire to the Vernons," which was followed by a stampede upstairs. The telegraph was a sufficiently new institution to appear a pleasure
rather than a toil, even though a message thus dispatched was an
infinitely longer and more laborious effort than a run round the
terrace, so to-day a leaf was torn from the note-book, a dramatic
announcement penned and placed in the hanging-bag, with its jingling
bell of warning, and the three girls took it in turns to pull at the
cord till the missive arrived at its destination. Attracted by the
sound of the bell, Vie and plain Hannah stood at the window awaiting the
communication, read over its contents, and stood silent and dismayed. The Garnetts, watching from afar, realised the dramatic nature of that
pause, and thrilled in sympathy. "_One of us is going to be sent to prison instead of to the country_!" "_Prison_!" Vie and plain Hannah wagged their heads over the cipher,
hesitated long, pencil in hand, and, finally, in a frenzy of impatience,
which refused to be curbed even by loyalty to the telegraph itself,
dispatched an urgent summons to speech--

"_Come round and talk_!" The Garnetts flew. The Vernons, waiting upon the doorstep, escorted
them upstairs to the scantily furnished room which had first been a
nursery, then promoted to playroom, and, ultimately, when the more
juvenile name wounded the susceptibilities of its inmates, had become
definitely and proudly "the study." The bureau in the corner was Dan's
special property, and might not be touched by so much as a finger-tip. The oak table with three sound legs and a halting fourth, supported by
an ancient volume of _Good Words_, was Vie's property; John and plain
Hannah shared the dining-table, covered with the shabby green baize
cloth, which stood in the centre of the room. There were a variety of
uncomfortable chairs, an ink-splashed drugget, and red walls covered
with pictures which had been banished from other rooms as they acquired
the requisite stage of decrepitude and grime. The five girls surged into the room, faced each other, and burst into
eager speech--

"_Who's_ going to prison?" "We don't know. Wish we did!" "What do you mean by prison?" "Aunt Maria's!" "Lady Maria's?" "Lady Maria's! One of us has to go and stay with her for eight weeks
instead of going with you to the sea." Vie Vernon collapsed on to the nearest chair, and gasped for breath. "Stu-pendous!" she murmured beneath her breath. Vie had a new word each
season which she used to describe every situation, good and bad. The
season before it had been "Weird!" this season it was "Stupendous," and
she was thankful for the extra syllable in this moment of emotion. "It's really true? You mean it in earnest? _Why_?" "Thinks it would be a pleasure to us, and that we should be cheery
companions. _So_ likely, isn't it?" "But--but surely your mother-- What does she say?" "Preaches! Oughtn't to think of ourselves. Ought to show a right
spirit and go." "Stu-pendous!" cried Vie once again. Plain Hannah hoisted herself on to
the corner of the table, and hunched herself in thought. She really was
extraordinarily plain. Looking at her critically, it seemed that
everything that should have been a line had turned into a curve, and
everything that should have been a curve into a line; she was thick-set,
clumsy, awkward in gait, her eyes were small, her mouth was large, she
had a meagre wisp of putty-coloured hair, and preposterously thick
eyebrows several shades darker in hue, and no eyelashes at all. Friends
and relations lavished much pity on poor dear Hannah's unfortunate
looks, but never a sigh did Hannah breathe for herself. She was strong
and healthy, her sturdy limbs stood her in good stead in the various
games and sports in which she delighted, and she would not have
exchanged her prowess therein for all the pink cheeks and golden locks
in the world. Hannah's manner, like her appearance, lacked grace and
charm; it was abrupt, forceful, and to the point. She spoke now, chin
sunk in her grey flannel blouse, arms wrapped round her knees--

"Is she coming to see you before she chooses, or will it be done by
post?" "She's coming! Two days next week. Isn't it too awful? We were so
happy--the telegraph up, and the weather jolly, and holidays nearly
here. `All unsuspecting of their doom the little victims played.' And
then--_this_! Holidays with Aunt Maria! Even the third of a chance
turns me cold with dismay. I couldn't bear--"

"You won't need to. She won't have you. She'll choose Darsie." Darsie squealed in shrillest protest--

"No, no! It's not fair. She won't! She can't! It's always the eldest
or the youngest. I'm the middle--the insignificant middle. Why should
she choose me?" "You are not so modest as a rule! You know perfectly well that
strangers always _do_ take more notice of you than any one else. You
are always the one who is fussed over and praised." "Because I want to be! This time I shan't. I'll be just as sulky and
horrid as I can for the whole blessed time." "You'll be there anyway, and you can't alter your face." "My fatal beauty!" wailed Darsie, and wrung her hands in impassioned
fashion. Then she looked critically from one sister to another, and
proceeded to candid criticisms of their charms. "Clemence is not pretty, but she's _nice_! If she did her hair better,
and sat up, and had a colour, and didn't poke her chin, she'd look quite
decent. I should think it would be interesting to take some one who
_needed_ improving, and see what you could do. Lavender's gawky, of
course, girls _are_ gawky at her age, but I shouldn't wonder if she grew
quite decent-looking in time. Rest and quiet would do wonders!" "Thank you, indeed! You _are_ kind!" The sisters bridled and tossed
their heads, by no means appeased by such prognostications of their
future charms. "Certainly if she took _you_, she might teach you to be
modest!" "Oh, dear, oh, dear, I don't want _any_ of you to go!" Vie, the
peacemaker, rushed to the rescue. She was just sixteen, younger than
Clemence, older than Darsie, attached almost equally to the two. Lavender, of course, was quite too young for a companion, but then
Lavender and Hannah paired together; if she were absent, Hannah at a
loose end would demand entrance into those three-sided conferences which
made the joy of life. The fear of such an incursion made Lavender at
that moment seem even more precious than her sisters. Vie continued her
lament with bitter emphasis--

"_Too_ bad--_too_ hard--stupendous! Spoil everything. Horrid
interfering old thing! If I were your parents I wouldn't--not for all
the money in the world, I wouldn't sacrifice a child to an old ogre like
that! I'd keep my own children and let them be happy while they could,
but, of course, if she talks of duty...! If there's one thing more
stupendous than another it's being put on one's honour! It gives one
_no_ chance. Well, you'll have to go, I suppose, and our holiday is
spoiled. I've never been so disappointed in my life." "Think of how _we_ feel!" croaked Clemence tragically, but this time the
tragedy did not ring so true, for since plain Hannah's verdict her
spirits had risen considerably. Hannah was the shrewdest and cleverest
of all five girls, and her prophecies were proverbially correct. Clemence felt sufficiently reassured to reflect that as the eldest in
years, she would do well to show an example of resignation. She
lengthened her face, and added solemnly--

"I don't think you ought to talk like that about honour, Vie! It ought
to be an incentive. If I go, the only thing that will console me most
is the feeling that I am doing my duty!" Vie stared, and the younger girls coughed in derisive chorus. "Isn't it easy to be resigned for somebody else?" demanded plain Hannah
of the ceiling. "You are _not_ going, my dear, and you know it. Darsie
likes well enough to queen it as a rule, and now she's got to pay the
price. That's the cost of good looks. Thank goodness no one will ever
want to run off with _me_!--not even a staid old aunt. Tell us about
your aunt, by the way--you've talked enough about yourselves. Where
does she live, and what is she like, and what does she do, and what will
_you_ do when you're there? Have any of you ever seen the place?" "Not since we were old enough to remember, but mother has been and told
us all about it. It's big, with a lodge, two lodges, and a park all
round, very rich, and grand, and respectable, and dull. There are men-
servants to wait at table, and the windows are never open, and she
drives out every day in a closed carriage, and plays patience at night,
and wears two wigs, turn about, a week at a time. Her cheeks are red,
the sort of red that is made up of little red lines, and never gets
brighter or darker, and she likes to be quiet and avoid excitement. Oh,
imagine what it would be like to _choose_ to be quiet, and deliberately
run away from a fuss! Can you imagine if you lived a thousand years
ever reaching such a pitch as that?" Darsie held out both hands in dramatic appeal, and her hearers groaned
with unction. It was impossible, absolutely beyond the power of
imagination to picture such a plight. Each girl hugged to herself the
conviction that with her at least would remain immortal youth; that
happen what might to the rest of mankind, no length of years could numb
her own splendid vitality and _joie de vivre_. Not even, and at the thought the three Garnetts sighed in concert, not
even Aunt Maria! CHAPTER FOUR. A DOUBLE PICNIC. Only four days before Aunt Maria arrived to make her great decision! The Garnetts were living in what Darsie graphically described as "the
hush before the storm," adored, condoned, and indulged by parents who
saw before them the pangs of separation, and by brothers shrewdly
expectant of parting spoils. Clemence, Darsie, and Lavender were acutely conscious of the rarified
atmosphere by which they were surrounded, and only regretted its
necessarily limited duration. "Let's take advantage of it!" cried Darsie, the diplomat. "It's our
chance; we should be noodles if we let it slip. Anything we ask now
they'll let us have. It's like prisoners who can order what they like
for supper the night before they're hanged. Let's think what we'd like,
and go in a body and petition mother. She won't have the heart to
refuse!" The sisters agreed enthusiastically, but were not rich in suggestions. It is one of the curious things in life that whereas every day one is
brought up sharply against a dozen longings and ambitions, without the
fulfilment of which it seems impossible to live, yet if the sudden
question be put, "_What would you have_?" instantly the brain becomes a
blank, and not a single suggestion is forthcoming. The Garnetts stared
at one another in labouring silence. It was too late for parties; too
early for pantomimes, a definite gift, failed to meet the case, since
each girl thought with a pang, "What's the use? I might not be here to
enjoy it!" Extra indulgences, such as sitting up at night, or being
"let off" early morning practising, did not appear sufficiently
important, since, with a little scheming, these might be gained in
addition. It was Lavender who at last succeeded in hitting the popular
taste. "A picnic! A real whole-day one this time. Lunch in the woods at
Earley, tea in our old woman's cottage, walk over the fields to the
amphitheatre, and home by train from Oxholm. Whoever goes with Aunt
Maria will be cheated of her holiday, for the well-behaved country
doesn't count. If you have to wear gloves and walk properly, you might
as well be in town at once. For the victim's sake we ought to have one
more day in the woods!" Clemence and Darsie sparkled, for the programme was an opulent one,
combining as it did the two ordinary picnics into one. The yearly
programme was that--"if you are good"--the Garnett family should be
taken for two half-day excursions into the country on two summer
Saturday afternoons, but though the woods and the amphitheatre were only
separated by three short miles, never yet had the two places been
visited together. An all-day picnic seemed a regal entertainment,
worthy of the unique occasion. "Ourselves and the Vernons! Mrs Vernon to talk to mother, then they
won't have as much time to look after us. When they begin on carpets
and curtains they forget everything else, and we can do as we like. Do
you suppose Dan would come?" "Sure he wouldn't." "Why?" "My dear!" Clemence held out eloquent hands. "Does he ever come? He's a man, soon
going to college, and you are only `kids.' I'm older than he is really;
a woman is always older than a man, but he doesn't like me. We are not
_en rapport_." Clemence tried hard to suppress a smirk of self-
consciousness at the use of the French term, while the two younger
sisters jeered and booed with the callous brutality of their kind. "Ha, ha! aren't we fine? Roll your r's a little more next time, my
dear. It will sound miles better. Your accent leaves much to be
desired. Aren't we grown-up to-day? Aunt Maria _would_ be impressed! A little stay in Paris just to put on the accent, and it's wonderful to
think of what you might do! _En rapport_! Bet you daren't say that to
Dan! Dare you to tell him that you are not _en rapport_!" Clemence was seized with agitation, discerning through the innocent
words a thinly veiled threat. If she didn't, Darsie _would_! "Darsie!" she cried loudly. "You mustn't tell; you must _not_! It's
mean. Only sneaky children repeat what is said in private. Promise
this minute that you won't say a word!" But Darsie, like her brothers, was keenly alive to the privilege of
holding a rod in pickle over an elder member of the family. So long as
Clemence lived in fear of humiliating disclosure, so long might she
herself walk in safety, free from rebuffs. She laid her head on one
side and smiled sweetly into her sister's face. "I shouldn't like exactly, positively, to _promise_, don't you know, for
I _am_ such a creature of impulse. If it rushed over me suddenly, it
might pop out, don't you know, bang! before I knew what I was about! Of
course, on the other hand, I _might_ not--"

"Very well," snapped Clemence sharply, "then I stay at home! It would
be no fun for _me_ to go for a picnic with that sort of thing hanging
over my head all the time. I know very well how you'd behave--rolling
your eyes across the table, and beginning half-sentences, and
introducing `_en rapport_' every other moment. If I'm going to be made
miserable, I'll be miserable at home. You can go to our last picnic as
an undivided family without me, the eldest of the family, and I only
hope you'll enjoy it; that's all!" "Oh, Darsie!" pleaded Lavender tragically, moved almost to tears by the
pathos of those last words, and Darsie shrugged her shoulders,
philosophically accepting her defeat. "All right, I promise! I'll hug the remembrance secretly in my own
breast. It will cheer me through the dullest hours!" Clemence bridled, but made no further protest. To think of Darsie
chuckling in secret was not agreeable, but it was as nothing compared
with the humiliation of meeting Dan's grave stare, and seeing the curl
of his lip at the repetition of her high-sounding phrase. As the
quickest way of changing the conversation she suggested an adjournment
to the morning-room, where mother sat busy over the eternal mending-
basket, to broach the picnic project without delay. Mother agreed instantly, eagerly, indeed, so that there was something
almost uncanny in the unusualness of the situation. To every demand,
every suggestion came the unfailing, "Yes, darlings! Certainly,
darlings!" Even the audacity of the double programme aroused no more
notice than the remark that it was an admirable idea. Darsie, striking
while the iron was hot, went a step farther and attacked the subject of
lunch. "Could we--for once--have something substantialler than sandwiches? Chickens?" She gasped at the audacity of the request, for chickens were
a state dish, reserved for occasions, and in summer for some inscrutable
reasons just because they were smaller cost more than ever. "Chickens
cut up are so easy to eat. We needn't have knives and forks. And
little cobby dinner-rolls from the confectioner's, with crisp, browny
crust, cut open and stuffed with butter and potted meat, and little
green pieces of lettuce. They had them that way at supper at the
Masons' party, and they were superb! And cakes and fruit! Do, mother,
let us have a real swagger lunch just for once!" And mother said, "Yes, darling!" like a lamb, swallowing as it were
spring chickens and cobby rolls at a gulp. It was impossible in giving
the invitation to the Vernons to refrain from a hint at the magnificence
of the preparations, though good manners would, of course, have prompted
silence on such a point. The Vernons accepted with acclamation, all except Dan, who rudely
declared that he "refused with pleasure," when Darsie bearded him in his
den and proffered the invitation. He was seated at his desk, for the
moment the only occupant of the workroom, and his manner was not
expressive of welcome to the new-comer. He was a big, heavily built
youth, with a face which was oddly attractive despite irregular features
and a dull complexion. Dark eyes looked at you straight and square
beneath bushy eyebrows; thin lips curved into the oddest, most
expressive of lines, the square chin had a fashion of projecting until
it seemed to become one of the most eloquent features in his face. Close observation showed that there was a shadow of his upper lip, and
rumour had it that he shaved, actually _shaved_ every morning of his
life. His huge hands had a grip of steel, but it was wonderful how deft
and gentle they could be on occasion. Every album and collection in the
house was labelled by Dan, indexed by Dan, embellished with ornamental
flourishes and headlines, which Dan's big fingers alone had the power to
produce. Now he leaned an elbow on the desk, turned round on his chair,
and tilted that eloquent chin in scorn. "Picnic? Not much. Hate 'em like poison! You don't want me!" "We _do_ want you! We shouldn't have asked you if we didn't. Don't be
unsociable, Dan. It's an extra special occasion, and it would be so
much jollier to be complete. The boys will behave better if you're
there." Dan's chin tilted still an inch higher. That was of course, but--

"I hate a family crowd!" he pronounced tersely. "If there were only one
or two, it wouldn't be so bad. Usual programme, I suppose--pick flowers
and eat biscuits? Not much in my line--thank you all the same. Hope
you'll have a good time!" "We're going to have a _real_ lunch--chickens and all sorts of good
things, and walk to Oxholm across the fields. It will be much more
exciting than the old picnics have been." "It might easily be that! No, thank you, I'm off. Some other day--"

"But we want you, Dan! _I_ want you to come." "But _I_ don't, you see. There's the difference. Sorry to disoblige." Darsie regarded him silently, considered the point whether wrath or
pathos would be the most powerful weapon, decided rapidly in favour of
pathos, and sank with a sigh on to an opposite chair. "Very well. I _quite_ understand. We wanted you especially because
this may be the last, the very last time that one of us girls has any
fun this summer, so of course it feels important. But you are so much
older--it's natural that you shouldn't care. I think you've been very
nice to be as much with us as you have been... Dan!" "Yes!" "Hannah says it will be _me_! That Aunt Maria is sure to choose me when
she comes. Do you think she will?" "Ten to one, I should say." "Oh, but why? _Why_? How can you be so sure?" Dan's dark eyes surveyed the alert little head, poised on the stem of
the graceful throat, his thin lips lengthened in the long, straight line
which showed that he was trying not to smile. "Because--er, you appear to me the sort of girl that an erratic old
fossil would naturally prefer!" "Ah-h!" --Darsie's dejection was deep--"Daniel, how cruel!" It was a
comforting retaliation to address her tormentor by the name he so
cordially disliked, but she remembered her role, and looked dejected
rather than irate. "I suppose that's true. I _need_ discipline, and
she would naturally choose the worst of the three. No one wants to be
disciplined instead of having a good time, but it may be good for me in
the end. All the time you are at sea, happy and free, I shall be being
disciplined for my good...  Wednesday may be my last, my very last, glad
day..."

"Bah! Rubbish!" snapped Dan, but he looked at the curly head, and felt
a pang of distaste. The idea of Darsie Garnett sobered and disciplined
out of recognition was distinctly unpleasant. He wriggled in his chair,
and said tentatively: "It will take more than one old lady to tame
_you_, young woman! You'll have lots of fun yet--perhaps more than if
you'd stayed at home." Darsie smiled with angelic resignation. "Perhaps so, but it won't be the same _kind_ of fun. New friends can
never be like old. If she chooses me, I must go, because of my duty to
father and the rest, but it's going to _hurt_! I feel,"--she waved her
arms dramatically in the air--"like a flower that is being torn out by
the roots! I shall not live long in a strange soil...  Well, goodbye,
Dan; I won't bother you any more! Thank you very much for all you've
done for me in the past." Done! Dan searched his memory, found therein inscribed a number of
snubs, rebuffs, and teasings, but nothing worthy of the thanks so
sweetly offered. He felt a stirring of reproach. Darsie was a decent kid--an amusing
kid; if she went away she would leave behind her a decided blank. Looking back over the years, Darsie seemed to have played the leading
part in the historic exploits of the family. She was growing into quite
a big kid now. He glanced at her again quickly, furtively, and drummed
with his fingers on the desk--hardly a kid at all, almost grown up! "Oh, that's all right; don't worry about that," he mumbled vaguely. "What a grandiloquent kid you are! I hope you'll have a better time
than you think, if you do go to visit your aunt." "Thanks so much; I hope I may; and if at any time--_any_ time--I can do
anything to help you, or give you the least--the _very_ least--pleasure,
please let me know, Dan! I can understand now how one feels when one
leaves home and faces the world!" said Darsie poignantly. "G-goodbye!" "Bye," said Dan coolly. He leaned back in his chair, still thudding
with his fingers on the desk. Darsie had reached the door and held it
open in her hands before he spoke again. "What time did you say that
blessed old picnic is to start?" "Wednesday. Ten o'clock," said Darsie, and, like a true daughter of
Eve, spoke not one more word, but shut the door and left him to his
thoughts. "Dan's coming! You're not to say a word till the time, but he _is_!" she announced to her sisters that evening; but when they questioned and
cross-questioned concerning the means whereby the miracle had been
wrought, she steadfastly refused to satisfy their curiosity. That was
not their concern. An inherent loyalty to Dan forbade that she should
make public the wiles by which he had been beguiled. CHAPTER FIVE. LEFT BEHIND! Wednesday dawned bright and fair; it had not seemed possible that it
could be wet, and the party of twelve, with their baskets and hampers,
drove economically and gaily to the ferry in a three-horse omnibus, so
ostentatiously treating it as their own vehicle that the few alien
passengers sat abashed, and plainly felt themselves _de trop_. Darsie's
prophecy had been fulfilled, for Dan appeared at the starting-point,
somewhat grim and sulky of demeanour, but obviously on picnic bent. He
was the only member of the party whose hands were free of basket or
bundle, and when the omnibus trundled into sight he walked forward to
meet it and swung himself up to a place on top as though anxious to
convince beholders that he had no connection with the noisy crowd at the
corner, whereupon the two mothers smiled at each other in amused
reminiscent fashion. The girls were dressed in white; the boys wore flannel trousers with
school blazers and caps. Clemence had put on a veil to protect her
complexion; plain Hannah's sailor hat left yards of forehead bleakly
exposed. Darsie wore her little Kodak swung across her shoulder in
jaunty military fashion. She invariably carried a camera on such
occasions, and never by any chance used it to take any photographs; the
programme was so unalterable that it had ceased to attract any attention
among her companions. The omnibus conveyed the party to the ferry, from whence an hourly boat
puffed several miles up the river to where the village of Earley stood
on the opposite bank. It was an ancient and by no means luxurious
barque, impregnated from bow to stern with a hot, oily, funnelly smell
from which it was impossible to escape, and as travellers to Earley were
almost invariably on pleasure bent, the usual satellites were in
attendance. There was an old man in a long coat who had played the same
ballads on the same old concertina with the same incredibly dirty
fingers for as long as memory could recall; there was an old woman with
a clean apron and a tray of gingerbread biscuits slung pendant from her
shoulders, who presented them to you for three a penny, and exclaimed,
"Bless yer little 'art!" when you paid for them yourself, because mother
said it was a pity to spoil your lunch. Deary me! one _would_ have to
be old to have one's appetite--and a picnic appetite at that!--spoiled
by three gingerbread biscuits! The sail to Earley would have been shorn
of one of its chief joys without these sticky sweets. The absence of
the clean, smiling old woman would have been resented as a positive
crime. The ferry at Earley was an old-fashioned affair, sloping over the muddy
shore to a little white pay-house with a clanky turnpike on either side. Once past these turnpikes, the visitor found himself in the midst of
things with delightful suddenness. A wide green stretch of grass lay
along the river bank, bordered by shady trees. To the right stood a
stone hotel with gardens of brilliant flower-beds, and an array of
white-covered tables dotted down the length of the veranda. Grand and
luxurious visitors took their meals in the hotel, but such a possibility
of splendour had never dawned upon the minds of the Garnetts or their
friends--as well might a wayfarer in Hyde Park think of asking for a cup
of tea at Buckingham Palace! To-day a young girl stood in the porch of
the hotel and gazed at the procession as it passed. She was arrayed in
a white serge coat and skirt, and wore a white sailor hat with a blue
band. "Exactly like yours!" said Lavender easily, but Clemence shook
her head in sad denial. _Her_ coat and skirt had been bought ready-made
at a sale, was an inch too short in the waist, and cockled at the seams;
her hat was last year's shape, while the girl in the porch had
just--_the_--very--latest and most perfect specimen of both. "Horrid thing, lunching in hotels in clothes like that! Some people
have all the luck!" said Clemence grudgingly, as she moved the heavy
basket from one hand to the other to screen it from the gaze of the
aristocratic eyes; and the girl in the porch spied it all the same, and
sighed to herself wistfully: "They are going picnicking--all those boys
and girls! Oh, how lovely to be them. How I _wish_ I were a big
family..." after the manner of the ungrateful people of this world, who
are so much occupied in envying the possessions of others that they have
no time left in which to be thankful for their own! The woods lay not a hundred yards from the ferry itself--real, natural,
untrammelled woods, with grand old trunks standing up tall and straight
like the columns of a cathedral, and dear old gnarled roots which ran
along the ground, covered with lichens and soft green moss. To young
people who spent their lives in one red-brick terrace looking out on
another red-brick terrace across the road, it was like a voyage into
fairyland to step within the cool, green shadow of the woods, to smell
the sweet, sharp smell of the earth, and watch the dapplings of sunlight
through the leaves overhead. Even the boys succumbed to the spell, and
for the first half-hour asked nothing better than to roll about on the
grass, poke in the roots of trees, and speculate concerning rabbit-holes
and nests; but the half-hour over, one and all were convinced that
watches were wrong and they were right in deciding that it was beyond
all manner of doubt full time for lunch; so the cloth was spread on a
level piece of turf, and the good things were consumed with the
lingering enjoyment which they deserved. Every one felt that, as lunch marked what was perhaps the most enjoyable
epoch of the whole day, it was his or her bounden duty to eat slowly and
to go on demanding helpings so long as the supply endured; and a certain
feeling of blankness descended when there was no longer any excuse for
lingering, inasmuch as nothing remained to be eaten but a dozen jam
puffs, which, as mother said, had been _meant_ to be very nice, but had
somehow failed to achieve success! The paste, hard enough on top, was
inside of a damp and doughy consistence, and cook had used gooseberry
jam for the filling, thereby taking a mean advantage of absence from
home, when she _knew_ that the family detested gooseberry in tarts, and
steadily plumped for apricot instead. "We'll give them to the little boy at the ferry. _He_ won't be so
particular!" Mrs Garnett said as she laid the rejected dainties on one
side and proceeded to pack the oddments which had been required for the
meal in one small basket, placing layers of paper in those left empty. The young people looked at each other with raised eyebrows as they
watched these proceedings, the meaning of which they knew only too well. It was forbidden to gather roots from the woods, but no authority had
dreamt of forbidding visitors to carry away _soil_, and this was just
what Mrs Garnett invariably insisted upon doing. The red-brown earth,
rich with sweet fragments of leaf and twig, was too tempting to be
resisted when she thought of her poor pot-bound plants at home;
therefore, instead of swinging homewards with baskets light as air, the
boys were doomed to bear even heavier weights than on the outward
journey. "Mother!" cried Clemence in a deep tone of protest. "Not _yet_! Remember the walk across the fields. Plenty of time to get soil in the
Amphitheatre!" And Mrs Garnett put down her trowel with quite a guilty
air and resigned herself to wait. "Well! Perhaps it would be best ...  Mrs Vernon and I would like an
hour's rest before going on. What are _you_ going to do now?" Every one waited for every one else, and no suggestion was forthcoming. The boys were once more beginning to roll about on the grass, poking and
pulling at each other in a manner which foretold the beginning of war. Clemence and Vie were gazing sentimentally through the branches. Plain
Hannah, stretched flat along the ground, was barricading the movements
of a tiny beetle, and chuckling over its persistent efforts to outwit
her schemes. Dan sat with arms clasped around his knees, a picture of
patience on a monument. The sight of his twisted lips, his tilted,
disconsolate chin fired Darsie to action. It was her doing that he was
here at all; it was her duty to make the time pass as agreeably as
possible. "Sports!" she cried quickly. "Competitive sports. We'll each plan an
event, and take them in turns. Dan shall be judge, and the one who gets
most marks shall have a prize." "What prize?" That was a stumper. Darsie could suggest nothing better than a general
subscription. "If we each paid a penny entrance--"

"Oh, be bothered the pennies! I'll give a prize!" cried Dan loftily. Darsie saw with joy that he had brisked up at the prospect of sports and
was already beginning to cast his eye around in professional manner,
taking in the lie of the land, the outstanding features of the position. As judge and manager he was in his element, and each suggestion of an
event was altered and amended with a lordly superiority. It is somewhat
difficult to introduce much variety into a programme of impromptu
sports, but one or two of this afternoon's events had the advantage of
novelty. A flower-gathering race, for instance, the object of which was
to see how many varieties of wild flowers each competitor could gather
in a given time, and a Roman water-carrier event, which consisted in
balancing the hot-water jug on one's head and seeing how far one could
walk without spilling its tepid contents over neck and shoulders. Plain
Hannah was the only one of the girls who took part in this event, and to
her joy succeeded in travelling a longer distance than any of the male
competitors. The final and most elaborate event was the obstacle race,
without which no competition of the kind is ever considered complete,
and the united wits of the company were put to work to devise traps for
their own undoing. Harry discovered two small trees whose trunks grew
so close together that it seemed impossible that any human creature
could squeeze between, and insisted upon it being done as a _sine qua
non_. Russell decreed that competitors should travel over a certain
route without touching the ground, swinging themselves from branch to
branch like so many monkeys, and as girls were plainly disqualified for
this feat an alternative test was invented which should score equally to
their credit. Hopping races, races complicated by arithmetical and
other such baffling problems, were also devised, and at the last moment
Darsie came forward with a thrilling novelty. "Run to the hamper, turn round three times, seize a jam puff, eat it in
two bites, and hop back to the goal!" "Good!" cried the judge approvingly, and after that the competitors
might storm and lament as they would; the event was fixed! The two mothers had retired from the scene of the fray and with backs
resting against two friendly trees were peacefully discoursing on
household trials; there was no one to preach concerning indigestion, and
the perils of rapid eating; hot and gasping from their previous trials,
the competitors ran, twirled, hopped and gobbled, and finally subsided
in paroxysms of laughter on the mossy bank. The sports were over; the
prize had fallen to Russell, as every one had known from the start that
it must inevitably do; he sat snoring with pride, waving aside Dan's
inquiries as to the nature of his prize in a gentlemanly manner worthy
of his reputation, until the two mothers, becoming conscious that the
afternoon was passing away, rose heavily from their seats and announced
that it was time to start on the second half of the day's expedition. The three-mile walk lay for three parts of the way through fields, which
to the town-livers afforded a refreshing change from noisy and dusty
streets, and when the little village was reached, "our old woman's
cottage" was found to be as clean and neat and hospitably attractive as
of yore. It was a tiny whitewashed cottage standing back from the lane
in a garden bright with old-fashioned flowers, and the stone-floored
kitchen boasted an old oak dresser and table which were the envy of all
beholders. "They're always after it!" our old woman would announce, chuckling. "Titled gentry I've had, driving up in their own carriage, a-coaxing and
wheedling so as never was. `_No_,' I says, `they was my mother's afore
me, and her mother's afore that, and it's a poor tale if I can't have
the pleasure of them while _I_ live! If it's waluable to you, it's
waluable to me, too. That's only common sense...'  And what's your
fancy today, lovies? boiled eggs and buttered toast, same as afore?" Boiled eggs and buttered toast it was, despite the protests of the
mothers, who thought that really, after such a lunch--! And after tea
our old woman provided buttonholes for each member of the party, and
hobbled to the gate to see them off, assuring them, as was her yearly
custom, that "the gamekeepers was getting very crusty of late, but you
leave the roots alone and nobody can't say nothing about a few bits of
flowers." That yearly threat of the gamekeeper lent a _soupcon_ of
excitement to the scramble over the sloping woods, which surrounded as
an amphitheatre a deep green meadow through which meandered a tiny
stream. At any moment, as it appeared, a stalwart figure in velveteen bearing a
gun over his shoulder might appear round the trunk of a tree, demanding
your licence or your life. It was interesting to discuss exactly what
you would do or say under the circumstances, and the very worst thing in
punishments which could possibly be your fate! To-day, however, no such interruption took place, and the dear old
playground looked, if possible, more beautiful than ever. The ground
was carpeted with buttercups, and when one stood on the top of the steep
banks and looked down on the green and the gold, and caught glimpses of
the blue sky beyond--well, it was as near an approach to fairyland as
one could hope to find within twenty miles of a big manufacturing town. Mrs Garnett packed her basket full of the soft, loamy soil; the girls
roamed up and down making up bouquets of wild roses, honeysuckle, and
fragrant meadowsweet; the boys were blissfully happy, risking life and
limb in an exciting endeavour to travel from top to bottom of the bank
without once touching grass. An occasional tree-trunk was permitted as
a foothold, otherwise you swung yourself from one branch to another, or
took flying leaps into space, and trusted to fate to catch hold of
something before you fell. Russell's hairbreadth escapes would have terrified his mother had she
been there to see, but the boys were wise in their generation and had
quietly worked their way round to the opposite bank before beginning
their experiments. It took a considerable time to call them back and
rally forces in time to catch the eight o'clock train, and it was a
dishevelled and by no means aristocratic-looking party which climbed
over the high stone stile leading into the high-road. It seemed hard luck that this last mile, when every one was feeling
tired and a trifle flat, should have to be traversed along a dusty,
uninteresting road, and the straggly line grew even farther and farther
apart as the distance to the station decreased. Dan led the way,
walking in the middle of the road, his head flung back with the old
proud air of detachment. The two mothers plodded steadily in the rear. Russell, scratched and dusty, and looking more like a street arab than a
youth renowned for gentlemanly demeanour, scuffled in the gutter,
kicking up the gathered dust which enveloped him as in a cloud; Harry
and John bore the big hamper slung on a stick, the ends of which they
frequently released for the purpose of straightening their backs and
rubbing their tired hands. Plain Hannah limped on the sideway, being
afflicted with corns which, as she expressed it, always "came on" at the
end of a day's pleasuring. Vie and Clemence, arm-in-arm, were deep in
sentimental conclave. Darsie, the last of the line, hung back of intent
until a curve in the road hid the others from sight. A shadow of
melancholy had descended upon her spirit during the last hour; that fear
of "the last time" which at times makes cowards of us all, was strong
upon her; the possibility of separation suddenly became a terror which
gripped her breath and left her faint and weak. Mother--Father--Home! The dear delights of the sea. Could she--could
she _bear_ to give them up? Darsie whimpered miserably, and stopped
short in the middle of the road to pull out her handkerchief, and wipe a
threatening tear. She really did not think she could, and yet every one
seemed to take it for granted that Aunt Maria's choice would fall upon
herself. Was there nothing, nothing that she could do to lessen the
probability? Nothing to make herself look ugly, unattractive, unsuited
for the post of lady's companion? A stranger walking along the high-road at this moment would have been
amused to see a pretty, disconsolate-looking young girl deliberately
twisting her features into one grimace after another, and critically
examining the effect in the back of a small silver watch. Every new
grimace necessitated a pause for inspection, so that the distance
between Darsie and her companions increased more and more, until on
turning the next corner of the winding road she was surprised to find no
one in sight--surprised and a trifle startled, for the early dusk was
already casting its shadow over the landscape, and the solitude of a
country road has in it something eerie to a lifelong dweller in towns. Darsie forgot her grimaces and set off at a trot to make up lost ground,
and even as she ran a sound came from afar which quickened the trot into
a run--the scream of an engine! the engine of the approaching train
which was to bear the picnickers back to town. The next turn of the road showed that the rest of the party had taken
alarm also, for the flying figures of Vie and Clemence could be seen
disappearing in the distance, evidently following hastily after those in
front. "They'll catch it--they'll rush down the steps just as it's going to
start, bundle in anyhow, into different carriages--never miss me--go
off, never know I'm not there till they get out!" These thoughts rushed
through Darsie's head as she ran gaspingly along the dusty road. It was
imperative that she must catch up to her friends--to be left behind,
without a penny in her pocket to buy a ticket, would be too awful for
words. The shriek of the engine had given place to a repeated snort
which was momentarily growing slower and less pronounced; the train was
slackening speed before drawing up at the platform. Faster! Faster! One rush to reach the goal! Darsie set her teeth and
put on a last desperate spurt, caught her foot on an outstanding stone
of the roadway, and fell heavily to the ground. CHAPTER SIX. DAN TO THE RESCUE. There were no bones broken; she was not seriously hurt; but one has to
try for oneself the experiment of running at full tilt, and while so
doing to pitch forward at full length on the ground, to realise how
extremely disagreeable and disconcerting it can be. Darsie dragged
herself slowly to a sitting position, and sat dazed and stupefied, a
forlorn, dust-encrusted figure, with hat tilted rakishly on one side,
and the palm of her right hand scratched to bleeding where it had
dragged along the stony ground. She blinked and stared, and
mechanically brushed at her blackened skirts, but it was several moments
before remembrance of her position returned to her brain, and with it
the realisation of the consequences of delay. She scrambled to her
feet, ran forward for a few paces, and stopped short with a sharp groan
of pain. She had bruised her knees as well as her hand, and the rapid
movement was quite startlingly painful; she fell into a limp, straining
her head upwards to peep over the hedgerow at the road beyond. And
then, clear and distinct after the interval of silence, came another
sharp whistle, another laborious puff, puff, puff. The train was leaving the station, and she was left behind! Darsie stopped short, and leaned against the hedge. There was no longer
any need to hurry. Either her absence had been discovered or it had
not, and a few minutes' time would settle that question once for all. It soothed her to pretend that there was a chance that she might find
some one waiting her arrival on the platform, but at the bottom of her
heart she had little hope of such a possibility. As members of a large
family whose parents were not rich enough to pay for the modern plethora
of nurses and governesses, the Garnetts and Vernons had been brought up
to be independent, and to fend for themselves, hence the two mothers
would not be so anxious to count the number of their brood, to see that
each member was safe and sound, as would have been the parents of
smaller, more indulged families. There would be a rush for tickets, a hurried glance around on emerging
from the office, the signal of waving hands, and bobbing heads from half
a dozen windows, a quick leap into the nearest seats, and off they would
all steam, panting and puffing, congratulating themselves on their
escape. No, Darsie told herself, it was stupid to pretend; certainly, quite
certainly she was left behind; nevertheless, when two or three minutes
later she reached the top of the railway bridge and peered over the
stone wall, it was with quite a big pang of dismay that she beheld the
empty platform. Not a soul! Not a single soul except a cross-looking
porter sitting astride a barrow, with his hands thrust into his trousers
pockets. Anything less promising in the shape of a forlorn hope it would be
difficult to imagine, but the circumstances offered no alternative. Darsie took her courage in both hands and marched boldly towards him. "Please will you tell me the time of the next train from town?" The porter rolled his eye sideways, surveyed her up and down, formed an
evidently poor opinion, and without a change of position muttered a curt
reply--

"Ten-thirty." "Ten-thirty!" Dismay at the lateness of the hour struggled with wounded
pride at the man's lack of respect. Half-past ten before any one could
come to the rescue; three long hours of chill and darkness, with no one
to speak to, and nowhere to go! Darsie threw the thought aside with the
impetuous incredulity of youth. "When's the next train to town?" "Nine-ten." That was better! Nine-ten. If she could manage to travel by that train
she would arrive at the terminus in abundance of time to prevent any one
starting by the next stopping train. It was all easy--perfectly easy,
except for the want of a miserable eightpence, but, alas! for the moment
eightpence seemed as inaccessible as eighty pounds. Darsie bent a
scrutinising glance upon the porter's downcast face. "He looks about as
disagreeable as he can be, but he's a human creature; he must have
_some_ heart! Perhaps he's in trouble, too, and it's soured his
disposition. It would mine! I just _hate_ it when things go wrong. I
don't in the least see why I shouldn't have a ticket on account! I'll
see what I can do." She coughed and ventured tentatively--

"I missed the last train." "Did ye!" said the porter coldly. It was not a question; there was no
flicker of the interest of a question in his voice, only a dreary
indifference which seemed to demand what in the world you were thinking
of to trouble him about a stupidity which had happened twenty times a
day throughout twenty years of his service on the line. Darsie drew
herself up with a feeling of affront. He was a rude, ill-mannered man,
who ought to be taught how to speak to ladies in distress. She would
ask her father to complain to the railway! What were porters paid for but to make themselves useful to passengers? She drew herself up in haughty fashion, then as suddenly collapsed as
her eye rested on her dusty boots and blackened, bloodstained skirt. Ridiculous to act the grand lady with such handicaps as these! She drew
a sharp breath, and said in a voice of childlike appeal--

"I'm left behind! My friends have gone on. It's very awkward!" "Are ye?" asked the porter indifferently. He took one hand out of his
pocket and pointed woodenly to the right. "Waiting-room first door. Ye
can sit there!" Of all the callous, cold-blooded--! Darsie turned with a swing and
marched forward into the bleak little cell which had the audacity to
call itself a first-class waiting-room, seated herself on a leather-
covered bench which seemed just the most inhospitable thing in the way
of furniture which the mind of man could conceive, and gave herself up
to thought. Never, never so long as she lived would she ever again
leave home without some money in her pocket! How in the name of all
that was mysterious could she contrive to possess herself of eightpence
within the next hour? "Our old woman" would lend it with pleasure, but
Darsie shrank from the idea of the darkening country road with the dread
of the town-dweller who in imagination sees a tramp lurking behind every
bush. No, this first and most obvious suggestion must be put on one
side, and even if she could have humbled herself to beg from the porter,
Darsie felt an absolute conviction that he would refuse. At the farther
side of the station there stretched a small straggling village. Surely
somehow in that village--! With a sudden inspiration Darsie leaped to
her feet and approached the porter once more. Into her mind had darted
the remembrance of the manner in which poor people in books possessed
themselves of money in critical moments of their history. "Porter, will you please tell me the way to the nearest pawnshop?" "P-p--!" Now, indeed, if she had wished to rouse the porter to
animation, she had succeeded beyond her wildest dreams! He spun round,
and gaped at her with a stupefaction of surprise. "Pawnshop, did ye
say? P-awn! What do _you_ want with a pawnshop, a slip of a girl like
you?" "That's my business!" returned Darsie loftily. Since he had been so
unsympathetic and rude, she was certainly not going to satisfy his
curiosity. Her dear little watch would provide her with money, and
somehow--she didn't understand why--pawnbrokers gave things back after
paying for them, in the most amiable and engaging of fashions. "That's my business! If you would kindly direct me--"

"We haven't got no pawnshop," said the porter gruffly. He stared at her
slowly up and down, down and up, appeared to awake to a suspicious
interest, and opined gruffly, "You'd better go 'ome!" "Just what I'm trying to do," sighed poor Darsie to herself. She turned
and went slowly back to her leather seat, and a second disconsolate
review of the situation. In time to come this experience would rank as
an adventure, and became an oft-told tale. She would chill her
listeners with hints of The Tramp, evoke shrieks of laughter at her
imitation of the porter. Darsie realised the fact, but for the moment
it left her cold. Summer evenings have a trick of turning chill and
damp after the sun is set, and the vault-like waiting-room was dreary
enough to damp the highest spirits. _How was she going to obtain that
eightpence for a ticket_? The station clock struck nine; the porter took a turn along the platform
and peered curiously through the dusty window; a luggage train rattled
slowly past, an express whizzed by with thunderous din. The station
clock struck the quarter, and still the problem was as far as ever from
solution. "Well," sighed Darsie miserably, "I must just wait. I'm perished with
cold already. In two more hours I shall be frozen. Rheumatic fever, I
suppose, or galloping decline. It will settle Aunt Maria, that's _one_
good thing! but it's hard all the same, in the flower of my youth! To
think of all that a human creature can suffer for the sake of a
miserable eightpence!" She got up stiffly and pressed her face against the pane. People were
beginning to assemble for the nine-ten. An old man with a satchel of
tools, two old women with baskets. "The poor are always generous to the
poor. Suppose I ask them? Twopence three farthings each would not kill
them!" But when one is not used to begging, it is extraordinary how
difficult it is to begin. Darsie tried to think of the words in which
she would proffer her request, and blushed in discomfort. No! she
_could_ not. Of the two disagreeables it really seemed easier to shiver
two hours, and retain one's pride intact, and then, suddenly, the door
of the waiting-room opened with a bang, and Dan's heavy figure stood on
the threshold! The cry of delight, of breathless incredulity with which
Darsie leaped to her feet, must have been heard to the end of the
platform. She rushed forward, clutched his arm, and hugged it fast in
the rapture of relief. "Oh, Dan--you angel--you angel! Have you dropped down straight from the
skies?" "Not I! Nothing so easy. Scorched along bad roads on a rickety
machine. Would you be kind enough to let go my arm and stop shrieking! You'll have the whole village here in a moment. So _you're_ all right,
I see! Sitting quietly here, after scaring us half out of our wits--"

"I think _I'm_ the one to be scared! You were all ready enough to go
on, and leave me stranded by myself. I've gone through a martyrdom. Dan! tell me, when did you miss me first?" Dan gave an expressive grimace. He looked hot and dusty, and thankful
to sit down on the leather bench. "Well, it was too much of a scrimmage to think of anything for the first
few miles, but things have a way of printing themselves on one's brain,
and when I _did_ begin to think, there seemed something missing! I
remembered Vie's face--the colour of a beetroot, and Clemence limping in
the rear. I remembered John and Russell hauling up Hannah by her arms,
and the two mothers were safely in their carriage--I'd made sure of
that, but--I couldn't remember a thing about _you_! Then I asked Vie,
and she said you were a long way behind, and I began to guess what had
happened. At the first stop I did a rush round, and--there you weren't! So of course I came back." "But how--how? There was no train. Did you cycle? Where did you get
your machine?" "Borrowed him from the stationmaster, and left my watch in exchange, in
case I never went back. Jolly good exchange for him, too. It's the
worst machine I ever rode, and that's saying a good deal. I told your
mother I'd bring you back all right, and persuaded her to go home. What
on earth possessed you to be such a muff?" Darsie tossed her head, gratitude giving place to wounded pride. "Muff, indeed! You don't know what you are talking about, or you
wouldn't be so unkind. I ran like the rest, but I fell--caught my foot
on something, and fell on my face. I believe I fainted." There was an
irrepressible note of pride in her voice as she made this last
statement, for fainting, being unknown in the healthy Garnett family,
was regarded as a most interesting and aristocratic accomplishment. "I
do believe I fainted, for for several minutes I didn't know where I was. And I hurt myself, too; look at my hand!" Dan looked and whistled. "Skinned it properly, haven't you! Reminds me of the days of my youth. Better sponge it clean with your handkerchief and some of that water. And when you _did_ remember, the train had gone--." "Yes--and not another until after ten, and not a halfpenny in my pocket
to buy a ticket, and no one but a callous wretch of a porter to consult. Oh, Dan, I _was_ wretched--I'll bless you all my life for coming back
like this!" "Rot!" said Dan briskly. "I was the only man. Couldn't do anything
else. I say, you know, it was your doing that I came to this blessed
old picnic at all, and you _have_ let me in for a day! 