



Produced by David Widger





VAGABONDIA

By Frances Hodgson Burnett

JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY - 1884




AUTHOR'S NOTE. This my first novel was written several years ago, and published
(without any revision by me) first in a ladies' magazine under the name
of "Dorothea," and afterwards in book form as "Dolly." For reasons not
necessary to state here, all control over the book had passed from
my hands. It has been for some time out of print; but, having at last
obtained control of the copyright, I have made such corrections as
seemed advisable, given it the name I originally intended for it, and
now issue it through my regular publishers. FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT. Washington, November, 1883. VAGABONDIA. CHAPTER I. ~ IN WHICH WE HOLD COUNSEL. It was a nondescript sort of a room, taking it altogether. A big, sunny
room, whose once handsome papering and corniceing had grown dingy, and
whose rich carpeting had lost its color and pile in places, and yet
asserted its superiority to its surroundings with an air of lost
grandeur in every shabby medallion. There were pictures in abundance on
the walls, and more than one of them were gems in their way, despite
the evidence all bore to being the work of amateurs. The tables were
carved elaborately, and the faded, brocaded chairs were of the order
_pouf_, and as inviting as they were disreputable in appearance; there
was manuscript music among the general litter, a guitar hung from the
wall by a tarnished blue and silver ribbon, and a violin lay on the
piano; and yet, notwithstanding the air of free-and-easy disorder, one
could hardly help recognizing a sort of vagabond comfort and luxury in
the Bohemian surroundings. It was so very evident that the owners
must enjoy life in an easy, light-hearted, though perhaps light-headed
fashion; and it was also so very evident that their light hearts and
light heads rose above their knowledge of their light purses. They were congregated together now, holding a grand family council
around the centre-table, and Dolly was the principal feature, as usual;
and, embarrassing as the subject of said council was, not one of them
looked as if it was other than a most excellent joke that Dolly, having
been invited into the camps of the Philistines, should find she had
nothing to put on to grace the occasion. And as to Dolly,--well, that
young person stood in the midst of them in her shabby, Frenchy little
hat, slapping one pink palm with a shabby, shapely kid glove, her eyes
alight, her comical dismay and amusement displaying itself even in the
arch of her brows. "And so the Philistine leader pounced upon me herself," she was saying. "You know the 'Ark,' Phil? Well, they were all in the Ark,--the Rev. Bilberry in front, and the boys and girls filling up the corners; so you
may imagine the effect produced when they stopped, and Lady Augusta
bent over the side to solemnly proclaim her intention of inviting me
to partake of coffee and conversation on Friday night, with an air of
severely wondering whether I would dare to say 'No!'" "Why did n't you say it?" said Aimee. "You know it will be an awful
bore, Dolly. Those Bilberry clan gatherings always are. You have said so
yourself often enough." "Of course I have," returned Dolly. "And of course it will be, but
it would be dreadfully indiscreet to let the Bilberry element know I
thought so. The Bilberry doors once closed against us, where is our
respectability, and Phil's chance of success among the Philistines? It
is bad enough, of course, but there is reason to be thankful that I am
the only victim. The rest of you would be sure to blunder into the B. B. B. 's [meaning the Bilberry black books], and that _would_ be an
agreeable state of affairs. 'Toinette, look at Tod, he is sitting in the
coal-box eating Phil's fusees." In 'Toinette we find Mrs. Phil, a handsome creature, young enough to
have been in the school-room, but with the face and figure of a Greek
goddess, and a pair of eyes lovely enough to haunt one's dreams as a
memory for a lifetime, and as to the rest, an inconsistent young madcap,
whose beauty and spirit seemed only a necessary part of the household
arrangements, and whose son and heir, in the person of the enterprising
Tod (an abbreviate of Theodore), was the source of unlimited domestic
enjoyment and the object of much indiscreet adoration. It was just like
Philip Crewe, this marrying on probabilities; and it was equally like
the rest of them to accept the state of affairs as an excellent joke,
and regard the result as an exquisite piece of pleasantry. 'Toinette
herself was only another careless, unworldly addition to the family
circle, and enjoyed her position as thoroughly as the rest did; and as
to Tod, what a delicate satire upon responsibilities Tod was, and how
tranquilly he comported himself under a _regime_ which admitted of free
access into dangerous places, and a lack of personal restraint which
allowed him all the joys the infantile mind can revel in! At Dolly's exclamation Toinette rushed at him in his stronghold, and
extricated him from the coal-box with demonstrations of dismay. "Look at his white dress!" she wailed pathetically. "I only put it on a
few minutes ago; and he has eaten two dozen fusees, if this was n't an
empty box when he found it. I hope they won't disagree with him, Phil." "They won't," said Phil, composedly. "Nothing does. Dust him, and
proceed to business. I want to hear the rest of Dolly's story." "I _think_," said Mollie, "that he ate Shem and Ham this morning, for I
could only find Japheth after he had been playing with his Noah's Ark. Go on, Dolly." "Wait until I have taken off my things," said Dolly, "and then we 'll
talk it over. We must talk it over, you know, if I am to go." She took off her hat, and then laid her shawl aside,--a little scarlet
shawl, draped about her figure and tossed over one shoulder smartly,
and by no means ungracefully,--and so stood revealed; and it must be
admitted she was well worth looking at. Not a beauty, but a fresh,
wholesome little body, with a real complexion, an abundance of hair,
and large-irised, wide-awake eyes, changeable as to color, because
capricious in expression; the sort of girl, in fact, who would be likely
to persuade people ultimately that, considering circumstances, absolute
beauty could be easily dispensed with, and, upon the whole, would rather
detract from the general charm of novelty, which, in her case, reigned
supreme. "It is n't the mere fact of being a beauty that makes women popular,"
she would say; "it's the being able to persuade people that you are
one,--or better than one. Don't some historians tell us that Cleopatra
had red hair and questionable eyes, and yet she managed to blind the
world so completely, that no one is sure whether it is true or not, and
to this day the generality of people are inclined to believe that it
was her supernatural beauty that dragged Marc Antony to the dust at her
feet." Aimee's face was more nearly perfect than Dolly's; Mollie's was more
imposing, child as she was; 'Toi-nette threw her far into the shade in
the matter of statuesque splendor; but still it was Dolly who did all
the difficult things, and had divers tragic adventures with questionable
adorers, whose name was legion, and who were a continual source of
rejoicing and entertainment to the family. Having tossed hat and shawl on to the table, among the manuscript music,
paint-brushes, and palettes, this young person slipped into the most
comfortable chair near the fire, and, having waited for the rest to
seat themselves, proceeded to open the council. Mollie, who was sixteen,
large, fair, beautiful, and not as tidy as she might have been, dropped
into a not ungraceful position at her feet. Aimee, who was a little
maiden with a tender, _spirituelle_ face, and all the forethought of
the family, sat near, with some grave perplexity in her expression. 'Toinette and Tod, _posed_ in the low nursery-chair,--the girl's firm,
white arm flung around the child,--swung lightly to and fro, fit models
for an artist. "You would make a first-class picture,--the lot of you," commented Phil,
amicably. "Never mind the picture," said Mollie, drawing her disreputable slippers
up under her wrapper. "We want to hear how Dolly thinks of going to the
Bilberrys'. Oh, Dolly, how heavenly it would be if you had a
turquoise-blue sat--"

"Heavenly!" interrupted Dolly. "I should think so. Particularly
celestial for Lady Augusta, who looks mahogany-colored in it, and
peculiarly celestial for a poor relation from Vagabondia. It would be
as much as my reputation was worth. She would never forgive me. You must
learn discretion, Mollie." "There is some consolation in knowing you can't get it," said 'Toinette. "You won't be obliged to deny yourself or be indiscreet. But what _are_
you going to wear, Dolly?" "That is for the council to decide," Dolly returned. "First, we must
settle on what we want, and then we must settle on the way to get it." "Other people go the other way about it," said Aimee. "If we were only rich!" said Mollie. "But it is a most glaringly patent fact that we are not," said Dolly. "There is one thing certain, however,--it must be white." "A simple white muslin," suggested 'Toinette, struggling in the grasp of
the immortal Tod,--"a simple white muslin, with an equally simple wild
flower in your hair, _a la_ Amanda Fitzallan. How the Dowager Bilberry
_would_ like that." "And a wide blue sash," suggested Mollie. "And the sleeves tied up with
bows. _And_ tucks, Dolly. Girls, just think of Dolly making great eyes
at an eligible Philistine, in white muslin and a sash and tucks!" She was a hardened little sinner, this Dolly, her only redeeming point
being that she was honest enough about her iniquities,--so honest
that they were really not such terrible iniquities after all, and were
regarded as rather good fun by the _habitues_ of Vaga-bondia proper. She laughed just as heartily as the rest of them at Mollie's speech. She could no more resist the temptation of making great eyes at eligible
Philistines than she could help making them at the entertaining but
highly ineligible Bohemians, who continually frequented Phil's studio. The fear of man was not before her eyes; and the life she had led had
invested her with a whimsical yet shrewd knowledge of human nature, and
a business-like habit of looking matters in the face, which made her
something of a novelty; and when is not novelty irresistible? And as to
the masculine Philistines,--well, the audacity of Dolly's successes in
the very midst of the enemy's camp had been the cause of much stately
demoralization of Philistine battalions. At her quietest she created small sensations and attracted attention;
but in her wicked moods, when she was in a state of mind to prompt her
to revenge the numerous small slights and overt acts of lofty patronage
she met with, the dowagers stood in some secret awe of her propensities,
and not without reason. Woe betide the daring matron who measured swords
with her at such times. Great would be her confusion and dire her fall
before the skirmish was over, and nothing was more certain than that she
would retire from the field a wiser if not a better woman. After being
triumphantly routed with great slaughter on two or three occasions,
the enemy had discovered this, and decided mentally that it was more
discreet to let "little Miss Crewe" alone, considering that, though it
was humiliating to be routed, even by one of their own forces, it was
infinitely more so to be routed by an innocent-looking young person,
whose position was questionable, and who actually owed her vague shadow
of respectability to her distant but august relative, the Lady Augusta
Decima Crewe Bilberry, wife of the Rev. Marmaduke Sholto Bilberry, and
mother of the plenteous crop of young Bilberrys, to whom little Miss
Crewe was music teacher and morning governess. So it was that Mollie's joke about the tucks and white muslin gained
additional point from the family recollection of past experiences. "But," said Dolly, when the laugh had subsided, "it won't do to
talk nonsense all day. Here 's where we stand, you know. Coffee and
conversation on Friday night on one side, and nothing but my draggled
old green tarlatan on the other, and it's Tuesday now." "And the family impecuniosity being a fact well established in the
family mind," began Phil, with composure. "But that 's nonsense," interrupted Aimee. "And, as Dolly says, nonsense
won't do now. But," with a quaint sigh, "we always _do_ talk nonsense." But here a slight diversion was created. Mrs. Phil jumped up, with
an exclamation of delight, and, dropping Tod on to Mollie's lap,
disappeared through the open door. "I will be back in a minute," she called back to them, as she ran
up-stairs. "I have just thought of something." "Girls," said Mollie, "it's her white merino." And so it was. In a few minutes she reappeared with it,--a heap of soft
white folds in her arms, and a yard or so of the train dragging after
her upon the carpet,--the one presentable relic of a once inconsistently
elaborate bridal trousseau, at present in a rather tumbled and rolled-up
condition, but still white and soft and thick, and open to unlimited
improvement. "I had forgotten all about it," she said, triumphantly. "I have never
needed it at all, and I knew I never should when I bought it, but it
looked so nice when I saw it that I could n't help buying it. I once
thought of cutting it up into things for Tod; but it seems to me, Dolly,
it 's what you want exactly, and Tod can trust to Providence,--things
always come somehow." It was quite characteristic of Vagabondia that there should be more
rejoicing over this one stray sheep of good luck than there would have
been over any ninety and nine in the ordinary folds of more prosperous
people. And Mrs. Phil rejoiced as heartily as the rest. It was her turn
now, and she was as ready to sacrifice her white merino on the shrine
of the household impecuniosity as she would be to borrow Dolly's best
bonnet, or Mollie's shoes, or Aimee's gloves, when occasion demanded
such a course. So the merino was laid upon the table, and the council
rose to examine, comment, and suggest. "A train," said Dolly, concisely; "no trimming, and swan's-down. Even
the Bilberry could n't complain of that, I 'm sure." Mollie, resting her smooth white elbows on the table in a comfortably
lounging posture, regarded the garment with great longing in her drowsy
brown eyes. "I wish it was white satin," she observed, somewhat irrelevantly, "and
I was going to wear it at a real ball, with real lace, you know, and a
court train, and flowers, and a fan." Dolly looked down at her handsome childish face good-naturedly. She
was such an incongruous mixture of beauty and utter simplicity, this
easy-going baby of sixteen, that Dolly could not have helped liking her
heartily under any circumstances, even supposing there had been no tie
of relationship between them. "I wish it was white satin and you were going to wear it," she said. "White satin is just the sort of thing for you, Mollie. Never mind, wait
until the figurative ship comes in." "And in the interval," suggested Aimee, "put a stitch or so in that
wrapper of yours. It has been torn for a week now, and Tod tumbles over
it half a dozen times every morning before breakfast." Mollie cast her eyes over her shoulder to give it an indifferent glance
as it rested on the faded carpet behind her. "I wish Lady Augusta would mend things before she sends them to us," she
said, with sublime _naivete_, and then, at the burst of laughter which
greeted her words, she stopped short, staring at the highly entertained
circle with widely opened, innocent eyes. "What are you laughing at?" she said. "I 'm sure she might. She is always preaching about liking to
have something to occupy her time, and it would be far more charitable
of her to spend her time in that way than in persistently going into
poor houses where the people don't want her, and reading tracts to them
that they don't want to hear." Dolly's appreciation of the audacity of the idea reached a climax in an
actual shriek of delight. "If I had five pounds, which I have not, and never shall have," she
said, "I would freely give it just to see Lady Augusta hear you say
that, my dear. Five pounds! I would give ten--twenty--fifty, if need be. It would be such an exquisite joke." But Mollie did not regard the matter in this light. To her
unsophisticated mind Lady Augusta represented nothing more than
periodical boredom in the shape of occasional calls, usually made
unexpectedly, when the house was at its worst, and nobody was especially
tidy,--calls invariably enlivened by severe comments upon the evil
propensities of poor relations in general, and the shocking lack of
respectability in this branch of the order in particular. Worldly wisdom
was not a family trait, Dolly's half-whimsical assumption of it being
the only symptom of the existence of such a gift, and Mollie was the
most sublimely thoughtless of the lot. Mrs. Phil had never been guilty
of a discreet act in her life. Phil himself regarded consequences less
than he regarded anything else, and Aimee's childish staidness and
forethought had certainly not an atom of worldliness in it. Accordingly,
Dolly was left to battle with society, and now and then, it must be
admitted, the result of her brisk affrays did her no small credit. For a very short space of time the merino was being disposed of to an
advantage; Dolly seating herself in her chair again to renovate the
skirt; Aimee unpicking the bodice, and Mollie looking on with occasional
comments. "Here is Griffith," she said, at last, glancing over her shoulder at
a figure passing the window; and the next minute the door was opened
without ceremony, and "Grif" made his appearance upon the scene. Being called upon to describe Griffith Donne, one would hardly feel
inclined to describe him as being imposing in personal appearance. He
was a thin, undersized young man, rather out at elbows and shabby of
attire, and with a decided air of Bohemia about him; but his youthful
face was singularly pleasing and innocent, and his long-lashed,
brown-black eyes were more than good-looking,--they were absolutely
beautiful in a soft, pathetic way,--beautiful as the eyes of the
loveliest of women. He came into the room as if he was used to coming into it in an
every-day fashion; and Dolly, looking up, gave him a smile and a nod. "Ah, you are all here, are you?" he said. "What is on hand now? What is
all this white stuff for?" And he drew a chair up close by Dolly's side,
and lifted the merino in his hand. "For Friday night," answered Aimee. "Bilberry's again, Griffith. Coffee
and conversation this time." Griffith looked at Dolly inquiringly, but Dolly only laughed and
shrugged her plump shoulders wickedly. "Look here," he said, with a disapproving air, "it ain't true, is it,
Dolly? You are not going to make a burnt-offering of yourself on the
Bilberry shrine again, are you?" But Dolly only laughed the more as she took the merino from him. "If you want a breadth of merino to hold, take another one," she
said. "I want that. And as to being a burnt-offering on the shrine of
Bilberry, my dear Griffith, you must know it is policy," and immediately
went on with her unpicking again, while Griffith, bending over in an
attitude more remarkable for ease than grace, looked on at her sharp
little glancing scissors with an appearance of great interest. It would perhaps be as well to pause here to account for this young
man's evident freedom in the family circle. It was very plain that he
was accustomed to coming and going when he pleased, and it was easy to
be adduced from his manner that, to him, Dolly was the chief attraction
in the establishment. The fact was, he was engaged to Dolly, and had
been engaged to her for years, and in all probability, unless his
prospects altered their aspect, would be engaged to her for years to
come. In past time, when both were absurdly young, and ought to have
been at school, the two had met,--an impressionable, good-natured,
well-disposed couple of children, who fell in love with each other
unreasoningly and honestly, giving no thought to the future. They
were too young to be married, of course, and indeed had not troubled
themselves about anything so matter of fact; they had fallen in love,
and enjoyed it, and, strange to say, had been enjoying it ever since,
and falling in love more deeply every day of their affectionate,
inconsequent, free-and-easy lives. What did it matter to them that
neither owned a solitary sixpence, for which they had not a thousand
uses? What did it matter to Dolly that Griffith's literary career had so
far been so unremunerative that a new suit is as an event, and an extra
shilling an era? What did it matter to Griffith that Dolly's dresses
were re-trimmed and re-turned and re-furbished, until their reappearance
with the various seasons was the opening of a High Carnival of jokes? Love is not a matter of bread and butter in Vaga-bondia, thank Heaven! Love is left to Bohemia as well as to barren Respectability, and, as
Griffith frequently observed with no slight enthusiasm, "When it comes
to figure, where's the feminine Philistine whose silks and satins and
purple and fine raiment fit like Dolly's do?" So it went on, and the
two adored each other with mutual simplicity, and, having their little
quarrels, always made them up again with much affectionate remorse, and,
scorning the prudential advice of outsiders, believed in each other and
the better day which was to come, when one or the other gained worldly
goods enough to admit of a marriage in which they were to be happy in
their own way,--which, I may add, was a way simple and tender, unselfish
and faithful, enough. It was quite evident, however, that Griffith was not in the best of
spirits this morning. He was not as sanguine as Dolly by nature, and
outward influences tended rather to depress him occasionally. But he
never was so low-spirited that Dolly could not cheer him, consequently
he always came to her with his troubles; and to her credit, be it said,
she never failed to understand and deal with them tenderly, commonplace
though they were. So she understood his mood very well to-day. Something
had gone wrong at "the office." ("The office" was the editorial den
which swallowed him up, and held him in bondage from morning until
night; appropriating his labor for a very small pecuniary compensation,
too, it may be added.) "Old Flynn," as the principal was respectfully
designated, had been creating one of his periodical disturbances, or he
had been snubbed, which, by the way, was not a rare event, and to poor
Griffith slights were stings and patronage poison. He could not laugh at
the enemy and scorn discomfiture as Dolly could, and the consequence of
an encounter with the Philistines on his part was usually a desperate
fit of low spirits, which made him wretched, bitter, and gloomy by
turns. This morning it appeared that his spirits had reached their lowest ebb,
and before many minutes had passed he was pouring forth his tribulations
with much frankness and simplicity. Mr. Griffith Donne's principal trial
was the existence of an elderly maiden aunt, who did not approve of him,
and was in the habit of expressing her disapproval in lengthy epistolary
correspondence, invariably tending to severe denunciation of his mode of
life, and also invariably terminating with the announcement that unless
he "desisted" (from what, or in what manner, not specified) she should
consider it her bounden duty to disinherit him forthwith. One of these
periodical epistles, having arrived before he had breakfasted, had
rather destroyed Griffith's customary equanimity, and various events of
the morning had not improved his frame of mind; consequently he came to
Dolly for comfort. "And she's coming to London, too," he ended, after favoring the
assemblage with extracts from the letter. "And, of course, she will
expect me to do the dutiful. Confound her money! I wish she would build
an asylum for irate, elderly spinsters with it, and retire into it
for the remainder of her natural life. I don't want it, and"--with
praiseworthy ingenuousness--"I shouldn't get it if I did!" "But," said Dolly, when they found themselves alone for a few minutes,
"it would be an agreeable sort of thing to have, Griffith, upon the
whole, wouldn't it?" They were standing close together by the fire, Griffith with his arm
thrown round the girl's waist, and she with both her plump, flexible
hands clasped on his shoulder and her chin resting on them, and her big,
round eyes gazing up into his. She was prone to affectionate, nestling
attitudes and coaxing ways--with Griffith it may be understood--her
other adorers were treated cavalierly enough. "A nice sort of thing," echoed Griffith. "I should think it would. I
should like to have it for your sake. I don't care for it so much for
myself, you know, Dolly, but I want the time to come when I can buy you
such things as Old Flynn's nieces wear. It would n't be a waste of good
material on such a figure as yours. I have an idea of my own about a
winter dress I intend you to have when we are rich,--a dark blue velvet,
and a hat with a white plume in, and one of those muff affairs made of
long white silky fur--"

"Angora," said Dolly, her artless enjoyment of the idea shining in her
eyes. "Angora, Griffith." "I don't know what it's called," answered Griffith, "but it is exactly
your style, and I have thought about it a dozen times. Ah, if we were
only rich!" Dolly laughed joyously, clasping her hands a little closer over his
shoulder. Their conversations upon prospects generally ended in some
such pleasantly erratic remarks. They never were tired of supposing
that they were rich; and really, in default of being rich, it must be
admitted that there is some consolation in being in a frame of mind
which can derive happiness from such innocent day-dreams. "Just think of the house we would have," she said, "and the fun we could
all have together, if you and I were rich and--and married, Griffith. We should be happy if we were married, and not rich, but if we were rich
_and_ married--goodness, Griffith!" and she opened her eyes wide and
looked so enjoyable altogether, that Griffith, being entirely overcome
by reason of the strength of his feelings upon the subject, caught her
in both arms and embraced her heartily, and only released her in an
extremely but charmingly crushed and dishevelled condition, after he had
kissed her about half a dozen times. It did not appear, upon the whole, that she objected to the proceeding. She took it quite naturally and unaffectedly, as if she was used to
it, and regarded it as a part of the programme. Indeed, it was quite
a refreshing sight to see her put both her little hands up to her
disarranged hair and settle the crimps serenely. "We should have the chances to find true people if we were rich," she
said. "And then we could take care, of Aimee and Mollie, and help them
to make grand marriages." But that very instant Griffith's face fell somewhat. "Dolly," he said, "have you never thought--not even _thought_ that you
would like to have made a grand marriage yourself?" And though there
was not the least shade of a reason for the change in his mood, it was
glaringly evident that he was at once rendered absolutely prostrate with
misery at the thought. These sudden pangs of remorse at his own selfishness in holding the girl
bound to him, were his weakness, and Dolly's great difficulty was to
pilot him safely through his shoals of doubt and self-reproach, and she
had her own way of managing it. Just now her way of managing it was to
confront him bravely, coming quite close to him again, and taking hold
of one of his coat buttons. "I have thought of it a hundred times," she said, "but not since I have
belonged to you; and as I have belonged to you ever since I was fifteen
years old, I should think what I thought before then can hardly have the
right to trouble us now. _You_ never think of marrying any one but me,
do you, Griffith?" "Think of marrying any one else!" exclaimed Griffith, indignantly. "I
would n't marry a female Rajah with a diamond--"

"I know you wouldn't," Dolly interrupted. "I believe in you, Griffith. Why won't you believe in me?" And the eyes lifted to his were so
perfectly honest and straightforward that the sourest of cynics must
have believed them, and Griffith was neither sour nor a cynic, but
simply an unsuccessful, affectionate, contradictory young man, too
susceptible to outward influences for his own peace of mind. He was a _very_ unfortunate young man, it may as well be observed at
once, and his misfortunes were all the harder to bear because he was not
to blame for them. He had talent, and was industrious and indefatigable,
and yet, somehow or other, the Fates seemed to be against him. If he
had been less honest or less willing, he might perhaps have been more
successful; but in his intercourse with the world's slippery ones he
customarily found himself imposed upon. He had done hard work for which
he had never been paid, and work for which he had been paid badly; he
had fought honestly to gain footing, and, somehow or other, luck had
seemed to be against him, for certainly he had not gained it yet. Honest
men admired and respected him, and men of intellectual worth prophesied
better days; but so far it had really seemed that the people who were
willing to befriend him were powerless, and those who were powerful
cared little about the matter. So he alternately struggled and
despaired, and yet retained his good nature, and occasionally enjoyed
life heartily in defiance of circumstances. With every member of the
Crewe household he was popular, from Tod to Mrs. Phil. His engagement
to Dolly they regarded as a satisfactory arrangement. That he was barely
able to support himself, and scarcely possessed a presentable suit of
clothes, was to their minds the most inconsequent of trifles. It was
unfortunate, perhaps, but unavoidable; and their sublime trust in the
luck which was to ripen in all of them at some indefinite future time,
was their hope in this case. Some time or other he would "get into
something," they had decided, and then he would marry Dolly, and they
would all enjoy the attendant festivities. And in the mean time they
allowed the two to be happy, and made Griffith welcome, inviting him to
their little impromptu suppers, and taking care never to be _de trop_ on
the occasion of _tete-a-tete_ conversations. The _tete-a-tete_ of the morning ended happily as usual. Dolly went back
to her unpicking, and Griffith, finding his ghost of self-reproach laid
for the time being, watched her in a supremely blissful state of mind. He never tired of watching her, he frequently told her in enthusiastic
confidence. The charm in Dolly Crewe was her adaptability; she was
never out of place, and it had been said that she suited herself to her
accompaniments far oftener than her accompaniments suited themselves
to her. Seeing her in a shabby dress, seated in the shabby parlor, one
instinctively felt that shabbiness was not so utterly unbearable after
all, and acknowledged that it had a brightness of its own. Meeting her
at a clan gathering in the camps of the Philistines, one always found
her in excellent spirits, and quite undamped in her enjoyment of the
frequently ponderous rejoicings. In the Bilberry school-room, among
dog-eared French grammars and lead-pencilled music, education did not
appear actually dispiriting; and now, as she sat by the fire, with the
bright, sharp little scissors in lier hand, and the pile of white merino
on her knees and trailing on the hearth-rug at her feet, Griffith found
her simply irresistible. Ah! the bliss that revealed itself in the
prospect of making her Mrs. Donne, and taking possession of her
entirely! The joy of seeing her seated in an arm-chair of his own, by
a fire which was solely his property, in a room which was nobody else's
paradise! He could imagine so well how she would regard such a state of
affairs as a nice little joke, and would pretend to adapt herself to
her position with divers daring witcheries practised upon himself to the
dethroning of his reason; how she would make innocent, wicked speeches,
and be coaxing and dazzling and mock-matronly by turns; and above all,
how she would enjoy it, and make him enjoy it, too; and yet sometimes,
when they were quiet and alone, would drop all her whimsical little airs
and graces, and make such tender, unselfish, poetic little speeches,
that he would find himself startled in life wonder at the depth
and warmth and generosity of her girlish heart. He often found her
surprising him-after this manner, and the surprise usually came when he
had just been most nearly betrayed into thinking of her as an adorable
little collection of witcheries and whimsicalities, and forgetting that
she had other moods. More than once she had absolutely brought tears
into his eyes, and a thrill to his heart, by some sudden, pathetic,
trustful speech, made after she had been dazzling and bewildering for
hours with her pretty coquetries and daring flashes of wit. No one but
Griffith ever saw her in these intense moods. The rest of them saw her
intense enough sometimes but the sudden, uncontrollable flashes of light
Griffith saw now and then, fairly staggered him. And the poor fellow's
love for her was something akin to adoration. There was only this one
woman upon earth to him, and his whole soul was bound up in her. It was
for her he struggled against disappointment, it was for her he hoped,
it was only the desperate strength of his love for her that made
disappointment so terribly bitter to him. Certainly his love made him
better and sweeter-tempered and more energetic than he would have been
if his life had not been so full of it. His one ambition was to gain
success to lay at her feet. To him success meant Dolly, and Dolly meant
Paradise, an honest Paradise, in which primeval bliss reigned supreme
and trial was unknown. Consequently the bright little scissors glanced
before his eyes a sort of loadstar. "I did n't tell you that nephew of Old Flynn's had come back, did I?" he said, at length. "No," answered Dolly, snipping diligently. "You never mentioned him. What nephew, and where did he come from?" "A fellow of the name of Gowan, who has been travelling in the East for
no particular reason for the last ten years. He called on Flynn, at the
office, today, for the first time; and if I had been called upon to
kick him out, I should have regarded it as a cheerful and improving
recreation." "Why?" laughed Dolly. "Is he one of the Philistines?" "Philistine!" echoed Griffith, with disgust. "I should think so. A
complacent idiot in a chronic state of fatigue.. Drove up to the door
in a cab,--his own, by the way, and a confoundedly handsome affair it
is,--gave the reins to his tiger, and stared at the building tranquilly
for at least two minutes before he came in, stared at Old Flynn when he
_did_ come in, stared at me, shook hands with Old Flynn exhaustedly, and
then subsided into listening and paring his nails during the remainder
of the interview." "Which might or might not be discreet under the circumstances," said
Dolly. "Perhaps he had nothing to say. Never mind, Grif. Let us console
ourselves with the thought that we are not as these utterly worthless
explorers of the East are," with a flourish of the scissors. "Better is a dinner of herbs in Vagabondia, with a garnish of
conversation and _bon-mots_, than a stalled ox among the Philistines
with dulness." But about an hour after Griffith had taken his departure, as she was
bending over the table, industriously clipping at the merino, a thought
suddenly crossed her mind, which made her drop her scissors and look up
meditatively. "By the way," she began, all at once. "Yes, it must be! How was it I
did not think of it when Grif was talking? I am sure, it was Gowan, Lady
Augusta said. To be sure it was. Mollie, this exploring nephew of
the Flynns is to partake of coffee and conversation with us at the
Bilberrys' on Friday, if I am not mistaken, and I never remembered it
until now." CHAPTER II ~ IN THE CAMPS OF THE PHILISTINES. A TOILET in Vagabondia was an event. Not an ordinary toilet, of course,
but a toilet extraordinary,--such as is necessarily called forth by some
festive gathering or unusual occasion. It was also an excitement after
a manner, and not a disagreeable one. It made demands upon the inventive
and creative powers of the whole family, and brought to light hidden
resources. It also aroused energy, and, being a success, was rejoiced
over as a brilliant success. Respectability might complacently retire
to its well-furnished chamber, and choose serenely from its unlimited
supply of figurative purple and legendary fine linen, without finding a
situation either dramatic or amusing; but in Vagabondia this was not the
case. Having contrived to conjure up, as it were, from the secret places
of the earth an evening dress, are not gloves still necessary? and,
being safe as regards gloves, do not the emergencies of the toilet
call for minor details seemingly unimportant, but still not to be done
without? Finding this to be the case, the household of Crewe rallied all
its forces upon such occasions, and set aside all domestic arrangements
for the time being. It was not impossible that Dolly should have
prepared for a rejoicing without the assistance of Mollie and Aimee,
Mrs. Phil and Tod, with occasional artistic suggestions from Phil and
any particular friend of the family who chanced to be below-stairs,
within hearing distance. It might not have appeared an impossibility, I
should say, to ordinary people, but the household of Crewe regarded
it as such, and accordingly, on the night of the Bilberry gathering,
accompanied Dolly in a body to her tiring-room. Upon the bed lay the merino dress, white, modest, and untrimmed,
save for the swan's-down accompaniments, but fitting to a shade and
exhibiting an artistic sweep of train. "It is a discreet sort of garment," said Dolly, by way of comment;
"and it is 'suitable to our social position.' Do you remember when
Lady Augusta said that about my black alpaca, girls? Pleasant little
observation, was n't it? 'Toinette, I trust hair-pins are not injurious
to infantile digestive organs. If they are, perhaps it would be as well
to convince Tod that such is the case. What is the matter, Mollie?" Mollie, leaning upon the dressing-table in her favorite attitude, was
looking rather discontented. She was looking very pretty, also, it might
be said. Her sleepy, warm brown eyes, being upraised to Dolly, showed
larger and warmer and browner than usual; the heavy brown locks,
tumbling down over her shoulders, caught a sort of brownish, coppery
shade in the flare of gas-light; there was a flush on her soft cheeks,
and her ripe lips were curved in a lovely dissatisfaction. Hence Dolly's
remark. "I wish I was going," said the child. Dolly's eyes flew open wide, in a very sublimity of astonishment. "Wish you were going?" she echoed. "To the Bilberrys'?" Mollie nodded. "Yes, even there. I want to go somewhere. I think I should enjoy myself
a little anywhere. I should like to see the people, and hear them talk,
and find out what they do, and wear an evening dress." Dolly gazed at her in mingled pity and bewilderment. "Mollie," she said, "you are very innocent; and I always knew you were
very innocent; but I did not know you were as innocent as this,--so
utterly free from human guile that you could imagine pleasure in a
Bilberry rejoicing. And I believe," still regarding her with that
questioning pity, "--I believe you really _could_. I must keep an eye on
you, Mollie. You are too unsophisticated to be out of danger." It was characteristic of her good-natured sympathy for the girl that it
should occur to her the next minute that perhaps it might please her to
see herself donned even in such modest finery as the white merino. She
understood her simple longings after unattainable glories so thoroughly,
and she was so ready to amuse her to the best of her ability. So she
suggested it. "Put it on, Mollie," she said, "and let us see how you would look in it. I should like to see you in full dress." The child rose with some faint stir of interest in her manner and went
to the bed. "It wouldn't be long enough for me if it wasn't for the train," she
said; "but the train will make it long enough nearly, and I can pull it
together at the waist." She put it on at the bedside, and then came forward to the toilet-table;
and Dolly, catching sight of her in the glass as she advanced, turned
round with a start. Standing in the light; the soft heavy white folds draping themselves
about her statuesque curves of form as they might have draped themselves
about the limbs of some young marble Grace or Goddess, with her white
arms and shoulders uncovered, with her unchildish yet youthful face,
with her large-irised eyes, her flush of momentary pleasure and half
awkwardness, she was just a little dazzling, and Dolly did not hesitate
to tell her so. "You are a beauty, Mollie," she said. "And you are a woman in that
dress. If you were only a Bilberry now, what a capital your face would
be to you, and what a belle you would be!" Which remarks, if indiscreet, were affectionate, and made in perfect
good faith. But when, having donned the merino herself, she made her way down the
dark staircase to the parlor, there was a vague ghost of uneasiness in
her mind, and it was the sight of Mollie in full dress which had aroused
it. "She is so very pretty," she said to herself. "I scarcely knew how very
pretty she was until I turned round from the glass to look at her. What
a pity it is that we are not rich enough to do her justice, and let her
enjoy herself as other girls do. And--and," with a little sigh, "I am
afraid we are a dreadfully careless lot. I wonder if Phil ever thinks
about it? And she is so innocent and ignorant too. I hope she won't fall
in love with anybody disreputable. I wish I knew how to take care of
her." And yet when she went into the parlor to run the gauntlet of family
inspection, and walked across the floor to show the sweep of her train,
and tried her little opera hood on Tod before putting it on herself, a
casual observer would certainly have decided that she had never had
a serious thought in her life. Griffith was there, of course. At
such times his presence was considered absolutely necessary, and his
admiration was always unbounded. His portion it was to tuck her under
his arm and lead her out to the cab when the train and wraps were
arranged and the hood put on. This evening, when he had made her
comfortable and shut the door, she leaned out of the window at the last
moment to speak to him. "I forgot to tell you, Griffith," she said, "Lady Augusta said something
about a Mr. Gowan to Mr. Bilberry the other day when she invited me. I
wonder if it is the Gowan you were telling me about? He is to be there
to-night." "Of course it is," answered Griffith, with sudden discontent. "He is
just the sort of fellow the Bil-berrys would lionize." It was rather incorrect of Dolly to feel, as she did, a sudden flash
of anticipation. She could not help it. This intense appreciation of a
novel or dramatic encounter with an eligible Philistine was her great
weakness, and she made no secret of it even with her lover, which was
unwise if frank. She gave her fan a wicked flirt, and her eyes flashed as she did it. "A mine of valuable information lies unexplored before me," she said. "I must make minute inquiries concerning the habits and peculiarities of
the people of the East. I shall take the lion in tow, and Lady Augusta's
happiness will be complete." Griffith turned pale--his conquering demon was jealousy. "Look here, Dolly," he began. But Dolly settled herself in her seat again, and waved her hand with an
air of extreme satisfaction. She did not mean to make him miserable,
and would have been filled with remorse if she had quite understood the
extent of the suffering she imposed upon him sometimes merely through
her spirit, and the daring onslaughts she made upon people for whom she
cared little or nothing. She understood his numerous other peculiarities
pretty thoroughly, but she did not understand his jealousy, for the
simple reason that she had never been jealous in her life. "Tell the cabman to drive on," she said, with a flourish. "There is balm
to be found even in Bilberry." And when the man drove on she composed herself comfortably in a corner
of the vehicle, in perfect unconsciousness of the fact that she had left
a thorn behind, rankling in the bosom of the poor fellow who watched her
from the pavement. She was rather late, she found, on reaching her destination. The parlors
were full, and the more enterprising of the guests were beginning to
group themselves in twos and threes, and make spasmodic efforts at
conversation. But conversation at a Bilberry assemblage was rarely a
success,--it was so evident that to converse was a point of etiquette,
and it was so patent that conversation was expected from everybody,
whether they had anything to say or not. Inoffensive individuals of retiring temperament, being introduced to
each other solemnly and with ceremony, felt that to be silent was to be
guilty of a glaring breach of Bilberry decorum, and, casting about in
mental agony for available remarks, found none, and were overwhelmed
with amiable confusion. Lady Augusta herself, in copper-colored silk of
the most unbending quality and make, was not conducive to cheerfulness. Yet Dolly's first thought on catching sight of her this evening was a
cheerful if audacious one. "She looks as if she was dressed in a boiler," she commented, inwardly. "I wonder if I shall ever live so long--I wonder if I ever _could_ live
long enough to submit to a dress like that. And yet she seems to be
almost happy in the possession of it. But, I dare say, that is the
result of conscious virtue." It was a very fortunate thing for Dolly that she was not easily
discomposed. Most girls entering a room full of people, evidently
unemployed, and in consequence naturally prone to not too charitable
criticism of new-comers, might have lost self-possession. Not so Dolly
Crewe. Being announced, she came in neither with unnecessary hurry nor
timidly, and with not the least atom of shrinking from the eyes turned
toward her; and, simple and unassuming a young person as she appeared
on first sight, more than one pair of eyes in question found themselves
attracted by the white merino, the white shoulders, the elaborate
tresses, and the serene, innocent-looking orbs. Lady Augusta advanced slightly to meet her, with a grewsome rustling of
copper-colored stiffness. She did not approve of Dolly at any time, but
she specially disapproved of her habit of setting time at defiance and
ignoring the consequences. "I am very glad to see you," she said, with the air of a potentate
issuing a proclamation. "I _thought_"--somewhat severely--"that you were
not coming at all." "Did you?" remarked Dolly, with tranquillity. "Yes," returned her ladyship. "And I could not understand it. It is nine
o'clock now, and I _believe_ I mentioned eight as the hour." "I dare say you did," said Dolly, unfurling her small downy fan, and
using it with much serene grace; "but I wasn't ready at eight. I hope
you are very well." "Thank you," replied her ladyship, icily. "I am very well. Will you
go and take a seat by Euphemia? I allowed her to come into the room
to-night, and I notice that her manner is not so self-possessed as I
should wish." Dolly gave a little nod of acquiescence, and looked across the room
to where the luckless Euphemia sat edged in a corner behind a row of
painfully conversational elderly gentlemen, who were struggling with
the best intentions to keep up a theological discourse with the Rev. Marmaduke. Euphemia was the eldest Miss Bilberry. She was overgrown
and angular, and suffered from chronic embarrassment, which was not
alleviated by the eye of her maternal parent being upon her. She was one
of Dolly's pupils, and cherished a secret but enthusiastic admiration
for her. And, upon the whole, Dolly was fond of the girl. She was
good-natured and unsophisticated, and bore the consciousness of her
physical and mental imperfections with a humility which was almost
touching to her friend sometimes. Catching Dolly's eye on this occasion,
she glanced at her imploringly, and then, catching the eye of her
mother, blushed to the tips of her ears, and relapsed into secret
anguish of mind. But Dolly, recognizing her misery, smiled reassuringly, and made her
way across the room to her, insinuating herself through the theological
phalanx. "I am so glad you are here at last," said the girl. "I was so afraid
you would n't come. And oh, how nice you look, and how beautifully you
manage your train! I could never do it in the world. I should be sure
to tumble over it. But nothing ever seems to trouble you at all. You
haven't any idea how lovely you were when you went across the room to
mamma.. Everybody looked at you, and I don't wonder at it." "They would have looked at anybody," answered Dolly, laughing. "They had
nothing else to do." "That is quite true, poor things," sighed Euphemia, sympathetically. "You don't know the worst yet, either. You don't know how stupid they
are and can be, Dolly. That old gentleman near the screen has not spoken
one word yet, and he keeps sighing and wiping the top of his bald head
with his pocket-handkerchief until I can't keep my eyes off him, and I
am afraid he has noticed me. I don't mean any harm, I'm sure, but I have
got nothing to do myself, and I can't help it. But what I was going to
say was, that people looked at you as they did not look at others who
came in. You seem different some way. And I'm sure that Mr. Gowan of
mamma's has been staring at you until it is positively rude of him." Dolly's slowly moving fan became stationary for a moment. "Mr. Gowan," she said. "Who is Mr. Gowan?" "One of mamma's people," answered Euphemia, "though I'm sure I can't
quite understand how he can be one of them. He looks so different from
the rest. He is very rich, you know, and very aristocratic, and has
travelled a great deal He has been all over the world, they say. There
he is at that side-table." Dolly's eyes, travelling round the assemblage with complacent
indifference, rested at last on the side-table where the subject of
Euphemia's remarks sat. He really was an eligible Philistine, it seemed, despite Griffith's
unflattering description of him. He was a long-limbed, graceful man, with an aquiline face and superb
eyes, which at this moment were resting complacently upon Dolly herself. It was not exactly admiration, either, which they expressed, it was
something of a more entertaining nature, at least so Dolly found it,--it
was nothing more nor less than a slowly awakening interest in her which
paid her the compliment of rising above the surface of evident boredom
and overcoming lassitude. It looked as if he was just beginning to study
her, and found the game worth the candle. Dolly met his glance with
steadiness, and as she met it she measured him. Then she turned to
Euphemia again and fluttered the fan slowly and serenely. "He's nice, is n't he?" commented the guileless Phemie. "If the rest of
them were like him, I don't think we should be so stupid, but as it is,
you know, he can't talk when there is nobody to talk to." "No," said Dolly. "One could hardly expect it of him. But I wonder why
he does not say something to that thin lady in the dress-cap." "Oh, dear!" exclaimed Phemie, "I don't wonder in the least. That is Miss
Berenice MacDowlas, Dolly." "Miss Berenice MacDowlas!" echoed Dolly, with a start. "You don't say
so?" "Yes," answered Euphemia. "Do you know her? You spoke as if you did." "Well--yes--no," answered Dolly, with a half laugh. "I should say I know
somebody who does." And she looked as if she was rather enjoying some small joke of her own. The fact was that Miss MacDowlas was no other than Griffith's amiable
aunt. But, of course, it would not have done to tell this to Euphemia
Bilberry. Euphemia's ideas on the subject of the tender passion were
as yet crude and unformed, and Dolly Crewe was not prone to sentimental
confidences, so, as yet, Euphemia and indeed the whole Bilberry family,
remained in blissful ignorance of the very existence of such a person as
Mr. Griffith Donne. If personal appearance was to be relied upon, Miss MacDowlas was not a
promising subject for diplomatic beguiling. "We have no need to depend upon her," was Dolly's mental decision. "One
glimpse of life in Vagabondia would end poor Griffith's chances with
her. I wonder what she would think if she could see Tod in all his glory
when 'Toinette and Phil are busy painting." And her vivid recollection of the personal adornments of Tod at such
times brought a smile to her lips. She made herself very comfortable in her corner, and, exerting herself
to her utmost to alleviate Euphemia's sufferings, succeeded so-far
that the girl forgot everything else but her enjoyment of her friend's
caustic speeches and satirical little jokes. Dolly was not afraid of
results, and, standing in do awe of public opinion, gave herself up to
the encouraging of any shadow of amusement quite heartily. She was so
entertaining in a small way upon this occasion, that Euphemia's frame of
mind became in some degree ecstatic. From her place of state across
the room, Lady Augusta regarded them with disapproval. It was so very
evident that they were enjoying themselves, and that this shocking
Dorothea Crewe was not to be suppressed. (Dorothea, be it known, was
Dolly's baptismal name, and Lady Augusta held to its full pronunciation
as a matter of duty.) It was useless, however, to disapprove. Behind the
theological phalanx Dolly sat enthroned plainly in the best of spirits,
and in rather a dangerous mood, to judge from outward appearances. There
was nothing of the poor relation about her at least. The little snowy
fan was being manipulated gracefully and with occasional artistic
nourishes, her enjoyable roulades of laughter tinkled audaciously, her
white shoulders were expressive, her gestures charming, and, above all,
people were beginning to look at her admiringly, if not with absolute
envy. Something must be done. Lady Augusta moved across the room, piloting her way between people on
ottomans and people on chairs, rustling with awe-inspiring majesty;
and, reaching the corner at last, she spoke to the daring Dolly over the
heads of the phalanx. "Dorothea," she said, "we should like a little music." This she had expected would be a move which could not fail to set the
young person in her right place. It would show her that her time was not
her own, and that she was expected to make herself useful; and it would
also set to rights any little mistake lookers-on might have previously
labored under as to her position. But even this did not destroy Dolly's
equanimity. She finished the small joke she had been making to Phemie,
and then turned to her august relative with a sweet but trying smile. "Music?" she said. "Certainly." And arose at once. Then Lady Augusta saw her mistake. It was only another chance for Miss
Dolly to display herself to advantage, after all. When she arose from
her seat in the corner, and gave a glance of inspection to her train
over her bare white shoulder, people began to look at her again; and
when she crossed the room, she was an actual Sensation,--and to create
a sensation in the Bilberry parlors was to attain a triumph. Worse than
this, also, as her ladyship passed the bald-headed individual by
the screen, that gentleman--who was a lion as regarded worldly
possessions--condescended to make his first remark for the evening. "Pretty girl, that," he said. "Nice girl,--fine figure. Relative?" "My daughter's governess, sir," replied her ladyship, rigidly. And in Dolly's passage across the room another incident occurred which
was not lost upon the head of the house of Bilberry. Near the seat of
Mr. Ralph Gowan stood a vacated chair, which obstructed the passage to
the piano, and, observing it, the gentleman in question rose and removed
it, bowing obsequiously in reply to Dolly's slight gesture of thanks,
and when she took her place at the instrument he moved to a seat near
by, and settled himself to listen with the air of a man who expected to
enjoy the performance. And he evidently did enjoy it, for a very pleasant little performance it
was. The songs had a thrill of either pathos or piquancy in every
word and note, and the audience found they were listening in spite of
themselves. When they were ended, Ralph Gowan sought out Lady Augusta in her
stronghold, and placidly proposed being introduced to her young guest;
and since it was evident that he intended to leave her no alternative,
her ladyship was fain to comply; and so, before half the evening was
over, Dolly found herself being entertained as she had never been
entertained before in the camps of the Philistines at least. And as to
the Eastern explorer, boredom was forgotten for the time, and he gave
himself up entirely to the amusing and enjoying of this piquant young
person with the white shoulders. "Crewe," he said to her during the course of their first conversation. "I am sure Lady Augusta said 'Crewe.' Then you are relatives, I
suppose?" "Poor relations," answered Dolly, coolly, and without a shadow of
discomfiture. "I am the children's governess. Trying, is n't it?" Ralph Gowan met the gaze of the bright eyes admiringly. Even at this
early period of their acquaintance he was falling into the snare
every other man fell into,--the snare of finding that Dolly Crewe was
startlingly unlike anybody else. "Not for the children," he said. "Under such circumstances education
must necessarily acquire a new charm." "Thank you," said Dolly. When supper was announced, Lady Augusta made another attack and was
foiled again. She came to their corner, and, bending over Dolly, spoke
to her in stage-whisper. "I will bring young Mr. Jessup to take you into the supper-room,
Dorothea," she said. But Dolly's plans were already arranged, and even if such had not been
the case she would scarcely have rejoiced at the prospect of the escort
of young Mr. Jessup, who was a mild young idiot engaged in the study of
theology. "Thank you, Lady Augusta," she said, cheerfully, "but I have promised
Mr. Gowan." And Lady Augusta had the pleasure of seeing her leave the room a minute
later, with her small glove slipped through Ralph Gowan's arm, and the
plainly delighted face of that gentleman inclined attentively toward the
elaborate Frenchy coiffure. At the supper-table little Miss Crewe was a prominent feature. At her
end of the table conversation flourished and cheerfulness reigned. Even
Euphemia and young Mr. Jessup, who had come down together in a mutual
agony of embarrassment, began to pluck up spirit and hazard occasional
remarks, and finally even joined in the laughter at Dolly's witticism. People lower down the table glanced up across the various dishes, and
envied the group who seemed to set the general heaviness and discontent
at defiance. Dolly, accompanied by coffee and cakes, was more at home and more
delightful than ever, so delightful, indeed, that Ralph Gowan began to
regard even Lady Augusta with gratitude, since it was to her he was, to
some extent, indebted for his new acquaintance. "She is a delightful--yes, a delightful girl!" exclaimed young Mr.
Jessup, confidentially addressing-Euphemia, and blushing vividly at his
own boldness. "I never heard such a laugh as she has in my life. It
is actually exhilarating. It quite raises one's spirits," with mild
_naivete_. Euphemia began to brighten at once. She could talk about Dolly Crewe if
she could talk about nothing else. "Oh, but you have n't seen _anything_ of her yet," she said, in a burst
of enthusiasm. "If you could only see her every day, as I do, and hear
the witty things she says, and see how self-possessed she is, when other
people would be perfectly miserable with confusion, there would be no
wonder at your saying you never saw anybody like her. _I_ never did, I
am sure. And then, you know, somehow or other, she always looks so well
in everything she wears,--even in the shabbiest things, and her things
are nearly always shabby enough, for they are dreadfully poor. She is
always finding new ways of wearing things or new ways of doing her hair
or--or something. It is the way her dresses fit, I think. Oh, dear, how
I do wish the dressmaker could make mine fit as hers do! Just look at
that white merino, now, for instance. It is the plainest dress in the
room, and there is not a bit of fuss or trimming about it, and yet
see how soft the folds look and how it hangs,--the train, you know. It reminds me of a picture,--one of those pictures in fashionable
monthlies,--illustrations of love stories, you know." "It is a very pretty dress," said young Mr. Jessup, eying it with great
interest. "What did you say the stuff was called?" "Merino," answered Phemie. "Merino," repeated Mr. Jessup. "I will try and remember. I should like
my sister Lucinda Maria to have a dress like it." And he regarded it with growing admiration just tempered by the effect
of a mental picture of Lucinda Maria, who was bony and of remarkable
proportions, attired in its soft and flowing counterpart, with white
swan's-down adorning her bare shoulders. "May I ask," said Miss MacDowlas, at the bottom of the table, to Lady
Augusta,--"may I ask who that young lady with the fresh completion
is,--the young lady in white at the other end?" "That is my governess," replied her ladyship, freezingly. "Miss
Dorothea Crewe." And Miss MacDowlas settled her eye-glass and gave Miss Dorothea Crewe
the benefit of a prolonged examination. "Crewe," she said, at length. "Poor relation, I suppose?" with some
sharpness of manner. Dignity was lost upon Miss MacDowlas. "A branch of my family who are no great credit to it," was the majestic
rejoinder. "Oh, indeed," was the lady's sole remark, and then Miss MacDowlas
returned to her coffee, still, however, keeping her double eye-glass
across her nose and casting an occasional glance at Dolly. And just at this particular moment Dolly was unconsciously sealing
Ralph Gowan's fate for him. Quite unconsciously, I repeat, for the
most serious of Dolly's iniquities were generally unconscious. When
she flirted, her flirtations were of so frank and open a nature, that,
bewildered and fascinated though her victims might be, they must have
been blind indeed to have been deceived, and so there were those who
survived them and left the field safe, though somewhat sore at heart. But when she was in her honest, earnest, life-enjoying moods, and meant
no harm,--when she was simply enjoying herself and trying to amuse her
masculine companion, when her gestures were unconscious and her speeches
unstudied, when she laughed through sheer merriment and was charmingly
theatrical because she could not help it and because little bits of
pathos and comedy were natural to her at times, then it was that the
danger became deadly; then it was that her admirers were regardless
of consequences, and defied results. And she was in just such a mood
to-night. "Come and see us?" she was saying. "Of course you may; and if you
come, you shall have an insight into the domestic workings of modern
Vagabondia. You shall be introduced to half a dozen people who toil not,
neither do they spin successfully, for their toiling and spinning seems
to have little result, after all. You shall see shabbiness and the spice
of life hand-in-hand; and, I dare say, you will find that the figurative
dinner of herbs is not utterly destitute of a flavor of _piquancy_. You shall see people who enjoy themselves in sheer defiance of
circumstances, and who find a pathos in every-day events, which, in the
camps of the Philistines, mean nothing. Yes, you may come if you care
to." And Ralph Gowan, looking down at the changeful eyes, saw an almost
tender light shining in their depths,--summoned up all at once perhaps
by one of those inexplicable touches of pathos of which she had spoken. But even coffee and conversation must come to an end at last, and so the
end of this evening came. People began to drop away one by one, bidding
their hostess good-night with the air of individuals who had performed
a duty, and were relieved to find it performed and disposed of for the
time being. So Dolly, leaving her companion with a bright farewell,
and amiably disposing of Lady Augusta, slipped up-stairs to the
retiring-room for her wraps. In the course of three minutes she
came down again, the scarlet shawl draped around her, and the highly
ornamental hood donned. She was of so little consequence in the Bilberry
household that no one met her when she reappeared. Even the servants
knew that her convenience or inconvenience was of small moment, so the
task of summoning her cab would have devolved upon herself, had it not
been for a little incident, which might have been either an accident
or otherwise. As she came down the staircase a gentleman crossed the
threshold of the parlor and came to meet her,--and this gentleman was no
other than Ralph Gowan. "Let me have the pleasure of putting you into your--"

"Cab," ended Dolly, with a trill of a laugh,--it was so evident that
he had been going to say "carriage." "Thank you, with the greatest of
pleasure. Indeed, it is rather a relief to me, for they generally keep
me waiting. And I detest waiting." He handed her into her seat, and lingered to see that she was
comfortable, perhaps with unnecessary caution; and then, when she gave
him her hand through the window, he held it for a moment longer than was
exactly called for by the exigencies of the occasion. "You will not forget that you have given me permission to call," he
said, hesitating slightly. "Oh, dear no!" she answered. "I shall not forget. We are always glad to
see people--in Vagabondia." And as the cab drove off, she waved the hand he had held in an airy
gesture of adieu, gave him a bewildering farewell nod, and, withdrawing
her face from the window, disappeared in the shadow within. "Great Jove!" meditated Ralph Gowan, when he had seen the last of her. "And this is a nursery governess,--a sort of escape-valve for the spleen
and ill moods of that woman in copper-color. She teaches them French and
music, I dare say, and makes those spicy little jokes of hers over
the dog-eared arithmetic. Ah, well! such is impartial Fortune," And he
strolled back into the house again, to make his adieus to Lady Augusta,
with the bewitching Greuze face fresh in his memory. But, for her part, Dolly, having left him behind in the Philistine camp,
was nestling comfortably in the dark corner of her cab, thinking of
Griffith, as she always did think of him when she found herself alone
for a moment. "I wonder if he will be at home when I get there," she said. "Poor
fellow! he would find it dull enough without me, unless they were all
in unusually good spirits. I wonder if the time ever will come when we
shall have a little house of our own, and can go out together or stay at
home, just as we like." CHAPTER III. ~ IN WHICH THE TRAIN IS LAID. "After a holiday comes a rest day." The astuteness of this proverb
continually proved itself in Vagabondia, and this was more particularly
the case when the holiday had been Dolly's, inasmuch as Dolly was
invariably called upon to "fight her battles o'er again," and recount
her experiences the day following a visit, for the delectation of the
household. Had there appeared in the camps a Philistine of notoriety,
then that Philistine must play his or her part again through the medium
of Dolly's own inimitable powers of description or representation; had
any little scene occurred possessing a spice of flavoring, or
illustrating any Philistine peculiarity, then Dolly was quite equal to
the task of putting it upon the family stage, and re-enacting it with
iniquitous seasonings and additions of her own. And yet the fun was
never of an ill-natured sort. When Dolly gave them a correct embodiment
of Lady Augusta in reception of her guests, with an accurate description
of the "great Copper-Boiler costume," the bursts of applause meant
nothing more than that Dolly's imitative gifts were in good condition,
and that the "great Copper-Boiler costume" was a success. Then, the
feminine mind being keenly alive to an interest in earthly vanities, an
enlargement on Philistine adornments was considered necessary, and Dolly
always rendered herself popular by a minute description of the reigning
fashions, as displayed by the Bilberry element. She found herself quite
repaid for the trouble of going into detail, by the unsophisticated
pleasure in Mollie's eyes alone, for to Mollie outward furnishings
seemed more than worthy of description and discussion. Accordingly, the morning after Lady Augusta's _conversazione_, Dolly
gave herself up to the task of enlivening the household. It was Saturday
morning, fortunately, and on Saturday her visits to the Bilberry mansion
were dispensed with, so she was quite at liberty to seat herself by
the fire, with Tod in her arms, and recount the events of the evening. Somehow or other, she had almost regarded him as a special charge
from the first. She had always been a favorite with him, as she was a
favorite with most children. She was just as natural and thoroughly at
home with Tod in her arms, or clambering over her feet, or clutching at
the trimmings of her dress, as she was under any other circumstances;
and when on this occasion Griffith came in at noon to hear the news, and
found her kneeling upon the carpet with outstretched hands teaching the
pretty little tottering fellow to walk, he felt her simply irresistible. "Come to Aunt Dolly," she was saying. "Tod, come to Aunt Dolly." And
then she looked up laughing. "Look at him, Griffith," she said. "He has
walked all the way from that arm-chair." And then she made a rush at
the child, and caught him in her arms with a little whirl, and jumped
up with such a light-hearted enjoyment of the whole affair that it was
positively exciting to look at her. It was quite natural--indeed, it would have been quite unnatural if she
had not found her usual abiding-place in her lover's encircling arm
at once, even with Tod conveniently established on one of her own,
and evidently regarding his own proximity upon such an occasion as
remarkable if nothing else. That arm of Griffith's usually _did_ slip
around her waist even at the most ordinary times, and long use had
so accustomed Dolly to the habit that she would have experienced some
slight feeling of astonishment if the familiarity had been omitted. It was rather a surprise to the young man to find that Miss MacDowlas
had appeared upon the scene, and that she had partaken of coffee and
conversation in the flesh the evening before. "But it's just like her," he said. "She is the sort of relative who
always _does_ turn up unexpectedly, Dolly. How does she look?" "Juvenescent," said Dolly; "depressingly so to persons who rely upon her
for the realizing of expectations. A very few minutes satisfied me that
I should never become Mrs. Griffith Donne upon _her_ money. It is a
very fortunate thing for us that we are of Vagabondian antecedents,
Griffith,--just see how we might trouble ourselves, and wear our
patience out over Miss MacDowlas, if we troubled ourselves about
anything. This being utterly free from the care of worldly possessions
makes one touchingly disinterested. Since we have nothing to expect, we
are perfectly willing to wait until we get it." She had thought so little about Ralph Gowan,--once losing sight of
him, as he stood watching her on the pavement, that in discussing other
subjects she had forgotten to mention him, and it was only Mollie's
entrance into the room that brought him upon the carpet. Coming in, with her hair bunched up in a lovely, disorderly knot, and
the dimple on her left cheek artistically accentuated by a small patch
of black, the youngest Miss Crewe yet appeared to advantage, when, after
appropriating Tod, she slipped down into a sitting posture with him on
the carpet, in the midst of the amplitude of folds of Lady Augusta's
once gorgeous wrapper. "Have you told him about the great Copper-Boiler costume, Dolly?" she
said, bending down so that one brown tress hung swaying before Tod's
eyes. "Has she, Griffith?" "Yes," answered Griffith, looking at her with a vague sense of
admiration. He shared all Dolly's enthusiasm on the subject of Mollie's
prettiness. "Was n't it good? I wish I was as cool as Dolly is. And poor Phemie--and
the gentleman who made love to you all the evening, Dolly. What was his
name? Was n't it Gowan?" Griffith's eyes turned toward Dolly that instant. "Gowan!" he exclaimed. "You didn't say anything about him. You didn't
even say he was there." "Did n't she?" said Mollie, looking up with innocently wide-open eyes. "Why, he made love to her all--"

"I wish you would n't talk such rubbish, Mollie," Dolly interrupted
her--a trifle sharply because she understood the cloud on her lover's
face so well. "Who said Mr. Gowan made love to me? Not I, you may be
sure. I told you he talked to me, and that was all." "You did not tell _me_ that much," said Griffith, dryly. It would scarcely have been human nature for Dolly not to have fired a
little then, in spite of herself. She was constitutionally good-natured,
but she was not seraphic, and her lover's rather excusable jealousy
was specially hard to bear, when, as upon this occasion, it had no real
foundation. "I did not think it necessary," she said; "and, besides, I forgot;
but if you wish to know the particulars," with a stiff little air
of dignity, "I can give them you. Mr. Gowan was there, and found the
evening stupid, as every one else did. There was no one else to talk to,
so he talked to me, and when I came home he put me into the cab. And,
the fact is, he is a good-natured Philistine enough. That is all, I
believe, unless you would like me to try to record all he said." "No, thank you," answered Griffith, and instantly began to torture
himself with imagining what he really had said, making the very natural
mistake of imagining what he would have said himself, and then giving
Ralph Gowan credit for having perpetrated like tender gallantries. He
never could divest himself of the idea that every living man found
Dolly as entrancing as he found her himself. It could only be one man's
bitter-sweet portion to be as desperately and inconsolably in love with
her as he was himself, and no other than himself, or a man who might be
his exact prototype, could have cherished a love at once so strong and
so weak. There had been other men who had loved Dolly Crewe,---adored
her for a while, in fact, and imagined themselves wretches because they
had been unsuccessful; but they had generally outlived their despair,
and their adoration, cooling for want of sustenance, had usually settled
down into a comfortable admiring liking for the cause of their
misery, but it would never have been so with Griffith. This ordinary,
hard-working, ill-paid young man had passionate impulse and hidden power
of suffering enough in his restive nature to make a broken hope a
broken life to him. His long-cherished love for the shabbily attired,
often-snubbed, dauntless young person yclept Dorothea Crewe was the
mainspring of his existence. He would have done daring deeds of valor
for her sake, if circumstances had called upon him to comfort himself
in such tragic manner; had he been a knight of olden time, he would just
have been the chivalrous, hotheaded, but affectionate young man to have
entered the lists in his love's behalf, and tilted against tremendous
odds, and died unvanquished; but living in the nineteenth century, his
impetuosity, being necessarily restrained, became concentrated upon one
point, and chafed him terribly at times. Without Dolly, he would have
been without an object in life; with Dolly, he was willing to face
any amount of discouragement and misfortune; and at this stage of his
affection--after years of belief in that far-off blissful future--to
lose her would have brought him wreck and ruin. So when Dolly, in the full consciousness of present freedom from
iniquity, withdrew herself from his encircling arm and turned her
attention to Tod and Mollie, he was far more wretched than he had any
right to be, and stood watching them, and gnawing his slender mustache,
gloomy and distrustful. But this could not last long, of course. They might quarrel, but they
always made friends; and when in a short time Mollie, doubtless feeling
herself a trifle in the way, left the room with the child, Dolly's
impulsive warm-heartedness got the better of her upon this occasion as
upon all others. She came back to her lover's side and laid her hand on his arm. "Don't let us quarrel about Ralph Gowan, Griffith," she said. "It was my
fault; I ought to have told you." He fairly crushed her in his remorseful embrace almost before she had
finished her appeal. His distrust of her was as easily overcome as it
was roused; one touch of her hand, one suspicion of a tremor in her
voice, always conquered him and reduced him to penitent submission. "You are an angel," he said, "and I am an unfeeling clod. No other woman
would bear with me as you do. God bless you, Dolly." She nestled within his arms and took his caresses almost gratefully. Perhaps it would have been wiser to have shown him how deep a sting his
want of faith gave her sometimes, but she was always so glad when their
misunderstandings were at an end, that she would not have so revenged
herself upon him for the world. The cool, audacious self she exhibited
in the camps of the Philistines was never shown to Griffith; in her
intercourse with him she was only a slightly intensified edition of the
child he had fallen in love with years before,--a bright, quick-witted
child, with a deep nature and an immense faculty for loving and clinging
to people. Dolly at twenty-two was pretty much what she had been at
fifteen, when they had quarrelled and made up again, loved each other
and romanced over the future brilliancy of prospect which now seemed
just as far off as ever. In five minutes after the clearing away of the temporary cloud, they
were in a seventh heaven of bliss, as usual. In some of his wanderings
about town, Griffith had met with a modest house, which would have been
the very thing for them if they had possessed about double the income of
which they were at present in receipt. He often met with houses of this
kind; they seemed, in fact, to present themselves to his longing vision
every week of his life; and I think it rather to his credit to mention
that he never failed to describe them to Dolly, and enlarge upon their
merits with much eloquence. Furniture warehouses also were a source of
some simple pleasure to them. _If_ they possessed the income (not that
they had the remotest prospect of possessing it), and rented the house,
naturally they would require furniture, and it was encouraging to
know that the necessary articles might be bought _if_ the money was
forthcoming. Consequently a low-priced table or a cheap sofa was a
consolation, if not a source of rejoicing, and their happiest hours were
spent in counting the cost of parlor carpets never to be purchased,
and window curtains of thin air. They even economized sternly in minor
matters, and debated the expenditure of an extra shilling as closely as
if it had been a matter entailing the deepest anxiety; and on the whole,
perhaps, practical persons might have condemned their affectionate,
hopeful weakness as childish and nonsensical, but they were happy in the
indulgence of it, at all events, and surely they might have been engaged
in a less tender and more worldly pastime. There were other people,
perhaps, weak and imprudent themselves it may be, who would have seen a
touch of simple pathos in this unconsciously shown faith in Fortune and
her not too kindly moods. "Old Flynn ought to raise my salary, you know, Dolly," said Griffith. "I
work hard enough for him, confound him!" somewhat irrelevantly, but with
laudable and not unamiable vigor. He meant no harm to "Old Flynn;" he
would have done a good-natured thing for him at any moment, the mild
expletive was simply the result of adopted custom. "There is n't a
fellow in the place who does as much as I do. I worked from seven in
the morning till midnight every day last week, and I wrote half his
editorials for him, and nobody knows he does n't get them up himself. If
he would only give me two hundred instead of one, just see how we could
live." "We could live on a hundred and fifty," put in Dolly, with an air of
practical speculation which did her credit, "if we were economical." "Well, say a hundred and fifty, then," returned Griffith, quite as
seriously, "for we should be economical. Say a hundred and fifty. It
would be nothing to him,--confound him!--but it would be everything in
the world to us. That house in the suburbs was only thirty pounds,
taxes and all, and it was just the very thing we should want if we were
married." "How many rooms?" asked Dolly. "Six, and kitchen and cupboards and all that sort of contrivances. I
asked particularly--went to see the landlord to inquire and see what
repairing he would do if we wanted the place. There is a garden of a
few yards in the front, too, and one or two rose-bushes. I don't know
whether they ever bloom, but if they do, you could wear them in your
hair. I thought of that the minute I saw them. The first time I saw you,
Dolly, you had a rose in your hair, and I remember thinking I had never
seen a flower worn in the same way. Other girls do n't wear things as
you wear them somehow or other." Dolly acknowledged the compliment with a laugh and a coaxing,
patronizing little squeeze of his arm. . "You think they don't," she said, "you affectionate old fellow, that is
it. Well, and what did the landlord say? Would he beautify?" "Well, yes, I think he would if the matter was pressed," said Griffith,
returning to the subject with a vigor of enjoyment inspiriting to
behold. "And, by the way, Dolly, I saw a small sofa at a place in town
which was just the right size to fit into a sort of alcove there is in
the front parlor." "Did you inquire the price?" said Dolly. "Well--no," cheerfully; "but I can, if you would like to know it. You
see, I had n't any money, and did n't know when I should have any, and
I felt rather discouraged at the time, and I had an idea the price would
make me feel worse, so I did not go in. But it was a comfortable, plump
little affair, covered with green,--the sort of thing I should like to
have in our house, when we have one. It would be so comfortable to throw
one's self down on to after a hard day's work, particularly if one had a
headache." "Yes," said Dolly; and then, half unconsciously and quite in spite of
herself, the ghost of a sigh escaped her. She could not help wishing
things were a trifle more real sometimes, bright and whimsically
unworldly as she was. "What did that mean?" Griffith asked her. She wakened up, as it were, and looked as happy as ever in an instant,
creeping a trifle closer to him in her loving anxiety to blind him to
the presence of the little pain in her heart. "Nothing," she said, briskly. And then--"We don't want much, do we,
Griffith?" "No," said Griffith, a certain grim sense of humor getting the better of
him. "And we have n't got it." She laughed outright at the joke quite enjoyably. Even the grimmest of
jocosities wins its measure of respect in Vagabondia, and besides,
her laugh removed the impression her sigh might have created. She was
herself again at once. "Never mind," she said. (It was always "never mind.") "Never mind, it
will all come right in the end. Humble merit _must_ be rewarded, and if
humble merit isn't, we can only console ourselves with the reasonable
reflection that there must be something radically wrong with the state
of society. Who knows whether you may not 'get into something,' as Phil
says, which may be twenty times better than anything Old Flynn can give
you!" with characteristic Vagabondian hopefulness. Just at this juncture Phil himself entered, or, rather, half entered,
for he only put his head--a comely, curled head surmounted by a
disreputable velvet cap--half into the room. "Oh, you are here, are you?" he said. "You are the fellow I want. I am
just touching up something I want to show you. Come into the studio for
a minute or so, Grif." "It is that picture Mollie sat for," he explained, as they followed him
into the big, barren room, dignified by the name of studio. "I have just
finished it." Mollie was standing before the picture herself when they went in to look
at it, but she did not turn round on hearing them. She had Tod in her
arms yet, but she seemed to have forgotten his very existence in her
preoccupation. And it was scarcely to be wondered at. The picture was
only a head,--Mollie's own fresh, drowsy-eyed face standing out in
contrast under some folds of dark drapery thrown over the brown hair
like a monk's cowl, two or three autumn-tinted oak leaves clinging to
a straying tress,--but it was effective and novel enough to be a
trifle startling. And Mollie was looking at it with a growing shadow of
pleasure in her expression. She was slowly awakening to a sense of its
beauty, and she was by no means dissatisfied. "It is lovely!" Dolly cried out, enthusiastically. "So it is," said Griffith. "And as like her as art can make it. It's a
success, Phil." Phil stepped back with a critical air to give it a new inspection. "Yes, it is a success," he said. "Just give me a chance to get it hung
well, and it will draw a crowd next season. You shall have a new dress
if it does, Mollie, and you shall choose it yourself." Mollie roused herself for a moment, and lighted up. "Shall I?" she said; and then all at once she blushed in a way that
made Dolly stare at her in some wonder. It seemed queer to think that
Mollie--careless child Mollie--was woman enough to blush over anything. And then Aimee and 'Toinette came in, and looked on and admired just as
openly and heartily as the rest, only Aimee was rather the more reticent
of the two, and cast furtive glances at Mollie now and then. But Mollie
was in a new mood, and had very little to say; and half an hour after,
when her elder sister went into the family sitting-room, she found her
curled up in an easy-chair by the fire, looking reflective. Dolly went
to the hearth and stood near her. "What are you thinking about?" she asked. Mollie stirred uneasily, and half blushed again. "I don't know," she answered. "Yes, you do," contradicted Dolly, good-naturedly. "Are you thinking
that it is a pleasant sort of a thing to be handsome enough to be made a
picture of, Mollie?" The brown eyes met hers with an innocent sort of deprecating
consciousness. "I--I never thought about myself in that way before,"
admitted Mollie, naively. "Why," returned Dolly, quite sincerely, "you must have looked in the
glass." "Ye-es," with a slow shake of the head; "but it did n't look the same
way in the glass,--it did n't look as nice." Dolly regarded her with a surprise which was not unmingled with
affectionate pity. She was not as unsophisticated as Mollie, and never
had been. As the feminine head of the family, she had acquired a certain
shrewdness early in life, and had taken a place in the household the
rest were hardly equal to. There had been no such awakening as this for
her. At fourteen, she had been fully and complacently conscious of the
exact status of her charms and abilities, physical and mental. She had
neither under-nor over-rated them. She had smiled back at her reflection
in her mirror, showing two rows of little milk-white teeth, and being
well enough satisfied with being a charming young person with a secure
complexion and enviable self-poise. She understood herself, and
attained perfection in the art of understanding others. Her rather
sharp experience had not allowed _her_ to look in the glass in guileless
ignorance of what she saw there, and perhaps this made her all the
fonder of Mollie. "What kind of a dress are you going to choose if Phil buys you one?" she
asked. "Maroon," answered Mollie. "Oh!" with a little shuddering breath of
desperate delight, "how I wish I could have a maroon silk!" Dolly shook her head doubtfully. "It wouldn't be serviceable, because you could only have the one, and
you could n't wear it on wet days," she said. "I should n't care about its being serviceable," burst forth innocent
Vagabondia, rebelling against the trammels of prudence. "I want
something pretty. I do so detest serviceable things. I would stay in the
house all the wet days if I might have a maroon silk to wear when it was
fine." "She is beginning to long for purple and fine linen," sighed Dolly, as
she ran up to her bedroom afterward. "The saints forefend! It is a bad
sign. She will fall in love the next thing. Poor, indiscreet little
damsel!" But, despite her sage lamentations, there was even at that moment a plan
maturing in her mind which was an inconsistent mixture of Vagabondia's
goodnature and whim. Mollie's fancy for the maroon silk had struck her
as being artistic, and there was not a Crewe among them who had not
a weakness for the artistic in effect. Tod himself was imaginatively
supposed to share it and exhibit preternatural intelligence upon the
subject. In Dolly it amounted to a passion which she found it impossible
to resist. By it she was prompted to divers small extravagances at
times, and by it she was assisted in the arranging of all her personal
adornments. It was impossible to slight the mental picture of Mollie
with maroon drapery falling about her feet, with her cheeks tinted with
excited color, and with that marvel of delight in her eyes. She could
not help thinking about it. "She would be simply incomparable," she found herself soliloquizing. "Just give her that dress, put a white flower in her hair and set her
down in a ballroom, or in the dress circle of a theatre, and she would
set the whole place astir. Oh, she must have it." It was very foolish and extravagant of course; even the people who are
weakly tolerant enough to rather lean toward Dorothea Crewe, will
admit this. The money that would purchase the maroon garment would have
purchased a dozen minor articles far more necessary to the dilapidated
household; but while straining at such domestic gnats as these articles
were, she was quite willing and even a trifle anxious to swallow
Mollie's gorgeous camel. Such impulsive inconsistency was
characteristic, however, and she betook herself to her bedroom with the
intention of working out the problem of accommodating supply to demand. She took out her purse and emptied its contents on to her
dressing-table. Two or three crushed bills, a scrap or so of
poetry presented by Griffith upon various tender occasions, and a
discouragingly small banknote, the sole remains of her last quarter's
salary The supply was not equal to the demand, it was evident. But she
was by no means overpowered. She was dashed, but not despairing. Of
course, she had not expected to launch into such a reckless piece of
expenditure all at once, she had only thought she might attain her
modest ambition in the due course of time, and she thought so yet. She
crammed bills and bank-note back into the purse with serene cheerfulness
and shut it with a little snap of the clasp. "I will begin to save up," she said, "and I will persuade Phil to help
me. We can surely do it between us, and then we will take her somewhere
and let her have her first experience of modern society. What a
sensation she would create in the camps of the Philistines!" She descended into the kitchen after this, appearing in those lower
regions in the full glory of apron and rolled-up sleeves, greatly to the
delight of the youthful maid-of-all-work, who, being feeble of intellect
and fond of society, regarded the prospect of spending the afternoon
with her as a source of absolute rejoicing. The "Sepoy," as she was
familiarly designated by the family, was strongly attached to Dolly, as,
indeed, she was to every other member of the household. The truth was,
that the usefulness of the Sepoy (whose baptismal name was Belinda) was
rather an agreeable fiction than a well-established fact. She had been
adopted as a matter of charity, and it was charity rather than any
recognized brilliance of parts which caused her to be retained. Phil had
picked her up on the streets one night in time gone by, and had brought
her home principally because her rags were soaked and she had asserted
that she had nowhere to go for shelter, and partly, it must be
confessed, because she was a curiosity. Having taken her in, nobody was
stern enough to turn her out to face her fate again, and so she stayed. Nobody taught her anything in particular about household economy,
because nobody knew anything particular to teach her. It was understood
that she was to do what she could, and that what she could not do
should be shared among them. She could fetch and carry, execute small
commissions, manage the drudgery and answer the door-bell, when she was
presentable, which was not often; indeed, this last duty had ceased
to devolve upon her, after she had once confronted Lady Augusta with
personal adornments so remarkable as to strike that august lady dumb
and rigid with indignation upon the threshold, and cause her, when she
recovered herself, to stonily, but irately demand an explanation of the
gratuitous insult she considered had been offered her. Belinda's
place was in the kitchen, after this, and to these regions she usually
confined herself, happily vigorous in the discharge of her daily duties. She was very fond of Dolly, and hailed the approach of her days of
freedom with secret demonstrations of joy. She hoarded the simple
presents of finery given her by that young person with care, and
regarded them in the light of sacred talismans. A subtle something in
her dwarfed, feeble, starved-out nature was stirred, it may be, by the
sight of the girl's life and brightness; and, apart from this, it
would not have been like Dolly Crewe if she had not sympathized, half
unconsciously, half because she was constitutionally sympathetic, with
even this poor stray. If she had been of a more practical turn of mind,
in all probability she would have taken Belinda in hand and attacked the
work of training her with laudable persistence; but, as it was, private
misgivings as to the strength of her own domestic accomplishments caused
her to confine herself to more modest achievements. She could encourage
her, at least, and encourage her she did with divers good-natured
speeches and a leniency of demeanor which took the admiring Sepoy by
storm. Saturday became a white day in the eyes of Belinda, because, being a
holiday, it left Dolly at liberty to descend into the kitchen and apply
herself to the study of cookery as a science, with much agreeable bustle
and a pleasant display of high spirit and enjoyment of the novelty of
her position. She had her own innocent reasons for wishing to become a
proficient in the art, and if her efforts were not always crowned with
success, the appearance of her handiwork upon the table on the
occasion of the Sunday's dinner never disturbed the family equilibrium,
principally, perhaps, because the family digestion was unimpaired. They
might be jocose, they had been ironical, but they were never severe,
and they always addressed themselves to the occasionally arduous task
of disposing of the viands with an indifference to consequences which
nothing could disturb. "One cannot possibly be married without knowing something of cookery,"
Dolly had announced oracularly; "and one cannot gain a knowledge of
it without practising, so I am going to practise. None of you are
dyspeptic, thank goodness, so you can stand it. The only risk we run is
that Tod might get hold of a piece of the pastry and be cut off in the
bloom of his youth; but we must keep a strict watch upon him." And she purchased a cookery book and commenced operations, and held
to her resolve with Spartan firmness, encouraged by private but
enthusiastic bursts of commendation from Griffith, who, finding her out,
read the tender meaning of the fanciful seeming whim, and was so touched
thereby that the mere sight of her in her nonsensical little affectation
of working paraphernalia raised him to a seventh heaven of bliss. When she made her entrance into the kitchen on this occasion, and began
to bustle about in search for her apron, Belinda, who was on her knees
polishing the grate, amidst a formidable display of rags and brushes,
paused to take breath and look at her admiringly. "Are yer goin' to make yer pies 'n things, Miss Dolly?" she asked. "Which, if ye are, yer apern 's in the left 'and dror." "So it is," said Dolly. "Thank you. Now where is the cookery book?" "Left 'and dror agin," announced Belinda, with a faint grin. "I allus
puts it there." Whereupon Dolly, making industrious search for it, found it, and applied
herself to a deep study of it, resting her white elbows on the dresser,
and looking as if she had been suddenly called upon to master its
contents or be led to the stake. She could not help being intense and in
earnest even over this every-day problem of pies and puddings. "Fricassee?" she murmured. "Fricassee was a failure, so was mock-turtle
soup; it looked discouraging, and the fat _would_ swim about in a way
that attracted attention. Croquettes were not so bad, though they were
a little stringy; but beef _a la mode_ was positively unpleasant. Jugged
hare did very well, but oyster _pates_ were dubious. Veal pie Griffith
liked." "There's somebody a-ringin' at the door-bell," said Belinda, breaking
in upon her. "He's rung twict, which I can go, mum, if I ain't got no
smuts." Dolly looked up from her book. "Some one is going now, I think," she said. "I hope it is n't a
visitor," listening attentively. But it was a visitor, unfortunately. In a few minutes Mollie came in,
studiously perusing a card she held in her hand. "Ralph," she proclaimed, coming forward slowly. "Ralph Gowan. It's Lady
Augusta's gentleman, Dolly, and he wants to see you." Dolly took the card and looked at it, giving her shoulders a tiny shrug
of surprise. "He has not waited long," she said; "and it is rather inconvenient, but
it can't be helped. I suppose I shall have to run up-stairs and present
him to Phil." She untied her apron, drew down her sleeves, settled the bit of ribbon
at her throat, and in three minutes opened the parlor door and greeted
her visitor, looking quite as much in the right place as she had done
the night before in the white merino. "I am very glad to see you," she said, shaking hands with him, "and I am
sure Phil will be, too. He is always glad to see people, and just now
you will be doubly welcome, because he has a new picture to talk about. Will you come into the studio, or shall I bring him here? I think it had
better be the studio at once, because you will be sure to drift there in
the end,--visitors always do." "The studio let it be, if you please," answered Gowan, wondering, just
as he had done the night before, at the indescribable something in
her manner which was so novel because it was so utterly free from any
suggestion of affectation. It would have been a difficult matter to tell
her that he had not come for any other reason than to see herself again,
and yet this really was the case. But his rather fanciful taste found Phil a novelty also when she led him
into the studio, and presented him to that young man, who was lying upon
a couch with a cigar in his mouth. Phil had something of the same cool friendliness of deportment, and,
being used to the unexpected advent of guests at all hours, was quite
ready to welcome him. He had the same faculty for making noticeable
speeches, too, and was amiable, though languid and _debonnaire_, and by
no means prone to ceremony. In ten minutes after he had entered the room
Ralph Gowan understood, as by magic, that, little as the world was to
these people, they had, in their Bohemian fashion, learned through sheer
tact to comprehend and tolerate its weaknesses. He examined the pictures
on the walls and in the folios, and now and then found himself roused
into something more than ordinary admiration. But he was disappointed in
one thing. He failed in accomplishing the object of his visit. After she had seen that Phil and the paintings occupied his attention to
some extent, Dolly left them. "I was beginning to think about pies and puddings when you came," she
said, "and I must go back to them. Saturday is the only day Lady Augusta
leaves me, in which to improve in branches of domestic usefulness," with
an iniquitous imitation of her ladyship's manner. After which she went down to the kitchen again and plunged into culinary
detail with renewed vigor, thinking of the six-roomed house in the
suburbs, and the green sofa which was to fit into the alcove in the
front parlor, growing quite happy over the mental picture, in blissful
unconsciousness of the fact that a train had been that day laid, and
that a spark would be applied that very night through the medium of a
simple observation made by Phil to her lover. "Gowan was here this morning, Grif, and Dolly brought him into the
studio. He's not a bad sort of fellow for a Philistine, and he seems
to know something about pictures. I should n't be surprised if he came
again." CHAPTER IV. ~ A LILY OF THE FIELD. THIS was the significant and poetic appellation which at once attached
itself to Ralph Gowan after his first visit to the studio in Bloomsbury
Place, and, as might have been expected, it was a fancy of Dolly's, the
affixing of significant titles being one of her _fortes_. "The lilies of the field," she observed, astutely, "are a distinct
class. They toil not, neither do they spin, and yet Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these. Yes, my young friends, Mr.
Ralph Gowan is a lily of the field." And she was not far wrong. Twenty-seven years before Mr. Ralph Gowan
had been presented to an extended circle of admiring friends as the sole
heir to a fortune large enough to have satisfied the ambitions of half
a dozen heirs of moderate aspirations, and from that time forward his
lines had continually fallen in pleasant places. As a boy he had been
handsome, attractive, and thoroughbred, and consequently popular; his
good looks made him a favorite with women, his good fortune with men;
his friends were rather proud of him, and his enemies were powerless
against him; he found it easy to be amiable because no obstacles to
amiability lay in his path; and altogether he regarded existence as a
comfortable enough affair. At school his fellows had liked him just as boys as well as men are apt
to like fortunate people; and as he had grown older he had always found
himself a favorite, it may be for something of the same reason. But
being, happily, a gentleman by nature, he had not been much spoiled by
the general adulation. Having been born to it, he carried himself easily
through it, scarcely recognizing the presence of what would have been
patent to men less used to popularity. He was fond of travelling, and so
had amused himself by comfortably arranging uncomfortable journeys and
exploring pleasantly those parts of the earth which to ordinary tourists
would appear unattainable. He was not an ordinary young man, upon the whole, which was evinced by
his making no attempt to write a book of travels, though he might safely
have done so; and really, upon the whole, "lily of the field" though
chance had made him, he was neither useless nor purposeless, and rather
deserved his good luck than otherwise. Perhaps it was because he was not an ordinary individual that his fancy
was taken by the glimpse he had caught of life in Vagabondia. It was
his first glimpse of the inner workings of such a life, and its
novelty interested him. A girl of twenty-two who received attention and
admiration in an enjoyable, matter-of-fact manner, as if she was used
to and neither over- nor under-valued it, who could make coffee and
conversation bearable and even exciting, who could hold her own against
patronage and slights, and be as piquant and self-possessed at home as
in society, who could be dazzling at night and charming in the morning,
was novelty enough in herself to make Bloomsbury Place attractive, even
at its dingiest, and there were other attractions aside from this one. Phil in the studio, taking life philosophically, and regarding the world
and society in general with sublime and amiable tolerance, was as unique
in his way as Dolly was in hers; his handsome girl-wife, who had come
in to them with her handsome child in her arms, was unique also; Mollie
herself, who had opened the door and quite startled him with the mere
sight of her face,--well, Mollie had impressed him as she impressed
everybody. And he was quite observant enough to see the element of
matter-of-fact, half-jocular affection that bound them one to another;
he could not help seeing it, and it almost touched him. They were not a
sentimental assembly, upon the whole, but they were fond of each other
in a style peculiar to themselves, and ready to unite in any cause which
was the cause of the common weal. The family habit of taking existence
easily and regarding misfortunes from a serenely philosophical
standpoint, amused Ralph Gowan intensely. It had spiced Dolly's
conversation, and it spiced Phil's; indeed, it showed itself in more
than words. They had banded themselves against unavoidable tribulation,
and it could not fail to be beautifully patent to the far-seeing mind
that, taking all things together, tribulation had the worst of it. They were an artistic study, Ralph Gowan found, and so, in his character
of a "lily of the field," he fell into the habit of studying them, as
an amusement at first, afterwards because his liking for them became
friendly and sincere. It was an easy matter to call again after the first visit,--people
always did call again at Bloomsbury Place, and Ralph Gowan was no
exception to the rule. He met Phil in the city, and sauntered home with
him to discuss art and look at his work; he invited him to first-class
little dinners, and introduced him to one or two men worth knowing;
in short, it was not long before the two were fond of each other in
undemonstrative man fashion. The studio was the sort of place Gowan
liked to drop into when time hung heavily on his hands, and consequently
hardly a week passed without his having at least once or twice dropped
into it to sit among the half dozen of Phil's fellow Bohemians, who were
also fond of dropping in as the young man sat at his easel, sometimes
furiously at work, sometimes tranquilly loitering over the finishing
touches of a picture. They were good-natured, jovial fellows, too, these
Bohemian visitors, though they were more frequently than not highly
scented with the odor of inferior tobacco, and rarely made an
ostentatious display in the matter of costume, or were conspicuously
faultless in the matter of linen; they failed to patronize the
hairdresser, and were prone to various convivialities, but they were
neither vicious nor vulgar, and they were singularly faithful to their
friendships for each other. They were all fond of Phil, and accordingly
fraternized at once with his new friend, adopting him into their circle
with the ease of manner and freedom of sentiment which seemed the
characteristic of their class; and they took to him all the more kindly
because, amateur though he was, he shared many of their enthusiasms. Of course he did not always see Dolly when he went. During every other
day of the week but Saturday she spent her time from nine in the morning
until five in the afternoon in the rather depressing atmosphere of
the Bilberry school-room. She vigorously assaulted the foundations of
Lindley Murray, and attacked the rules of arithmetic; she taught Phemie
French, and made despairing but continuous efforts at "finishing" her
in music. But poor Phemie was not easily "finished," and hung somewhat
heavily upon the hands of her youthful instructress; still, she was
affectionate, if weak-minded, and so Dolly managed to retain her good
spirits. "I believe they are all fond of me in their way," she said to
Griffith,--"all the children, I mean; and that is something to be
thankful for." "They couldn't help being fond of you," returned the young man. "Did any
human being ever know you without being fond of you?" "Yes," said Dolly; "Lady Augusta knows me; and I do not think--no," with
a cheerfully resigned shake of the head, which did not exactly express
deep regret or contrition, "I really do not think Lady Augusta is what
you might call overwhelmed with the strength of her attachment for me." "Oh, Lady Augusta!" said Griffith. "Confound Lady Augusta!" Griffith was one of the very few people who did not like Ralph Gowan,
and perhaps charitably inclined persons will be half inclined to
excuse his weakness. It was rather trying, it must be admitted, for a
desponding young man rather under stress of weather, so to speak, to
find himself thrown into sharp contrast with an individual who had
sailed in smooth waters all his life, and to whom a ripple would have
been a by no means unpleasant excitement; it was rather chafing to
constantly encounter this favorite of fortune in the best of humors,
because he had nothing to irritate him; thoroughbred, unruffled, and
_debonnaire_ because he had nothing of pain or privation to face;
handsome, well dressed, and at ease, because his income and his tastes
balanced against each other accommodatingly. Human nature rose up
and battled in the Vagabondian breast; there were times when, for the
privilege of administering severe corporeal chastisement to Ralph
Gowan, Griffith would have sacrificed his modest salary with a Christian
fortitude and resignation beautiful to behold. To see him sitting in one
of the faded padded chairs, roused all his ire, and his consciousness of
his own weakness made the matter worse; to see him talking to Dolly, and
see her making brisk little jokes for his amusement, was worse still,
and drove him so frantic that more than once he had turned quite pale in
his secret frenzy of despair and jealousy, and had quite frightened the
girl, though he was wise enough to keep his secret to himself. It was
plain enough that Gowan admired Dolly, but other men had admired her
before; the sting of it was that this fellow, with his cool airs and
graces and tantalizing repose of manner, had no need to hold back if
he could win her. There would be no need for him to plan and pinch and
despair; no need for faltering over odd shillings and calculating odd
pence; _he_ could marry her in an hour if she cared for him, and he
could surround her with luxuries, and dress her like a queen, and make
her happy, as she deserved to be. And then the poor fellow's heart would
beat fiercely, and the very blood would tremble in his veins, at the
mere thought of giving her up. One night after they had been sitting together, and Gowan had just left
the room with Phil, Dolly glanced up from her work and saw her lover
looking at her with a face so pale and wretched that she was thrown into
a passion of fear. She tossed her work away in a second, and, making one of her little
rushes at him, was caught in his arms and half suffocated. She knew
the instant she caught sight of his face what he was suffering, though
perhaps she did not know the worst. "Oh, why will you?" she cried out, in tears, all at once. "It is cruel! You are as pale as death, and I know--I know so well what it means." "Tell me you will never forget what we have been to each other,"
he said, when he could speak; "tell me you don't care for that
fellow,--tell me you love me, Dolly, tell me you love me." She did not hesitate a moment; she had never flirted with Griffith
in her life, and she knew him too well to try him when he wore that
desperate, feverish look of longing in his eyes. She burst into an
impetuous sob, and clung to him with both hands. "I love you with all my soul," she said. "I will never _let_ you give
me up; and as to forgetting, I might die, but I could never forget. Care
for Ralph Go wan! I love _you_, Griffith, I love _you!_"

"And you don't regret?" he said, piteously. "Oh, Dolly, just think of
what _he_ could give you; and then think of our hopeless dreams about
miserable six-roomed houses and cheap furniture." "You will make me hate him," cried Dolly, her gust of love and pity
making her fierce. "I don't want anything anybody could give me. I only
want you, _dear_ old fellow,--_darling_ old fellow," holding him fast,
as if she would never let him go, and shedding a shower of impassioned,
tender tears. "Oh, my darling, only wait until I am your own wife, and
see how happy I will be, and how happy I will make you,--for I _can_
make you happy,--and see how I will work in our little home for your
sake, and how content I will be with a little. Oh, what must I do to
show you how I love you! Do you think I could have cared for Ralph Gowan
all these years as I have cared for you? No indeed; but I shall care for
you forever, and I would wait for you a _thousand_ years if I might only
be your wife, and die in your arms at the end of it." And she believed every word she said, too, and would have been willing
to lay down her young life to prove it, extravagant as it may all sound
to the discreet. And she quite believed, too, that she could never have
so loved any other man than this unlucky, jealous, tempestuous one; but
I will take the liberty of saying that this was a mistake, for, being
an impassioned, heart-ruled, unworldly young person, it is quite likely
that if Ralph Gowan had stood in Mr. Griffith Donne's not exactly
water-tight shoes, she would have clung to him quite as faithfully, and
believed in his perfections quite as implicitly, and quite as scornfully
would have depreciated the merits of his rival; but chance had arranged
the matter for her years before, and so Mr. Griffith was the hero. "Ralph Gowan!" she flung out. "What is Ralph Gowan, or any other man on
earth, to me? Did I love _him_ before I knew what love was, and scarcely
understood my own heart? Did I grow into a woman loving _him_ and
clinging to _him_ and dreaming about him? Have I ever had any troubles
in common with _him_? Did we grow up together, and tell each other all
our thoughts and help each other to bear things? Let him travel in the
East, if he likes,"--with high and rather inconsistent disdain,--"and
let him have ten thousand a year, if he will,--a hundred thousand
millions a year wouldn't buy me from you--my own!" In another burst,
"Let him ride in his carriage, if he chooses,"--rather, as if such
a course would imply the most degraded weakness; but, as I have said
before, she was illogical, if affectionate,--"let him ride in his
carriage. I would rather walk barefoot through the world with you
than ride in a hundred carriages, if every one of them was lined with
diamonds and studded with pearls." There was the true flavor of Vagabondia's indiscretion and want of
forethought in this, I grant you; but such speeches as these were Dolly
Crewe's mode of comforting her lover in his dark moods; at least, she
was sincere,--and sincerity will excuse many touches of extravagance. And as to Griffith, every touch of loving, foolish rhapsody dropped upon
his heart like dew from heaven, filling him with rapture and drawing him
nearer to her than before. "But," he objected,--a rather weak objection, offered rather weakly,
because he was so full of renewed confidence and bliss,--"but he is a
handsomer fellow than I am, Dolly, and it must be confessed he has good
taste." "Handsomer!" echoed Dolly. "What do I care about his beauty? He is n't
_you_,--that is where he fails to come up to the mark. And as to his
good taste, do you suppose for a second that I could ever admire the
most imposing 'get-up' by Poole, as I love this threadbare coat of
yours, that I have laid my cheek against for the last three years?" And
she bent down all at once and kissed the shabby sleeve. 