



Produced by David Garcia, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  THEO. _A SPRIGHTLY LOVE STORY._

                     BY MRS. FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT

AUTHOR OF "KATHLEEN," "PRETTY POLLY PEMBERTON," "LINDSAY'S LUCK," "IN
CONNECTION WITH THE DE WILLOUGHBY CLAIM," "THE MAKING OF A MARCHIONESS,"
"THE METHODS OF LADY WALDERHURST," ETC. NEW YORK
HURST & COMPANY
PUBLISHERS

COPYRIGHT, 1877
By T. B. PETERSON & BROTHERS. MRS. BURNETT'S NOVELETTES. _Mrs. Frances Hodgson Burnett is one of the most charming among American
writers. There is a crisp and breezy freshness about her delightful
novelettes that is rarely found in contemporaneous fiction, and a close
adherence to nature, as well, that renders them doubly delicious. Of all
Mrs. Burnett's romances and shorter stories those which first attracted
public attention to her wonderful gifts are still her best. She has done
more mature work, but never anything half so pleasing and enjoyable. These masterpieces of Mrs. Burnett's genius are all love stories of the
brightest, happiest and most entertaining description; lively, cheerful
love stories in which the shadow cast is infinitesimally small compared
with the stretch of sunlight; and the interest is always maintained at
full head without apparent effort and without resorting to the
conventional and hackneyed devices of most novelists, devices that the
experienced reader sees through at once. No more sprightly novel than
"Theo" could be desired, and a sweeter or more beautiful romance than
"Kathleen" does not exist in print, while "Pretty Polly Pemberton"
possesses besides its sprightliness a special interest peculiar to
itself, and "Miss Crespigny" would do honor to the pen of any novelist,
no matter how celebrated. "Lindsay's Luck," "A Quiet Life," "The Tide on
the Moaning Bar" and "Jarl's Daughter" are all worthy members of the
same collection of Mrs. Burnett's earlier, most original, best and
freshest romances. Everybody should read these exceptionally bright,
clever and fascinating novelettes, for they occupy a niche by themselves
in the world's literature and are decidedly the most agreeable, charming
and interesting books that can be found anywhere._




CONTENTS. I. PREPARING FOR A JOURNEY

II. THE ARRIVAL

III. THE MEETING

IV. THEO'S DIARY

V. THE SEPARATION

VI. THEO GOES TO PARIS

VII. "PARTING IS SWEET SORROW"

VIII. THEO'S FIRST TROUBLE

IX. WHAT COMES OF IT ALL




"THEO." CHAPTER I. PREPARING FOR A JOURNEY. A heavy curtain of yellow fog rolled and drifted over the waste of
beach, and rolled and drifted over the sea, and beneath the curtain the
tide was coming in at Downport, and two pair of eyes were watching it. Both pair of eyes watched it from the same place, namely, from the
shabby sitting-room of the shabby residence of David North, Esq.,
lawyer, and both watched it without any motive, it seemed, unless that
the dull gray waves and their dull moaning were not out of accord with
the watchers' feelings. One pair of eyes--a youthful, discontented black
pair--watched it steadily, never turning away, as their owner stood in
the deep, old-fashioned window, with both elbows resting upon the broad
sill; but the other pair only glanced up now and then, almost furtively,
from the piece of work Miss Pamela North, spinster, held in her slender,
needle-worn fingers. There had been a long silence in the shabby sitting-room for some
time--and there was not often silence there. Three rampant,
strong-lunged boys, and as many talkative school-girls, made the house
of David North, Esq., rather a questionable paradise. But to-day, being
half-holiday, the boys were out on the beach digging miraculous
sand-caves, and getting up miraculous piratical battles and excursions
with the bare-legged urchins so numerous in the fishermen's huts; and
Joanna and Elinor had been absent all day, so the room left to Theo and
her elder sister was quiet for once. It was Miss Pamela herself who broke the stillness. "Theo," she said,
with some elder-sister-like asperity, "it appears to me that you might
find something better to do than to stand with your arms folded, as you
have been doing for the last half hour. There is a whole basketful of
the boys' socks that need mending and--"

"Pam!" interrupted Theo, desperately, turning over her shoulder a face
more like the face of some young Spanish gipsy than that of a poor
English solicitor's daughter. "Pam, I should really like to know if life
is ever worth having, if everybody's life is like ours, or if there are
really such people as we read of in books." "You have been reading some ridiculous novel again," said Pamela,
sententiously. "If you would be a little more sensible, and less
romantic, Theodora, it would be a great deal better for all of us. What
have you been reading?" The capable gipsy face turned to the window again half-impatiently. "I have been reading nothing to-day," was the answer. "I should think
you knew that--on Saturday, with everything to do, and the shopping to
attend to, and mamma scolding every one because the butcher's bill can't
be paid. I was reading Jane Eyre, though, last night. Did you ever read
Jane Eyre, Pamela?" "I always have too much to do in attending to my duty," said Pamela,
"without wasting my time in that manner. I should never find time to
read Jane Eyre in twenty years. I wish I could." "I wish you could, too," said Theo, meditatively. "I wish there was no
such thing as duty. Duty always appears to me to be the very thing we
don't want to do." "Just at present, it is your duty to attend to those socks of Ralph and
Arthur's," put in Pamela, dryly. "Perhaps you had better see to it at
once, as tea will be ready soon, and you will have to cut bread for the
children." The girl turned away from the window with a sigh. Her discussions on
subjects of this kind always ended in the same unsatisfactory manner;
and really her young life was far from being a pleasant one. As the next
in age to Pamela, though so many years lay between them, a hundred petty
cares fell on her girlish shoulders, and tried her patience greatly with
their weight, sometimes. And in the hard family struggle for everyday
necessities there was too much of commonplace reality to admit of much
poetry. The wearisome battling with life's needs had left the mother, as
it leaves thousands of women, haggard, careworn, and not too smooth in
disposition. There was no romance about her. She had fairly forgotten
her girlhood, it seemed to lie so far behind; and even the unconquerable
mother-love, that gave rise to her anxieties, had a touch of hardness
about it. And Pamela had caught something of the sharp, harassed spirit
too. But Theo had an odd secret sympathy for Pamela, though her sister
never suspected it. Pamela had a love-story, and in Theo's eyes this one
touch of forlorn romance was the silver lining to many clouds. Ten years
ago, when Pamela had been a pretty girl, she had had a lover--poor
Arthur Brunwalde--Theo always mentally designated him; and only a week
before her wedding-day, death had ended her love-story forever. Poor
Pamela! was Theo's thought: to have loved like Jane Eyre, and Agnes
Wickfield, and Lord Bacon, and to have been so near release from the
bread-and-butter cutting, and squabbling, and then to have lost all. Poor Pamela, indeed! So the lovely, impulsive, romance-loving younger
sister cherished an odd interest in Pamela's thin, sharp face, and
unsympathizing voice, and in picturing the sad romance of her youth, was
always secretly regardful of the past in her trials of the present. As she turned over the socks in the basket, she glanced up now and then
at Pamela's face, which was bent over her work. It had been a pretty
face, but now there were faint lines upon it here and there; the
features once delicate were sharpened, the blue eyes were faded, and the
blonde hair faded also. It was a face whose youth had been its beauty,
and its youth had fled with Pamela North's happiness. Her life had ended
in its prime; nay, not ended, for the completion had never come--it was
to be a work unfinished till its close. Poor Arthur Brunwalde! A few more silent stitches, and then the work slipped from Theo's
fingers into her lap, and she lifted her big, inconsistent eyes again. "Pam," she said, "were you ever at Lady Throckmorton's?" A faint color showed itself on Pamela's faded face. "Yes," she answered, sharply, "I was once. What nonsense is running in
your mind now, for goodness sake?" Theo flushed up to her forehead, no half flush; she actually glowed all
over, her eyes catching a light where her delicate dark skin caught the
dusky red. "Don't be cross, Pam," she said, appealingly. "I can't help it. The
letter she sent to mamma made me think of it. Oh, Pam! if I could only
have accepted the invitation." "But you can't," said Pam, concisely. "So you may as well let the matter
rest." "I know I can't," Theo returned, her quaint resignation telling its own
story of previous disappointments. "I have nothing to wear, you know,
and, of course, I couldn't go there, of all places in the world, without
something nice." There was another silence after this. Theo had gone back to her work
with a sigh, and Miss Pamela was stitching industriously. She was never
idle, and always taciturn, and on this occasion her mind was fully
occupied. She was thinking of Lady Throckmorton's invitation too. Her ladyship was a half-sister of their father's, and from the height of
her grandeur magnanimously patronizing now and then. It was during her
one visit to London, under this relative's patronage, that Pamela had
met Arthur Brunwalde, and it was through her that the match had been
made. But when Arthur died, and she found that Pamela was fixed in her
determination to make a sacrifice of her youth on the altar of her dead
love, Lady Throckmorton lost patience. It was absurd, she said; Mr.
North could not afford it, and if Pamela persisted, she would wash her
hands of the whole affair. But Pamela was immovable, and, accordingly,
had never seen her patroness since. It so happened, however, that her
ladyship had suddenly recollected Theo, whose gipsy face had once struck
her fancy, and the result of the sudden recollection was another
invitation. Her letter had arrived that very morning at breakfast time,
and had caused some sensation. A visit to London, under such auspices,
was more than the most sanguine had ever dared to dream of. "I wish I was Theo," Joanna had grumbled. "She always gets the lion's
share of everything, because Elin and I are a bit younger than she is." And Theo had glowed up to her soft, innocent eyes, and neglected the
bread-and-butter cutting, to awaken a moment later to sudden despair. "But--but I have nothing fit to wear, mamma," she said, in anguished
tones. "No," answered Mrs. North, two or three new lines showing themselves on
her harassed forehead; "and we can't afford to buy anything. You can't
go, Theo." And so the castle which had towered so promisingly in the air a moment
ago, was dashed to the dust with one touch of shabby gentility's
tarnished wand. The glow died out of Theo's face, and she went back to
her bread-and-butter cutting with a soreness of disappointment which
was, nevertheless, not without its own desperate resignation. This was
why she had watched the tide come in with such a forlorn sense of
sympathy with the dull sweep of the gray waves, and their dull, creeping
moan; this was why she had been rash enough to hope for a crumb of
sympathy even from Pamela; and this also was why, in despairing of
gaining it, she bent herself to her unthankful labor again, and patched
and darned until the tide had swept back again under the curtain of fog,
and there was no more light, even for the stern taskmaster, poverty. The silence was effectually broken in upon after this. As soon as the
street lamps began to twinkle in the murkiness outside, the boys made
their appearance--Ralph, and Arthur, and Jack, all hungry, and
dishevelled, and of course, all in an uproar. They had dug a cave on the
shore, and played smugglers all the evening; and one fellow had brought
out a real cutlass and a real pistol, that belonged to his father, and
they had played fighting the coast-guard, and they were as hungry as the
dickens now; and was tea ready, and wouldn't Pam let them have some
strawberry-jam? Pamela laid her work aside, and went out of the room, and then Ralph,
who was in the habit of patronizing Theo occasionally, came to his
favorite corner and sat down, his rough hands clasped round his knees,
boy-fashion. "I say, Theo," he began. "I wonder how much it would cost a fellow to
buy a cutlass--a real one?" "I don't know," Theo answered, indifferently. "I never bought a cutlass,
Ralph." "No, of course you never did. What would a girl want with a cutlass? But
couldn't you guess, now--just give a guess. Would it cost a pound?" "I daresay it would," Theo managed to reply, with a decent show of
interest. "A good one." "Well, I'd want a good one," said Ralph, meditatively; "but if it would
cost a pound, I shall never have one. I say, Theo, we never do get what
we want at this house, do we?" "Not often," said Theo, a trifle bitterly. Ralph looked up at her. "Look here," he said, sagaciously. "I know what you are thinking of. I
can tell by your eyes. You're thinking about having to stay at home from
Lady Throckmorton's, and it is a shame too. If you are a girl, you could
have enjoyed yourself in your girl's way. I'd rather go to their place
in Lincolnshire, where old Throckmorton does his hunting. The governor
says that a fellow that was a good shot could bag as much game as he
could carry, and it wouldn't take long to shoot either. I can aim first
rate with a bow and arrow. But that isn't what you want, is it? You want
to go to London, and have lots of dresses and things. Girls always do;
but that isn't my style." "Ah, Ralph!" Theo broke out, her eyes filling all at once. "I wish you
wouldn't! I can't bear to hear it. Just think of how I might have
enjoyed myself, and then to think that--that I can't go, and that I
shall never live any other life than this!" Ralph opened his round Saxon eyes, in a manner slightly expressive of
general dissatisfaction. "Why, you're crying!" he said. "Confound crying. You know I don't cry
because I can't go to Lincolnshire. You girls are always crying about
something. Joanna and Elin cry if their shoes are shabby or their gloves
burst out. A fellow never thinks of crying. If he can't get the thing he
wants, he pitches in, and does without, or else makes something out of
wood that looks like it." Theo said no more. A summons from the kitchen came to her just then. Pam
was busy with the tea-service, and the boys were hungry--so she must go
and help. Pamela glanced up at her sharply as she entered, but she did not speak. She had borne disappointments often enough, and had lived over them to
become seemingly a trifle callous to their bitterness in others, and, as
I have said, she was prone to silence. But it may be that she was not so
callous after all, for at least Theo fancied that her occasional
speeches were less sharp, and certainly she uttered no reproof to-night. She was grave enough, however, and even more silent than usual, as she
poured out the tea for the boys. A shadow of thoughtfulness rested on
her thin sharp face, and the faint, growing lines were almost deepened;
but she did not "snap," as the children called it; and Theo was thankful
for the change. It was not late when the children went to bed, but it was very late when
Pamela followed them; and when she went up-stairs, she was so
preoccupied as to appear almost absent-minded. She went to her room and
locked the door, after her usual fashion; but that she did not retire
was evident to one pair of listening ears at least. In the adjoining
bedroom, where the girls slept, Theo lay awake, and could hear her every
movement. She was walking to and fro, and the sounds of opening drawers
and turned keys came through the wall every moment. Pamela had
unaccountable secret ways, Joanna always said. Her room was a sanctuary,
which the boldest did not dare to violate lightly. There were closets
and boxes there, whose contents were reserved for her own eyes alone,
and questions regarding them seldom met with any satisfactory answer. She was turning over these possessions to-night, Theo judged, from the
sounds proceeding from her chamber. To be truthful, Theo had some
curiosity about the matter, though she never asked any questions. The
innate delicacy which prompted her to reverence the forlorn aroma of
long-withered romance about the narrow life had restrained her. But
to-night she was so wide-awake, and Joanna and Elin were so fast asleep,
that every movement forcing itself upon her ear, made her more
wide-awake still. The turning of keys and unlocking of drawers roused
her to a whimsical meditative wonder. Poor Pam! What dead memories and
coffined hopes was she bringing out to the dim light of her solitary
candle? Was it possible that she ever cried over them a little when
there was no one to see her relaxing mood? Poor Pam! Theo sighed again,
and was just deciding to go to sleep, if possible, when she heard a door
open, which was surely Pamela's, and feet crossing the narrow corridor,
which were surely Pamela's own, and then a sharp yet soft tap on the
door, and a voice which could have been no other than Pamela's, under
any possibility. "Theo!" it said, "I want you for a short time. Get up." Theo was out upon the floor, and had opened the door in an instant,
wider awake than ever. "Throw something over you," said Pamela, in the dry tone that always
sounded almost severe. "You will take cold if you don't. Put on a shawl
or something, and come into my room." Theodora caught up a shawl, and, stepping across the landing, stood in
the light, the flare of the candle making a queer, lovely picture of
her. The shawl she had wrapped carelessly over her white night-dress was
one of Lady Throckmorton's gracious gifts; and although it had been worn
by every member of the family in succession, and was frayed, and torn,
and forlorn enough in broad daylight, by the uncertain Rembrandt glare
of the chamber-candle, its gorgeous palm-leaf pattern and soft folds
made a by no means unpicturesque or unbecoming drapery, in conjunction
with the girl's grand, soft, un-English eyes, and equally un-English
ebon hair. "Shut the door," said Pamela. "I want to speak to you." Theo turned to obey, wonderingly, but, as she did so, her eyes fell upon
something which made her fairly start, and this something was nothing
less than the contents of the opened boxes and closets. Some of said
contents were revealed through raised lids; but some of them were lying
upon the bed, and the sight of them made the girl catch her breath. She
had never imagined such wealth--for it seemed quite like wealth to her. Where had it all come from? There were piles of pretty, lace-trimmed
garments, boxes of handkerchiefs, ribbons, and laces, and actually a
number of dresses, of whose existence she had never dreamed--dresses
quaint enough in fashion, but still rich and elaborate. "Why, Pam!" she exclaimed, "whose are they? Why have you never--"

Pamela stopped her with an abrupt gesture. "They are mine," she said. "I have had them for years, ever since
Arthur--Mr. Brunwalde died. They were to have been my bridal trousseau,
and most of them were presents from Lady Throckmorton, who was very kind
to me then. Of course, you know well enough," with dry bitterness, "I
should never have had them otherwise. I thought I would show them to you
to-night, and offer them to you. They may be of use just now." She stopped and cleared her throat here, with an odd, strained sound;
and before she went on, she knelt down before one of the open trunks,
and began to turn over its contents. "I wish you to go to Lady Throckmorton's," she said, speaking without
looking at the amazed young face at her side. "The life here is a weary
one for a girl to lead, without any change, and the visit may be a good
thing for you in many ways. My visit to Lady Throckmorton's would have
made me a happy woman, if death had not come between me and my
happiness. I know I am not at fault in saying this to you. I mean it in
a manner a girl can scarcely understand--I mean, that I want to save you
from the life you must lead, if you do not go away from here." Her hands were trembling, her voice, cold and dry, as it usually was,
trembled too, and the moment she paused, the amazed, picturesque young
figure swooped down upon her as it were, falling upon its knees,
flinging its white-robed arms about her, and burying her in an
unexpected confusion of black hair and oriental shawl, showering upon
her loving, passionate little caresses. For the first time in her life,
Theo was not secretly awed by her. "Why, Pam!" she cried, the tears running down her cheeks. "Dear, old,
generous Pamela! Do you care for me so much--enough to make such a
sacrifice! Oh, Pam! I am only a girl as you say; but I think that,
because I am a girl, perhaps I understand a little. Do you think that I
could let you make such a sacrifice? Do you think I could let you give
them to me--the things that were to have belonged to poor, dead Arthur's
wife? Oh, my generous darling! Poor dead Arthur! and the poor young wife
who died with him!" For some time Pamela said nothing, but Theo felt the slender, worn form,
that her arms clasped so warmly, tremble within them, and the bosom on
which she had laid her loving, impassioned face throb strangely. But she
spoke at length. "I will not say it is not a sacrifice," she said. "I should not speak
truly if I did. I have never told you of these things before, and why I
kept them; because such a life as ours does not make people understand
one another very clearly; but to-night, I remembered that I was a girl
too once, though the time seems so far away; and it occurred to me that
it was in my power to help you to a happier womanhood than mine has
been. I shall not let you refuse the things. I offer them to you, and
expect you to accept them, as they are offered--freely." Neither protest nor reasoning was of any avail. The elder sister meant
what she said, with just the settled precision that demonstrated itself
upon even the most trivial occasions; and Theo was fain to submit now,
as she would have done in any smaller matter. "When the things are of no further use, you may return them to me,"
Pamela said, dryly as ever. "A little managing will make everything as
good as new for you now. The fashion only needs to be changed, and we
have ample material. There is a gray satin on the bed there, that will
make a very pretty dinner-dress. Look at it, Theo." Theo rose from her knees with the tears scarcely dry in her eyes. She
had never seen such dresses in Downport before. These things of Pamela's
had only come from London the day of Arthur's death, and had never been
opened for family inspection. Some motherly instinct, even in Mrs.
North's managing economy, had held them sacred, and so they had rested. And now, in her girl's admiration of the thick, trailing folds of the
soft gray satin, Theodora very naturally half forgot her tears. "Pamela!" she said, timidly, "do you think I could make it with a train? I never did wear a train, you know, and--"

There was such a quaint appeal in her mellow-lighted eyes, that Pamela
perceptibly softened. "You shall have half a dozen trains if you want them," she said; and
then, half-falteringly, added, "Theo, there is something else. Come
here." There was a little carven ebony-box upon the dressing-table, and she
went to it and opened it. Upon the white velvet lining lay a pretty set
of jewels--sapphires, rarely pellucid; then clear pendants sparkling
like drops of deep sea-water frozen into coruscant solidity. "They were one of Mr. Brunwalde's bridal gifts to me," she said,
scarcely heeding Theo's low cry of admiration. "I should have worn them
upon my wedding-day. You are not so careless as most girls, Theodora,
and so I will trust them to you. Hold up your arm and let me clasp one
of the bracelets on it. You have a pretty arm, Theo." It was a pretty arm in truth, and the flashing, rose-tinted pendants set
it off to a great advantage. Theo, herself, scarcely dared to believe
her senses. Her wildest dreams had never pictured anything so beautiful
as these pretty, modest sapphires. Was it possible that she--she was to
wear them? The whole set of earrings, necklace, bracelets, rings, and
everything, with all their crystallized drops and clusters! It was a
sudden opening of the gates of fairyland! To go to London would have
been happiness enough; but to go so like an enchanted princess, in all
her enchanted finery, was more than she could realize. A color as
brilliant as the scarlet in Lady Throckmorton's frayed palm-leaf shawl
flew to her cheeks, she fairly clapped her hands in unconscious ecstasy. "Oh, Pam!" she cried, with pathetic gratitude. "How good you are--how
good--how good! I can't believe it, I really can't. And I will take such
care of them--such care of everything. You shall see the dresses are not
even crushed, I will be so careful." And then she ended with another
little shower of impulsive caresses. But it was late by this time, and with her usual forethought--a
forethought which no enthusiasm could make her forget--Pamela sent her
back to bed. She would be too tired to sew to-morrow, she said,
prudently, and there was plenty of hard work to be done; so, with a
timid farewell-kiss, Theo went to her room, and in opening her door,
awakened Joanna and Elin, who sat up in bed, dimly conscious of a white
figure wrapped in their august relative's shawl, and bearing a candle to
light up scarlet cheeks, and inconsistent eyes, and tangled back hair. "I am going to London," the voice pertaining to this startling figure
broke out. "Joanna and Elin, do you hear? I am going to London, to Lady
Throckmorton's." Joanna rubbed her eyes sleepily. "Oh, yes!" she said, not too amiably by any means. "Of course you are. I knew you would. You are everlastingly going somewhere, Theo, and Elin
and I stay at home, as usual. Lady Throckmorton will never invite us, I
know. Where are your things going to come from?" snappishly. "Pamela!" was Theo's deprecating reply. "They are the things that
belonged to her wedding outfit. She never wore them after Mr. Brunwalde
died, you know, Joanna, and she is going to lend them to me." "Let us go to sleep, Elin," Joanna grumbled, drowsily. "We know all
about it now. It's just like Pam, with her partiality. She never offered
to lend them to us, and we have wanted them times and times, worse than
ever Theo does now." And then Theo went to bed also; but did not sleep, of course; only lay
with eyes wide open to the darkness, as any other girl would have done,
thinking excitedly of Pamela's generous gifts, and of Lady Throckmorton,
and, perhaps, more than once the strange chance which had brought to
light again the wedding-day, that was never more than the sad ghost of a
wedding, and the bridal gifts that had come to the bride from a dead
hand. CHAPTER II. THE ARRIVAL. A great deal of hard work was done during the following week. The
remodelling of the outfit was no light labor: but Pamela was steady to
her trust, in her usual practical style. She trimmed, and fitted, and
cut, until the always-roughened surface of her thin forefinger was
rougher than ever. She kept Theo at work at the smaller tasks she chose
to trust to her, and watched her sharply, with no shadow of the softened
mood she had given the candle-lighted bedroom a glimpse of. She was as
severe upon any dereliction from duty as ever, and the hardness of her
general demeanor was not a whit relaxed. Indeed, sometimes Theo found
herself glancing up furtively from her tasks, to look at the thin, sharp
face, and wondering if she had not dreamed that her arms had clasped a
throbbing, shaken form, when they faced together the ghost of long dead
love. But the preparations were completed at last, and the trunks packed; and
Lady Throckmorton had written to say that her carriage would meet her
young relative's arrival. So the time came when Theo, in giving her
farewell kisses, clung a little closely about Pamela's neck, and when
the cab-door had been shut, saw her dimly through the smoky glass, and
the mistiness in her eyes; saw her shabby dress, and faded face, and
half-longed to go back; remembered sadly how many years had passed since
she had left the dingy sea-port town to go to London, and meet her fate,
and lose it, and grow old before her time in mourning it; saw her, last
of all, and so was whirled up the street, and out of sight. And in like
manner she was whirled through the thronged streets of London, when she
reached that city at night, only that Lady Throckmorton's velvet-lined
carriage was less disposed to rattle and jerk over the stones, and more
disposed to an aristocratic, easily-swung roll than the musty vehicle of
the Downport cabman. There was a queer, excited thrill in her pulses as she leaned back,
watching the gaslights gleaming through the fog, and the people passing
to and fro beneath the gaslights. She was so near her journey's end that
she began to feel nervous. What would Lady Throckmorton look like? How
would she receive her? How would she be dressed? A hundred such simple,
girlish wonders crowded into her mind. She would almost have been glad
to go back--not quite, but almost. She had a lingering, inconsistent
recollection of the contents of her trunks, and the sapphires, which
was, nevertheless, quite natural to a girl so young, and so unused to
even the most trivial luxuries. She had never possessed a rich or
complete costume in her life; and there was a wondrous novelty in the
anticipation of wearing dresses that were not remodelled from Pamela's
or her mother's cast-off garments. When the carriage drew up before the door of the solid stone house, in
the solid-looking, silent square, she required all her courage. There
was a glare of gaslight around the iron grating, and a glare of gaslight
from the opening door, and then, after a little confusion of entrance,
she found herself passing up a stair-case, under the guidance of a
servant, and so was ushered into a large, handsome room, and formally
announced. An elderly lady was sitting before the fire reading, and on hearing
Theo's name, she rose, and came forward to meet her. Of course, it was
Lady Throckmorton, and, having been a beauty in her long past day, even
at sixty-five Lady Throckmorton was quite an imposing old person. Even
in her momentary embarrassment, Theo could not help noticing her bright,
almond-shaped brown eyes, and the soft, close little curls of fine
snow-white hair, that clustered about her face under her rich,
black-lace cap. "Theodora North, is it?" she said, offering her a wrinkled yet strong
white hand. "I am glad to see you, Theodora. I was afraid you would be
too late for Sir Dugald's dinner, and here you are just in time. I hope
you are well, and not tired." Theo replied meekly. She was quite well, and not at all tired, which
seemed to satisfy her ladyship, for she nodded her handsome old head
approvingly. "Very well, then, my dear," she said. "I will ring for Splaighton to
take you up-stairs, and attend to you. Of course, you will want to
change your dress for dinner, and you have not much time. Sir Dugald
never waits for anybody, and nothing annoys him more than to have dinner
detained." Accordingly, greatly in awe of Sir Dugald, whoever he might be, Theodora
was pioneered out of the room again, and up another broad stair-case,
into an apartment as spacious and luxurious as the one below. There her
toilet was performed and there the gray satin was donned in some
trepidation, as the most suitable dress for the occasion. She stepped before the full-length mirror to look at herself before
going down, and as she did so, she was conscious that her waiting-woman
was looking at her too in sedate approval. The gray satin was very
becoming. Its elaborate richness and length of train changed the
undeveloped girl, to whom she had given a farewell glance in the small
mirror at Downport, to the stateliest of tall young creatures. Her bare
arms and neck were as soft and firm as a baby's; her _riant_, un-English
face seemed all aglow of color and mellow eyes. But for the presence of
the maid, she would have uttered a little cry of pleasure, she was so
new to herself. It was like a dream, the going down-stairs in the light and brightness,
and listening to the soft sweep of the satin train; but it was
singularly undream-like to be startled as she was by the rushing of a
huge Spanish mastiff, which bounded down the steps behind her, and
bounding upon her dress, nearly knocked her down. The animal came like a
rush of wind, and simultaneously a door opened and shut with a bang; and
the man who came out to follow the dog, called to him in a voice so
rough that it might have been a rush of wind also. "Sabre!" he shouted. "Come back, you scoundrel!" and then his heavy feet
sounded upon the carpet. "The deuce!" he said, in an odd, low mutter,
which sounded as though he was speaking half to her, half to himself. "My lady's protege, is it? The other Pamela! Rather an improvement on
Pamela, too. Not so thin." Theo blushed brilliantly--a full-blown rose of a blush, and hesitated,
uncertain what etiquette demanded of her under the circumstances. She
did not know very much about etiquette, but she had an idea that this
was Sir Dugald, whoever Sir Dugald might be. But Sir Dugald set her mind
at rest on nearing her. "Good-evening, Theodora," he said, unceremoniously. "Of course, it is
Theodora." Theo bowed, and blushed more brilliantly still. "All the better," said this very singular individual. "Then I haven't
made a mistake," and, reaching, as he spoke, the parlor door at the foot
of the stairs, and finding that the mastiff was stretched upon the mat,
he favored him with an unceremonious, but not unfriendly kick, and then
opened the door, the dog preceding them into the room with slow
stateliness. "You are a quick dresser, I am glad to see, Theodora," said Lady
Throckmorton, who awaited them. "Of course, there is no need of
introducing you two to each other. Sir Dugald does not usually wait for
ceremonies." Sir Dugald looked down at the lovely face at his side with a ponderous
stare. He might have been admiring it, or he might not; at any rate, he
was favoring it with a pretty close inspection. "I believe Sir Dugald has not introduced himself to me," said Theo, in
some confusion. "He knew that I was Theodora North; but I--"

"Oh!" interposed her ladyship, as collectedly as if she had scarcely
expected anything else, "I see. Sir Dugald Throckmorton. Theodora--your
uncle." By way of returning Theo's modest little recognition of the
presentation, Sir Dugald nodded slightly, and, after giving her another
stare, turned to his mastiff, and laid a large muscular hand upon his
head. He was not a very prepossessing individual, Sir Dugald
Throckmorton. Lady Throckmorton seemed almost entirely oblivious of her husband's
presence; she solaced herself by ignoring him. When they rose from the table together, the authoritative old lady
motioned Theo to a seat upon one of the gay foot-stools near her. "Come and sit down by me," she said. "I want to talk to you, Theodora." Theo obeyed with some slight trepidation. The rich-colored old brown
eyes were so keen as they ran over her. But she seemed to be satisfied
with her scrutiny. "You are a very pretty girl, Theodora," she said. "How old are you?" "I am sixteen," answered Theo. "Only sixteen," commented my lady. "That means only a baby in Downport,
I suppose. Pamela was twenty when she came to London, and I
remember--Well, never mind. Suppose you tell me something about your
life at home. What have you been doing all these sixteen years?" "I had always plenty to do," Theo answered. "I helped Pamela with the
housework and the clothes-mending. We did not keep any servant, so we
were obliged to do everything for ourselves." "You were?" said the old lady, with a side-glance at the girl's slight,
dusky hands. "How did you amuse yourself when your work was done?" "We had not much time for amusements," Theo replied, demurely, in spite
of her discomfort under the catechism; "but sometimes, on idle days, I
read or walked on the beach with the children, or did Berlin-wool work." "What did you read?" proceeded the august catechist. She liked to hear
the girl talk. "Love stories," more demurely still, "and poetry, and sometimes history;
but not often history--love stories and poetry oftenest." The clever old face was studying her with a novel sort of interest. Upon
the whole, my lady was not sorry she had sent for Theodora North. "And, of course, being a Downport baby, you have never had a lover. Pamela never had a lover before she came to me." A lover. How Theodora started and blushed now to be sure! "No, madame," she answered, and, in a perfect wonder of confusion,
dropped her eyes, and was silent. But the very next instant she raised them again at the sound of the door
opening. Somebody was coming in, and it was evidently somebody who felt
himself at home, and at liberty to come in as he pleased, and when the
fancy took him, for he came unannounced entirely. Theo found herself guilty of the impropriety of gazing at him
wonderingly as he came forward, but Lady Throckmorton did not seem at
all surprised. "I have been expecting you, Denis," she said. "Good-evening! Here is
Theodora North. You know I told you about her." Theo rose from her footstool at once, and stood up tall and straight--a
young sultana, the youngest and most innocent-looking of sultanas, in
unimperial gray satin. The gentleman was looking at her with a pair of
the handsomest eyes she had ever seen in her life. Then he made a low, ceremonious bow, which had yet a sort of indolence
in its very ceremony, and then having done this much, he sat down, as if
he was very much at home indeed. "I thought I would run in on my way to Broome street," he said. "I am
obliged to go to Miss Gower's, though I am tired out to-night." "Obliged!" echoed her ladyship. "Well--yes," the gentleman answered, with cool negligence. "Obliged in
one sense. I have not seen Priscilla for a week." The handsome, strongly-marked old eyebrows went up. "For a week," remarked their owner, quite sharply. "A long time to be
absent." It was rather unpleasant, Theodora thought, that they should both seem
so thoroughly at liberty to say what they pleased before her, as if she
was a child. Their first words had sufficed to show her that "Miss
Gower's"--wherever Miss Gower's might be, or whatever order of place it
was--was a very objectionable place in Lady Throckmorton's eyes. "Well--yes," he said again. "It is rather a long time, to tell the
truth." He seemed determined that the matter should rest here, for he changed
the subject at once, having made this reply, thereby proving to Theo
that he was used to having his own way, even with Lady Throckmorton. He
was hard-worked, it seemed, from what he said, and had a great deal of
writing to do. He was inclined to be satirical, too, in a careless
fashion, and knew quite a number of literary people, and said a great
many sharp things about them, as if he was used to them, and stood in no
awe whatever of them and their leonine greatness. But he did not talk to
her, though he looked at her now and then; and whenever he looked at
her, his glance was a half-admiring one, even while it was evident that
he was not thinking much about her. He did not remain with them very
long, scarcely an hour, and yet she was almost sorry to see him go. It
was so pleasant to sit silent and listen to these two worldly ones, as
they talked about their world. But he had promised Priscilla that he
would bring her a Greek grammar she required; and a broken promise was a
sin unpardonable in Priscilla's eyes. When he was gone, and they had heard the hall-door close upon him, the
stillness was broken in upon by my lady herself. "Well, my dear," she said, to Theodora. "What is your opinion of Mr.
Denis Oglethorpe?" "He is very handsome," said Theo, in some slight embarrassment. "And I
think I like him very much. Who is Priscilla, aunt?" She knew that she had said something amusing by Lady Throckmorton's
laughing quietly. "You are very like Pamela, Theodora," she said. "It sounds very like
Pamela--what Pamela used to be--to be interested in Priscilla." "I hope it wasn't rude?" fluttered the poor little rose-colored sultana. "Not at all," answered Lady Throckmorton. "Only innocent. But I can tell
you all about Priscilla in a dozen words. Priscilla is a modern Sappho. Priscilla is an elderly young lady, who never was a girl--Priscilla is
my poor Denis Oglethorpe's _fiancee_." "Oh!" said Theodora. Her august relative drew her rich silk skirts a little farther away from
the heat of the fire, and frowned slightly; but not at Theodora--at
Priscilla, in her character of _fiancee_. "Yes," she went on. "And I think you would agree with me in saying poor
Denis Oglethorpe, if you could see Priscilla." "Is she ugly?" asked Theo, concisely. "No," sharply. "I wish she was; but at twenty-two she is elderly, as I
said just now--and she never was anything else. She was elderly when
they were engaged, five years ago." "But why--why didn't they get married five years ago, if they were
engaged?" "Because they were too poor," Lady Throckmorton explained; "because
Denis was only a poor young journalist, scribbling night and day, and
scarcely earning his bread and butter." "Is he poor now?" ventured Theo again. "No," was the answer. "I wish he was, if it would save him from the
Gowers. As it is, I suppose, if nothing happens to prevent it, he will
marry Priscilla before the year is out. Not that it is any business of
mine, but that I am rather fond of him--very fond of him, I might say,
and I was once engaged to his father." Theo barely restrained an ejaculation. Here was another romance--and she
was so fond of romances. Pamela's love-story had been a great source of
delight to her; but if Mr. Oglethorpe's father had been anything like
that gentleman himself, what a delightful affair Lady Throckmorton's
love-story must have been! The comfortable figure in the arm-chair at
her side caught a glow of the faint halo that surrounded poor Pam; but
in this case the glow had a more roseate tinge, and was altogether free
from the funereal gray that in Pamela always gave Theo a sense of
sympathizing discomfort. The next day she wrote to Pamela:

     "I have not had time yet to decide how I like Lady Throckmorton,"
     she said. "She is very kind to me, and asks a good many questions. I think I am a little afraid of her; but perhaps that is because I
     do not know her very well. One thing I am sure of, she doesn't like
     either Sir Dugald or his dog very much. We had a caller last
     night--a gentleman. A Mr. Denis Oglethorpe, who is a very great
     favorite of Lady Throckmorton. He is very handsome, indeed. I never
     saw any one at all like him before--any one half so handsome and
     self-possessed. I liked him very much because he talked so well,
     and was so witty. I had on the gray satin when he came, and the
     train hung beautifully. I am glad we made it with a train, Pamela. I think I shall wear the purple cloth to-night, as Lady
     Throckmorton said that perhaps he might drop in again, and he knows
     so many grand people, that I should like to look nice. There seems
     to be a queer sort of friendship between aunt and himself, though
     somehow I fancied he did not care much about what she said to him. He is engaged to be married to a very accomplished young lady, and
     has been for several years; but they were both too poor to be
     married until now. The young lady's name is Priscilla Gower; and
     Lady Throckmorton does not like her, which seems very strange to
     me. She is as poor as we are, I should imagine, for she gives
     French and Latin lessons, and lives in a shabby house. But I don't
     think that is the reason Lady Throckmorton does not like her. I
     believe it is because she thinks she is not suited to Mr.
     Oglethorpe. I hope she is mistaken, for Mr. Oglethorpe is very nice
     indeed, and very clever. He is a journalist, and has written a book
     of beautiful poetry. I found the volume this morning, and have been
     reading it all day. I think it is lovely; but Lady Throckmorton
     says he wrote it when he was very young, and makes fun of it now. I
     don't think he ought to, I am sure. I shall buy a copy before I
     return, and bring it home to show you. I will write to mamma in a
     day or so. With kisses and love, and a hundred thanks again for the
     dresses, I remain, my dearest Pamela, your loving and grateful,

     "THEO." CHAPTER III. THE MEETING. But Denis Oglethorpe did not appear again for several days. Perhaps
business detained him; perhaps he went oftener to see Priscilla. At any
rate, he did not call again until the end of the week. Lady Throckmorton was in her private room when he came, and as he made
his entrance with as little ceremony as usual, he ran in upon Theodora. Now, to tell the truth, he had, until this moment, forgotten all about
that young person's very existence. He saw so many pretty girls in a
day's round, and he was so often too busy to notice half of them--though
he was an admirer of pretty girls--that it was nothing new to see one
and forget her, until chance threw them together again. Of course, he
had noticed Theodora North that first night. How could a man help
noticing her? And the something beautifully over-awed and bashfully
curious in her lovely, uncommon eyes, had half amused him. And yet,
until this moment, he had forgotten her, with the assistance of proofs,
and printers, and Priscilla. But when, after running lightly up the stair-case, he opened the
drawing-room door, and saw a tall, lovely figure in a closely-fitting
dress of purple cloth, bending over Sabre, and stroking his huge, tawny
head with her supple little tender hand, he remembered. "Ah, yes!" he exclaimed, in an admiring aside. "To be sure; I had
forgotten Theodora." But Theodora had not forgotten him. The moment she saw him she stood up
blushing, and with a light in her eyes. It was odd how un-English she
looked, and yet how thoroughly English she was in that delicious,
uncomfortable trick of blushing vividly upon all occasions. She was
quite unconscious of the fact that the purple cloth was so becoming, and
that its sweep of straight, heavy folds made her as stately as some
Rajah's dark-eyed daughter. She did not feel stately at all; she only
felt somewhat confused, and rather glad that Mr. Denis Oglethorpe had
surprised her by coming again. How Mr. Denis Oglethorpe would have
smiled if he had known what an innocent commotion his simple presence
created! "Lady Throckmorton is up-stairs reading," she explained. "I will go and
tell her you are here." There were no bells in the house at Downport,
and no servants to answer if any one had rang one, and, very naturally,
Theo forgot she was not at Downport. "Excuse me. No," said Mr. Denis Oglethorpe. "I would not disturb her on
any account; and, besides, I know she will be down directly. She never
reads late in the evening. This is a very handsome dog, Miss North." "Very handsome, indeed," was Theo's reply. "Come here, Sabre." Sabre stalked majestically to her side, and laid his head upon her knee. Theo stroked him softly, raising her eyes quite seriously to Mr.
Oglethorpe's face. "He reminds me of Sir Dugald himself," she said. Mr. Denis Oglethorpe smiled faintly. He was not very fond of Sir Dugald,
and the perfect gravity and _naivete_ with which this pretty,
unsophisticated young sultana had made her comment had amounted to a
very excellent joke. "Does he?" he returned, as quietly as possible, and then his glance
meeting Theo's, she broke into a little burst of horror-stricken
self-reproach. "Oh, dear!" she exclaimed. "I oughtn't to have said that, ought I? I
forgot how rude it would sound; but, indeed, I only meant that Sabre was
so slow and heavy, and--and so indifferent to people, somehow. I don't
think he cares about being liked at all." She was so abashed at her blunder, that she looked absolutely imploring,
and Mr. Denis Oglethorpe smiled again. He felt inclined to make friends
with Theodora. "There is a little girl staying at Lady Throckmorton's," he had said to
Priscilla. "A relative of hers. A pretty creature, too, Priscilla, for a
bread-and-butter Miss." But just at this moment, he thought better of the matter. What tender,
speechful eyes she had! He was aroused to a recognition of their beauty
all at once. What contour there was in the turn of arm and shoulder
under the close-fitting purple cloth! He was artistically thankful that
there was no other trimming of the straight bodice than the line of
buttons that descended from the full white ruff of swansdown at her
throat, to her delicate, trim waist. Her unconscious stateliness of
girlish form, and the conscious shyness of her manner, were the
loveliest inconsistency in the world. "Oh, I shall not tell Sir Dugald," he said to her, good-humoredly. "Besides, I think the comparison an excellent one. I don't know anything
in London so like Sir Dugald as Sir Dugald's dog." Theodora stroked Sabre, apologetically, but could scarcely find courage
to speak. She had stood somewhat in awe of Mr. Denis Oglethorpe, even at
first, and her discomfort was rapidly increasing. He must think her
dreadfully stupid, though he was good-humored enough to make light of
her silly speech. Certainly Priscilla never made such a silly speech in
her life; but then, how could one teach French and Latin, and be
anything but ponderously discreet? Mr. Denis Oglethorpe was not thinking of Priscilla's wisdom, however; he
was thinking of Theodora North; he was thinking that he must have been
very blind not to have seen before that his friend's niece was a beauty
of the first water, young as she was. But he had been tired and fagged
out, he remembered, on the first occasion of their meeting--too tired to
think of anything but his appointment at Broome street, and Priscilla's
Greek grammar. And now in recognizing what he had before passed by, he
was quite glad to find the girl so young and inexperienced--so modest,
in a sweet way. It was easy, as well as proper enough, to talk to her
unceremoniously without the trouble of being diffuse and complimentary. So he made himself agreeable, and Theodora listened until she quite
forgot Sir Dugald, and only remembered Sabre, because his big heavy head
was on her knee, and she was stroking it. "And you were never in London before?" he said at length. "No, sir," Theo answered. "This is the first time. I was never even out
of Downport before." "Then we must take you to see the lions," he said, "if Lady Throckmorton
will let us, Miss Theodora. I wonder if she would let us? If she would,
I have a lady friend who knows them all, from the grisliest, downward,
and I know she would like to help me to exhibit them to you. How should
you like that?" "Better than anything in the world," glowing with delighted surprise. "If it wouldn't be too much trouble," she added, quite apologetically. Mr. Denis Oglethorpe smiled. "It would be simply delightful," he said. "I should like it better than
anything in the world, too. We will appeal to Lady Throckmorton." "When Priscilla was in London--" Theodora was beginning a minute later,
when the handsome face changed suddenly as her companion turned upon her
in evident surprise. "Priscilla?" he repeated, after her. "How stupid I am!" she ejaculated, distressedly. "I meant to say Pamela. My eldest sister's name is Pamela, and--and--"

"And you said Priscilla by mistake," interposed Oglethorpe, with a
sudden accession of gravity. "Priscilla is a little like Pamela." It needed nothing more than this simple slip of Theodora North's tongue
to assure him that Lady Throckmorton had been telling her the story of
his engagement to Miss Gower, and, as might be anticipated, he was not
as devoutly grateful to her ladyship as he might have been. He was
careless to a fault in some things, and punctilious to a fault in
others; and he was very punctilious about Priscilla Gower. He was not an
ardent lover, but he was a conscientiously honorable one, and, apart
from his respect for his betrothed, he was very impatient of
interference with his affairs; and my lady was not chary of interfering
when the fancy seized her. It roused his pride to think how liberally he
must have been discussed, and, consequently, when Lady Throckmorton
joined them, he was not in the most amiable of moods. But he managed to
end his conversation with Theo unconstrainedly enough. He even gained
her ladyship's consent to their plan. It was curiously plain how they
both appeared to agree in thinking her a child, and treating her as one. Not that Theo cared about that. She had been so used to Pamela, that she
would have felt half afraid of being treated with any greater ceremony;
but still she could clearly understand that Mr. Oglethorpe did not speak
to her as he would have spoken to Miss Gower. But free from any touch of
light gallantry as his manner toward the girl was, Denis Oglethorpe did
not forget her this night. On the contrary, he remembered her very
distinctly, and had in his mind a very exact mental representation of
her purple robe, soft white ruff, and all, as he buttoned up his paletot
over his chest in walking homeward. But he thought of her carelessly and
honestly enough, as a beautiful young creature years behind him in
experience, and utterly beyond him in all possibility of any sentimental
fancy. The friendship existing between Lady Throckmorton and this young man was
a queer, inconsistent sentiment enough, and yet was a friendship, and a
mature one. The two had encountered each other some years ago, when
Denis had been by no means in his palmiest days. In fact, my lady had
picked him up when he stood in sore need of friends, and Oglethorpe
never forgot a favor. He never forgot to be grateful to Lady
Throckmorton; and so, despite the wide difference between their
respective ages and positions, their mutual liking had ripened into a
familiarity of relationship which made them more like elder sister and
younger brother than anything else. Oglethorpe, junior, was pretty much
what Oglethorpe, senior, had been, and notwithstanding her practical
views, Lady Throckmorton liked him none the worse for it. She petted and
patronized him, questioned and advised him, and if he did not please
her, rated him roundly without the slightest compunction. In fact, she
was a woman of caprices even at sixty-five, and Denis Oglethorpe was one
of her caprices. And, in like manner, Theodora North became another of them. Finding her
tractable, she became quite fond of her, in her own way, and was at
least generous to lavishness in her treatment of her. "You are very handsome, indeed, Theodora," she said to her a few days
after her arrival. "Of course, you know that--ten times handsomer than
ever poor Pamela could have been. Your figure is perfect, and you have
eyes like a Syrian, instead of a commonplace English woman. I am going
to give you a rose-pink satin dress. Rose-pink is just your shade, and
some day, when we go out together, I will lend you some of my diamonds." After this whimsical manner she lavished presents upon her whenever she
had a new fancy. In truth, her generosity was constitutional, and she
had been generous enough toward Pamela, but she had never been so
extravagant as she was with Theodora. Theodora was an actual beauty, of
an uncommon type, in the face of her ignorance of manners and customs. Pamela had never, at her best, been more than a delicately pretty girl. In the meantime, Denis Oglethorpe made friendly calls as usual, and
always meeting Theodora, found her very pleasant to talk to and look at. He found out her enthusiastic admiration for the poetic effusions of his
youth, and in consideration thereof, good-humoredly presented her with a
copy of the volume, with some very witty verses written on the fly-leaf
in a flourishing hand. It was worth while to amuse Theodora, she was so
pretty and unassuming in her delight at his carelessly-amiable efforts
for her entertainment. She was only a mere child after all at sixteen,
with Downport in the background; so he felt quite honestly at ease in
being attentive to her girlish requirements. Better that he should amuse
her than that she should be left to the mercy of men who would perhaps
have the execrable taste to spoil her pretty childish ways with
flattery. "Don't let all these fine people and fine speeches turn your head,
Theodora," he would say, in a tone that might either have been jest or
earnest. "They spoiled me in my infancy, and my unfortunate experience
causes me to warn you." But whether he jested or not, Theo was always inclined to listen to him
with some degree of serious belief. She took his advice when it was
proffered, and regarded his wisdom as the wisdom of an oracle. Who
should know better than he what was right? His indifference to the rule
of opinion could only be the result of conscious perfection, and his
careless satires were to her the most brilliant of witticisms. He paid
her his first compliment the night the rose-colored satin-dress came
home. They were going to see Faust together with Lady Throckmorton, and she
had finished dressing early, and came down to the drawing-room, and
there Denis found her when he came up-stairs--the thick, lustrous folds
of satin billowing upon the carpet around her feet, something white, and
soft, and heavy wrapped about her. He was conscious of a faint shock of delight on first beholding her. He
had just left Priscilla, pale and heavy-eyed, in dun-colored merino,
poring over a Greek dictionary, and the sudden entering the bright room,
and finding himself facing Theodora North in rose-colored satin, was a
little like electricity. "Oh! it's Theodora, is it?" he said, slowly, when he recovered himself. "Thank you, Theodora." "What for?" asked Theo, blushing. "For the rose-colored satin," he returned, complacently. "It is so very
becoming. You look like a sultana, my dear Theodora." Theo looked up at him for a second, and then looked down. Much as she
admired Mr. Denis Oglethorpe, she never quite comprehended him. He had
such an eccentric fashion of being almost curt sometimes. She had seen
him actually give a faint start when he entered, and she had not
understood that, and now he had paid her a compliment, but with so much
of something puzzling hidden in his quiet-sounding voice, that she did
not understand that either--and he saw she did not. "I have been making a fine speech to Theodora," he said to Lady
Throckmorton, when she came in. "And she does not comprehend it in the
least." It was somewhat singular, Theo thought, that he should be so silent
after this, for he was silent. He even seemed absent-minded, for some
reason or other. He did not talk to her as much as usual, and she was
quite sure he paid very little attention to Faust. But during the final act she found that he was not looking at the stage
at all; but was sitting in the shadow of the box-curtain watching
herself. She had been deeply interested in Marguerite a minute before,
and, in her heart-touched pleasure, had leant upon the edge of the box,
her whole face thrilled with excitement. But the steady gaze magnetized
her, and drew her eyes round to the shadowy corner where Denis sat; and
she positively turned with just such a start as he himself had given
when Theodora North, in rose-colored satin, burst upon him, in such
vivid, glowing contrast to Priscilla Gower, in dun merino. "Oh!" she said, and though the little exclamation was scarcely more than
an indrawn breath, Denis heard it, and came out of his corner to take a
seat at her side, and lean over the box-edge also. "What is it, Theodora?" he asked, in a low, clear voice. "Is it
Marguerite?" She looked at him in a little fright at herself. She did not know why
she had exclaimed--she scarcely knew how; but when she met his
unembarrassed eyes, she began to think that possibly it might be
Marguerite. Indeed, a second later, she was quite sure it had been
Marguerite. "Yes--I think so," she faltered. "Poor Marguerite! If she could only
have saved him?" "How?" he asked. "I don't--at least I scarcely know; but I think the author ought to have
made her save him, someway. If--if she could have suffered something, or
sacrificed something--"

"Would she have done it if she could?" commented Denis, languidly. He
had quite recovered himself by this time. "I would have done it if I had been Marguerite," Theo half whispered. In his surprise he forgot his self-possession. He turned upon her
suddenly, and meeting her sweet, world-ignorant eyes, felt the faint,
pained shock once more, and strangely enough his first thought was a
disconnected one of Priscilla Gower. "You?" he said, the next moment. "Yes, I believe you would, Theodora." He was sure she would, after that swift glance of his, and--Well, what a
happy man he would be for whom this tender young Marguerite would suffer
or be sacrificed. The idea had really never occurred to him before that
Theodora North was nearly a woman; but it occurred to him now with all
the greater force, because he had been so oblivious to the fact before. He sat by her side until the curtain fell; but his silent mood seemed to
have come upon him again. He was very much interested in Marguerite
after this, Theo thought; but it is very much to be doubted whether he
could have given a clear account of what was passing before his eyes
upon the stage. He did not even go into the house with them when they
returned; but as he stood upon the door-step, touching his hat in a
final adieu, he was keenly alive to a consciousness of Theodora North at
the head of the stair-case, with billows of glistening rose-pink satin
lying on the rich carpet about her feet, as she half turned toward him
to bid him good-night. Bright as the future was, it left a sense of discomfort, he could not
explain why. He dismissed the carriage, and walked down the street,
feeling fairly depressed in spirits. He had, perhaps, never given the girl a thought before, unless when
chance had thrown them together, and even then his thoughts had been
common admiring ones. She had pleased him, and he had tried to amuse her
in a careless, well-meant fashion, though he had never made fine
speeches to her, as nine men out of ten would have done. He had been so
used to Priscilla, that it never occurred to him that a girl so young as
this one could be a woman. And, after all, his blindness had not been
the result of any frivolous lack of thought. A sharp experience had made
him as thoroughly a man of the world as a man may be; but it had not
made him callous or indifferent to the beauties of life. No one would
ever have called him emotional, or prone to enthusiasms of a weak kind,
and yet he was by no means hard of heart. He had quiet fancies of his
own about people and things, and many of these reticent,
rarely-expressed ideas were reverent, chivalrous ones of women. The
opposing force of a whole world could never have shaken his faith in
Priscilla Gower, or touched his respect for her; but though, perhaps, he
had never understood it so, he had never felt very enthusiastically
concerning her. Truly, Priscilla Gower and enthusiasm were not in
accordance with each other. Chance had thrown them together when both
were very young, and propinquity did the rest. Propinquity is the
strongest of agents in a love affair, and in Denis Oglethorpe's love
affair, propinquity had accomplished what nothing else would have been
likely to have done. The desperate young scribbler of twenty years had
been the lodger of the elder Miss Gower, and Priscilla, aged seventeen,
had brought in his frugal dinners to him, and receipted his modest bills
on their weekly payment. Priscilla at seventeen, silent, practical, grave and handsome, had,
perhaps, softened unconsciously at the sight of his often pale face--he
worked so hard and so far into the night; when at length they became
friends, Priscilla gravely, and without any hesitation, volunteered to
help him. She could copy well and clearly, and he could come into her
aunt's room--it would save fires. So she helped him calmly and
decorously, bending her almost austerely-handsome young head over his
papers for hours on the long winter nights. It is easy to guess how the
matter terminated. If ever he won success he determined to give it to
Priscilla--and so he told her. He had never wavered in his faith for a
second since, though he had encountered many beautiful and womanly
women. He had worked steadily for her sake, and shielded her from every
care that it lay within his power to lighten. He was not old Miss
Elizabeth Gower's lodger now--he was her niece's husband in perspective. He was to marry Priscilla Gower in eight months. This was why Theodora
North, in glistening rose-pink satin, sent him home confronting a
suddenly-raised spirit of pain. Twice, in one night, he had found
himself feeling toward Theodora North as he had never felt toward
Priscilla Gower in his life. Twice, in one night, he had turned his eyes
upon this girl of sixteen, and suffered a sudden shock of enthusiasm, or
something like it. He was startled and discomfited. She had no right to
win such admiration from him--he had no right to give it. But as his walk in the night-air cooled him, it cooled his ardor of
self-examination somewhat. His discontent was modified by the time he
reached his own door, and took his latch-key out of his pocket. The face
that had looked down upon him beneath the light at the head of the
stair-case, had faded into less striking color--it was only a girl's
face again. He was on better terms with himself, and his weakness seemed
less formidable. "I will keep my promise to-morrow," he said, "and Priscilla shall go
with us. Poor Priscilla!--poor girl! Rose-pink satin would scarcely be
in good taste in Broome street." The promise he had made was nothing more than a ratification of the old
one. They were to see the lions together, and Priscilla was to guide
them. And when the morrow came, he found it, after all, safe enough, and an
easy enough matter, to tuck Theodora's small, gloved hand under his arm,
when they set out on their tour of investigation and discovery. The girl
was pretty enough, too, in her soft, black merino--her "best" dress in
Downport--but she was not dazzling. The little round, black-plumed hat
was becoming also; but in his now more prosaic mood, he could stand
that, too, pretty as it was in an innocent, unconsciously-coquettish
way. Theo was never coquettish herself in the slightest degree. She was
not world-wise enough for that yet. But she was quite exhilarating
to-day; so glad to be out even in the London fog of November; so glad to
be taken lion-hunting; so delighted with the shops and their gay
windows; so ready to let her young tongue run on in a gay stream of
chatter, altogether so bright, and pretty, and joyous, that her escort
was fain to be delighted too. "Guess where we are going to first?" said he. (He had not before openly
spoken of Priscilla to her.) She glanced up into his face, brightly. She remembered what he had told
her about his lady friend. "I don't exactly know the name of the place," she said; "but I think I
know the name of the person we are going to see." "Do you?" was his reply. "Then say it to me--let me hear it." "Miss Gower," she answered, softly, in a pretty reverence for him. "Miss
Priscilla Gower." He nodded, slightly, with a curious mixture of expressions in his face. "Yes," he said. "Miss Gower, or rather Miss Priscilla Gower, as you say. Number twenty-three, Broome street; and Broome street is not a
fashionable locality, my dear Theodora." "Isn't it?" queried Theo. "Why not?" He shrugged his shoulders. "Ask Lady Throckmorton," he said. "But do you know who Miss Priscilla
Gower is, Theodora?" Her bright eyes crept up to his, half-timidly; but she said nothing, so
he continued. "Miss Priscilla Gower is the young lady to whom I am to be married next
July. Did you know that?" "Yes," answered Theo, looking actually pleased, and blushing beautifully
as he looked down at her. "But I am very much obliged to you for telling
me, Mr. Oglethorpe." "Why?" he asked. It was very preposterous, that even though his mood was
so prosaic and paternal a one, he was absurdly, vacantly sensible of
feeling some uneasiness at the brightness of her upturned face. For
pity's sake, why was it that he was impelled to such a puerile
weakness--such a vanity, as he sternly called it. "Because," returned Theo, "it makes me feel as if--I mean it makes me
happy to think you trust me enough to tell me about what has made you
happy. I hope--oh! I do hope Miss Priscilla Gower will like me." He had been looking straight before him while she spoke, but this
brought his eyes to hers again, and to her face--bright, appealing,
upturned--and he found himself absolutely obliged to steady himself with
a jesting speech. "My dearest Theodora," he said. "Miss Priscilla Gower could not possibly
help it." Comforting as this assurance was to her, it must be confessed she found
herself somewhat over-awed on reaching Broome street, and being taken
into the tiny, dwarfed-looking parlor of number twenty-three; Miss
Elizabeth Gower herself was there, in her company-cap, and
long-cherished company-dress of snuff-colored satin. There were not many
shades of difference in either her snuff-colored gown, or her
snuff-colored skin, or her neat, snuff-colored false-front, Theo
fancied, but she was not at all afraid of her. She was a trifle afraid
of Miss Priscilla. Miss Priscilla was sitting at the table reading when
they entered, and as she rose to greet them, holding her book in one
hand, the thought entered Theo's mind that she could comprehend dimly
why Lady Throckmorton disliked her, and thought her unsuited to Denis
Oglethorpe. There was an absence of anything girl-like in her fine,
ivory-pale face, somehow, though it was a young face and a handsome
face, at whose fine lines and clear contour even a connoisseur could not
have caviled. Its long almond-shaped, agate-gray eyes, black-fringed and
lustrous as they were, still were silent eyes--they did not speak even
to Denis Oglethorpe. "I am glad you have come," she said, simply, extending her hand in
acknowledgment of Denis's introduction. The quietness of this greeting
speech was a fair sample of all her manner. It would have been sheerly
impossible to expect anything like effusiveness from Priscilla Gower. The most sanguine and empty-headed of mortals would never have looked
for it in her. She was constitutionally unenthusiastic, if such a thing
may be. But she was gravely curious in this case concerning Theodora North. The
fact that Denis had spoken of her admiringly was sufficient to arouse in
her mind an interest in this young creature, who was at once, and so
inconsistently, beautiful, timid, and regal, without consciousness. "Three years more will make her something wonderful, as far as beauty is
concerned," he had said; and, accordingly, she had felt some slight
pleasure in the anticipation of seeing her. Yet Theo had some faint misgivings during the day as to whether Miss
Priscilla Gower would like her or not. She was at first even inclined to
fear that she would not, being so very handsome, and grave, and womanly. But toward the end of their journeying together, she felt more hopeful. Reticent as she was, Priscilla Gower was a very charming young person. She talked well, and with much clear, calm sense; she laughed musically
when she laughed at all, and could make very telling, caustic speeches
when occasion required; but still it was singular what a wide difference
the difference of six years made in the two girls. As Lady Throckmorton
had said, it was not a matter of age. At twenty-two Theodora North would
overflow with youth as joyously as she did now at seventeen; at
seventeen Priscilla Gower had assisted her maiden aunt's lodger to copy
his manuscript with as mature a gravity as she would have displayed
to-day. "I hope," said Theodora, when, after their sight-seeing was over, she
stood on the pavement before the door in Broome street, her nice little
hand on Denis Oglethorpe's arm, "I hope you will let me come to see you
again, Miss Gower." Priscilla, standing upon the door-step, smiled down on her blooming
girl's face, a smile that was a little like moonlight. All Priscilla's
smiles were like moonlight. Theo's had a delicious glow of the sun. "Yes," she said, in her practical manner. "It will please me very much
to see you, Miss Theodora. Come as often as you can spare the time." She watched the two as they walked down the street together, Theo's
black feather glossy in the gaslight, as it drooped its long end against
Oglethorpe's coat, and as she watched them, she noticed even this trifle
of the feather, and the trifling fact that though Theo was almost regal
in girlish height, she was not much taller than her companion's
shoulder. It was strange, she thought afterward, that she should have
done so; but even while thinking it strange in the afterward that came
to her, she remembered it all as distinctly as ever, and knew that to
the last day of her life she would never quite forget the quiet of the
narrow, dreary street, the yellow light of the gas-lamps, and the two
figures walking away into the shadow, with their backs toward her, the
girl holding Denis Oglethorpe's arm, and the glossy feather in her black
hat drooping its tip upon his shoulder. CHAPTER IV. THEO'S DIARY. Up-stairs, in a sacred corner of the chamber Lady Throckmorton had
apportioned to her, Theodora North kept her diary. Not a solid,
long-winded diary, full of creditable reflections upon the day's events,
but, on the contrary, a harmless little book enough--a pretty little
book, bound in pink and gold, and much ornamented about the corners, and
greatly embellished with filagree clasps. Lady Throckmorton had given it
to her because she admired it, and, in a very natural enthusiasm, she
had made a diary of it. And here are the entries first recorded in its
gilt-edged pages:

_December_ 7.--Mr. Oglethorpe was so kind as to remember his promise
about showing me the lions. Enjoyed myself very much. Miss Priscilla
Gower went with us. She is very dignified, or something; but I think I
like her. I am sure I like her, so I will go to see her again. I wonder
how it is she reminds me of Pamela without being like Pamela at all. Poor Pam always so sharp in her ways, and I do not think Miss Gower ever
could speak sharply at all. And yet she reminds me of Pam. _December_ 14.--Went to the theatre again with Lady Throckmorton and Mr.
Oglethorpe. I wonder if the rose-pink satin is not becoming to me? I
thought it was; but before I went up-stairs to dress, Mr. Oglethorpe
said to me, "Don't put on the rose-pink satin, Theodora." I am sorry
that he does not think it is pretty. Wore a thin, white-muslin dress,
and dear, dearest old Pamela's beautiful sapphires. The muslin had a
long train. _December_ 18.--Mr. Oglethorpe came to-night with a kind of message from
Miss Gower. From these innocent extracts, persons of an unlimited experience might
draw serious conclusions; but when she made said entries, kneeling
before her toilet-table, each night, our dear Theodora thought nothing
about them at all. She had nothing else in particular to write about at
present, so, in default of finding a better subject, she jotted down
guileless remembrances of Denis Oglethorpe and the length of her trains. But one memorable evening, on going into the sitting-room, with the pink
and gold volume in her hand, she encountered Sir Dugald, who seemed to
be in an extraordinary frame of mind, and withal nothing loth to meet
her. "What pretty book have you there, Theodora?" he asked, in his usual
amiably uncivilized manner. "It is my diary," Theo answered. "Lady Throckmorton gave it to me. I put
things down in it." "Oh, oh!" was the reply, taking hold of both Sabre's ears, and
chuckling. "Put things down, do you? What sort of things do you put
down, eh, pretty Theodora? Lovers, eh? Literary men, eh?" Theo grew pink all over--pink as to cheeks, pink as to slim white
throat, even pink as to small ears. She was almost frightened, and her
fright was of a kind such as she had never experienced before. But it
was not Sir Dugald she was afraid of--she was used to him. It was
something new of which she had never thought until this very instant. "Literary men, eh?" Sir Dugald went on. "Do you put down what their
names are, and what they do, and how they make mistakes, and take the
wrong young lady to see Norma, and Faust and Il Trovatore? Il
Trovatore's a nice opera; Theo and Leonora sounds something like
Theodora. It doesn't sound anything like Priscilla, does it? The devil
fly away with Priscilla, I say. Priscilla isn't musical, is it,
Leonora?" Once having freed herself from him, which was by no means an easy
matter, Theo flew up-stairs, tremulous, breathless, flushed. She did not
stop to think. She had seen the drawing-room empty and unlighted, save
by a dull fire, on her way down-stairs, so she turned to the
drawing-room. She had been conscious of nothing but Sir Dugald, so she
had not heard the hall-door open; and, not having heard the hall-door
open, had, of course, not heard Denis Oglethorpe come in. So, in running
into the fire-lit room, she broke in upon that gentleman, who was
standing in the shadow, and it must be confessed was rather startled by
her sudden entrance and curiously-excited face. He stopped her short, however, collectedly enough. "What is the matter, Theodora?" he demanded. She slipped down upon a footstool, all in a flutter, when she saw him,
she was so shaken; and then, in her sudden abasement and breathless
tremor, gave vent to a piteous little half-sob, though she was terribly
ashamed of it. "I--I don't know," she answered him. "It's--it's nothing at all." But he
knew better than that, and guessing very shrewdly that he was not wholly
unconnected with the matter himself, questioned her as closely as was
consistent with delicacy, and, in the end, after some diplomacy, and a
few more of surprised, piteous, little unwilling half-sobs, gleaned a
great deal of the truth from her. "It was only--only something Sir Dugald said about you and Miss Gower,
and--and something about me," she added, desperately. "Oh!" he said, looking so composed about it that the very sight of his
composure calmed her, and made her begin to think she had seen a
mountain in a mole-hill. "Sir Dugald? Only Sir Dugald? What did he say,
may I ask, as it--it is about myself and Miss Gower?" Of course he might ask, but the difficulty lay in gaining any definite
answer. Theodora blushed, and then actually turned a little pale,
looking wondrously abased in her uncalled-for confusion; but she was not
at all coherent in her explanations, which were really not meant for
explanations at all. "Il Trovatore was so beautiful!" she burst out, finally; "and so was
Faust; and I had never been to the opera in all my life before, and, of
course--" blushing and palpitating, but still looking at him without a
shade of falsehood in her innocent, straightforward eyes; "of course, I
couldn't. How could I be so silly, and vain, and presuming, as to think
of--of--of--"

She stopped here, as might be expected, and, if the room had been light
enough, she might have seen a shadow fall on Oglethorpe's face, as he
prompted her. "Of what?" Her eyes fell. "Of what Sir Dugald said," she ended, in a troubled
half-whisper. There was a slight pause, in which both pairs of eyes looked
down--Theodora's upon the rug of tiger-skin at her feet, Oglethorpe's at
Theodora herself. They were treading upon dangerous ground, he knew, and
yet in the midst of his fierce anger at his weakness, he was conscious
of a regret--a contemptible regret, he told himself--that the eyes she
had raised to his own a moment ago, had been so very clear and
guilelessly honest in their accordance with the declaration her lips had
made. "But, my dear Theodora," he at length broke the silence by saying,
carelessly, "why should we trouble ourselves about that elderly Goth, or
Vandal, if you choose--Sir Dugald? Who does trouble themselves about Sir
Dugald, and his amiably ponderous jocoseness? Not Lady Throckmorton, I
am sure; not society in general, you must know; consequently, let us
treat Sir Dugald with silent contempt, in a glorious consciousness of
our own spotless innocence." He was half uneasy under his satirical indifference; though he was so
accustomed to conceal his thoughts under indifference and satire, he was
scarcely sure enough of himself at this minute; but, despite this, he
carried out the assumed mood pretty well. "We have no need to be afraid of Sir Dugald's Vandalism, if we have no
fear of ourselves, and, considering, as you so very justly observed,
that it is quite impossible for us to be silly, and vain, and presuming
toward each other. I think we must be quite safe. I believe you said it
would be impossible, Theodora?" Just one breath's space, and Theodora North looked up at him, as it were
through the influence of an electric flash of recognition. There was a
wild, sweet, troubled color on her cheeks, and her lips were trembling;
her whole face seemed to tremble; her very eyes had a varying tremulous
glow. "Quite impossible, wasn't it, Theodora?" he repeated, and though he had
meant it for nothing more than a careless, daring speech, his voice
changed in defiance of him, and altered, or seemed to alter, both words
and their meaning. What, in the name of madness, he would have been rash
enough to say next, in response to the tremor of light and color in the
upturned face, it would be hard to say, for here he was stopped, as it
were, by Fortune herself. Fortune came in the form of Lady Throckmorton, fresh from Trollope's
last, and in a communicative mood. "Ah! You are here, Denis, and you, too, Theodora? Why are you sitting in
the dark?" And, as she bent over to touch the bell, Theodora rose from
her footstool to make way for her--rose with a little sigh, as if she
had just been awakened from a dream which was neither happy nor sad. It was very plainly Lady Throckmorton's business to see, and, seeing,
understand the affairs of her inexperienced young relative; but if Lady
Throckmorton understood that Theodora North was unconsciously
endangering the peace of her girlish heart, Lady Throckmorton was very
silent, or very indifferent about the matter. But she was not moulded
after the manner of the stern female guardians usually celebrated in
love stories. She was not mercenary, and she was by no means
authoritative. She had sent for Theo with the intention of extending to
her the worldly assistance she had extended to Pamela, and, beyond that,
the matter lay in the girl's own hands. Lady Throckmorton had no high
views for her in particular; she wanted to see her enjoy herself as much
as possible until the termination of her visit, in whatever manner it
terminated, whether matrimonially or otherwise. Besides, she was not so
young as she had been in Pamela's time, and, consequently, though she
was reasonably fond of her handsome niece, and more than usually
generous toward her, she was inclined to let her follow her own devices. For herself, she had her luxurious little retiring-room, with its
luxurious fires and lounges; and after these, or rather with these, came
an abundance of novels, and the perfect, creamy chocolate her French
cook made such a masterpiece of--novels and chocolate standing as
elderly and refined dissipations. And not being troubled with any very
strict ideas of right or wrong, it would, by no means, have annoyed her
ladyship to know that her handsome Theodora had out-generalled her pet
grievance, Priscilla Gower. Why should not Priscilla Gower be
out-generalled, and why should not Denis marry some one who was as much
better suited to him, as Theodora North plainly was? "Tut! tut!" she said to Sir Dugald. "Why shouldn't they be married to
each other? It would be better than Priscilla Gower, if Theodora had
nothing but Pam's gray satin for her bridal trousseau." So Theo was left to herself, and having no confidant but the pink and
gold journal, gradually began to trust to its page some very troubled
reflections. It had not occurred to her that she could possibly be
guilty in admiring Mr. Denis Oglethorpe so much as she did, and in
feeling so glad when he came, and so sorry when he went away. She had
not thought that it was because he was sitting near her, and talking to
her between the acts; that Il Trovatore and Faust had been so
thrillingly beautiful and tender. And this was quite true, even though
she had not begun to comprehend it as yet. She had no right to feel anxious about him; and yet, when, after having
committed himself in the rash manner chronicled, he did not make his
appearance for nearly two weeks, she was troubled in no slight degree. Indeed, though the thought was scarcely defined, she had some
unsophisticated misgivings as to whether Miss Priscilla Gower might not
have been aroused to a sense of the wrongs done her through the medium
of Il Trovatore, and so have laid an interdict upon his visits; but it
was only Sir Dugald who had suggested this to her fancy. But by the end of the two weeks, she grew tired of waiting, and the days
were so very long, that at length, not without some slight compunction,
she made up her mind to go and pay a guileless visit to Miss Priscilla
Gower herself. "I am going to see Miss Gower, aunt," she ventured to say one morning,
at the breakfast table. Sir Dugald looked up from his huge slice of broiled venison, clumsily
jocose after his customary agreeable manner. "What's that, Leonora?" he said. "Going to see the stern vestal, are
you? Priscilla, eh?" Lady Throckmorton shrugged her shoulders in an indifferent sarcasm. She
was often both sarcastic and indifferent in her manner toward Sir
Dugald. "Theo's in-goings and out-goings are scarcely our business, so long as
she enjoys herself," she said. "Present my regards to the Miss Gowers,
my dear, and say I regret that my health does not permit me to accompany
you." A polite fiction by the way, as my lady was looking her best. It was
only upon state occasions, and solely on Denis' account, that she ever
submitted to Broome street, albeit the fat, gray horses, and fat gray
coachman did occasionally recognize the existence of that remote
locality. It so happened that, as they drew up before Miss Gower's modest door
this morning, the modest door in question opened, and Denis Oglethorpe
himself came out, and, of course, caught sight of Theodora North, who
had just bent forward to pull the check-string, and so gave him a full
view of her charming _reante_, un-English face, and, in her pleasure at
seeing him, that young lady forgot both herself and Sir Dugald, and
exclaimed aloud,

"Oh, Mr. Oglethorpe!" she cried out. "I am so glad--" and then stopped,
in a confusion and trepidation absolutely brilliant. He came to the window, and looked in at her. "Are you coming to see Priscilla?" he said. "Lady Throckmorton said I might," she answered, the warmth in her face
chilled by his unenthusiastic though kindly tone. She did not know what
a struggle it cost him to face her thus carelessly all at once. He did not even open the carriage-door himself, but waited for the
footman to do it. "Priscilla will be glad to see you," he said, quietly. "I will go into
the house again with you." The dwarfed sitting-room looked very much as it had looked on Theo's
first introduction to it; but on this occasion Miss Elizabeth was not
arrayed in the snuff-colored satin; and when they entered, Priscilla was
kneeling down upon the hearth-rug, straightening out an obstreperous
fold in it. She rose, collectedly, at once, and as her face turned toward them, Theo
was struck with some fancy of its being a shade paler than it had been
the last time she had seen it. But her manner was not changed in the
least, and she welcomed her visitor with grave cordiality. Poor little
snuff-colored Miss Elizabeth was delighted. She was getting very fond of
company in her old age, and had taken a great fancy to Theodora North. "Send the carriage away, and stay with us until evening, Miss Theodora,"
she fluttered in wild, old-maidenly excitement. "Do stay, Miss Theodora,
and I will show you how to do the octagon-stitch, as I promised the last
time you were here. You remember how you admired it in that antimacassar
I was making for Priscilla?" Miss Elizabeth's chief delight and occupation was the making of
miraculously-gorgeous mysteries for Priscilla; and Theo's modest
eulogies of her last piece of work had won her admiration and regard at
once. Consequently, under stress of Miss Elizabeth, the carriage was
fain to depart, much to the abasement of the fat, gray coachman, who
felt himself much dishonored in finding he was compelled, not only to
pay majestic calls to Broome street, but to acknowledge the humiliating
fact of friendly visits. "We must have a fire in the best parlor, my dear," chirped Elizabeth,
ecstatically, when Theo's hat and jacket were being carried out of the
room. "Don't forget to tell Jane, Priscilla, and--" fumbling in her
large side-pocket, "here's the key of the preserve-closet. Quince
preserve, my dear, and white currant-jelly." Theodora was reminded of Downport that day, in a hundred ways. The nice
little company-dinner reminded her of it; the solitary little roast fowl
and the preserves and puddings; but the company-dinners at Downport had
always been detracted from by the sharp annoyance in Pam's face, and the
general domestic bustle, and the total inadequacy of gravy and stuffing
to the wants of the boys. She was particularly reminded of it by the
ceremonious repairing to the fire in the front parlor, where everything
was so orderly, and even the family portraits had the appearance of
family portraits roused from a deep reverie to be surprised at an
intrusion. "My late lamented parents, my dear," said Miss Elizabeth, rubbing her
spectacles, and admiringly regarding an owl-like, elderly gentleman, in
an aggressive brown wig, and an equally owl-like lady, in a
self-announcing false-front, embarrassingly suggestive of Miss
Elizabeth's own. "My late lamented parents, at the respective ages of
fifty and fifty-seven. My sister, Anastasia; my only brother, my
sister-in-law, his wife; and my dear Priscilla, at seventeen years." Theo turned from the others to look at this last with a deeper interest;
remembered that it was when she was seventeen, that Priscilla had first
met Denis Oglethorpe. It was a small picture, half life-size, and set in
an oval frame of black walnut. Priscilla at seventeen had not been very
different from Priscilla at twenty-two. She had a pale, handsome,
ungirlish face--a Minerva face--steady, grave, handsome eyes, and a fine
head, unadorned, save with a classic knot of black brown hair. The
picture was not even younger-looking than Priscilla was now. Miss Elizabeth regarded it in affectionate admiration of its beauty. "My dear," she said to Theodora, "that is the most beautiful face in
London, to my old eyes. It reminds me of my dear Anastasia in her youth. I was always glad my brother Benjamin's daughter was not like his wife. We were not fond of my brother Benjamin's wife. She was a very giddy
young person, and very fond of gayety. She died of lung-fever,
contracted through exposing herself one night at a military ball, in
direct opposition to my brother Benjamin's wishes. She insisted upon
wearing blue-satin slippers, and a low-necked dress." "Oh, dear!" said Theodora, secretly conscious of a guilty sympathy for
the giddy young person who ran counter to brother Benjamin's wishes, in
the matter of military balls and blue-satin slippers. "Yes, my love!" Miss Elizabeth proceeded. "And for that reason I was
always glad to find that Priscilla was not at all like her. Priscilla
and I have been very happy together, in our quiet way; she has been the
best of dear, good girls to me. Indeed, I really don't know what I shall
do when I must lose her, as of course you know I shall be obliged to,
when she marries Mr. Denis Oglethorpe!" "Yes, ma'am," answered Theo, and as she spoke, she felt a curious,
startled glow flash over her. This was the first time an actual approach
to the subject had been made in her presence. "Yes, my dear!" said Miss Elizabeth again. "I shall feel the separation
very deeply, but it must be, you know. They have waited so long for each
other, that I should be a very wicked selfish old woman to throw any
obstacle, even so slight a one as my own discomfort, in their way. Don't
you think so?" "Yes, madame," Theo faltered, very unsteadily, indeed. But Miss Elizabeth did not notice any hesitation in her manner, and went
on with her confidential chat, eulogizing Priscilla and her betrothed
affectionately. Mr. Denis Oglethorpe would be a rich man some of these
days, and then what a happy life must Priscilla's be--so young, so
beautiful, so beloved. "Not that wealth brings happiness, my dear Miss
Theodora. Riches are very deceitful, you know; but there is a great deal
of solid comfort in a genteel sufficiency." To all of which Theo acquiesced, modestly, inwardly wondering if she was
very wrong in wishing that Oglethorpe had not left them quite so early. The day passed pleasantly enough, however, in a quiet way. Miss
Elizabeth was very affectionate and communicative, and told her a great
many stories of Anastasia, and the late-lamented Benjamin, as they sat
by the fire together, in the evening, and blundered over the
octagon-stitch. It was an Afghan Miss Elizabeth was making now; and when
at tea-time, Mr. Oglethorpe came, he found Theodora North sitting on the
hearth, flushed with industrious anxiety, and thrown into reflected glow
of brilliant Berlin wool, a beautiful young spider in a gorgeous Afghan
web. "I should like," she was saying as he entered, "to buy Pamela and the
girls some nice little presents. What would you advise me to get, Miss
Gower?" She was very faithful to the shabby household at Downport. Her letters
were never careless or behind time, and no one was ever neglected in the
multiplicity of messages. She would be the most truthful and faithful of
loving women a few years hence, this handsome Theodora. There was some
reserve in her manner toward Denis this evening. She attended to Miss
Elizabeth's octagon-stitch, and left him to amuse Priscilla. He had not
seemed very much pleased to see her in the morning, and besides,
Priscilla was plainly his business. But when the carriage was announced,
and she returned to the parlor, after an absence of a few minutes,
drawing on her gloves, and buttoning her pretty jacket close up to her
beautiful slender, dusky throat, Denis took his hat and accompanied her
to the carriage. He did not wait for the footman this time; but, after
assisting her to get in, closed the door himself, and leaned against the
open window for a moment. "I want you to deliver a message to Lady Throckmorton for me," he said. "May I trouble you, Theodora?" She bent her head with an unpleasantly-quickened heart-beat. It was very
foolish, of course, but she felt as if something painful was going to
happen, and nothing on earth could prevent it. "Business has unexpectedly called me away from London--from England," he
explained, in a strange yet quite steady voice. "I am obliged to go to
Belgium at once, and my affairs are in such a condition that I may be
compelled to remain across the channel for some time. Be good enough to
say to Lady Throckmorton that I regret deeply that I could not see her
before going; but--but the news has been sudden, and my time is fully
occupied; but I will write to her from my first stopping-place." "I will tell her," said Theodora. "Thank you," he replied, courteously, and then, after a short
hesitation, began again, in the tone he used so often--the tone that
might be jest or earnest. "And now, there is something else, a subject
upon which I wish to ask your unbiased opinion, my dear Theodora, before
I say good-bye. When a man finds himself in a danger with which he
cannot combat, and remain human--in danger, where defeat means dishonor,
do you not agree with me, that the safest plan that man can adopt is to
run away?" Her quickened heart might almost have been running a life-and-death race
with her leaping pulse, but she answered him almost steadily. "Yes," she said to him. 