

E-text prepared by D Alexander, Josephine Paolucci, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



THE TIME OF ROSES

by

MRS. L. T. MEADE

Author of
"A Bunch of Cherries," "Daddy's Girl," "Bad Little Hannah," "A World of
Girls," "A School Favorite," Etc. "It was the Time of Roses;
    We plucked them as we passed." Chicago
M. A. Donohue & Company

[Illustration]




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                        PAGE

         I. Home at Last                          5

        II. The Little Mummy's Arrangements      13

       III. A Startling Meeting                  19

        IV. An Evil Genius                       28

         V. Maurice Trevor                       33

        VI. Mrs. Aylmer's Strategy               41

       VII. The Chains Begin to Fret             48

      VIII. Bertha's Quandary                    56

        IX. A Tempting Offer                     63

         X. The Little Mummy's Curiosity         69

        XI. Florence's Good Angel                72

       XII. Alone in London                      80

      XIII. A Weary Wait                         88

       XIV. A Blunt Question                     92

        XV. Edith Franks                         99

       XVI. On the Brink of an Abyss            106

      XVII. Nearer and Nearer                   116

     XVIII. A Vestige of Hope                   121

       XIX. In the Balance                      128

        XX. Rose View                           133

       XXI. An Awkward Position                 137

      XXII. The Story Accepted                  144

     XXIII. Bertha's Joy                        151

      XXIV. Trevor Asks Bertha's Advice         156

       XXV. Trevor's Resolve                    162

      XXVI. At Aylmer's Court                   169

     XXVII. Bertha's Secret                     174

    XXVIII. A Smiling World                     178

      XXIX. Almost Betrayed                     187

       XXX. The Telegram                        194

      XXXI. Bertha Writes the Essay             199

     XXXII. Trevor and Florence                 206

    XXXIII. A Tete-a-Tete                       215

     XXXIV. Maurice Rebels                      221

      XXXV. The Essay Arouses Criticism         225

     XXXVI. A Letter from Home                  230

    XXXVII. Trevor Proposes to Florence         236

   XXXVIII. At the Reception                    241

     XXXIX. An Admirable Arrangement            252

        XL. Is It "Yes" or "No"? 259

       XLI. The Little Mummy in London          271

      XLII. Bertha Keys Defeated                281

     XLIII. Mrs. Aylmer's Will                  290

      XLIV. Bertha Changes Her Tone             298

       XLV. "All the Roses Are Dead"            309

      XLVI. A Denouement                        313

     XLVII. Finis                               324




THE TIME OF ROSES. CHAPTER I. HOME AT LAST. It was on a summer's evening early in the month of August that the
little Mummy was once again seen on the platform at Dawlish. She looked now very much like she did when we saw her of yore--slightly
broadened, it is true, by the added years, but she still wore somewhat
rusty widow's black, and her face still had that half-anxious,
half-comical expression, which made people turn to look at her with
something between a smile and a sigh. She was commonplace and plain, and
yet in one sense she was neither commonplace nor plain. She had a
character, and that character had developed during the last few years,
and rather for the better. There were very few passengers on the platform, and the little woman
paced up and down, thinking to herself. "She is coming home at last. I don't know whether I am glad or sorry. I
wonder what sort of girl Miss Sharston is. She has been very kind to
Florence; but it was rash of Florence to invite her. Still, I suppose
we shall be able to manage all right." Just then the signal announcing the approaching train was lowered, and a
moment or two later the said train drew up at the platform and one or
two passengers alighted. Amongst these was a tall, well-set-up,
dark-eyed girl, and accompanying her was another girl, who was not so
tall and was very slender, with an ethereal sort of face, and large,
speaking grey eyes. The tall girl rushed up to where the little Mummy was standing. "Here I am, Mummy," she said, "and this is Kitty, and we are both tired
and hungry, and glad to see you again. Is there any sort of trap for our
luggage, or can the porter take it and shall we walk to the cottage?" "The cottage is just as small as ever it was, Florence," replied the
little Mummy. "Oh, I am so glad to see you, Miss Sharston." Here she
shook hands with Kitty Sharston. "We like things small," said Kitty; "we want to have a real charming
time in the country. It is very good of you to consent to take me in,
Mrs. Aylmer." A porter now appeared. Florence bustled off to see to the luggage, and
Mrs. Aylmer and Kitty slowly left the station. Florence ran after them
in a moment or two. "Well," she said, "here we are! Both of us have done with school for
ever and a day. We are grown-up girls ready to take our place in the
world, and to give you a right good time, Mummy; isn't that so, Kitty?" "Yes," said Kitty, in that gentle voice which always had a pathetic
ring in it. Then she added after a moment's pause: "But I don't know
that I am glad to have left school; I must confess that I enjoyed the
last few years at Cherry Court School immensely." "Don't talk to me of Cherry Court School," said the widow, with a little
shudder. She glanced round in an inquiring way at Florence, who coloured faintly
and then said, in a stout voice: "I have repented of that old sin long
ago, and I do not in the least mind having Cherry Court School alluded
to. I have had a right good time, and it was a very lucky thing for me I
did not win that Scholarship, for if I had I should have been eating the
bread of dependence now, whereas--" Here she drew herself up, uttered a
quick sigh, and looked ahead of her. Her face was not handsome, but it was bright and taking. She was a head
and shoulders taller than the little Mummy, who gazed at her with
something of her old expression of mingled affection and fear. Florence
had quite double the strength of the little Mummy, and this astute
personage was aware of the fact. They reached the tiny house, where Sukey was standing on the steps,
looking not a day older than she had done six years ago. She dropped a
curtsey when she saw Florence, but Florence ran up and wrung her hand. "How do you do, Sukey?" she said. "I am very glad to come home, and this
is my great friend Miss Sharston." Sukey stared up at Kitty; then she glanced at Mrs. Aylmer and slowly
shook her head. "It's a very, _very_ small house," she said, "and how we are to fit you
two young ladies in is more than I can tell." "Never mind, Sukey," said Mrs. Aylmer; "I have it all arranged; don't
you go and put your finger into the pie and spoil things, you silly,
stupid old thing." Here Mrs. Aylmer shook her hand with a playful gesture at Sukey, and
then the entire party found themselves in the house. Florence had not
been home for two or three years. Kitty had never seen the cottage at
Dawlish before. Certainly the one sitting-room was very tiny. "How it has dwindled!" said Florence, looking round her. "Good gracious! Why, the ceiling nearly reaches my head, and as for the walls"--she
stretched out her long arms playfully--"I can almost touch from wall to
wall; but never mind, it's home; it's your house, Mummy, and you are
good to take us girls in and look after us for a whole delightful
fortnight." "There is a very nice supper waiting for you," said Mrs. Aylmer, "and
quite in the old style--crabs and a water-cress salad. I thought you
would appreciate that; we so often had crabs for supper when--when you
were here last, Flo. You remember them, don't you?" "Nothing could be more appetising," replied Florence. "Would you like to
come upstairs now, Kitty?" Mrs. Aylmer had given up her wee bed-room to the two girls. Where she
was to sleep was a mystery known only to herself; but, as she seemed
quite cheerful and happy over it, Florence advised Kitty not to
investigate matters too closely. "It's the Mummy's way," she said; "she likes managing; she quite adores
the thought of having us both with her in this little dull house. Can
you put up with it, Kitty?" "The place is quite lovely," replied Kitty, "and I would put up with
anything after the news I told you this morning." "Oh, that your father is really coming back: that you have not to go to
India after all: that you are going to live here and take a beautiful
house and be real mistress of a home," said Florence. "I don't know anything about the beautiful house, nor being mistress of
a home," replied Kitty; "but I am going to be with father wherever he
is, and that," she added, "will be home to me." "Of course," answered Florence, in a somewhat wistful tone. "But what are you going to do, Flo?" "I am going to earn my living," replied Florence stoutly. "Of course; but how?" "I shall talk things over with you and the Mummy. I have left school at
last for good. What a blessing it is that I shall not have anything to
do with Aunt Susan! I feel so jolly independent; but I should like to
meet her and--"

"Girls, supper is ready," called out Mrs. Aylmer's voice from below, and
the two ran downstairs. The meal was very merry; the old schoolfellows were glad to be together. Mrs. Aylmer chatted in very much the way she had chatted six years ago. She could not help constantly alluding to Mrs. Aylmer the great. "I have not seen her," she said; "but she sends me my money regularly
once a quarter--twelve pounds ten shillings. She never misses a day, I
will say that for her, and I think I am a very good manager not to be
one farthing in debt." "You are perfectly splendid, mother," replied Florence. "She has never once asked for you; she said she would not, and she has
kept her word," continued Mrs. Aylmer. "Well, mother, does it matter?" replied the daughter. "They say, too," continued the little Mummy--and here she heaved a heavy
sigh--"that she has adopted a young man as her heir. I have never seen
him, but his name is Maurice Trevor. He is no relation of any sort, and
goodness knows why she has adopted him. They say he is a very pushing
and a very designing young man, and that he twists poor Susan round his
little finger. I know she sent him to Cambridge and spent an enormous
sum on him there--two or three hundred a year at the very least--and now
he has returned and lives with her, and is to take the management of her
estates. She has been buying a lot of fresh property; but there--I am
sick of the subject. You didn't play your cards well, Florence; you
ought to have been in the position which young Mr. Trevor occupies." "I am glad I am not," replied Florence; "I'm twice the girl for being
independent. Mother, Kitty and I want to go out and have a walk by the
seashore." "Do, my dear, do; I have a great deal to contrive and manage, and
Susan's temper is not what it was. Oh, don't breathe it too loud. I
wouldn't part with her for the world; but really she does rule me. She'll be as cross as two sticks because we sat so long over supper. Do
go; it is a lovely evening." So the two girls put on their hats and went out. There was a silver moon
shining to-night on a silver sea, and the place looked calm and
peaceful, as if no storms had ever ruffled those waters: as if no
trouble had ever visited those shores. Kitty, whose heart was full of song and her face of delight, almost
danced as she walked. Florence's steps were also full of spring, but
they were a little slower than her companion's. "What are you thinking of, Flo?" said the younger girl. "All sorts of things," replied Florence; "about that man, Maurice
Trevor, for instance. I don't envy him." "Nor do I. I wonder he submits to it," said Kitty. "But don't let us
think of him. He has nothing whatever to do with us." "No more he has," answered Florence; "but to eat the bread of
dependence: to eat _her_ bread! Oh, he must be a horror! I only trust I
shall never meet him." Kitty now linked her arm inside her companion's. "You must often come and stay with me," she said: "it would be
delightful. I will coax and beg of father to have a house where you can
come; then you will have two homes, you know, Florry: the little Mummy's
home, as you always call your mother, and my home. You will be equally
welcome at both. Oh, dear, you are quite my very greatest friend--the
greatest friend I have in all the world." "You are wonderfully good to put up with me," said Florence; "but there,
I have repented of that old sin, and it is not going to darken my
life." "There is only one thing I dislike about you, Florence," said Kitty. She
frowned slightly as she spoke. "What is that?" "You always will revert to the old times. Just do promise me that you
won't speak of them again, at least to me." "I will try not, darling; but you are good to forget." CHAPTER II. THE LITTLE MUMMY'S ARRANGEMENTS. Those who remember "A Bunch of Cherries" will recall the fact that
Florence Aylmer left Cherry Court School under a cloud: that Kitty
Sharston won the prize offered by Sir John Wallis, and of course stayed
on at the school; and that Bertha Keys, finding her game was up and her
wickedness discovered, disappeared--it was hoped by the unhappy girl
whom she had injured never to show her face again. In this old world of ours, however, bad people do not always receive
their punishment, and it came to pass that Bertha Keys, although she had
failed in the case of Cherry Court School, did manage to feather her
nest and to secure a very comfortable post for herself. So daring an adventuress was this young woman that she absolutely made
up her mind to lay siege to no less a person than Mrs. Aylmer the great. It was easy for her to do this. Mrs. Aylmer had not noticed her on that
auspicious occasion when all the girls of the school were collected in
Sir John Wallis's fine old house. The part that Bertha had played in the
affair, which had lowered her niece in her eyes for ever, was very
slightly impressed on her memory. There was a pupil teacher who had not
behaved right, but what the name of that pupil teacher was had never
sunk into the good lady's memory. She was terribly disappointed about her niece Florence, although she
pretended not to care, and a month or two afterwards she advertised in a
local paper for a companion. The person who answered this advertisement was Bertha Keys. She managed
to satisfy the good lady with regard to testimonials, taking care never
to breathe the name of Cherry Court School. She secured the post, and
from that moment ruled Mrs. Aylmer, although Mrs. Aylmer supposed that
she ruled her. Florence found a friend in Sir John Wallis, who put her on the
foundation of an excellent school which he knew of. She was well
educated, and now at the age of twenty was prepared to fight the battle
of life. Florence had received a present of twenty pounds from Sir John Wallis on
leaving school, and with this slender provision she meant to fight the
world and find her own niche. Kitty Sharston had fulfilled all her early promise of beauty and grace. Her father was now returning to England, and she was to go and live with
him. Mrs. Aylmer the less was just as determined and just as peculiar as in
the days of old. She always spoke out what she thought, and the next
morning at breakfast, as the two girls with rosy faces and bright eyes
sat round the very tiny board, she expounded her views. "Florence," she said, "I am nothing if I am not frank." "We know that, Mummy," replied her daughter, with a twinkle in her
bright dark eyes; "what is up now?" "Only this: I have been thinking things in the night." "Oh, do satisfy my curiosity, Mrs. Aylmer," exclaimed Kitty; "where did
you sleep last night? You don't know how uncomfortable Florry and I
were, fearing we had taken your bed." "Which you did, my dear. If it was a subject of fear, your fears were
realised," responded the little widow. "Oh, but this is quite dreadful: ought we to stay on here, Florry, or,
at least, ought I to stay on?" "How much, Florry, are you going to pay me per week?" now exclaimed Mrs.
Aylmer. "I wish I could take you, my dear, darling child, for nothing;
but the fact is, I cannot, and if I could Sukey would not allow it. Sukey says that a greater stint she will not bear, and twelve pounds ten
a quarter cannot be made to go farther than we two poor women make it
go, Florence. Do you think you could rise to the sum of fifteen
shillings a week if I give you meat every day?" "Of course, Mummy, of course." "And I must and will pay a pound a week," said Kitty; "why, it is
cheap--so cheap that father will be more than astonished, and the place
is so lovely, and I am enjoying it greatly. Can you put me up and give
me what food I require for a pound a week, Mrs. Aylmer?" "It will be riches," said Mrs. Aylmer, with tears in her eyes. "The fact
is, I can feed you both comfortably for ten shillings a piece, and the
rest will be clear profit: fifteen shillings over for clear profit. Why,
I won't know myself. I might be able to buy some new clothes; for I
declare, my dears, I am shabby, having turned and turned and contrived
and contrived until my clothes are past wearing. Your aunt has not sent
me a box of her cast-offs for over a year, and I think it is extremely
unkind of her." "But you have not told me yet where you slept last night, dear Mrs.
Aylmer," said Kitty. "Well, dear, if you must know, I slept here in this room. I slept on the
dining-table. I borrowed some extra pillows from a neighbour, or,
rather, Sukey borrowed them for me, for it would never do for my friends
to suppose that I have not got abundance of pillows in my own house. I
have had quite a luxurious night, my dear girls; so pray don't trouble
about me." Kitty looked somewhat inclined to cry, but Florence burst out laughing. She jumped up, went to her mother, and put her arms round her neck. "You dear little Mummy," she said; "you are too comical for anything." "There is no doubt whatever," replied Mrs. Aylmer, in answer to this
caress, "that God Almighty makes us each in the most useful shape and
form. Now, you are big, Florence, and could never manage on a table, but
a little woman like me--why, it comes in most handy. Everything is
arranged for the best, and so I always say." Here she glanced around her
with her black eyes full of merriment, and certainly she looked as
happy, notwithstanding her uncomfortable bed, as woman could look. "I thought of sharing the kitchen with Sukey," she said; "but she won't
stand any disarrangement of her habits, so there was nothing but the
table, and if you think that it isn't worth that small discomfort for
the sake of having you two bright young things about the house, and the
neighbours remarking on you and wondering how I am managing, and I with
fifteen shillings a week to the good in my pocket, why, you don't know
your mother, Florence Aylmer." "Well, Mummy, and what was that thought you said you had in the back of
your head?" continued Florence. "Oh, that," said Mrs. Aylmer--here she looked at both girls. "I wonder,
Kitty Sharston," she said, "if you can keep a secret?" "Try me, Mrs. Aylmer," replied Kitty. "Well, I was thinking things over in the night, and it struck me that
the very best possible way to punish my sister-in-law, Susan Aylmer, and
have everything that was wrong put right, is for you, Florence, to
secure the young man, Maurice Trevor, as your husband." "Oh, mother, how can you talk such nonsense?" said Florence. "As if I
would," she added, jumping to her feet and shaking the crumbs from her
dress. "There," said Mrs. Aylmer, "that's just like you. I have been planning
it all. You have but to show the fascinations which all women ought to
possess, and you will soon twist him round your little finger." "I could never, never think of it, mother; and I am distressed that you
should say it, and more particularly before Kitty," was Florence's
answer. Mrs. Aylmer laughed. "Girls always say that," she remarked, "but in the end they yield to the
inevitable. It would be a splendid _coup_; it would serve her right. She would be forced to have you living with her after all. I am told she
has made the young man the heir of all she possesses, and--but what is
the matter, my dear?" "I really won't listen to another word," cried Florence, and she jumped
up and ran out of the room. Mrs. Aylmer's eyes now filled with tears. She looked full at Kitty. "I don't know what is the matter with Florence," she said. "I had hoped
that that dreadful thing which happened years ago had subdued her spirit
and tamed her a trifle, but she seems just as obdurate as ever. It was
such a beautiful idea, and it came over me in the night, and I thought I
would tell Florence at once, and we might put our heads together and
contrive a means by which the young folks could meet; but if she takes
it up in that dreadful spirit, what is to be done?" "But, of course, Mrs. Aylmer, it would never do," said Kitty. "How can
you think of such a thing for a single moment?" CHAPTER III. A STARTLING MEETING. Kitty went out soon afterwards and joined Florence on the beach. They
walked up and down, chatting eagerly. For a time nothing whatever was
said about Mrs. Aylmer's queer suggestion; then suddenly Florence spoke
of it. "There is one thing I ought to say, Kitty." "What is that?" asked Kitty. "You must never mind the little Mummy's oddities. She has lived alone on
extremely circumscribed means for many years, and when she gets an idea
into her head she broods on it." "You mean, of course, what she said with regard to Mr.--Mr. Trevor,"
said Kitty, flushing as she spoke. "Yes, it wasn't nice of her," said Florence, with a sigh; "and we won't
either of us think of it again. Kitty, I have made up my mind not to
marry." "Why so?" "For a great many reasons. One of them is that I vastly prefer my
independence. Another is that I do not think a rich nice man is likely
to come in my way, and I do not want to have anything to do with a poor
man, whether he is nice or nasty. I have seen too much of poverty. I
have had it close to me all my days. I mean to do well in the world: to
be beholden to no one. In a fortnight's time I am going to London. I am
just taking this one fortnight of rest and refreshment: then I go to
London. I have in my trunk half a dozen introductions to different
people. I mean to use them; I mean to get something to do; I mean to
step from the lowest rung of the ladder up to the highest. I mean to be
a success: to prove to the world that a girl can fight her own battles,
live her own life, secure her reward--be, in short, a success." "Why, Florence," said her companion, "how well you speak; how excited
you look!" "I have not gone through all I have gone through in my life for
nothing," was Florence's reply. "I will never scheme again, I will never
again do anything underhand, and I will not marry the man my mother has
singled out for me." She had scarcely said the words before the attention of both girls was
arrested by the sound of a merry laugh not ten yards away. They both
looked round, and Florence's cheeks first of all grew vivid and then
turned white. A gracefully-dressed woman, or rather girl, was crossing
the sands, accompanied by a young man in a grey suit. The man had broad
shoulders, closely-cropped, rather fair hair, a sweeping moustache, and
eyes as blue as the sky. He had a nice, open sort of face. He was tall,
nearly six feet in height, and held himself as erect as a grenadier. He
was bending towards the girl and talking to her, and the girl continued
to laugh, and once she glanced with a quick, darting movement in the
direction where Kitty and Florence were sitting. Then, touching her
companion on the arm, she said: "I am tired; will you take me back to
the hotel?" Neither Kitty nor Florence said a word until the pair--the good-looking,
well-set-up young man and the girl in her pretty summer
dress--disappeared from view. Then Florence turned to Kitty. "It is?" said Florence. Kitty nodded. "Who would have believed it?" continued Florence. She started up in her
excitement. "I do not think I can quite stand this," she said. "But where has she come from?" said Kitty again. "How can I tell? I never want to see her wicked face again." "She looks just as young as she did six years ago," said Kitty. Then she
added impulsively: "I am sorry I have seen her again; I never could bear
her face. Do you think her eyes were set quite straight in her head,
Florence?" "I don't know anything about that," answered Florence recklessly. "Long
ago she did me a great deal of harm. There came a time when I almost
hated her. Whether her eyes are straight or not, her mind at least is
crooked. Who is that man she is with?" "He is good-looking and looks nice also," said Kitty. Florence made no reply. The girls paced up and down together; but
somehow the edge of the day's enjoyment seemed gone. They went in to
their midday meal between twelve and one, and afterwards Kitty, who said
she felt a little tired, went to lie down. Florence, however, was still
restless and perturbed; she hated the thought of the vicinity of Bertha
Keys, and yet she had a curious longing to know something about her. "I am not going to fight shy of her or to show her that I am in the
least afraid of her," thought Florence; "I can make myself much more
disagreeable to her and much more dangerous than she can ever make
herself to me. I wonder where she is staying?" Mrs. Aylmer proposed that she and her daughter should spend the
afternoon on the sands. "Let us visit the shrimp-woman and get some fresh shrimps and perhaps a
crab or a lobster for supper," said the little Mummy, holding out a bait
which would have quite won the day in the old times. But Florence had
outgrown her taste for these special dainties. "I want to go out alone, Mummy," she said; "you and I and Kitty can have
a walk after tea, but just for the present I must be alone." She pinned
on her hat, put on her gloves, and left the cottage. Mrs. Aylmer stood in the porch and watched her. "A good girl, a fairly good-looking girl too," she said to herself, "but
obstinate, obstinate as a mule. Even that trouble of long ago has not
tamed her. She is the image of her poor dear father; he always was a man
with a desperate will of his own." Miss Aylmer watched Florence until she disappeared in the direction of
the pier. There was a bench there, and a girl was seated on it. She wore
a pink dress of some washing material and a large black shady hat. Florence came nearer and nearer. The girl, who was reading a book,
dropped it and gazed in her direction. Presently Florence found herself
within less than two hundred yards from the place where the other girl
was seated. At this moment the girl flung down her book, uttered a hasty
exclamation, and came forward. "Is it or is it not Florence Aylmer?" she said. She held out both her
hands, uttering a little cry of apparent pleasure. Florence did not notice the outstretched hands. She came up to her. "I have come on purpose," she said; "I knew you were here. What are you
doing here?" "Why should I tell you what I am doing?" replied Bertha. Her eyes
slightly contracted, she pushed her hair away from her forehead, then
she looked full at Florence and uttered a laugh. "What is the good of
quarrelling?" she said. "We have met. I am in the running; you are out
of it. I am up and you are down. My prospects are first-rate, yours----"

"What do you mean? How can you tell anything about my prospects? Why do
you trouble me? Why did you come to meet me just now?" "Speak the truth," said Miss Keys; "were you not coming on purpose to
see me?" Florence was silent for a moment. "I recognised you this morning," she said, "and I was restless to know
why you were here." "Ah, curiosity, you are Eve's own daughter," said Bertha Keys, with a
laugh. "Well, now that we have met, we may as well talk the thing out. Can you deny that you are down and I am up?" "I neither deny nor affirm your statement," replied Florence. "I have
never heard of you--I have never mentioned your name since that
dreadful day at Cherry Court six years ago." "Six years this autumn--not quite six years yet," replied Bertha,
correcting her. "Yes, I too remember the day," she said thoughtfully. "It seemed a bad day for me, and yet it was a good one. I have feathered
my nest. You stepped out of it and I stepped in. Do you understand?" "I don't." "You have grown a good deal, Florence Aylmer," said Bertha, looking her
all over. "You are what would be called a fine young woman. If you had
had the advantages of a refined life, of very good dress, you might, now
that you are grown up, command almost any future. As it is"--she
shrugged her shoulders. "What is the matter with my dress?" said Florence; "you always were
queer and rude, Bertha, and time has not improved you." "You cannot say that I am badly dressed," said Bertha Keys, and she
glanced at her exquisitely-cut pink zephyr skirt, her pretty blouse, and
her neat shoes. Florence also eyed her all over. "You are well got up," she said; "but what of that? Your face never
changes." "Thank you for the compliment," replied Bertha; "I cannot say that you
are well got up, and your face, if it has changed, is not more beautiful
than it promised to be." "Pray leave my face alone; it belongs to me, not to you," retorted
Florence, with some spirit. "Do you want to know what I am doing now: how I am managing to live?" said Bertha. "You can tell me if you please; if you prefer not to say anything, it
does not matter in the least." "But it does matter; it matters a good deal," replied Bertha. "You did
something very silly long ago. You thought to succeed, but you failed. It was not my fault. I did what I could for you. If I was clever then, I
am still more clever now. I have a gift of writing, but I need not wear
my brain out thinking of curious essays and well-devised stories and
clever plots. I am working at my own story, and I think it will come off
well." "But what do you mean? Where are you?" "We are staying at the 'Crown and Garter' for the present." "We?" said Florence, in a questioning tone. "Yes; how stupid you are! Have not you guessed! Mrs. Aylmer, Mr. Trevor,
and I." "You don't mean it?" said Florence, springing to her feet. "Aunt Susan! Are you staying with her?" "Yes, and I fancy I am indispensable to her. I have lived with her for
nearly six years. I manage her affairs; I write her letters; I attend to
her business; she consults me about everything. She goes where I like;
she does what I want. The nest is comfortable. It was meant for you, but
it fits me. Now perhaps you know." "And Mr.--Mr. Trevor?" said Florence, in a trembling voice. "Oh, he fits me too. He is a very good fellow, very nice indeed. He
thinks I am quite an angel; he admires my talent, as he calls it. I
believe he would be very sad if I were not there; he is much more likely
to go than I am. Yes, Florence, you did well for me when you lost that
Scholarship. I thought I would tell you." "Oh! oh!" said Florence, trembling and turning pale; "but if Aunt Susan
knew! If she knew!" "Yes, if she knew," said Bertha, "but she does not know, and of course
you won't tell her." "You think I won't; but--but Mummy will." "I don't think so. It would be much worse for yourselves if you did. I
can hoodwink her; I can turn her against your mother; I can make her
more bitterly opposed to you. Now you have to understand. I have long
felt that I must come to an understanding with you. You must keep
silence. If you speak you will do very little good, but it is possible
you may give me an uncomfortable half-hour. Now, I don't care to have an
uncomfortable half-hour, and, above all things, I don't want Mr. Trevor
set against me." "Do you--do you mean to marry him?" said Florence abruptly. Bertha Keys coloured very faintly. "You are impertinent," she said; "I refuse to answer. I am comfortable
where I am, and I mean to stay there. If you put Mr. Trevor against me,
if you put Mrs. Aylmer against me, it will be all the worse for
yourself; but if, on the other hand, you respect my secret, I can make
things perhaps a shade more comfortable for you." "Oh, oh, Bertha, no," said poor Florence. She covered her face--her
cheeks were crimson. "I hate you! I can never be your friend. Why did
you come here?" "I came on purpose. I have not lost sight of you. You know something
about me which I do not want the world to know. You could make things
uncomfortable for me. I guessed that you would be coming here about now,
and Mrs. Aylmer, Mr. Trevor, and I came to the 'Crown and Garter' at my
suggestion. We will leave again the day after to-morrow; but not--not
until you have made me a promise." CHAPTER IV. AN EVIL GENIUS. After Bertha said the last words, Florence was quite silent. Bertha
turned and looked at her; then, satisfied with what she saw or fancied
she saw in her face, she turned aside again, giving a faint sigh as she
did so. "It was a narrow shave," she said to herself; "this had to be. If she
took it in one way all was lost; but she won't take it in that dreadful
way: she will protect me for her own sake. The girl who could stoop to
deceit, who could use my assistance to gain her own ends six years ago,
is not immaculate now. I can use her in the future; she will be
extremely useful in many ways, and my secret is absolutely safe." So Bertha leant back against the bench, crossed one prettily-shod foot
over the other, and looked out across the summer sea. Presently Florence
spoke in a low tone. "Good-bye," she said. She rose as she uttered the words. "Why do you say that? Sit down again. We have come to no terms." "We cannot come to any," answered Florence, in still that low, almost
heart-broken voice. Then, all of a sudden, without the least warning,
she burst into tears. "You bring the past back to me, Bertha," she said: "the hateful past." "It is very silly of you indeed to cry," said Bertha; "and as to the
past, goodness knows it is dead and buried deep enough unless you choose
to dig it out of its grave. Leave it alone, Florence, and come to terms
with me. Now, for goodness' sake stop crying!" "I won't tell of you just at present," said Florence; "that is the only
thing I can say now." Once more she rose. "You had Kitty Sharston with you this morning," continued Bertha. "She
recognised me too, did she not?" "Yes, we both recognised you." "I never did anything particular to injure her; I mean, everything came
right for her," continued Bertha; "she could scarcely interfere. It is
you whom I dread. You and your mother between you can do me harm; but,
after all, even at your very worst I may not be deprived of my present
comfortable home and my delightful future. But I do not choose to run
the risk, so you must promise that you won't betray me." "Does mother know that Mrs. Aylmer--that Aunt Susan is staying at
Dawlish?" continued Florence. "She probably knows it by this time. Mrs. Aylmer has written her a note
asking her to call to see her. She won't see you, so don't imagine it." "I don't want to see her." "Before your mother accepts that invitation, I want you to secure her
silence; or, stay," continued Bertha briskly, "I will see her myself." She thought for a moment over a new idea which had come to her. Her lips
then broke into smiles. "How stupid of me!" she said. "I never thought of your mother before;
she is the very person. I will meet you to-morrow morning here,
Florence, and then you can tell me what you decide. It will be all the
better for you if you are wise: all the worse for you if you are silly. Now go home, as I see you are dying to do so." Florence turned away from her companion without even bidding her
good-bye: her heart was in a tumult. She scarcely knew what to say or
what to do. She did not want to injure Bertha, and yet she hated to feel that she
was in her present position. She disliked her as much as it was possible
for her to dislike anyone. "She makes me feel bad," thought the girl; "she brings back the dreadful
past. Oh, I was a wicked girl; but she helped to make me so. She brings
back the dreadful, dreadful past." By the time she had reached her mother's cottage she resolved to tell
her exactly what had transpired and to ask her advice. "For the little Mummy must also have learned her lesson: the little
Mummy will tell me what is right to do," thought the girl. But when she entered the house Mrs. Aylmer was nowhere to be seen. Sukey, on the contrary, came forward with an important manner. "Well, Miss Flo," she said, "when you come to the place, that aunt of
yours seems also to put in an appearance. Your mother has had a note
from her. She is staying at the 'Crown and Garter,' and Mrs. Aylmer has
gone up there to tea. No, you are not invited, Miss Flo, and sorry I am
that you are not." "It doesn't matter, Sukey," replied Florence. She sighed as she spoke. "Have you a bit of a headache, my dear?" asked the old servant. "Yes, I think I have," answered the girl. "I'll get you your tea, and the tea for the other pretty young lady too. You can have it in the porch. It's a lovely evening. It don't do for
girls to have headaches; but there's nothing to set you right like a cup
of tea." Sukey bustled off to prepare the simple meal, and presently Kitty came
downstairs. She was refreshed by her sleep and inclined to be merry with
Florence. Florence, however, felt too anxious to talk much. "What is the matter with you, Florry? Are you worried about anything?" asked the companion. "Oh, I suppose it is about that wretched Bertha
Keys. What can she be doing here?" "You'll be amazed when I tell you that I saw Bertha this afternoon,"
continued Florence. "Where do you think she is staying? What post do you
think she has secured?" "How can I tell?" answered Kitty, raising her brows almost with
impatience; then she added, before Florence could utter a word: "I am
afraid I don't greatly care. All you and I want is that she should not
come into our lives." "But she has come into my life once more," said poor Florence, clasping
and unclasping her strong white hands as she spoke. "I believe she is my
evil genius. I quite dread her, and she has a power over me, and it has
not lessened, although I have not seen her for six years. Do you know
where she is staying?" "No." "She is living with Aunt Susan Aylmer as her companion." Kitty was so much startled by the news that she sprang to her feet. "Never!" she cried. "It is the case; she has been with Aunt Susan for years." "But how did she get the post? From the little I have seen of your aunt,
she is one of the most particular, fastidious women in the world." "Trust Bertha to manage that," replied Florence, in a bitter tone; "but
anyhow, she is very much afraid of me: she does not want me to see Aunt
Susan, nor tell her what I know." "And what will you do, Flo?" "I am undecided at the present moment." "I think you ought to tell her," said Kitty gravely. "She won't see me, and I do dread making Bertha a greater enemy than she
is at present." "All the same, I think you ought to tell her," replied Kitty. She looked
grave and earnest as she spoke. "If I were you I would," replied Florence, with some bitterness; "if I
were you I would never do a crooked thing, or think a crooked thought;
but I am not made that way. I am different, quite different. She
frightens me." "Well, don't think any more of her just now. Take your tea and let us go
out for a walk." CHAPTER V.

MAURICE TREVOR. Florence's head ached sufficiently badly to make her inclined to
follow Kitty's advice. The girls had just finished their tea when
Mrs. Aylmer, with flushed cheeks, and wearing her very best
turned-for-the-twentieth-time dress, entered the little room where they
were seated. "Well, well, girls," she said: "well, well, where do you think I have
been?" "I know, Mummy," said Florence. "You know!" replied Mrs. Aylmer. "Who told you?" "Sukey." "I begged of her not; but really that woman can keep nothing to herself,
and she is always agog to be first in the field. Your aunt is going to
send me a trunk full of old clothes. I dare say some of them may be made
to fit you, Flo." "I do not think so, mother," answered Florence. "Where is the use of being proud? She's a very fine figure of a woman
still. She wears wonderfully, and she has a most charming secretary: a
sort of companion, a delightful girl. She and I walked down together
almost to this door. She is in your shoes, my poor Florence; but she is
really a _very_ nice girl." "I have seen her to-day, mother; I know who she is," said Florence
gravely; "her name is Bertha Keys." "Bertha Keys," replied Mrs. Aylmer; "Bertha Keys?" "You know who Bertha Keys is, mother. She is the girl, the pupil
teacher, who behaved so badly at Cherry Court School six years ago." "Oh, we won't mention that affair; it is dead and buried; we are not
going to dig it out of its grave," replied Mrs. Aylmer. Florence did not reply. She looked full at her mother. "Bertha has been saying something to her," she thought; "she has been
trying to influence her. Those were almost Bertha's own words." She got
up hastily. "The fact is, mother, I do not care to talk of it," she said; "the whole
thing has upset me very much." "Well, darling, I cannot think that it is your affair. It is bitterly
disappointing that you should have lost your Aunt Susan's patronage. How
proud I should be of you now if you were really her adopted daughter." "Why, no, mother, you would not see me; you forget that part." "To be sure, how stupid I am!" said Mrs. Aylmer. "Well, your aunt was
most agreeable to-day: not so stingy either. We had quite a nice little
tea; and that young man I told you of, Mr. Trevor, he came in. He is a
charming person, my dear; quite fascinating. I was much taken with him. I longed to ask him to call, but I saw that Susan would allow no
liberties. He chatted to me all the time, and was so agreeable. I am
quite delighted with him." "We are going for a walk now, mother," said Florence. "Well, dear, do; you both look pale. I want you to get nice and
sunburnt, and to have a right good time. Yes, I am quite pleased with my
visit. There is no use in quarrelling with your relations, and Susan,
the moment she looked at my poor turned skirt--it is shiny, is it not,
Miss Sharston?--she spoke about that trunk of clothes which is to arrive
next week. She turned to the charming Miss Keys, and asked her to
collect them." "And you stood it, mother; you really stood it," said Florence, the
colour coming and going on her face. "My dear, good girl, beggars cannot be choosers. I have been absolutely
at my wits' ends for clothes since Susan has been so thoughtless. I not
only stood it, but on the way home I gave Miss Keys a hint as to the
sort of things I wanted. I told her to try and smuggle into the trunk
one of your aunt's rich black silks. She said she thought she could
manage it, as she has at least four or five at the present moment, and
never can tell herself how many she has. I told Miss Keys to let it be
four in the future, and send the fifth on to me, and she laughed. She is
a very clever, agreeable girl, and said she thought it could be done. I
am made. I'll astonish the neighbours this winter." "Come out, Kitty," said poor Florence, turning to her companion. She
felt that, fond as she was of the little Mummy, she could not endure any
more of her society for the present. The moment the girls had departed, Mrs. Aylmer, who was standing on
tiptoe near the window to watch them as they went slowly away in the
direction of the beach, turned abruptly, went to the door of the little
sitting-room, and locked it. She then put her hand into her pocket. "Is it true? Have I the evidence of my own senses?" she thought. "I
never met a nicer girl than Miss Keys. Of course, she did wrong years
ago: but so, for that matter, did my own poor Florence. She really can
be made of great use. That black silk will be invaluable, and...." Here
the widow, from the depths of her pocket, brought out four sovereigns. "She says she can give me more by-and-by, and I am to influence
Florence. Of course I will. Do I envy the poor child her post? By no
means. As Florence cannot occupy it, as well she as another. That she is
setting her cap at that handsome Mr. Trevor there is no doubt; but
perhaps Florence can win him over her head. We will see about that. Anyhow, I am not going to injure the poor, dear girl, and I shall tell
Florence so." Mrs. Aylmer felt far too excited to sit down. From the depths of poverty
she suddenly felt herself raised almost to a pinnacle of wealth, as she
estimated it. Four golden sovereigns and the faithful promise of one of Susan's best
silk dresses. "There will be lots of odds and ends besides," thought the
little widow. "I am made! I am made! Now, if I only could! if I only
could!" As she considered the possibility of a very definite line of action, she
still continued to stand by the tiny window of the sitting room, and
from this vantage-point she saw a young man in a grey tweed suit
strolling slowly in the direction of the sea-beach. "Mr. Trevor!" she said to herself; "Mr. Maurice Trevor, as
gentlemanly-looking a young fellow as I have seen for many a day. He
reminds me of poor dear Florence's father. He had just that downright
sort of air, and he was fond of sticking his hands into his pockets
too--yes, and he used to whistle, as I see that young fellow is
whistling. I am always told that whistling is a good sign: it shows a
generous disposition. If I am not greatly mistaken, that young man
Maurice Trevor is generous and open-handed; he'll suit me. Now, if I
could only introduce them! Florence and Kitty Sharston are on the
beach--Mr. Trevor is going down to the beach. I'll go and take a walk. It is a fine evening, and it will do me good." No sooner had this thought come to Mrs. Aylmer than she bustled into the
kitchen. "Well, ma'am," said Sukey, in a cross voice, "have you washed up the
tea-things yet? We're in a rare mull this afternoon with those two young
ladies in the house, and I can't do more than I said I would do. You
promised that the tea-things should be your care, ma'am; and are they
washed up? That's what I want to know." "Oh, my dear good Sukey, don't worry about the tea-things now," said
Mrs. Aylmer. "I am in no end of a flurry. A beautiful new black silk
dress is promised to me, Sukey, and I am made in other ways too. You
wash them up, and I'll give you threepence; I will--I promise you." "You can't afford it, ma'am. What's the good of promising what you
haven't got?" said the obdurate Sukey. "I will; I declare I will, and I'll bring in something nice and tasty
for supper. You wash the tea-things, there's a good soul!" Mrs. Aylmer scarcely waited for Sukey's very indignant reply. The next
moment she was out of the house. She could walk quickly enough when she chose, and she knew every yard of
the ground. Soon she was on the beach. Mr. Trevor was walking slowly in
front of her. He was smoking a cigarette, his straw hat was pushed
slightly forward over his blue eyes, his hands were still in his
pockets, he was looking straight ahead of him, and as he slowly
sauntered forward he was thinking. His thoughts were evidently not quite
to his taste, for he frowned now and then, and looked over the wide
expanse of sands, and occasionally he stood quite still. Thus Mrs.
Aylmer found it easy to catch him up. She did so with a little pattering
run which was one of her characteristics. "Good evening, Mr. Trevor," she said, in her cheerful tone. He started when she spoke to him, turned to look at her, and then took
off his hat. "Good evening," he said; "I did not recognise you at first." "No wonder, as you only saw me for the first time to-day. I am taking a
stroll; it is very pleasant here in the evenings, is it not?" "Very pleasant! It is a charming place," said Trevor. Mrs. Aylmer considered for a moment whether she should proceed on her
walk alone, or whether she should try to induce the young man to
accompany her. "I am looking for my girls," she said; "they went down on the beach
half an hour ago. Did you happen to see them, Mr. Trevor, as you were
walking?" "I have only just come out. I have not seen anyone," was his answer. "Are you quite sure? I _know_ they were going on the sands, my two
girls, my daughter and her friend. I should like to introduce you to my
daughter, Mr. Trevor." "I should be pleased to know her," he answered, still speaking in that
vague sort of way which showed that he was thinking of something else. Mrs. Aylmer held both her hands before her eyes. Thus shaded from the
evening sun, she was able to look long and steadily across the beach. "I do declare I believe those two are the very girls we are looking
for," she cried; "if you will come with me now (and I don't suppose you
have anything special to do) I'll introduce you." Trevor had, of course, no excuse to make. He was not interested in Mrs.
Aylmer's daughter, nor in Mrs. Aylmer herself, but as well walk with her
as alone. So the two stepped briskly across the sands. "It was the greatest possible pleasure to me to meet you to-day,"
continued the little widow; "I am so glad that my poor sister-in-law has
a bright young fellow like you to look thoroughly after her affairs." "But I don't look after them," he said; "Mrs. Aylmer has been extremely
good to me, but the person who manages her business affairs is that very
clever young lady, Miss Keys." "Oh, what a genius she is!" said Mrs. Aylmer; "a wonderful girl, quite
charming." "Do you think so?" answered Trevor. He looked at the little widow, and
the faintest dawn of an amused smile stole into his eyes. "Do I think so? I am immensely taken with her," said Mrs. Aylmer. "She
is, I know, the greatest comfort to my dear sister-in-law. How
splendidly Susan wears, and how considerate she is! I don't know what I
should do without her. Mr. Trevor, I will say it, you are a very lucky
person to be such a favourite." "Mrs. Aylmer has done a great deal for me," said the young man; "she has
after a fashion adopted me." "And you are very glad, are you not?" "Yes, I am glad," he replied. "Is that your daughter?" he continued, as
if he wished to turn the conversation. "That is my dear daughter Florence." Mrs. Aylmer spoke excitedly. Florence and Kitty Sharston were seated on the edge of a rock. Kitty was
poking with her parasol at some sea-anemones which were clinging to the
rock just under the water. Florence was gazing with a frown between her
dark brows at her mother and the man who was by her mother's side. If
she could have fled, she would, but Mrs. Aylmer, who knew Florence's
ways to perfection, now raised her voice to a shrill scream. "Stay where you are, Florence; I am coming to sit with you, so is Mr.
Trevor; don't stir until we come up." Poor Florence's blush was so vivid that it was well it was too far off
to be noticed. There was nothing for it, however, but to obey. Mrs.
Aylmer came up in high good humour, and made the necessary
introductions. CHAPTER VI. MRS. AYLMER'S STRATEGY. "Now, this is cosy," said the widow, "quite what I call friendly. I love
these impromptu little meetings; all the stiffness which generally
surrounds a first introduction must vanish when four human creatures
find themselves face to face with Nature in her grandest aspects. Look
at those great rolling waves, Mr. Trevor, and tell me if you ever saw
anything finer in its way." "Oh, mother, don't be a goose," said Florence. Try as she would, she
could not help laughing. That laugh settled the matter. Trevor looked
into her dancing eyes, noticed how white her teeth were, and, moving a
step nearer, sat down by her side. "Do you know this place well?" he asked. "It has been my home for the greater part of my life," was Florence's
reply. She felt inclined to be rude to Mr. Trevor. The man who was adopted by
Aunt Susan, who was doubtless the chosen and confidential friend of
Bertha Keys, could surely have no interest for her! But Trevor had a
gentle and very polite manner. It never occurred to him that this
somewhat showy-looking girl could dislike his company. He was
good-looking himself, and accustomed to being made much of and petted a
good deal by women, and before many minutes had passed, Florence, in
spite of herself, was chatting gaily with him. She forgot that her mother had manoeuvred in the most open and brazen
way to secure this introduction; she forgot everything but the pleasure
of talking to a fellow-creature, who seemed to understand her
sentiments, and also to approve them. When a young man approves of a
girl's ideas, when he likes to look into her face and watch the sparkle
of her eyes, she must be one in a thousand if she does not find him
agreeable, sympathetic, and all the rest. Presently Trevor suggested that he and Florence should go down on the
beach, cross some low-lying rocks, and find a certain pool, which at low
water contained the most lovely of sea-anemones to be found anywhere
round the coast. "Oh, come too, mother; come too, Kitty," said Florence, as she jumped to
her feet. "No, my dear, I am much too tired," said Mrs. Aylmer. She clutched at
Kitty's skirt as the young girl was about to rise, and pulled her back,
to her own astonishment. "Stay by me, Miss Sharston: I have much to say to you," remarked the
widow. Accordingly Florence and Trevor, Florence well knowing that Kitty had
not been allowed to come with her, started on their tour of
investigation alone. They found the sea-anemones and chatted about them,
and Trevor asked Florence if she would like to begin to make a
collection, and Florence began by saying "Yes," but finally refused the
tempting offer which Trevor made to help her in the matter. "I am going to London in a few days," she said. "To London?" he asked; "now, in this broiling weather?" "Yes; why not? Don't you like London in August?" "I never care for London at any time--in August it is particularly
detestable," was his reply. "We are going to stay here for a day or two. I think you know Miss Keys; she told me that you were an old friend of
hers." "She was at the same school with me years ago," said Florence, flushing
as she spoke. "Oh, do look at that beauty in the corner: a kind of dark
electric-blue. What a wonderful creature! Oh, and that rose-coloured one
near it! Sea-anemones are like great tropical flowers." Meanwhile Mrs. Aylmer was consulting with Kitty. "Shall we or shall we not ask him to supper?" she said. "What do you
think?" "I am sure I don't know," said Kitty. She looked at her companion with
those innocent, wide-open grey eyes, which were her greatest charm. "He has quite taken to Florence; don't you see for yourself?" "Oh, yes; everyone takes to her," replied Kitty, with enthusiasm; "she
is so nice and honest and downright." Mrs. Aylmer sighed. "She has had her troubles, poor child; but in the end things may come
round in a most wonderful way. Do you know, I like him very much?" "Like who?" asked Kitty. "Really, Miss Sharston, you are a little silly--Mr. Trevor, Mr. Maurice
Trevor, the adopted son of my wealthy sister-in-law, Susan Aylmer." "Oh, yes," said Kitty; "I forgot that you were talking about him." "I was asking you, my dear, if you thought we might invite him to join
us at supper." "Why not?" said Kitty. "Well, Sukey's temper grows worse and worse. We were going to have a
very small supper, not what you could put a man down to; but if he were
coming you and I might just whip round to the shrimp-shop and get a
lobster: lobster with a nice salad is what young men delight in; and we
might get a bottle of claret at the grocer's. If you would carry the
lobster, I would bring the claret. It is an enormous expense to go to,
but if in the end----"

"Oh, dear," said Kitty, rising. She looked at Mrs. Aylmer, and the
colour rose in a delicate wave all over her pretty face. "Oh, I would
not," she said; "I don't think Florence would like it--I am certain she
would not. Oh, you know her: she will be rude; don't do it, please,
please don't." But if there was one person more determined than another to have her own
way, it was the little Mummy. She had only vaguely considered the
possibility of asking Mr. Trevor to partake of their humble meal when
she first spoke of it; now that Kitty opposed it she made up her mind
that by hook or crook she would convey him to their house. What a
victory it would be! Susan Aylmer, her rich sister-in-law, waiting and
wondering why her handsome and fascinating young protege did not appear:
Bertha Keys finding her meal very dull without him: both these ladies
talking about him, and in their hearts of hearts longing for his
society: and he all the time in the tiny cottage, partaking of the
humble fare of Mrs. Aylmer the less, with the naughty Florence close to
his side, and the fascinating Kitty not a yard off. Oh, it was worth a
struggle! Mrs. Aylmer rose to her feet. A good stiff wind was beginning to blow,
and she staggered for a moment as it caught her stout little person. Then she raised her voice: "Florence!" "Yes, mother," said Florence, turning. She was a hundred yards away now,
and Trevor was talking in a more fascinating way than ever about
sea-anemones and their beauties. "If Mr. Trevor would come back to supper with us, we should be much
pleased to see him. I will expect you, dear, to bring him in, when you
have done your little preambulation. So pleased if you will join us, Mr. Trevor." All these words were shrieked on the sea-breeze. Florence made a reply
which did not quite reach her mother's ears. Mrs. Aylmer shouted once
more, and then, seizing Kitty's hand, turned in the direction of the
little town. "Now for the shrimp-woman and the grocer's shop," she said; "we must be
as quick as possible. Sukey will be in a flurry: but never mind: it is
worth the effort." Poor Kitty had never felt more uncomfortable. Really there were times
when the little Mummy was almost unendurable. A lobster was chosen,
quite a nice expensive one; Kitty was desired to go to the nearest
greengrocer's shop, in order to secure the crispest lettuce and half a
pound of tomatoes; the bottle of claret was also bought, and, laden
with these spoils, the girl and the elder lady re-entered the tiny
cottage. "Now then, Sukey," called out Mrs. Aylmer, "brisk is the word. I have
caught the most charming young man you ever heard of, and he is coming
to supper with us." Sukey stared at her mistress. "What folly are you up to now, ma'am?" she asked. "No folly at all, my dear Sukey. Here's six-pence for you; don't say
anything about it. Make the salad as only you know how, and trim the
lobster. I was considerate, Sukey, and I got things that really will not
give you trouble. Kitty, my dear sweet little girl, help me to arrange
the table. It will be supper in a bower--quite romantic. The young man
will enjoy it; I am certain he will. Dear Flo! what it is to have a
mother like me to look after her and see that she does not waste her
opportunities." "But," said Kitty, changing colour as she spoke, "do you really
mean----"

"I mean that mum's the word at present," was Mrs. Aylmer's mysterious
remark. "Help me, Kitty Sharston, like a good girl, and for goodness
sake don't make yourself look too pretty to-night. I don't want him to
turn his attention to you, I may as well say so frankly." Kitty earnestly longed for the moment when she should leave Mrs.
Aylmer's cottage. The supper was prepared, however; everything was arranged; and then the
two ladies stood by the window watching for the return of the truants,
as Mrs. Aylmer was now pleased to call Florence and Mr. Trevor. Presently she saw her daughter coming up the somewhat steep path alone. "Flo, Flo, child, where is he? is he coming?" "Oh, no, mother," said Florence. "Did you give him my invitation?" "I told him he was not to accept it," said Florence. "Oh, dear me,
mother, don't be silly. But, I say, what a nice lobster, and I am so
hungry." CHAPTER VII. THE CHAINS BEGIN TO FRET. Meanwhile Trevor went slowly back to the hotel. He had enjoyed his talk
with Florence; he liked her brusque way, she did not flatter him, and
she was, he considered, a particularly attractive-looking girl. In Mrs.
Aylmer's society he was made a great deal of and fussed over, and when
that happens to a young man he always enjoys the sort of girl who snubs
him by way of contrast. He thought Mrs. Aylmer the less one of the most
extraordinary women he had ever met; but as he liked Florence, and was
in the mood for a bit of an adventure, he would gladly have accepted her
mother's invitation to supper if she had not tabooed it. "You are not to come," said Florence, looking at him with her wide-open
frank dark eyes; "mother is the soul of hospitality, but we are very
poor: we have nothing proper to give you for supper, and I for one would
much rather you did not come." "I do not in the least mind what I eat," he said, in a somewhat pleading
tone, and he looked full at Florence with his blue eyes. "Nevertheless, you are not to come; it is only my mother's way: she
always goes on like that with strangers. I never allow people to accept
her invitations." After this there was nothing more to be said, and Florence and Trevor
bade each other a very friendly good-bye. When Trevor reached the "Crown and Garter" he found that Mrs. Aylmer and
Miss Keys were already at dinner. They had both wondered where he was,
and Bertha Keys had been a little anxious and a little uneasy. When he
came in, the faces of both ladies brightened. "What makes you so late?" said Mrs. Aylmer, looking up at him. "I had a bit of an adventure," he said. He drew his chair to the table. "There was a slight chance of my not coming in to supper at all," he
continued. "I met that charming little lady who visited you to-day, Mrs. Aylmer." "What?" said Mrs. Aylmer, dropping her knife and fork. "I met her again, and she introduced me to her daughter and to another
young lady who is staying with them. By the way, they are your
relations, so the little lady told me, and she was very hospitable, and
invited me to supper, and I should have been very glad to go if the
young lady had not told me that I must not accept her mother's
invitation." Now, these remarks were anything but agreeable to Mrs. Aylmer, and still
less did they suit Bertha Keys. Neither lady said anything, however, at
the present moment, but each glanced at the other. After a time, Mrs.
Aylmer stretched out her hand and touched Trevor on his sleeve. "I am sorry you have made the acquaintance of Miss Florence Aylmer," she
said. "Sorry? Why?" he asked. "I consider her a remarkably nice girl." "I regret to have to inform you that she is anything but a nice girl. I
will tell you about her another time. It is quite contrary to my wishes
that you should have anything to do with her: you understand?" Trevor flushed. He had a way of looking annoyed at times, and he looked
annoyed now. His silken chains sometimes fretted him a great deal. He
often wondered whether he had done right in allowing himself to become
Mrs. Aylmer's adopted son. Bertha, however, gave him a warning glance,
and he said nothing. Presently dinner was over, and Bertha beckoned to him to join her on the
balcony. "Shall we go out on the sands?" she said. "I have something I want to
say to you." "But Mrs. Aylmer has something to say to me also--something about that
particularly nice girl, Miss Florence Aylmer." "She will not say it to you to-night; she has a headache, and I
persuaded her to go early to bed. I quite sympathise with you, too,
about Florence; she is one of my greatest friends." Trevor gave Bertha a grateful glance. "I am so glad you like her," he said. "I was never yet mistaken about
anyone, and I took to her frank ways. She looks like the sort of girl
who will never deceive you." Bertha gave a peculiar smile, which vanished almost as soon as it
visited her face. "Shall we meet, say, in twenty minutes," she said, "just by the pier? I
must see Mrs. Aylmer to bed; but I can join you then." "Very well," he answered. Bertha left the balcony, and Trevor, lighting a cigar, tried to soothe
his somewhat ruffled feelings. He had never liked Mrs. Aylmer less than
he did at that moment. "It is horrid when a woman runs down a girl," he said to himself; "such
bad form, and, as to this girl, it is impossible Mrs. Aylmer can know
anything against her." Presently he looked at his watch, and prepared to keep his appointment
with Bertha. He liked Bertha Keys very much; she was always jolly and
good-tempered, and she often tried to smooth over matters when there was
any little difference between himself and Mrs. Aylmer. When he reached
the pier he found her waiting for him. It was a moonlight night, and the
young couple began to pace up and down. "What is it?" he said at last. "Have you anything special to say?" "I know you are in a bad humour, and I am not surprised," she said. "Listen, Miss Keys," said Trevor. He dropped his cigar, and turned and
faced her. "I often feel that I cannot stand this sort of thing much
longer: it is like being in chains. I would much rather talk the matter
out with Mrs. Aylmer, tell her I am very much obliged to her for her
kind intentions with regard to me, but that I would sooner carve out my
own career in life and be indebted to no one." "And how silly that would be!" said Bertha. "But what do you want Mrs.
Aylmer to do?" "To let me go. I feel like a captive in her train; it is not manly. I
never felt more annoyed than when she spoke to me as she did this
evening. It is horrid when a woman abuses a girl--such bad taste." "You know how peculiar she is," said Bertha; "but you suit her better
than anyone I know. You want her to give you money to allow you to live
in town. I am sure I can manage it. I quite understand that you must
hate being tied to her apron-strings." "It is detestable," said the young man; "and if it were not for my own
mother, who seems so happy about me, and so grateful to Mrs. Aylmer, I
should break with her to-morrow." "I quite sympathise with you," said Bertha. "You must have money, and
you must go to town. You want to read for the Bar: I will see that it is
arranged. Mrs. Aylmer is rich, but not rich enough for you to live all
your life in idleness. It would break her heart now if you deserted her:
she has gone through much." "What do you mean?" "I cannot tell you." "Why does she dislike Miss Florence Aylmer?" "I would rather not say." "But she will tell me herself." "I shall beg of her not to do so." "By the way," said Trevor, after a pause, "is this girl Mrs. Aylmer's
niece?" "She is her niece by marriage. Mrs. Aylmer's husband was Florence
Aylmer's uncle." "Then in the name of all that is just," cried Trevor impetuously, "why
should I have the fortune which is really meant for Florence Aylmer? Oh, this is unendurable," he cried; "I cannot stand it. I will tell Mrs.
Aylmer to-morrow that I am obliged to her, but that I will not occupy a
false position." "You will do fearful harm if you make such a remark," said Bertha. "Something very sad happened a few years ago, something which I cannot
tell you, but----" Bertha's lips quivered and her face was very pale. "What is it? Having told me so much, you must go on." Bertha was silent for a moment. "What has Miss Aylmer done? If there is a frank, open-hearted,
nice-looking girl, she is one. I do not care so much for her mother, but
Miss Aylmer herself--I defy anyone to throw a stone at her." "I own that she is a nice girl, a very nice girl; but once, once--well,
anyhow, she managed to offend Mrs. Aylmer. You must not ask me for
particulars. I want you to be most careful; that is why I have brought
you out here to-night. I want you to be most careful to avoid the
subject with Mrs. Aylmer. Florence offended her, and she has resolved
never to see her and never to speak to her again. She is annoyed at your
having made her acquaintance, and I doubt not we shall leave Dawlish
to-morrow on that account. Be satisfied that Florence only did what
perhaps another girl equally tempted would have done, but it was----"

"It was what? The worst thing you can do is to throw out innuendoes
about a girl. What did she do?" "She was not quite straight, if you must know--not quite straight about
a prize which was offered in the school where she was being educated." "She told me that you were a teacher in the same school." "Did she?" said Bertha. Her face turned pale, but her companion was not
looking at her at that moment. "Ah, yes, poor girl: that is how I happen
to know all about it. It was hushed up at the time, and of course
Florence has quite retrieved her character. It was nothing whatever but
what a girl tempted as she was would do, but it settled her as far as
Mrs. Aylmer was concerned, and if you do not wish to bring fresh trouble
upon the niece you will avoid the subject with her aunt. That is what I
wished to say to you." "How can I avoid it? It is quite impossible for me to be long with Mrs.
Aylmer and prevent her speaking about what she has made up her mind to
tell me." "I have been thinking of that," said Bertha; "the very best thing you
can do is to go up to London to-morrow morning." "I go to London to-morrow?" "Yes; go away for the present. I will tell her that you have had sudden
news of your mother: that she wants to see you; or you can leave her a
note to that effect." "But it would not be true." Trevor darted a keen glance at his
companion. Bertha coloured again. "It is difficult to manage with people who are as quixotically straight
as you are," she said, after a pause; "I want you to keep away for your
own sake. If what I have suggested does not please you, think of
something else." "I will tell her that I wish for a change: that is true enough," he
answered; "but how will that help me? When I come back, she will tell me
the thing you do not wish me to hear about Miss Aylmer." "Oh, I never said I did not wish you to hear it: I think it would be
better for your peace of mind not to hear it: that is all. I have said
that it was a little shady: that it happened years ago: that Florence
has quite retrieved her character." Trevor stamped his foot impatiently. "I will not go away to-morrow," he said, after a pause. "I should like
to see Miss Florence Aylmer again. I will ask her to tell me frankly
what occurred some years ago." "You will?" said Bertha, and now her face looked frightened. "Yes," he answered, looking full into her eyes; "I will. She is
perfectly honest. She can excuse herself if necessary. Anyhow, she shall
have the chance of telling her own story in her own way." CHAPTER VIII. BERTHA'S QUANDARY. It was by no means the first time that Bertha Keys had found herself in
a quandary. She was very clever at getting out of these tight corners:
of extricating herself from these, to all appearances, impossible
situations; but never had she been more absolutely nonplussed than at
the present moment. When she and Florence had both left Cherry Court School her prospects
had been dark. She had been dismissed without any hope of a character,
and had, as it were, to begin the world over again. Then chance put Mrs.
Aylmer the great in her way. Mrs. Aylmer wanted a companion, a clever
companion, and Bertha was just the girl for the purpose. She obtained
the situation, managing to get references through a friend, taking care
to avoid the subject of Cherry Court School, and never alluding to
Florence Aylmer. 