



Produced by Ted Robb and Martin Robb.  HTML version by Al Haines.









IN THE REIGN OF TERROR

The Adventures of a Westminster Boy.


by

G. A. Henty




PREFACE.


MY DEAR LADS,

This time only a few words are needed, for the story speaks for
itself. My object has been rather to tell you a tale of interest
than to impart historical knowledge, for the facts of the dreadful
time when "the terror" reigned supreme in France are well known to
all educated lads. I need only say that such historical allusions as
are necessary for the sequence of the story will be found correct,
except that the Noyades at Nantes did not take place until a somewhat
later period than is here assigned to them.

Yours sincerely,

G.A. HENTY.




CONTENTS

       I  A Journey to France
      II  A Mad Dog
     III  The Demon Wolf
      IV  The Clouds Gather
       V  The Outburst
      VI  An Anxious Time
     VII  The 2d of September
    VIII  Marie Arrested
      IX  Robespierre
       X  Free
      XI  Marie and Victor
     XII  Nantes
    XIII  In the Hands of the Reds
     XIV  The Noyades
      XV  England




CHAPTER I

A Journey to France


"I don't know what to say, my dear."

"Why, surely, James, you are not thinking for a moment of letting
him go?"

"Well, I don't know. Yes, I am certainly thinking of it, though I
haven't at all made up my mind. There are advantages and disadvantages."

"Oh, but it is such a long way, and to live among those French people,
who have been doing such dreadful things, attacking the Bastille,
and, as I have heard you say, passing all sorts of revolutionary
laws, and holding their king and queen almost as prisoners in
Paris!"

"Well, they won't eat him, my dear. The French Assembly, or the
National Assembly, or whatever it ought to be called, has certainly
been passing laws limiting the power of the king and abolishing
many of the rights and privileges of the nobility and clergy; but
you must remember that the condition of the vast body of the French
nation has been terrible. We have long conquered our liberties,
and, indeed, never even in the height of the feudal system were the
mass of the English people more enslaved as have been the peasants
of France.

"We must not be surprised, therefore, if in their newly-recovered
freedom they push matters to an excess at first; but all this will
right itself, and no doubt a constitutional form of government,
somewhat similar to our own, will be established. But all this is
no reason against Harry's going out there. You don't suppose that
the French people are going to fly at the throats of the nobility.
Why, even in the heat of the civil war here there was no instance
of any personal wrong being done to the families of  those engaged
in the struggle, and in only two or three cases, after repeated
risings, were any even of the leaders executed.

"No; Harry will be just as safe there as he would be here. As to
the distance, it's nothing like so far as if he went to India, for
example.  I don't see any great chance of his setting the Thames
on fire at home.  His school report is always the same--'Conduct
fair; progress in study moderate'--which means, as I take it, that
he just scrapes along. That's it, isn't it, Harry?"

"Yes, father, I think so. You see every one cannot be at the top
of the form."

"That's a very true observation, my boy. It is clear that if there
are twenty boys in a class, nineteen fathers have to be disappointed.
Still, of course, one would like to be the father who is not
disappointed."

"I stick to my work," the boy said; "but there are always fellows
who seem to know just the right words without taking any trouble
about it. It comes to them, I suppose."

"What do you say to this idea yourself, Harry?"

"I don't know, sir," the boy said doubtfully.

"And I don't know," his father agreed. "At anyrate we will sleep
upon it. I am clear that the offer is not to be lightly rejected."

Dr. Sandwith was a doctor in Chelsea. Chelsea in the year 1790
was a very different place to Chelsea of the present day. It was a
pretty suburban hamlet, and was indeed a very fashionable quarter.
Here many of the nobility and personages connected with the court
had their houses, and broad country fields and lanes separated it
from the stir and din of London. Dr. Sandwith had a good practice,
but he had also a large family. Harry was at Westminster, going
backwards and forwards across the fields to school. So far he had
evinced no predilection for any special career. He was a sturdy,
well-built lad of some sixteen years old. He was, as his father
said, not likely to set the Thames on fire in any way. He was as
undistinguished in the various sports popular among boys in those
days as he was in his lessons. He was as good as the average, but
no better; had fought some tough fights with boys of his own age,
and had shown endurance rather than brilliancy.

In the ordinary course of things he would probably in three or four
years' time have chosen some profession; and, indeed, his father
had already settled in his mind that as Harry was not likely to
make any great figure in life in the way of intellectual capacity,
the best thing would be to obtain for him a commission in his
Majesty's service, as to which, with the doctor's connection among
people of influence, there would not be any difficulty. He had,
however, said nothing as yet to the boy on the subject.

The fact that Harry had three younger brothers and four sisters,
and that Dr. Sandwith, who was obliged to keep up a good position,
sometimes found it difficult to meet his various expenses, made
him perhaps more inclined to view favourably the offer he had
that morning received than would otherwise have been the case. Two
years before he had attended professionally a young French nobleman
attached to the embassy. It was from him that the letter which
had been the subject of conversation had been received. It ran as
follows:


"Dear Doctor Sandwith,--Since my return from Paris
I have frequently spoken to my brother, the Marquis of St. Caux,
respecting the difference of education between your English boys
and our own.  Nothing struck me more when I was in London than your
great schools. With us the children of good families are almost
always brought up at home. They learn to dance and to fence, but
have no other exercise for their limbs, and they lack the air of
manly independence which struck me in English boys. They are more
gentil--I do not know the word in your language which expresses
it--they carry themselves better; they are not so rough; they are
more polite. There are advantages in both systems, but for myself I
like yours much the best. My brother is, to some extent, a convert
to my view. There are no such schools to which he could send his sons
in France, for what large schools we have are under the management
of the fathers, and the boys have none of that freedom which is
the distinguishing point of the English system of education. Even
if there were such schools, I am sure that madame my sister-in-law
would never hear of her sons being sent there.

"Since this is so, the marquis has concluded that the best thing
would be to have an English boy of good family as their companion.
He would, of course, study with them under their masters. He would
play and ride with them, and would be treated as one of themselves.
They would learn something of English from him, which would
be useful if they adopt the diplomatic profession. He would learn
French, which might also be useful to him; but of course the great
point which my brother desires is that his sons should acquire
something of the manly independence of thought and action which
distinguishes English boys.

"Having arranged this much, I thought of you. I know that you have
several sons. If you have one of from fourteen to sixteen years,
and you would like him to take such a position for two or three
years, I should be glad indeed to secure such a companion for my
nephews. If not, would you do me the favour of looking round among
your acquaintances and find us a lad such as we need. He must be
a gentleman and a fair type of the boy we are speaking of. I may
say that my brother authorizes me to offer in his name, in addition
to all expenses, two thousand francs a year to the young gentleman
who will thus benefit his sons. I do not think that the political
excitement which is agitating Paris need be taken into consideration.
Now that great concessions have been made to the representatives
of the nation, it is not at all probable that there will be any
recurrence of such popular tumults as that which brought about the
capture of the Bastille. But in any case this need not weigh in
the decision, as my brother resides for the greater part of the
year in his chateau near Dijon in Burgundy, far removed from the
troubles in the capital."


The more Dr. Sandwith thought over the matter the more he liked it.
There were comparatively few Englishmen in those days who spoke the
French language. It was, indeed, considered part of the education
of a young man of good family to make what was called the grand
tour of Europe under the charge of a tutor, after leaving the
university. But these formed a very small proportion of society,
and, indeed, the frequent wars which had, since the Stuarts lost the
throne of England, occurred between the two countries had greatly
interfered with continental travel.

Even now the subjects of France and England were engaged in a
desperate struggle in India, although there was peace between the
courts of Versailles and St. James's. A knowledge of the French
language then would be likely to be of great utility to Harry if
he entered the army; his expenses at Westminster would be saved,
and the two hundred and forty pounds which he would acquire during
his three years' stay in France would be  very useful to him on
his first start in life. After breakfast next morning Dr. Sandwith
asked Harry to take a turn in the garden with him, for the holidays
had just begun.

"What do you think of this, Harry?"

"I have not thought much about it one way or the other, sir,"
Harry said, looking up with a smile. "It seemed to me better that
you should do the thinking for both of us."

"I might perhaps be better able to judge whether it would
be advantageous or otherwise for you to accept the offer, but you
must be the best judge as to whether you would like to accept it
or not."

"I can't quite make up my mind as to that, sir. I like school very
much and I like being at home. I don't want to learn Frenchified
ways, nor to eat frogs and snails and all sorts of nastiness;
still, it would be fun going to a place so different to England,
and hearing no English spoken, and learning all their rum ways,
and getting to jabber French."

"It might be very useful to you in the army, Harry;" and then the
doctor stopped suddenly.

"The army!" Harry exclaimed in a tone of astonished delight.  "Oh,
sir, do you really think of my going into the army? You never said
a word about that before. I should like that immensely."

"That slipped out, Harry, for I did not mean to say anything about
it until you had left school; still, if you go to France I do not
know why you should not keep that before you. I don't think the army
is a very good profession, but you do not seem to have any marked
talent for anything else. You don't like the idea of medicine or
the church, and you were almost heart-broken when I wanted you to
accept the offer of your uncle John of a seat in his counting-house.
It seems to me that the army would suit you better than anything
else, and I have no doubt that I could get you a commission. Now,
whenever we fight France is sure to be on the other side, and I
think that it would be of great advantage to you to have a thorough
knowledge of French--a thing which very few officers in our army
possess. If you accept this offer you will have the opportunity of
attaining this, and at the same time of earning a nice little sum
which would pay for your outfit and supply you with pocket-money
for some time."

"Yes, sir, it would be first rate!" Harry exclaimed excitedly. "Oh,
please, accept the offer; I should like it of all things; and even
if I do get ever so skinny on frogs and thin soup, I can get fat
on roast beef again when I get back."

"That is all nonsense, Harry, about frogs and starving. The French
style of cookery differs from ours, but they eat just as much, and
although they may not, as a rule, be as broad and heavy as Englishmen,
that is simply a characteristic of race; the Latin peoples are of
slighter build than the Teutonic. As to their food, you know that
the Romans, who were certainly judges of good living, considered
the snail a great luxury, and I dare say ate frogs too. A gentleman
who had made the grand tour told me that he had tasted them in Paris
and found them very delicate eating. You may not like the living
quite at first, but you will soon get over that, and once accustomed
to it you will like it quite as well as our solid joints. My
principal objection to your going lies quite in another direction.
Public opinion in France is much disturbed. In the National Assembly,
which is the same as our Parliament, there is a great spirit
of resistance to the royal authority, something like a revolution
has already been accomplished, and the king is little more than a
prisoner."

"But that would surely make no difference to me, sir!"

"No, I don't see that it should, Harry. Still, it would cause your
mother a good deal of anxiety."

"I don't see it could make any difference," Harry repeated; "and
you see, sir, when I go into the army and there is war, mother
would be a great deal more anxious."

"You mean, Harry," the doctor said with a smile, "that whether her
anxiety begins a little sooner or later does not make much difference."

"I don't think I quite meant that, sir," Harry said; "but yes,"
he added frankly, after a moment's thought, "I suppose I did; but
I really don't see that supposing there were any troubles in France
it could possibly make any difference to me; even if there were a
civil war, such as we had in England, they would not interfere with
boys."

"No, I don't see that it would make any difference, and the chance
is so remote that it need not influence our decision. Of course if
war broke out between the two countries the marquis would see that
you were sent back safely. Well, then, Harry, I am to consider that
your decision is in favour of your accepting this appointment."

"If you please, sir. I am sure it will be a capital thing for me,
and I have no doubt it will be great fun. Of course at first it
will be strange to hear them all jabbering in French, but I suppose
I shall soon pick it up."

And so Mrs. Sandwith was informed by her husband that after talking
it over with Harry he had concluded that the proposed arrangement
would really be an excellent one, and that it would be a great pity
to let such an opportunity slip.

The good lady was for a time tearful in her forebodings that Harry
would be starved, for in those days it was a matter of national
opinion that our neighbours across the Channel fed on the most meagre
of diet; but she was not in the habit of disputing her husband's
will, and when the letter of acceptance had been sent off, she
busied herself in preparing Harry's clothes for his long absence.

"He ought to be measured for several suits, my dear," she said to
her husband, "made bigger and bigger to allow for his growing."

"Nonsense, my dear! You do not suppose that clothes cannot be
purchased in France! Give him plenty of under-linen, but the fewer
jackets and trousers he takes over the better; it will be much
better for him to get clothes out there of the same fashion as
other people; the boy will not want to be stared at wherever he
goes. The best rule is always to dress like people around you. I
shall give him money, and directly he gets there he can get a suit
or two made by the tailor who makes for the lads he is going to be
with. The English are no more loved in France than the French are
here, and though Harry has no reason to be ashamed of his nationality
there is no occasion for him to draw the attention of everyone
he meets to it by going about in a dress which would seem to them
peculiar."

In due time a letter was received from Count Auguste de St.  Caux,
stating that the marquis had requested him to write and say that
he was much gratified to hear that one of the doctor's own sons
was coming over to be a companion and friend to his boys, and that
he was sending off in the course of two days a gentleman of his
household to Calais to meet him and  conduct him to Paris. On young
Mr. Sandwith's arrival at Calais he was to go at once to the Hotel
Lion door and ask for M. du Tillet.

During the intervening time Harry had been very busy, he had to
say good-bye to all his friends, who looked, some with envy, some
with pity, upon him, for the idea of a three years' residence in
France was a novel one to all. He was petted and made much of at
home, especially by his sisters, who regarded him in the light of
a hero about to undertake a strange and hazardous adventure.

Three days after the arrival of the letter of the marquis, Dr.
Sandwith and Harry started by stage for Dover, and the doctor put
his son on board the packet sailing for Calais. The evening before,
he gave him much good advice as to his behaviour.

"You will see much that is new, and perhaps a good deal that you
don't like, Harry, but it is better for you never to criticize or
give a hostile opinion about things; you would not like it if a
French boy came over here and made unpleasant remarks about English
ways and manners. Take things as they come and do as others do;
avoid all comparisons between French and English customs; fall in
with the ways of those around you; and adopt as far as you can the
polite and courteous manner which is general among the French, and
in which, I must say, they are far ahead of us. If questioned, you
will, of course, give your opinion frankly and modestly; it is the
independence of thought among English boys which has attracted the
attention and approval of Auguste de St. Caux.

"Be natural and simple, giving yourself no airs, and permitting
none on the part of the lads you are with; their father says you
are to be treated as their equal. But, upon the other hand, do not
be ever on the lookout for small slights, and bear with perfect
good temper any little ridicule your, to them foreign, ways and
manners may excite.  I need not tell you to be always straightforward,
honest, and true, for of those qualities I think you possess a fair
share. Above all things restrain any tendency to use your fists;
fighting comes naturally to English boys, but in France it is
considered as brutal and degrading--a blow is a deadly insult,
and would  never be forgiven.

"So, whatever the provocation, abstain from striking anyone.  Should
you find that in any way your position is made intolerable, you
will of course appeal to the marquis, and unless you obtain redress
you will come home--you will find  no difficulty in travelling
when you once understand the language--but avoid anything like
petty complaints. I trust there will be no reason for complaints at
all, and that you will find your position an exceedingly pleasant
one as soon as you become accustomed to it; but should occasion
arise bear my words in mind."

Harry promised to follow his father's advice implicitly, but in
his own mind he wondered what fellows did when they quarrelled if
they were not allowed to fight; however, he supposed that he should,
under the circumstances, do the same as French boys, whatever that
might be.

As soon as the packet was once fairly beyond the harbour Harry's
thoughts were effectually diverted from all other matters by the
motion of the sailing boat, and he was soon in a state of prostration,
in which he remained until, seven hours later, the packet entered
Calais harbour.

Dr. Sandwith had requested the captain to allow one of his men
to show Harry the way to the Lion door. Harry had pulled himself
together a little as the vessel entered the still water in the
harbour, and was staring at the men in their blue blouses and wooden
shoes, at the women in their quaint and picturesque attire, when
a sailor touched him on the shoulder:

"Now, young sir, the captain tells me I am to show you the way to
your hotel. Which is your box?"

Harry pointed out his trunk; the sailor threw it on his shoulder,
and Harry, with a feeling of bewilderment, followed him along the
gangway to the shore. Here he was accosted by an officer.

"What does he say?" he asked the sailor.

"He asks for your passport."

Harry fumbled in his breast pocket for the document which his father
had obtained for him from the foreign office, duly viseed by the
French ambassador, notifying  that Henry Sandwith, age sixteen,
height five feet eight, hair brown, eyes gray, nose short, mouth
large, was about to reside in France in the family of the Marquis
de St.  Caux. The officer glanced it over, and then returned it to
Harry with a polite bow, which Harry in some confusion endeavoured
to imitate.

"What does the fellow want to bow and scrape like that for?" he
muttered to himself as he followed his guide. "An Englishman would
just have nodded and said 'All right!' What can a fellow want more,
I should like to know? Well I suppose I shall get accustomed to
it, and shall take to bowing and scraping as a matter of course."

The Lion door was close at hand. In reply to the sailor's question
the landlord said that M. du Tillet was within. The sailor put
down the trunk, pocketed the coin Harry gave him, and with a "Good
luck, young master!" went out, taking with him, as Harry felt,
the last link to England. He turned and followed the landlord. The
latter mounted a flight of stairs, knocked at a door, and opened
it.

"A young gentleman desires to see M. du Tillet," he said, and Harry
entered.

A tall, big man, whose proportions at once disappointed Harry's
preconceived notions as to the smallness and leanness of Frenchmen,
rose from the table at which he was writing.

"Monsieur--Sandwith?" he said interrogatively. "I am glad to see
you."

Harry did not understand the latter portion of the remark, but he
caught the sound of his name.

"That's all right," he said nodding. "How do you do, M. du Tillet?"

The French gentleman bowed; Harry bowed; and then they looked
at each other. There was nothing more to say. A smile stole over
Harry's face, and broke into a frank laugh. The Frenchman smiled,
put his hand on Harry's shoulder, and said:

"Brave garcon!" and Harry felt they were friends.

M. du Tillet's face bore an expression of easy good temper. He wore
a wig with long curls; he had a soldier's bearing, and a scar on
his left cheek; his complexion was dark and red, his eyebrows black
and bushy. After a pause he said:

"Are you hungry?" and then put imaginary food to his mouth.

"You mean will I eat anything?" Harry translated. "Yes, that I
will if there's anything fit to eat. I begin to feel as hungry as
a hunter, and no wonder, for I am as hollow as a drum!"

His nod was a sufficient answer. M. du Tillet took his hat, opened
the door, and bowed for Harry to precede him.

Harry hesitated, but believing it would be the polite way to do as
he was told, returned the bow and went out. The Frenchman put his
hand on his shoulder, and they went down stairs together and took
their seats in the salon, where his companion gave an order, and
in two or three minutes a bowl of broth was placed before each of
them.

It fully answered Harry's ideas as to the thinness of French soup,
for it looked like dirty water with a few pieces of bread and some
scraps of vegetables floating in it. He was astonished at the piece
of bread, nearly a yard long, placed on the table. M. du Tillet
cut a piece off and handed it to him. He broke a portion of it into
his broth, and found, when he tasted it, that it was much nicer
than it looked.

"It's not so bad after all," he thought to himself.  "Anyhow bread
seems plentiful, so there's no fear of my starving."  He followed
his companion's example and made his way steadily through a number
of dishes all new and strange to him; neither his sight nor his taste
gave him the slightest indication as to what meat he was eating.

"I suppose it's all right," he concluded; "but what people can want
to make such messes of their food for I can't make out. A slice of
good roast beef is worth the lot of it; but really it isn't nasty;
some of the dishes are not bad at all if one only knew what they
were made of." M. du Tillet offered him some wine, which he tasted
but shook his head, for it seemed rough and sour; but he poured
himself out some water. Presently a happy idea seized him; he
touched the bread and said interrogatively, "Bread?" M. du Tillet
at once replied "Pain," which Harry repeated after him.

The ice thus broken, conversation began, and Harry soon learned the
French for knife, fork, spoon, plate, and various other articles,
and felt that he was fairly on the way towards talking French.
After the meal was over M. du Tillet rose and put on his hat, and
signed to Harry to accompany him. They strolled through the town,
went down to the quays and looked at the fishing-boats; Harry was
feeling more at home now, and asked the French name for everything
he saw, repeating the word over and over again to himself until he
felt sure that he should remember it, and then asking the name of
some fresh object.

The next morning they started in the post-waggon for Paris, and
arrived there after thirty-six hours' travel. Harry was struck
with the roads, which were far better tended and kept than those in
England. The extreme flatness of the country surprised him, and,
except in the quaintness of the villages and the variety of the
church towers, he saw little to admire during the journey.

"If it is all like this," he thought to himself, "I don't see that
they have any reason for calling it La belle France."

Of Paris he saw little. A blue-bloused porter carried his trunk what
seemed to Harry a long distance from the place where the conveyance
stopped. The streets here were quiet and almost deserted after the
busy thoroughfares of the central city. The houses stood, for the
most part, back from the street, with high walls and heavy gates.

"Here we are at last," his guide said, as he halted before a large
and massive gateway, surmounted by a coat of arms with supporters
carved in stone work. He rang at the bell, which was opened by a
porter in livery, who bowed profoundly upon seeing M. du Tillet.
Passing through the doorway, Harry found himself in a spacious
hall, decorated with armour and arms. As he crossed the threshold
M. du Tillet took his hand and shook it heartily, saying, "Welcome!"
Harry understood the action, though not the words, and nodded,
saying:

"I think I shall get on capitally if they are all as jolly as you
are."

Then they both laughed, and Harry looked round wondering what was
coming next.

"The marquis and his family are all away at their chateau near
Dijon," his companion said, waving his hand. "We shall stay a day
or two to rest ourselves after our journey, and then start to join
them."

He led Harry into a great salon magnificently furnished, pointed
to the chairs and looking-glasses and other articles of furniture,
all swathed up in coverings; and the lad understood at once that
the family were away. This was a relief to him; he was getting on
capitally with M. du Tillet, but shrank from the prospect of meeting
so many strange faces.

A meal was speedily served in a small and comfortably-furnished
apartment; and Harry concluded that although he might not be able
to decide on the nature of his food, it was really nice, and that
there was no fear whatever of his falling  away in flesh. M. du
Tillet pressed him to try the wine again, and this he found to be
a vast improvement upon the vintage he had tasted at Calais.

After breakfast next morning they started for a walk, and Harry
was delighted with the Louvre, the Tuileries, the Palais Royal, and
other public buildings, which he could not but acknowledge were
vastly superior to anything he had seen in London. Then he was
taken to a tailor's, the marquis having commissioned his guide to
carry out Dr. Sandwith's request in this matter. M. du Tillet looked
interrogatively at Harry as he entered the shop, as if to ask if
he understood why he was taken there.

Harry nodded, for indeed he was glad to see that no time was
to be lost, for he was already conscious that his dress differed
considerably from that of French boys. Several street gamins had
pointed at him and made jeering remarks, which, without understanding
the words, Harry felt to be insulting, and would, had he heard them
in the purlieus of Westminster, have considered as a challenge to
battle. He had not, however, suffered altogether unavenged, for
upon one occasion M. du Tillet turned sharply round and caught one
offender so smartly with his cane that he ran howling away.

"They are awful guys!" Harry thought as he looked at the French boys
he met. "But it's better to be a guy than to be chaffed by every
boy one meets, especially if one is not to be allowed to fight."
It was, therefore, with a feeling of satisfaction that he turned
into the tailor's shop. The proprietor came up bowing, as Harry
thought, in a most cringing sort of way to his companion. M. du
Tillet gave some orders, and the tailor unrolled a variety of pieces
of cloth and other materials for Harry's inspection.

The lad shook his head and turned to his guide, and, pointing to
the goods, asked him to choose the things which were most suitable
for him; M. du Tillet understood the appeal and ordered four suits.
Two of these were for ordinary wear; another was, Harry concluded,
for the evening; and the fourth for ceremonial occasions.

The coats were cut long, but very open in front, and were far too
scanty to button; the waistcoats were long and embroidered; a white
and ample handkerchief went round the throat and was tied loosely,
with long ends edged with lace falling in front; knee-breeches,
with white stockings, and shoes with buckles, completed the costume.

Harry looked on with a smile of amusement, and burst into a hearty
laugh when the garments were fixed upon, for the idea of himself
dressed out in these seemed to him ludicrous in the extreme.

"How they would laugh at home," he thought to himself, "if they
could see me in these things! The girls would give me no peace.
And wouldn't there be an uproar if I were to turn up in them in
Dean's Yard and march up school!"

Harry was then measured. When this was done he took out his purse,
which contained fifty guineas; for his father had thought it probable
that the clothes he would require would cost more than they would
in London, and he wished him to have a good store of pocket-money
until he received the first instalment of his pay. M.  du Tillet,
however, shook his head and motioned to him to put up his purse;
and Harry supposed that it was not customary to pay for things in
France until they were delivered. Then his companion took him into
another shop, and pointing to his own ruffles intimated that Harry
would require some linen of this kind to be worn when in full dress.
Harry signified that his friend should order what was necessary;
and half a dozen shirts, with deep ruffles at the wrist and breast,
were ordered. This brought their shopping to an end.

They remained three days in Paris, at the end of which time Harry's
clothes were delivered. The following morning a carriage with the
arms of the marquis emblazoned upon it came up to the door, and
they started. The horses were fat and lazy; and Harry, who had no
idea how far they were going, thought that the journey was likely
to be a long one if this was the pace at which they were to travel.

Twelve miles out they changed horses at a post-station, their own
returning to Paris, and after this had relays at each station, and
travelled at a pace which seemed to Harry to be extraordinarily
rapid.  They slept twice upon the road.

The third day the appearance of the country altogether changed, and,
instead of the flat plains which Harry had begun to think extended
all over France, they were now among hills higher than anything he
had ever seen before. Towards the afternoon they crossed the range
and began to descend, and as evening approached M. du Tillet pointed
to a building standing on rising ground some miles away and said:

"That is the chateau."




CHAPTER II

A Mad Dog


It was dark before the carriage drove up to the chateau. Their
approach had been seen, for two lackeys appeared with torches at
the head of the broad steps. M. du Tillet put his hand encouragingly
on Harry's shoulder and led him up the steps. A servant preceded
them across a great hall, when a door opened and a gentleman came
forward.

"Monsieur le Marquis," M. du Tillet said, bowing, "this is the
young gentleman you charged me to bring to you.

"I am glad to see you," the marquis said; "and I hope you will make
yourself happy and comfortable here."

Harry did not understand the words, but he felt the tone of kindness
and courtesy with which they were spoken. He could, however, only
bow; for although in the eight days he had spent with M. du Tillet
he had picked up a great many nouns and a few phrases, his stock
of words was of no use to him at present.

"And you, M. du Tillet," the marquis said. "You have made a good
journey, I hope? I thank you much for the trouble you have taken.
I like the boy's looks; what do you think of him?"

"I like him very much," M. du Tillet said; "he is a new type to
me, and a pleasant one. I think he will make a good companion for
the young count."

The marquis now turned and led the way into a great drawing-room,
and taking Harry's hand led him up to  a lady seated on a couch.

"This is our young English friend, Julie. Of course he is strange
at present, but M. du Tillet reports well of him, and I already
like his face."

The lady held out her hand, which Harry, instead of bending over
and kissing, as she had expected, shook heartily. For an instant
only a look of intense surprise passed across her face; then she
said courteously:

"We are glad to see you. It is very good of you to come so far to
us. I trust that you will be happy here."

"These are my sons Ernest and Jules, who will, I am sure, do all
in their power to make you comfortable," the marquis said.

The last words were spoken sharply and significantly, and their
tone was not lost upon the two boys; they had a moment before been
struggling to prevent themselves bursting into a laugh at Harry's
reception of their mother's greeting, but they now instantly composed
their faces and advanced.

"Shake hands with him," the marquis said sharply; "it is the custom
of his country."

Each in turn held out his hand to Harry, who, as he shook hands
with them, took a mental stock of his future companions.

"Good looking," he said to himself, "but more like girls than boys.
A year in the fifth form would do them a world of good. I could
polish the two off together with one hand."

"My daughters," the marquis said, "Mesdemoiselles Marie, Jeanne,
and Virginie."

Three young ladies had risen from their seats as their father
entered, each made a deep curtsy as her name was mentioned, and
Harry bowed deeply in return. Mademoiselle Marie was two years at
least older than himself, and was already a young lady of fashion.
Jeanne struck him as being about the same age as his sister Fanny,
who was between fourteen and fifteen. Virginie was a child of ten.
Ernest was about his own age, while Jules came between the two
younger girls.

"Take M. Sandwith to the abbe," the marquis said to Ernest, "and do
all in your power to set him at his ease. Remember what you would
feel if you were placed, as he is, among strange people in a strange
country."

The lad motioned to Harry to accompany him, and the three boys left
the room together.

"You can go to your gouvernante," the marquise said to the two
younger girls; and with a profound curtsy to her and another to the
marquis, they left the room. Unrestrained now by their presence,
the marquise turned to her husband with a merry laugh.

"But it is a bear you have brought home, Edouard, a veritable
bear--my fingers ache still--and he is to teach manners to my sons!
I always protested against the plan, but I did not think it would
be as bad as this. These islanders are savages."

The marquis smiled.

"He is a little gauche, but that will soon rub off. I like him,
Julie. Remember it was a difficult position for a boy. We did not
have him here to give polish to our sons. It may be that they have
even a little too much of this at present. The English are not
polished, everyone knows that, but they are manly and independent.
That boy bore himself well. He probably had never been in a room
like this in his life, he was ignorant of our language, alone among
strangers, but he was calm and self-possessed. I like the honest
straightforward look in his face. And look at the width of the
shoulders and the strength of his arms; why, he would break Ernest
across his knee, and the two boys must be about the same age."

"Oh, he has brute strength, I grant," the marquise said; "so have
the sons of our peasants; however, I do not want to find fault with
him, it is your hobby, or rather that of Auguste, who is, I think,
mad about these English; I will say nothing to prevent its having
a fair trial, only I hope it will not be necessary for me to give
him my hand again."

"I do not suppose it will until he leaves, Julie, and by that time,
no doubt, he will know what to do with it; but here is M. du Tillet
waiting all this time for you to speak to him."

"Pardon me, my good M. du Tillet," the marquise said. "In truth
that squeeze of my hand has driven all other matters from my mind.
How have you fared? This long journey with this English bear must
have been very tedious for you."

"Indeed, Madame la Marquise," M. du Tillet replied, "it has been no
hardship, the boy has amused me greatly; nay, more, he has pleased
me. We have been able to say little to each other, though, indeed,
he is quick and eager to learn, and will soon speak our language;
but his face has been a study. When he is pleased you can see that
he is pleased, and that is a  pleasure, for few people are pleased
in our days. Again, when he does not like a thing you can also
see it.  I can see that he says to himself, I can expect nothing
better, these poor people are only French. When the gamins in Paris
jeered him as to his dress, he closed his hands and would have flown
at them with his fists after the manner of his countrymen had he
not put strong restraint on himself. From the look of his honest
eyes I shall, when he can speak our language, believe implicitly
what he says.  That boy would not tell a lie whatever were the
consequences.  Altogether I like him much. I think that in a very
little while he will adapt himself to what goes on around him, and
that you will have no reason ere long to complain of his gaucheries."

"And you really think, M. du Tillet, that he will be a useful
companion for my boys?"

"If you will pardon me for saying so, madam, I think that he will--at
any rate I am sure he can be trusted to teach them no wrong."

"You are all against me," the marquise laughed. "And you, Marie?"

"I did not think of him one way or the other," the girl said coldly.
"He is very awkward; but as he is not to be my companion that does
not concern me. It is like one of papa's dogs, one more or less
makes no difference in the house so long as they do not tread upon
one's skirt."

"That is the true spirit of the French nobility, Marie," her father
said sarcastically. "Outside our own circle the whole human race is
nothing to us; they are animals who supply our wants, voila tour.
I tell you, my dear, that the time is coming when this will not
suffice.  The nation is stirring; that France which we have so long
ignored is lifting its head and muttering; the news from Paris is
more and more grave. The Assembly has assumed the supreme authority,
and the king is a puppet in its power. The air is dark as with a
thunder-cloud, and there may be such a storm sweep over France as
there has not been since the days of the Jacquerie."

"But the people should be contented," M. du Tillet said; "they have
had all the privileges they ever possessed given back to them."

"Yes," the marquis assented, "and there lies the danger. It is one
thing or the other. If as soon as the temper of the third estate
had been seen the king's guards had entered and cleared the place
and closed the door, as Cromwell did  when the parliament was
troublesome to him in England, that would have been one way. Paris
would have been troublesome, we might have had again the days of
the Fronde, but in the end the king's party would have won.

"However, that was not the way tried. They began by concessions,
they go on with concessions, and each concession is made the ground
for more. It is like sliding down a hill; when you have once begun
you cannot stop yourself, and you go on until there is a crash;
then it may be you pick yourself up sorely wounded and bruised,
and begin to reclimb the hill slowly and painfully; it may be that
you are dashed to pieces. I am not a politician. I do not care much
for the life of Paris, and am well content to live quietly here on
our estates; but even I can see that a storm is gathering; and as
for my brother Auguste, he goes about shaking his head and wringing
his hands, his anticipations are of the darkest. What can one
expect when fellows like Voltaire and Rousseau were permitted by
their poisonous preaching to corrupt and inflame the imagination
of the people? Both those men's heads should have been cut off the
instant they began to write.

"The scribblers are at the root of all the trouble with their
pestilent doctrines; but it is too late now, the mischief is done.
If we had a king strong and determined all might yet be well; but
Louis is weak in decision, he listens one moment to Mirabeau and the
next to the queen, who is more firm and courageous. And so things
drift on from bad to worse, and the Assembly, backed by the turbulent
scum of Paris, are masters of the situation."

For some time Harry lived a quiet life at the chateau. He found
his position a very pleasant one. The orders of the marquis that
he should be treated as one of the family were obeyed, and there
was no distinction made between himself and Ernest. In the morning
the two boys and himself worked with the abbe, a quiet and gentle
old man; in the afternoon they rode and fenced, under the instructions
of M. du Tillet or one or other of the gentlemen of the marquis
establishment; and on holidays shot or fished as they chose on
the preserves or streams of the estate. For an hour each morning
the two younger girls shared in their studies, learning Latin and
history with their brothers. Harry got on very well with Ernest,
but there was no real cordiality between them. The  hauteur and
insolence with which the young count treated his inferiors were a
constant source of exasperation to Harry.

"He thinks himself a little god," he would often mutter to himself.
"I would give a good deal to have him for three months at Westminster.
Wouldn't he get his conceit and nonsense knocked out of him!"

At the same time he was always scrupulously polite and courteous to
his English companion--much too polite, indeed, to please Harry.
He had good qualities too: he was generous with his money, and
if during their rides a woman came up with a tale of distress he
was always ready to assist her. He was clever, and Harry, to his
surprise, found that his knowledge of Latin was far beyond his own,
and that Ernest could construct passages with the greatest ease
which altogether puzzled him. He was a splendid rider, and could
keep his seat with ease and grace on the most fiery animals in his
father's stables.

When they went out with their guns Harry felt his inferiority
keenly.  Not only was Ernest an excellent shot, but at the end of
a long day's sport he would come in apparently fresh and untired,
while Harry, although bodily far the most powerful, would be
completely done up; and at gymnastic exercises he could do with
ease feats which Harry could at first not even attempt. In this
respect, however, the English lad in three months' time was able
to rival him. His disgust at finding himself so easily beaten by a
French boy nerved him to the greatest exertions, and his muscles,
practised in all sorts of games, soon adapted themselves to the
new exercises.

Harry picked up French very rapidly. The absolute necessity there was
to express himself in that language caused him to make a progress
which surprised himself, and at the end of three months he was able
to converse with little difficulty, and having learned it entirely
by ear he spoke with a fair accent and pronunciation. M. du Tillet,
who was the principal instructor of the boys in their outdoor
exercises, took much pains to assist him in his French, and helped
him on in every way in his power.

In the evening there were dancing lessons, and although very far
from exhibiting the stately grace with which Ernest could perform
the minuet or other courtly dances  then in fashion, Harry came
in time to perform his part fairly. Two hours were spent in the
evening in the salon. This part of the day Harry at first found the
most tedious; but as soon as he began to speak fluently the marquis
addressed most of his conversation to him, asking him questions
about the life of English boys at school and about English manners
and customs, and Harry soon found himself chatting at his ease.

"The distinction of classes is clearly very much less with you in
England than it is here," the marquis said one day when Harry had
been describing a great fight which had taken place between a party
of Westminster boys and those of the neighbourhood. "It seems
extraordinary to me that sons of gentlemen should engage in a
personal fight with boys of the lowest class. Such a thing could
not happen here. If you were insulted by such a boy, what would
you do, Ernest?"

"I should run him through the body," Ernest said quietly.

"Just so," his father replied, "and I don't say you would be wrong
according to our notions; but I do not say that the English plan is
not the best. The English gentleman--for  Monsieur Sandwith says
that even among grown-up people the same habits prevail--does not
disdain to show the canaille that even with their own rough weapons
he is their superior, and he thus holds their respect. It is a
coarse way and altogether at variance with our notions, but there
is much to be said for it."

"But it altogether does away with the reverence that the lower
class should feel for the upper," Ernest objected.

"That is true, Ernest. So long as that feeling generally exists, so
long as there is, as it were, a wide chasm between the two classes,
as there has always existed in France, it would be unwise perhaps
for one of the upper to admit that in any respect there could be
any equality between them; but this is not so in England, where a
certain equality has always been allowed to exist. The Englishman
of all ranks has a certain feeling of self-respect and independence,
and the result is shown in the history of the wars which have been
fought between the two nations.

"France in early days always relied upon her chivalry. The horde of
footmen she placed in the field counted for little. England, upon
the other hand, relied principally upon her archers and her pikemen,
and it must be admitted that they beat us handsomely. Then again in
the wars in Flanders, under the English general Marlborough their
infantry always proved themselves  superior to ours. It is galling
to admit it, but there is no blinking the facts of history. It seems
to me that the feeling of independence and self-respect which this
English system gives rise to, even among the lowest class, must
render them man for man better soldiers than those drawn from a
peasantry whose very lives are at the mercy of their lords."

"I think, du Tillet," the marquis said later on on the same evening,
when the young people had retired, "I have done very well in taking
my brother Auguste's advice as to having an English companion
for Ernest. If things were as they were under the Grand Monarque,
I do not say that it would have been wise to allow a young French
nobleman to get these English ideas into his head, but it is
different now.

"We are on the eve of great changes. What will come of it no one
can say; but there will certainly be changes, and it is a good thing
that my children should get broader ideas than those in which we
were brought up. This lad is quiet and modest, but he ventures to
think for himself. It scarce entered the head of a French nobleman
a generation back that the mass of the people had any feelings or
wishes, much less rights. They were useful in their way, just as
the animals are, but needed no more consideration. They have never
counted for anything.

"In England the people have rights and liberties; they won them
years ago. It would be well for us in the present day had they
done so in France. I fancy the next generation will have to adapt
themselves to changed circumstances, and the ideas that Ernest and
Jules will learn from this English lad will be a great advantage
to them, and will fit them for the new state of things."

It was only during lessons, when their gouvernante was always
present, at meal times, and in the salon in the evening, that
Harry had any communication with the young ladies of the family. If
they met in the grounds they were saluted by the boys with as much
formal courtesy as if they had been the most distant acquaintances,
returning the bows with deep curtsies.

These meetings were a source of great amusement to Harry, who could
scarcely preserve his gravity at these formal and distant greetings.
On one occasion, however, the even course of these meetings was
broken. The boys had just left  the tennis-court where they had
been playing, and had laid aside the swords which they carried when
walking or riding.

The tennis-court was at some little distance from the house, and
they were walking across the garden when they heard a scream.  At
a short distance was the governess with her two young charges.  She
had thrown her arms round them, and stood the picture of terror,
uttering loud screams.

Looking round in astonishment to discover the cause of her terror,
Harry saw a large wolf-hound running towards them at a trot.  Its
tongue was hanging out, and there was a white foam on its jaws.  He
had heard M. du Tillet tell the marquis on the previous day that
this dog, which was a great favourite, seemed strange and unquiet,
and he had ordered it to be chained up. It had evidently broken
its fastening, for it was dragging a piece of chain some six feet
long behind It.


It flashed across him at once that the animal was mad, but without
an instant's hesitation he dashed off at full speed and threw himself
in front of the ladies before the dog reached them. Snatching off
his coat, and then kneeling on one knee, he awaited the animal's
attack. Without deviating from its course the hound sprang at him
with a short snarling howl. Harry threw his coat over its head and
then grasped it round the neck.

The impetus of the spring knocked him over, and they rolled together
on the ground. The animal struggled furiously, but Harry retained
his grasp round its neck. In vain the hound tried to free itself
from its blinding encumbrance, or to bite his assailant through
it, and struggled to shake off his hold with its legs and claws.
Harry maintained his grasp tightly round its neck, with his head
pressed closely against one of its ears. Several times they rolled
over and over.  At last Harry made a great effort when he was
uppermost, and managed to get his knees upon the animal's belly, and
then, digging his toes in the ground, pressed with all his weight
upon it.

There was a sound as of cracking of bones, then the dog's struggles
suddenly ceased, and his head fell over, and Harry rose to his
feet by the side of the dead hound just as a number of men, with
pitch-forks and other weapons, ran up to the spot from the stables,
while the marquis, sword in hand, arrived from the house.

The gouvernante, too, paralysed by fear, had stood close by with
her charges while the struggle was going on. Ernest had come up, and
was standing in front of his sisters, ready to be the next victim
if the dog had overpowered Harry. Less accustomed to running than
the English boy, and for a moment rooted to the ground with horror
at his sisters' danger, he had not arrived at the spot until the
struggle between Harry and the dog was half over, and had then seen
no way of rendering assistance; but believing that the dog was sure
to be the conqueror, he had placed himself before his sisters to
bear the brunt of the next assault.

Seeing at a glance that his daughters were untouched, the marquis
ran on to Harry, who was standing panting and breathless, and threw
his arms round him.

"My brave boy," he exclaimed, "you have saved my daughters from a
dreadful death by your courage and devotion. How can I and their
mother ever thank you? I saw it all from the terrace--the speed
with which you sprang to their assistance--the quickness of thought
with which you stripped off your coat and threw it over its head.
After that I could see nothing except your rolling over and over
in a confused mass. You are not hurt, I trust?"

"Not a bit, sir," Harry said.

"And you have killed it--wonderful!"

"There was nothing in that, sir. I have heard my father, who is a
doctor, say that a man could kill the biggest dog if he could get
it down on its back and kneel on it. So when I once managed to get
my knees on it I felt it was all right."

"Ah, it is all very well for you to speak as if it were nothing!"
the marquis said. "There are few men, indeed, who would throw
themselves in the way of a mad dog, especially of such a formidable
brute as that. You too have behaved with courage, my son, and I
saw you were ready to give your life for your sisters; but you had
not the quickness and readiness of your friend, and would have been
too late."

"It is true, father," Ernest said in a tone of humility. "I should
have been too late, and, moreover, I should have been useless, for
he would have torn me down in a moment, and then fallen upon my
sisters.  M. Sandwith," he said frankly, "I own I have been wrong.
I have thought the games of which you spoke, and your fighting, rough
and barbarous; but I see their use now. You have put me to shame.
When I saw that dog I felt powerless, for I had not my sword with
me; but you--you rushed to the fight without a moment's hesitation,
trusting in your strength and your head. Yes, your customs have
made a man of you, while I am a boy still."

"You are very good to say so," Harry said; "but I am quite sure that
you would be just as quick and ready as me in most circumstances,
and if it had been a matter of swords, very much more useful; but I
am glad you see there is some advantage in our rough English ways."

The marquis had put his hand approvingly upon Ernest's shoulder
when he addressed Harry, and then turned to his daughters.  The
governess had sunk fainting to the ground when she saw that the
danger was over. Virginie had thrown herself down and was crying
loudly; while Jeanne stood pale, but quiet, beside them.

The marquis directed one of the men to run up to the chateau and
bid a female servant bring down water and smelling-salts for the
governess, and then lifted Virginie up and tried to soothe her,
while he stretched out his other hand to Jeanne.

"You are shaken, my Jeanne," he said tenderly, "but you have borne
the trial well. I did not hear you cry out, though madame, and the
little one screamed loudly enough."

"I was frightened enough, father," she said simply, "but of course
I wasn't going to cry out; but it was very terrible; and oh, how
noble and brave he was! And you know, papa, I feel ashamed to think
how often I have been nearly laughing because he was awkward in
the minuet. I feel so little now beside him."

"You see, my dear, one must not judge too much by externals," her
father said soothingly as she hid her face against his coat, and he
could feel that she was trembling from head to foot. "Older people
than you often do so, and are sorry for it afterwards; but as I am
sure that you would never allow him to see that you were amused no
harm has been done."

"Shall I thank him, papa?"

"Yes, presently, my dear; he has just gone off with Ernest to see
them bury the dog."

This incident caused a considerable change in Harry's position in
the family. Previously he had been accepted in consequence of the
orders of the marquis. Although compelled to treat him as an equal
the two boys had in their hearts looked upon him as an inferior,
while the girls had regarded him as a sort of tutor of their
brothers, and thus as a creature altogether indifferent to them.
But henceforth he appeared in a different light. Ernest acted up to
the spirit of the words he had spoken at the time, and henceforth
treated him as a comrade to be respected as well as liked. He tried
to learn some of the English games, but as most of these required
more than two players he was forced to abandon them. He even asked
him to teach him to box, but Harry had the good sense to make
excuses for not doing so.  He felt that Ernest was by no means his
match in strength, and that, with all his good-will, he would find
it difficult to put up good-naturedly with being knocked about. He
therefore said that it could not be done without boxing-gloves, and
these it would be impossible to obtain in France; and that in the
next place he should hardly advise him to learn even if he procured
the gloves, for that in such contests severe bruises often were
given.

"We think nothing of a black eye," he said laughing, "but I am
sure madame your mother would not be pleased to see you so marked;
besides, your people would not understand your motive in undertaking
so rough an exercise, and you might lose somewhat of their respect.
Be content, Count Ernest; you are an excellent swordsman, and
although I am improving under M. du Tillet's tuition I shall never
be your match. If you like; sometime when we are out and away
from observation we can take off our coats, and I can give you a
lesson in wrestling; it is a splendid exercise, and it has not the
disadvantages of boxing."

Little Jules looked up to Harry as a hero, and henceforth, when
they were together, gave him the same sort of implicit obedience
he paid to his elder brother. The ceremonious habits of the age
prevented anything like familiarity on the part of the younger
girls; but Jeanne and Virginie now always greeted him with a smile
when they met, and joined in conversation with him as with their
brothers in the evening.

The marquise, who had formerly protested, if playfully, against
her husband's whim in introducing an English boy into their family
circle, now regarded him with real affection, only refraining from
constant allusions to the debt she considered she owed him because
she saw that he really shrank from the subject.

The marquis shortly after this incident went to Paris for a fortnight
to ascertain from his friends there the exact position of things.
He returned depressed and angry.

The violence of the Assembly had increased from day to day.  The
property of all the convents had been confiscated, and this measure
had been followed by the seizure of the vast estates of the church.
All the privileges of the nobility had been declared at an end,
and in August a decree had been passed abolishing all titles of
nobility. This decree had taken effect in Paris and in the great
towns, and also in some parts of the country where the passions of
the people were most aroused against the nobility; but in Burgundy
it had remained a dead letter. The Marquis de St. Caux was popular
upon his estates, and no one had ever neglected to concede to
him and to the marquise their titles. He himself had regarded the
decree with disdain. "They may take away my estates by force," he
said, "but no law can deprive me of my title, any more than of the
name which I inherited from my fathers. Such laws as these are mere
outbursts of folly."

But the Assembly continued to pass laws of the most sweeping
description, assuming the sovereign power, and using it as no
monarch of France had ever ventured to do. Moderate men were shocked
at the headlong course of events, and numbers of those who at the
commencement of the movement had thrown themselves heart and soul
into it now shrank back in dismay at the strange tyranny which was
called liberty.

"It seems to me that a general madness has seized all Paris," the
marquis said to his wife on his return, "but at present nothing can
be done to arrest it. I have seen the king and queen. His majesty is
resolved to do nothing; that is, to let events take their course,
and what that will be Heaven only knows. The Assembly has taken
all power into its hands, the king is already a mere cipher, the
violence of the leaders of these men is beyond all bounds; the
queen is by turns hot and cold, at one moment she agrees with her
husband that the only hope lies in conceding  everything; at another
she would go to the army, place herself in its hands, and call on
it to march upon Paris.

"At anyrate there is nothing to be done at present but to wait.
Already numbers of the deputies, terrified at the aspect of affairs,
have left France, and I am sorry to say many of the nobles have
also gone. This is cowardice and treachery to the king. We cannot
help him if he will not be helped, but it is our duty to remain
here ready to rally round him when he calls us to his side. I am
glad that the Assembly has passed a law confiscating the estates
of all who have emigrated."

Although the marquise was much alarmed at the news brought by her
husband she did not think of questioning his decision. It did not
seem to her possible that there could be danger for her and hers
in their quiet country chateau. There might be disturbance and
bloodshed, and even revolution, in Paris; but surely a mere echo
of this would reach them so far away.

"Whenever you think it is right to go up and take your place by
the king I will go and take mine by the queen," she said quietly.
"The children will be safe here; but of course we must do our duty."

The winter passed quietly at the chateau; there was none of the
usual gaiety, for a deep gloom hung over all the noble families
of the province; still at times great hunting parties were got up
for the chase of the wolves among the forests, for, when the snow
was on the ground, these often came down into the villages and
committed great depredations.




CHAPTER III

The Demon Wolf


Upon the first of these occasions Harry and Ernest were in high
spirits, for they were to take part in the chase. It was the first
time that Ernest had done so, for during the previous winter the
marquis had been in attendance on the court. At an early hour the
guests invited to take part in the chase began to assemble at the
chateau.  Many who lived at a distance had come overnight, and
the great court-yard presented a lively aspect with the horses
and attendants of the guests. A collation was spread in the great
hall, and the marquise and her eldest daughter moved about among
the guests saying a few words of welcome to each.

"Who is that young man who is talking to mademoiselle your sister,
Ernest?" Harry asked, for since the adventure with the mad dog the
ceremonious title had been dropped, and the boys addressed each
other by their Christian names.

"That is Monsieur Lebat; he is the son of the Mayor of Dijon.  I
have not see him here before, but I suppose my father thinks it is
well in these times to do the civil thing to the people of Dijon.
He is a good-looking fellow too, but it is easy to see he is not
a man of good family."

"I don't like his looks at all," Harry said shortly. "Look what a
cringing air he puts on as he speaks to madame la marquise. And yet
I fancy he could be insolent when he likes. He may be good-looking,
but it is not a style I admire, with his thick lips and his
half-closed eyes. If I met him at home I should say the fellow was
something between a butcher and a Jew pedlar."

"Well done, monsieur the aristocrat!" Ernest said laughing.  "This
is your English equality! Here is a poor fellow who is allowed to
take a place our of his station, thanks to the circumstances of
the time, and you run him down mercilessly!"

"I don't run him down because he is not a gentleman," Harry said.
"I run him down because I don't like his face; and if he were the
son of a duke instead of the son of a mayor I should dislike it
just as much. You take my word for it, Ernest, that's a bad fellow."

"Poor Monsieur Lebat!" Ernest laughed. "I daresay he is a very
decent fellow in his way.

"I am sure he is not, Ernest; he has a cruel bad look. I would not
have been that fellow's fag at school for any money.

"Well, it's fortunate, Harry, that you are not likely to see much
of him, else I should expect to see you flying at his neck and
strangling him as you did the hound."

Harry joined in the laugh.

"I will restrain myself, Ernest; and besides, he would be an awkward
customer; there's plenty of strength in those shoulders of his, and
he looks active and sinewy in spite of that indolent air he puts
on; but there is the horn, it is time for us to mount."

In a few minutes some thirty gentlemen were in the saddle, the
marquis, who was grand louvetier of the province, blew his horn,
and the whole cavalcade got into motion, raising their hunting
caps, as they rode off, to the marquise and her daughters, who were
standing on the step of the chateau to see them depart. The dogs
had already been sent forward to the forest, which was some miles
distant.

On arriving there the marquis found several woodmen, who had been
for the last two days marking the places most frequented by the
wolves. They had given their reports and the party were just starting
when a young forester rode up.

"Monsieur le marquis," he said, "I have good news for you; the demon
wolf is in the forest. I saw him making his way along a glade an
hour since as I was on my way thither. I turned back to follow him,
and tracked him to a ravine in the hills choked with undergrowth."

The news created great excitement.

"The demon wolf!" the marquis repeated. "Are you sure?"

"Quite sure, monsieur. How could I mistake it! I saw him once four
years ago, and no one who had once done so could mistake any other
wolf for him."

"We are in luck indeed, gentlemen," the marquis said. "We will see
if we can't bring this fellow's career to an end at last. I have
hunted him a score of times myself since my first chase of him,
well-nigh fifteen years ago, but he has  always given us the slip."

"And will again," an old forester, who was standing close to Harry,
muttered. "I do not believe the bullet is cast which will bring
that wolf to earth."

"What is this demon wolf?" Harry asked Ernest.

"It is a wolf of extraordinary size and fierceness. For many years
he has been the terror of the mothers of this part of France. He
has been known to go into a village and boldly carry off an infant
in mid-day. Every child who has been killed by wolves for years is
always supposed to have been slain by this wolf. Sometimes he is
seen in one part of the province, and sometimes in another.

"For months he is not heard of. Then there is slaughter among the
young lambs. A child going to school, or an old woman carrying
home a faggot from the forest is found torn and partly devoured,
and the news spreads that the demon wolf has returned to the
neighbourhood. Great hunts have over and over again been got up
specially to slay him, but he seems to lead a charmed life. He has
been shot at over and over again, but he seems to be bullet-proof.

"The peasants regard him not as an ordinary wolf but as a demon,
and mothers quiet their children when they cry by saying that if
they are not good the demon wolf will carry them off.  Ah, if we
could kill him to-day it would be a grand occasion!"

"Is there anything particular about his appearance?"

"Nothing except his size. Some of those who have seen him declare
that he is as big as three ordinary wolves; but my father, who has
caught sight of him several times, says that this is an exaggeration,
though he is by far the largest wolf he ever saw. He is lighter in
colour than other wolves, but those who saw him years ago say that
this was not the case then, and that his light colour must be due
to his great age."

The party now started, under the guidance of the forester, to the
spot where he had seen the wolf enter the underwood.

It was the head of a narrow valley. The sides which inclosed it
sloped steeply, but not too much so for the wolf to climb. During
the last halt the marquis had arranged the plan of action. He
himself, with three of the most experienced huntsmen, took their
stations across the valley, which was but seventy or eighty yards
wide. Eight of the others were to dismount and take post on either
side of the ravine.

"I am sorry, gentlemen, that I cannot find posts for the rest of
you, but you may have your share of the work. Over and over again
this wolf has slipped away when we thought we had him surrounded,
and what he has done before he may do again. Therefore, let each of
you take up such a position as he thinks best outside our circle,
but keeping well behind trees or other shelter, so as to cover
himself from any random shot that may be fired after the wolf. Do
you, on your part, fire only when the wolf has passed your line,
or you may hit some of us."

The two lads were naturally among those left out from the inner
circle.

"What do you think, Ernest; shall we remain on our horses here in
the valley or climb the hills?"

"I should say wait here, Harry; in the first place, because it
is the least trouble, and in the second, because I think he is as
likely to come this way as any other. At any rate we may as well
dismount here, and let horses crop that piece of fresh grass until
we hear the horn that will tell us when the dogs have been turned
into the thicket to drive him out."

It was half an hour before they heard the distant note of the horn.

"They have begun," Ernest exclaimed; "we had better mount at once.
If the brute is still there he is just as likely, being such an
old hand at the sport, to make a bolt at once, instead of waiting
until the dogs are close to him."

"What are we to do if we see him?" Harry asked.

"We are to shoot him if we can. If we miss him, or he glides past
before we can get a shot, we must follow shouting, so as to guide
the rest as to the direction he is taking."

"My chance of hitting him is not great," Harry said. "I am not a
very good shot even on my feet; but sitting in my saddle I do not
think it likely I should get anywhere near him."

A quarter of an hour passed. The occasional note of a dog and the
shouts of the men encouraging them to work their way through the
dense thicket could be heard, but no sound of a shot met their
ears.

"Either he is not there at all, or he is lying very close," Ernest
said.

"Look, look!" Harry said suddenly, pointing through the trees to
the right.

"That is the wolf, sure enough," Ernest exclaimed. "Come along."

The two lads spurred their horses and rode recklessly through the
trees towards the great gray beast, who seemed to flit like a shadow
past them.

"Mind the boughs, Ernest, or you will be swept from your saddle.
Hurrah! The trees are more open in front."

But although the horses were going at the top of their speed they
scarcely seemed to gain on the wolf, who, as it seemed to them,
kept his distance ahead without any great exertion.

"We shall never catch him," Harry exclaimed after they had ridden
for nearly half an hour, and the laboured panting of the horses
showed that they could not long maintain the pace.

Suddenly, ten yards ahead of the wolf, a man, armed with
a hatchet, stepped out from behind a tree directly in its way. He
was a wood-cutter whose attention being called by the sound of the
galloping feet of the horses, had left his half-hewn tree and stepped
out to see who was coming. He gave an exclamation of surprise and
alarm as he saw the wolf, and raised his hatchet to defend himself.
Without a moment's hesitation the animal sprang upon him and
carried him to the ground, fixing its fangs into his throat. There
was a struggle for a few moments, and then the wolf left its lifeless
foe and was about to continue its flight.

"Get ready to fire, Harry," Ernest exclaimed as the wolf sprang
upon the man, "it is our last chance. If he gets away now we shall
never catch him."

They reined in their horses just as the wolf rose to fly. Harry
fired first, but the movement of his panting horse deranged his aim
and the bullet flew wide. More accustomed to firing on horseback,
Ernest's aim was truer, he struck the wolf on the shoulder, and
it rolled over and over. With a shout of triumph the boys dashed
forward, but when they were within a few paces the wolf leapt
to its feet and endeavoured to spring towards them. Harry's horse
wheeled aside so sharply that he was hurled from the saddle.

The shock was a severe one, and before he could rise to his
feet the wolf was close upon him. He tried as he rose to draw his
hunting-sword, but before he could do so,  Ernest, who had, when he
saw him fall, at once leaped from his horse, threw himself before
him, and dealt the wolf a severe blow on the head with his weapon.

Furious with rage and pain the wolf sprang upon him and seized
him by the shoulder. Ernest dropped his sword, and drawing his
hunting-knife struck at it, while at the same moment Harry ran it
through the body.

So strong and tenacious of life was the animal that the blows
were repeated several times before it loosed its hold of Ernest's
shoulder and fell dead.

"Are you hurt, my dear Ernest?" was Harry's first exclamation.

"Oh, never mind that, that's nothing," Ernest replied. "Only think,
Harry, you and I have killed the demon wolf, and no else had a hand
in it. There is a triumph for us."

"The triumph is yours, Ernest," Harry said. "He would have got away
had you not stopped him with your bullet, and he would have made
short work of me had you not come to my rescue, for I was half
stunned with the fall, and he would have done for me as quickly as
he did for that poor fellow there."

"That is true, Harry, but it was you who gave him his mortal wound.
He would have mastered me otherwise. He was too strong for me, and
would have borne me to the ground. No, it's a joint business, and
we have both a right to be proud of it. Now let us fasten him on my
horse; but before we do that, you must bind up my shoulder somehow.
In spite of my thick doublet he has bit me very sharply. But first
let us see to this poor fellow. I fear he is dead."

It was soon seen that nothing could be done for the woodman, who
had been killed almost instantly. Harry, therefore, proceeded to
cut off Ernest's coat-sleeve and bathed the wound. The flesh was
badly torn, and the arm was so useless that he thought that some
bones were broken. Having done his best to bandage the wound,
he strapped the arm firmly across the body, so as to prevent its
being shaken by the motion of the riding. It was with the greatest
difficulty that they were able to lift the body of the wolf, but
could not lay it across the horse, as the animal plunged and kicked
and refused to allow it to be brought near. Ernest was able to
assist but little, for now that the excitement was over he felt
faint and sick with the pain of his wound.

"I think you had better ride off, Harry, and bring some one to our
assistance. I will wait here till you come back."

"I don't like to do that," Harry said. "They must be seven or eight
miles away, and I may not be able to find them. They may have moved
away to some other part of the forest. Ah! I have an idea!  Suppose
I cut a pole, tie the wolf's legs together and put the pole through
them; then we can hoist the pole up and lash its ends behind the
two saddles. The horses may not mind so much if it's not put upon
their backs."


"That might do," Ernest agreed; "but you mustn't make the pole more
than six or seven feet long, or we shall have difficulty in riding
between the trees."

The pole was soon cut and the wolf in readiness to be lifted, but
the horses still refused to stand steady.

"Blindfold them, Harry," Ernest said suddenly, "and tie them up to
two trees a few feet apart."

This was soon done, and the boys then patted and soothed them until
they became quiet. The pole was now lifted, and this time they
managed to lay it across the saddles and to lash it securely to
the cantles. Then they mounted, and taking the bandages off the
horses' eyes set out on their way. The horses were fidgety at first,
but presently fell into a quiet walk.

For upwards of an hour they heard nothing of the huntsmen.  Not a
sound broke the stillness of the forest; the sun was shining through
the leafless trees, and they were therefore enabled to shape their
course in the direction in which  they had come. Presently they
heard the sound of a shot, followed by several others, and then
the bay of hounds. The sound came from their left.

"They have been trying a fresh place," Ernest said, "and I expect
they have come upon two wolves; one they have shot, the hounds are
after the other."

They turned their horses' heads in the direction of the sounds,
and presently Harry said:

"They are coming this way."

Louder and louder grew the sounds of the chase; then the deep tones
of the hounds were exchanged for a fierce angry barking.

"The wolf is at bay!" Ernest exclaimed.

A minute later some notes were sounded on the horn.

"That is the mort, Harry. We shall arrive before they move on
again."

Five minutes later they rode into a glade where a number of horsemen
were assembled. There was a shout as they were seen.

"Why, Ernest," the marquis called as they approached, "we thought
you had lost us. You have missed some rare sport; but what's the
matter with your arm, and what have you got there?"

"We have got the demon wolf," Ernest replied; "so you haven't had
all the sport to yourselves."

There was a general exclamation of surprise and almost incredulity,
and then every one rode over to meet them, and when it was seen
that the object slung between the two horses was really the demon
wolf there was a shout of satisfaction and pleasure. Again the
notes of the mort rang out through the woods, and every one crowded
round the lads to congratulate them and to examine the dead monster.
Ernest was lifted from his horse, for he was now reeling in
the saddle, and could not have kept his seat many minutes longer.
His wound was carefully examined, and the marquis pronounced
the shoulder-bone to be broken. A litter was made  and four of
the foresters hoisted him upon their shoulders, while four others
carried the wolf, still slung on its pole, behind the litter. While
the preparations were being made Harry had given the history of the
slaying of the wolf, saying that he owed his life to the quickness
and courage of Ernest.

"And I owe mine to him," Ernest protested from the bank where he
was lying. "The wolf would have killed me had he not slain it. I
was lucky in stopping it with a ball, but the rest was entirely a
joint affair."

The slaying of the demon wolf was so important an event that no
one thought of pursuing the hunt further that day. The other two
wolves were added to the procession, but they looked small and
insignificant beside the body of that killed by the boys. Harry
learned that no one had suspected that they had gone in pursuit of
the wolf.  A vigilant look-out had been kept all round the thicket,
while the dogs hunted it from end to end, but no signs had been seen
of it, and none were able to understand how it could have slipped
between the watchers unseen.

After the ravine had been thoroughly beaten the party had moved
off to another cover. On their way there the marquis had missed
the two boys. No one had seen them, and it was supposed that they
had loitered behind in the forest. Two or three notes of recall had
been blown, and then no one had thought more of the matter until
they rode into the glade when the second wolf had just been pulled
down by the pack.

It was afternoon when the hunting party arrived at the chateau.
Before they started homewards the marquis had sent off two horsemen;
one to Dijon to bring a surgeon with all speed to the chateau,
the other to tell the marquise that Ernest had been hurt, and that
everything was to be got in readiness for him; but that she was not
to make herself uneasy, as the injury was not a serious one.  The
messengers were charged strictly to say nothing about the death of
the demon wolf.

The marquise and her daughters were at the entrance as the party
arrived. The sight of the litter added to the anxiety which Ernest's
mother was feeling; but the marquis rode on a short distance ahead
to her.

"Do not be alarmed, Julie," he said; "the lad is not very seriously
hurt. He has been torn a bit by a wolf, and has behaved splendidly."

"The messenger said he had been hurt by a wolf, Edouard; but how
came he to put himself in such peril?"

"He will tell you all about it, my dear. Here he is to speak for
himself."

"Do not look so alarmed, mother," Ernest said as she ran down to
the side of the litter. "It is no great harm, and I should not have
minded if it had been ten times as bad."

"Bring up the wolf," the marquis said, "and Harry, do you come
here and stand by Ernest's side. Madam la marquise," he went on,
"do you see that great gray wolf? That is the demon wolf which has
for years been the terror of the district, and these are its slayers.
Your son and M. Sandwith, they, and they alone, have reaped the
glory which every sportsman in Burgundy has been so long striving
to attain; they alone in the forest, miles away from the hunt,
pursued and slew this scourge of the province."

He put his horn to his lips. The others who carried similar
instruments followed his example. A triumphant traralira was blown.
All present took off their hunting-caps and cheered, and the hounds
added their barking to the chorus.

"Is it possible, Edward," the marquise said, terrified at the
thought of the danger her son must have run in an encounter with
the dreaded beast, "is it possible that these two alone have slain
this dreadful wolf?"

"It is quite possible, my dear, since it has been done, though,
had you asked me yesterday, I should almost have said that it could
not be; however, there it is. Ernest and his brave young friend
have covered themselves with glory; they will be the heroes of the
department. But we must not stay talking here. We must get Ernest
into bed as soon as possible. A surgeon will be here very shortly.
I sent a messenger on to Dijon for one at the same time I sent to
you."

The marquis stayed outside for a few minutes while the domestics
handed round great silver cups full of spiced wine, and then bidding
good-bye to his guests entered the chateau just as the surgeon rode
up to the entrance.

"Please tell us all about it," his daughters asked him when,
having seen the surgeon set the broken bone and bandage the wound,
operations which Ernest bore with stoical firmness, he went down
to the salon where his daughters were anxiously expecting him. "All
about it, please. We have heard nothing, for Harry went upstairs
with Ernest, and has not come down again."

The marquis told the whole story, how the wolf had made his escape
unseen through the cordon round his lair, and had passed within the
sight of the two boys some distance away, and how they had hunted
it down and slain it. The girls shuddered at the story of the death
of the wood-cutter and the short but desperate conflict with the
wolf.

"Then Ernest has the principal honour this time," the eldest girl
said.

"It is pretty evenly divided," the marquis said. "You see Ernest
brought the wolf to bay by breaking its shoulder, and struck the
first blow as it was flying upon Harry, who had been thrown from
his horse. Then, again, Ernest would almost certainly have been
killed had not Harry in his turn come to his assistance and dealt
it its mortal blows. There is not much difference, but perhaps the
chief honours rest with Ernest."

"I am glad of that, papa," Mademoiselle de St. Caux said; "it is
only right the chief honour should be with your son and not with
this English boy. He has had more than his share already, I think."

"You would not think so if he had saved your life, sister," Jeanne
broke in impetuously. "It was very brave of them both to kill the
wolf; but I think it was ever, ever so much braver to attack a
great mad dog without weapons. Don't you think so, papa?"

"I don't think you should speak so warmly to your elder sister,
Jeanne," the marquis said; "she is a grown-up young lady, and you
are in the school-room. Still, in answer to your question, I admit
that the first was very much the braver deed. I myself should have
liked nothing better than to stand before that great wolf with my
hunting sword in my hand; but although if I had been near you when
the hound attacked you, I should doubtless have thrown myself before
you, I should have been horribly frightened and should certainly
have been killed; for I should never have thought of or carried so
promptly out the plan which Harry adopted of muzzling the animal.
But there is no need to make comparisons. On the present occasion
both the lads have behaved with great bravery, and I am proud that
Ernest is one of the conquerors of the demon wolf. It will start
him in life with a reputation already established for courage.
Now, come with me and have a look at the wolf. I don't think such
a beast was ever before seen in France. I am going to have him
stuffed and set up as a trophy. He shall stand over the  fireplace
in the hall, and long after we have all mouldered to dust our
descendants will point to it proudly, telling how a lad of their
race, with another his own age, slew the demon wolf of Burgundy."

Ernest was confined to his bed for nearly a month, and during
this time Harry often went long rides and walks by himself. In the
evening the marquis frequently talked with him over the situation
of the country and compared the events which had taken place with
the struggle of the English parliament with the king.

"There was one point of difference between the two cases," he said
one evening. "In England the people had already great power in
the state. The parliament had always been a check upon the royal
authority; and it was because the king tried to overrule parliament
that the trouble came about. Here our kings, or at least the ministers
they appointed, have always governed; often unwisely I admit, but
is it likely that the mob would govern better? That is the question.
At present they seem bent on showing their incapacity to govern
even themselves."

The Marquis de St. Caux had, in some respects, the thoughts and
opinions of the old school. He was a royalist pure and simple.  As
to politics, he troubled his head little about them. These were a
matter for ministers. It was their business to find a remedy for
the general ills. As to the National Assembly which represented
only the middle class and people, he regarded it with contempt.

"Why, it was from the middle class," he said, "that the oppressors
of the people were drawn. It is they who were farmers-general,
collectors, and officials of all kinds. It is  they who ground
down the nation and enriched themselves with the spoil. It is not
the nobles who dirtied their hands with money wrung from the poor.
By all means let the middle class have a share in the government;
but it is not a share they desire. The clergy are to have no voice;
the nobility are to have no voice; the king himself is to be a
cipher. All power is to be placed in the hands of these men, the
chosen of the scum of the great towns, the mere mouthpieces of the
ignorant mob. It is not order that these gentry are organizing, it
is disorder."

Such were the opinions of the marquis, but he was tolerant of other
views, and at the gatherings at the chateau Harry heard opinions
of all kinds expressed.

During his rambles alone he entered as much as he could into
conversation with the peasants, with woodcutters, foresters, and
villagers. He found that the distress which prevailed everywhere
was terrible. The people scarcely kept life together, and many
had died of absolute starvation. He found a feeling of despair
everywhere, and a dull hatred of all who were above them in the
world. Harry had difficulty in making them talk, and at first could
obtain only sullen monosyllables. His dress and appearance showed
him to belong to the hated classes, and set them against him at
once; but when he said that he was English, and that in England
people were watching with great interest what was passing in France,
they had no hesitation in speaking.

Harry's motives in endeavouring to find out what were the feelings
of the people at large, were not those of mere curiosity. He was
now much attached to the marquis and his family; and the reports
which came from all parts of France, as well as from Paris, together
with the talk among the visitors at the chateau, convinced him that
the state of affairs was more serious than the marquis was inclined
to admit. The capture of the Bastille and the slaughter of its
defenders--the massacres of persons obnoxious to the mob, not only
in the streets of Paris but in those of other great towns, proved
that the lower class, if they once obtained the upper hand, were
ready to go all lengths; while the number of the nobility who were
flocking across the frontier showed that among this body there
existed grievous apprehensions as to the future.

Harry had read in a book in the library of the chateau an account
of the frightful excesses perpetrated by the Jacquerie. That dreadful
insurrection had been crushed out by the armour-clad knights of
France; but who was to undertake the task should such a flame again
burst out? The nobles no longer wore armour, they had no armed
retainers; they would be a mere handful among a multitude. The
army had already shown its sympathy with the popular movement, and
could not be relied upon. That the marquis himself should face out
any danger which might come seemed to Harry right and natural; but
he thought that he was wrong not to send his wife and daughters, and
at any rate Jules, across the Rhine until the dangers were passed.

But the marquis had no fears. Some one had mentioned the Jacquerie
in one of their conversations, but the marquis had put it aside as
being altogether apart from the question.

"The Jacquerie took place," he said, "hundreds of years ago.  The
people then were serfs and little more than savages. Can we imagine
it possible that at this day the people would be capable of such
excesses?"

The answer of the gentleman he addressed had weighed little with
the marquis, but Harry thought over it seriously.

"Civilization has increased, marquis, since the days of the Jacquerie,
but the condition of the people has improved but little.  Even now
the feudal usages are scarce extinct. The lower class have been
regarded as animals rather than men; and the increase of civilization
which you speak of, and from which they have received no benefit,
makes them hate even more bitterly than of old those in position
above them.

"I am a reformer; I desire to see sweeping changes; I want a good,
wise, and honest government; and I desire these things because
I fear that, if they do not come peacefully they will come in a
tempest of lawlessness and vengeance."

"Well, they are getting all they want," the marquis said peevishly.
"They are passing every law, however absurd, that comes into their
hands. No one is opposing them. They have got the reins in their
own hands. What on earth can they want more? There might have been
an excuse for rebellion and riot two years since--there can be
none now. What say you, abbe?"

The abbe seldom took part in conversations on politics, but, being
now appealed to, he said mildly:

"We must allow for human nature, monsieur. The slave who finds
himself free, with arms in his hands, is not likely to settle down
at once into a peaceful citizen. Men's heads are turned with the
changes the last two years have brought about. They are drunk with
their own success, and who can say where they will stop? So far
they find no benefit from the changes. Bread is as dear as ever,
men's pockets are as empty. They thought to gain everything--they
find they have got nothing; and so they will cry for more and more
change, their fury will run higher and higher with each  disappointment,
and who can say to what lengths they will go? They have already
confiscated the property of the church, next will come that of the
laity."

"I had no idea you were such a prophet of evil, abbe," the marquis
said with an uneasy laugh, while feelings of gloom and anxiety fell
over the others who heard the abbe's words.

"God forbid that I should be a prophet!" the old man said gravely.
"I hope and trust that I am mistaken, and that He has not reserved
this terrible punishment for France. But you asked me for my opinion,
marquis, and I have given it to you."

Despite these forebodings the winter of 1790 passed without
disturbance at the chateau.

In the spring came news of disorder, pillage, and acts of ruffianism
in various parts. Chateaux and convents were burned and destroyed,
and people refused to pay either their taxes or rents to their
landlords. In the south the popular excitement was greater than in
other parts. In Burgundy there was for the most part tranquility;
and the marquis, who had always been regarded as an indulgent
seigneur by the people of his estate, still maintained that these
troubles only occurred where the proprietors had abused their
privileges and ground down the people.




CHAPTER IV

The Clouds Gather


Occasionally and at considerable intervals Harry received letters
from his father. The latter said that there was great excitement
in England over the events which had taken place in France, and
that his mother was rendered extremely anxious by the news of the
attacks upon chateaux, and the state of tumult and lawlessness
which prevailed. They thought he had better resign his situation
and return home.

Harry in his replies made light of the danger, and said that after
having been treated so kindly it would be most ungrateful of him
to break the engagement he had made for three years, and leave his
friends at the present moment. Indeed, he, like all around him,
was filled with the excitement of the time. In spite of the almost
universal confusion and disorder, life went on quietly and calmly
at the chateau.  The establishment was greatly reduced, for few of
the tenants paid their rents; but the absence of ceremonial brought
the family closer together, and the marquis and his wife agreed that
they had never spent a happier time than the spring and summer of
1791.

The news of the failure of the king's attempt at flight on the
20th of June was a great shock to the marquis. "A king should never
fly," he said; "above all, he should never make an abortive attempt
at flight. It is lamentable that he should be so ill-advised."

At the end of September the elections to the Legislative Assembly as
it was now to be called, resulted in the return of men even more
extreme and violent than those whom they succeeded.

"We must go to Paris," the marquis said one day towards the end of
October. "The place for a French nobleman now is beside the king."

"And that of his wife beside the queen," the marquise said quietly.

"I cannot say no," the marquis replied. "I wish you could have stayed
with the children, but they need fear no trouble here.  Ernest is
nearly seventeen, and may well begin, in my absence, to represent
me. I think we can leave the chateau without anxiety, but even were
it not so it would still be our duty to go."

"There is another thing I want to speak to you about before we
start," the marquise said. "Jeanne is no longer a child, although
we still regard her as one; she is fifteen, and she is graver
and more earnest than most girls of her age. It seems ridiculous
to think of such a thing, but it is clear that she has made this
English lad her hero. Do you not think it better that he should
go? It would be unfortunate in the extreme that she should get to
have any serious feelings for him."

"I have noticed it too, Julie," the marquis said, "and have smiled
to myself to see how the girl listens gravely to all he says, but
I am not disposed to send him away. In the first place, he has done
a great deal of good to the boys, more even than I had hoped for.
Ernest now thinks and speaks for himself, his ideas are broader, his
views wider. He was fitted before for the regime that has passed;
he is rapidly becoming fit to take his part in that which is to
come.

"In the next place, my dear, you must remember the times have
changed. Mademoiselle Jeanne de St. Caux, daughter of a peer and
noble of France, was infinitely removed from the son of an English
doctor; but we seem to be approaching the end of all things;
and although so far the law for the abolition of titles has been
disregarded here, you must prepare yourself to find that in Paris
you will be no longer addressed by your title, and I shall be
Monsieur de St. Caux; or may be they will object both to the de
and the St., and I shall find myself plain Monsieur Caux."

"Oh, Edouard!" the marquise exclaimed aghast.

"I am quite in earnest, my dear, I can assure you. You will say
she is still the heiress of a portion of our estates, but who can
say how long the estates will remain after the title is gone? Just
as the gentlemen of the pave object to titles because they have
none themselves, so being penniless they will object to property,
and for aught I know may decree a general division of lands and
goods."

"Impossible, Edouard!"

"Not at all impossible, Julie. The beggars are on horseback, and
they intend to ride. Last week I called in from my bankers, all
the cash at my disposal, about five thousand louis, and to-morrow
du Tillet is going to start for Holland. He will hand it over to
a banker there to forward to Dr. Sandwith, to whom I have written
asking him to undertake the charge. If you will take my advice you
will forward at the same time all your jewelry. If things go wrong
it will keep us in our old age and furnish a dot for our daughters.

"The jewels of the St. Caux have always been considered as equal
to those of any family in France, and are certainly worth half a
million francs even to sell. Keep a few small trinkets, and send
all the others away.  But I have wandered from my subject. Under
these circumstances I think it as well that we should not interfere
in the matter you speak of. Personally one could not wish for a
better husband for one of our daughters than this young Englishman
would make.

"His father is a gentleman, and so is he, and in such times as
are coming I should be glad to know that one of my girls had such
a protector as he would make her; but this is, as you said at first,
almost ridiculous. He is two years older than she is, but in some
respects she is the elder; he regards her as a pretty child, and
all his thoughts are given to his studies and his sports.

"He has something of the English barbarian left in him, and is
absolutely indifferent to Jeanne's preference. A French lad at his
age would be flattered. This English boy does not notice it, or if
he notices it regards it as an exhibition of gratitude, which he
could well dispense with, for having saved her life.

"You can leave them with a tranquil heart, my dear. I will answer
for it that never in his inmost heart has the idea of his ever
making love to Jeanne occurred to this English lad. Lastly I should
be sorry for him to leave, because his good spirits and cheerfulness
are invaluable at present. Ernest is apt to be gloomy and depressed,
and cheerfulness is at a premium in France at present. Moreover,
should there be any difficulty or danger while we are absent I trust
very much to that lad's good sense and courage. That incident of
the dog showed how quick he is to plan and how prompt to carry his
plans into effect. It may seem absurd when there are several of
our staunch and tried friends here to rely in  any way on a lad,
but I do so.  Not, of course, as before our faithful friends, but
as one whose aid is not to be despised."

Thus it happened that on the same day that the marquis started for
Paris, M. du Tillet set out from the chateau taking with him some
trunks and packages which appeared but of little value and were
not likely to attract attention, but which contained a considerable
sum of money and the famous St. Caux jewels.

Life at the chateau was dull after the departure of its heads.  They
had few visitors now; the most frequent among them being Victor
de Gisons. The estates of the duke, his father, adjoined those of
the marquis, and between him and Marie a marriage had long before
been arranged by their parents. For once the inclination of the
young people agreed with the wishes of the elders, and they were
warmly attached to each other. No formal betrothal, however, had
as yet taken place, the troubles of the times having caused its
postponement, although formerly it had been understood that in the
present autumn the marriage should be celebrated.

The young count had at the assembly of the States General been
a prominent liberal, and had been one of those who had taken his
seat with the third estate and had voted for the abolition of the
special privileges of the nobility, but the violence of the Assembly
had alarmed and disgusted him, and in the winter he had left Paris
and returned to his father's estates.

Ernest and Harry studied with the abbe, and fenced and rode as usual
with M. du Tillet after his return from Holland. The ever-darkening
cloud weighed upon their  spirits, and yet life at the chateau was
pleasant. The absence of their parents and the general feeling of
anxiety knit the rest of the family closer together. Much of the
ceremonial observance which had, on his first arrival, surprised
and amused Harry was now laid aside. Marie, happy in the visits
of her lover and at the prospect of her approaching marriage, did
her best to make the house cheerful. Harry, who had not much liked
her at first, now found her most pleasant and agreeable, and the
younger girls walked in the grounds with their brothers and chatted
when they were gathered in the evening just as Harry's sisters had
done at home. Jeanne was, if the group broke up, generally Harry's
companion. Ever since the affair of the mad dog she had treated
him as her special friend, adopting all his  opinions and falling
in with any suggestion he might make with a readiness which caused
Ernest one day to say laughingly to Harry:

"One would think, Harry that you were Jeanne's elder brother, not
I. She listens to you with a good deal more deference than she does
to me."

The winter came and went. From time to time letters arrived from
Paris, but the news was always in the same strain. Things were going
worse and worse, the king was little more than a prisoner in the
hands of the people of Paris. The violence of the Assembly was
ever on the increase, the mob of Paris were the real masters of
the situation, the greater part of the nobility had fled, and any
who appeared in the streets were liable to insult.

The feeling in the provinces kept pace with that in Paris.  Committees
were formed in every town and village and virtually superseded the
constituted authorities. Numbers of chateaux were burned, and the
peasants almost universally refused any longer to pay the dues to
their seigneurs. But at present none dreamt of personal danger.
The nobles who emigrated did so because they found the situation
intolerable, and hoped that an army would be shortly raised and
set in motion by foreign powers to put down the movement which
constituted a danger to kings, nobles, and property all over Europe.
But as yet there was nothing to foreshadow the terrible events
which were to take place, or to indicate that a movement, which
began in the just demand of an oppressed people for justice and
fair treatment, would end in that people becoming a bloodthirsty
rabble, eager to destroy all who were above them in birth, education,
or intellect.

Therefore, although the Marquis de St. Caux foresaw the possibility
of confiscation of the property and abolition of all the privileges
of the nobility, he was under no uneasiness whatever as to the
safety of his children.  His instructions were precise: that if a
small party of peasants attacked the chateau, and it was evident
that a successful resistance could be made, M. du Tillet should
send word down to the mayor of Dijon and ask for help, and should,
with the servants of the chateau, defend it; if it was attacked by
a large mob, no resistance was to be offered, but he was to abandon
it at once and journey to Paris with the children. But the time
went on without disturbance. In Dijon as elsewhere a  committee
had been formed and had taken into its hands the entire control of
the management of the town. At its head was the son of the mayor,
Monsieur Lebat.

"I do not understand that young fellow," M. du Tillet said one day
on his return from Dijon. "I do not like him; he is ambitious and
pushing, he is the leader of the advanced party in Dijon, and is
in communication with the most violent spirits in Paris, but I am
bound to say that he appears most anxious to be of service to the
family. Whenever I see him he assures me of his devotion to the
marquis. To-day, Mademoiselle Marie, he prayed me to assure you
that you need feel no uneasiness, for that he held the mob in his
hand, and would answer for it that no hostile movement should be
made against the chateau, and in fact I know, for I have taken the
precaution of buying the services of a man who is upon the committee,
that Lebat has actually exerted himself to benefit us.

"It has several times been urged by the most violent section that
the mob should be incited to attack the chateau, but he has each
time successfully opposed the proposition. He has declared that while
no one is more hostile than himself to the privileges of seigneury,
and while he would not only abolish the nobles as a class but
confiscate their possessions, he considers that in the case of the
marquis nothing should be done until a decree to that effect is
passed by the Assembly.

"Until that time, he argues, the people should discriminate.  The
chateaux of tyrants should be everywhere levelled to the ground,
but it would be unworthy of the people to take measures of vengeance
against those who have not notably ground down those dependent upon
them, and that, as the marquis has not pushed the privilege of his
class to the utmost, his chateau and property should be respected
until the Assembly pass a decree upon the subject."

"I am sure we are much indebted to this Monsieur Lebat," Marie
said. "He was here at the hunting party and seemed a worthy young
man of his class. Of course he was out of place among us, but for
a man in his position he seemed tolerable."

"Yes," Monsieur du Tillet agreed, but in a somewhat doubtful tone
of voice. "So far as assurances go there is nothing to be desired,
and he has, as I said, so far acted loyally up to them, and
yet somehow I do not like him. It strikes me that he is playing a
game, although what that game is I cannot say.  At  anyrate I do
not trust him; he speaks smoothly but I think he has a double face,
and that he is cruel and treacherous."

"That is not like you, Monsieur du Tillet," Marie laughed, "you
who generally have a good word for everyone. It seems to me that
you are hard upon the young man, who appears to be animated by
excellent sentiments towards us."

Spring came again. M. du Tillet learned that the mob of Dijon were
becoming more and more violent, and that spies and watchmen had
been told off to see that none of the family attempted to fly for
the frontier. He therefore wrote to the marquis urging that it
would be better that the family should move to Paris, where they
would be in no danger. In reply he received a letter begging him
to start as soon as the roads were fit for travel.

About the same time Victor de Gisons received a summons from his
father to join him in Paris.

The messenger who brought the letter to M. du Tillet brought one
also for Marie from the marquise, saying that the heads of both
families were of opinion that the marriage must be still further
postponed, as in the present state of affairs all private plans and
interests must be put aside in view of the dangers that surrounded
the king. Marie acquiesced in the decision, and bade her lover
adieu calmly and bravely.

"They are quite right, Victor; I have felt for some time that when
France was on the verge of a precipice it was not the time for her
nobles to be marrying. Noblesse oblige. If we were two peasants
we might marry and be happy. As it is we must wait, even though we
know that waiting may never come to an end. I have a conviction,
Victor, that our days of happiness are over, and that terrible
things are about to happen."

"But nothing that can happen can separate us, Marie."

"Nothing but death, Victor," she said quietly.

"But surely, Marie, you take too gloomy a view. Death, of course,
may separate all lovers; but there seems no reason that we should
fear him now more than at other times. A few farmers-general and
others who have made themselves obnoxious to the mob have been
killed, but what is that! There should at least be no hostility
to our order. Many of the nobles have  been foremost in demanding
reforms. All have cheerfully resigned their privileges. There is
no longer the slightest reason for hostility against us."

"My dear Victor," Marie said quietly, "you do not ask a wild beast
about to rend his prey, what is the reason for his actions. I hope
I may be wrong; but at least, dear, we shall see each other again
before long, and, whatever troubles may come, will share them. My
mother in her letter yesterday said that she and the marquis had
determined that we should join them in Paris; for that although the
disorders have abated somewhat they are anxious at the thought of
our being alone here, and in the present position of things they
have no hope of being able to leave the king. She says my father
is very indignant at the great emigration of the nobility that
is going on. In the first place, he holds that they are deserting
their post in the face of the enemy; and in the second place, by
their assemblage across the frontier and their intrigues at foreign
courts against France they are causing the people to look with
suspicion upon the whole class."

"You have kept your good news till the last, Marie," Victor said.
"Here have we been saying good-bye, and it seems that we are going
to meet again very shortly."

"I have been bidding farewell," Marie said, "not to you, but to
our dream of happiness. We shall meet soon, but I fear that will
never return."

"You are a veritable prophet of ill to-day, Marie," Victor said
with an attempt at gaiety. "Some day, I hope, dear, that we shall
smile together over your gloomy prognostication."

"I hope so, Victor--I pray God it may be so!"

A week later three carriages arrived from Paris to convey the
family there; and upon the following day the whole party started;
the girls, the gouvernante, the abbe, and some of the female servants
occupying the carriages, Monsieur du Tillet, the boys, and several
of the men riding beside them as an escort.

They met with no interruption on the road, and arrived in Paris
on the last day of April, 1792. Harry was glad at the change. The
doings at Paris had been the subject of conversation and thought for
nearly two years, and he had caught the excitement which pervaded
France. He was tired of the somewhat monotonous life in the country,
and had for some time been secretly  longing to be at the centre
of interest, and to see for himself the stirring events, of which
little more than a feeble echo had reached them at the chateau.

The change of life was great indeed; the marquis had thrown himself
into the thick of all that was going on, and his salon was crowded
every evening with those of the nobility who still remained In
Paris. But he was regarded as by no means a man of extreme views,
and many of the leaders of the party of the Gironde with whose names
Harry was familiar were also frequent visitors--Roland, Vergniaud,
Lanjuinais, Brissot, Guader, Lebrun, and Condorcer.

Harry was struck with the variety of conversation that went on at
these meetings. Many of the young nobles laughed and chatted with
the ladies with as much gaiety as if the former state of things
were continuing undisturbed; and an equal indifference to the public
state of things was shown by many of the elders, who sat down and
devoted themselves to cards. Others gathered apart in little groups
and discussed gloomily and in low tones the events of the day;
while others who were more liberal in their views gathered round the
deputies of the Gironde and joined in their talk upon the meetings
of the Assembly and the measures which were necessary to consolidate
the work of reform, and to restore peace and happiness to France.

The marquis moved from group to group, equally at home with all,
chatting lightly with the courtiers, whispering gravely with the
elders, or discussing with the tone of the man of the world the
views and opinions of the deputies. Victor de Gisons was constantly
at the house, and strove by his cheerfulness and gaiety to dissipate
the shade of melancholy which still hung over Marie.

Towards the end of July the Marquis de St. Caux and the little
body of royalists who still remained faithful to the king became
more and more anxious; the position of the royal family was now
most precarious; most of the troops in Paris had been sent to the
frontier, and those left behind were disorganized and ready to join
the mob.  Two out of the three Swiss battalions had been sent away
and but one remained at the Tuileries. Of the National Guard only
the battalion of Filles St. Thomas and part of the battalion of
the Saints Pares could be trusted to defend the king. The rest were
opposed to him, and would certainly join the populace.

On the 14th of July a large number of National Guards from the
provinces had arrived in Paris; and the battalion from Marseilles,
the most violent of all, had, immediately that it arrived in the
city, come into collision with one of the loyal battalions.

The royalists were wholly without organization, their sole aim
being to defend the king should he be in danger, and if necessary
to die by his side.

On the evening before the 10th of August the tocsin was heard to
sound and the drums to beat to arms. All day there had been sinister
rumours circulating, but the king had sent privately to his friends
that the danger was not imminent and that he had no need of them;
however, as soon as the alarm sounded the marquis snatched up a
sword and prepared to start for the palace. He embraced his wife,
who was calm but very pale, and his children. Ernest asked to be
allowed to go with him, but the marquis said:

"No, my son, my life is the king's; but yours at present is due
to your mother and sisters."

It was twenty-four hours before he returned. His clothes were torn,
his head was bound up, and one of his arms disabled. The marquise
gave a cry of delight as he entered. No one had slept since he
left, for every hour fresh rumours of fighting had arrived, and
the sound of cannon and musketry had been heard in the early part
of the day.

"It is all over, wife!" he said. "We have done our best, but the
king will do nothing. We cannot say we have lost the battle, for
we have never tried to win it; but it would be the same thing in
the long run."

Before hearing what had passed the marquise insisted upon her husband
taking refreshment and having his wounds bound up and attended to.
When he had finished his meal the marquis began:

"We had a good deal of difficulty in getting into the Tuileries,
for the National Guard tried to prevent our passing. However, we
most of us got through; and we found that there were about a hundred
assembled, almost all men of family. The Marshal de Mailly led us
into the king's apartment.

"'Sire,' he said, 'here are your faithful nobles, eager to replace
your majesty on the throne of your ancestors.' The National Guard
in the palace withdrew at once, leaving us alone with the Swiss.

"We formed in the courtyard; and the king, with his hat in his hand,
walked down our ranks and those of the Swiss. He seemed without
fear, but he did not speak a word, and did nothing to encourage us.
Several of our party, in trying to make their way to the palace,
had been murdered, and the mob cut off their heads and put them on
pikes; and these were paraded in the streets within sight of the
windows. Roederer, the procureur-general of the department of Paris,
came to the king and pressed him to leave the Tuileries.

"'There are not five minutes to lose, sire,' he said. 'There is no
safety for your majesty but in the National Assembly.'

"The queen resisted; but upon Roederer saying that an enormous
crowd with cannon were coming, and that delay would endanger the
lives of the whole of the royal family, he went. But he thought of
us, and asked what was to become of us. Roederer said that, as we
were not in uniform, by leaving our swords behind us we could pass
through the crowd without being recognized. The king moved on,
followed by the queen, Madam Elizabeth, and the children.  The crowd,
close and menacing, lined the passage, and the little procession
made their way with difficulty to the Assembly.

"We remained in the palace, and every moment the throng around
became more and more numerous. The cannon they brought were turned
against us. The first door was burst open, the Swiss did not fire,
the populace poured in and mixed with us and the soldiers.  Some
one fired a gun. Whether it was one of the Swiss or one of the mob
I know not, but the fight began. The Swiss in good order marched
down the staircase, drove out the mob, seized the cannon the
Marseillais had brought, and turning them upon their assailants
opened fire. The mob fled in terror, and I believe that one battalion
would have conquered all the scum of Paris, had not the king, at
the sound of the first shot, sent word to the Swiss to cease firing.
They obeyed, and although the mob kept firing upon them from the
windows, the great part of them marched calm, and without returning
a shot, to the Assembly, where, at the order of the king, they laid
down their arms and were shut up in the church of the Feuillants.

"A portion of the Swiss had remained on guard in the Tuileries when
the main body marched away. The instant the palace was undefended
the mob burst in. Every Swiss was murdered, as well as many of
the servants of the queen. The mob sacked the palace and set it on
fire. When the Swiss left we  had one by one made our way out by a
back entrance, but most of us were recognized by the mob and were
literally cut to pieces. I rushed into a house when assaulted,
and, slamming the door behind me, made my way out by the back and
so escaped them, getting off with only these two wounds; then I
hurried to a house of a friend, whom I had seen murdered before my
eyes, but his servants did not know of it, and they allowed me to
remain there till dark, and you see here I am."

"But what has happened at the Assembly and where is the king?" the
marquise asked, after the first exclamation of horror at the tale
they had heard.

"The king and his family are prisoners in the Temple," the marquis
said. "The Commune has triumphed over the Assembly and a National
Convention is to be the supreme power. The king's functions are
suspended, but as he has not ruled for the last three years that
will make little difference.  A new ministry has been formed with
Danton, Lebrun, and some of the Girondists. He and his family are
handed over to the care of the Commune, and their correspondence is
to be intercepted. A revolutionary tribunal has been constituted,
when, I suppose, the farce of trying men whose only crime is loyalty
to the king is to be carried out.

"We must be prepared, my love, to face the worst. Escape is now
impossible, and, indeed, so long as the king and queen are alive I
would not quit Paris; but we must prepare for sending the children
away if possible."




CHAPTER V

The Outburst


"Monsieur le Marquis," M. du Tillet exclaimed, hurrying into the
salon, in which the marquis with his family were sitting, on the
evening of the 21st of August, "I hear that it is rumoured in the
street that all the members of noble families are to be arrested."

The room was lit up as if to receive company, but the crowd which
had thronged it a fortnight before were gone. The Girondists had
first withdrawn, then the nobles had begun to fall off, for it had
become dangerous for them to show themselves in the streets, where
they were liable to be insulted and attacked by the mob. Moreover,
any meeting of known Royalists was regarded with suspicion by the
authorities, and so gradually the gatherings had become smaller
and smaller.

The only constant visitor now was the Count de Gisons, but he
to-night was absent. The news was not unexpected. The violence of
the extremists of the Mountain had been increasing daily. At the
Cordeliers and Jacobin Clubs, Danton, Robespierre, and Marat had
thundered nightly their denunciations against the aristocrats, and
it was certain that at any moment the order for their arrest might
be given. Such bad news had been received of the state of feeling
in the provinces, that it was felt that it would be more dangerous
to send the young ones away than to retain them in Paris, and the
marquise had been a prey to the liveliest anxiety respecting her
children. It seemed impossible that there could be any animosity
against them, but the blind rage of the mob had risen to such a
height that it was impossible to say what might happen. Now that
she heard the blow was about to fall she drew her younger girls
instinctively to her, as if to protect them, but no word passed
her lips.

"It might still be possible to fly," M. du Tillet went on. "We have
all the disguises in readiness."

"A Marquis de St. Caux does not fly from the canaille of Paris,"
the marquis said quietly. "No, Du Tillet; the king and queen are
in prison, and it is not for their friends to leave their post here
in Paris because danger threatens them; come when they may, these
wretches will find us here ready for them."

"But the children, Edouard!" the marquise murmured.

"I shall stand by my father's side," Ernest said firmly.

"I do not doubt your courage, my son. I wish now that I had long
ago sent you all across the frontier; but who could have foreseen
that the people of France were about to become a horde of wild
beasts, animated by hate against all, old and young, in whose veins
ran noble blood. However, although it is the duty of your mother
and I to stay at our posts, it is our duty also to try and save
our house from destruction; therefore, Du Tillet, I commit my two
sons to your charge. Save them if you can, disguise them as you will,
and make for the frontier. Once there you know all the arrangements
we have already made."

"But, father," Ernest remonstrated.

"I can listen to no argument, Ernest," the marquis said firmly.
"In this respect my will is law. I know what your feelings are,
but you must set them aside, they must give way to the necessity
of saving one of the oldest families of France from perishing."

"And the girls?" the marquise asked, as Ernest bent his head in
sign of obedience to his father's orders.

"I cannot think," the marquis said, "that they will be included in
the order for our arrest. They must go, as arranged, in the morning
to the house of our old servant and remain quietly there awaiting
the course of events. They will pass very well as three of her
nieces who have arrived from the country. You had better send a
trusty servant to prepare her for their coming. You, Harry, will,
of course, accompany my sons.

"Pardon, marquis," Harry said quietly, "I am firmly resolved to
stay in Paris. I may be of assistance to your daughters, and there
will be no danger to me in remaining, for I have no noble blood in
my veins. Besides, my travelling with M. du  Tillet would add to
his danger. He will have difficulty enough in traversing the country
with two boys; a third would add to that difficulty."

"I cannot help that," the marquis said. "I ought long ago to have
sent you home, and feel that I have acted wrongly in allowing you
to remain so long. I must insist upon your accompanying my sons."

"I am sorry to disobey you, monsieur le marquis," Harry said quietly
but firmly; "but from the moment of your arrest I shall be my own
master and can dispose of my actions. I am deeply sensible of all
your goodness to me, but I cannot yield, for I feel that I may be
of some slight use here. There are so many strangers in Paris that
there is little fear of my attracting any notice. A mouse may help
a lion, monsieur, and it may be that though but a boy I may be able
to be of service to mesdemoiselles."

"Do not urge him further, Edouard," the marquise said, laying a
hand on her husband's arm as he was again about to speak. "Harry
is brave and thoughtful beyond his years, and it will be somewhat
of a comfort to me to think that there is some one watching over
our girls. I thank you, Harry, for your offer, and feel sure that
you will do all that can possibly be done to protect my girls. You
will be freer to do so than any of our friends, for they are likely
to become involved in our fate, whatever that may be. Marie, you
will view our English friend as joint guardian with yourself over
your sisters. Consult him should difficulty or danger arise as if
he were your brother, and be guided by his advice. And now, girls,
come with me to my room, I have much to say to you.

"I am glad my wife decided as she did, Harry," the marquis said,
putting his hand on his shoulder when his wife and daughters left
the room, "for I too shall feel comfort in knowing that you are
watching over the girls. Now leave us, for I have much to arrange
with Monsieur du Tillet."

After a prolonged talk with M. du Tillet the marquis sent for
Ernest. As soon as he entered the lad said:

"Of course, sir, I shall obey your commands; but it seems to me an
unworthy part for your son to play, to be flying the country and
leaving a stranger here to look after your daughters."


"He is hardly a stranger, Ernest," the marquis replied. "He has been
with us as one of the family for two years, and he risked his life
for your sisters. You could not stay here without extreme risk, for
if your name is not already included in the warrant for arrest it
speedily will be so, and when they once taste blood these wolves
will hunt down every one of us. He, on the other hand, might proceed
openly through the streets without danger; nevertheless, I would
not have kept him if he would have gone; but I have no power
of controlling him, and as he chooses to devote himself to us I
thankfully accept his devotion.

"And now, my son, it may be that after our parting to-morrow we
shall not meet again, for God alone knows what fate is in store for
us. I have, therefore, some serious advice to give you. If anything
happens to me, you will, I know, never forget that you are the
head of the family, and that the honour of a great name is in your
keeping; but do not try to strive against the inevitable. Adapt
yourself to the new circumstances under which you will be placed,
and lay aside that pride which has had much to do with the misfortunes
which are now befalling us.

"As to your sisters, Marie is already provided for, that is if
De Gisons is not included in the order for arrest. I have already
sent off a message to him to warn him; and as it has already been
arranged between us that while his father will stay and face whatever
will come, it is his duty, like yours, to escape the danger which
threatens our class, I trust that he will at once endeavour to
leave the country; but I imagine that he will stop in Paris until
some means are devised for getting your sisters away.

"As to the others, if you all reach England and settle down there
do not keep up the class distinctions which have prevailed here.
Marry your sisters to men who will protect and make them happy.
That these must be gentlemen goes without saying; but that is
sufficient.  For example, if in future time a gentleman of the rank
of our English friend here, of whose character you can entirely
approve, asks for the hand of either of your younger sisters, do
not refuse it. Remember that such a suit would have the cordial
approval of your mother and myself."

A look of great surprise passed over Ernest's face. It had seemed
to him so much a matter of course that the ladies of his house should
marry into noble families that the idea of one of them being given
to a gentleman belonging to the professional class was surprising
indeed.

"Do you really mean, sir, that if my friend Harry were some day to
ask for Jeanne's hand you would approve of the match?"

"That is exactly what I do mean, Ernest. In the stormy times in
which we are living I could wish no better protector for her. Were
he a Frenchman, in the same position of life, I own that I might
view the matter in a different light; but, as I have said, in
England the distinction of classes is much less marked than here;
and, moreover, in England there is little fear of such an outbreak
of democracy as that which is destroying France."

A few minutes later Monsieur du Tillet entered with the clothes which
had been prepared for the boys. They were such as would be worn by
the sons of workmen; he himself was attired in a blue blouse and
trousers. Jules was aroused from the couch on which he had for the
last hour been asleep, and he and Ernest retired to dress themselves
in their new costume, M. du Tillet accompanying them to assist in
their toilet. Both boys had the greatest repugnance to the change,
and objected still further when M. du Tillet insisted it was
absolutely necessary that they should cut their hair and smear
their faces and hands with dirt.

"My dear Monsieur Ernest," he said, "it would be worse than useless
for you to assume that attire unless at the same time you assumed
the bearing and manners appropriate to it. In your own dress we
might for a short time walk the street without observation; but if
you sallied out in that blouse with your white hands and your head
thrown back, and a look of disdain and disgust on your face, the
first gamin who met you would cry out, 'There is an aristocrat in
disguise!'

"You must behave as if you were acting in a comedy. You are
representing a lad of the lower orders. You must try to imitate
his walk and manner. Shove your hands deep in your pockets, shuffle
your feet along carelessly; let your head roll about as if it were
uneasy on your neck, round your shoulders, and slouch your head
forward.  As to you Jules, your role should be impertinence. Put
your cap on the wrong way; hold your nose in the air; pull your
short hair down over your forehead, and let some of it  spurt
out through that hole in your cap. To be quite correct, you ought
to address jeering remarks to every respectable man and woman you
meet in the streets; but as you know nothing of Parisian slang,
you must hold your tongue. See how thoroughly I have got myself
up. You would take me for an idle out-of-elbows workman wherever
you met me. I do not like it; but, as I have to disguise myself,
I try to do it thoroughly."

It was, however, with a feeling of humiliation that the boys presented
themselves before the marquis. He looked at them scrutinizingly.

"You will do, my boys," he said gravely. "I should have passed
you in the street without knowing you. Now come in with me and say
good-bye to your mother and sisters. The sooner you are out of this
house the better, for there is no saying at what hour the agents
of the canaille may present themselves."

The parting was a sad one indeed, but it was over at last, and
Monsieur du Tillet hurried the two boys away as soon as their father
returned with them.

"God bless you, du Tillet!" the marquis said as he embraced his
friend. "Should aught happen to us, you will, I know, be a father
to them."

"Now, Harry," the marquis said when he had mastered the emotion
caused by the parting, which he felt might be a final one, "since
you have chosen to throw in your lot with ours, I will give you a
few instructions. In the first place, I have hidden under a plank
beneath my bed a bag containing a thousand crowns. It is the middle
plank. Count an even number from each leg and the centre one covers
the bag.

"You will find the plank is loose and that you can raise it easily
with a knife; but wax has been run in, and dust swept over it, so
that there is no fear of its being noticed by any who may pillage
the house, which they will doubtless do after we are arrested. I
have already sent an equal sum to Louise Moulin. Here is her address;
but it is possible that you may need money, and may be unable to
communicate with my daughters at her house; at any rate do you keep
the bag of money in your charge.

"You had best attire yourself at once in the oldest suit of clothes
you have got. My daughters will be ready in a few minutes. They are
already dressed, so that they can slip out at the back entrance.
Should we be disturbed before morning I shall place them under your
escort; for although I hope that all the servants are faithful, one
can answer for no one in these times. I would send them off now,
but that the sight of females moving through the streets at this
time of night would be likely to attract attention on the part of
drunken men, or of fellows returning from these rascally clubs,
which are the centre and focus of all the mischief that is going
on.

"I can give you no further advice. You must be guided by
circumstances. If, as I trust, the girls can live undisturbed and
unsuspected with their mother's old nurse, it were best that they
should remain there until the troubles are finally over, and France
comes to her senses again. If not, I must leave it to you to act for
the best. It is a great trust to place in the hands of a youth of
your age; but it is your own choosing, and we have every confidence
in you.

"I will do my best to deserve it, sir," Harry said quietly; "but I
trust that you and madame la marquise will soon be able to resume
your guardianship. I cannot believe that although just at present
the populace are excited to fury by agitators, they can in cold
blood intend to wreak their vengeance upon all the classes above
them."

"I hope you may be right," the marquis said; "but I fear that it
is not so. The people are mad so far. All that has been done has
in no way mitigated their sufferings, and they gladly follow the
preachings of the arch scoundrels of the Jacobin Club. I fear that
before all this is over France will be deluged with blood. And
now, when you have changed your clothes, lie down, ready to rise
at a moment's notice.  Should you hear a tumult, run at once to
the long gallery. There my daughters will join you prepared for
flight. Lead them instantly to the back entrance, avoiding, if
possible, any observation from the domestics. As these sleep on
the floor above, and know nothing of the dangers which threaten us,
they will not awake so quickly, and I trust that you will be able
to get out without being seen by any of them. In that case, however
closely questioned no one will be able to afford a clue by which
you can be traced."

When he had changed his clothes Harry extinguished all the lights in
the salon, for the marquis had long before ordered all the servants
to retire to rest. Then he opened the window looking into the street
and took his place close to it. Sleep under the circumstances was
impossible.

As the hours passed he thought over the events of the last few
days. He was fully aware that the task he had undertaken might be
full of danger; but to a healthy and active English lad a spice of
danger is by no means a deterrent. He could, of course, have left
his employment before the family left their chateau; but after
his arrival in Paris it would have been difficult for him to have
traversed the country and crossed the frontier, and he thought that
the danger which he now ran was not much greater than would have
been entailed by such a step.

In the next place he was greatly attached to the family of the
marquis; and the orgies of the mob had filled him with such horror
and disgust that he would have risked much to save any unfortunate, even
a stranger, from their hands; and lastly, he felt the fascination
of the wild excitement of the times, and congratulated himself
that he should see and perhaps be an actor in the astonishing drama
which was occupying the attention of the whole civilized world.

As he sat there he arranged his own plans. After seeing his charge
in safety he would take a room in some quiet locality, alleging
that he was the clerk of a notary, and would, in the dress of one
of that class, or the attire of one of the lower orders, pass his
days in the streets, gathering every rumour and watching the course
of events.

Morning was just breaking when he heard the sound of many feet
coming along the street, and looking out saw a crowd of men with
torches, headed by two whose red scarfs showed them to be officials.
As they reached the entrance gate the men at the head of the
procession stopped. Harry at once darted away to the long gallery,
and as he did so, heard a loud knocking at the door.

Scarcely had he reached the gallery when a door at the further end
opened, and three figures, the tallest carrying a lamp, appeared.
The girls, too, had been keeping watch with their father and
mother.  They were dressed in the attire of respectable peasant
girls. Virginie was weeping loudly, but the elder girls, although
their cheeks bore traces of many tears they had shed during the
night, restrained them now. When they reached Harry, the  lad,
without a word, took the lamp from Marie's hand, and led the way
along the corridor and down the stairs towards the back of the
house.

Everything was quiet. The knocking, loud as it was, had not yet
aroused the servants, and, drawing the bolt quietly, and blowing
out the lamp, Harry led the way into the garden behind the house.
Then for a moment he paused. There was a sound of axes hewing down
the gate which led from the garden into the street behind.

"Quick, mesdemoiselles!" he said. "There is no time to lose."

He took they key out of the door, and closed and locked it after
him. Then throwing the key among the shrubs he took Virginie's hand,
and led the way rapidly towards the gate, which was fortunately a
strong one.

"In here, mesdemoiselles," he said to Marie, pointing to some shrubs
close to the gate. "They will rush straight to the house when the
gate gives way, and we will slip out quietly."

For nearly five minutes the gate, which was strongly bound with iron,
resisted the attack upon it. Then there was a crash, and a number
of men with torches, and armed with muskets and pikes, poured in.
Virginie was clinging to Marie, who, whispering to her to be calm
and brave, pressed the child closely to her, while Jeanne stood
quiet and still by the side of Harry, looking through the bushes.

Some twenty men entered, and a minute later there was the sound of
battering at the door through which the fugitives had sallied out.

"Now," Harry said, "let us be going." Emerging from the shelter, a
few steps took them to the gate, and stepping over the door, which
lay prostrate on the ground, they turned into the lane.

"Let us run," Harry said; "we must get out of this lane as soon as
possible. We are sure to have the mob here before long, and should
certainly be questioned."

They hurried down the lane, took the first turning away from the
house, and then slackened their pace. Presently they heard a number
of footsteps clattering on the pavement; but fortunately they
reached another turning before the party came up. They turned down
and stood up in a doorway till the footsteps had passed, and then
resumed their way.

"It is still too early for us to walk through the streets without
exciting attention," Harry said. "We had better make down to the
river and wait there till the town is quite astir."

In ten minutes they reached the river, and Harry found a seat for
them at the foot of a pile of timber, where they were partially
screened from observation. Hitherto the girls had not spoken a
word since they had issued from the house. Virginie was dazed and
frightened by the events of the night, and had hurried along almost
mechanically holding Marie's hand. Marie's brain was too full to
talk; her thoughts were with her father and mother and with her
absent lover. She wondered that he had not come to her in spite of
everything. Perhaps he was already a captive; perhaps, in obedience
to his father's orders, he was in hiding, waiting events. That
he could, even had his father commanded him, have left Paris as a
fugitive without coming to see her, did not even occur to her as
possible.

With these thoughts there was mingled a vague wonder at her own
position. A few weeks since petted and cared for as the eldest
daughter of one of the noblest families of France, now a fugitive
in the streets under the sole care of this English boy. She had,
the evening before, silently sided with Ernest. It had seemed to
her wrong that he should be sent away, and the assertion of Harry
that he intended to stay and watch over her and her sisters seemed
at once absurd and presumptuous; but she already felt that she had
been wrong in that opinion.

The decision and coolness with which he had at once taken the
command from the moment he met them in the gallery, and the quickness
with which he had seized the only mode of escape, had surprised
and dominated her. Her own impulse, when on opening the door she
heard the attack that was being made on the gate, was to draw back
instantly and return to the side of her parents, and it was due to
Harry only that she and her sisters had got safely away.

Hitherto, although after the incident of the mad dog she had exchanged
her former attitude of absolute indifference to one of cordiality
and friendliness, she had regarded him as a boy. Indeed she had
treated and considered him as being very much younger than Ernest,
and in some respects she had been justified in doing so, for in
his light-hearted fun, his love of active exercise, and his entire
absence of any assumption of age, he was far more boyish than
Ernest. But although her thoughts were too busy  now to permit her
to analyse her feelings, she knew that she had been mistaken, and
felt a strange confidence in this lad who had so promptly and coolly
assumed the entire command of the party, and had piloted them with
such steady nerve through the danger.

As for Jeanne, she felt no surprise and but little alarm. Her
confidence in her protector was unbounded. Prompt and cool as he
was himself, she was ready on the instant to obey his orders, and
felt a certain sensation of pride at the manner in which her previous
confidence in him was being justified.

After placing the girls in their shelter Harry had left them and
stood leaning against the parapet of the quay as if carelessly
watching the water, but maintaining a vigilant look-out against
the approach of danger. The number of passers-by increased rapidly.
The washerwomen came down to the boats moored in the stream and
began their operation of banging the linen with wooden beaters.
Market-women came along with baskets, the hum and stir of life
everywhere commenced, and Paris was fairly awake.

Seeing that it was safe now to proceed, Harry returned to his
companions. He had scarcely glanced at them before, and now looked
approvingly at their disguises, to which the marquise had, during
the long hours of the night, devoted the most zealous attention.
Marie had been made to look much older than she was. A few dark
lines carefully traced on her forehead, at the corners of her eyes
and mouth, had added many years to her appearance, and she could
have passed, except to the closest observer, as the mother of
Virginie, whose dress was calculated to make her look even younger
than she was. The hands and faces of all three had been slightly
tinged with brown to give them a sun-burnt aspect in accordance
with their peasant dresses, and so complete was the transformation
that Harry could scarcely suppress a start of surprise as he looked
at the group.

"It would be safe now, mademoiselle," he said to Marie, "for us to
proceed. There are plenty of people about in the streets; but as
the news has, no doubt, already been spread that the daughters of
the Marquis de St. Caux had left the house before those charged
with their father's arrest arrived, it will be better for you not
to keep together. I would suggest that you should walk on with
Virginie.  I will follow with Jeanne a hundred yards behind, so
that I can keep you in sight, and will come up if anyone should
accost you."

Marie at once rose, and taking the child's hand set out. They had
to traverse the greater part of Paris to reach their destination.
It was a trial for Marie, who had never before been in the streets
of Paris except with her mother and closely followed by two domestics,
and even then only through the quiet streets of a fashionable
quarter.  However, she went steadily forward, tightly holding
Virginie's hand and trying to walk as if accustomed to them in the
thick heavy shoes which felt so strangely different to those which
she was in the habit of wearing.

From time to time she addressed an encouraging word to Virginie
as she felt her shrink as they approached groups of men lounging
outside the wine-shops, for there was but little work done in Paris,
and the men of the lower class spent their time in idleness, in
discussions of the events of the day, or in joining the mobs which,
under one pretext or another, kept the streets in an uproar.

Fortunately Marie knew the way perfectly and there was no occasion
for her to ask for directions, for she had frequently driven with
her mother to visit Louise Moulin. The latter occupied the upper
floor of a house in a quiet quarter near the fortifications in the
north-western part of the town. A message had been sent to her the
night before, and she was on the look-out for her visitors, but
she did not recognize them, and she uttered a cry of surprise as
Marie and Virginie entered the room.

"Is it you, mademoiselle?" she exclaimed in great surprise. "And
you, my little angel? My eyes must be getting old, indeed, that I
did not recognize you; but you are finely disguised. But where is
Mademoiselle Jeanne?"

"She will be here in a moment, Louise; she is just behind. But you
must not call me mademoiselle; you must remember that we are your
nieces Marie and Jeanne, and that you are our aunt Louise Moulin,
whom we have come to stay with."

"I shall remember in time," the old woman said. "I have been
talking about you to my neighbours for the last week, of how your
good father and mother have died, and how you were going to journey
to Paris under the charge of a neighbour, who was bringing a waggon
load of wine from Burgundy, and  how you were going to look after
me and help me in the house since I am getting old and infirm, and
the young ones were to stop with me till they were old enough to
go out to service. Ah, here is Mademoiselle Jeanne!"

"Here is Jeanne," Marie corrected; "thank God we have all got here
safely. This, Louise, is a young English gentleman who is going to
remain in Paris at present, and to whom we are indebted for having
got us safely here."

"And your mother," Louise Moulin exclaimed, "the darling lamb
I nursed, what of her and your father? I fear, from the message I
got last night, that some danger threatens them."

"They have, I fear, been arrested by the sans culottes," Marie said
mournfully as she burst into tears, feeling, now that the strain
was over, the natural reaction after her efforts to be calm. For
her mother's sake she had held up to the last, and had tried to
make the parting as easy as possible.

"The wretches!" the old woman said, stamping her foot. "Old as I am
I feel that I could tear them to pieces. But there I am chattering
away, and you must be faint with hunger. I have a nice soup ready
on the fire, a plate of that will do good to you all. And you too,
monsieur, you will join us, I hope?"

Harry was nothing loth, for his appetite was always a healthy one.
When he had finished he said:

"Madame Moulin, I have been thinking that it would be an advantage
if you would take a lodging for me. If you would say that a youth
whose friends are known to you has arrived from Dijon, to make his
way in Paris, and they have asked you to seek a lodging for him;
it will seem less strange than if I went by myself. I should like
it to be near, so that you can come to me quickly should anything
out of the way occur. I should like to look in sometimes to see that
all is well. You could mention to your neighbours that I travelled
up with the same waggon with your nieces.

"I will do that willingly," the old woman said; "but first, my dears,
you must have some rest; come in here." And she led the way to the
next room. "There is a bed for you, Mademoiselle Marie, and one for
the two young ones. The room is not like what you are accustomed
to, but I dared not buy finer things, though I had plenty of money
from your mother to have  furnished the rooms like a palace; but you
see it would have seemed strange to my neighbours; but, at least,
everything is clean and sweet."

Leaving the girls, who were worn out with weariness and anxiety,
to sleep, she rejoined Harry.

"Now, monsieur, I will do your business. It is a comfort to me to
feel that some one will be near of whom I can ask advice, for it is
a terrible responsibility for an old woman in such dreadful times
as these, when it seems to me that everyone has gone mad at once.
What sort of a chamber do you want?"

"Quite a small one," Harry answered, "just such a chamber as a
young clerk on the look-out for employment and with his pocket very
slenderly lined, would desire."

"I know just such a one," the old woman said. "It is a house a
few doors away and has been tenanted by a friend of mine, a young
workwoman, who was married four days ago--it is a quiet place,
and the people keep to themselves, and do not trouble about their
neighbours' affairs."

"That will just suit me," Harry said. "I suppose there is no porter
below, so that I can go in or out without being noticed."

"Oh, we have no porters in this quarter, and you can go in and out
as you like."

Half an hour later the matter was settled, and Harry was installed
in his apartment, which was a little room scantily furnished, at
the top of the house, the window looking into the street in front.




CHAPTER VI

An Anxious Time


Harry and the girls had brought bundles of clothes with them
in their flight, as it would have looked strange had they arrived
without any clothes save those they wore. Harry had brought with him
only underlinen, as he had nothing else which would be of service
to him now.  No sooner had Louise Moulin left him than he went out
and purchased, at a second-hand shop, a workman's suit. This he
carried home, and dressing himself in it descended the stairs again
and set out to retrace his steps across Paris.

When he reached the mansion of the marquis he found a crowd of
people going in and out. Those leaving the house were laden with
articles of furniture, clocks, pictures, bedding, and other things.
A complete sack of the mansion was indeed taking place. The servants
had all fled after the arrest of the marquis and his wife, and
the mob had taken possession of the house. The lofty mirrors were
smashed into fragments, the costly hangings torn down, and after
they had destroyed much of the elaborate furniture, every man and
woman began to lay hands upon whatever they fancied and the mansion
was already stripped of the greater part of its belongings.

With his hands in his pockets, whistling carelessly, Harry wandered
from room to room watching the proceedings. Several barrels of wine
had been brought up into the salon, and round these were gathered
a number of already drunken men, singing, shouting, and dancing.

"Drink, drink, my garcon," a woman said, holding a silver goblet
full of wine towards him, "drink confusion to the tyrants and
liberty and freedom to the people."

Harry drank the toast without hesitation, and then, heartsick
at the destruction and ruin, wandered out again into the streets.
Knowing the anxiety which Marie would be suffering as to the safety
of her lover he next took his way to the mansion of the Duke de
Gisons. The house was shut up, but groups of men were standing in
the road opposite talking.

Sauntering along Harry stopped near enough to one of these to hear
what they were saying. He learned that the duke had been arrested
only that morning. It had been effected quietly, the doors had
again been locked before those in the neighbourhood knew what was
going on, and a guard had been left inside, partly, it was said, in
order that the mansion might be preserved from pillage and be used
for public purposes, partly that the young count, who was absent,
might be arrested when he returned.

As Harry knew that the duke had estates in the neighbourhood of
Fontainebleau he thought it probable that Victor might have gone
thither, and he at once proceeded towards the gate by which he would
enter on his return thence. He sat down a short distance outside
the gate and watched patiently for some hours until he perceived a
horseman approaching at a gallop and at once recognized Victor de
Gisons. Harry went forward on to the road and held out his arms.
The young count, not recognizing him, did not check his horse and
would have ridden him down had he not jumped aside, at the same
time shouting to him by name to stop.

"What do you want, fellow?" Victor exclaimed, reining in his horse.

"You do not recognize me!" Harry said. "I am Harry Sandwith, count,
and I am here to warn you of the danger of proceeding."

"Why, what has happened?" Victor exclaimed anxiously; "and why are
you in disguise, Monsieur Sandwith?"

"A great number of arrests have taken place in the night, among them
that of the Marquis de St. Caux and your father. Men are waiting
inside your house to arrest you as you enter."

Victor uttered an exclamation of anger.

"That is why I have been sent away," he said. "My father had no
doubt received a warning of what was about to happen, and yesterday
at noon he requested me to ride to his estate and have an interview
with the steward as to the rents. I wondered at his sending me
so suddenly, and, feeling uneasy,  rode there post-haste, saw the
steward last night, and started again on a fresh horse this morning.
This accounts for it. He knew that if I were there nothing would
have induced me to separate myself from him, while by sending me
away he left it to me to do as I thought fit afterwards, trusting
that when I found that he was already imprisoned I might follow the
counsel he had urged upon me, to make my escape from the country.
And how about the ladies, how about Marie?"

"The marquise was conveyed to prison with the marquis. The three
young ladies are all safe with their mother's old servant, Louise
Moulin; this is her address. They are in disguise as peasants, and
no suspicion will, I hope, arise as to their real position. Not
that the marquis thought it probable they would be included in
the order of arrest, but he said there was no knowing now to what
lengths the mob might go and he thought it better that they should
disappear altogether for the present. Ernest and Jules went away
in disguise with Monsieur du Tillet. After seeing the young ladies
in safety this morning I went down to see what had happened at your
father's mansion, in order to assuage Mademoiselle de St. Caux's
anxiety respecting your safety, and found, as I expected, that
the duke had been arrested, and learned that a party were inside
waiting to arrest you on your return.

"I thank you indeed," Victor said, "and most warmly. I do not
know what to do. My father is most anxious that I should cross the
frontier, but I cannot go so long as he and Marie are in danger."

"If you enter Paris as you are," Harry said, "you are certain to
be arrested. Your only chance would be to do as I have done, namely
to disguise yourself and take a small lodging, where you might live
unsuspected."

"And in that way I can see Marie sometimes," Victor said.

"You could do so," Harry agreed, in a somewhat hesitating way, "but
it would greatly add to her danger, and, were you detected, might
lead to the discovery of her disguise. Besides, the thought that
you were liable to arrest at any time would naturally heighten the
anxiety from which she is suffering as to the fate of her father
and mother."

"But I cannot and will not run away and leave them all here in
danger," Victor said passionately.

"I would not advise you to do so," Harry replied. "I would only
suggest, that after seeing Mademoiselle de St. Caux once, you
should lead her to believe that you have decided upon making for
the frontier, and she will therefore have the happiness of believing
that you are safe, while you are still near and watching over her."

"That is all very well," Victor said; "but what opinion would she
have of me if she thought me capable of deserting her in that way?"

"You would represent that you were obeying the duke's orders; and
besides, if you did suffer in her opinion it would be but temporarily,
for when she learned the truth, that you had only pretended to
leave in order that her position might be the safer and that her
mind might be relieved, she could only think more highly of you.
Besides, if necessary, you could at any time again present yourself
before her."

"Your counsel is good, Monsieur Sandwith, and I will, at anyrate
for a time, follow it. As you say, I can at anytime reappear.
Where are you lodging? I will take a room near, and we can meet
and compare notes and act together."

Harry gave him his address.

"You have only to walk upstairs to the top story. My room is the
one directly opposite the top of the stairs."

"I will call on you to-morrow morning," Victor said. "I will ride
my horse a few miles back and turn him loose in some quiet place,
and buy at the first village a blouse and workman's pantaloons."

"I think," Harry said, "that would be unwise, count; it would look
strange in the extreme for a gentleman dressed as you are to make
such a purchase. You might be at once arrested, or a report of the
circumstance might be sent into Paris and lead to your discovery.
If you will wait here for half an hour I will go back and buy you
the things you want at the first shop I come to and bring them out
to you. Then you can ride back and loose the horse as you propose;
but I should advise you to hide the saddle and bridle, as well as
the clothes you are now wearing, most carefully. Whoever finds your
horse will probably appropriate it and will say nothing about it,
so that all clue to your movements will be lost, and it will be
supposed that you have ridden to the frontier."

"Peste, Monsieur Sandwith! You seem to have a head ready for all
emergencies. I know what a high opinion the marquis had of you,
and I perceive that it is fully justified, and consider myself as
fortunate indeed in having you for a friend in such a time as the
present."

"We have need of all our wits," Harry said quietly. "The marquis
was good enough to accept my offer to do all that I could to look
after the safety of mesdemoiselles, and if I fail in my trust it
will not, I hope, be from any lack of care or courage."

The meeting had taken place at a point where it could not be observed
from the gate, and the count withdrew a few hundred yards farther
away while Harry went back into Paris. The latter had no difficulty
in purchasing the clothes required by the count and returned with
them in little over a quarter of an hour, and then, having seen
De Gisons ride off, he sauntered back into Paris and made his way
towards the heart of the city.

Crossing the river he found a vast crowd gathered in front of the
Hotel de Ville. The news of the wholesale arrests which had been
made during the night had filled the populace with joy, and the air
was full of shouts of "Down with the Aristocrats!" "Vive Danton!
Vive Marat! Vive Robespierre!" Hawkers were selling, in the crowd,
newspapers and broadsheets filled with the foulest attacks, couched
in the most horrible language, upon the king, the queen, and the
aristocracy.

At various points men, mounted upon steps or the pedestals of
statues, harangued the mob while from time to time the crowd opened
and made way for members of the city council, who were cheered or
hooted according to their supposed sentiments for or against the
cause of the people. After remaining there for some time Harry
made his way to the entrance to the Assembly. A crowd was gathered
here, and a tremendous rush was made when the doors were opened.
Harry managed to force his way in and sat for some hours listening to
the debate, which was constantly interrupted by the people in the
galleries, who applauded with frenzy the speeches of their favourite
orators, the deputies of the Mountain, as the bank of seats occupied
by the Jacobin members was named, and howled and yelled when the
Girondists ventured to advocate moderation or conciliation.

It was late in the evening before the sitting was over, and Harry
was unable to leave his place earlier. Then he went and had supper
at a wineshop, and after sauntering on the Boulevards until the
streets began to be deserted he again crossed the river and made
his way to the mansion. Not a light was to be seen in the windows
and all was still and quiet. The great door stood open. The work
of destruction was complete; the house was stripped of everything
that could be carried away.

Harry made his way up to the bedroom of the marquis. The massive
bedstead still stood in its place, having defied the efforts
of destruction which had proved successful with the cabinets and
other furniture. Sitting down on the floor Harry counted the boards
beneath the bed, and then taking out a strong knife which he had
purchased during the day he inserted it by the side of the middle
board and tried to raise it. It yielded without difficulty to his
effort.

As soon as it was lifted he groped in the cavity below it, and his
hand soon came in contact with the heavy bag. Taking this out and
putting it beneath his blouse he replaced the board and made his
way downstairs. He felt too fatigued to walk across Paris again,
and therefore made his way down to the river and curled himself
up for the night at the foot of the wood pile where the girls had
found shelter in the morning, and, in spite of the novelty of his
situation, fell instantly asleep.

It was broad daylight when he woke, and an hour later he regained
his lodgings, stopping by the way to breakfast at a quiet estaminet
frequented by the better class of workmen. As when he had sallied
out the day before, he was fortunate in meeting no one as he made
his way up the stairs to his room. His first step was to get up
a board and to deposit beneath it the bag of money. Then, having
changed his clothes, he went out and made a variety of purchases
for housekeeping, as he did not wish to be obliged to take his
meals at places where anyone sitting at the table with him might
enter into conversation.

His French was quite good enough to pass in the salon of the
marquis, but his ignorance of the Parisian slang spoken among the
working-classes would have rendered it difficult for him to keep
up his assumed character among them, and would have needed the
fabrication of all sorts of stories as to his birthplace and past
history.

Although in the position in which he was placed Harry felt that it
would be impossible always to adhere to the truth, he shrank from
any falsehoods that could possibly be avoided.

His first duty in order to carry out the task he had undertaken was
to keep up his disguise, and this must be done even at the cost of
telling lies as to his antecedents; but he was determined that he
would avoid this unpleasant necessity as far as lay in his power.

At nine o'clock he made his way to the apartments of Louise Moulin.
His entry was received with a cry of satisfaction from the girls.

"What is the news, Harry?" Jeanne exclaimed. "We expected you here
yesterday evening, and sat up till ten o'clock."

"I was over the other side of the river discharging a mission your
father had confided to me, and did not get back till this morning."

"I knew he was prevented by something," Jeanne said triumphantly.
"I told you so, Marie--didn't I?"

"Yes, dear, I was wrong to be impatient; but you will forgive me,
Harry? You can guess how I suffered yesterday."

"It was natural you should expect me, mademoiselle. I was sorry
afterwards that I did not tell you when I left you that I should
not be able to come in the evening, but indeed I did not think of
it at the time."

"And now for your news, Harry," Jeanne asked impatiently; "have
you learned anything about our father and mother?"

"I am sorry to say I have not, except that they, with many others,
were taken to the prison of Bicetre. But I have good news for you,
Mademoiselle Marie. After going first to the house and finding it in
the possession of a hideous mob, who were plundering and drinking,
I went to see what had taken place at the hotel of the Duc de
Gisons.  I found that he had, like your father, been arrested in
the night. I learned that the count was absent, and that a party
were inside in readiness to arrest him on his return. Thinking
it probable that he might have gone down to their estate near
Fontainebleau, I went out beyond the gate on that road and waited
for him. I had the good fortune to meet him, to warn him of his
danger, and to prevent his returning to town. He rode away with a
suit of workman's clothes I had procured for him, and was to enter
Paris in that disguise in the evening. He is to call on me at ten
o'clock, and I will then conduct him hither. I thought it best to
come in before to let you know that he was coming."

Marie burst into tears of happiness at hearing that her lover had
escaped from the danger which threatened. Worn out by the fatigue
and anxiety of the previous night, she had slept for some hours
after reaching the shelter of the old nurse's roof, but she had
lain awake all night thinking over the danger of all those dear to
her.  She was now completely overcome with the revulsion of feeling.

"You are a dear boy, Harry!" Jeanne said with frank admiration,
while Marie sobbed out exclamations of gratitude. "You do seem to
think about everything; and now Marie knows that Victor is safe, I
do hope she is going to be more like herself. As I tell her, they
cannot hurt father or mother. They have done no wrong, and they
must let them out of prison after a time. Mamma said we were to
be brave; and at anyrate I try to be, and so does Virginie, though
she does cry sometimes. And now I hope Marie will be cheerful too,
and not go about the rooms looking so downcast and wretched. It
seems to me a miserable thing being in love. I should have thought
Marie would have been the last person to be downcast, for no one
is prouder of being a St. Caux than she is."

"I shall be better now, Jeanne," Marie said smiling, as she wiped
away her tears. "You shall not have any reason to complain of me
in future.

"But do you not think, Harry," she went on with a return of her
anxiety, "that it is very dangerous for Victor to come back into
Paris? I know that his father has long been praying him to make
for the frontier."

"I do not think it is very dangerous at present, mademoiselle,
although it may be later, if this rage against the aristocrats
increases; but I hope that when he has once seen you, which is
his principal object in returning to Paris, he will carry our his
father's wishes and make for the frontier, for his presence here
can be of no possible utility."

"Oh, I hope so," Marie said, "for I am sure Victor would soon
be found out, he could never make himself look like one of these
canaille."

"Why shouldn't he?" Jeanne said indignantly. "Harry does, and he
is just as good-looking as Victor."

Marie burst into a fit of laughter.

"What a champion you are, child, to be sure! But you are quite
right. Clothes, after all, do go a long way towards making a man.
Still, although I think that it is dangerous for Harry, I think it
will be more dangerous for Victor; because, you see, he is a man
and he has the manner of his race, and would find it more difficult
to pass himself off as a workman than Harry, who has got something
of English"--and she hesitated.

"Roughness," Harry put in laughing. "You are quite right, mademoiselle.
I can assure you that with these thick shoes on I find it quite
natural for me to slouch along as the workmen do; and it will be
much more difficult for the count, who always walks with his head
thrown back, and a sort of air of looking down upon mankind in
general."

Marie laughed this time.

"That is a fair retort. Victor certainly has the grand manner.
However, I shall order him to go; and if he won't obey his father's
wishes, he will have to give way to mine."

"I think, mademoiselle, that it would be wiser for Monsieur de Gisons
to meet you elsewhere than here. The arrival of three relations to
stop with Madame Moulin is sure to attract some little attention
among her neighbours just at first. You will be the subject of talk
and gossip. My visit will no doubt be noticed, and it will be as
well that there should not be more material for talk. The less we
attract attention the better. No doubt many have escaped arrest,
and there will be a sharp look-out, for, as they will call us,
suspicious persons. I should propose, if you have no objection to
such a course, that you should stroll out with your sisters and
Louise through the fields to St.  Denis. The count will be in my
room in a few minutes. We can keep a look-out from my window and
follow you at a distance until we get clear from observation beyond
the gates."

Marie looked at Madame Moulin, who nodded.

"That would be the best plan, my dear.  What Monsieur Sandwith
says is very true. The less we give the neighbours to gossip about
the better; for though your disguises are good, if sharp eyes are
watching you they may note something in your walk or air that may
excite suspicion."

"That being arranged then you must excuse me, for it is just the
time when the count was to arrive, and I fancy that he will be
before rather than behind time."

Indeed, upon reaching the door of his room Harry found the young
count standing there.

"Oh, it is you, friend Harry! I have been here ten minutes, and I
began to be afraid that something might have happened to you and
to imagine all sorts of things."

"It is still three or four minutes before the time we agreed upon,
Victor," Harry said in a loud voice, for at this moment one of the
other doors opened, and a woman came out with a basket in her arms.

"I have been looking about as usual, but without luck so far. I
suppose you have had no better fortune in your search for work?"
He had by this time unlocked his door, and the two entered together.

"I must call you by your Christian name, count, and will do so, if
you don't mind, when alone as at other times, otherwise the title
might slip out accidentally. Will you, on your part, call me Henri?
As you know the marquis and his family called me Harry, which is
the ordinary way in England of calling anyone whose name is Henry,
that is unless he is a soft sort of fellow; but I must ask them to
call me Henri now, Harry would never do here."

"Have you seen them?" was the count's first question.

"I have just left them, Victor, and if you look out from that window
into the street you will in a few minutes see them also; they are
just going for a ramble towards St. Denis, and we will follow them.
I thought it safer not to attract attention by going to the house,
and I also thought that it would be more pleasant for you to talk
to Mademoiselle de St. Caux out there in the fields, than in a
little room with us present.

"Much more pleasant; indeed, I was wondering whether I should get
an opportunity for a few minutes' talk alone with her."

They both took their places at the open window and leaned out
apparently chatting and carelessly watching what was passing in
the street.

A quarter of an hour later they saw Louise Moulin and the girls
come out of their house.

"We had better come away from the window now," Harry said; "Virginie
might look up and nod, we can't be too careful."

They waited three or four minutes to allow the others to get well
ahead and then started out after them; they walked fast until they
caught sight of the others, and then kept some distance behind
until the party had left the town and were out among the fields
which lay between Paris and St. Denis. They then quickened their
pace and were soon up with them.

The greeting between the lovers was a silent one, few words were
spoken, but their faces expressed their joy at meeting again after
the perils through which they had passed; there was a little pause,
and then Harry, as usual, took the lead.

"I will stroll on to St. Denis and back with Jeanne and Virginie;
Madame Moulin can sit down on that log over there, and go on with
her knitting; you, Victor, can ramble on with mademoiselle by that
path through the field; we will agree to meet here again in an
hour."

This arrangement was carried out; Jeanne and Virginie really enjoyed
their walk; the latter thought their disguise was great fun, and,
being naturally a little mimic, imitated so well the walk and
manner of the country children she had seen in her walks near the
chateau that her sister and Harry were greatly amused.

"I like this too, Harry," Jeanne said. "It would not be nice to be
a peasant girl for many things; but it must be joyful to be able
to walk, and run, and do just as you please, without having a
gouvernante always with you to say, Hold up your head, Mademoiselle
Jeanne; Do not swing your arms, Mademoiselle Jeanne; Please walk
more sedately, Mademoiselle Jeanne. Oh, it was hateful! Now we
might run, mightn't we, Harry?"

"Oh, by the way, Jeanne, please call me Henri now; Harry is English,
and people would notice directly if you happened to say it while
anyone is near."

"I like Harry best," Jeanne said; "but, of course, I should not
say it before the people; but may we run just for once?"

"Certainly you may," Harry laughed; "you and Virginie can have a
race to the corner of that wall."

"Come on, Virginie," Jeanne cried as she started, and the two
girls ran at full speed to the wall; Jeanne, however, completely
distancing her younger sister. They were both laughing when Harry
came up.

"That is the first time I have run a race," Jeanne said. "I have
often wanted to try how fast I could run, but I have never ventured
to ask mademoiselle; she would have been horrified; but I don't
know how it is Virginie does not run faster."

"Virginie has more flesh," Harry said smiling. "She carries weight,
as we should say in England, while you have nothing to spare.

"And she is three years older," Virginie put in. "Jeanne is just
sixteen, and I am not thirteen yet; it makes a difference."

"A great deal of difference," Harry agreed; "but I don't think you
will ever run as fast as she does. That will not matter, you know,"
he went on, as Virginie looked a little disappointed, "because it
is not likely that you will ever race again; but Jeanne looks cut
out for a runner--just the build, you see--tall, and slim, and
active."

"Yes," Virginie agreed frankly, "Jeanne has walked ever so far and
never gets tired, while I get dreadfully tired; mamma says sometimes
I am quite a baby for my age."

"Here are some people coming," Harry said; "as we pass them please
talk with a little patois. Your good French would be suspicious."

All the children of the marquis, from their visits among the peasants'
cottages, had picked up a good deal of the Burgundian patois, and
when talking among themselves often used the expressions current
among the peasantry, and they now dropped into this talk, which
Harry had also acquired, as they passed a group of people coming
in from St. Denis.

They walked nearly as far as that town, and then turned and reached
the point where the party had separated, a few minutes before the
expiration of the appointed hour.

The two girls ran away to Louise Moulin, and chatted to her gaily,
while Harry walked up and down until, a quarter of an hour later,
the count and Marie made their appearance. The party stood talking
together for a few minutes; then adieus were said with a very pale
face, but with firmness on  Marie's part, and then the girls, with
Louise, turned their faces to Paris, while Harry and Victor remained
behind until they had got well on their way.

"It was hard to deceive her," Victor said; "but you were right.
She insisted that I should go. I seemed to resist, and urged that
it was cowardly for me to run away and to leave her here alone,
but she would not listen to it. She said it was a duty I owed to my
father and family to save myself, and that she should be wretched
if she thought I was in Paris in constant danger of arrest. Finally,
I had to give way to her, but it went against the grain, for even
while she was urging me she must have felt in her heart it would be
cowardly of me to go.  However, she will know some day that Victor
de Gisons is no coward."

"I am sure it is better so," Harry said. "She will have anxiety
enough to bear as to her father and mother; it is well that her
mind should be at ease concerning you."

"In reality," Victor said, "I shall be safer here than I should be
journeying towards the frontier. The papers this morning say that
in consequence of the escape of suspected persons, and of the
emigration of the nobles to join the enemies of France, orders
have been sent that the strictest scrutiny is to be exercised on
the roads leading to the frontier, over all strangers who may pass
through. All who cannot give a perfectly satisfactory account of
themselves and produce their papers en regle, are to be arrested
and sent to Paris. Therefore, my chance of getting through would be
small indeed, whereas while remaining in Paris there can be little
fear of detection."

"Not much risk, I hope," Harry agreed; "but there is no saying what
stringent steps they may take as time goes on."

Victor had taken a lodging a few houses from that of Harry.  Every
day the excitement in Paris increased, every day there were fresh
arrests until all the prisons became crowded to overflowing. It
was late in August; the Prussians were advancing and had laid siege
to Verdun, and terror was added to the emotions which excited to
madness the population of Paris. Black flags were hung from the
steeples, and Danton and his allies skilfully used the fear inspired
by the foreign enemy to add to the general hatred of the Royalists.

"We Republicans," he said in the rostrum of the Assembly, "are
exposed to two parties, that of the enemy without, that of the
Royalists within. There is a Royalist directory which sits secretly
at Paris and corresponds with the Prussian army. To frustrate it
we must terrify the Royalists."

The Assembly decreed death against all who directly or indirectly
refused to execute or hindered the orders given by the executive
power.  Rumours of conspiracy agitated Paris and struck alarm into
people's minds, while those who had friends within the prison walls
became more and more alarmed for their safety.

On the 28th of August orders were issued that all the inhabitants
of Paris were to stay in their houses in order that a visit might
be made by the delegates of the Commune to search for arms, of which
Danton had declared there were eighty thousand hidden in Paris, and
to search for suspected persons. As soon as the order was issued,
Harry and Victor went to their lodgings, and telling their landlords
that they had obtained work at the other end of town, paid their
rent and left the city, and for the next two days slept in the
woods.

They passed most of their time discussing projects for enabling
their friends to escape, for from the stringency of the steps taken,
and the violence of the Commune, they could no longer indulge in
the hopes that in a short time the prisoners against whom no serious
charge could be brought, would be released. At the same time they
could hardly persuade themselves that even such men as those who
now held the supreme power in their hands, could intend to take
extreme measures against so vast a number of prisoners as were now
in custody.

Victor and Harry knew that their friends had at first been taken to
the prison of Bicetre, but whether they were still confined there
they were of course ignorant. Still there was no reason to suppose
that they had been transferred to any of the other jails.

The Bicetre was, they had discovered, so strongly guarded that
neither force nor stratagem seemed available. The jailers were the
creatures of Danton and Robespierre, and any attempt to bribe them
would have been dangerous in the extreme. Victor proposed that,
as he as well as Harry was well provided with funds, for he had
brought to Paris all the money which the steward of the estates
had collected, they should recruit a band among the ruffians of the
city, and make a sudden attack upon the prison. But  Harry pointed
out that a numerous band would be required for such an enterprise,
and that among so many men one would be sure to turn traitor before
the time came.

"I am ready to run all risks, Victor, but I see no chance of success
in it. The very first man we spoke to might denounce us, and if
we were seized there would be no one to look after the safety of
Mademoiselle de St. Caux and her sisters. My first duty is towards
them. I gave my promise to their father, and although it is not
probable that I can be of any use to them, I will at any rate, if
possible, be at hand should occasion arise."

On the evening of the 30th they returned to Paris, and took two
fresh apartments at a distance from their former quarters.

They were greatly anxious as to the safety of the girls, and Harry
at once hastened there, but found that all was well. The deputies,
learning from the landlord that only an old woman and her nieces
inhabited the upper story, and having a heavy task before them,
had only paid a short visit to the room, and had left after asking
Louise one or two questions.

The girls, however, were in a state of terrible anxiety as to
their parents, although Louise had avoided repeating to them the
sinister rumours which came to her ears when she was abroad doing
her marketing, for she now went out alone, thinking it better that
the girls should appear as little as possible in the streets.

"It is terrible," Marie said. "I think night and day of our father
and mother. Can nothing be done? Surely we might devise some means
for their escape."

"I can think of nothing," Harry said. "The prison is too strong to
be taken without a considerable force, and it would be impossible
to get that together."

"Could we not bribe these wretches?"

"I have thought over that too," Harry replied; "but, you see, it
would be necessary to get several men to work together. One might,
perhaps, bribe the man who has charge of the cell, but there would
be other warders, and the guard at the gate, and the latter are
changed every day. I do not see how that could possibly be done."

"Would it be any use, do you think, were I to go to Danton or
Robespierre and plead with them for their lives? I would do that
willingly if you think there would be the slightest chance of
success."

"It would be like a lamb going to plead with a wolf. You would only
attract attention to them."

"Could you not get hold of one of these wretches and force him to
sign an order for their release?" Jeanne suggested.

"Eh!" Harry exclaimed in surprise. "Jeanne, you have the best
head of us all. That idea never occurred to me. Yes, that might be
possible. How stupid of me not to think of it!"

"Do not run into any danger, Harry," Marie said earnestly.  "Such
a scheme could hardly succeed."

"I don't know, mademoiselle. I think it might. I will think it over.
Of course there are difficulties, but I do not see why it should
not succeed."

"Certainly it will succeed if Harry undertakes it," Jeanne said,
with implicit trust in his powers.

Harry laughed, and even Marie, anxious as she was, could not help
smiling.

"I will try and deserve your confidence, Jeanne; but I am not a
magician. But I will talk it over with"--and he hesitated--"with
a young fellow who is, like myself, a Royalist, and in disguise.
Luckily, we ran against each other the other day, and after a
little conversation discovered each other. He, too, has relatives
in prison, and will, I am sure, join me in any scheme I may undertake.
Two heads are better than one, and four are much better than two
when it comes to acting.  And now I must say good-night. I hope
when I see you again I shall be able to tell you that I have formed
some sort of plan for their release."




CHAPTER VII

The 2d of September


Victor de Gisons was, as usual, waiting near the door when Harry
left Louise Moulin's.

"What is the news, Henri? Nothing suspicious, I hope? You are out
sooner than usual."

"Yes, for I have something to think of. Here have we been planning
in vain for the last fortnight to hit upon some scheme for getting
our friends out of prison, and Jeanne has pointed out a way which
you and I never thought of."

"What is that, Henri?"

"The simplest thing in the world, namely, that we should seize one
of the leaders of these villains and compel him to sign an order
for their release."

"That certainly seems possible," Victor said. "I wonder it never
occurred to either of us. But how is it to be done?"

"Ah, that is for us to think out! Jeanne has given us the idea, and
we should be stupid if we cannot invent the details. In the first
place we have got to settle which of them it had better be, and
in the next how it is to be managed. It must be some one whose
signature the people at the prison would be sure to obey."

"Then," Victor said, "it must be either Danton or Robespierre."

"Or Marat," Harry added; "I think he is as powerful as either of
the others."

"He is the worst of them, anyhow," Victor said. "There is something
straightforward about Danton. No doubt he is ambitious, but I think
his hatred of us all is real. He is a terrible enemy, and will
certainly stick at nothing. He is ruthless and pitiless, but I do
not think he is double-faced. Robespierre is  ambitious too, but
I think he is really acting according to his principles, such as
they are. He would be pitiless too, but he would murder on principle.

"He would sign unmoved the order for a hundred heads to fall if he
thought their falling necessary or even useful for the course of
the Revolution, but I do not think he would shed a drop of blood
to satisfy private enmity. They call him the 'incorruptible.' He is
more dangerous than Danton, for he has no vices. He lives simply,
and they say is fond of birds and pets. I do not think we should
make much of either Danton or him, even if we got them in our power.

"Danton would be like a wild beast in a snare. He would rage with
fury, but I do not think that he would be intimidated into signing
what we require, not do I think would Robespierre. Marat is a
different creature altogether. He is simply venomous. He hates the
world, and would absolutely rejoice in slaughter. So loathsome is
he in appearance that even his colleagues shrink from him. He is a
venomous reptile whom it would be a pleasure to slay, as it would
be to put one's heel upon a rattlesnake. Whether he is a coward
or not I do not know, but I should think so. Men of his type are
seldom brave. I think if we had him in our hands we might frighten
him into doing what we want."

"Then Marat it shall be," Harry said; "that much is settled. Tomorrow
we will find out something about his  habits. Till we know about
that we cannot form any plan whatever. Let us meet at dinner-time
at our usual place. Then we will  go outside the Assembly and wait
till he comes out. Fortunately we both know him well by sight.  He
will be sure to go, surrounded, as usual, by a mob of his admirers,
to the Jacobin Club. From there we can trace him to his home. No
doubt anyone could tell us where he lives, but it would be dangerous
to ask. When we have found that out we can decide upon our next
step."

They were, however, saved the trouble they contemplated, for they
learned from the conversation of two men among the mob, who cheered
Marat as he entered the Assembly, what they wanted to know.

"Marat is the man for me," one of them said. "He hates the aristocracy;
he would bathe in their blood. I never miss reading his articles
in the Friend of the People. His cry is always 'Blood! Blood!' He
does not ape the manner of the bourgeois. He does not wash his face
and put on clean linen. He is a  great man, but he is as dirty as
the best of us. He still lives in his old lodgings, though he could
move if he liked into any of the fine houses whose owners are in
the prisons. He wants no servants, but lives just as we do. Vive
Marat!"

"Where does the great citizen live?" Victor asked the men in a
tone of earnest entreaty. On learning the address they took their
way to the dirty and disreputable street where Marat lodged.

"The citizen Marat lives in this street, does he not?" Victor asked
a man lounging at the door of a cabaret.

"Yes, in that house opposite. Do you want him?"

"No; only I was curious to see the house where the friend of the
people lives, and as I was passing the end of the street turned
down.  Will you drink a glass?"

"I am always ready for that," the man said, "but in these hard
times one cannot do it as often as one would like."

"That is true enough," Victor said as they took their seats at
a table. "And so Marat lives over there; it's not much of a place
for a great man."

"It is all he wants," the other said carelessly; "and he is safer
here than he would be in the richer quarters. There would be a plot
against him, and those cursed Royalists would kill him if they had
the chance; but he is always escorted home from the club by a band
of patriots."

In the evening Harry and Victor returned to the street and watched
until Marat returned from the Jacobin Club. His escort of men with
torches and bludgeons left him at the door, but two or three went
upstairs with him, and until far in the night visitors came and
went. Then the light in the upper room was extinguished.

"It is not such an easy affair," Victor said as they moved away;
"and you see, as that man in the wine-shop told us, there is an
old woman who cooks for him, and it is much more difficult to seize
two people without an alarm being given than one."

"That is so," Harry agreed; "but it must be done somehow.  Every
day matters grow more threatening, and those bands of scoundrels
from Marseilles have not been brought all this way for nothing.
The worst of it is, we have such a short time to act. Marat does
not seem to be ever alone from early morning until late at night.
Supposing we did somehow get the order of release from him at night
we could not present it till the  morning, and before we could
present it some one might arrive and discover him fastened up, and
might take the news to the prison before we could get them out."

"Yes, that is very serious," Victor agreed. "I begin to despair,
Henri."

"We must not do that," Harry rejoined. "You see we thought it
impossible before till Jeanne gave us the idea. There must be some
way out of it if we could only hit upon it. Perhaps by to-morrow
morning an idea will occur to one of us. And there is another thing
to be thought of; we must procure disguises for them. It would be
of no use whatever getting them out unless we could conceal them
after they are freed. It would not do for them to go to Louise
Moulin's.  She has three visitors already, and the arrival of more
to stay with her would be sure to excite talk among the neighbours.
The last orders are so strict about the punishment of anyone giving
shelter to enemies of the republic, that people who let rooms will
all be suspicious. The only plan will be to get them out of the city
at once. It will be difficult for them to make their way through
France on foot, for in every town and village there is the strictest
look-out kept for suspected persons. Still, that must be risked;
there is no other way."

"Yes, we must see about that to-morrow, Henri; but I do not think
the marquise could support a journey, for they would have to sleep
in the fields. Moreover, she will probably elect to stay near her
children until all can go together. Therefore I think that it will
be best for her to come either to you or me. We can take an additional
room, saying that our mother is coming up from the country to keep
house for us."

"Yes, that would be much the best plan, Victor. And now here we
are close home. I hope by the time we meet in the morning one of
us may have hit upon some plan or other for getting hold of this
scoundrel."

"I have hit upon an idea, Victor," Harry said when they met the
next morning.

"I am glad to hear it, for though I have lain awake all night I
could think of nothing. Well, what is your idea?"

"Well, you see, Marat often goes out in the morning alone. He is
so well known and he is so much regarded by the lower class that
he has no fear of any assault being made upon him during the day.

"My plan is that we should follow him till he gets into some street
with few people about. Then I would rush upon him, seize him, and
draw a knife to strike, shouting, 'Die, villain!' You should be
a few paces behind, and should run up and strike the knife out of
my hand, managing at the same moment to tumble over Marat and fall
with him to the ground. That would give me time to bolt. I would
have a beard on, and would have my other clothes under the blouse.
I would rush into the first doorway and run up stairs, pull off
my beard, blouse, and blue pantaloons, and then walk quietly down.
You would, of course, rush up stairs and meet me on the way. I
should say I had just met a fellow running up stairs, and should
slip quietly off."

"It would be a frightful risk, Henri, frightful!"

"No, I think it could be managed easily enough. Then, of course,
Marat would be very grateful to you, and you could either get him
to visit your lodgings or could go up to his, and once you had
been there you could manage to outsit his last visitor at night,
and then we could do as we agreed."

"But, you know, we thought we should hardly have time in the morning,
Henri!"

"No, I have been thinking of that, and I have come to the conclusion
that our best plan would be to seize him and hold a dagger to his
heart, and threaten to kill him instantly if he did not accompany
us. Then we would go down with him into the street and walk arm in
arm with him to your lodging. We could thrust a ball of wood into
his mouth so that he could not call out even if he had the courage
to do so, which I don't think he would have if he were assured that
if he made the slightest sound we would kill him. Then we could
make him sign the order and leave him fastened up there. It would
be better to take him to your lodgings than mine, in case my visits
to Louise Moulin should have been noticed, and when he is released
there will be a hue and cry after his captors."

"The best plan will be to put a knife into his heart at once the
minute you have got the order signed," Victor said savagely; "I
should have no more hesitation in killing him than stamping on a
snake."

"No, Victor; the man is a monster, but we cannot kill him in cold
blood; besides, we should do more harm than good to the cause, for
the people would consider he had died a martyr to his championship
of their rights, and would be more furious than ever against the
aristocracy."

"But his account of what he has gone through will have just the
same effect, Henri."

"I should think it probable he would keep the story to himself.
What has happened once may happen again; and besides, his cowardice
in signing the release of three enemies of the people in order to
save his life would tell against him. No, I think he would keep
silence. After we have got them safe away we can return and so
far loosen his bonds that he would be able, after a time, to free
himself.  Five minutes' start would be all that we should want."

But the plan was not destined to be carried out. It was the morning of
the 2d of September, 1792, and as they went down into the quarter
where the magazines of old clothes were situated, in order to
purchase the necessary disguises, they soon became sensible that
something unusual was in the air. Separating, they joined the groups
of men at the corners of the streets and tried to learn what was
going on, but none seemed to know for certain. All sorts of sinister
rumours were about. Word had been passed that the Jacobin bands
were to be in readiness that evening. Money had been distributed.
The Marseillais had dropped hints that a blow was to be struck at
the tyrants. Everywhere there was a suppressed excitement among
the working-classes; an air of gloom and terror among the bourgeois.

After some time Harry and Victor came together again and compared
their observations. Neither had learned anything definite, but both
were sure that something unusual was about to take place.

"It may be that a large number of fresh arrests are about to be
made," Harry said. "There are still many deputies who withstand
the violence of the Mountain. It may be that a blow is going to be
struck against them."

"We must hope that that is it," Victor said, "but I am terribly
uneasy."

Harry had the same feeling, but he did his best to reassure his
friend, and proposed that they should at once set about buying
the disguises, and that on the following morning they should carry
into effect their plan with reference to  Marat. The dresses were
bought.  Two suits, such as a respectable mechanic would wear on
Sundays or holidays, were first purchased. There was then a debate
as to the disguise for the marquise; it struck them at once that it
was strange for two young workmen to be purchasing female attire,
but, after some consultation, they decided upon a bonnet and long
cloak, and these Victor went in and bought, gaily telling the
shopkeeper that he was buying a birthday present for his old mother.

They took the clothes up to Harry's room, agreeing that Louise could
easily buy the rest of the garments required for the marquise as
soon as she was free, but they decided to say nothing about the
attempt that was about to be made until it was over, as it would
cause an anxiety which the old woman would probably be unable to
conceal from the girls.

Victor did not accompany Harry to his room; they had never, indeed,
visited each other in their apartments, meeting always some little
distance away in order that their connection should be unobserved,
and that, should one be arrested, no suspicion would follow the
other. As soon as he had deposited the clothes Harry sallied out
again, and on rejoining Victor they made their way down to the
Hotel de Ville, being too anxious to remain quiet. They could learn
nothing from the crowd which was, as usual, assembled before the
Hotel.

There was a general impression that something was about to happen,
but none could give any definite reason for their belief. All day
they wandered about restless and anxious. They fought their way
into the galleries of the Assembly when the doors opened, but for
a time nothing new took place.

The Assembly, in which the moderates had still a powerful voice,
had protested against the assumption of authority by the council of
the Commune sitting at the Hotel de Ville. But the Assembly lacked
firmness, the Commune every day gained in power. Already warrants
of arrest were prepared against the Girondists, the early leaders
of the movement.

Too restless to remain in the Assembly, Victor and Harry again
took their steps to the Hotel de Ville. Just as they arrived there
twenty-four persons, of whom twenty-two  were priests, were brought
out from the prison of the Maine by a party of Marseillais, who
shouted, "To the Abbaye!" These ruffians pushed the prisoners into coaches
standing at the door, shouting: "You will not arrive at the prison;
the people are waiting to tear you in pieces." But the people looked
on silently in sullen apathy.

"You see them," the Marseillais shouted. "There they are. You are
about to march to Verdun. They only wait for your departure to
butcher your wives and children."

Still the crowd did not move. The great mass of the people had no
share in the bloody deeds of the Revolution; these were the work of
a few score of violent men, backed by the refuse of the population.
A few shouts were raised here and there of, "Down with the priests!"
But more of the crowd joined in the shouts which Victor and Harry
lustily raised of, "Shame, down with the Marseillais!" Victor would
have pressed forward to attack the Marseillais had not Harry held
his arm tightly, exclaiming in his ear:

"Restrain yourself, Victor. Think of the lives that depend upon
ours. The mob will not follow you. You can do nothing yourself.
Come, get out of the crowd."

So saying he dragged Victor away. It was well that they could not
see what was taking place in the coaches, or Victor's fury would
have been ungovernable, for several of the ruffians had drawn their
swords and were hacking furiously at their prisoners.

"We will follow them," Harry said, when he and Victor had made
their way out of the crowd; "but you must remember, Victor, that,
come what may, you must keep cool. You would only throw away your
life uselessly; for Marie's sake you must keep calm. Your life
belongs to her, and you have no right to throw it away."

"You are right, Henri," Victor said gloomily; "but how can one look
on and see men inciting others to massacre? What is going to take
place? We must follow them."

"I am ready to follow them," Harry said; "but you must not go
unless you are firmly resolved to restrain your feelings whatever
may happen. You can do no possible good, and will only involve
yourself in the destruction of others."

"You may trust me," the young count said; "I will be calm for
Marie's sake."

Harry had his doubts as to his friend's power of self-control, but
he was anxious to see what was taking place, and they joined the
throng that followed the coaches. But they were now in the rear,
and could see nothing that was taking place before them. When the
carriages reached the Abbaye the prisoners alighted. Some of them
were at once cut down by the Marseillais, the rest fled into the
hall, where one of the committees was sitting. Its members, however,
did nothing to protect them, and looked on while all save two were
massacred unresistingly. Then the Marseillais came out brandishing
their bloody weapons and shouting, "The good work has begun; down
with the priests! Down with the enemies of the people!"

The better class of people in the crowd assembled at the Hotel de
Ville had not followed the procession to the Abbaye. They had been
horror-struck at the words and actions of the Marseillais, and
felt that this was the beginning of the fulfilment of the rumours
of the last few days.

The murder of the first prisoner was indeed the signal for every
man of thought or feeling and of heart to draw back from the
Revolution. Thousands of earnest men who had at first thought that
the hour of life and liberty commenced with the meeting of the
States-General, and who had gone heart and  soul with that body in
its early struggles for power, had long since shrunk back appalled
at the new tyranny which had sprung into existence.

Each act of usurpation of power by the Jacobins had alienated a
section. The nobles and the clergy, many of whom had at first gone
heartily with the early reformers, had shrunk back appalled when
they saw that religion and monarchy were menaced. The bourgeoisie,
who had made the Revolution, were already to a man against it; the
Girondists, the leaders of the third estate, had fallen away, and
over their heads the axe was already hanging. The Revolution had
no longer a friend in France, save among the lowest, the basest,
and the most ignorant. And now, by the massacres of the 2d of
September, the republic of France was to stand forth in the eyes
of Europe as a blood-stained monster, the enemy, not of kings
only, but of humanity in general.  Thus the crowd following the
Marseillais was composed almost entirely of the scum of Paris,
wretches who had long been at war with society, who hated the rich,
hated the priests, hated all above them--men who had suffered
so much that  they had become wild beasts, who were the products
of that evil system of society which had now been overthrown. The
greater proportion of them were in the pay of the Commune, for,
two days before, all the unemployed had been enrolled as the army
of the Commune. Thus there was no repetition before the Abbaye of
the cries of shame which had been heard in front of the Maine. The
shouts of the Marseillais were taken up and re-echoed by the mob.
Savage cries, curses, and shouts for vengeance filled the air;
many were armed, and knives and bludgeons, swords and pikes, were
brandished or shaken. Blood had been tasted, and all the savage
instincts were on fire.

"This is horrible, Henri!" Victor de Gisons exclaimed. "I feel as
if I were in a nightmare, not that any nightmare could compare in
terror to this. Look at those hideous faces--faces of men debased
by crime, sodden with drink, degraded below the level of brutes,
exulting in the thought of blood, lusting for murder; and to think
that these creatures are the masters of France. Great Heavens! What
can come of it in the future? What is going to take place now?"

"Organized massacre, I fear, Victor. What seemed incredible,
impossible, is going to take place; there is to be a massacre of
the prisoners."

They had by this time reached the monastery of the Carmelites, now
converted into a prison. Here a large number of priests had been
collected. The Marseillais entered, and the prisoners were called
by name to assemble in the garden.

First the Archbishop of Arles was murdered; then they fell upon the
others and hewed them down. The Bishops of Saintes and Beauvais
were among the slain, and the assassins did not desist until the
last prisoner in the Carmelites had been hacked to pieces. Graves
had already been dug near the Barrier Saint Jacques and carts were
waiting to convey the corpses there, showing how carefully the
preparations for the massacre had been made.

Then the Marseillais returned to the Abbaye, and, with a crowd
of followers, entered the great hall. Here the bailiff Maillard
organized a sort of tribunal of men taken at random from the
crowd. Some of these were paid hirelings of the Commune, some were
terrified workmen or small tradesmen who had, merely from curiosity,
joined the mob. The Swiss officers and soldiers, who were, with the
priests, special objects of hatred to the mob,  were first brought
out. They were spared the farce of a trial, they were ordered to
march out through the doors, outside which the Marseillais were
awaiting them. Some hesitated to go out, and cried for mercy.

A young man with head erect was the first to pass through the fatal
doors. He fell in a moment, pierced with pikes. The rest followed
him, and all save two, who were, by some caprice of the mob,
spared, shared his fate. The mob had crowded into the galleries
which surrounded the hall and applauded with ferocious yells the
murder of the soldiers. In the body of the hall a space was kept
clear by the armed followers of the Commune round the judges' table,
and a pathway to the door from the interior of the prison to that
opening into the street.

When the Swiss had been massacred the trial of the other prisoners
commenced. One after another the prisoners were brought out. They
were asked their names and occupations, a few questions followed,
and then the verdict of "Guilty." One after another they were
conducted to the door and there slain. Two or three by the wittiness
of their answers amused the mob and were thereupon acquitted,
the acquittals being greeted by the spectators as heartily as the
sentences of death.

Victor and Harry were in the lowest gallery. They stood back from
the front, but between the heads of those before them they could see
what was going on below. Victor stood immovable, his face as pale
as death. His cap had fallen off, his hair was dank with perspiration,
his eyes had a look of concentrated horror, his body shook with
a spasmodic shuddering. In vain Harry, when he once saw what was
going to take place, urged him in a low whisper to leave. He did
not appear to hear, and even when Harry pulled him by the sleeve
of his blouse he seemed equally unconscious. Harry was greatly
alarmed, and feared that every moment his companion would betray
himself by some terrible out-burst.

After the three or four first prisoners had been disposed of,
a tall and stately man was brought into the hall. A terrible cry,
which sounded loud even above the tumult which reigned, burst from
Victor's lips. He threw himself with the fury of a madman upon those
in front of him, and in a moment would have bounded into the hall
had not Harry brought the heavy stick he carried with all his force
down upon his head. Victor fell like a log under the blow.

"What is it?  What is it?" shouted those around.

"My comrade has gone out of his mind," Harry said quietly; "he
has been drinking for some days, and his hatred for the enemies
of France has turned his head. I have been watching him, and had
I not knocked him down he would have thrown himself head-foremost
off the gallery and broken his neck."

The explanation seemed natural, and all were too interested in
what was passing in the hall below to pay further attention to so
trivial an incident. It was well that Harry had caught sight of the
prisoner before Victor did so and was prepared for the out-break,
for it was the Duc de Gisons who had thus been led in to murder.
Harry dragged Victor back against the wall behind and then tried
to lift him.

"I will lend you a hand," a tall man in the dress of a mechanic,
who had been standing next to him, said, and, lifting Victor's body
on to his shoulder, made his way to the top of the stairs, Harry
preceding him and opening a way through the crowd. In another minute
they were in the open air.

"Thank you greatly," Harry said. "I do not know how I should have
managed without your aid. If you put him down here I will try and
bring him round."

"I live not far from here," the man said. "I will take him to my
room. You need not be afraid," he added as Harry hesitated, "I have
got my eyes open, you can trust me."

So saying he made his way through the crowd gathered outside.  He
was frequently asked who he was carrying, for the crowd feared lest
any of their prey should escape; but the man's reply, given with
a rough laugh--"It is a lad whose stomach is not strong enough to
bear the sight of blood, and I tell you it is pretty hot in
there,"--satisfied them.

Passing through several streets the man entered a small house and
carried Victor to the attic and laid him on a bed, then he carefully
closed the door and struck a light.

"You struck hard, my friend," he said as he examined Victor's head.
"Ma foi, I should not have liked such a blow myself, but I don't
blame you. You were but just in time to prevent his betraying
himself, and better a hundred times a knock on the head than those
pikes outside the door. I had my eye on him, and felt sure he would
do something rash, and I had intended to choke him, but he was too
quick for me. How came you to be so foolish as to be there?"

"We had friends in the prison, and we thought we might do something
to save them," Harry answered, for he saw that it would be his best
policy to be frank. "It was his father whom they brought out."

"It was rash of you, young sir. A kid might as well try to save his
mother from the tiger who has laid its paw upon her as for you to
try to rescue any one from the clutches of the mob. Mon Dieu! To
think that in the early days I was fool enough to go down to the
Assembly and cheer the deputies; but I have seen my mistake. What
has it brought us? A ruined trade, an empty cupboard, and to be
ruled by the ruffians of the slums instead of the king, the clergy,
and the upper classes. I was a brass-worker, and a good one, though
I say it myself, and earned good wages. Now for the last month
I haven't done a stroke of work. Who wants to buy brass-work when
there are mansions and shops to pillage? And now, what are you
going to do?  My wife is out, but she will probably be back soon.
We will attend to this young fellow. She is a good nurse, and I
tell you I think he will need all we can do for him."

"You don't think I have seriously injured him?" Harry said in a
tone of dismay.

"No, no; don't make yourself uneasy. You have stunned him, and
that's all; he will soon get over that. I have seen men get worse
knocks in a drunken row and be at work again in the morning; but
it is different here. I saw his face, and he was pretty nearly mad
when you struck him. I doubt whether he will be in his right senses
when he comes round; but never fear, we will look after him well.
You can stay if you like; but if you want to go you can trust him
to us. I see you can keep your head, and will not run into danger
as he did."

"I do want to go terribly," Harry said, "terribly; and I feel
that I can trust you completely. You have saved his life and mine
already.  Now you will not be hurt at what I am going to say. He
is the son of the Duc de Gisons, the last man we  saw brought out
to be murdered.  We have plenty of money. In a belt round his waist
you will find a hundred louis. Please do not spare them. If you
think he wants a surgeon call him in, and get everything necessary
for your household.  While you are nursing him you cannot go out
to work. I do not talk of reward; one cannot reward kindness like
yours; but while you are looking after him you and your wife must
live."

"Agreed!" the man said, shaking Harry by the hand. "You speak
like a man of heart. I will look after him. You need be under no
uneasiness. Should any of my comrades come in I shall say: 'this
is a young workman who got knocked down and hurt in the crowd, and
whom, having nothing better to do, I have brought in here."'

"If he should recover his senses before I come back," Harry said,
"please do not let him know it was I who struck him. He will
be well-nigh heart-broken that he could not share the fate of his
father.  Let him think that he was knocked down by some one in the
crowd."

"All right! That is easily managed," the man said. "Jacques Medart
is no fool. Now you had best be off, for I see you are on thorns,
and leave me to bathe his head. If you shouldn't come back you can
depend upon it I will look after him till he is able to go about
again."




CHAPTER VIII

Marie Arrested


On leaving Victor in the care of the man who had so providentially
came to his aid, Harry hurried down the street towards the Abbaye,
then he stopped to think--should he return there or make his way
to the Bicetre.  He could not tell whether his friends had, like
the Duc de Gisons, been removed to the Abbaye. If they had been
so, it was clearly impossible for him to aid them in any way.  They
might already have fallen. The crowd was too great for him to regain
the gallery, and even there could only witness, without power to
avert, their murder. Were they still at the Bicetre he might do
something. Perhaps the assassins had not yet arrived there.

It was now nine o'clock in the evening. The streets were almost
deserted. The respectable inhabitants all remained within their
houses, trembling at the horrors, of which reports had circulated
during the afternoon. At first there had been hopes that the Assembly
would take steps to put a stop to the massacre, but the Assembly
did nothing.  Danton and the ministers were absent. The cannon's
roar and the tocsin sounded perpetually. There was no secret as to
what was going on. The Commune had the insolence to send commissioners
to the bar of the Assembly to state that the people wished to break
open the doors of the prisons, and this when two hundred priests
had already been butchered at the Carmelites.

A deputation indeed went to the Abbaye to try to persuade the murderers
to desist; but their voices were drowned in the tumultuous cries.
The Commune of Paris openly directed the massacre. Billaud-Varennes
went backwards and  forwards to superintend the execution of his
orders, and promised the executioners twenty-four francs a day.
The receipt for the payment of this blood-money still exists.

On arriving in front of the Bicetre Harry found all was silent
there, and with a faint feeling of hope that the massacre would not
extend beyond the Abbaye, he again turned his steps in that direction.

The bloody work was still going on, and Harry wandered away into
the quiet streets to avoid hearing the shrieks of the victims and
the yells of the crowd. A sudden thought struck him, and he went
along until he saw a woman come out of a house. He ran up to her.

"Madam," he said, "I have the most urgent need of a bonnet and
shawl. Will you sell me those you have on? The shops are all shut,
or I would not trouble you. You have only to name your price, and
I will pay you."

The woman was surprised at this proposition, but seeing that a good
bargain was to be made she asked twice the cost of the articles
when new, and this Harry paid her without question.

Wrapping the shawl and bonnet into a bundle, he retraced his steps,
and sat down on some doorsteps within a distance of the Abbaye
which would enable him to observe any general movement of the crowd
in front of the prison. At one o'clock in the morning there was a
stir, and the body of men with pikes moved down the street.

"They are going to La Force," he said, after following them for some
distance. "Oh, if I had but two or three hundred English soldiers
here we would make mincemeat of these murderers!"

Harry did not enter La Force, where the scenes that were taking
place at the Abbaye--for, in spite of the speed with which the mock
trials were hurried through, these massacres were not yet finished
there, so great was the number of prisoners--were repeated.

At La Force many ladies were imprisoned, among them the Princess de
Lamballe. They shared the fate of the male prisoners, being hewn
to pieces by sabres. The head of the princess was cut off and stuck
upon a pike, and was carried in triumph under the windows of the
Temple, where the king and queen were confined, and was held up to
the bars of the room they occupied for them to see. Marie Antoinette,
fearless for herself, fainted at the terrible sight of the pale
head of her friend.

Harry remained at a little distance from La Force, tramping
restlessly up and down, half-mad with rage and horror, and at his
powerlessness to interfere in any way with the proceedings of the
wretches who were carrying on the work of murder. At last, about
eight o'clock in the morning, a boy ran by.

"They have finished with them at the Abbaye," he said with fiendish
glee. "They are going from there to the Bicetre."

Harry with difficulty repressed his desire to slay the urchin, and
hurried away to reach the prison of Bicetre before the band from the
Abbaye arrived there. Unfortunately he came down by a side street
upon them when they were within a few hundred yards of the prison.
His great hope was that he might succeed in penetrating with the
Marseillais and find the marquise, and aid her in making her way
through the mob in the disguise he had purchased.

But here, as at the other prisons, there was a method in the work
of murder. The agents of the Commune took possession of the hall
at the entrance and permitted none to pass farther into the prison,
the warders and officials bringing down the prisoners in batches,
and so handing them over for slaughter. In vain Harry tried to
penetrate into the inner part of the prison. He was roughly repulsed
by the men guarding the door; and at last, finding that nothing
could be done, he forced his way out again into the open air, and
hurrying away for some distance, threw himself on the ground and
burst into a passion of tears.

After a time he rose and made his way back to the house where he
had left Victor de Gisons. He found him in a state of delirium,
acting over and over again the scene in the Abbaye, cursing the
judge and executioners, and crying out he would die with his father.

"What does the doctor think of him?" he asked the woman who was
sitting by Victor's bed.

"He did not say much," the woman replied. "He shook his head, and
said there had been a terrible mental shock, and that he could not
answer either for his life or reason. There was nothing to do but
to be patient, to keep his head bandaged with wet cloths, and to
give him water from time to time. Do not be afraid, sir; we will
watch over him carefully."

"I would stay here if I could," Harry said; "but I have others
I must see about. I have the terrible news to break to some young
ladies of the murder of their father and mother."

"Poor things! Poor things!" the woman said, shaking her head.  "It
is terrible! My husband was telling me what he saw; and a neighbour
came in just now and said it was the same thing at all the other
prisons. The priest, too--our priest at the little church at the
corner of the street, where I used to go in every morning to pray
on my way to market--he was dragged away ten days ago to the
Carmelites, and now he is a saint in heaven. How is it, sir, that
God allows such things to be?"

"We cannot tell," Harry said sadly. "As for myself, I can hardly
believe it, though I saw it. They say there are over four thousand
people in the prisons, and they will all be murdered. Such a thing
was never heard of. I can hardly believe that I am not in a dream
now."

"You look almost like one dead yourself," the woman said pityingly.
"I have made a bouillon for Jacques' breakfast and mine.  It is
just ready. Do take a mouthful before you go out. That and a piece
of bread and a cup of red wine will do you good."

Harry was on the point of refusing; but he felt that he was utterly
worn and exhausted, and that he must keep up his strength.  Her
husband, therefore, took her place by Victor's bedside in readiness
to hold him down should he try to get up in his ravings, while
the good woman ladled out a basin of the broth and placed it with
a piece of bread and some wine on the table. Harry forced himself
to drink it, and when he rose from the table he already felt the
benefit of the meal.

"Thank you very much," he said. "I feel stronger now; but how I
am to tell the story I do not know. But I must make quite certain
before I go to these poor girls that their parents were killed.
Three or four were spared at the Abbaye. Possibly it may have been
the same thing at the Bicetre."

So Harry went back and waited outside the prison until the bloody
work was over; but found on questioning those who came out when
all was done that the thirst for blood had increased with killing,
and that all the prisoners found in the Bicetre had been put to
death.

"Ma foi!" the man whom he was speaking to said; "but these accursed
aristocrats have courage. Men and women were alike; there was not
one of them but faced the judges bravely and went to their death
as calmly as if to dinner. There was a marquis and his wife--the
Marquis de St. Caux they called him.  They brought them out together.
They were asked whether they had anything to say why they should
not be punished for their crimes against France. The marquis laughed
aloud.

"'Crimes!' he said. 'Do you think a Marquis de St. Caux is going
to plead for his life to a band of murderers and assassins? Come,
my love.'

"He just gave her one kiss, and then took her hand as if they were
going to walk a minuet together, and then led her down between the
lines of guards with his head erect and a smile of scorn on his
face. She did not smile, but her step never faltered. I watched
her closely. She was very pale, and she did not look proud, but
she walked as calmly and steadily as her husband till they reached
the door where the pikemen were awaiting them, and then it was
over in a minute, and they died without a cry or a groan. They are
wretches, the aristocrats. They have fattened on the life-blood of
the people; but they know how to die, these people."

Without a word Harry turned away. He had told himself there was no
hope; but he knew by the bitter pang he felt now that he had hoped
to the last. Then he walked slowly away to tell the news.

There were comparatively few people about the streets, and these
all of the lower order. Every shop was closed. Men with scared faces
stood at some of the doors to gather the news from passers-by, and
pale women looked timidly from the upper windows. When he reached
the house he could not summon courage to enter it, but stood for a
long time outside, until at last he saw Louise Moulin put her head
from the window. He succeeded in catching her eye, and placing his
finger on his lips signed to her to come down. A minute later she
appeared at the door.

"Is it all true, Monsieur Sandwith? They say they are murdering
the prisoners. Surely it must be false! They could never do such
a thing!"

"It is true, Louise. I have seen it myself. I went with a disguise
to try and rescue our dear lady, even if I could not save the
marquis; but I could not get to her--the wretches have murdered
them both."

"Oh, my dear lady!" the old woman cried, bursting into tears.  "The
pretty babe I nursed. To think of her murdered; and the poor young
things upstairs--what shall I do!--what shall I do, Monsieur
Sandwith!"

"You must break it to them, Louise. Do they know how great the
danger is?"

"No. I have kept it from them. They can see from the window that
something unusual is going on; everyone can see that. But I told
them it was only that the Prussians were advancing. They are
anxious--very anxious--but they are quite unprepared for this."

"Break it gradually, Louise. Tell them first that there are rumours
that the prisons have been attacked. Come down again presently as
if to get more news, and then tell them that there are reports that
the prisoners have been massacred, and then at last tell them all
the truth."

"But will you not come up, Monsieur Sandwith--they trust you so
much? Your presence will be a support to them."

"I could do nothing now," Harry said sadly. "God only can console
them. They had best be by themselves for awhile. I will come in this
evening. The first burst of grief will be over then, and my talk
may aid them to rouse themselves. Oh, if we had but tried to get
them out of prison sooner. And yet who could have foreseen that here
in Paris thousands of innocent prisoners, men and women, would be
murdered in cold blood!"

Finding that she could not persuade Harry to enter, Louise turned
to perform her painful duty; while Harry, thoroughly exhausted with
the night of horrors, made his way home, and throwing himself on
the bed, fell asleep, and did not wake until evening. His first step
was to plunge his head into water, and then, after a good wash, to
prepare a meal. His sleep had restored his energy, and with brisk
steps he made his way through the streets to Louise Moulin. He
knocked with his knuckles at the outer door of her apartments. The
old nurse opened it quietly.

"Come in," she said, "and sit down. They are in their room, and
I think they have cried themselves to sleep. My heart has been
breaking all day to see them. It has been dreadful. Poor little
Virginie cried terribly, and sobbed for hours;  but it was a long
time before the others cried. Marie fainted, and when I got her
round lay still and quiet without speaking. Jeanne was worst of
all. She sat on that chair with her eyes staring open and her face
as white as if she were dead. She did not seem to hear anything I
said; but at last, when Virginie's sobs were stopping, I began to
talk to her about her mother and her pretty ways when she was a
child, and then at last Jeanne broke down, and she cried so wildly
that I was frightened, and then Marie cried too; and after a while
I persuaded them all to lie down; and as I have not heard a sound
for the last hour I hope the good God has sent them all to sleep."

"I trust so indeed, Louise. I will stay here quietly for an hour,
and then if we hear nothing I will go home, and be back again in
the morning. Sleep will do more for them than anything I can say."

At the end of an hour all was still quiet, and Harry with a somewhat
lightened heart took his departure.

At nine o'clock next morning he was again at the house. When he
entered Virginie ran to him, and throwing her arms round his neck
again burst into a passion of tears. Harry felt that this was the
best thing that could have happened, for the others were occupied
for some time in trying to soothe her, crying quietly to themselves
while they did so. At last her sobs became less violent.

"And now, Harry," Marie said, turning to him, "will you tell us
all about it?"

"I will tell you only that your dear father and mother died, as
you might be sure they would, calmly and fearlessly, and that they
suffered but little. More than that I cannot tell you now. Some day
farther on, when you can bear it, I will tell you of the events of
the last forty-eight hours. At present I myself dare not think of
it, and it would harm you to know it.

"Do not, I pray you, ask me any questions now. We must think of
the future. Fortunately you passed unsuspected the last time they
searched the house; but it may not be so another time. You may be
sure that these human tigers will not be satisfied with the blood
they have shed, but that they will long for fresh victims. The
prisons are empty now, but they will soon be filled again. We must
therefore turn our thoughts to your making your escape from the
city. I fear that there is peril everywhere; but it must be faced.
I think it will be useless for us to try and reach the  frontier
by land. At every town and village they will be on the look-out
for fugitives, and whatever disguise you might adopt you could not
escape observation. I think, then, that we must make for the sea
and hire a fishing-boat to take us across to England.

"But we must not hurry. In the first place, we must settle all
our plans carefully and prepare our disguises; in the next place,
there will be such tremendous excitement when the news of what has
happened here is known that it would be unsafe to travel. I think
myself it will be best to wait a little until there is a lull. That
is what I want you to think over and decide.

"I do not think there is any very great danger here for the next
few days. For a little time they will be tired of slaying; and,
from what I hear, the Girondists are marked out as the next victims.
They say Danton has denounced them at the Jacobin Club. At any
rate it will be better to get everything in readiness for flight,
so that we can leave at once if we hear of any fresh measures for
a search after suspects."

Harry was pleased to find that his suggestion answered the purpose
for which he made it. The girls began to discuss the disguises
which would be required and the best route to be taken, and their
thoughts were for a time turned from the loss they had sustained.
After an hour's talk he left them greatly benefited by his visit.

For the next few days Harry spent his time for the most part by
the bedside of Victor de Gisons. The fever was still at its height,
and the doctor gave but small hopes of his recovery. Harry determined
that he would not leave Paris until the issue was decided one way
or the other, and when with the girls he discouraged any idea of
an immediate flight. This was the more easy, for the news from the
provinces showed that the situation was everywhere as bad as it
was at the capital.

The Commune had sent to all the committees acting in connection with
them in the towns throughout the country the news of the execution
of the enemies of France confined in the prisons, and had urged
that a similar step should at once be taken with reference to all
the prisoners in their hands. The order was promptly obeyed, and
throughout France massacres similar to those in Paris were at once
carried out. A carnival of murder and horror had commenced, and the
madness for blood  raged throughout the whole country. Such being
the case, Harry found it by no means difficult to dissuade the
girls from taking instant steps towards making their escape.

He was, however, in a state of great uneasiness. Many of the moderate
deputies had been seized, others had sought safety in flight, and
the search for suspected persons was carried on vigorously.  Difficult
and dangerous as it would be to endeavour to travel through France
with three girls, he would have attempted it without hesitation
rather than remain in Paris had it not been for Victor de Gisons.

One day a week after the massacres at the prisons he received
another terrible shock. He had bought a paper from one of the men
shouting them for sale in the street, and sat down in the garden of
the Tuileries to read it. A great portion of the space was filled
with lists of the enemies of the people who had been, as it was
called, executed. As these lists had formed the staple of news for
several days Harry scarce glanced at the names, his eye travelling
rapidly down the list until he gave a start and a low cry. Under
the heading of persons executed at Lille were the names of Ernest
de St. Caux, Jules de St. Caux, Pierre du Tillet--"aristocrats
arrested, August 15th, in the act of endeavouring to leave
France in disguise."

For some time Harry sat as if stunned. He had scarce given a thought
to his friends since that night they had left, the affairs of the
marquis and his wife, of their daughters, and of Victor de Gisons,
almost excluding everything else. When he thought of the boys it
had been as already in England, under the charge of du Tillet.

He had thought, that if they had been arrested on the way he
should have been sure to hear of it; and he had such confidence in
the sagacity of Monsieur du Tillet that he had looked upon it as
almost certain he would be able to lead his two charges through
any difficulty and danger which might beset them. And now he knew
that his hopes had been ill founded--that his friends had been
arrested when almost within sight of the frontier, and had been
murdered as soon as the news of the massacres in Paris had reached
Lille.

He felt crushed with the blow. A warm affection had sprung up between
him and Ernest, while from the first the younger boy had attached
himself to him; and now they were dead, and the girls were alone
in the world, save for himself and the poor young fellow tossing
with fever! It was true that if  his friends had reached England
in safety they could not have aided him in the task he had before
him of getting the girls away; still their deaths somehow seemed
to add to his responsibilities.

Upon one thing he determined at once, and that was, that until his
charges were safely in England they should not hear a whisper of
this new and terrible misfortune which had befallen them.

In order to afford the girls some slight change, and anxious at their
pale faces, the result of grief and of their unwonted confinement,
Louise Moulin had persuaded them to go out with her in the early
mornings when she went to the markets. The fear of detection was
small, for the girls had now become accustomed to their thick shoes
and rough dress; and indeed she thought that it would be safer to
go out, for the suspicions of her neighbours might be excited if
the girls remained secluded in the house. Harry generally met them
soon after they started, and accompanied them in their walk.

One morning he was walking with the two younger girls, while Marie
and the old nurse were together a short distance in front of them.
They had just reached the flower-market, which was generally the
main object of their walks--for the girls, having passed most
of their time in the country, were passionately fond of flowers--when
a man on horseback wearing a red sash, which showed him to be
an official of the republic, came along at a foot-pace. His eyes
fell upon Marie's face and rested there, at first with the look of
recognition, followed by a start of surprise and satisfaction. He
reined in his horse instantly, with the exclamation:

"Mademoiselle de St. Caux!"

For a moment she shrank back, her cheek paler even than before;
then recovering herself she said calmly:

"It is myself, Monsieur Lebat."

"Citizen Lebat," he corrected. "You forget, there are no titles
now--we have changed all that. It goes to my heart," he went on with
a sneer, "to be obliged to do my duty; but however unpleasant it
is, it must be done. Citizens," he said, raising his voice, "I want
two men well disposed to the state."

As to be ill disposed meant danger if not death, several men within
hearing at once came forward.

"This female citizen is an aristocrat in disguise," he went on,
pointing to Marie; "in virtue of my office as deputy of Dijon and
member of the Committee of Public Safety, I arrest her and give
her into your charge. Where is the person who was with her? Seize
her also on a charge of harbouring an enemy of the state!"

But Louise was gone. The moment Lebat had looked round in search
of assistance Marie had whispered in Louise's ear: "Fly, Louise,
for the sake of the children; if you are arrested they are lost!"

Had she herself been alone concerned, the old woman would have stood
by Marie and shared her fate; but the words "for the sake of the
children" decided her, and she had instantly slipped away among
the crowd, whose attention had been called by Lebat's first words,
and dived into a small shop, where she at once began to bargain
for some eggs.

"Where is the woman?" Lebat repeated angrily.

"What is she like?" one of the bystanders asked.

But Lebat could give no description whatever of her. He had noticed
that Marie was speaking to some one when he first caught sight of
her face; but he had noticed nothing more, and did not know whether
the woman was young or old.

"I can't tell you," he said in a tone of vexation. "Never mind; we
shall find her later on. This capture is the most important."

So saying he set out, with Marie walking beside him, with a guard
on either hand. In the next street he came on a party of four of
the armed soldiers of the Commune, and ordered them to take the
place of those he had first charged with the duty, and directed
them to proceed with him to the Maine.

Marie was taken at once before the committee sitting en permanence
for the discovery and arrest of suspects.

"I charge this young woman with being an aristocrat in disguise.
She is the daughter of the ci-devant Marquis de St. Caux, who was
executed on the 2d of September at Bicetre."

"Murdered, you mean, sir," Marie said in a clear haughty voice.
"Why not call things by their proper name?"

"I am sorry," Lebat went on, not heeding the interruption, "that
it should fall to my lot to denounce her, for I acknowledge that
in the days before our glorious Revolution commenced I have visited
at her father's chateau. But I feel that my duty to the republic
stands before any private considerations."

"You have done perfectly right," the president of the committee
said. "As I understand that the accused does not deny that she
is the daughter of the ci-devant marquis, I will at once sign the
order for her committal to La Force. There is room there still,
though the prisons are filling up again fast."

"We must have another jail delivery," one of the committee laughed
brutally; and a murmur of assent passed through the chamber.

The order was made out, and Marie was handed over to the armed
guard, to be taken with the next batch of prisoners to La Force.

Harry was some twenty yards behind Marie and her companion when
Lebat checked his horse before her. He recognized the man instantly,
and saw that Marie's disguise was discovered. His first impulse
was to rush forward to her assistance, but the hopelessness of any
attempt at interference instantly struck him, and to the surprise
of the two girls, who were looking into a shop, and had not noticed
what was occurring, he turned suddenly with them down a side street.

"What are you doing, Harry? We shall lose the others in the crowd
if we do not keep them in sight," Jeanne said.

"I know what I am doing, Jeanne; I will tell you presently." He walked
along several streets until he came to an unfrequented thoroughfare.

"There is something wrong, Harry. I see it in your face!" Jeanne
exclaimed. "Tell us at once.

"It is bad news," Harry said quietly. "Try and nerve yourselves,
my dear girls, for you will need all your courage. Marie is captured."

"Oh, Harry!" Virginie exclaimed, bursting into tears, while Jeanne
stood still and motionless.

"Why are you taking us away?" she said in a hard sharp voice which
Harry would not have recognized as hers. "Our place is with her,
and where she goes we will go. You have no right to lead us away.
We will go back to her at once."

"You can do her no good, Jeanne, dear," Harry said gently. "You
could not help her, and it would only add to her misery if Virginie
and you were also in their hands. Besides, we can be of more use
outside. Trust to me, Jeanne; I will do all in my power to save
her, whatever the risk."

"You could not save our father and mother," Jeanne said with a
quivering lip.

"No, dear; but I would have saved them had there been but a little
time to do so. This time I hope to be more successful. Courage,
Jeanne! Do not give way; I depend on your clear head to help me.
Besides, till we can get her back, you have to fill Marie's place
and look after Virginie."

The appeal was successful, and Jeanne burst into a passion of
tears. Harry did not try to check them, and in a short time the
sobs ceased and Jeanne raised her head again.

"I feel better now," she said. "Come, Virginie, and dry your eyes,
darling; we shall have plenty of time to cry afterwards. Are we to
go home, Harry? Have they taken Louise?"

"I do not know, Jeanne; that is the first thing to find out, for
if they have, it will not be safe for you to return. Let us push on
now, so that if she has not been taken we shall reach home before
her. We will place ourselves at the corner of your street and wait
for an hour; she may spend some time in looking for us, but if she
does not come by the end of that time I shall feel sure that it
is because she cannot come, and in that case I must look out for
another place for you."

They hurried on until they were nearly home, the brisk walk having,
as Harry had calculated it would do, had the effect of preventing
their thoughts from dwelling upon Marie's capture. They had not
been more than a quarter of an hour at their post when Harry gave
an exclamation of satisfaction as he saw Louise Moulin approaching.
The two girls hurried to meet her.

"Thank God you are both safe, dears!" she exclaimed with tears
streaming down her cheeks. "I thought of you in the middle of it
all; but I was sure that Monsieur Sandwith would see what was being
done and would get you away."

"And you, Louise," said Harry, who had now come up, "how did you
get away? I have been terribly anxious, thinking that they might
seize you too, and that would have been dreadful."

"So they would have done," the old woman said; "but when that evil
man looked away for a moment, mademoiselle whispered, 'Fly, Louise,
for the children's sake!' and I slipped away into the crowd without
even stopping to think, and ran into a shop; and it was well I did,
for he shouted to them to seize me too, but I was gone, and as I
don't think he noticed me before, they could not find me; and as
soon as they had all moved away I came out. I looked for you for
some time, and then made up my mind that Monsieur Sandwith had come
on home with you."

"So I did, you see," Harry said; "but I did not dare to go in until
we knew whether you had been taken too. If you had not come after
a time we should have looked for another lodging, though I knew
well enough that you would not tell them where you lived."

"No, indeed," the old woman said. "They might have cut me in pieces
without getting a single word from me as to where I lived.  Still
they might have found out somehow, for they would have been sure to
have published the fact that I had been taken, with a description
of me. Then the neighbours would have said, 'This description is
like Louise Moulin, and she is missing;' and then they would have
talked, and the end of it would have been you would have been
discovered. Will you come home with us, Monsieur Sandwith?"

"I will come after it's dark, Louise. The less my visits are noticed
the better."

"This is awful!" Harry said to himself as he turned away. "The
marquis and his wife massacred, Ernest and Jules murdered, Marie
in prison, Victor mad with fever, Jeanne and Virginie with no one
to trust to but me, my people at home in a frightful state of mind
about me. It is awful to think of. It's enough to drive a fellow
out of his senses. Well, I will go and see how Victor is going on.
The doctor thought there was a change yesterday. Poor fellow! If
he comes to his senses I shall have hard work to keep the truth
about Marie from him. It would send him off again worse than ever
if he had an idea of it."

"And how is your patient to-day, madame?" he asked, as Victor's
nurse opened the door to him.

"He is quieter, much quieter," she replied. "I think he is too weak
to rave any longer; but otherwise he's just the same. He lies with
his eyes open, talking sometimes to himself, but I cannot make out
any sense in what he says. The  doctor has been here this morning,
and he says that he thinks another two days will decide. If he does
not take a turn then he will die. If he does, he may live, but even
then he may not get his reason again. Poor young fellow! I feel
for him almost as if he were my son, and so does Jacques."

"You are both very good, madame," Harry said, "and my friend is
fortunate indeed to have fallen into such good hands. I will sit
with him for three or four hours now, and you had better go and
get a little fresh air."

"That I will, monsieur. Jacques is asleep. He was up with him all
last night, and I had a good night. He would have it so."

"Quite right!" Harry said. "You must not knock yourself up, madame.
You are too useful to others for us to let you do that. Tomorrow
night I will take my turn."




CHAPTER IX

Robespierre


After dark Harry presented himself at Louise Moulin's.

"Have you thought of anything, Harry?" was Jeanne's first question.
She was alone, for Louise was cooking, and Virginie had lain down
and cried herself to sleep.

"I have thought of a number of things," he replied, for while he
had been sitting by Victor's bedside he had turned over in his mind
every scheme by which he could get Marie out of prison, "but at
present I have fixed upon nothing. I cannot carry out our original
plan of seizing Marat. It would require more than one to carry
out such a scheme, and the friend whom I relied upon before can no
longer aid me."

"Who is it?" Jeanne asked quietly. "Is it Victor de Gisons?"

"What! Bless me, Jeanne!" Harry exclaimed in surprise. "How did
you guess that?"

"I felt sure it was Victor all along," the girl said. "In the first
place, I never believed that he had gone away. Marie told me she
had begged and prayed him to go, and that he had only gone to please
her. She seemed to think it was right he should go, but I didn't
think so. A gentleman would not run away and leave anyone he liked
behind, even if she told him. It was not likely. Why, here are
you staying here and risking your life for us, though we are not
related to you and have no claim upon you. And how could Victor
run away?  But as Marie seemed pleased to think he was safe, I said
nothing; but I know, if he had gone, and some day they had been
married, I should never have looked upon him as a brother. But I
felt sure he wouldn't do it, and that he was in Paris still. Then,
again, you did not tell us the name of the friend who was working
with you, and I felt sure you must have some reason for your
silence. So, putting the two things together, I was sure that it
was Victor. What has happened to him?  Is he in prison too?"

"No, he is not in prison, Jeanne," Harry said, "but he is very
ill." And he related the whole circumstances of Victor's fever.
"I blamed myself awfully at first for having hit him so hard, as
you may suppose, Jeanne; but the doctor says he thinks it made no
difference, and that Victor's delirium is due to the mental shock
and not in any way to the blow on the head. Still I should not like
your sister to know it. I am very glad you have guessed the truth,
for it is a comfort to talk things over with you."

"Poor Marie!" Jeanne said softly. "It is well she never knew about
it. The thought he had got safely away kept her up. And now, tell
me about your plans. Could I not take Victor's place and help you to
seize Marat? I am not strong, you know; but I could hold a knife,
and tell him I would kill him if he cried out. I don't think I
could, you know, but he wouldn't know that."

"I am afraid that wouldn't do, Jeanne," Harry said with a slight
smile, shaking his head. "It was a desperate enterprise for two of
us.  Besides, it would never do for you to run the risk of being
separated from Virginie. Remember you are father and mother and
elder sister to her now. The next plan I thought of was to try and
get appointed as a warder in the prison, but that seems full of
difficulties, for I know no one who could get me such a berth, and
certainly they would not appoint a fellow at my age unless by some
extraordinary influence. Then I thought if I let out I was English
I might get arrested and lodged in the same prison, and might
help her to get out then. From what I hear, the prisoners are not
separated, but all live together."

"No, no, Harry," Jeanne exclaimed in a tone of sharp pain, "you
must not do that of all things. We have only you, and if you are
once in prison you might never get out again; besides, there are
lots of other prisons, and there is no reason why they should send
you to La Force rather than anywhere else. No, I will never consent
to that plan."

"I thought it seemed too doubtful myself," Harry said. "Of course,
if I knew that they would send me to La Force, I might risk it.  I
could hide a file and a steel saw about me, and might cut through
the bars; but, as you say, there is no  reason why they should send
me there rather than anywhere else. I would kill that villain who
arrested her--the scoundrel, after being a guest at the chateau!--but
I don't see that would do your sister any good, and would
probably end in my being shut up. The most hopeful plan seems to
me to try and bribe some of the warders. Some of them, no doubt,
would be glad enough to take money if they could see their way to
letting her out without fear of detection."

"But you know we thought of that before, Harry, and agreed it would
be a terrible risk to try it, for the very first man you spoke to
might turn round on you."

"Of course there is a certain risk, Jeanne, anyway. There is no
getting a prisoner out of La Force without running some sort of
risk; the thing is to fix on as safe a plan as we can. However, we
must think it out well before we do try. A failure would be fatal,
and I do not think there is any pressing danger just at present.
It is hardly likely there will be any repetition of the wholesale
work of the 2nd of September; and if they have anything like a trial
of the prisoners, there are such numbers of them, so many arrested
every day, that it may be a long time before they come to your
sister. I do not mean that we should trust to that, only that
there is time for us to make our plans properly. Have you thought
of anything?"

"I have thought of all sort of things since you left us this morning,
Harry, but they are like yours, just vague sort of schemes that
do not seem possible when you try to work them out. I do not know
whether they let you inside the prisons to sell everything to the
prisoners, because if they did I might go in with something and
see Marie, and find out how she could be got out."

Harry shook his head.

"I do not think anyone would be allowed in like that, but if they
did it would only be a few to whom the privilege would be granted."

"Yes, I thought of that, Harry; but one of them might be bribed
perhaps to let me take her place."

"It might be possible," Harry said, "but there would be a terrible
risk, and I don't think any advantage to compensate for it. Even if
you did get to her and spoke to her, we should still be no nearer
to getting her out. Still we mustn't be disheartened. We can hardly
expect to hit upon a scheme at once, and I  don't think either of
our heads is very clear to-day; let us think it over quietly, and
perhaps some other idea may occur to one of us, I expect it will be
to you.  Now, good-night; keep your courage up. I rely very much
upon you, Jeanne, and you don't know what a comfort it is to me that
you are calm and brave, and that I can talk things over to you. I
don't know what I should do if I had it all on my own shoulders."

Jeanne made no answer, but her eyes were full of tears as she put
her hands into Harry's, and no sound came from her lips in answer
to his good-night.

"That girl's a trump, and no mistake," Harry said to himself as
he descended the stairs. "She has got more pluck than most women,
and is as cool and calm as if she were twice her age. Most girls
would be quite knocked over if they were in her place. Her father
and mother murdered, her sister in the hands of these wretches,
and danger hanging over herself and Virginie! It isn't that she
doesn't feel it. I can see she does, quite as much, if not more,
than people who would sit down and howl and wring their hands. She
is a trump, Jeanne is, and no mistake. And now about Marie. She
must be got out somehow, but how? That is the question. I really
don't see any possible way except by bribing her guards, and
I haven't the least idea how to set about that. I think to-morrow
I will tell Jacques and his wife all about it; they may know some
of these men, though it isn't likely that they do; anyhow, three
heads are better than one."

Accordingly, next morning he took the kind-hearted couple into his
counsel. When they heard that the young lady who had been arrested
was the fiance of their sick lodger they were greatly interested,
but they shook their heads when he told them that he was determined
at all hazards to get her out of prison.

"It isn't the risk so much," Jacques said, "that I look at. Life
doesn't seem of much account in these days; but how could it be
done? Even if you made up your mind to be killed, I don't see that
would put her a bit nearer to getting out of prison; the place is
too strong to break into or to break out of."

"No, I don't think it is possible to succeed in that sort of way;
but if the men who have the keys of the corridors could be bribed,
and the guard at the gate put soundly to sleep by drugging their
drink, it might be managed."

Jacques looked sharply at Harry to see if he was in earnest, and
seeing that he was so, said drily:

"Yes, if we could do those things we should, no doubt, see our way;
but how could it be managed?"

"That is just the point, Jacques. In the first place it will be
necessary to find out in which corridor Mademoiselle de St. Caux
is confined; in the second, to let her know that we are working
for her, and to learn, if possible, from her whether, among those
in charge of her, there is one man who shows some sort of feeling
of pity and kindness; when that is done we should, of course, try
to get hold of him. Of course he doesn't remain in the prison all
day. However, we can see about that after we have found out the
first points."

"I know a woman who is sister to one of the warders," Elise Medart
said. "I don't know whether he is there now or whether he has been
turned out. Martha is a good soul, and I know that sometimes she
has been inside the prison, I suppose to see her brother, for before
the troubles the warders used to get out only once a month.  What
her brother is like I don't know, but if he is like her he would,
I think, be just the man to help you."

"Yes," Jacques assented, "I didn't think of Martha. She is a good
soul and would do her best, I am sure."

"Thank you both," Harry said; "but I do not wish you to run any
risks. You have already incurred the greatest danger by sheltering
my friend; I cannot let you hazard your lives farther. This woman
may, as you say, be ready to help us, but her brother might betray
the whole of us, and screen his sister by saying she had only
pretended to enter into the plot in order to betray it."

"We all risk our lives every day," Jacques said quietly. "I am
sure we can trust Martha, and she will know whether she can rely
completely upon her brother. If she can, we will set her to sound
him. Elise will go and see her to-day, and you shall know what she
thinks of it when you come this evening for your night's watching."

Greatly pleased with this unexpected stroke of luck, Harry went off
at once to tell Jeanne that the outline of a plan to rescue Marie
had been fixed upon.

The girl's pale face brightened up at the news.

"Perhaps," she said, "we may be able to send a letter to her. I
should like to send her just a line to say that Virginie and I are
well.  Do you think it can be done?"

"I do not know, Jeanne. At any rate you can rely that, if it is
possible and all goes well, she shall have it; but be sure and give
no clue by which they might find you out, if the letter falls into
wrong hands. Tell her we are working to get her free, and ask if
she can suggest any way of escape; knowing the place she may see
opportunities of which we know nothing. Write it very small, only
on a tiny piece of paper, so that a man can hide it anywhere, slip
it into her hand, or put it in her ration of bread."

Jeanne wrote the little note--a few loving words, and the message
Harry had given her.

"Do not sign your name to it," Harry said; "she will know well
enough who it comes from, and it is better in case it should fall
into anyone else's hands."

That evening Harry learned that the woman had consented to sound
her brother, who was still employed in the prison. She had said she
was sure that he would not betray her even if he refused to aid in
the plan.

"I am to see her to-morrow morning," Elise said. "She will go
straight from me to the prison. She says discipline is not nearly
so strict as it used to be. There is a very close watch kept over
the prisoners, but friends of the guards can go in and out without
trouble, except that on leaving they have to be accompanied by
the guard at the door, so as to be sure that no one is passing out
in disguise. She says her brother is good-natured but very fond
of money. He is always talking of retiring and settling down in a
farm in Brittany, where he comes from, and she thinks that if he
thought he could gain enough to do this he would be ready to run
some risk, for he hates the terrible things that are being done
now."

"He seems just the man for us," Harry said. "Will you tell your
friend, when you see her in the morning, that I will give her twenty
louis and her brother a hundred if he can succeed in getting Marie
out?"

"I will tell them, sir. That offer will set his wits to work, I
have no doubt."

Harry then gave her the note Jeanne had written, for the woman
to hand to her brother for delivery if he proved willing to enter
into their plan. Harry had a quiet night of watching, for Victor
lay so still that his friend several times leant over him to see
if he breathed. The doctor had looked in late and said that the
crisis was at hand.

"To-morrow your friend will either sink or he will turn the corner.
He is asleep now and will probably sleep for many hours. He may
never wake again; he may wake, recognize you for a few minutes,
and then go off in a last stupor; he may wake stronger and with a
chance of life. Here is a draught that you will give him as soon
as he opens his eyes; pour besides three or four spoonfuls of soup
down his throat, and if he keeps awake do the same every half hour."

It was not until ten o'clock in the morning that Victor opened his
eyes. He looked vaguely round the room and there was no recognition
in his eyes as they fell upon Harry's face, but they had lost the
wild expression they had worn while he had lain there, and Harry
felt renewed hope as he lifted his head and poured the draught
between his lips. Then he gave him a few spoonfuls of soup and had
the satisfaction of seeing his eyes close again and his breathing
become more and more regular.

The doctor, when he came in and felt Victor's pulse, nodded approval.

"The fever has quite left him," he said; "I think he will do now.
It will be slow, very slow, but I think he will regain his strength;
as to his mind, of that I can say nothing at present."

About mid-day Elise returned.

"I have good news, monsieur," she said at once. "I waited outside
the prison till Martha came out. Her brother has agreed to help if
he can, but he said that he did not think that it would be at all
possible to get mademoiselle out. There are many of the men of the
faubourgs mixed up with the old warders, and there is the greatest
vigilance to ensure that none escape. There would be many doors to
be opened, and the keys are all held by different persons. He says
he will think it over, and if it is any way possible he will risk
it. But he wishes first of all to declare that he does not think
that any way of getting her out can be discovered. He will give
her the note on the first opportunity, and get an answer from her,
which he will send to his sister as soon as he gets a chance."

"That is all we can expect," Harry said joyfully. "I did not expect
that it would be an easy business, or that the man would be able
to hit upon a scheme at once; but now that he has gone so far as
to agree to carry notes, the thought that he may, if he succeeds,
soon have his little farm in Brittany, will sharpen his wits up
wonderfully."

It was three days before an answer came from Marie. Jacques handed
it to Harry when he came to take his turn by Victor's bedside.
Victor was better; he was no longer unconscious, but followed with
his eyes the movements of those in the room. Once he had said, "Where
am I?" but the answer "You are with friends; you have been ill;
you shall hear all about it when you get stronger," had apparently
satisfied him. At Harry he looked with doubtful recognition. He
seemed to remember the face, but to have no further idea about it,
and even when Harry said cheerfully:

"Don't you remember your friend Harry, Victor?" he had shaken his
head in feeble negative.

"I expect it will all come back to him," Jacques said, "as he gets
stronger; and after all it is much better that he should remember
nothing at present. It will be quite time enough for that when he
is better able to stand it."

"I agree with you there," Harry said, "and I am really glad that he
did not remember me, for had he done so the past might have come
back at once and, feeble as he is, that would have completely
knocked him over."

Upon the receipt of Marie's note Harry at once started off at full
speed and soon had the satisfaction of handing it to Jeanne.

She tore it open.

"Do you not know what it is, Harry?"

"How could I?" Harry replied. "As you see the letter is addressed
to you. Of course I should not think of looking at it."

"Why not? You are as much interested in it as I am. Sit down between
me and Virginie and let us read it together. Why, it is quite a
long epistle."

It was written in pencil upon what was evidently a fly-leaf of a
book, and ran as follows:

"My darling Jeanne and Virginie, you can imagine what joy I felt
when I received your little note to-day and heard that you were
still safe. I could hardly believe my senses when, on opening the
little ball of paper which one of our guards  thrust into my hand, I
found that it was from you, and that you were both safe and well.
I am writing this crouched down on the ground behind Madame de
Vigny, and so hidden from the sight of our guards, but I can only
write a few lines at a time, lest I should be detected. Tell our
good friend that I fear there is little chance of escape. We are
watched night and day. We are locked up at night, three or four
together, in little cells, but in the day we are in a common hall.

"It is a strange mixture. Here are many of the best blood in France,
together with deputies, advocates, and writers. We may talk together
as much as we like, and sometimes even a joke and a laugh are heard.
Every day some names are called out, and these go and we never see
them again. Do not fret about me, my dear sisters, we are all in
God's hands. If it is his will, we shall be saved; if not, we must
face bravely whatever comes.

"It is a day since I wrote last. A strange thing has happened which
will make your blood boil, Jeanne, as it has made mine. I was called
out this morning to a little room where questions are sometimes
asked us, and who do you think was there? M. Lebat, the son of the
Maire of Dijon--the man who denounced and arrested me. What do
you think the wretch had the insolence to say? That he loved me,
and that if I would consent to marry him he could save me. He said
that his influence would suffice, not only to get me free, but to
obtain for me some of our estates, and he told me he would give me
time to consider his offer, but that I must remember that nothing
could save me if I refused. What do you think I did, Jeanne?
Something very unladylike, I am afraid. I made a step closer to
him, and then I gave him a slap on the face which made my fingers
tingle, then I made him a deep curtsy and said, 'That is my answer,
Monsieur Lebat,' and walked into the great hall again.

"But do not let me waste a line of this last precious letter that
I may be able to write to you by saying more about this wretch. I
can see no possible way of escape, dears, so do not buoy yourselves
up with hope. I have none. Strange as it may seem to you we are
not very unhappy here. There are many of our old friends and some
of the deputies of the Gironde, who used to attend our salon. We
keep up each other's courage. We talk of  other things just as if
we were in a drawing-room, and when the list is called out of a
morning, those who are named say good-bye bravely; there is seldom
a tear shed.

"So do not think of me as wretched or unhappy in these last days.
And now, my sisters, I must say adieu. You must trust yourselves
entirely to our brave English friend, as you would trust a brother.
He will do all that is possible to take you out of this unhappy land
and conduct you to England, where you will find Victor, Monsieur
du Tillet, and your brothers, who have, I trust, weeks ago arrived
there in safety. Thank our friend from me and from our dead parents
for his goodness and devotion. That your lives may be happy, my
dear sisters, will be the last prayer of your loving Marie."

Inside the letter was another tiny note addressed for Jeanne,
"Private." Having read the other Jeanne took the little note and
walking to the window opened it. As she did so a burning flush
of colour swept across her face to her very brow. She folded it
carefully again and stood looking through the window silently for
another quarter of an hour before she came back to the table.

"What is it, Jeanne?" Virginie asked; "have you been crying, Jeanne
dear? You look so flushed. You must not fret. Harry says we must
not give up hope, for that he believes he may hit upon some plan
for saving Marie yet. He says it's only natural that she should
think there was no means of getting away, but it was only what he
expected. It is we who must invent something."

"Yes, dear, we will try," Jeanne said with a quiver in her lip,
and then she suddenly burst into tears.

"You mustn't give way, Jeanne," Harry said, when she recovered
herself a little. "You know how much I trust to your advice; if
you were to break down I should lose heart. Do not think of Marie's
letter as a good-bye. I have not lost hope yet, by a long way. Why,
we have done wonders already in managing to get a letter in to her
and to have her reply. I consider half the difficulty is over now
we have a friend in there."

"I will try not to break down again," Jeanne said; "it is not often
I give way, but to-day I do not feel quite myself, and this letter
finished me. You will see I shall be all right to-morrow."

"I hope so," Harry said as he rose to leave; "but I think you had
better ask Louise to give you something--your hands are hot and
your cheeks are quite flushed, and you look to me as if you were
feverish. Good night, dears!"

"I do hope Jeanne is not going to break down," Harry said as he
walked towards his lodging. "If she were to get laid up now that
would be the finishing touch to the whole affair; but perhaps, as
she says, she will be all right in the morning. No doubt in that
note Marie wrote as if she were sure of dying, and such a letter
as that would be enough to upset any girl, even such a plucky one
as Jeanne.

"However, it is of Marie I must think now. It was a brave letter of
hers; it is clear she has given up all hope. This is a bad business
about the scoundrel Lebat. I used to wonder why he came so often
to the chateau on business that could have been done just as well
by a messenger. He saw how things were going, and thought that when
the division of the estates came he might get a big slice. However,
it's most unfortunate that he should have had this interview with
Marie in the prison. If it had not been for that it might have been
months before her turn came for trial. As it is, no doubt Lebat will
have her name put down at once in the list of those for trial, if
such a farce can be called a trial, and will see that no time is
lost before it appears on that fatal list for execution.

"He will flatter himself, of course, that when the last moment
comes, and she sees that there is no hope whatever, she will change
her mind. There is one thing, if she is murdered I will kill him
as I would a dog, for he will be her murderer just as much as if
he had himself cut her throat. I would do it at once if it were not
for the girls. I must not run any unnecessary risks, at any rate
I need not think of him now; the one thing at present is to get
Marie out."

Turning this over in his mind, he walked about for some hours,
scarce noticing where he was going. It seemed to him that there
must be some way of getting Marie out if he could only hit upon
it.  He turned over in his mind every escape he had ever read of,
but in most of these the prisoner had been a man, capable of using
tools passed in to him to saw through iron bars, pierce walls, or
overcome jailers; some had been saved by female relatives, wives
or daughters, who went in and exchanged clothes and places with
them, but this was not feasible here. This was not a prison where
relatives could call upon friends, for to be a relative or  friend
of a prisoner was quite sufficient in the eyes of the terrorists
to mark anyone as being an enemy of the republic.

He was suddenly roused from his reverie by a cry, and beneath the
dim light of a lantern, suspended over the narrow street, he saw a
man feebly defending himself against two others. He sprang forward
just as the man fell, and with his stick struck a sharp blow on
the uplifted wrist of one of the assailants, sending the knife he
was holding flying through the air. The other turned upon him, but
he drew the pistol which he always carried beneath his clothes, and
the two men at once took to their heels. Harry replaced his pistol
and stooped over the fallen man.

"Are you badly hurt?" he asked.

"No, I think not, but I do not know. I think I slipped down; but
they would have killed me had you not arrived."

"Well, let me get you to your feet," Harry said, holding out
his hands, but with a feeling of some disgust at the abject fear
expressed in the tones of the man's voice. He was indeed trembling
so that even when Harry hauled him to his feet he could scarcely
stand.

"You had better lean against the wall for a minute or two to
recover yourself," Harry said. "I see you have your coat cut on the
shoulder, and are bleeding pretty freely, but it is nothing to be
frightened about. If you will give me your handkerchief I will bind
it up for you."

Harry unbuttoned the man's coat, for his hands shook so much that
he was unable to do so, pulled the arm out of the sleeve, and tied
the bandage tightly round the shoulder. The man seemed to belong
to the bourgeois class, and evidently was careful as to his attire,
which was neat and precise. His linen and the ruffles of his shirt
were spotlessly white and of fine material. The short-waisted coat
was of olive-green cloth, with bright metal buttons; the waistcoat,
extending far below the coat, was a light-buff colour, brocaded
with a small pattern of flowers. When he had bound the wound Harry
helped him on with his coat again. He was by this time recovering
himself.

"Oh these aristocrats," he murmured, "how they hate me!"

The words startled Harry. What was this? He had not interfered, as
he had supposed, to prevent the robbery of some quiet citizen by
the ruffians of the streets. It was a political assassination that
had been attempted--a vengeance  by Royalists upon one of the men
of the Revolution. He looked more closely at the person whose life
he had saved. He had a thin and insignificant figure--his face was
pale and looked like that of a student. It seemed to Harry that he
had seen it before, but where he could not say. His first thought
was one of regret that he had interfered to save one of the men
of the 2d of September; then the thought flashed through his mind
that there might be some benefit to be derived from it.

"Young man," the stranger said, "will you give me your arm and
escort me home?  You have saved my life; it is a humble one, but
perhaps it is of some value to France. I live but two streets away.
It is not often I am out alone, for I have many enemies, but I was
called suddenly out on business, though I have no doubt now the
message was a fraudulent one, designed simply to put me into the
hands of my foes."

The man spoke in a thin hard voice, which inspired Harry, he knew
not why, with a feeling of repulsion; he had certainly heard it
before. He offered him his arm and walked with him to his door.

"Come up, I beg you," the stranger said.

He ascended to the second floor and rang at the bell. A woman with
a light opened it.

"Why, my brother," she exclaimed on seeing his face, "you are ill!
Has anything happened?"

"I have been attacked in the street," he said, "but I am not hurt,
though, had it not been for this citizen it would have gone hardly
with me. You have to thank him for saving your brother's life."

They had entered a sitting-room now. It was plainly but very neatly
furnished. There were some birds in cages, which, late though the
hour was, hopped on their perches and twittered when they heard
the master's voice, and he responded with two or three words of
greeting to them.

"Set the supper," he said to his sister; "the citizen will take a
meal with us. You know who I am, I suppose?" he said to Harry.

"No," Harry replied. "I have a recollection of your face and voice,
but I cannot recall where I have met you."

"I am Robespierre," he said.

Harry gave a start of surprise. This man whom he had saved was he
whom he had so often execrated--one of the leaders of those who
had deluged France with blood--the man who, next only to Marat
was hated and feared by the Royalists of France. His first feeling
was one of loathing and hatred, but at the same moment there flashed
through his mind the thought that chance had favoured him beyond
his hopes, and that the comedy which he had planned with Victor
to carry out upon the person  of Marat had come to pass without
premeditation, but with Robespierre as the chief actor.

But so surprised and so delighted was he that for a minute he sat
unable to say a word. Robespierre was gratified at the effect which
his name had produced. His was a strangely-mixed character--at
once timid and bold, shrinking from personal danger, yet ready to
urge the extremest measures. Simple in his tastes, and yet very vain
and greedy of applause. Domestic and affectionate in his private
character, but ready to shed a river of blood in his public capacity.
Pure in morals; passionless in his resolves; incorruptible and
inflexible; the more dangerous because he had neither passion nor
hate; because he had not, like Danton and Marat, a lust for blood,
but because human life to him was as nothing, because had he
considered it necessary that half France should die for the benefit
of the other half he would have signed their death-warrant without
emotion or hesitation.

"You are surprised, young man," he said, "but the ways of fate are
inscrutable. The interposition of a youth has thwarted the schemes
of the enemies of France. Had you been but ten seconds later I should
have ceased to be, and one of the humble instruments by which fate
is working for the regeneration of the people would have perished."

While Robespierre was speaking Harry had rapidly thought over the
role which it would be best for him to adopt. Should he avow his
real character and ask for an order for the liberation of Marie as
a recompense for the service he had rendered Robespierre, or should
he retain his present character and obtain Robespierre's confidence?
There was danger in an open appeal, for, above all things, Robespierre
prided himself upon his incorruptibility, and he might consider
that to free a prisoner for service rendered  to himself would be
a breach of his duty to France. He resolved, therefore, to keep
silence at present, reserving an appeal to Robespierre's gratitude
for the last extremity.

"Pardon me, monsieur," he said, after he had rapidly arrived at
this conclusion; "my emotion was naturally great at finding that
I had unwittingly been the means of saving the life of one on whom
the eyes of France are fixed. I rejoice indeed that I should have
been the means of preserving such a life."

This statement was strictly true, although not perhaps in the sense
in which Robespierre regarded it.

"We will talk more after supper," he said. "My sister is, I see,
ready with it. Indeed it is long past our usual hour, and we were
just sitting down when I was called out by what purported to be an
important message from the Club."




CHAPTER X

Free


Robespierre chatted continuously as the meal went on, and Harry
asked himself in astonishment whether he was in a dream, and if
this man before him, talking about his birds, his flowers, and his
life before he came to Paris, could really be the dreaded Robespierre.
After the meal was over his host said:

"As yet I am ignorant of the name of my preserver."

"My name is Henry Sandwith," Harry replied.

"It is not a French name," Robespierre said in surprise.

"I am of English parentage," Harry said quietly, "but have been
resident for some years in France. I was for some time in the service
of the ci-devant Marquis de St. Caux; but since the break-up of his
household I have been shifting for myself as best I could, living
chiefly on the moneys I had earned in his service, and on the
look-out for any employment that may offer."

"England is our enemy," Robespierre said, raising his voice angrily;
"the enemy of free institutions and liberty."

"I know nothing about English politics," Harry replied with a smile;
"nor indeed about any politics. I am but little past eighteen, and
so that I can earn my living I do not ask whether my employer is a
patriot or an aristocrat. It is quite trouble enough to earn one's
living without bothering one's head about politics. If you can put
me in the way of doing so I shall consider that I am well repaid
for the little service I rendered you."

"Assuredly I will do so," Robespierre said. "I am a poor man, you
know. I do not put my hand into the public purse, and I and my
sister live as frugally as we did when we first came to Paris from
Arras.  My only gains have been the hatred of the aristocrats and
the love of the people. But though I have not money, I have influence,
and I promise to use it on your behalf. Until I  hear of something
suitable you can, if you will, work here with me, and share what
I possess.  My correspondence is very heavy. I am overwhelmed with
letters from the provinces begging me to inquire into grievances
and redress wrongs. Can you read and write well?" For from Harry's
words he supposed that he had held some menial post in the household
of the Marquis de St. Caux.

"Yes, I can read and write fairly," Harry said.

"And are you acquainted with the English tongue?"

"I know enough of it to read it," Harry said. "I spoke it when I
was a child."

"If you can read it that will do," Robespierre said. "There are
English papers sent over, and I should like to hear for myself
what this perfidious people say of us, and there are few here who
can translate the language. Do you accept my proposal?"

"Willingly," Harry said.

"Very well, then, come here at nine o'clock in the morning.  But
mind you are only filling the post of my secretary until I can find
something better for you to do."

"The post will be a better one some day, Monsieur Robespierre.
Ere long you will be the greatest man in France, and the post of
secretary will be one which may well be envied."

"Ah, I see you know how to flatter," Robespierre said with a smile,
much gratified nevertheless with Harry's words. "You must remember
that I crave no dignities, that I care only for the welfare of
France."

"I know, monsieur, that you are called 'Robespierre the Incorruptible,"'
Harry said; "but, nevertheless, you belong to France, and France
will assuredly see that some day you have such a reward as you
richly merit."

"There was no untruth in that," Harry said to himself as he made
his way down stairs. "These human tigers will meet their doom when
France comes to her senses. He is a strange contrast, this man;
but I suppose that even the tiger is a domestic animal in his own
family. His food almost choked me, and had I not known that Marie's
fate depends upon my calmness, I should assuredly have broken out
and told this dapper little demagogue my opinion of him. But this
is glorious! What news I shall have to give the girls in the morning!
If I cannot ensure Marie's freedom now I  should be a bungler
indeed.  Had I had the planning of the events of this evening they
could not have turned out better for us."

It was the first time that Harry had called at Louise Moulin's as
early as eight o'clock in the morning, and Jeanne leaped up as he
entered.


"What is it, Harry? You bring us some news, don't you?"

"I do indeed, Jeanne; capital news. Whom do you think I had supper
with last night?"

"Had supper with, Harry!" Jeanne repeated. "What do you mean? How
can I guess whom you had supper with?"

"I am sure you cannot guess, Jeanne, so I will not puzzle your
brain. I had supper with Robespierre."

"With Robespierre!" the two girls repeated in astonishment.  "You
are not joking, Harry?" Jeanne went on. "But no, you cannot be
doing that; tell us how you came to have supper with Robespierre."

"My dear Jeanne, I regard it as a special providence, as an answer
from God to your prayers for Marie. I had the good fortune to save
his life."

"Oh, Harry," Jeanne exclaimed, "what happiness! Then Marie's life
will be saved."

"I think I can almost promise you that, Jeanne, though I do not know
yet exactly how it's to be done. But such a piece of good fortune
would never have been sent to me had it not been intended that we
should save Marie. Now, sit down quietly, both of you, and you too,
Louise, and let me tell you all about it, for I have to be with
Robespierre again at nine o'clock."

"Oh, that is fortunate indeed!" Jeanne exclaimed when he had
finished. "Surely he cannot refuse any request you may make now."

"If he does, I must get it out of him somehow," Harry said cheerfully.
"By fair means or foul I will get the order for her release."

"But you don't think he can refuse, Harry?" Jeanne asked anxiously.

"I think he may refuse, Jeanne. He is proud of his integrity and
incorruptibility, and I think it quite possible that he may refuse
to grant Marie's release in return for a benefit done him personally.
However, do not let that discourage you in the least. As I said,
I will have the order by fair means or foul."

At nine o'clock Harry presented himself in readiness for work, and
found that his post would be no sinecure. The correspondence which
he had to go through was enormous. Requests for favours, letters
of congratulation on Robespierre's speeches and motions in the
Assembly, reports of scores of provincial committees, denunciations
of aristocrats, letters of blame because the work of rooting out
the suspects did not proceed faster, entreaties from friends of
prisoners. All these had to be sorted, read, and answered.

Robespierre was, Harry soon found, methodical in the extreme.  He
read every letter himself, and not only gave directions how they
were to be answered, but read through the answers when written,
and was most careful before he affixed his signature to any paper
whatever. When it was time for him to leave for the Assembly he
made a note in pencil on each letter how it should be answered,
and directed Harry when he had finished them to leave them on the
table for him on his return.

"I foresee that you will be of great value to me, Monsieur Sandwith,"
he said, "and I shall be able to recommend you for any office that
may be vacant with a feeling of confidence that you will do justice
to my recommendation; or if you would rather, as time goes on,
attach your fortunes to mine, be assured that if I should rise to
power your fortune will be made. When you have done these letters
your time will be your own for the rest of the day. You know our
meal hours, and I can only say that we are punctual to a second."

When Harry had finished he strolled out. He saw that the task of
getting an order for Marie's release would be more difficult than
he had anticipated. He had hoped that by placing it with a batch of
papers before Robespierre he would get him to sign it among others
without reading it, but he now saw that this would be next to
impossible. One thing afforded him grounds for satisfaction. Among
the papers was a list of the prisoners to be brought up on the
following day for trial. To this Robespierre added two names, and
then signed it and sent it back to the prison. There was another
list with the names of the prisoners to be executed on the following
day, and this, Harry learned, was not sent in to the prison authorities
until late in the evening, so that even they were ignorant until
the last moment which of the prisoners were to be called for by
the tumbrils next morning. Thus he would know when Marie was to go
through the mockery of a trial, and would also know  when her name
was put on the fatal list for the guillotine. The first fact he
might have been able to learn from his ally in the prison, but the
second and most important he could not have obtained in any other
way.

The work had been frequently interrupted by callers. Members of the
Committee of Public Safety, leaders of the Jacobin and Cordeliers
Clubs, and others, dropped in and asked Robespierre's advice,
or discussed measures to be taken; and after a day or two Harry
found that it was very seldom, except when taking his meals, that
Robespierre was alone while in the house; and as his sister was in
and out of the room all day, the idea of compelling him by force to
sign the order, as they had originally intended to do with Marat,
was clearly impracticable.

Each day after his work was over, and this was generally completed
by about one o'clock, Harry called to see how Victor was getting
on. He was gaining strength, but his brain appeared to make far
less progress than his bodily health. He did not recognize Harry in
the least, and although he would answer questions that were asked
him, his mind appeared a blank as to the past, and he often lay for
hours without speaking a word. After leaving him Harry met Louise
and the two girls at a spot agreed upon the day before, a fresh
meeting-place being arranged each day. He  found it difficult to
satisfy them, for indeed each day he became more and more doubtful
as to his ability to get the order of release from Robespierre.
Towards the man himself his feelings were of a mixed kind. He
shuddered at the calmness with which, in his letters to the provincial
committees, he advocated wholesale executions of prisoners. He
wondered at the violence with which, in his shrill, high-pitched
voice, he declaimed in favour of the most revolutionary measures.
He admired the simplicity of his life, his affection for his sister
and his birds, his kindness of heart in all matters in which politics
were not concerned.

Among Robespierre's visitors during the next three weeks was Lebat,
who was, Harry found, an important personage, being the representative
on the Committee of Public Safety of the province of Burgundy, and
one of the most extreme of the frequenters of the Jacobin Club. He
did not recognize Harry, whom he had never noticed particularly on
the occasion of his visits to the chateau, and who, in the somewhat
threadbare black  suit which he had assumed instead of the workman's
blouse, wrote steadily at a table apart, taking apparently no notice
of what was going on in the apartment.

But Harry's time was not altogether thrown away. It was his duty
the first thing of a morning to open and sort the letters and lay
them in piles upon the table used by Robespierre himself, and he
managed every day to slip quietly into his pockets several of the
letters of denunciation against persons as aristocrats in disguise
or as being suspected of hostility to the Commune. When Robespierre
left him to go to the Club or the Assembly Harry would write short
notes of warning in a disguised hand to the persons named, and
would, when he went out, leave these at their doors. Thus he had
the satisfaction of saving a considerable number of persons from
the clutches of the revolutionists. He would then, two or three
days later, slip the letters of denunciation, very few of which
were dated, among the rest of the correspondence, satisfied that
when search was made the persons named would already have shifted
their quarters and assumed some other disguise.

February had come and Harry was still working and waiting, busy
for several hours each day writing and examining reports with
Robespierre, striving of an evening to keep up the courage and
spirits of the girls, calling in for a few minutes each day to see
Victor, who, after passing through a long and terrible fever, now
lay weak and apparently unconscious alike of the past and present,
his mind completely gone; but the doctor told Harry that in this
respect he did not think the case was hopeless.

"His strength seems to have absolutely deserted him," he said,
"and his mind is a blank like that of a little child, but I by no
means despair of his gradually recovering; and if he could hear the
voice of the lady you tell me he is engaged to, it might strike a
chord now lying dormant and set the brain at work again."

But as to Marie, Harry could do nothing. Do what he would, he
could hit upon no plan whatever for getting her out of prison; and
he could only wait until some change in the situation or the appearance
of her name in the fatal list might afford some opportunity for
action.  It was evident to him that Lebat was not pushing matters
forward, but that he preferred to wait and leave  the horror of
months in prison to work upon Marie's mind, and so break her down
that she would be willing enough to purchase her life by a marriage
with him.

There had been some little lull in the work of blood, for in
December all eyes had been turned to the spectacle of the trial of
the king.  From the 10th of August he had remained a close prisoner
in the Temple, watched and insulted by his ruffian guards, and
passing the time in the midst of his family with a serenity of mind,
a calmness, and tranquility which went far to redeem the blunders
he had made during the preceding three years. The following is the
account written by the princess royal in her journal of the manner
in which the family passed their days:  "My father rose at seven
and said prayers till eight; then dressing himself he was with my
brother till nine, when he came to breakfast with my mother. After
breakfast my father gave us lessons till eleven o'clock; and then
my brother played till midday, when we went to walk together,
whatever the weather was, because at that hour they relieved guard
and wished to see us to be sure of our presence. Our walk was
continued till two o'clock, when we dined. After dinner my father
and mother played at backgammon, or rather pretended to play, in
order to have an opportunity of talking together for a short time.

"At four o'clock my mother went up stairs with us, because the king
then usually took a nap. At six o'clock my brother went down, and
my father gave us lessons till supper at nine. After supper my
mother soon went to bed. We then went up stairs, and the king went
to bed at eleven. My mother worked much at tapestry and made me
study, and frequently read alone. My aunt said prayers and read
the service; she also read many religious books, usually aloud."

But harmless as was the life of the royal family, Danton and the
Jacobins were determined upon having their lives. The mockery of
the trial commenced on the 10th of December. Malesherbes, Tronchet,
and Deseze defended him fearlessly and eloquently, but it was
useless--the king was condemned beforehand. Robespierre and Marat
led the assault. The Girondists, themselves menaced and alarmed,
stood neutral; but on the 15th of January  the question was put to
the Assembly, "Is Louis Capet, formerly King of the French, guilty
of conspiracy and attempt against the general safety of the state?"

With scarcely a single exception, the Assembly returned an affirmative
answer, and on the 17th the final vote was taken. Three hundred
and sixty-one voted for death, two for imprisonment, two hundred
and eighty-six for detention, banishment, or conditional death,
forty-six for death but after a delay, twenty-six for death but
with a wish that the Assembly should revise the sentence.

Sentence of death was pronounced. After a sitting which lasted for
thirty-seven hours there was another struggle between the advocates
of delay and those of instant execution, but the latter won; and
after parting with noble resignation from his wife and family, the
king, on the 21st, was executed. His bearing excited the admiration
even of his bitterest foes.

France looked on amazed and appalled at the act, for Louis had
undoubtedly striven his best to lessen abuses and to go with the
people in the path of reform. It was his objection to shed blood,
his readiness to give way, his affection for the people, which had
allowed the Revolution to march on its bloody way without a check.
It was the victims--the nobles, the priests, the delicate women and
cultured men--who had reason to complain; for it was the king's
hatred to resistance which left them at the mercy of their foes.
Louis had been the best friend of the Revolution that slew him.

The trial and execution of the king had at least the good effect of
diverting the minds of Jeanne and Virginie from their own anxieties.
Jeanne was passionate and Virginie tearful in their sorrow and
indignation. Over and over again Jeanne implored Harry to try to
save the king. There were still many Royalists, and indeed the bulk
of the people were shocked and alienated by the violence of the
Convention; and Jeanne urged that Harry might, from his connection
with Robespierre, obtain some pass or document which would enable
the king to escape. But Harry refused to make any attempt whatever
on his behalf.

"In the first place, Jeanne, it would be absolutely impossible for
the king, watched as he is, to escape; and no pass or permit that
Robespierre could give would be of the smallest utility. You must
remember, that although all apparently unite against the king, there
is a never-ending struggle going on in  the Convention between the
various parties and the various leaders. Robespierre is but one
of them, although, perhaps, the most prominent; but could I wring
a pass from him even if only to see the king, that pass would not
be respected.

"In the next place, Jeanne, I have nothing to do with these struggles
in France. I am staying here to do what little I can to watch over
you and Virginie, for the sake of your dear parents and because I
love you both; and I have also, if possible, to rescue Marie from
the hands of these murderers. The responsibility is heavy enough;
and could I, by merely using Robespierre's name, rescue the king
and queen and their children and pass them across the frontier, I
would not do it if the act in the slightest degree interfered with
my freedom of action towards you and Marie."

"But Virginie and I would die for the king!" Jeanne said passionately.

"Happily, Jeanne," Harry replied coolly, "your dying would in no
respect benefit him; and as your life is in my eyes of a thousand
times more consequence than that of the king, and as your chances
of safety to some extent depend upon mine, I do not mean to risk
one of those chances for the sake of his majesty. Besides, to tell
you the truth, I have a good deal of liking for my own life, and
have a marked objection to losing my head. You see I have people
at home who are fond of me, and who want to see me back again with
that head on my shoulders."

"I know, Harry; I know," Jeanne said with her eyes full of tears.
"Do not think that I am ungrateful because I talk so. I am always
thinking how wrong it is that you should be staying here risking
your life for us instead of going home to those who love you. I
think sometimes Virginie and I ought to give ourselves up, and then
you could go home." And Jeanne burst into tears.

"My dear Jeanne," Harry said soothingly, "do not worry yourself
about me. It would have been just as dangerous at the time your
father was taken prisoner for me to have tried to escape from
the country as it was to stay here--in fact I should say that it
was a good deal more dangerous; and at present, as Robespierre's
secretary, I am in no danger at all. It is a little disagreeable
certainly serving a man whom one regards in some respects as  being
a sort of wild beast; but at the same time, in his own house, I
am bound to say, he is a very decent kind of man and not at all a
bad fellow to get on with.

"As to what I have done for you, so far as I see I have done nothing
beyond bringing you here in the first place, and coming to have a
pleasant chat with you every evening. Nor, with the best will in
the world, have I been able to be of the slightest assistance to
Marie. As we say at home, my intentions are good; but so far the
intentions have borne no useful fruit whatever. Come, Jeanne, dry
your eyes, for it is not often that I have seen you cry. We have
thrown in our lot together, and we shall swim or sink in company.

"You keep up my spirits and I keep up yours. Don't let there be any
talk about gratitude. There will be time enough for that if I ever
get you safely to England. Then, perhaps, I may send in my bill
and ask for payment."

Harry spoke lightly, and Jeanne with a great effort recovered her
composure; and after that, although the trial and danger of the
king were nightly discussed and lamented, she never said a word as
to any possibility of the catastrophe being averted.

One day towards the end of February Harry felt a thrill run through
him as, on glancing over the list of persons to be tried on the
following day, he saw the name of Marie, daughter of the ci-devant
Marquis de St. Caux. Although his knowledge of Robespierre's character
gave him little ground for hope, he determined upon making a direct
appeal.

"I see, citizen," he said--for such was the mode of address universal
at that time--"that among the list of persons to be tried is the
name of Marie de St. Caux."

"Say Marie Caux," Robespierre said reprovingly. "You know de and St.
are both forbidden prefixes. Yes; what would you say about her?"

"I told you, citizen, upon the first night when I came here, that
I had been in the service of the father of this female citizen.
Although I know now that he was one of those who lived upon the
blood of the people, I am bound to say that he always treated his
dependants kindly.  His daughter also showed me many marks of kindness,
and this I would now fain return. Citizen, I did you some service
on the night when we first met; and I ask you now, as a full
quittance for that aid, that you will grant me the freedom of  this
young woman. Whatever were the crimes of her father, she cannot have
shared in them. She is young, and cannot do harm to any;  therefore
I implore you to give me her life."

"I am surprised at your request," Robespierre said calmly. "This
woman belongs to a race who have for centuries oppressed France,
and it is better that they should perish altogether. If she can
convince the tribunal that she is innocent of all crime, undoubtedly
she will be spared; but I cannot, only on account of the obligation
I am under to you, interfere on her behalf; such an act would be
treason to the people, and I hope you know me well enough by this
time to be aware that nothing whatever would induce me to allow my
private inclinations to interfere with the course of justice. Ask
of me all I have, it is little enough, but it is yours; but this
thing I cannot grant you."

For a moment Harry was on the point of bursting out indignantly,
but he checked himself and without a word went on with his writing,
although tears of disappointment for a time almost blinded him; but
he felt it would be hopeless to urge the point further, and that
did he do so he might forfeit the opportunity he now had of learning
what was going on.

Another month passed before the name appeared on the fatal list. In
the meantime Harry had corresponded regularly with Marie by means
of the warder, and had even once seen her and exchanged a few
words with her, having been sent by Robespierre with a letter to
the governor of the prison.

Marie was greatly changed: her colour had faded away, the former
somewhat haughty air and carriage had disappeared, and there was
an expression of patient resignation on her face. Harry had only
the opportunity to whisper to her "Hope always, all is not lost
yet." He had spent hours each day in his lodging imitating the
signature of Robespierre, and he had made up his mind that, should
all other efforts fail, he would boldly present himself at the prison
with an order for Marie's release, with Robespierre's signature
forged at the bottom.

He thought he could write it now plainly enough for it to pass; his
fear was that the prison authorities would not act upon it, unless
presented by a well-known official personage, without sending to
Robespierre to have it verified.

Still but little change had taken place in Victor de Gisons' condition.
He remained in a state almost of lethargy, with an expression of
dull hopelessness on his face; sometimes he passed his hand wearily
across his forehead as if he were trying to recollect something he
had lost; he was still too weak to stand, but Jacques and his wife
would dress him and place him on a couch which Harry purchased for
his use. The worthy couple ran no risk now, for the sharpest spy
would fail to recognize in the bowed-down invalid with vacant face,
the once brilliant Victor de Gisons.

Harry had many talks with Jeanne concerning him. "What should we
do, Harry," the girl said over and over again, "if we could get
Marie away and all get safe together to England, which I begin to
despair now of our ever doing, but if we should do it what should
we say to Marie? She thinks Victor is safe there. Only the other
day, as you know, she sent us out a letter to him. What would she
say when she learned on her arrival in England that Victor has all
this time been lying broken down and in suffering in Paris?"

To this question Harry, for a long time, could give no answer.  At
last he said, "I have been thinking it over, Jeanne, and I feel
that we have no right to take Marie away without her knowing the
truth about Victor. His misfortunes have come upon him because he
would stop in Paris to watch over her. I feel now that she has the
right, if she chooses, of stopping in Paris to look after him."

"Oh, Harry, you would never think of our going away and leaving
her!"

"I don't know, Jeanne, if it would not be best. She could stay
in the disguise of a peasant girl with Jacques and his wife; they
would give out that she was Victor's sister who had come to nurse
him. I have great hopes that her voice and presence would do what
we have to do, namely, awaken him from his  sad state of lethargy.
They could stay there for months until these evil days are over.
Jacques' workmen friends are accustomed now to Victor being with
him, and there is no chance of any suspicion arising that he is
not what he seems to be, a workman whom Jacques picked up injured
and insensible on that terrible night. It would seem natural that
his sister or his fiance--Marie could pass for whichever she
chose--should come and help take care of him."

"Then if she can stop in Paris with Victor, of course we can stop
with Louise?"

"I am afraid not," Harry said. "Every day the search for suspects
becomes stricter; every day people are being seized and called upon
to produce the papers proving their identity; and I fear, Jeanne,
there is no hope of permanent safety for you save in flight."

It was just a month from the mock trial, at which Marie had been
found guilty and sentenced to death, that Harry received a double
shock. Among the letters of denunciation was the following: "Citizen,
I know that you watch over the state. I would have you know that
for more than seven months two girls have been dwelling with one
Louise Moulin of 15 Rue Michel; there were three of them, but the
eldest has disappeared. This, in itself, is mysterious; the old
woman herself was a servant in the family of the ci-devant Marquis
de St.  Caux. She gives out that the girls are relatives of hers,
but it is believed in the neighbourhood that they are aristocrats
in disguise. They receive many visits from a young man of whom no
one knows anything."

Harry felt the colour leave his cheeks, and his hand shook as
he hastily abstracted the note, and he could scarcely master the
meaning of the next few letters he opened.

This was a sudden blow for which he was unprepared. He could not
even think what was best to be done. However, saying to himself
that he had at any rate a few days before him, he resolutely put the
matter aside, to be thought over when he was alone, and proceeded
with his work. After a time he came to the list of those marked
out for execution on the following day, and saw with a fresh pang
the name of Marie de St. Caux.

So the crisis had arrived. That night or never Marie must be rescued,
and his plan of forging Robespierre's signature must be put into
effect that day. He opened the next few papers mechanically, but
steadied himself upon Robespierre asking him a question. For a time
he worked on; but his brain was swimming, and he was on the point
of saying that he felt strangely unwell, and must ask to be excused
his work for that day, when he heard a ring at the bell, and a
moment later Lebat entered the room.

"I have just come from the tribunal, citizen," he said, "and have
seen the list for to-morrow. I have come to you, as I know you are
just, and abhor the shedding of innocent blood. There is among the
number a young girl, who is wholly innocent. I know her well, for
she comes from my province, and her father's chateau was within a
few miles of Dijon. Although her father was a furious aristocrat,
her heart was always with the people. She was good to the poor, and
was beloved by all the tenants on the estate. It is not just that
she should die for the sins of her parents. Moreover, henceforth,
if pardoned, she will be no longer an aristocrat. I respond for
her; for she has promised to marry me, the delegate of Burgundy
to the Commune.  The young woman is the daughter of the man called
the Marquis de St. Caux, who met his deserved fate on the 2d of
September."

"You are willing to respond for her, citizen?" Robespierre said.

"I am. The fact that she will be my wife is surely a guarantee?"

"It is," Robespierre said. "What you tell me convinces me that I
can without damage to the cause of the people grant your request.
I am the more glad to do so since my secretary has also prayed
for her life. But though he rendered me the greatest service, and
I owe to him a debt of gratitude, I was obliged to refuse; for
to grant his request would have been to allow private feeling to
interfere with the justice of the people; but now it is different.
You tell me that, except by birth, she is no aristocrat; that she
has long been a friend of the people, and that she is going to be
your wife; on these grounds I can with a good conscience grant her
release."

Lebat had looked with astonishment at Harry as Robespierre spoke.

"Thank you, citizen," he said to Robespierre. "It is an act of justice
which I relied upon from your well-known character. I promise you
that your clemency will not be misplaced, and that she will become a
worthy citizen. May I ask," he said, "how it is that your secretary,
whose face seems familiar to me, is interested in this young woman
also?"

"It is simple enough," Robespierre replied. "He was in the service
of her father."

"Oh, I remember now," Lebat said. "He is English. I wonder, citizen,
that you should give your confidence to one of that treacherous
nation."

"He saved my life," Robespierre replied coldly; "a somewhat good
ground, you will admit, for placing confidence in him."

"Assuredly," Lebat said hastily, seeing that Robespierre was offended.
"And now, citizen, there is another matter of importance on which
I wish to confer with you."

Harry rose.

"Citizen, I will ask you to excuse me from further work to-day.
My head aches badly, and I can scarce see what I am writing."

"I thought you were making some confusion of my papers," Robespierre
said kindly. "By all means put aside your work."

On leaving the room Harry ran up to the attic above, which he had
occupied since he had entered Robespierre's service, rapidly put on
the blue blouse and pantaloons which he had formerly worn, pulled
his cap well down over his eyes, and hurried down stairs. He
stationed himself some distance along the street and waited for
Lebat to come out. Rapidly thinking the matter over, he concluded
that the man would not present himself with the order of release until
after dark, in order that if Marie struggled or tried to make her
escape it would be unnoticed in the street. Lebat had calculated,
of course, that on the presentation of the order the prison officials
would at once lead Marie to the gates whether she wished it or not,
and would, at his order, force her into a vehicle, when she would
be completely in his power, and he could confine her in his own
house or elsewhere until she consented to be his wife.

A quarter of an hour later Lebat came out of the house and walked
down the street. Harry followed him. After walking for some distance
Lebat came to a stand of hackney-coaches and spoke to one of the
drivers. When he had gone on again Harry went up to the man.

"Comrade," he said, "do you wish to do a good action and earn a
couple of gold pieces at the same time?"

"That will suit me admirably," the coachman replied.

"Let one of your comrades look after your horse, then, and let us
have a glass of wine together in that cabaret."

As soon as they were seated at a small table with a measure of wine
before them Harry said:

"That deputy with the red sash who spoke to you just now has engaged
you for a job this evening?"

"He has," the coachman said. "I am to be at the left corner of the
Place de Carrousel at eight this evening."

"He is a bad lot," Harry said; "he is going to carry off a poor
girl to whom he has been promising marriage; but of course we know
better than that. She is a friend of mine, and so were her parents,
and I want to save her. Now what I want to do is to take your place
on the box this evening. I will drive him to the place where he
is to meet her, and when he gets her to the door of his lodging I
shall jump off and give my citizen such a thrashing as will put a
stop to his gallivanting for some time. I will give you ten crowns
for the use of your coach for an hour."

"Agreed!" the coachman said. "Between ourselves, some of these
fellows who pretend to be friends of the people are just as great
scoundrels, ay, and worse, than the aristocrats were. We drivers
know a good many things that people in general don't; but you must
mind, citizen, he carries a sword, you know, and the beating may
turn out the other way."

"Oh, I can get a comrade or two to help," Harry said laughing.
"There are others besides myself who will not see our pretty Isabel
wronged."

"And where shall I get my coach again?"

"At the end of the Rue St. Augustin. I expect I shall be there by
nine o'clock with it; but I am sure not to be many minutes later.
Here is a louis now. I will give you the other when I change places
with you. Be at the Place de Carrousel at half-past seven. I shall
be on the look-out for you.

"I won't fail," the coachman said; "you may rely upon that."

Harry now hurried away to his friend Jacques, and rapidly gave an
account of what had taken place.

"In the first place, Jacques, I want your wife to see her friend
and to get her to take a note instantly to the warder, for him
to give to Mademoiselle de St. Caux. It is to tell her to make
no resistance when Lebat presents the order for her release, but
to go with him quietly; because if she appeals to the warders and
declares that she would rather die than go with him, it is just
possible that they might refuse to let him take her away, saying
that the order was for her release, but not for her delivery to him.
I don't suppose they would do so, because as one of the members of
the Committee of Public Safety he is all-powerful; still it would
be  as well to avoid any risk whatever of our scheme failing. I
will drive to the Rue Montagnard, which, as you know, is close to
La Force. It is a quiet street, and it is not likely there will be
anybody about at half-past eight. Will you be there and give me a
hand to secure the fellow?"

"Certainly I will," Jacques said heartily. "What do you propose to
do with him?"

"I propose to tie his hands and feet and gag him, and then drive
to the Rue Bluert, which is close by, and where there are some
unfinished houses. We can toss him in there, and he will be safe
till morning.

"It will be the safest plan to run him through at once and have
done with him," Jacques said. "He will be a dangerous enemy if he
is left alive; and as he would kill you without mercy if he had a
chance, I don't see why you need be overnice with him."

"The man is a scoundrel, and one of a band of men whom I regard as
murderers," Harry said; "but I could not kill him in cold blood."

"You are wrong," Jacques said earnestly, "and you are risking
everything by letting him live. Such a fellow should be killed like
a rat when you get him in a trap."

"It may be so," Harry agreed; "but I could not bring myself to do
it."

Jacques was silent, but not convinced. It seemed to him an act of
the extremest folly to leave so dangerous an enemy alive.

"He would hunt us all down," he said to himself, "Elise and I,
this poor lad and the girl, to say nothing of the Englishman and
the girl's sisters. Well, we shall see. I am risking my head in
this business, and I mean to have my say."

Having made all his arrangements, Harry returned to his attic and
lay down there until evening, having before he went in purchased a
sword. At seven o'clock he placed his pistols in his bosom, girded
on his sword, which would attract no attention, for half the
rabble of Paris carried weapons, and then set out for the Place de
Carrousel.  At half-past seven his friend the coachman drew up.

"Ah, here you are!" he said. "You had better take this big cape of
mine; you will find it precious cold on the box; besides he would
notice at once that you are not the coachman he hired if you are
dressed in that blouse."

Harry took off his sword and placed it on the seat, wrapped himself
in the great cape, wound a muffler round the lower part of his
face, and waited. A few minutes after the clock had struck eight
Lebat came along.

"Here we are, citizen," Harry said in a rough voice, "I am glad you
have come, for it's no joke waiting about on such nights as this.
Where am I to drive you to?"

"The prison of La Force," Lebat said, taking his seat in the coach.

Harry's heart beat fast as he drove towards the prison. He felt
sure that success would attend his plans; but the moment was an
exciting one. It did not seem that anything could interpose to prevent
success, and yet something might happen which he had not foreseen
or guarded against. He drove at a little more than a footpace,
for the streets a short distance from the centre of town were only
lighted here and there by a dim oil lamp, and further away they
were in absolute darkness, save for the lights which gleamed through
the casements. At last he reached the entrance to the prison. Lebat
jumped out and rang at the bell.

"What is it, citizen?" the guard said looking through a grille in
the gate.

"I am Citizen Lebat of the Committee of Public Safety, and I have
an order here, signed by Citizen Robespierre, for the release of
the female prisoner known as Marie Caux."

"All right, citizen!" the man said, opening the gate. "It is late
for a discharge; but I don't suppose the prisoner will grumble at
that."

Ten minutes later the gate opened again and Lebat came out with
a cloaked female figure. She hesitated on the top step, and then
refusing to touch the hand Lebat held out to assist her, stepped
down and entered the coach.

"Rue Fosseuse No. 18," Lebat said as he followed her.

Harry drove on, and was soon in the Rue Montagnard. It was a dark
narrow street; no one seemed stirring, and Harry peered anxiously
through the darkness for the figure of Jacques. Presently he heard
a low whistle, and a figure appeared from a doorway. Harry at once
checked the horse.

"What is it?" Lebat asked, putting his head out of the window.

Harry got off the box, and going to the window said in a drunken
voice:

"I want my fare. There is a cabaret only just ahead, and I want a
glass before I go further. My feet are pretty well frozen."

"Drive on, you drunken rascal," Lebat said furiously, "or it will
be worse for you."

"Don't you speak in that way to me, citizen," Harry said hoarsely.
"One man's as good as another in these days, and if you talk like
that to me I will break your head in spite of your red sash."

With an exclamation of rage Lebat sprang from the coach, and as his
foot touched the ground Harry threw his arms round him; but as he
did so he trod upon some of the filth which so thickly littered
the thoroughfare, and slipped. Lebat wrenched himself free and drew
his sword, and before Harry could have regained his feet he would
have cut him down, when he fell himself in a heap from a tremendous
blow which Jacques struck him with his sword.

"Jump inside," Jacques said to Harry. "We may have some one out to
see what the noise is about. He will be no more trouble."

He seized the prostrate body, threw it up on the box, and taking
his seat drove on.

"Marie," Harry said as he jumped in, "thank God you are safe!"

"Oh, Harry, is it you? Can it be true?" And the spirit which had
so long sustained the girl gave way, and leaning her head upon his
shoulder she burst into tears. Harry soothed and pacified her till
the vehicle again came to a stop.

"What is it, Jacques?" Harry asked, putting his head out of the
window.

"Just what we agreed upon," the man said. "Here are the empty
houses. You stop where you are. I will get rid of this trash."

Harry, however, got out.

"Is he dead?" he asked in a low voice.

"Well, considering his head's cut pretty nigh in two, I should think
he was," Jacques said. "It could not be helped, you know; for if
I hadn't struck sharp it would have been all over with you. Anyhow
it's better as it is a hundred times. If you don't value your neck,
I do mine. Now get in again. I sha'n't be two minutes."

He slipped off the red sash and coat and waistcoat of the dead
man, emptied his trouser pockets and turned them inside out, then
lifting the body on his shoulder he carried it to one of the empty
houses and threw it down.

"They will never know who he is," he said to himself "In this
neighbourhood the first comer will take his shirt and trousers. They
will suppose he has been killed and robbed, no uncommon matter in
these days, and his body will be thrown into the public pit, and
no one be any the wiser. I will burn the coat and waistcoat as soon
as I get back."




CHAPTER XI

Marie and Victor


"Are you taking me to the girls, Harry?"

"No," Harry said. "It would not be safe to do so. There are already
suspicions, and they have been denounced."

Marie gave a cry of alarm.

"I have managed to suppress the document, Marie, and we start with
them in a day or two. Still it will be better for you not to go
near them.  I will arrange for you to meet them to-morrow."

"Where am I going, then?"

"You are going to the house of a worthy couple, who have shown
themselves faithful and trustworthy by nursing a friend of mine,
who has for nearly six months been lying ill there. You will be
perfectly safe there till we can arrange matters."

"But if Robespierre has signed my release, as they said, I am safe
enough, surely, and can go where I like."

"I think you will be safe from re-arrest here in Paris, Marie, because
you could appeal to him; but outside Paris it might be different.
However, we can talk about that to-morrow, when you have had a good
night's rest."

Harry did not think it necessary to say, that when Lebat was missed
it would probably be ascertained that he was last seen leaving La
Force with her, and that if inquiries were set on foot about him
she might be sought for. However, Marie said no more on the subject,
quite content that Harry should make whatever arrangements he
thought best, and she now began to ask all sorts of questions about
her sisters, and so passed the time until they were close to the
Place de Carrousel; then Harry called Jacques to stop.

"Will you please get out, Marie, and wait with our good friend here
till I return. I shall be back in five minutes. I have to hand the
coach over to its owner."

Jacques threw Lebat's clothes over his arm and got down from the
box. Harry took his seat and drove into the Place, where he found
the coachman awaiting him.

"Have you managed the job?"

"That we have," Harry said. "He has a lesson, and Isabel has gone
off to her friends again. Poor little girl, I hope it will cure her
of her flightiness. Here is your cape and your money, my friend,
and thank you."

"You are heartily welcome," the driver said, mounting his box.  "I
wish I could do as well every day; but these are bad times for us,
and money is precious scarce, I can tell you."

Harry soon rejoined Jacques and Marie. There were but few words said
as they made their way through the streets, for Marie was weakened
by her long imprisonment, and shaken by what she had gone through.
She had not asked a single question as to what had become of Lebat;
but she had no doubt that he was killed. She had grown, however,
almost indifferent to death. Day after day she had seen batches
of her friends taken out to execution, and the retribution which
had fallen upon this wretch gave her scarcely a thought, except a
feeling of thankfulness that she was freed from his persecutions.
Completely as she trusted Harry, it was with the greatest difficulty
that she had brought herself to obey his instructions and to place
herself for a moment in the power of her persecutor, and appear to
go with him willingly.

When Lebat told her triumphantly that he had saved her from death,
and that she was to have formed one of the party in the tumbril
on the following morning had he not obtained her release, she had
difficulty in keeping back the indignant words, that she would have
preferred death a thousand times. When he said that he had come to
take her away, she had looked round with a terrified face, as if
to claim the protection of the guards; but he had said roughly:

"It is no use your objecting, you have got to go with me; and
if you are a wise woman you had better make the best of it. After
all I am not very terrible, and you had better marry me than the
guillotine."

So, trembling with loathing and disgust, she had followed him,
resolved that if Harry's plan to rescue her failed she would kill
herself rather than be the wife of this man.

When they reached the house Elise opened the door.

"So you have come, poor lamb!" she said. "Thanks to the good God
that all has turned out well. You will be safe here, my child. We
are rough people, but we will take care of you as if you were our
own."

So saying she led the girl to the little sitting-room which they
had prepared for her, for they had that afternoon taken the other
two rooms on the floor they occupied, which were fortunately to
let, and had fitted them up as a bed-room and sitting-room for her.
There was already a communication existing between the two sets
of apartments, and they had only to remove some brickwork between
the double doors to throw them into one suite. Telling Marie to
sit down, Elise hurried off and returned with a basin of bouillon.

"Drink this, my dear, and then go straight to bed; your friend will
be here in good time in the morning, and then you can talk over
matters with him." She waited to see Marie drink the broth, and
then helped her to undress.

"She will be asleep in five minutes," she said when she rejoined
her husband and Harry. "She is worn out with excitement, but a
night's rest will do wonders for her. Don't come too early in the
morning, Monsieur Sandwith; she is sure to sleep late, and I would
not disturb her till she wakes of herself."

"I will be here at nine," Harry said, "and will go round before
that and tell her sisters. They will be wondering they have seen
nothing of me to-day, but I was afraid to tell them until it was
all over. The anxiety would have been too great for them."

It was fortunate that Robespierre went out early on the following
morning to attend a meeting at the Jacobins, and Harry was therefore
saved the necessity for asking leave to absent himself again. At
eight o'clock he was at Louise Moulin's.

"What is it, Harry?" Jeanne exclaimed as he entered. "I can see
you have news. What is it?"

"I have news," Harry said, "and good news, but you must not excite
yourselves."

"Have you found a way for getting Marie out?"

"Yes, I have found a way."

"A sure, certain way, Harry?" Virginie asked. "Not only a chance?"

"A sure, certain way," Harry replied. "You need have no more fear;
Marie will certainly be freed."

The two girls stood speechless with delight. It never occurred to
them to doubt Harry's words when he spoke so confidently.

"Have you told us all, Harry?" Jeanne asked a minute later, looking
earnestly in his face. "Can it be? Is she really out already?"

"Yes," Harry said, "thank God, dears, your sister is free."

With a cry of delight Virginie sprang to him, and throwing her
arms round his neck, kissed him in the exuberance of her happiness.
Louise threw her apron over her head and burst into tears of
thankfulness, while Jeanne put her hand on his shoulder and said:

"Oh, Harry, how can we ever thank you enough for all you have done
for us?"

Six months back Jeanne would probably have acted as Virginie did,
but those six months had changed her greatly; indeed, ever since
she received that note from Marie, which she had never shown even
to Virginie, there had been a shade of difference in her manner to
Harry, which he had more than once noticed and wondered at.

It was some little time before the girls were sufficiently composed
to listen to Harry's story.

"But why did you not bring her here, Harry?" Virginie asked.  "Why
did you take her somewhere else?"

"For several reasons, Virginie. I have not told you before, but there
is no reason why you should not know now, that Victor is still in
Paris."

Virginie uttered an exclamation of wonder.

"He stopped here to look after you all, but he has had a very bad
illness, and is still terribly weak, and does not even know me.
Marie will nurse him. I have great hopes that he will know her,
and that she may be able in time to effect a complete cure. In the
next place I think it would be dangerous to bring her here, for we
must leave in a very few days."

"What, go without her?"

"Yes, I am afraid so, Virginie. I have learned, Louise, that
some of your neighbours have their suspicions, and that a letter
of denunciation has already been sent, so it will be absolutely
necessary to make a move. I have suppressed the first letter, but
the writer will probably not let the matter drop, and may write to
Danton or Marat next time, so we must go without delay. You cannot
change your lodging, for they would certainly trace you; besides,
at the present time the regulations about lodgers are so strict that
no one would dare receive you until the committee of the district
have examined you and are perfectly satisfied. Therefore, I think
we must go alone.  Marie is wanted here, and I think she will be
far safer nursing Victor than she would be with us; besides, now
she has been freed by Robespierre's orders, I do not think there
is any fear of her arrest even if her identity were discovered.
Lastly, it would be safer to travel three than four. Three girls
travelling with a young fellow like me would be sure to attract
attention. It will be difficult enough in any case, but it would
certainly be worse with her with us."

"But we are to see her, Harry?" Jeanne said. "Surely we are not to
go away without seeing Marie!"

"Certainly not, Jeanne; I am not so cruel as that. This evening,
after dark, we will meet in the gardens of the Tuileries. Louise,
will you bring them down and be with them near the main entrance?
I will bring Marie there at six o'clock. And now I must be off; I
have to break the news to Marie that Victor is in the same house
with her and ill. I did not tell her last night. She will be better
able to bear it after a good night's sleep."

Marie was up and dressed when Harry arrived, and was sitting by
the fire in the little kitchen.

"I have just left your sisters, Marie," Harry said, "and you may
imagine their delight at the news I gave them. You are to see them
this evening in the gardens of the Tuileries."

"Oh, Harry, how good you are! How much you have done for us!"

Harry laughed lightly.

"Not very much yet; besides, it has been a pleasure as well as a
duty. The girls have both been so brave, and Jeanne has the head
of a woman."

"She is nearly a woman now, Harry," Marie said gently. "She is some
months past sixteen, and though you tell me girls of that age in
England are quite children, it is not so here. Why, it is nothing
uncommon for a girl to marry at sixteen."

"Well, at anyrate," Harry said, "Jeanne has no time for any thought
of marrying just at present. But there is another thing I want to
tell you about.  I have first a confession to make. I have deceived
you."

"Deceived me!" Marie said with a smile. "It can be nothing very
dreadful, Harry. Well, what is it?"

"It is more serious than you think, Marie. Now you know that when
the trouble began I felt it quite out of the question for me to
run away, and leave you all here in Paris unprotected. Such a thing
would have been preposterous."

"You think so, Harry, because you have a good heart; but most people
would have thought of themselves, and would not have run all sorts
of risks for the sake of three girls with no claim upon them."

"Well, Marie, you allow then that a person with a good heart would
naturally do as I did."

"Well, supposing I do, Harry, what then?"

"You must still further allow that a person with a good heart, and
upon whom you had a great claim, would all the more have remained
to protect you."

"What are you driving at, Harry, with your supposition?" she said,
her cheek growing a little paler as a suspicion of the truth flashed
upon her.

"Well, Marie, you mustn't be agitated, and I hope you will not
be angry; but I ask you how, as he has a good heart, and you have
claims upon him, could you expect Victor de Gisons to run away like
a coward and leave you here?"

Marie had risen to her feet and gazed at him with frightened eyes.

"What, is it about him that you deceived me! Is it true that he
did not go away? Has anything happened to him? Oh, Harry, do not
say he is dead!"

"He is not dead, Marie, but he has been very, very ill. He was with
me at La Force on that terrible night, and saw his father brought
out to be murdered. The shock nearly killed him. He has had brain
fever, and has been at death's door. At  present he is mending, but
very, very slowly. He knows no one, not even me, but I trust that
your voice and your presence will do wonders for him."

"Where is he, Harry?" Marie said as she stood with clasped hands,
and a face from which every vestige of colour had flown. "Take me
to him at once."

"He is in the house, Marie; that is why I have brought you here.
These good people have nursed and concealed him for five months."

Marie made a movement towards the door.

"Wait, Marie, you cannot go to him till you compose yourself.  It
is all-important that you should speak to him, when you see him,
in your natural voice, and you must prepare yourself for a shock.
He is at present a mere wreck, so changed that you will hardly know
him."

"You are telling me the truth, Harry? You are not hiding from me
that he is dying?"

"No, dear; I believe, on my honour, that he is out of danger now,
and that he is progressing. It is his mind more than his body that
needs curing. It may be a long and difficult task, Marie, before he
is himself again; but I believe that with your care and companionship
he will get round in time, but it may be months before that."

"Time is nothing," Marie said. "But what about the girls?"

"They must still be under my charge, Marie. I shall start with
them in a day or two and try to make for the sea-shore, and then
across to England. Suspicions have been aroused; they have already
been denounced, and may be arrested at any time. Therefore it is
absolutely necessary that they should fly at once; but I thought
that you would consider it your first duty to stay with Victor,
seeing that to him your presence is everything, while you could do
nothing to assist your sisters, and indeed the fewer of us there
are the better."

"Certainly it is my duty," Marie said firmly.

"You will be perfectly safe here under the care of Jacques and his
wife. They have already given out to their neighbours that Victor's
fiance is coming to help nurse him, and even if by any possibility
a suspicion of your real position arises, you have Robespierre's
pardon as a protection. This state of things  cannot last for
ever; a reaction must come; and then if Victor is cured, you will
be able to escape together to England."

"Leave me a few minutes by myself, Harry. All this has come so
suddenly upon me that I feel bewildered."

"Certainly," Harry said. "It is best that you should think things
over a little. No wonder you feel bewildered and shaken with all
the trials you have gone through."

Marie went to her room and returned in a quarter of an hour.

"I am ready now," she said, and by the calm and tranquil expression
of her face Harry felt that she could be trusted to see Victor.

"I have a feeling," she went on, "that everything will come right
in the end. I have been saved almost by a miracle, and I cannot
but feel that my life has been spared in order that I might take
my place here. As to the girls, it was a shock at first when you
told me that fresh danger threatened them, and that I should not
be able to share their perils upon their journey; but I could not
have aided them, and God has marked out my place here. No, Harry,
God has protected me so far, and will aid me still. Now I am ready
for whatever may betide."

"One moment before you enter, Marie. You are prepared, I know,
to see a great change in Victor, but nevertheless you cannot but
be shocked at first. Do not go up to him or attract his attention
till you have overcome this and are able to speak to him in your
natural voice. I think a great deal depends upon the first impression
you make on his brain. Your voice has a good deal changed in the
last six months; it would be strange if it had not; but I want you
to try and speak to him in the bright cheerful tone he was accustomed
to hear."

Marie nodded. "One moment," she said, as she brushed aside the tears
which filled her eyes, drew herself up with a little gesture that
reminded Harry of old times, and then with a swift step passed
through the door into Victor's room. Whatever she felt at the sight
of the wasted figure lying listlessly with half-closed eyes on the
couch, it only showed itself by a swift expression of pain which
passed for a moment across her face and then was gone.

"Victor," she said in her clear ringing voice, "Victor, my well
beloved, I am come to you." The effect upon Victor was instantaneous.
He opened his eyes with a start, half rose from his couch and held
out his arms towards her.

"Marie," he said in a faint voice, "you have come at last. I have
wanted you so much."

Then, as Marie advanced to him, and kneeling by his side, clasped
him in her arms, Elise and Harry stole quietly from the room.  It
was nearly an hour before Marie came out. There was a soft glow of
happiness on her face, though her cheeks were pale.

"Not yet!" she said, as she swept past them into her own room.

In a few minutes she reappeared.

"Pardon me," she said, holding out her hands to Harry and Elise,
"but I had to thank the good God first. Victor is quite sensible
now, but oh, so weak! He remembers nothing of the past, but seems
to think he is still in Burgundy, and has somehow had an illness.
Then he spoke of the duke and my dear father and mother as being
still alive, and that he hoped they would let me come to him
now. I told him that all should be as he wished as soon as he got
stronger, but that he must not think of anything now, and that
I would nurse him, and all would be well. He seemed puzzled about
my dress"--for Marie had already put on the simple attire which
had been prepared for her--"but I told him that it was fit for a
sick-room, and he seemed satisfied. He has just dozed off to sleep,
and I will go in and sit with him now till he wakes."

"When he does, mademoiselle, I will have some broth and a glass of
good burgundy ready for him," Elise said.

"Thank you; but please call me Marie in future. There are no
mesdemoiselles in France now, and I shall call you Elise instead
of Madame. And Harry, would you mind telling the girls that I will
meet them to-morrow instead of this evening. I long to see them, oh
so, so much; but I should not like to leave him for a moment now.
I fear so that his memory might go again if he were to wake and
miss me."

"I was going to propose it myself, Marie," Harry said. "It is
all-important to avoid any agitation now. To-morrow, I hope, it
will be safer, and the doctor will give him a sleeping-draught, so
that he shall not wake while you are away. But, Marie, remember it
will be a farewell visit, for I dare not let them stay  more than
another day.  They may be denounced again at any hour, for the man
who wrote to Robespierre, if he finds that nothing comes of it,
may go to the local committee, and they will not lose an hour, you
may be sure."

"I must see them this evening, then," Marie said hurriedly. "The doctor
will be here, you say, soon. Victor must have his sleeping-draught
this afternoon instead of to-morrow. They must go at once.  I
should never forgive myself if, by putting off our parting for
twenty-four hours, I caused them to fall into  the hands of these
wretches; so please hurry on all the arrangements so that they may
leave the first thing to-morrow morning."

"It will be best," Harry said, "if you will do it, Marie. I own
that I am in a fever of apprehension. I will go there at once to
tell them that all must be in readiness by to-night. They will be
glad indeed to hear that your presence has done such wonders for
Victor.  They will be able to leave you with a better heart if
they feel that your stay here is likely to bring health to him and
happiness to both of you."

"A week since," Marie said, "it did not seem to me that I could
ever be happy again; but though everything is still very dark, the
clouds seem lifting."

The girls were greatly rejoiced when they heard the good news that
Victor had recognized Marie, and that Harry had now hopes that he
would do well.

"And now we must talk about ourselves," Harry said. "We must not
lose another hour. Now, Louise, you must take part in our council.
We have everything to settle, and only a few hours to do it in. I
should like, if possible, that we should not come back here this
evening after you have once left the house. The man who denounced
you will expect that something would be done to-day, and when he
sees that nothing has come of his letter he may go this evening
to the local committee, and they would send men at once to arrest
you. No doubt he only wrote to Robespierre first, thinking he would
get credit and perhaps a post of some sort for his vigilance in the
cause. But if Louise thinks that it cannot possibly be managed, I
will write a letter at once to him in Robespierre's name, saying
that his letter has been noted and your movements will be closely
watched, and thanking him for his zeal in the public service."

"No, I think we are ready," Jeanne said. "Of course we have
been talking it over for weeks, and agreed it was better to be in
readiness whenever you told us it was time to go. Louise will tell
you all about it."

"The disguises are all ready, Monsieur Sandwith; and yesterday
when you said that my dear mademoiselle could not go with them,
I settled, if you do not see any objection, to go with the dear
children."

"I should be very glad," Harry said eagerly, for although he had
seen no other way out of it, the difficulties and inconveniences
of a journey alone with Jeanne and Virginie had been continually
on his mind. The idea of taking the old woman with them had never
occurred to him, but now he hailed it as a most welcome solution
of the difficulty.

"That will be a thousand times better in every way, for with you
with us it would excite far lees remark than three young people
travelling alone. But I fear, Louise, that the hardships we may
have to undergo will be great."

"It matters little," the old woman said. "I nursed their mother,
and have for years lived on her bounty; and gladly now will I
give what little remains to me of life in the service of her dear
children. I know that everything is turned topsy-turvy in our poor
country at present, but as long as I have life in my body I will
not let my dear mistress's children be, for weeks perhaps, wandering
about with only a young gentleman to protect them, and Mademoiselle
Jeanne almost a woman too."

"Yes, it is better in every way," Harry said. "I felt that it would
be a strange position, but it seemed that it could not be helped;
however, your offer gets us out of the embarrassment. So your
disguises are ready?"

"Yes, monsieur," Louise said; "I have a boy's suit for Mademoiselle
Virginie. She did not like it at first, but I thought that if
mademoiselle went with you it would be strange to have three girls
journeying under the charge of one young man."

"I think it a very good plan, Louise, but you must get out of the
way of calling me monsieur or else it will slip out before people.
Now what I propose is, that when we get fairly away we shall buy a
horse and cart, for with you with us we can go forward more boldly
than if we were alone.

"You will be grandmother, and we shall be travelling from a farm
near Etampes to visit your daughter, who is married to a farmer near
Nantes. That will be a likely story now, and we can always make a
detour to avoid towns. It will be dark when you go out this evening,
so you can take three bundles of clothes with you. The only thing
is about to-night. The weather is bitterly cold, and it is out of
the question that you should stop out all night, and yet we could
not ask for a lodging close to Paris.

"Oh, I see now! The best plan will be for you all to sleep to-night
at Jacques'. The good people will manage  somehow; then we can
start early in the morning. Yes, and in that way it will not be
necessary for Marie to go out and leave Victor."

"That will certainly be the best way," Louise said. "I have been
wondering ever since you said we must start this evening, what
would become of us to-night. When we once get fairly away from
Paris it will be easier, for the country people are kind-hearted,
and I think we shall always be able to get shelter for the night;
but just outside Paris it would be different. Then where shall we
meet this evening?"

"I will be at the end of the street," Harry said. "It is quite
dark by five, so do you start a quarter of an hour later; hide your
bundles under your cloaks, for if that fellow is on the look-out he
might follow you if he thought you were leaving. Draw your blinds
up when you leave, Louise, so that the room will look as usual,
and then it may be some time before anyone suspects that you have
left; and if I were you I would mention to some of your neighbours
this afternoon that you have had a letter from your friends in
Burgundy, and are going away soon with your nieces to stay with
them for a while. You had better pay your rent for three months
in advance, and tell your landlord the same thing; saying that you
may go suddenly anytime, as a compere who is in Paris, and is also
going back, is going to take charge of you on the journey, and that
he may call for you at any time. Thus when he finds that you have
left, your absence will be accounted for; not that it makes much
difference, for I hope that when you have seen the girls safely to
England you will make your home with them there."

"Yes, I shall never come back here," the old woman said, "never,
even if I could. Paris is hateful to me now, and I have no reason
for ever wanting to come back."

"In that case," Harry said smiling, "we may as well save the three
months' rent."

"Oh, how I long to be in England," Virginie exclaimed, "and to see
dear Ernest and Jules again! How anxious they must be about us, not
having heard of us all this long time! How shall we know where to
find them?"

"You forget, Virginie," Jeanne said, "it was arranged they should
go to Harry's father when they got to England, and he will know
where they are living; there is sure to be no mistake about that,
is there, Harry?"

"None at all," Harry said. "You may rely upon it that directly you
get to my father you will hear where your brothers are. And now I
will go and tell Marie that there is no occasion for Victor to take
a sleeping draught."

Marie was delighted when she heard that she was going to have her
sisters with her for the whole evening and night, and Elise busied
herself with preparations for the accommodation of her guests.
Harry then went back to his attic, made his clothes into a bundle,
and took up the bag of money from its hiding-place under a board
and placed it in his pocket.

He had, since he had been with Robespierre, gradually changed the
silver for gold in order to make it more convenient to carry, and
it was now of comparatively little weight, although he had drawn
but slightly upon it, except for the payment of the bribe promised
to the warder. His pistols were also hidden under his blouse.

He went down stairs and waited the return of Robespierre.

"Citizen," he said when he entered, "circumstances have occurred
which render it necessary for me to travel down to Nantes to escort
a young girl, a boy, and an old woman to that town; they cannot
travel alone in such times as these, and they have a claim upon me
which I cannot ignore."

"Surely, friend Sandwith," Robespierre said, "the affairs of France
are of more importance than private matters like these."

"Assuredly they are, citizen; but I cannot flatter myself that
the affairs of France will be in any way injured by my temporary
absence.  My duty in this matter is clear to me, and I can only
regret that my temporary absence may put you to some inconvenience.
But I have a double favour to ask you: the one is to spare me for
a time; the second, that you will give me papers  recommending
me, and those travelling with me, to the authorities of the towns
through which we shall pass. In these times, when the enemies of
the state are travelling throughout France seeking to corrupt the
minds of the people, it is necessary to have papers showing that
one is a good citizen."

"But I have no authority," Robespierre said. "I am neither a minister
nor a ruler."

"You are not a minister, citizen, but you are assuredly a ruler. It
is to you men look more than to any other. Danton is too headstrong
and violent. You alone combine fearlessness in the cause of France
with that wisdom and moderation which are, above all things,
necessary in guiding the state through its dangers."

Robespierre's vanity was so inordinate that he accepted the compliment
as his due, though he waved his hand with an air of deprecation.

"Therefore, citizen," Harry went on, "a letter from you would be
more powerful than an order from another."

"But these persons who travel with you, citizen--how am I to be
sure they are not enemies of France?"

"France is not to be shaken," Harry said, smiling, "by the efforts
of an old woman of seventy and a young boy and girl; but I can
assure you that they are no enemies of France, but simple inoffensive
people who have been frightened by the commotion in Paris, and long
to return to the country life to which they are accustomed. Come,
citizen, you refused the first boon which I asked you, and, methinks,
cannot hesitate at granting one who has deserved well of you this
slight favour."

"You are right," Robespierre said. "I cannot refuse you, even if
the persons who accompany you belong to the class of suspects, of
which, mind, I know nothing, though I may have my suspicions. I
have not forgotten, you know, that you asked for the life of the
daughter of the ci-devant Marquis de St. Caux; and for aught I know
these children may be of the same breed. But I will not ask you.
Did I know it, not even the obligation I am under to you would you
induce me to do what you ask; for although as children they can
do no harm, they might do so were they allowed to grow up hating
France. All children of suspects are, as you know, ordered to be
placed in the state schools, in order that  they may there learn
to love the people of France and to grow up worthy citizens. Now,
how shall I word it?" he said, taking up a pen; and Harry dictated:

"I hereby recommend Citizen Henri Sandwith, age 19, who has been
acting as my confidential secretary, to all public authorities,
together with Citoyenne Moulin and her two grandchildren, with whom
he is travelling."

To this Robespierre signed his name and handed the paper to Harry.

"How long will you be before you return?" he asked.

"I cannot say exactly," Harry replied; "as after I have seen them
to their destination I may stop with them for a few weeks."

Robespierre nodded and held out his hand.

"I shall be glad to have you with me again, for I have conceived
a strong friendship for you, and think none the worse of you for
your showing your gratitude to the family in whom you are interested."

Harry then went into the kitchen, where Robespierre's sister was
preparing the next meal, and said good-bye to her.

She had taken a fancy to her brother's young secretary, and expressed
a hope that his absence would be but a short one, telling him that
Robespierre had said only the day before how much work he had saved
him, and that he was determined to push his fortunes to the utmost.

Having thus paved the way for an appeal to Robespierre should he
find himself in difficulties on the road, Harry proceeded to Jacques'
house and waited there until it was time to go up to meet Louise
and the girls.

Victor did not wake until the afternoon. The doctor had called
as usual, but had not roused him. He had been told what had taken
place, and had held out hope to Marie that Victor's improvement
would be permanent, and that he would now make steady progress
towards recovery.

At the appointed hour Harry was at his post to meet the party.  They
came along within a few minutes of the time named, but instead of
stopping to greet him they walked straight on, Jeanne saying as
she passed him:

"I think we are followed."

Harry at once drew back and allowed them to go fifty yards on before
he moved after them. As there were many people about, it was some
little time before he could verify Jeanne's suspicions; then he
noticed that a man, walking a short distance ahead of him, followed
each turning that the others took.

Harry waited until they were in a quiet street, and then quickened
his pace until he was close behind the man. Then he drew one of
his pistols, and, springing forward, struck him a heavy blow on
the head with its butt. He fell forward on his face without a cry;
and Harry, satisfied that he had stunned him, ran on and overtook
the others, and, turning down the first street they came to, was
assured that they were safe from pursuit.

"We had noticed a man lounging against the house opposite all the
afternoon," Jeanne said, "and came to the conclusion that he must
be watching us; so we looked out for him when we came out, and
noticed that as soon as we went on he began to walk that way too.
So I told Louise to walk straight on without stopping when we came
up to you. I was sure you would manage somehow to get rid of him."

Harry laughed.

"I fancy he will spend to-morrow in bed instead of lounging about.
Perhaps it will teach him to mind his own business in future and to
leave other people alone. I am very glad that he did follow you;
for I felt that I owed him one, and was sorry to leave Paris without
paying my debt. Now I think we are pretty well square."

The meeting between the sisters was indeed a happy one. They fell
on each other's necks, and for some time scarce a word was spoken;
then they stood a little apart and had a long look at each other.

"You are changed, Marie dear," Jeanne said; "you look pale, but
you look, too, softer and prettier than you used to."

"All my airs and graces have been rubbed off," Marie said with a
slight smile. "I have learned so much, Jeanne, and have been where
noble blood has been the reverse of a recommendation. You are changed
too--the six months have altered you. Your gouvernante would not
call you a wild girl now. You are quite a woman.

"We have suffered too, Marie," Jeanne said as tears came to her eyes
at the thought of the changes and losses of the last few months.
"We have thought of you night and day; but Louise has been very good
to us, and as for Harry, we owe  everything to him. He has always
been so hopeful and strong, and has cheered us up with promises
that he would bring you to us some day."

Marie smiled.

"You are right, Jeanne. I used to laugh a little, you know, at your
belief in your hero, and little thought that the time would come
when I should trust him as implicitly as you do. You have a right
to be proud of him, Jeanne. What thought and devotion and courage
he has shown for us! And do you know, he saved Victor too. Jacques
has told me all about it--how Victor saw his father brought out
to be murdered; and how, half-mad, he was springing out to stand
beside him, when Harry as quick as thought knocked him down before
he could betray himself; and then Jacques, who was standing by saw
it, helped him carry him here. Oh, my dear, how much we owe him!

"And now, Virginie," she said, turning to the youngest, "I must
have a good look at you, little one--but no, I mustn't call you
little one any longer, for you are already almost as tall as I am.
My child, how you have been growing, and you look so well! Louise
must have been feeding you up. Ah, Louise, how much we all owe to
you too!  And I hear you are going to leave your comfortable home
and take care of the girls on their journey. It was such a comfort
to me when Harry told me!"

"I could not let them go alone, mademoiselle," the old woman said
simply; "it was only my duty. Besides, what should I do in Paris
with all my children in England?"

"Now, my dears, take your things off," Marie said. "I will just
run in and see how Victor is getting on. Harry went straight in to
him, and I want to know whether Victor recognized him."




CHAPTER XII

Nantes


Harry was very pleased to see a look of recognition on Victor's
face as he came up to the side of his couch.

"Well, Victor," he said cheerfully, "I am glad to see you looking
more yourself again."

Victor nodded assent, and his hand feebly returned the pressure of
Harry's.

"I can't understand it," he said after a pause. "I seem to be in
a dream; but it is true Marie is here, isn't it?"

"Oh yes! She is chatting now with her sisters, Jeanne and Virginie,
you know."

"And why am I here?" Victor asked, looking round the room.  "Marie
tells me not to ask questions."

"No. There will be plenty of time for that afterwards, Victor.  It
is all simple enough. You were out with me, and there was an accident,
and you got hurt. So I and a workman who was passing carried you
into his house, and he and his wife have been taking care of you.
You have been very ill, but you are getting on better now.  Marie
has come to nurse you, and she won't leave you until you are quite
well. Now, I think that's enough for you, and the doctor would be
very angry if he knew I had told you so much; because he said you
were not to bother yourself about things at all, but just to sleep
as much as you can, and eat as much as you can, and listen to Marie
talking and reading to you, and not trouble your brain in any way,
because it's your brain that has gone wrong, and any thinking will
be very bad for it."

This explanation seemed satisfactory to Victor, who soon after
dozed off to sleep, and Harry joined the party in Marie's sitting-room.

"Oh, if I could but keep them here with me, Harry, what a comfort
it would be!"

"I know that it would, Marie; but it is too dangerous. You know they
were denounced at Louise Moulin's. Already there is risk enough in
you and Victor being here. The search for Royalists does not relax,
indeed it seems to become more and more keen every day.  Victor's
extreme illness is your best safeguard. The neighbours have heard
that Jacques has had a fellow-workman dangerously ill for some long
time, and Victor can no longer be looked upon as a stranger to be
suspected, while your coming here to help nurse him will seem so
natural a step that it will excite no comment. But any fresh addition
of numbers would be sure to give rise to talk, and you would have
a commissary of the Commune here in no time to make inquiries, and
to ask for your papers of domicile."

"Yes, I know that it would be too dangerous to risk," Marie agreed;
"but I tremble at the thought of their journey."

"I have every hope that we shall get through safely," Harry said.
"I have some good news I have not yet told you. I have received a
paper from Robespierre stating that I have been his secretary, and
recommending us all to the authorities, so that we can dispense
with the ordinary papers which they would otherwise ask for."

"That is good news, indeed, Harry," Marie said. "That relieves me
of half my anxiety. Once on the sea-coast it will be comparatively
easy to get a passage to England. My dear Harry, you surprise me
more every day, and I am ashamed to think that when our dear father
and mother first told me that they had accepted your noble offer
to look after us, I was inclined in my heart to think that such
protection would be of little use. You see I confess, Harry; and
you know that is half-way to forgiveness."

"There is nothing either to confess or forgive," Harry said with
a smile. "It was perfectly natural for you to think that a lad
of eighteen was a slender reed to lean on in the time of trouble
and danger, and that it was only by a lucky accident--for saving
Robespierre's life was but an accident--that I have been enabled
to be of use to you; and that I have now a pass which will enable
me to take your sisters with comparative safety as far as Nantes.
Had it not been for that I could have done little indeed to aid
you."

"You must not say so, Harry. You are too modest. Besides, was it
not your quickness that saved Victor? No, we owe you everything, and
disclaimers are only thrown away. As for me, I feel quite jealous
of Jeanne's superior perspicacity, for she trusted you absolutely
from the first."

"It has nothing to do with perspicacity," Jeanne said. "Harry saved
my life from that dreadful dog, and after that I knew if there was
danger he would be able to get us out of it. That is, if it were
possible for anyone to do so."

"I hope I shall be able to justify your trust, Jeanne, and arrive
safely with you at my father's house. I can promise you the warmest
of welcomes from my mother and sisters. I fear they must long since
have given me up for dead. I shall be like a shipwrecked mariner
who has been cast upon an island and given up as lost. But my father
always used to say, that if I was a first-rate hand at getting
into scrapes, I was equally good at getting out of them again; and
I don't think they will have quite despaired of seeing me again,
especially as they know, by the last letters I sent them, that
you all said I could speak French well enough to pass anywhere as
a native."

"How surprised they will be at your arriving with two girls and
Louise!" Virginie said.

"They will be pleased more than surprised," Harry replied. "I have
written so much about you in my letters that the girls and my mother
will be delighted to see you."

"Besides," Jeanne added, "the boys will have told them you are
waiting behind with us, so they will not be so surprised as they
would otherwise have been. But it will be funny, arriving among
people who don't speak a word of our language."

"You will soon be at home with them," said Harry reassuringly.
"Jenny and Kate are just about your ages, and I expect they will
have grown so I shall hardly know them. It is nearly three years
now since I left them, and I have to look at you to assure myself
that Jenny will have grown almost into a young woman. Now I shall
go out for a bit, and leave you to chat together.

"You need not fidget about Victor, Marie. Elise is with him, and
will come and let you know if he wakes; but I hope that he has gone
off fairly to sleep for the night. He knew me, and I think I have
put his mind at rest a little as to how he came here. I have told
him it was an accident in the street, and that  we brought him in
here, and he has been too ill since to be moved. I don't think he
will ask any more questions. If I were you I would, while nursing,
resume the dress you came here in. It will be less puzzling to him
than the one you are wearing now."

The little party started the next morning at day-light, and at the
very first village they came to, found how strict was the watch upon
persons leaving Paris, and had reason to congratulate themselves
upon the possession of Robespierre's safe-conduct. No sooner had
they sat down in the village cabaret to breakfast than an official
with a red scarf presented himself, and asked them who they were
and where they were going. The production of the document at once
satisfied him; and, indeed, he immediately addressed the young man
in somewhat shabby garments, who had the honour of being secretary
to the great man, in tones of the greatest respect.

Virginie at present was shy and awkward in her attire as a boy, and
indeed had there been time the night before to procure a disguise
for her as a girl it would have been done, although Harry's opinion
that it would attract less attention for her to travel as a boy
was unchanged; but he would have given way had it been possible to
make the change. As any delay, however, would certainly be dangerous,
the original plan was adhered to.

Marie had cut her sister's hair short, and no one would have
suspected from her appearance that Virginie was not what she seemed,
a good-looking boy of some thirteen years old. With their bundles
in their hands they trudged along the road, and stopped for the
night at a village about twelve miles out of Paris. After having
again satisfied the authorities by the production of the pass,
Harry made inquiries, and the next morning went two miles away to
a farm-house, where there was, he heard, a cart and horse to be
disposed of.

After much haggling over terms--since to give the sum that was
first asked would have excited surprise, and perhaps suspicion--Harry
became the possessor of the horse and cart, drove triumphantly
back to the village, and having stowed Louise and the two girls on
some straw in the bottom of the cart, proceeded on the journey.

They met with no adventure whatever on the journey to Nantes, which
was performed in ten days. The weather was bitterly cold.  Although
it was now well on in March the snow lay deep on the ground; but
the girls were well wrapped  up, and the cart was filled with straw,
which helped to keep them warm. Harry walked for the most part by
the side of the horse's head, for they could only proceed at foot-pace;
but he sometimes climbed up and took the reins, the better to chat
with the girls and keep up their spirits. There was no occasion for
this in the case of Jeanne, but Virginie often gave way and cried
bitterly, and the old nurse suffered greatly from the cold in spite
of her warm wraps.

On arriving at Nantes Harry proceeded first to the Maine, and on
producing Robespierre's document received a permit to lodge in the
town. He then looked for apartments in the neighbourhood of the
river, and when he had obtained them disposed of the horse and cart.
The statement that he was Robespierre's secretary at once secured
for him much attention from the authorities, and he was invited to
become a member of the Revolutionary Committee during his stay in
the town, in order that he might see for himself with what zeal
the instructions received from Paris for the extermination of the
Royalists were being carried out.

This offer he accepted, as it would enable him to obtain information
of all that was going on. Had it not been for this he would gladly
have declined the honour, for his feelings were daily harrowed by
arrests and massacres which he was powerless to prevent, for he
did not venture to raise his voice on the side of mercy, for had he
done so, it would have been certain to excite suspicion. He found
that, horrible as were the atrocities committed in Paris, they
were even surpassed by those which were enacted in the provinces,
and that in Nantes in particular a terrible persecution was raging
under the direction of Carrier, who had been sent down from Paris
as commissioner from the Commune there.

Harry's next object was to make the acquaintance of some of the
fishermen, and to find out what vessels were engaged in smuggling
goods across to England; for it was in one of these alone that he
could hope to cross the Channel. This, however, he found much more
difficult than he had expected.

The terror was universal. The news of the execution of the king
had heightened the dismay. Massacres were going on all over France.
The lowest ruffians in all the great towns were now their masters,
and under pretended accusations were wreaking their hate upon the
respectable inhabitants. Private  enmities were wiped out in blood.
None were too high or too low to be denounced as Royalists, and
denunciation was followed as a matter of course by a mock trial
and execution. Every man distrusted his neighbour, and fear caused
those who most loathed and hated the existing regime to be loudest
in their advocacy of it. There were spies everywhere--men who
received blood-money for every victim they denounced.

Thus, then, Harry's efforts to make acquaintances among the
sailors met with very slight success. He was a stranger, and that
was sufficient to cause distrust, and ere long it became whispered
that he had come from Paris with special authority to hasten on the
work of extirpation of the enemies of the state. Soon, therefore,
Harry perceived that as he moved along the quay little groups of
sailors and fishermen talking together broke up at his approach, the
men sauntering off to the wine-shops, and any he accosted replied
civilly indeed, but with embarrassment and restraint; and although
any questions of a general character were answered, a profound
ignorance was manifested upon the subject upon which he wished to
gain information. The sailors all seemed to know that occasionally
cargoes of spirits were run from the river to England, but none
could name any vessel engaged in the trade. Harry soon perceived
that he was regarded with absolute hostility, and one day one of
the sailors said to him quietly:

"Citizen, I am a good sans-culotte, and I warn you, you had best
not come down the river after dark, for there is a strong feeling
against you; and unless you would like your body to be fished out
of the river with half a dozen knife-holes in it, you will take my
advice."

Harry began to feel almost crushed under his responsibilities.  His
attendance at the Revolutionary Committee tried him greatly.  He
made no progress whatever in his efforts to obtain a passage; and
to add to his trouble the old nurse, who had been much exhausted
by the change from her usual habits, and the inclemency of the
weather on her journey, instead of gaining strength appeared to be
rapidly losing it, and was forced to take to her bed. The terrible
events in Paris, and the long strain of anxiety as to the safety
of the girls and the fate of Marie, had completely exhausted her
strength, and the last six months had aged her as many  years. Harry
tried hard to keep up his appearance of hopefulness, and to cheer
the girls; but Jeanne's quick eye speedily perceived the change in
him.

"You are wearing yourself out, Harry," she said one evening as they
were sitting by the fire, while Virginie was tending Louise in the
next room. "I can see it in your face. It is of no use your trying
to deceive me. You tell us every day that you hope soon to get
hold of the captain of a boat sailing for England; but I know that
in reality you are making no progress. All those months when we
were hoping to get Marie out of prison--though it seemed next to
impossible--you told us not to despair, and I knew you did not
despair yourself; but now it is different. I am sure that you do
in your heart almost give up hope. Why don't you trust me, Harry?
I may not be able to do much, but I might try to cheer you. You
have been comforting us all this time. Surely it is time I took my
turn. I am not a child now."

"I feel like one just at present," Harry said unsteadily with
quivering lips. "I feel sometimes as if--as we used to say at
school--I could cry for twopence. I know,  Jeanne, I can trust you, and
it isn't because I doubted your courage that I have not told you
exactly how things are going on, but because it is entirely upon
you now that Louise and Virginie have to depend, and I do not wish
to put any more weight on your shoulders; but it will be a relief
to me to tell you exactly how we stand."

Harry then told her how completely he had failed with the sailors,
and how an actual feeling of hostility against him had arisen.

"I think I could have stood that, Jeanne; but it is that terrible
committee that tries me. It is so awful hearing these fiends marking
out their victims and exulting over their murder, that at times I
feel tempted to throw myself upon some of them and strangle them."

"It must be dreadful, Harry," Jeanne said soothingly. "Will it not
be possible for you to give out that you are ill, and so absent
yourself for a time from their meetings? I am sure you look ill--ill
enough for anything. As to the sailors,  do not let that worry
you.  Even if you could hear of a ship at present it would be of no
use. I couldn't leave Louise; she seems to me to be getting worse
and worse, and the doctor you called in three days ago thinks
so too. I can see it by his face. I think he is a good man.  The
woman whose sick child I sat up with last night tells me the poor
all love him. I am sure he guesses that we are not what we seem.
He said this morning to me:

"' I cannot do much for your grandmother. It is a general break-up.
I have many cases like it of old people  and women upon whom the
anxiety of the times has told. Do not worry yourself with watching,
child. She will sleep quietly, and will not need attendance.  If
you don't mind I shall have you on my hands. Anxiety affects the
young as well as the old.'

"At anyrate, you see, we cannot think of leaving here at present.
Louise has risked everything for us. It is quite impossible for
us to leave her now, so do not let that worry you. We are all in
God's hands, Harry, and we must wait patiently what He may send
us."

"We will wait patiently," Harry said. "I feel better now, Jeanne,
and you shall not see me give way again. What has been worrying me
most is the thought that it would have been wiser to have carried
out some other plan--to have put you and Virginie, for instance,
in some farmhouse not far from Paris, and for you to have waited
there till the storm blew over."

"You must never think that, Harry," Jeanne said earnestly. "You
know we all talked it over dozens of times, Louise and all of us,
and we agreed that this was our best chance, and Marie when she
came out quite thought so too. So, whatever comes, you must not
blame yourself in the slightest. Wherever we were we were in danger,
and might have been denounced."

"I arranged it all, Jeanne. I have the responsibility of your being
here."

"And to an equal extent you would have had the responsibility of
our being anywhere else. So it is of no use letting that trouble
you.  Now, as to the sailors, you know I have made the acquaintance
of some of the women in our street. Some of them are sailors' wives,
and possibly through them I may be able to hear about ships. At
anyrate I could try."

"Perhaps you could, Jeanne; but be very, very careful what questions
you put, or you might be betrayed."

"I don't think there is much fear of that, Harry. The women are
more outspoken than the men. Some of them are with what they call
the people; but it is clear that others are quite the other way.
You see trade has been almost stopped,  and there is great suffering
among the sailors and their families. Of course I have been very
careful not to seem to have more money than other people; but
I have been able to make soups and things--I have learned to be
quite a cook from seeing Louise at work--and I take them to those
that are very poor, especially if they have children ill, and I
think I have won some of their hearts."

"You win everyone's heart who comes near you, Jeanne, I think,"
Harry said earnestly.

Jeanne flushed a rosy red, but said with a laugh:

"Now, Harry, you are turning flatterer. We are not at the chateau
now, sir, so your pretty speeches are quite thrown away; and now
I shall go and take Virginie's place and send her in to you."

And so another month went by, and then the old nurse quietly
passed away. She was buried, to the girls' great grief, without
any religious ceremony, for the priests were all in hiding or had
been murdered, and France had solemnly renounced God and placed
Reason on His throne.

In the meantime Jeanne had been steadily carrying on her work among
her poorer neighbours, sitting up at night with sick children, and
supplying food to starving little ones, saying quietly in reply to
the words of gratitude of the women:

"My grandmother has laid by savings during her long years of
service. She will not want it long, and we are old enough to work
for ourselves; besides, our brother Henri will take care of us. So
we are glad to be able to help those who need it."

While she worked she kept her ears open, and from the talk of the
women learned that the husbands of one or two of them were employed in
vessels engaged in carrying on smuggling operations with England.
A few days after the death of Louise one of these women, whose
child Jeanne had helped to nurse through a fever and had brought
round by keeping it well supplied with good food, exclaimed:

"Oh, how much we owe you, mademoiselle, for your goodness!"

"You must not call me mademoiselle," Jeanne said, shaking her head.
"It would do you harm and me too if it were heard."

"It comes so natural," the woman said with a sigh. "I was in service
once in a good family before I married Adolphe. But I know that
you are not one of those people who say there is no God, because I
saw you kneel down and pray by Julie's bed when you thought I was
asleep. I expect Adolphe home in a day or two. The poor fellow
will be wild with delight when he sees the little one on its feet
again.  When he went away a fortnight ago he did not expect ever
to see her alive again, and it almost broke his heart. But what
was he to do?  There are so many men out of work that if he had
not sailed in the lugger there would have been scores to take his
place, and he might not perhaps have been taken on again."

"He has been to England, has he not?" Jeanne asked.

"Yes; the lugger carries silks and brandy. It is a dangerous trade,
for the Channel is swarming with English cruisers. But what is he
to do? One must live."

"Is your husband in favour of the new state of things?" Jeanne
asked.

"Not in his heart, mademoiselle, any more than I am, but he holds
his tongue. Most of the sailors in the port hate these murdering
tyrants of ours; but what can we do?"

"Well, Marthe, I am sure I can trust you, and your husband can help
me if he will."

"Surely you can trust me," the woman said. "I would lay down my
life for you, and I know Adolphe would do so too when he knows what
you have done for us."

"Well, then, Marthe, I and my sister and my brother Henri are anxious
to be taken to England. We are ready to pay well for a passage,
but we have not known how to set about it."

"I thought it might be that," Marthe said quietly; "for anyone who
knows the ways of gentlefolk, as I do, could see with half an eye
that you are not one of us. But they say, mademoiselle, that your
brother is a friend of Robespierre, and that he is one of the
committee here."

"He is only pretending, Marthe, in order that no suspicion should
fall upon us. But he finds that the sailors distrust him, and he
cannot get to speak to them about taking a passage, so I thought
I would speak to you, and you can tell me when a boat is sailing
and who is her captain."

"Adolphe will manage all that for you, never fear," the woman
said. "I know that many a poor soul has been hidden away on board
the smuggler's craft and got safely out of the country; but of
course it's a risk, for it is death to assist any of the suspects.
Still the sailors are ready to run the risk, and indeed they haven't
much fear of the consequences if they are caught, for the sailor
population here are very strong, and they would not stand quietly
by and see some of their own class treated as if they had done
some great crime merely because they were earning a few pounds by
running passengers across to England. Why they have done it from
father to son as far as they can recollect, for there has never
been a time yet when there were not people who wanted to pass from
France to England and from England to France without asking the
leave of the authorities. I think it can be managed, mademoiselle,
especially, as you say, you can afford to pay, for if one won't take
you, another will. Trade is so bad that there are scores of men
would start in their fishing-boats for a voyage across the Channel
in the hope of getting food for their wives and families."

"I was sure it was so, Marthe, but it was so difficult to set about
it. Everyone is afraid of spies, and it needs some one to warrant
that we are not trying to draw them into a snare, before anyone
will listen.  If your husband will but take the matter up, I have
no doubt it can be managed."

"Set your mind at ease; the thing is as good as done. I tell you
there are scores of men ready to undertake the job when they know
it is a straightforward one."

"That is good news indeed, Jeanne," Harry said, when the girl
told him of the conversation. "That does seem a way out of our
difficulties. I felt sure you would be able to manage it, sooner
or later, among the poor people you have been so good to. Hurry it
on as much as you can, Jeanne. I feel that our position is getting
more and more dangerous. I am afraid I do not play my part sufficiently
well. I am not forward enough in their violent councils. I cannot
bring myself to vote for proposals for massacre when there is any
division among them. I fear that some have suspicions. I have been
asked questions lately as to why I am staying here, and why I have
come. I have been thinking for the last few days whether it would
not be better for us to make our way down to the mouth of the river
and try and bribe some fishermen in the villages there who would
not have that feeling against me that the  men here have, to take
us to sea, or if that could not be managed, to get on board some
little fishing-boat at night and sail off by ourselves in the hopes
of being picked up by an English cruiser."

Harry indeed had for some days been feeling that danger was
thickening round him. He had noticed angry glances cast at him by
the more violent of the committee, and had caught sentences expressing
doubt whether he had really been Robespierre's secretary.  That
evening as he came out from the meeting he heard one man say to
another:

"I tell you he may have stolen it, and perhaps killed the citizen
who bore it. I believe he is a cursed aristocrat. I tell you I shall
watch him. He has got some women with him; the maire, who saw the
paper, told me so. I shall make it my business to get to the bottom
of the affair, and we will make short work with him if we find
things are as I believe."

Harry felt, therefore, that the danger was even more urgent than
he had expressed it to Jeanne, and he had returned intending to
propose immediate flight had not Jeanne been beforehand with her
news. Even now he hesitated whether even a day's delay might not
ruin them.

"Have you told me all, Harry?" Jeanne asked.

"Not quite all, Jeanne. I was just thinking it over. I fear the
danger is even more pressing than I have said;" and he repeated
the sentence he had overheard. "Even now," he said, "that fellow
may be watching outside or making inquiries about you. He will hear
nothing but praise; but that very praise may cause him to doubt
still more that you are not what you seem."

"But why can we not run away at once?" Virginie said. "Why should
we wait here till they come and take us and carry us away and kill
us?"

"That is what I was thinking when I came home, Virginie; but the
risk of trying to escape in a fishing-boat by ourselves would be
tremendous. You see, although I have gone out sailing sometimes on
the river in England, I know very little about it, and although we
might be picked up by an English ship, it would be much more likely
that we should fall into the hands of one of the French gunboats.
So I look upon that as a desperate step, to be taken only at the
last moment. And now that Jeanne seems to  have arranged a safe plan,
I do not like trying such a wild scheme. A week now, and perhaps
all might be arranged; but the question is--Have we a week? Have
we more than twenty-four hours? What do you think, Jeanne?"

"I do not see what is best to do yet," Jeanne said, looking steadily
in the fire. "It is a terrible thing to have to decide; but I see
we must decide." She sat for five minutes without speaking, and
then taking down her cloak from the peg on which it hung she said;
"I will go round to Marthe Pichon again and tell her we are all
so anxious for each other, that I don't think we can judge what is
really the best.  Marthe will see things more clearly and will be
able to advise us."

"Yes, that will be the best plan."

It was three-quarters of an hour before she returned.

"I can see you have a plan," Harry said as he saw that there was
a look of brightness and hope on Jeanne's face.

"Yes, I have a plan, and a good one; that is to say, Marthe has. I
told her all about it, and she said directly that we must be hidden
somewhere till her husband can arrange for us to sail. I said, of
course, that was what was wanted, but how could it be managed? So
she thought it over, and we have quite arranged it. She has a sister
who lives in a fishing-village four miles down the river. She will
go over there to-morrow and arrange with them to take us, and will
get some fisher-girls' dresses for us. She says she is sure her
sister will take us, for she was over here yesterday and heard
about the child getting better, and Marthe told her all sorts of
nonsense about what I had done for it. She thinks we shall be quite
safe there, for there are only six or seven houses, and no one but
fishermen live there. She proposes that you shall be dressed up in
some of her husband's clothes, and shall go out fishing with her
sister's husband. What do you think of that, Harry?"

"Splendid, Jeanne! Can the husband be trusted too?"

"Oh, yes, she says so. He is an honest man, she says; and besides,
they are very poor, and a little money will be a great help to them.
She says she would not propose it unless she was quite, quite sure
of them, for if anything happened to us she would be a wretched
woman all her life."

"Thank God," Harry said fervently, "that one sees daylight at last!
I have felt so helpless lately! Dangers seemed to be thickening
round you, and I could do nothing; and now, Jeanne, you have found
a way out for us where I never should have found one for myself."

"It is God who has done it, not me," Jeanne said reverently. "I did
not begin to go about among the poor people here with any thought
of making friends, but because they were so poor and miserable; but
He must have put it into my heart to do it, in order that a way of
escape might be made for us."




CHAPTER XIII

In the Hands of the Reds


The next morning Harry went out, as usual, immediately after
breakfast, for a walk for two or three hours. This he did partly
to allow the girls to tidy the rooms, an office which had naturally
fallen to them since the commencement of their old nurse's illness;
partly because in active exercise he found some relief from the
burden of his anxieties. To-day he felt more anxious than ever. The
conversation with Marthe Pichon had afforded good grounds of hope
that in a day or two a fair prospect of escape would be open to them;
but this only seemed to make the present anxiety all the sharper.
The woman had promised to get disguises, and make the arrangements
with her friends at the village below during the course of the day,
and by night, if all went well, they might start. He told himself
that he had no reason for supposing that the vague suspicions which
were, he knew, afloat would suddenly be converted into action. He
determined to take his place that afternoon with the committee as
usual, and endeavour to allay their doubts by assuming a violent
attitude. He felt, however, that the day would be more trying than
any he had passed, and that he would give a great deal if the next
twenty-four hours were over. Scarcely heeding where he walked he
was out longer than usual, and it was nearly three hours after he
started before he approached the town again by the road along the
river bank. Just when he came to the first houses a woman, who was
standing there knitting, came up to him.

"You are the citizen who lives with his two sisters next door to
La Mere Pichon, are you not?"

Harry assented hurriedly, with a strange presentiment of evil.

"La Mere Pichon bids me tell you," the woman said, "that half an
hour after you started this morning six men, with an official with
the red scarf, came to the house and arrested your sisters and
carried them off. They are watching there for your return."

Harry staggered as if struck with a blow.

"Poor young man," the woman said compassionately, seeing the ghastly
pallor of his face, "but I pity you. The street is furious that
these wretches should have carried off that sweet young creature,
who was so good to everyone; but what could we do? We hissed the men,
and we would have pelted them had we not been afraid of striking
your sisters. When they had gone La Mere Pichon said to some of
us, 'The best thing we can do for that angel is to save her brother
from being caught also. So do one of you post yourself on each
road leading to the house, and warn him in time. He generally walks
beyond the town. I heard one of his sisters say so.' So some of
us came out on all the roads, and two remained, one at each end of
the street, in case we should miss you. La Mere said, whoever met
you was to tell you to be on this road, by the river, just outside
the town, after dark, and she would bring you some clothes, and
take you where you would be safe; but till then you were to go away
again, and keep far from the town. Do you understand?" she asked,
laying her hand on his arm, for he seemed dazed and stupid with
the shock he had received.

"I understand," he said in a low voice. "Thank you all for your
warning. Yes, I will be here this evening."

So saying he turned and moved away, walking unsteadily as if he
were drunk. The woman looked after him pityingly, and then, shaking
her head and muttering execrations against the "Reds," she made
her way home to tell Mere Pichon that she had fulfilled her mission.

Harry walked on slowly until some distance from the town, and then
threw himself down on a bank by the road and lay for a time silent
and despairing. At last tears came to his relief, and his broad
shoulders shook with a passion of sobbing to think that just at
the moment when a chance of escape was opened--just when all the
dangers seemed nearly past--the girls should have fallen into
the hands of the enemy, and he not there to strike a blow in their
defence.  To think of Jeanne--his bright, fearless Jeanne--and
clinging little Virginie, in the hands of these human  tigers. It
was maddening! But after a time the passion of weeping calmed down,
and Harry sat up suddenly.

"I am a fool," he said as he rose to his feet; "a nice sort of fellow
for a protector, lying here crying like a girl when I had begun to
fancy I was a man; wasting my time here when I know the only hope
for the girls is for me to keep myself free to help them. I need
not lose all hope yet. After Marie has been saved, why shouldn't
I save my Jeanne? I am better off than I was then, for we have
friends who will help. These women whose hearts Jeanne has won will
aid if they can, and may get some of their husbands and brothers
to aid. The battle is not lost yet, and Jeanne will know I shall
move heaven and earth to save her."

Harry's fit of crying, unmanly as he felt it, had afforded him an
immense relief, for he hardly knew himself how great the strain
had been upon him of late, and with a more elastic step he strode
away into the country, and for hours walked on, revolving plan
after plan in his mind for rescuing the girls. Although nothing
very plausible had occurred to him he felt brighter in mind, though
weary in body, when, just after nightfall, he again approached the
spot where he had that morning received so heavy a blow. He was
not disheartened at the difficulty before him, for he knew that he
should have some time yet to hit upon a a plan, and the jails were
so crowded with prisoners that he might fairly reckon upon weeks
before there was any actual necessity for action. Marthe Pichon
was waiting for him.

"Ah, Monsieur," she began, "but this is a terrible day! Oh, if I
had but known a day or two earlier they could have moved in time,
and now they are in the power of those wolves; but we will try
to save them. We have been talking it over. We will all go to the
tribunal, and we will take our husbands and our children with us,
and we will demand their release. We will not let them be murdered.
And now here are the clothes, but you need not put them on now.
There will be a boat here in a few minutes. We have told some of
the sailors how they misjudged you, and they are sorry, now it is
too late, that they would not listen when you spoke to them. However,
they will do all they can for you. I have sent a message by a boy
to my sister to say that I shall be down this evening, so they will
be expecting us.  Ah, here is the boat!"

The splash of oars was heard, and a boat rowed along close to the
bank.

"Is that you, Pierre?"

"It is us, sure enough, Mere Pichon. Is all right?"

"Yes, we are both here."

In another minute the boat was rowed alongside, and Harry and the
woman got on board. There were few words spoken as the two men rowed
vigorously down stream. In three quarters of an hour some lights
were seen on the opposite bank, and the boat was headed towards
them and soon reached a little causeway.

"I shall not be more than twenty minutes," Mere Pichon said as she
got out.

"All right, we will wait!" was the reply, and mounting the causeway
La Mere Pichon led the way to the farthest cottage in the little
fishing-village. A light was burning within, and lifting the latch
she entered, followed by Harry. A fisherman and his wife were
sitting by the fire.

"Here, sister Henriette and brother Pierre," Marthe said; "you
have heard from me how a dear angel, who lived next door to me, has
nursed and tended my little Julie, and by blessing of the Virgin
brought her round from her illness; and those wretches, the Reds,
have carried her off to-day with her sister, and you know what it
is to fall into their hands. This is her brother, and I am going
to ask you to give him shelter and let him stay here with you. I
have brought him a suit of clothes with me, and no one will guess
that he is not the son of some comrade of yours. He will pay you
well for sheltering him till we can put him on board Adolphe's
lugger and send him across the water. If it had not been that the
Reds had come to-day I should have brought his sisters with him. I
was just starting to arrange it with you when those wretches came
and took them away, and it may be that they would pay a hundred
crowns to you, and that is not a sum to be earned every day."

"No, indeed," her sister said briskly; "that will buy Pierre a new
boat, and a good one, such as he can go out to sea in; besides, as
you say, after what his sister did for Julie we are bound to help
them.  What do you say, Pierre?"

Pierre's face had expressed anything but satisfaction until the
money was mentioned, but it then changed entirely. The times were
bad--his boat was old and unseaworthy--a hundred crowns was a
fortune to him.

"I have risked my life often," he said, "to earn five crowns,
therefore I do not say no to the offer. Monsieur, I accept; for a
hundred crowns I will run the risk of keeping you here, and your
sisters too if they should come, until you can cross the water."

"Very well then," Marthe Pichon said. "That's settled, now I shall
be off at once. They will be watching the street for monsieur, and
to-morrow, when they find he has not come back, they will be asking
questions, so the sooner I am back the better."

"We cannot give you much accommodation, monsieur," the fisherman
said. "There is only the loft upstairs, and, for to-night, the sails
to sleep on; but we will try and make you more comfortable to-morrow."

"I care nothing for comfort," Harry answered, "so make no change
for me. Just treat me as if I were what I shall seem to be--a young
fisherman who has come to work with you for a bit. I will row with
you and help you with your nets. Your sister has promised to send
a boy every day with all the news she can gather. Now, if you have
a piece of bread I will gladly eat it, for I have touched nothing
since breakfast."

"We can do better than that for you," the woman replied, and in a
few minutes some fish were frying over the fire. Fortunately the
long hours he had been on his feet had thoroughly tired Harry out,
and after eating his supper he at once ascended to the loft, threw
himself on the heap of sails, and in a few minutes was sound asleep.
The next morning he dressed himself in the fisherman's clothes with
which he had been provided, and went down stairs.

"You will do," Pierre said, looking at him; "but your hands and face
are too white. But I was tanning my sails yesterday, and there is
some of the stuff left in the boiler; if you rub your hands and
face with that you will do well."

Harry took the advice, and the effect was to give him the appearance
of a lad whose face was bronzed by long exposure to the sea and
air.

"You will pass anywhere now," Pierre said approvingly. "I shall give
out that you belong to St. Nazaire, and are the son of a friend of
mine whose fishing-boat was lost in the last gale, and so you have
come to work for a time with me; no one would ask you any more.
Besides, we are all comrades, and hate the Reds, who have spoilt
our trade by killing all our best customers, so if they come asking
questions here they won't get a word out of anyone."

For ten days Harry lived with the fisherman. Adolphe had returned
in his lugger the day after his arrival there, and came over the
next evening to see him. He said that it would be some little time
before the lugger sailed again, but that if he was ready to start
before she sailed he would manage to procure him a passage in some
other craft. He said that he had already been talking to some of
the sailors on the wharves, and that they had promised to go to
the Tribunal when the girls were brought up before it, and that he
would manage to get news from a friend employed in the prison when
that would be.

Harry frequently went up in a boat to Nantes with Pierre with the
fish they had caught. He had no fear of being recognized, and did
not hesitate to land, though he seldom went far from the boat.
Adolphe was generally there, and he and two or three of his comrades,
who were in the secret, always hailed him as an old acquaintance,
so that had any of the spies of the Revolutionists been standing
there, no suspicion that Harry was other than he seemed would have
entered their minds.

One evening, three weeks after Harry's arrival at the hut, Adolphe
came in with his head bound up by a bandage.

"What is the matter, Adolphe?" Harry exclaimed.

"I have bad news for you, monsieur. I learned this morning that
mesdemoiselles were to-day to be brought before the Tribunal, and
we filled the hall with women and two or three score of sailors.
Mesdemoiselles were brought out. The young one seemed frightened,
but the elder was as calm and brave as if she feared nothing. They
were asked their names, and she said:

"'I am Jeanne de St. Caux, and this is my sister Virginie. We have
committed no crime.'

"Carrier himself was there, and he said:

"'You are charged with being enemies of France, with being here
in disguise, and with trying to leave France contrary to the laws
against emigration, and with being in company with one who, under
false pretenses, obtained admission to the Committee of Safety
here, but who is an enemy and traitor to France. What do you say?'

"'I do not deny that we were in disguise,' she said in her clear
voice. 'Nor do I deny that we should have escaped if we could. And
as you treat us as enemies, and our lives are in danger, I cannot
see that we were to blame in doing so. I deny that we are enemies
of France, or that the gentleman who was with us was so either. He
did not obtain a place on the committee by fraud, for he was really
the secretary of Monsieur Robespierre, and he could not refuse the
post when it was offered to him.'

"Then we thought it was time to speak, and the women cried out
for mercy, and said how good she had been to the poor; and we men
cried out too. And then Carrier got into a passion, and said they
were traitors and worthy of death, and that they should die.  And
we shouted we would not have it, and broke into the Tribunal and
surrounded mesdemoiselles, and then the guards rushed in and there
was a fight. We beat them off and got outside, and then a regiment
came up, and they were too strong for us, though we fought stoutly,
I can tell you, for our blood was up; but it was no use. The dear
ladies were captured again, and many of us got severe wounds.  But
the feeling was strong, I can tell you, among the sailors when the
news spread through the town, for some of the women got hurt, too,
in the melee, and I think we could get five hundred men together
to storm the jail."

Harry was bitterly disappointed, for he had hoped that the
intercession of the women might have availed with the judges, and
doubtless would have done so had not Carrier himself been present.
However, he thanked the sailor warmly for the efforts he had made
and gave him some money to distribute among the wounded, for he
always carried half his money concealed in a belt under his clothes.
The other half was hidden away under a board in his lodgings,
so that in case of his being captured the girls would still have
funds available for their escape. As to the prospects of storming
the jail he did not feel sanguine. It was strongly guarded, and
there were three regiments of troops in the town, and  these could
be brought up before the fishermen could force the strong defences
of the jail. However, as a last resource, this might be attempted.

Two days later Adolphe again returned, and was obliged to confess
in answer to Harry's inquiries that he feared the sailors as a body
would not join in the attempt.

"I can hardly blame them, monsieur. For though I myself would risk
everything, and some of the others would do so too, it is a terrible
thing for men with wives and families to brave the anger of these
monsters. They would think nothing of putting us all to death.
It isn't the fighting we are afraid of, though the odds are heavy
against us, but it's the vengeance they would take afterwards,
whether we happened to win or whether we didn't."

"I cannot blame them," Harry said. "As you say, even if they succeeded
there would be a terrible vengeance for it afterwards. No; if the
girls are to be rescued it must be by some other way. I have been
quiet so long because I hoped that the intercession of the women
would have saved them. As that has failed I must set to work. I
have thought of every method, but bribery seems the only chance.
Will you speak to the man you know in the prison, and sound him
whether it will be possible to carry out any plan in that way?"

"I will speak again to him," Adolphe said. "But I have already
sounded him, and he said that there were so many guards and jailers
that he feared that it would be impossible. But I will try again."

The next day, soon after dinner, Adolphe came again, and there was
a white scared look upon his face which filled Harry with alarm.

"What is it, Adolphe? What is your news?"

"Monsieur, I can hardly tell it," Adolphe said in a low awe-stricken
voice. "It is too awful even for these  fiends."

"What is it, Adolphe? Tell me. If they have been murdered I will
go straight to Nantes and kill Carrier the first time he leaves
his house, though they may tear me to pieces afterwards."

"They are not murdered yet," Adolphe said; "but they are to be, and
everyone else." And this time the sailor sat down and cried like
a child.

At last, in answer to Harry's entreaties, he raised his head and
told the story. The Revolutionary Committee had that day been down
at the wharf, and had taken for the public service four old luggers
past service which were lying on  the mud, and they had openly
boasted that an end was going to put to the aristocrats; that the
guillotine was too slow, that the prison must be cleared, and that
they were going to pack the aristocrats on board the luggers and
sink them.

Harry gave a cry of horror, in which the fisherman and his wife
joined, the latter pouring out voluble curses against Carrier and
the Reds.

After his first cry Harry was silent; he sank down on to a low chair,
and sat there with his face hidden in his hands for some minutes,
while the fisherman and his wife poured question after question upon
Adolphe. Presently Harry rose to his feet, and saying to Adolphe,
"Do not go away, I shall be back presently, I must think by myself,"
went out bareheaded into the night.

It was half an hour before he returned.

"Now, Adolphe," he said, "I can think again. Now, how are they to
be saved?"

"I cannot say, monsieur," Adolphe said hesitatingly. "It does not
seem to me--"

"They have to be saved," Harry interrupted him in a grave, steady
voice. "The question is how?"

"Yes, monsieur," Adolphe agreed hesitatingly, "that is the question.
You can rely upon me, monsieur," he went on, "to do my best whatever
you may decide; but I have no head to invent things.  You tell me
and I will do it."

"I know I can rely upon you, Adolphe. As far as I can see there
are but two ways. One is for me to go to Carrier's house, find the
monster, place a pistol at his head, compel him to order them to
be released, stand with him at the prison door till they come out,
embark with him and them in a boat, row down the river, and put to
sea."

"And then, monsieur?" Adolphe asked after a pause, seeing that
Harry was speaking to himself rather than to him.

"Yes, that is the question that I cannot answer," Harry replied.
"I can see all the rest as if it were passing. I can feel Carrier
trembling in my grasp, and shrinking as the pistol touches his
forehead. I can hear him giving his orders, I can see the crowd
falling back as I walk with him through the street, I can hear  him
crying to the people to stand aside and let us pass, I can see us
going down the river together; but what am I to do in a boat with
two ladies at sea?"

"Could you not embark in a lugger?" Adolphe exclaimed, carried
away by the picture which Harry seemed to be describing as if he
saw it. "Why not start in a lugger at once? I might have the Trois
Freres ready, and the men will all stand by you; and when we are
once outside the river we will throw Carrier over to the fishes
and make for England."

"Thank you, Adolphe. If the other plans seem impossible we will
try that, but only as a last resource; for I know the chances are
a hundred to one against its success. I should have no fear as to
Carrier himself, but as I went through the streets some one else
might place a musket at the back of my head and shoot me. If I
could get him alone it would be different. You could go with me;
I would force him to sign the order of release; you could take it;
and I would stand over him till you had time to embark with them;
then I would blow out his brains and make my way down to the river.
But there would be no chance of finding him alone. Monsters like
this are always fearful of assassination."

"And what is monsieur's other plan?"

"The other plan is to get on board the boat in which they are to be
placed--you might find out which it is from your friend in prison--hide
down in the hold until the guards leave her; then join them;
and when she sinks fasten them to a spar and drift down the river
with them till out of sight of the town, when Pierre could row off
and pick them up."

"They say there are to be soldiers on each side of the river,"
Adolphe said despondently, "to shoot down any who may try to swim
to shore. But there would not be many who would try. Most of them,
they say, will be women and children; but the heads would be seen
as you drifted down."

"Yes; but we must think of something, Adolphe--think, man,
think--and you, Pierre, think; if you were in a sinking ship, and you
wanted something which would hide you from the eyes of people a
hundred yards away, what would you take?"

"But you would be seen on anything you climbed on to or clung to,
monsieur.

"But we need not climb on to it," Harry said. "I can take pieces
of cork with me and wrap round them so as to keep their faces just
afloat. I should only want something that would hide their faces."

"A hatch might do," Pierre said.

"The very thing!" Harry exclaimed with a fresh ring of animation
and hopefulness in his voice. "The very thing! Of course there
would be a hatchway to the forecastle of the lugger. We might get
that loosened beforehand, so that it would float off. What is the
size of such a hatch?"

"Some four feet square, monsieur."

"That will be enough," Harry said; "but how high would a hatch
float out of water, because there must be room between the top of
the water for us to breathe as we lie on our backs. Four inches
would be enough. Are the sides buoyant enough to keep the top that
much out of water?"

"I do not think so, monsieur," Pierre said with a shake of the
head. "It would float nearly level with the water."

"But see here, monsieur," Adolphe said eagerly; "I have an idea!
The hatches are covered with tarpaulin. If you could hide in the
forecastle during the night you might cut away all the top underneath
the tarpaulin and prop it up, so that if anyone trod on it in the
morning they would not notice what had been done. Then when they
have pushed off you could knock away the props, the board would
tumble down, and there would be only the tarpaulin cover on the
sides. It would float then quite four inches out of the water, and
that in the middle of the stream would look almost level with it."

"I will try it," Harry said; "there is a chance of success."

"It is a terrible risk, monsieur," Pierre said.

"I know it," Harry replied; "but it is just possible. The chances
are a hundred to one against it, but it may succeed. Well, Pierre,
do you be with your boat on the river just below the point where
the town can be seen. If you see a hatch floating down row to it.
If we are beneath it, well and good; if not--"

"If not, monsieur," the fisherman's wife said solemnly, "we will
pray for your souls."

"Adolphe will send down to you in the morning the two fisher-girls'
dresses his wife had prepared for the ladies. Have some brandy in
the boat and your little charcoal stove, and keep water boiling.
They will want it. And now good-bye, my good friends! Pray for us
to-night. Now, Adolphe, let us hasten back to the town, for there
is much to be done. And first of all you must see your friend in
the prison; find out if mesdemoiselles are on the list of those
to be murdered. I have no doubt they will be, for after the emeute
there has been about them they are almost sure to be among the
first victims.  But above all, find out, if you can, which vessel
they are to be placed in.

"But if I cannot find that out, monsieur; if there is no arrangement
made at all--though I should think there would be, for the butchers
will like to have everything done in order--"

"Then I will get you to find a dozen men you can trust to volunteer
to row the boats to put them on board. And you must be sure to take
the boat in which they are to the lugger we have prepared."

"I will try," Adolphe said, "though I would rather cut off my hand
than pull an oar to take these poor creatures out to be murdered.
But I will do it, monsieur. But except for that I warrant me they
will not get a sailor in Nantes to put his hand to an oar to aid
their accursed work."

It was four o'clock when they arrived at Nantes. Adolphe went
straight to the prison, while Harry walked along the quay. When
he came abreast the centre of the town a number of sailors and
fishermen were standing talking in low tones, and looking with
horror at four luggers moored in a line in the centre of the river.
A number of men drawn from the scum of the town were painting them
white, while a strong body of troops were drawn up on the quay in
readiness to put a summary stop to any demonstration of hostility
on the part of the sailors. These did not indeed venture to express
openly their detestation of the proceedings, but the muttered
execrations and curses that rose from the little group showed how
deep were their feelings.

Harry joined a little knot of three or four men who had been, with
Adolphe, in the habit of greeting him when he landed.

"All is lost, you see!" one of them said in a tone of deep
commiseration. "There is nothing left but vengeance--we will take
that one of these days--but that is a poor consolation for you
now."

"All is not quite lost," Harry said. "I have yet one hope."

"We dare not try force," one of the other men said. "They have marched
three more regiments of Reds in to-day. What can we do against them
without arms? I could cry to think that we are so helpless in the
face of these things."

"No; I know force is useless," Harry said. "Still I have just one
hope left. It is a desperate one, and I cannot tell you what it is
now; but to-night, maybe, Adolphe may ask you to help us. I expect
him here soon."

In half an hour Adolphe returned, and Harry at once joined him.

"I have got the news I wanted," he said. "Mesdemoiselles are to be
in the first batch brought out. Boats have already been bought by
the Reds to row them out, and men hired. They were forced to buy
the boats, for not a man would let his craft for such a purpose.
It would be accursed ever afterwards, no sailor would ever put a
foot on board. The first boats will go to the ship lying lowest in
the stream; then they will come back and take the next batch out
to the vessel next above; and so until all are on board. There will
be fifty placed on board each lugger; and I hear, monsieur, that
is only the first of it, and that the drownings will go on until
the prisons are cleared."

"Thank God we know that much, Adolphe! Now, in the first place,
I want you to get me some tools--a sharp saw, a chisel, a large
screw-driver, and half a dozen large screws; also, two beams of
wood to fasten across the hatchway and keep the boards up after I
have sawn through them; also, I want three bundles of cork--flat
pieces will be the best if you can get them, but that doesn't matter
much. I may as well have an auger too. When you go back to your
house will you go in next door and ask our landlady, Mere Leflo--"

"She died three days ago," the man said.

"Then go into the house without asking, and in the farthest corner
to the right-hand side of the kitchen scratch away the earth, and
you will find a little bag of money. If I fail to-morrow, keep it
for yourself; if I succeed, bring it to me at Pierre's. When does
your lugger sail for England?"

"In three days, monsieur. I have already sounded the captain, and
I think he will take you. And what shall I do next?"

"At nine o'clock this evening have a boat with the things on board
half a mile below the town. Give a low whistle, and I will answer
it. Wrap some flannel round the rowlocks to muffle the sound.  It
will be a dark night, and there's a mist rising already from the
river.  I do not think there's much chance of our meeting any boats
near those vessels."

"No, indeed," Adolphe agreed. "It makes me shiver to look at them.
There will be no boat out on the river to-night except ours.  Will
you not come home with me, monsieur, until it is time to start?
You will need supper, for you must keep up your strength."

Harry accepted the sailor's invitation; and after partaking of
a meal with Adolphe and his wife, who was informed of the attempt
which was about to be made, he sat looking quietly into the fire,
arranging in his mind all the details of the enterprise, uttering
many a silent but fervent prayer that he might be permitted to save
the lives of the two girls.

Adolphe went in and out making his preparations. At half-past eight
he said, touching Harry on the shoulder: "It is time to start,
monsieur. I have got the bag of money. Everything is in the boat,
and I saw the men start with it. It is time for us to go and meet
them."

Marthe burst into tears as she said good-bye to Harry.

"I shall spend all night on my knees," she said, "praying God and
the Holy Virgin to aid you and save those dear angels. Here is
a packet, monsieur, with some food for you to eat in the morning,
and a bottle of good wine. You will want strength for your adventure."

Three or four minutes after Harry and Adolphe had gained
the appointed spot they heard a low whistle on the water. Adolphe
whistled in return, and in another minute a dark object appeared
through the mist. They took their places in the stern, and the boat
rowed quietly off again. So well were the oars muffled that Harry
could hear no sound save an almost imperceptible splash each time
they dipped into the water.

The town was very still and scarce a sound was heard. The awe
of the horrible event which was about to take place hung over the
town, and although there was drinking and exultations among the
ruffians in the back lanes, even these instinctively avoided the
neighbourhood of the river.

So thick was the fog that they were some little time before they
found the white luggers. When they did so they rowed to that moored
lowest down the stream and made fast alongside. Noiselessly the
tools and beams were handed on board. Then Harry said:

"That is all, Adolphe."

"Not at all, monsieur. We are not going to leave you till the work
is done. We have settled that four sets of hands can work better
than one, and besides, we may hit on some idea. No one can say."

Finding it useless to remonstrate, Harry let the good fellows have
their way. The men had already removed their boots, and noiselessly
made their way to the hatch of the forecastle.

"Ah, it is just as well I brought a file with me," Adolphe said in
a low voice, as he knelt down and felt the hatch. "It is fastened
down with a staple and padlock. They are old, but you might have
some trouble in breaking them. But let us see first. No, it moves.
Now, a wrench all together."

As he spoke the staple came up through the rotten wood of the deck.
The hatch was then lifted.

"Lower it down corner-ways into the fo'castle," Adolphe said.  "We
can work all the better at it there. Jacques, do you get that sail
up out of the boat and throw it over the hatch. It isn't likely
anyone will come out here through the fog; but it's just as well
not to run any risk."

As soon as all were below, and the sail spread over the opening
above, Adolphe produced a dark lantern from the great pocket of his
fisherman's cloak, together with two or three candles. These were
lit at the lantern, and the party then set to work.

Two saws had been brought on board, and a piece three feet square
was cut out of the top of the hatch, leaving six inches of wood
all round. Great pains were taken not to saw through the tarpaulin
cover.

"Now, the next thing to do," Harry said, "is to fix the beams so
as to hold the wood in its place again." Four pieces of wood, each
three inches long, were screwed against the combing of the hatchway
in such a position that when the beams were placed upon them they
were exactly level with the top, and supported the piece cut out
from the hatchway in its original position.

"That will do rarely," Adolphe said, when it was finished and the
hatchway experimentally placed in its position. "Now, all you have
to do is just to knock the ends of the beams off their ledges.  The
bit we have cut out will fall down, and you will be able easily
enough to lift the hatchway from its place. It is no great weight
now.

"It will do capitally," Harry agreed, "and when it floats the
tarpaulin will certainly be three inches above the water. Yes, I
have no fear of that part of the adventure going wrong. You don't
think that it will be noticed from the shore, Adolphe?"

"Not it," Adolphe answered confidently. "Why, from the shore it
will look awash with the water. No one will ever dream that there
could be a soul alive underneath it. I begin to think you will do
it, monsieur. At first it seemed hopeless. Now I really do think
there is a chance. I should feel pretty confident if it was you
and two of us who had to do it; but the difficulty will be to get
the young ladies under it, and then to get them to lie quiet there."

"That is the difficulty," Harry admitted. "I am sure of the eldest.
Her nerves are as good as mine; what I fear is about the younger."

"I'll tell you what, monsieur," one of the other men said; "if you
take my advice you will have a piece of rope in readiness and tie
it round her arms so as to prevent her struggling."

"That would be the best way," Harry agreed. "Yes, if I see she
won't be calm and do as I tell her, that is what I will do."

"Now, monsieur, I will bore a couple of auger-holes through the
bulkhead here so that you can see what is going on in the hold.
They have got the hatch off there. I suppose it wasn't padlocked,
and they will no doubt go down to bore the holes the last thing.
Like enough they have bored them already, and will only have to
knock out the plugs. I will just go and see anyhow. If that is so
you may set your mind at rest that none of them will come down here
in the morning."

So saying, taking the dark lantern he climbed up on deck, and
descended the hold.

"That's it," he said when he returned; "there are six holes bored
with plugs in them, so they won't be coming down here. When we
go up we will put the staple into its hole again, so that it will
look all right. Now, monsieur, we will just  have one nip of brandy
apiece out of this bottle, and then we will be off. It's just
gone midnight, and it were best we should leave you to sleep for a
few hours. You will want your strength in the morning, unless, of
course, you would rather we stopped with you for a bit."

"No, thank you, Adolphe, I don't think I shall sleep; I shall sit
and think out every detail."

"Then good night, monsieur. May the good God bless you and aid you
to-morrow, and I think he will! I do think you are the bravest man
I ever met."

"I am not brave for myself, Adolphe, but for them."

The three men shook hands with Harry, and one after another in
husky voices gave him their good wishes. Then they ascended to the
deck, put on the hatch, pressed the staple down through its holes
in the deck, got into the boat, cast off the head-rope, and got
out the oars.

"Mon Dieu, what courage!" one of them exclaimed. "His hand is as
steady, and his voice as firm as if he were going fishing to-morrow."

"I think he will succeed;" Adolphe said, "anyhow, we will have our
boat out below the bend of the river, and lend a hand to Pierre to
get them out."




CHAPTER XIV

The Noyades


When left alone Harry blew out the other candles, but left that
in the lantern burning, and threw himself down on the locker and
thought over every detail of the work for the next day. As he had
said, the great danger was of Virginie struggling and being too
frightened to follow his instructions. Certainly he could fasten a
rope round her, but even then it might be difficult to manage her.
The next danger was, that other persons might cling to the hatchway.
Harry felt the long knife which was concealed in his breast.

"God grant I may not have to use it!" he said. "But, if it must be,
I shall not hesitate. They would simply destroy us without saving
themselves, that is certain; therefore, I am justified in defending
the girls, as I would against any other enemy."

He knelt down and prayed for some time. Then he replaced the piece
they had cut out from the hatch, and fixed the beams beneath it,
and then lay down again. He was worn out by the excitement of the
day, and in spite of his anxiety about the morrow he presently fell
off to sleep.

It was long before he woke. When he did so, he looked through one
of the auger-holes into the hold and saw the light streaming down
the open hatchway, and could tell that the sun was already up.

He ate the food which Marthe had put into his pocket just as he
was starting; saw that the bundles of corks were ready at hand, and
the ropes attached to them so placed that they could be fastened on
in an instant. Then there was nothing to do but to wait. The time
passed slowly. Presently he heard the sound of drums and bugles, and
knew that the troops were taking up their positions on the quays.
At last--it seemed many hours to him--he heard the splash of oars,
and presently a slight shock as a boat ran alongside the lugger.
Then there were voices, and the sound of  feet above as persons
mounted on to the deck. There was a scraping noise by the lugger's
side, and immediately afterwards another bump as the second boat
took the place of the first.

This, as far as Harry could hear, did not leave the lugger. There
was a great hum of talking on deck, principally in women's voices,
and frequently persons stepped on the hatch, and Harry congratulated
himself that the beams gave a solid support to it.

Half an hour passed, as well as Harry could judge, then the boom
of a cannon was heard, and immediately two men leapt down into the
hold, knocked the six plugs out of their place, and climbed up on
deck again. There was again the scraping noise, and Harry knew the
boat had pushed off this time for good. He watched as if fascinated
the six jets of water for a minute or two. Then, saying to himself,
"It is time," he knocked the beams from their ledges, allowed
the square of wood to fall, lifted the hatch, and pushed it off
its combing, and then clambered on to the deck with the corks and
ropes. There were some fifty persons on board, for the most part
women and children, but with two or three men among them. They were
gathered near the stern, and were apparently watching the scene
ashore with astonishment. He hurried aft, having no fear that at
this distance from the shore his figure would be recognized from
the rest, and, if it were, it mattered not. Two or three turned
round as the supposed sailor came aft, exclaiming:

"What does this mean? Why are we put here on board these white
ships? What are they going to do with us?"

"Alas, ladies," he said, "they have put you here to die; they have
bored holes in the ships' bottoms, and in a few minutes they will
sink. It is a wholesale execution."

As he began to speak one of the ladies in the stern pushed her way
through the rest.

"Oh, Harry, is it you!" she exclaimed as he finished. "Is it true,
are we to die together?"

"We are in God's hands, Jeanne, but there is hope yet. Bring Virginie
forward with me."

At Harry's first words a panic had seized all around; one or two
ran to the hatchway and looked down into the hold, and screamed
out that the water was rushing in; then some cried to the distant
crowd to send to save them; others ran up  and down as if demented;
while some threw themselves on their knees. But the panic soon
passed away; all had for weeks looked death in the face, and though
the unexpected form in which it appeared had for the moment shaken
them, they soon recovered. Mothers clasped their daughters to their
breasts for a last farewell, and then all with bowed heads kneeled
and listened in silence to an old man who began to pray aloud.

Jeanne, without another word, had taken Virginie's hands and
accompanied Harry forward to the fore part of the deck.

"Jeanne, I am going to try to save you and Virginie, but everything
depends upon your being cool and brave. I need not urge you, because
I am sure of you. Virginie, will you try to be so for Jeanne's sake
and your own? If you do not we must all die together."

"What are we to do, Harry?" Jeanne said steadily, while Virginie
clung to her sister sobbing bitterly.

"Fasten this bundle of corks between Virginie's shoulders high
up-yes, there."

While Jeanne was doing this, Harry fastened a rope to a ring in the
side of the hatch, then he tied the corks on to Jeanne's shoulders,
and adjusted the third bundle to his own. "Now, Jeanne," he said,
"I will tell you what we are going to do. You see this hatch; when
the vessel sinks it will float, and we must float on our backs with
our faces underneath it so that it will hide us from the sight of
the wretches on shore; and even if they put out in boats to kill
any who may be swimming or clinging to spars, they will not suspect
that there is anyone under this. We may not succeed; an accident
may betray us, but there is a possibility. At anyrate, dear, we
shall live or die together."

"I am content," Jeanne said quietly.

"You know, Jeanne," Harry said, putting his hands on the girl's
shoulders, "that I love you; I should never have told you so until
I got you home if it hadn't been for this; but though I have never
said it, you know I love you."

"I know, Harry, and I love you too with all my heart; so much that
I can feel almost happy that we are going to die together. We are
affianced now, dear, come what will." And she lifted her face to
his.

He gave her one long kiss, then there was a crash. Impatient at
the length of time the vessels were in sinking, those ashore had
opened fire with cannons upon them, and the shot had struck the
lugger just above the water.

With a little cry Virginie fell senseless on the deck.

"That's the best thing that could have happened," Harry said as
Jeanne stooped over her sister. "Lie down on the deck, dear, or
you may be struck; they are firing with muskets now. I am going to
lie down too," he said in answer to her look, "but I shall first
twist this cord round Virginie so as to keep her arms by her side,
otherwise when the water touches her she may come to her senses
and struggle.  That's all right."

Then he lay down on the deck between the girls with his head against
the hatch, and holding the rope.

"Put your head on my shoulder, Jeanne, and I will put my arm round
you; I will hold Virginie the same way the other side. Hold tight
by me for a moment as we sink, I may have to use my arms to get
the hatch over our faces. Do not breathe while you are under the
water, for we shall, no doubt, go down with the lugger, although
I shall try to keep you afloat; when you are under the hatch you
will find you will float with your mouth well out of the water,
and will be able to breathe, the corks will keep you up."

"I understand, Harry; now let us pray until the time comes."

Shot after shot struck the lugger, then Harry felt her give a sudden
lurch. There was a wild cry and the next moment she went down stern
first. She was so nearly even with the water when she sank, that
there was less downward suck than Harry had expected, and striking
out with his feet his head was soon above the surface.  The cord
had kept the hatch within a couple of feet of him, and with some
difficulty, owing to the buoyancy of the corks, he thrust himself
and the girls under it. The tarpaulin was old and rotten, and the
light penetrated in several places, and Harry could see that, in
the position in which they were lying, the faces of both girls were
above the water.

It was useless to speak for their ears were submerged; but a slight
motion from Jeanne responded to a pressure of his arm, and he knew
that she was sensible although she had not made the slightest motion
from the moment the vessel sank. Virginie had not, as he feared
would be the case, recovered her  senses with the shock of the
immersion, but lay insensible on his shoulder. He could see by the
movement of Jeanne's lips that she was praying, and he too thanked
God that He had given success to the plan so far, and prayed for
protection to the end.

With every minute that passed, his hopes rose; everything had
answered beyond his expectation. The other victims had apparently
not even noticed what he was doing, and therefore had not, as he
feared might be the case, interfered with his preparations, nor
had any of them striven to gain a hold on the hatchway. The sinking
of the vessels, and the tearing up of the water by the shot, would
render the surface disturbed and broken, and decrease the chances
of the floating hatch attracting attention. After ten minutes had
passed he felt certain that they must be below the point where the
troops were assembled.

The tide was running out strong, for the time for the massacre had
been fixed at an hour which would ensure the bodies being swept down
to sea. Half an hour would, he thought, take them past the bend,
where their friends would be waiting for them. The time seemed
endless, for although Harry felt the coldness of the water but little
for himself, he knew that it must be trying indeed for Jeanne. As
far as he could see her face it was as white as her sister's; but
he had hold of one of her hands now, and knew that she was still
conscious.

At last he heard the sound of oars. It might not be one of the
friendly boats; but the probability was that it was one or other
of them. Had they seen any other fisherman's boat near the point
they would have rowed high up so as to intercept the hatch before
it reached the stranger. Harry could not hear voices; for although
the water had conveyed the sound of the oars a considerable distance,
he could hear no sound in the air.

The oars came nearer and nearer, and by the quickness with which
the strokes followed each other he knew that two boats were at
hand. Then the hatch was suddenly lifted, and as Harry raised his
head above water there was a loud cheer, and he saw Adolphe and
Pierre, one on each side, stretch out their arms to him. The girls
were first lifted into Pierre's boat, for Jeanne was as incapable
of movement as her sister, then Harry was  dragged in, the rough
sailors shaking his hand and patting him on the shoulder, while
the tears ran down their cheeks.

"Give them some hot brandy and water," were his first words.  Pierre
had a kettle boiling. A glass of hot liquor was placed to Jeanne's
lips.

At first she could not swallow, but after a few drops had passed
her lips she was able to take a sip, and would then have stopped,
but Harry insisted upon her drinking the whole contents of the
glass.

"You must do as you are told, Jeanne," he said in her ear. "You
belong to me now, you know. It can do you no harm chilled as you
are, and may save you from illness."

In the meantime Pierre had poured several spoonfuls of nearly neat
brandy between Virginie's lips. Adolphe, and one of the men with
him, had changed over into Pierre's boat, and were rowing lustily
down the river.

As soon as Jeanne was able to sit up she began to chafe one of
Virginie's hands, while Harry took the other.

"Take off her shoes, Pierre, and soak a swab with the hot water
and put it to her feet."

But with all these efforts it was not until they were close to
Pierre's village that Virginie opened her eyes. When they arrived
at the little causeway the two girls were wrapped up in the peasants
cloaks which Pierre had brought with him. Jeanne took Harry's arm,
while Adolphe lifted Virginie and carried her up. Henriette was
standing at the door as Jeanne staggered in with Harry.

"That is right, mademoiselle. Thank God who has brought you straight
through the danger. Now, do not stop a moment, but come in here
and get into bed, it is all ready for you. The blankets have been
before the fire until the moment you landed; they will soon give
you warmth. Hurry in, mademoiselle; I will undress your sister.
And do you, Monsieur Sandwith, hurry up to the loft and get on dry
clothes."

Harry soon rejoined the party in the kitchen. The strong glass of
hot spirits he had drunk had sent the blood quickly through his
veins, and he felt in a glow of warmth.

"Now," he said, "my friends, I can thank you all for the aid you
have given us. It is to you we owe our lives, for without your aid
I never should have succeeded."

"Say nothing about it, monsieur. We are happy to have saved such a
brave young man, and to have rescued two victims from those monsters."

"Do you think there is any danger of anyone here taking the news
of our landing to the town?" Harry asked. "They must have seen us
come up to the cottage."

"There is no fear," Pierre said confidently. "There is not a man
or woman here who would not tear the _scelerats_ to pieces if they
had the chance. Have they not spoiled our market by killing all
our best customers? And now how are we to earn our living, I should
like to know? Why, not even the poorest beggar in Nantes would buy
fish out of the river for months after this. No, you need have no
fear of them. They may guess who you are, but it is no business of
theirs, and they will hold their tongues."

"At anyrate, Pierre, you had better distribute a few crowns among
them, to help them live till the fishing is good again."

"That I will do, monsieur. It is quite safe; but it is as well to
make it even safer."

In half an hour Pierre's wife came in from the inner room, and said
that both girls were sound asleep.

"Now, Adolphe, it only remains for you to arrange with your captain
for our passage."

"That I will do this afternoon," Adolphe said confidently.  "Consider
it as good as done."

After Adolphe had started for the town, Harry was persuaded by
Pierre to lie down for a bit; but he soon gave up the idea of going
to sleep. His brain was in a whirl from the events of the last
twenty-four hours, and above all he felt so  brimming over with
happiness that the girls had been saved that he soon found it
impossible to lie still. He therefore went down again and joined
Pierre, who was doing some repairs to his boat.

"It is no use my trying to sleep, Pierre. I am too delighted that
everything has turned out right. I want to break out into shouting
and singing."

"I can understand, monsieur. Yes, yes. After great trouble great
joy. I know it myself. I was once adrift in a boat for three weeks.
I was on a voyage to Guadaloupe when we were blown in a hurricane
on a 'key,' as they call the low sandy islands out there. It was
in fact no more than a sand-bank. More than half of those on board
were drowned; but eight of us got ashore, and we managed to haul
up a woman with her child of two years old in her arms.

"We thought at first the mother was dead, but she came round.
The ship went to pieces and we saved nothing. The currents swept
everything away but a boat, which had been thrown up beyond the reach
of the waves. For two days we had no food or water, and suffered
terribly, for the sun had shone down straight on our heads, and we
envied those who had died at once. The woman set us a good example.
She spent her time tending her child and praying to God; and we
sailors, who are rough, you know--but who know that God protects
us, and never go for a long voyage without going to the chapel and
paying for a mass for our safety--we prayed too, and the third
morning there were three turtles asleep on the shore. We turned them
over on their backs, and there was meat for us for a long time.

"We killed one and drank the blood, and ate our first meal raw.
Then we cut up the rest of the flesh and hung it up in the sun to
dry.  That very night we saw the clouds banking up, and knew it
was going to rain.

"'Now,' our mate said, 'if we had but a barrel we could catch water
and start in our boat, but without that the water will last only a
day or two; for if we kill all the turtles and fill their shells,
it will evaporate in a day under this hot sun, and it may be weeks
before there is rain again, and we might as well have died at once.

"'For shame,' the woman said. 'You are doubting the good God again,
after he has saved your life and has sent you food and is now going
to send you water. Do you think he has done all this for nothing?
There must be some way out of the difficulty if we could but think
of it.'

"She sat looking at the turtle for two or three minutes, and then
said:

"'It is easy. Why have you not thought of it? See there. Cut off
one of their heads, and then you can get your arm in, if you take
the biggest. Then cut out all the meat and bones piece by piece,
and there is a great bottle which will hold gallons.'

"We shouted for joy, for it was as she had said, though I am sure
none of us would ever have thought of it if God had not given her
the idea. We soon set to work and got the shell ready. The rain
storm came quickly. We had turned the boat over, the oars had been
washed away, but the mast and sail were lashed to the thwarts. We
made a little hollow in the sand and stretched out the sail, and by
the time this was done and the men were ready with the turtle-shell
the rain came. When it rains in those parts it comes down in
bucketfuls, and we soon had enough in the sail to drink our fill
and to fill up the turtle-shell to the top.

"The next morning we got the boat afloat, put the other turtle
in, with our stock of dried flesh and our shell of water, and set
sail.  But our luck seemed gone. We lay for days scarce moving
through the water, with the sail hanging idle and the sun blazing
down upon us. We had not been careful enough of the water at first,
making sure that in three or four days we should sight land, and
when after three days we put ourselves on short rations, there was
scarce a gallon of water left.

"It was a week after that before we saw a sail. Two of the men had
jumped overboard raving mad, the rest were lying well-nigh senseless
in the bottom of the boat. Only the woman was sitting up, holding
her child in her arms. She was very weak, too; but she had never
complained, never doubted for a moment. Her eyes went from the
child's face over the sea to look for the help she felt would come,
and back again, and at last she said quite quiet and natural:

"'There is the ship. I knew it must come to-day, for my child could
not live through another night.'

"We thought she was dreaming or off her head. But one of us made
a shift to stand up and look, and when he screamed out 'A sail!  A
sail!' two of us who were strong enough looked out also. There she
was and sailing, as we could soon see, on a line as directly for
us as if they had our bearings, and had been sent to fetch us.

"It was not until evening that she came up, though she was bringing
a light breeze along with her. And when we were lifted on to her
deck, and had water held to our lips, and knew that we were safe,
we felt, I expect, much the same as you do now, monsieur, that it
was the good God himself who had assuredly saved us from death.
That was my last voyage, for Henriette was waiting for me at home,
and I had promised her that after we had gone to church together I
would go no more to distant countries, but would settle down here
as a fisherman."

"That was a narrow escape indeed, Pierre," Harry said as he worked
away with the tar brush. "That idea of the turtle was a splendid
one, and you may well say that God put it into the woman's head,
for without it you could never have lived till the ship found you."

In the meantime Henriette had made her rounds to the cottage to see
what remarks had been made as to the coming of her visitors.  She
saw that everyone had guessed that the girls who had been picked
up by Pierre were victims of the massacre, but no one supposed that
it was the result of intention.

"Ah, Mere Gounard, but your good man was fortunate to-day," one
of the women said. "My man did not go out. We heard what was doing
at Nantes, and he had not the heart to go; besides, who would buy
fish caught to-day? If he had thought of it he would have gone too,
and perhaps he would have picked up somebody, as you have done.
Poor things, what an escape for them!"

"It is wonderful that they have come round," Henriette said.  "It
was lucky my husband had some brandy in the boat. He thought for a
time he would never bring the youngest round. They are only young
girls. What harm could they have done that those monsters at Nantes
should try to murder them? There is no fear, I hope, that any in
the village will say a word about it."

"What!" the woman said indignantly. "Do you think that anyone
here would betray a comrade to the Reds? Why, we would tear him to
pieces."

"No, no," Henriette said; "I never thought for a moment that anyone
would do it intentionally; but the boys might let slip a word
carelessly which might bring them down upon us."

"We will take care of that," the woman said. "Make your mind easy.
Not a soul outside the village will ever know of it."

"And," Henriette added, "one of them has some money hidden upon her,
and she told me just before I came out, when I was saying that the
village would have a bad time now the fishing was spoiled--that
as she hoped to cross to England in a few days, and would have
no need of the money, for it seems that she can get plenty over
there, she will give five crowns to each house in the village as
a thank-offering."

"Well, that is not to be despised," the woman said. "We shall have
a hard time of it for a bit, and that will carry us on through it.
You are sure she can spare it; because we would rather starve than
take it if she cannot."

Henriette assured her that her visitor said she could afford it
well.

"Well, then, it's a lucky day for the village, Mere Gounard, that
your husband picked them up."

"Well, I will go back now," Henriette said. "Will you go round the
village and tell the others about silencing the children? I must
get some broth ready by the time these poor creatures wake."

The next morning Jeanne appeared at breakfast in her dress as
a fish-girl, but few words were spoken between her and Harry, for
the fisherman and his wife were present.

"How is Virginie?" he asked.

"She's better, but she is weak and languid, so I told her she must
stop in bed for to-day. Do not look anxious. I have no doubt that
she will be well enough to be up to-morrow. She has been sleeping
ever since she went to bed yesterday, and when she woke she had
a basin of broth. I think by to-morrow she will be well enough to
get up. But it will be some time before she is herself again. It
is a terrible strain for her to have gone through, but she was very
brave all the time we were in prison. She had such confidence in
you, she felt sure that you would manage somehow to rescue us."

Alter breakfast Jeanne strolled down with Harry to the river-side.

"I feel strange with you, Harry," she said. "Before you seemed
almost like a brother, and now it is so different."

"Yes; but happier?" Harry asked gently.

"Oh, so much happier, Harry! But there is one thing I want to tell
you. It might seem strange to you that I should tell you I loved you
on my own account without your speaking to the head of the family."

"But there was no time for that, Jeanne," Harry said smiling.

"No," Jeanne said simply. "I suppose it would have been the same
anyhow; but I want to tell you, Harry, that in the first letter
which she sent me when she was in prison, Marie told me, that as
she might not see me again, she thought it right I should know that
our father and mother had told her that night we left home that
they thought I cared for you. You didn't think so, did you, Harry?"
she broke off with a vivid blush. "You did not think I cared for
you before you cared for me?"

"No, indeed, Jeanne," he said earnestly. "It never entered my mind.
You see, dear, up to the beginning of that time I only felt as a
boy, and in England lads of eighteen or nineteen seldom think about
such things at all. It was only afterwards, when somehow the danger
and the anxiety seemed to make a man of me, when I saw how brave
and thoughtful and unselfish you were, that I knew I loved you, and
felt that if you could some day love me, I should be the happiest
fellow alive. Before that I thought of you as a dear little girl
who inclined to make rather too much of me because of that dog
business.  And did you really care for me then?"

"I never thought of it in that way, Harry, any more than you did,
but I know now that my mother was right, and that I loved you all
along without knowing it. My dear father and mother told Marie
that they thought I was fond of you, and that, if at any time you
should get fond of me too and ask for my hand, they gave their
approval beforehand, for they were sure that you would make me
happy.

"So they told Marie and Ernest, who, if ill came to them, would be
the heads of the family, that I had their consent to marry you. It
makes me happy to know this, Harry."

"I am very glad, too, dear," Harry said earnestly.

"It is very satisfactory for you, and it is very pleasant to me to
know that they were ready to trust you to me. Ah!" he said suddenly,
"that was what was in the letter. I wondered a little at the time,
for somehow after that, Jeanne, you were a little different with
me. I thought at first I might somehow have offended you. But I did
not think that long," he went on, as Jeanne  uttered an indignant
exclamation, "because if anything offended you, you always spoke
out frankly. Still I wondered over it for some time, and certainly
I was never near guessing the truth."

"I could not help being a little different," Jeanne said shyly. "I
had never thought of it before, and though I am sure it made me
happy, I could not feel quite the same with you, especially as I
knew that you never thought of me like that."

"But you thought of me so afterwards, Jeanne?"

"Sometimes just for a moment, but I tried not to think of it,
Harry. We were so strangely placed, and it made it easier for you
to be a brother, and I felt sure you would not speak till we were
safely in England, and I was in Ernest's care. But," she said
with a little laugh, "you were nearly speaking that evening in the
cottage when you felt so despairing."

"Very nearly, Jeanne; I did so want comfort."

And so they talked happily together for an hour.

"I wonder Pierre does not come down to his boat," Harry said at
last. "There were several more things wanting doing to it. Why,
there he is calling. Surely it can never be dinner-time; but that's
what he says. It doesn't seem an hour since breakfast."

Jeanne hurried on into the hut.

"Why, Pierre," Harry said to the fisherman, who was waiting outside
for him, "I thought you were going on with your boat."

"So I was, monsieur, but Henriette told me I should be in the way."

"In the way, Pierre!" Harry repeated in surprise.

"Ah, monsieur," Pierre said with a twinkle in his eye, "you have
been deceiving us. My wife saw it in a moment when the young lady
came to breakfast.

"'Brother!' she said to me when you went out; 'don't tell me!
Monsieur is the young lady's lover. Brother and sister don't look
at each other like that. Why, one could see it with half an eye.'

"Your wife is right, Pierre; mademoiselle is my fiance. I am really
an Englishman. She and her sister had their old nurse with them,
till the latter died some three weeks since; but I have always been
called their brother, because it made it easier for her."

"Quite right, monsieur; but my wife and I are glad to see that it
is otherwise, and that, after all you have risked for that pretty
creature, you are going to be happy together. My wife was not
surprised.  Women are sharper than men in these matters, and she
said to me, when she heard what you were going to do to save them,
'I would wager, Pierre, that one of these mesdemoiselles is not
monsieur's sister.  Men will do a great deal for their sister, but
I never heard of a man throwing away his life as he is going to do
on the mere chance of saving one.'"

"I should have done just the same had it been one of my sisters,"
Harry said a little indignantly.

"Perhaps you would, monsieur, I do not say no," the fisherman said,
shaking his head; "but brothers do not often do so."

A stop was put to the conversation by Henriette putting her head
outside the door and demanding angrily what they were stopping
talking there for when the fish was getting cold.

In the evening Adolphe and his wife came in.

"Ah, mademoiselle," the woman said as she embraced Jeanne with tears
in her eyes, "how thankful I am to see you again! I never thought
I should do so. My heart almost stopped beating yesterday when
I heard the guns. I and my little one were on our knees praying
to the good God for the dear lady who had saved her life. Adolphe
had spoken hopefully, but it hardly seemed to me that it could be,
and when he brought back the news that he had left you all safely
here, I could hardly believe it was true."

"And I must thank you also, mademoiselle," Adolphe said, "for saving
the life of my little one. I never expected to see her alive again,
and when the lugger made fast to the wharf I was afraid to go home,
and I hung about till Marthe had heard we were in and came down
to me with Julie in her arms, looking almost herself again. Ah,
mademoiselle, you cannot tell how glad I was when she told me that
there was a way of paying some part of my debt to you."

"You have been able to pay more than your debt," Jeanne said gently;
"if I saved one life you have helped to save three."

"No, we shall be only quits, mademoiselle, for what would Marthe's
life and mine be worth if the child had died?

"There are fresh notices stuck up," he went on, "warning all
masters of ships, fishermen, and others, against taking passengers
on board, and saying that the penalty of assisting the enemies of
France to escape from justice is death."

"That is rather serious," Harry said.

"It is nothing," Adolphe replied confidently. "After yesterday's
work there is not a sailor or fisherman in the port but would do all
he could to help people to escape from the hands of the butchers,
and once on board, it will help you. You may be sure the sailors
will do their best to run away if they can, or to hide any on
board, should they be overhauled, now they know that they will be
guillotined if anyone is found. However, our captain has made the
agreement, and he is a man of his word; besides, he hates the Reds.
I have been helping ship the casks to-day, and we have stowed them
so as to leave space into which your sisters can crawl and the
entrance be stopped up with casks, if we should be overhauled. As
for you, monsieur, you will pass anywhere as one of the crew, and
we have arranged that one of the men shall at the last moment stay
behind, so that the number will be right, and you will answer to
his name. We have thought matters over, you see, and I can tell
you that the captain does it more because he hates the Reds than
for the money. The day before, he would give me no answer. He said
he thought the risk was too great; but when I saw him last night he
was a different man altogether. His face was as white as a sheet,
and his eyes seemed on fire, and he said, 'I will take your friends,
Adolphe. I would take them without a penny. I should never sleep
again if, owing to me, they fell into the hands of these monsters.'
So you see he is in it heart and soul."

After half an hour's talk Adolphe and Marthe took their leave.  Both
refused the reward which Harry had promised, but Harry insisted,
and at last Jeanne said:

"You can refuse for yourselves, but you will make me unhappy if
you do not take it. Put it by for Julie; it will help swell her dot
when she marries, and will set her husband up in a good fishing-boat
if she takes to a sailor."

So it was arranged, and Adolphe and his wife went off invoking
blessings on the heads of the fugitives. At daybreak the party took
their places in the boat with the fishermen. Virginie was still
weak, but was able to walk with Harry's help.  Half an hour later
a lugger was seen coming down with the wind and tide. She carried
a small white flag flying on the mizzen.

"That is her," the fisherman said; "that is the signal."

He rowed out into the middle of the river. In a few minutes the
lugger came dashing along, her course took her within a few feet
of the boat, a rope was thrown, and in an instant the boat was
tearing through the water alongside her. Half a dozen hands were
stretched out, the girls and Harry sprang on board, the rope was
cast off, and the fisherman, with a cheery "God speed you," put
out his oars again and rowed to shore.




CHAPTER XV

England


"Go below, mesdemoiselles," the captain of the lugger said as soon
as they had put foot on the deck. "If anyone on the shore were to
see us as we ran down, and notice women on deck, he would think it
strange. At anyrate it's best to be on the safe side."

So saying he led the way to his cabin below.

"It is a rough place, mesdemoiselles," he said, removing his cap,
"but it is better than the prisons at Nantes. I am sorry to say
that when we get down near the forts I shall have to ask you to
hide down below the casks. I heard last night that in future every
boat going out of the river, even if it is only a fishing-boat,
is to be searched. But you needn't be afraid; we have constructed
a hiding-place, where they will never find you unless they unloaded
the whole lugger, and that there is no chance of their doing."

"We do not mind where we hide, captain," Jeanne said. "We have been
hiding for the last six months, and we are indeed grateful to you
for having consented to take us with you."

"I hope that you will not be the last that the Trois Freres will
carry across," the captain said. "Whatever be the risk, in future
I will take any fugitives who wish to escape to England. At first
I was against the government, for I thought the people were taxed
too heavily, and that if we did away with the nobles things would
be better for those who work for their living, but I never bargained
for bloodshed and murder, and that affair I saw yesterday has
sickened me altogether; and fond as I am of the Trois Freres, I
would myself bore holes in her and sink her if I had Carrier and
the whole of his murderous gang securely fastened below hatches.
This cabin is at your disposal, mesdemoiselles, during the voyage,
and I trust you will make yourselves as comfortable as  you can.
Ah, here is the boy with coffee. Now, if you will permit me, I will
go on deck and look after her course."

In the meantime Harry was chatting with Adolphe, who introduced
him to the crew, whom he had already told of the services Jeanne
had rendered, and as several of them lived in the same street they
too had heard from their wives of the young woman who lodged with
Mere Leflo, and had done so much for those who were suffering.  He
was therefore cordially received by the sailors, to each of whom
the captain had already promised double pay for the voyage if they
got through safely.

"You will remember," Adolphe said, "that you are Andre Leboeuf.
Andre had to make a cold swim of it this morning, for there was the
commissary on the wharf when we started, and he had the captain's
list of the crew, and saw that each man was on board and searched
high and low to see that there was no one else. So Andre, instead
of slipping off home again, had to go with us. When we were out of
sight of the town the captain steered as near the bank as he could
and Andre jumped over and swam ashore. It is all the better as it
has turned out, because the commissary signed the list of the crew
and put a seal to it."

In four hours the Trois Freres was approaching the forts at the
mouth of the river, and the captain came down to the cabin, in
which Harry was chatting with the two girls.

"Now, mesdemoiselles," he said, "it is time for you to go to your
hiding-place, for it will take us nearly half an hour to close it
up again. As soon as the Reds have left us we will let you out."

The hatch was lifted and they descended into the hold of the
vessel, which was full of kegs to within three feet of the deck.
The captain carried a lantern.

"Please follow me, mesdemoiselles, you must crawl along here."

The girls followed him until they were close to the bulkhead dividing
the hold from the forecastle. Two feet from this there was a vacant
space.

"Now, mesdemoiselles, if you will give me your hands I will lower
you down here. Do not be afraid--your feet will touch the bottom;
and I have had some hay put there for you to sit upon.  Adolphe,
you had better go down first with that lantern of yours to receive
them."

The girls were lowered down and found themselves in a space of five
feet long and two feet wide. One side was formed by the bulkhead,
on the other there were kegs. Four feet from the bottom a beam of
wood had been nailed against the bulkhead. The captain now handed
down to Adolphe some short beams; these he fixed with one end
resting on the beam, the other in a space between the kegs.

"This is to form the roof, mesdemoiselles," he said. "I am going
up now, and then we shall place three tiers of kegs on these beams,
which will fill it up level with the rest above. I think you will
have plenty of air, for it can get down between the casks, and the
captain will leave the hatchway open. Are you comfortable?"

"Quite," Jeanne said firmly, but Virginie did not answer; the
thought of being shut up down there in the dark was terrible to
her.  However, the warm, steady pressure of Jeanne's hand reassured
her, and she kept her fears to herself. The kegs were lowered into
their places, and all was made smooth just as one of the men called
down the hatchway to the captain:

"There is a gunboat coming out from the port, captain."

After a last look round the captain sprang on to the deck and
ordered the sails to be lowered, and in a few minutes the gunboat
ran alongside.

"Show me your papers," an officer said as he leaped on board followed
by half a dozen sailors. The captain went down into his cabin and
brought up the papers.

"That is all right," the officer said glancing at them; "now, where
is the list of your crew?"

"This is it," the captain said taking it from his pocket; "a
commissary at Nantes went through them on starting and placed his
seal to it, as you see."

"Form the men up, and let them answer to their names," the officer
said. The men formed in line and the officer read out the names;
Harry answering for Andre Leboeuf. "That is all right, so far,"
the officer said. "Now, sir, I must, according to my orders, search
your vessel to see that no one is concealed there."

"By all means," the captain said, "you will find the Trois Freres
carries nothing contraband except her cargo. I have already taken
off the hatch, as you see, in order to save time."

The forecastles and cabin were first searched closely. Several of
the sailors then descended into the hold. Two lanterns were handed
down to them.

"It looks all clear, sir," one of the sailors said to their officer.
The latter leaped down on to the kegs and looked round.

"Yes, it looks all right, but you had better shift some of the kegs
and see that all is solid."

Some of the kegs were moved from their position, and in a few places
some of the second tier were also lifted.  The officer himself
superintended the search.

"I think I can let you go on now, Captain Grignaud," he said.
"Your men can stow the cargo again. A good voyage to you, and may
you meet with no English cruisers by the way."

The captain at once gave orders for the sails to be run up again,
and by the time the officer and his men had climbed over the bulwarks
into the gunboat the Trois Freres had already way upon her. The
captain then gave the order for the men to go below and stow the
casks again. Adolphe and Harry were the first to leap down, and
before the vessels were two hundred yards apart they had removed
the two uppermost tiers of kegs next to the bulkhead, and were able
to speak to the girls.

"Are you all right down there, Jeanne?" Harry asked.

"Yes, quite right, Harry, though the air is rather close. Virginie
has fainted; she was frightened when she heard them moving the
kegs just over our heads; but she will come round as soon as you
get her on deck."

The last tier was removed, and Harry lowered himself into the hold;
he and Jeanne raised Virginie until Adolphe and one of the other
sailors could reach her. Jeanne was lifted on to the cross beams,
and was soon beside her sister, and Harry quickly clambered up.

"They must not come on deck yet," the captain said, speaking down
the hatchway. "We are too close to the gunboat, and from the forts
with their glasses they can see what is passing on our deck. Don't
replace the kegs over the hole again, Adolphe; we may be overhauled
again, and had better leave it open in case of emergencies."

Virginie was carried under the open hatchway; some water was handed
down to Jeanne, who sprinkled it on her face, and this with the
fresh air speedily brought her round. When the lugger was a mile
below the forts, the captain said that they could now safely come
up, and they were soon in possession of the cabin again. Before
evening the lugger was out of sight of land. The wind was blowing
freshly, and she raced along leaving a broad track of foam behind
her. The captain and crew were in high spirits at having succeeded
in carrying off the fugitives from under the noses of their enemies,
and at the progress the lugger was making.

"We shall not be far from the coast of England by to-morrow night,"
the captain said to Harry, "that is if we have the luck to avoid
meeting any of the English cruisers. We don't care much for the
revenue cutters, for there is not one of them that can overhaul
the Trois Freres in a wind like this. They have all had more than
one try, but we can laugh at them; but it would be a different
thing if we fell in with one of the Channel cruisers; in a light
wind we could keep away from them too, but with a brisk wind like
this we should have no chance with them; they carry too much sail
for us. There is the boy carrying in the supper to your sisters;
with their permission, you and I will sup with them."

The captain sent in a polite message to the girls, and on the
receipt of the answer that they would be very pleased to have the
captain's company, he and Harry went down. The meal was an excellent
one, but the girls ate but little, for they were both beginning to
feel the effects of the motion of the vessel, for they had, when
once fairly at sea, kept on deck. The captain perceiving that they
ate but little proposed to Harry that coffee should be served on
deck, so that the ladies might at once lie down for the night.

"Now, captain," Harry said as the skipper lit his pipe, "I daresay
you would like to hear how we came to be fugitives on board your
ship."

"If you have no obligation to tell me, I should indeed," the captain
replied; "I have been wondering all day how you young people escaped
the search for suspects so long, and how you came to be at Nantes,
where, as Adolphe tells me, your sister was an angel among the poor,
and that you yourself were a member of the Revolutionary Committee;
that seemed to me the most extraordinary of all, but I wouldn't
ask any questions until you yourself volunteered to enlighten me."

Harry thereupon related the whole story of their adventures,
concealing only the fact that the girls were not his sisters; as
it was less awkward for Jeanne that this relationship should be
supposed to exist.

"Sapriste, your adventures have been marvellous, monsieur, and I
congratulate you heartily. You have a rare head and courage, and
yet you cannot be above twenty."

"I am just nineteen," Harry replied.

"Just nineteen, and you succeeded in getting your friend safely
out of that mob of scoundrels in the Abbaye, got your elder sister
out of La Force, you fooled Robespierre and the Revolutionists
in Nantes, and you carried those two girls safely through France,
rescued them from the white lugger, and got them on board the Trois
Freres! It sounds like a miracle."

"The getting them on board the Trois Freres was, you must remember,
my sister's work. I had failed and was in despair. Suspicions were
already aroused, and we should assuredly have been arrested if it
had not been that she had won the heart of Adolphe's wife by nursing
her child in its illness."

"That is so," the captain agreed; "and they must have good courage
too that they didn't betray themselves all that time. And now I
tell you what I will do, monsieur. If you will write a letter to
your sister in Paris, saying that you and the other two have reached
England in safety, I will when I return send it by sure hand to
Paris.  To make all safe you had better send it to the people she
is staying with, and word it so that no one will understand it if
they were to read it. Say, for example:

"'My dear Sister,  You will be glad to hear that the consignment of
lace has been safely landed in England,' Then you can go on saying
that 'your mother is better, and that you expect to be married
soon, as you have made a good profit out of the lace,' and so on;
and just sign your name--'Your brother Henri.'

"I can trust the man who will deliver it in Paris, but it is just
as well always to be on the safe side. If your letter is opened and
read, anyone will suppose that it is written by a sailor belonging
to one of the Nantes luggers."

Harry thanked the captain warmly for the offer, and said that the
letter would indeed be an immense comfort to his sister and friend.

"I will tell the man that he is to ask if there is any answer," the
captain said. "And if your sister is as sharp as you are she will
write the same sort of letter, and I will bring it across with me
to England the first voyage I make after I get it."

Harry slept down in the forecastle with the crew, the captain
keeping on deck all night. He was awoke by an order shouted down
the forecastle for all hands to come on deck; and hurrying up with
the rest found that the sun had just risen. The day was beautifully
fine, and to Harry's surprise he found that those on deck had
already lowered the great lugsails.

"What is it, captain?" he asked.

"There is a sail there I don't like," the captain said. "If I am
not mistaken that is an English frigate."

There were several sails in sight, but the one to which the captain
pointed was crossing ahead of the lugger. Her hull could not be
seen, and indeed from the deck only her topsails and royals were
visible above the water.

"I hope she will not see us," the captain said. "We are low in the
water, and these stump masts could not be seen at that distance
even by a look-out at the mast-head.

"We are already somewhat astern of her, and every minute will take
her further away. If she does not see us in a quarter of an hour,
we shall be safe. If she does, there is nothing for it but to run
back towards the French coast. We should have such a long start
that with this wind she would never catch us. But she may fire her
guns and bring another cruiser down upon us and cut us off. There
are a dozen of them watching on different parts of the coast."

Harry kept his eye anxiously upon the ship, but she sailed steadily
on; and in half an hour the sails were again hoisted and the Trois
Freres proceeded on her way. She passed comparatively near several
merchantmen, but these paid no attention to her. She was too small
for a privateer, and her object and destination were easily guessed
at. The girls soon came on deck, and the captain had some cushions
placed for them under shelter of the bulwark; for although the sun
was shining brightly the wind was keen and piercing.

"Are we beyond danger?" was Virginie's first question as Harry took
his seat by her.

"Beyond all danger of being overtaken--that is to say, beyond all
danger of meeting a French vessel-of-war. They very seldom venture
to show themselves many miles from port, except, of course, as a
fleet; for single vessels would soon get picked up by our cruisers.
Yes, I think we are quite out of danger. There is only one chance
against us."

"And what is that, Harry?" Jeanne asked.

"It is not a serious one," Harry replied; "it is only that we may
be chased by English revenue cutters and forced to run off from the
English coast again. But even then we should soon return. Besides,
I have no doubt the captain would let us have a boat, so that we
could be picked up by the cutter in pursuit of us."

"I don't think that would be a good plan," Jeanne said; "because
they might not stop to pick us up, and then we might have a long
way to reach the shore. No, I think it will be better to stay on
board, Harry; for, as you say, if she does have to run away for a
time, she is sure to come back again to unload her cargo. But of
course do whatever you think best."

"I think your view is the best, Jeanne. However, I hope the
opportunity will not occur, and that the Trois Freres will run her
cargo without interference. The captain tells me he is making for
a point on the Dorsetshire coast, and that he is expected. Of course
he could not say the exact day he would be here. But he told them
the day on which, if he could get his cargo on board, he should
sail, and they will be looking out for him."

Before sunset the English coast was visible.

"We could not have timed it better," the captain said. "It will be
getting dark before they can make us out even from the cliffs."

Every sail was now scrutinized by the captain through his glass,
but he saw nothing that looked suspicious. At nine o'clock in the
evening the lugger was within three miles of the coast.

"Get ready the signal lanterns," the captain ordered. And a few
minutes later three lanterns were hoisted, one above the other.
Almost immediately two lights were shown in a line on top of the
cliff.

"There is our answer," the captain said. "There is nothing to be
done to-night. That means 'The revenue men are on the look-out;
come back to-morrow night."'

"But they are always on the look-out, are they not?" Harry asked.

"Yes," the captain said; "but when our friends on shore know we are
coming they try to throw them off the scent. It will be whispered
about to-morrow that a run is likely to be made ten miles along
the coast, and they will take care that this comes to the ears of
the revenue officer. Then to-morrow evening after dusk a fishing-boat
will go out and show some lights  two miles off shore at the point
named, and a rocket will be sent up from the cliff. That will
convince them that the news is true, and the revenue officers will
hurry away in that direction with every man they can get together.
Then we shall run here and land our cargo. There will be plenty of
carts waiting for us, and before the revenue men are back the kegs
will be stowed safely away miles inland. Of course things go wrong
sometimes and the revenue officers are not to be fooled, but in
nine cases out of ten we manage to run our cargoes without a shot
being fired. Now I must get off shore again."

The orders were given, and the Trois Freres was soon running out
to sea. They stood far out and then lowered the sails and drifted
until late in the afternoon, when they again made sail for the
land.  At ten o'clock the signal lights were again exhibited, and
this time the answer was made by one light low down by the water's
edge.

"The coast is clear," the captain said, rubbing his hands. "We'll
take her in as close as she will go, the less distance there is to
row the better."

The Trois Freres was run on until within a hundred yards of the
shore, then a light anchor was dropped. The two boats had already
been lowered and were towed alongside, and the work of transferring
the cargo at once began.

"Do you go in the first boat, monsieur, with the ladies," the
captain said. "The sooner you are ashore the better. There is no
saying whether we may not be disturbed and obliged to run out to
sea again at a moment's notice."

"Thank God!" he exclaimed, as after wading through the shallow
water he stood on the shore, while two of the sailors carried the
girls and put them beside him. "Thank God, I have got you safe on
English soil at last. I began to despair at one time."

"Thank God indeed," Jeanne said reverently; "but I never quite
despaired, Harry. It seemed to me He had protected us through so
many dangers, that He must mean that we should go safely through
them all, and yet it did seem hopeless at one time."

"We had better stand on one side, girls, or rather we had better
push on up the cliff. These people are all too busy to notice us,
and you might get knocked down; besides, the coastguard might arrive
at any moment, and then there would be a fight. So let us get well
away from them."

But they had difficulty in making their way up the cliff, for the
path was filled with men carrying up tubs or coming down for more
after placing them in the carts, which were waiting to convey them
inland. At last they got to the top. One of the carts was already
laden, and was on the point of driving off when Harry asked the man
if he could tell him of any farmhouse near, where the two ladies
who had landed with him could pass the night.

"Master's place is two miles away," the man said; "but if you like
to walk as far, he will take you in, I doubt not."

The girls at once agreed to the proposal, and in three quarters of
an hour the cart drew up at a farmhouse.

"Is it all right, Bill?" a man asked, opening the door as the cart
stopped.

"Yes, it be all right. Not one of them revenue chaps nigh the place.
Here be the load of tubs; they was the first that came ashore."

"Who have you got here?" the farmer asked as Harry came forward
with the girls.

"These are two young ladies who have crossed in the lugger," Harry
replied. "They have narrowly escaped being murdered in France by
the Revolutionists, and have gone through a terrible time. As they
have nowhere to go to-night, I thought perhaps you would kindly
let them sit by your fire till morning."

"Surely I will," the farmer said. "Get ye in, get ye in. Mistress,
here are two young French ladies who have escaped from those
bloody-minded scoundrels in Paris. I  needn't tell you to do what
you can for them."

The farmer's wife at once came forward and received the girls most
kindly. They had both picked up a little English during Harry's
residence at the chateau, and feeling they were in good hands, Harry
again went out and lent his assistance to the farmer in carrying
the tubs down to a place of concealment made under the flooring of
one of the barns.

The next day the farmer drove them in his gig to a town some miles
inland. Here they procured dresses in which they could travel without
exciting attention, and took their places in the coach which passed
through the town for London next day.

That evening Harry gently broke to the girls the news of their
brothers' death, for he thought that it would otherwise come as a
terrible shock to them on their arrival at his home. Virginie was
terribly upset, and Jeanne cried for some time, then she said:

"Your news does not surprise me, Harry. I have had a feeling all
along that you knew something, but were keeping it from me.  You
spoke so very seldom of them, and when you did it seemed to me that
what you said was not spoken in your natural voice. I felt sure
that had you known nothing you would have often talked to us of
meeting them in London, and of the happiness it would be. I would
not ask, because I was sure you had a good reason for not telling
us; but I was quite sure that there was something."

"I thought it better to keep it from you, Jeanne, until the danger
was all over. In the first place you had need of all your courage
and strength; in the next place it was possible that you might never
reach England, and in that case you would never have suffered the
pain of knowing anything about it."

"How thoughtful you are, Harry!" Jeanne murmured. "Oh how much
we owe you! But oh how strange and lonely we seem--everyone gone
except Marie, and we may never see her again!"

"You will see her again, never fear," Harry said confidently. "And
you will not feel lonely long, for I can promise you that before
you have been long at my mother's place you will feel like one of
the family."

"Yes; but I shall not be one of the family," Jeanne said.

"Not yet, Jeanne. But mother will look upon you as her daughter
directly I tell her that you have promised to become so in reality
some day."

Harry's reception, when with the two girls he drove up in a hackney
coach to the house at Cheyne Walk, was overwhelming, and the two
French girls were at first almost bewildered by the rush of boys
and girls who tore down the steps and threw themselves upon Harry's
neck.

"You will stifle me between you all," Harry said, after he had
responded to the embraces. "Where are father and mother?"

"Father is out, and mother is in the garden. No, there she is"--as
Mrs. Sandwith, pale and agitated, appeared at the door, having
hurried in when one of the young ones had shouted out from a back
window: "Harry has come!"

"Oh, my boy, we had given you up," she sobbed as Harry rushed into
her arms.

"I am worth a great many dead men yet, mother. But now let me
introduce to you Mesdemoiselles Jeanne and Virginie de St. Caux,
of whom I have written to you so often. They are orphans, mother,
and I have promised them that you and father will fill the place
of their parents."

"That will we willingly," Mrs. Sandwith said, turning to the girls
and kissing them with motherly kindness. "Come in, my dears, and
welcome home for the sake of my dear boy, and for that of your
parents who were so kind to him. Never mind all these wild young
people," she added, as the boys and girls pressed round to shake
hands with the new-comers. "You will get accustomed to their way
presently.  Do you speak in English?"

"Enough to understand," Jeanne said; "but not enough to speak much.
Thank you, madame, for receiving us so kindly, for we are all alone
in the world."

Mrs. Sandwith saw the girl's lip quiver, and putting aside her
longing to talk to her son, said:

"Harry, do take them all out in the garden for a short time.  They
are all talking at once, and this is a perfect babel."

And thus having cleared the room she sat down to talk to the two
girls, and soon made them feel at home with her by her unaffected
kindness. Dr. Sandwith soon afterwards ran out to the excited
chattering group in the garden, and after a few minutes' happy talk
with him, Harry spoke to him of the visitors who were closeted with
his mother.

"I want you to make them feel it is their home, father. They will
be no burden pecuniarily, for there are money and jewels worth a
large sum over here."

"Of course I know that," Dr. Sandwith said, "seeing that, as you
know, they were consigned to me, and the marquis wrote to ask me
to act as his agent. The money is invested in stock, and the jewels
are in the hands of my bankers. I had begun to wonder what would
become of it all, for I was by no means sure that the whole family
had not perished, as well as yourself."

"There are only the three girls left," Harry said.

"In that case they will be well off, for the marquis inclosed me a
will, saying that if anything should happen to him, and the estates
should be altogether lost, the money and proceeds of the jewels
were to be divided equally among his children. You must have gone
through a great deal, old boy. You are scarcely nineteen, and you
look two or three and twenty."

"I shall soon look young again, father, now I have got my mind
clear of anxiety. But I have had a trying time of it, I can tell
you; but it's too long a story to go into now, I will tell you all
the whole yarn this evening. I want you to go in with me now to
the girls and make them at home. All this must be just as trying
for them at present as the dangers they have gone through."

The young ones were all forbidden to follow, and after an hour
spent with his parents and the girls in the dining-room, Harry
was pleased to see that the latter were beginning to feel at their
ease, and that the strangeness was wearing off.

That evening, before the whole circle of his family, Harry related
the adventures that they had gone through, subject, however, to a
great many interruptions from Jeanne.

"But I am telling the story, not you, Jeanne," he said at last.
"Some day when you begin to talk English quite well you shall give
your version of it."

"But he is not telling it right, madame," Jeanne protested, "he
keeps all the best part back. He says about the dangers, but he says
noting about what he do himself." Then she broke into French, "No,
madame, it is not just, it is not right; I will not suffer the tale
to be told so. How can it be the true story when he says no word
of his courage, of his devotion, of the way he watched over us and
cheered us, no word of his grand heart, of the noble way he risked
his life for us, for our sister, for our parents, for all? Oh,
madame, I cannot tell you what we all owe to him;" and Jeanne, who
had risen to her feet in her earnestness, burst into passionate
tears. This put an end to the story for the evening, for Mrs.
Sandwith saw that Jeanne required rest and quiet, and took the two
girls up at once to the bed-room prepared for them. From this
Jeanne did not descend for some days. As long as the strain was
upon her she had borne herself bravely, but now that it was over
she collapsed completely.

After the young ones had all gone off to bed, Harry said to his
father and mother:

"I have another piece of news to tell you now. I am afraid you will
think it rather absurd at my age, without a profession or anything
else, but I am engaged to Jeanne. You see," he went on, as his
parents both uttered an exclamation of surprise, "we have gone
through a tremendous lot together, and when people have to look
death in the face every day it makes them older than they are; and
when, as in this case, they have to depend entirely on themselves,
it brings them very closely together. I think it might have been
so had these troubles never come on, for somehow we had taken very
much to each other, though it might have been years before anything
came of it. Her poor father and mother saw it before I  knew
it myself, and upon the night before they were separated told her
elder sister and brother that, should I ever ask for Jeanne's hand,
they approved of her marrying me. But although afterwards I came
to love her with all my heart, I should never have spoken had it
not been that I did so when it seemed that in five minutes we should
neither of us be alive. If it hadn't been for that I should have
brought her home and waited till I was making my own way in life."

"I do not blame you, Harry, my boy," his father said heartily.  "Of
course you are very young, and under ordinary circumstances would
not have been thinking about a wife for years to come yet; but I
can see that your Jeanne is a girl of no ordinary character, and it
is certainly for her happiness that, being here with her sister alone
among strangers, she should feel that she is at home. Personally she
is charming, and even in point of fortune you would be considered
a lucky fellow. What do you say, mother?"

"I say God bless them both!" Mrs. Sandwith said earnestly.  "After
the way in which Providence has brought them together, there can
be no doubt that they were meant for each other."

"Do you know I half guessed there was something more than mere
gratitude in Jeanne's heart when she flamed out just now; did not
you, mother?"

Mrs. Sandwith nodded and smiled. "I was sure there was," she said.

"I did not say anything about it when we came in," Harry said,
"because I thought it better for Jeanne to have one quiet day, and
you know the young ones will laugh awfully at the idea of my being
engaged."

"Never you mind, Harry," his father said; "let those laugh that
win. But you are not thinking of getting married yet, I hope."

"No, no, father; you cannot think I would live on Jeanne's money."

"And you still intend to go into the army, Harry?"

"No, father; I have had enough of bloodshed for the rest of my life.
I have been thinking it over a good deal, and I have determined to
follow your example and become a doctor."

"That's right, my boy," Dr. Sandwith said heartily. "I have always
regretted you had a fancy for the army, for I used to look forward
to your becoming my right hand. Your brothers, too, do not take to
the profession, so I began to think I was going to be alone in my
old age.  You have made me very happy, Harry, and your mother too,
I am sure. It will be delightful for us having you and your pretty
French wife settled by us; will it not, mother?"

"It will indeed," Mrs. Sandwith said in a tone of deep happiness.
"You are certainly overworked and need a partner terribly, and who
could be like Harry?"

"Yes, I have been thinking of taking a partner for some time, but
now I will hold on alone for another three years. By that time
Harry will have passed."

The next morning the young ones were told the news. The elder girls
were delighted at the thought of Jeanne becoming their sister, but
the boys went into fits of laughter and chaffed Harry so unmercifully
for the next day or two that it was just as well that Jeanne was
up in her room. By the time she came down they had recovered their
gravity. Mrs. Sandwith and the girls had already given her the
warmest welcome as Harry's future wife, and the boys received her
so warmly when she appeared that Jeanne soon felt that she was
indeed one of the family.

Three years later, on the day after Harry passed his final examination,
Jeanne and he were married, and set up a pretty establishment
close to Cheyne Walk, with Virginie to live with them; and Harry,
at first as his father's assistant, and very soon as his partner,
had the satisfaction of feeling that he was not wholly dependent
on Jeanne's fortune.

They had received occasional news from Marie. Victor had steadily
recovered his strength and memory, and as soon as the reign of terror
had come to an end, and the priests were able to show themselves
from their hiding-places in many an out-of-the-way village in the
country, Marie and Victor were quietly married. But France was at
war with all Europe now, and Victor, though he hated the revolution,
was a thorough Frenchman, and through some of his old friends who
had escaped the wave of destruction, he had obtained a commission,
and joined Bonaparte when he went to take the command of the army
of Italy. He had attracted his general's attention early in the
campaign by a deed of  desperate valour, and was already in command
of a regiment, when, soon after Jeanne's marriage, Marie came over
to England by way of Holland to stay for a time with her sisters.
She was delighted at finding Jeanne so happy, and saw enough before she
returned to France to feel assured that before very long Virginie
would follow Jeanne's example, and would also become an Englishwoman,
for she and Harry's next brother Tom had evidently some sort of
understanding between them. It was not until many years later that
the three sisters met again, when, after the fall of Napoleon,
Jeanne and Virginie went over with their husbands and stayed for
some weeks with General De Gisons and his wife at the old chateau
near Dijon. This the general had purchased back from the persons
into whose hands it had fallen at the Revolution with the money
which he had received as his wife's dowry.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In the Reign of Terror, by G. A. Henty

