



Produced by Ken Smidge





PENROD AND SAM

By Booth Tarkington




Contents

     I.     Penrod and Sam
     II. The Bonded Prisoner
     III. The Militarist
     IV. Bingism
     V.     The In-Or-In
     VI. Georgie Becomes a Member
     VII. Whitey
     VIII. Salvage
     IX. Reward of Merit
     X.     Conscience
     XI. The Tonic
     XII. Gipsy
     XIII. Concerning Trousers
     XIV. Camera Work in the Jungle
     XV. A Model Letter to a Friend
     XVI. Wednesday Madness
     XVII. Penrod's Busy Day
     XVIII. On Account of the Weather
     XIX. Creative Art
     XX. The Departing Guest
     XXI. Yearnings
     XXII. The Horn of Fame
     XXIII. The Party
     XXIV. The Heart of Marjorie Jones




CHAPTER I. PENROD AND SAM

During the daylight hours of several autumn Saturdays there had been
severe outbreaks of cavalry in the Schofield neighbourhood. The sabres
were of wood; the steeds were imaginary, and both were employed in a
game called "bonded pris'ner" by its inventors, Masters Penrod Schofield
and Samuel Williams. The pastime was not intricate. When two enemies
met, they fenced spectacularly until the person of one or the other was
touched by the opposing weapon; then, when the ensuing claims of foul
play had been disallowed and the subsequent argument settled, the
combatant touched was considered to be a prisoner until such time as
he might be touched by the hilt of a sword belonging to one of his own
party, which effected his release and restored to him the full enjoyment
of hostile activity. Pending such rescue, however, he was obliged to
accompany the forces of his captor whithersoever their strategical
necessities led them, which included many strange places. For the game
was exciting, and, at its highest pitch, would sweep out of an alley
into a stable, out of that stable and into a yard, out of that yard and
into a house, and through that house with the sound (and effect upon
furniture) of trampling herds. In fact, this very similarity must have
been in the mind of the distressed coloured woman in Mrs. Williams's
kitchen, when she declared that she might "jes' as well try to cook
right spang in the middle o' the stock-yards." All up and down the neighbourhood the campaigns were waged, accompanied
by the martial clashing of wood upon wood and by many clamorous
arguments. "You're a pris'ner, Roddy Bitts!" "I am not!" "You are, too! I touched you." "Where, I'd like to know!" "On the sleeve." "You did not! I never felt it. I guess I'd 'a' felt it, wouldn't I?" "What if you didn't? I touched you, and you're bonded. I leave it to Sam
Williams." "Yah! Course you would! He's on your side! _I_ leave it to Herman." "No, you won't! If you can't show any SENSE about it, we'll do it over,
and I guess you'll see whether you feel it or not! There! NOW, I guess
you--"

"Aw, squash!" Strangely enough, the undoubted champion proved to be the youngest and
darkest of all the combatants, one Verman, coloured, brother to Herman,
and substantially under the size to which his nine years entitled him. Verman was unfortunately tongue-tied, but he was valiant beyond all
others, and, in spite of every handicap, he became at once the chief
support of his own party and the despair of the opposition. On the third Saturday this opposition had been worn down by the
successive captures of Maurice Levy and Georgie Bassett until it
consisted of only Sam Williams and Penrod. Hence, it behooved these
two to be wary, lest they be wiped out altogether; and Sam was dismayed
indeed, upon cautiously scouting round a corner of his own stable, to
find himself face to face with the valorous and skilful Verman, who was
acting as an outpost, or picket, of the enemy. Verman immediately fell upon Sam, horse and foot, and Sam would
have fled but dared not, for fear he might be touched from the rear. Therefore, he defended himself as best he could, and there followed a
lusty whacking, in the course of which Verman's hat, a relic and too
large, fell from his head, touching Sam's weapon in falling. "There!" panted Sam, desisting immediately. "That counts! You're bonded,
Verman." "Aim meewer!" Verman protested. Interpreting this as "Ain't neither", Sam invented a law to suit the
occasion. "Yes, you are; that's the rule, Verman. I touched your hat
with my sword, and your hat's just the same as you." "Imm mop!" Verman insisted. "Yes, it is," said Sam, already warmly convinced (by his own statement)
that he was in the right. "Listen here! If I hit you on the shoe, it
would be the same as hitting YOU, wouldn't it? I guess it'd count if I
hit you on the shoe, wouldn't it? Well, a hat's just the same as shoes. Honest, that's the rule, Verman, and you're a pris'ner." Now, in the arguing part of the game, Verman's impediment cooperated
with a native amiability to render him far less effective than in the
actual combat. He chuckled, and ceded the point. "Aw wi," he said, and cheerfully followed his captor to a hidden place
among some bushes in the front yard, where Penrod lurked. "Looky what _I_ got!" Sam said importantly, pushing his captive into
this retreat. "NOW, I guess you won't say I'm not so much use any more! Squat down, Verman, so's they can't see you if they're huntin' for us. That's one o' the rules--honest. You got to squat when we tell you to." Verman was agreeable. He squatted, and then began to laugh uproariously. "Stop that noise!" Penrod commanded. "You want to betray us? What you
laughin' at?" "Ep mack im mimmup," Verman giggled. "What's he mean?" Sam asked. Penrod was more familiar with Verman's utterance, and he interpreted. "He says they'll get him back in a minute." "No, they won't. I'd just like to see--"

"Yes, they will, too," Penrod said. "They'll get him back for the main
and simple reason we can't stay here all day, can we? And they'd find us
anyhow, if we tried to. There's so many of 'em against just us two, they
can run in and touch him soon as they get up to us--and then HE'LL be
after us again and--"

"Listen here!" Sam interrupted. "Why can't we put some REAL bonds on
him? We could put bonds on his wrists and around his legs--we could put
'em all over him, easy as nothin'. Then we could gag him--"

"No, we can't," said Penrod. "We can't, for the main and simple reason
we haven't got any rope or anything to make the bonds with, have we? I
wish we had some o' that stuff they give sick people. THEN, I bet they
wouldn't get him back so soon!" "Sick people?" Sam repeated, not comprehending. "It makes 'em go to sleep, no matter what you do to 'em," Penrod
explained. "That's the main and simple reason they can't wake up, and
you can cut off their ole legs--or their arms, or anything you want to." "Hoy!" exclaimed Verman, in a serious tone. His laughter ceased
instantly, and he began to utter a protest sufficiently intelligible. "You needn't worry," Penrod said gloomily. "We haven't got any o' that
stuff; so we can't do it." "Well, we got to do sumpthing," Sam said. His comrade agreed, and there was a thoughtful silence; but presently
Penrod's countenance brightened. "I know!" he exclaimed. "_I_ know what we'll do with him. Why, I thought
of it just as EASY! I can most always think of things like that, for the
main and simple reason--well, I thought of it just as soon--"

"Well, what is it?" Sam demanded crossly. Penrod's reiteration of his
new-found phrase, "for the main and simple reason", had been growing
more and more irksome to his friend all day, though Sam was not
definitely aware that the phrase was the cause of his annoyance. "WHAT
are we goin' to do with him, you know so much?" Penrod rose and peered over the tops of the bushes, shading his eyes
with his hand, a gesture that was unnecessary but had a good appearance. He looked all round about him in this manner, finally vouchsafing a
report to the impatient Sam. "No enemies in sight--just for the main and simple reason I expect
they're all in the alley and in Georgie Bassett's backyard." "I bet they're not!" Sam said scornfully, his irritation much increased. "How do YOU know so much about it?" "Just for the main and simple reason," Penrod replied, with dignified
finality. And at that, Sam felt a powerful impulse to do violence upon the person
of his comrade-in-arms. The emotion that prompted this impulse was so
primitive and straightforward that it almost resulted in action; but Sam
had a vague sense that he must control it as long as he could. "Bugs!" he said. Penrod was sensitive, and this cold word hurt him. However, he was
under the domination of his strategic idea, and he subordinated private
grievance to the common weal. "Get up!" he commanded. "You get up, too,
Verman. You got to--it's the rule. Now here I'll SHOW you what we're
goin' to do. Stoop over, and both o' you do just exackly like _I_ do. You watch ME, because this biz'nuss has got to be done RIGHT!" Sam muttered something; he was becoming more insurgent every moment, but
he obeyed. Likewise, Verman rose to his feet, ducked his head between
his shoulders, and trotted out to the sidewalk at Sam's heels, both
following Penrod and assuming a stooping position in imitation of him. Verman was delighted with this phase of the game, and, also, he was
profoundly amused by Penrod's pomposity. Something dim and deep within
him perceived it to be cause for such merriment that he had ado to
master himself, and was forced to bottle and cork his laughter with both
hands. They proved insufficient; sputterings burst forth between his
fingers. "You stop that!" Penrod said, looking back darkly upon the prisoner. Verman endeavoured to oblige, though giggles continued to leak from him
at intervals, and the three boys stole along the fence in single file,
proceeding in this fashion until they reached Penrod's own front gate. Here the leader ascertained, by a reconnaissance as far as the
corner, that the hostile forces were still looking for them in another
direction. He returned in a stealthy but important manner to his
disgruntled follower and the hilarious captive. "Well," said Sam impatiently, "I guess I'm not goin' to stand around
here all day, I guess! You got anything you want to do, why'n't you go
on and DO it?" Penrod's brow was already contorted to present the appearance of
detached and lofty concentration--a histrionic failure, since it did not
deceive the audience. He raised a hushing hand. "SH!" he murmured. "I got to think." "Bugs!" the impolite Mr. Williams said again. Verman bent double, squealing and sputtering; indeed, he was ultimately
forced to sit upon the ground, so exhausting was the mirth to which he
now gave way. Penrod's composure was somewhat affected and he showed
annoyance. "Oh, I guess you won't laugh quite so much about minute from now, ole
Mister Verman!" he said severely. "You get up from there and do like I
tell you." "Well, why'n't you TELL him why he won't laugh so much, then?" Sam
demanded, as Verman rose. "Why'n't you do sumpthing and quit talkin' so
much about it?" Penrod haughtily led the way into the yard. "You follow me," he said, "and I guess you'll learn a little sense!" Then, abandoning his hauteur for an air of mystery equally irritating
to Sam, he stole up the steps of the porch, and, after a moment's
manipulation of the knob of the big front door, contrived to operate the
fastenings, and pushed the door open. "Come on," he whispered, beckoning. And the three boys mounted the
stairs to the floor above in silence--save for a belated giggle on
the part of Verman, which was restrained upon a terrible gesture from
Penrod. Verman buried his mouth as deeply as possible in a ragged
sleeve, and confined his demonstrations to a heaving of the stomach and
diaphragm. Penrod led the way into the dainty room of his nineteen-year-old sister,
Margaret, and closed the door. "There," he said, in a low and husky voice, "I expect you'll see what
I'm goin' to do now!" "Well, what?" the skeptical Sam asked. "If we stay here very long your
mother'll come and send us downstairs. What's the good of--"

"WAIT, can't you?" Penrod wailed, in a whisper. "My goodness!" And going
to an inner door, he threw it open, disclosing a clothes-closet hung
with pretty garments of many kinds, while upon its floor were two rows
of shoes and slippers of great variety and charm. A significant thing is to be remarked concerning the door of this
somewhat intimate treasury: there was no knob or latch upon the inner
side, so that, when the door was closed, it could be opened only from
the outside. "There!" said Penrod. "You get in there, Verman, and I'll bet they won't
get to touch you back out o' bein' our pris'ner very soon, NOW! Oh, I
guess not!" "Pshaw!" said Sam. "Is that all you were goin' to do? Why, your
mother'll come and make him get out the first--"

"No, she won't. She and Margaret have gone to my aunt's in the country,
and aren't goin' to be back till dark. And even if he made a lot o'
noise, it's kind of hard to hear anything from in there, anyway, when
the door's shut. Besides, he's got to keep quiet--that's the rule,
Verman. You're a pris'ner, and it's the rule you can't holler or
nothin'. You unnerstand that, Verman?" "Aw wi," said Verman. "Then go on in there. Hurry!" The obedient Verman marched into the closet and sat down among the shoes
and slippers, where he presented an interesting effect of contrast. He
was still subject to hilarity--though endeavouring to suppress it by
means of a patent-leather slipper--when Penrod closed the door. "There!" said Penrod, leading the way from the room. "I guess NOW you
see!" Sam said nothing, and they came out to the open air and reached their
retreat in the Williams' yard again, without his having acknowledged
Penrod's service to their mutual cause. "I thought of that just as easy!" Penrod remarked, probably prompted
to this odious bit of complacency by Sam's withholding the praise that
might naturally have been expected. And he was moved to add, "I guess
it'd of been a pretty long while if we'd had to wait for you to think of
something as good as that, Sam." "Why would it?" Sam asked. "Why would it of been such a long while?" "Oh," Penrod responded airily, "just for the main and simple reason!" Sam could bear it no longer. "Oh, hush up!" he shouted. Penrod was stung. "Do you mean ME?" he demanded. "Yes, I do!" the goaded Sam replied. "Did you tell ME to hush up?" "Yes, I did!" "I guess you don't know who you're talkin' to," Penrod said ominously. "I guess I just better show you who you're talkin' to like that. I guess
you need a little sumpthing, for the main and simple--"

Sam uttered an uncontrollable howl and sprang upon Penrod, catching him
round the waist. Simultaneously with this impact, the wooden swords spun
through the air and were presently trodden underfoot as the two boys
wrestled to and fro. Penrod was not altogether surprised by the onset of his friend. He had
been aware of Sam's increasing irritation (though neither boy could
have clearly stated its cause) and that very irritation produced a
corresponding emotion in the bosom of the irritator. Mentally, Penrod
was quite ready for the conflict--nay, he welcomed it--though, for the
first few moments, Sam had the physical advantage. However, it is proper that a neat distinction be drawn here. This was
a conflict; but neither technically nor in the intention of the
contestants was it a fight. Penrod and Sam were both in a state of high
exasperation, and there was great bitterness; but no blows fell and no
tears. They strained, they wrenched, they twisted, and they panted and
muttered: "Oh, no, you don't!" "Oh, I guess I do!" "Oh, you will, will
you?" "You'll see what you get in about a minute!" "I guess you'll learn
some sense this time!" Streaks and blotches began to appear upon the two faces, where colour
had been heightened by the ardent application of a cloth sleeve or
shoulder, while ankles and insteps were scraped and toes were trampled. Turf and shrubberies suffered, also, as the struggle went on, until
finally the wrestlers pitched headlong into a young lilac bush, and came
to earth together, among its crushed and sprawling branches. "OOCH!" and "WUF!" were the two exclamations which marked this episode,
and then, with no further comment, the struggle was energetically
continued upon a horizontal plane. Now Penrod was on top, now Sam; they
rolled, they squirmed, they suffered. And this contest endured. It went
on and on, and it was impossible to imagine its coming to a definite
termination. It went on so long that to both the participants it seemed
to be a permanent thing, a condition that had always existed and that
must always exist perpetually. And thus they were discovered by a foray of the hostile party, headed
by Roddy Bitts and Herman (older brother to Verman) and followed by the
bonded prisoners, Maurice Levy and Georgie Bassett. These and others
caught sight of the writhing figures, and charged down upon them with
loud cries of triumph. "Pris'ner! Pris'ner! Bonded pris'ner!" shrieked Roddy Bitts, and touched
Penrod and Sam, each in turn, with his sabre. Then, seeing that they
paid no attention and that they were at his mercy, he recalled the fact
that several times, during earlier stages of the game, both of them had
been unnecessarily vigorous in "touching" his own rather plump person. Therefore, the opportunity being excellent, he raised his weapon again,
and, repeating the words "bonded pris'ner" as ample explanation of his
deed, brought into play the full strength of his good right arm. He used
the flat of the sabre. WHACK! WHACK! Roddy was perfectly impartial. It was a cold-blooded
performance and even more effective than he anticipated. For one thing,
it ended the civil war instantly. Sam and Penrod leaped to their feet,
shrieking and bloodthirsty, while Maurice Levy capered with joy, Herman
was so overcome that he rolled upon the ground, and Georgie Bassett
remarked virtuously:

"It serves them right for fighting." But Roddy Bitts foresaw that something not within the rules of the game
was about to happen. "Here! You keep away from me!" he quavered, retreating. "I was just
takin' you pris'ners. I guess I had a right to TOUCH you, didn't I?" Alas! Neither Sam nor Penrod was able to see the matter in that light. They had retrieved their own weapons, and they advanced upon Roddy with
a purposefulness that seemed horrible to him. "Here! You keep away from me!" he said, in great alarm. "I'm goin'
home." He did go home--but only subsequently. What took place before his
departure had the singular solidity and completeness of systematic
violence; also, it bore the moral beauty of all actions that lead to
peace and friendship, for, when it was over, and the final vocalizations
of Roderick Magsworth Bitts, Junior, were growing faint with increasing
distance, Sam and Penrod had forgotten their differences and felt well
disposed toward each other once more. All their animosity was exhausted,
and they were in a glow of good feeling, though probably they were not
conscious of any direct gratitude to Roddy, whose thoughtful opportunism
was really the cause of this happy result. CHAPTER II. THE BONDED PRISONER

After such rigorous events, every one comprehended that the game of
bonded prisoner was over, and there was no suggestion that it should or
might be resumed. The fashion of its conclusion had been so consummately
enjoyed by all parties (with the natural exception of Roddy Bitts) that
a renewal would have been tame; hence, the various minds of the company
turned to other matters and became restless. Georgie Bassett withdrew
first, remembering that if he expected to be as wonderful as usual,
to-morrow, in Sunday-school, it was time to prepare himself, though
this was not included in the statement he made alleging the cause of
his departure. Being detained bodily and pressed for explanation, he
desperately said that he had to go home to tease the cook--which had
the rakehelly air he thought would insure his release, but was not
considered plausible. However, he was finally allowed to go, and, as
first hints of evening were already cooling and darkening the air,
the party broke up, its members setting forth, whistling, toward their
several homes, though Penrod lingered with Sam. Herman was the last to
go from them. "Well, I got git 'at stove-wood f' suppuh," he said, rising and
stretching himself. "I got git 'at lil' soap-box wagon, an' go on ovuh
wheres 'at new house buil'in' on Secon' Street; pick up few shingles an'
blocks layin' roun'." He went through the yard toward the alley, and, at the alley gate,
remembering something, he paused and called to them. The lot was a
deep one, and they were too far away to catch his meaning. Sam shouted,
"Can't HEAR you!" and Herman replied, but still unintelligibly; then,
upon Sam's repetition of "Can't HEAR you!" Herman waved his arm in
farewell, implying that the matter was of little significance, and
vanished. But if they had understood him, Penrod and Sam might have
considered his inquiry of instant importance, for Herman's last shout
was to ask if either of them had noticed "where Verman went." Verman and Verman's whereabouts were, at this hour, of no more concern
to Sam and Penrod than was the other side of the moon. That unfortunate
bonded prisoner had been long since utterly effaced from their fields
of consciousness, and the dark secret of their Bastille troubled them
not--for the main and simple reason that they had forgotten it. They drifted indoors, and found Sam's mother's white cat drowsing on
a desk in the library, the which coincidence obviously inspired the
experiment of ascertaining how successfully ink could be used in making
a clean white cat look like a coach-dog. There was neither malice
nor mischief in their idea; simply, a problem presented itself to the
biological and artistic questionings beginning to stir within them. They did not mean to do the cat the slightest injury or to cause her any
pain. They were above teasing cats, and they merely detained this one
and made her feel a little wet--at considerable cost to themselves from
both the ink and the cat. However, at the conclusion of their efforts,
it was thought safer to drop the cat out of the window before anybody
came, and, after some hasty work with blotters, the desk was moved to
cover certain sections of the rug, and the two boys repaired to the
bathroom for hot water and soap. They knew they had done nothing wrong;
but they felt easier when the only traces remaining upon them were the
less prominent ones upon their garments. These precautions taken, it was time for them to make their appearance
at Penrod's house for dinner, for it had been arranged, upon petition
earlier in the day, that Sam should be his friend's guest for the
evening meal. Clean to the elbows and with light hearts, they set forth. They marched, whistling--though not producing a distinctly musical
effect, since neither had any particular air in mind--and they found
nothing wrong with the world; they had not a care. Arrived at their
adjacent destination, they found Miss Margaret Schofield just entering
the front door. "Hurry, boys!" she said. "Mamma came home long before I did, and I'm
sure dinner is waiting. Run on out to the dining-room and tell them I'll
be right down." And, as they obeyed, she mounted the stairs, humming a little tune and
unfastening the clasp of the long, light-blue military cape she wore. She went to her own quiet room, lit the gas, removed her hat and placed
it and the cape upon the bed; after which she gave her hair a push,
subsequent to her scrutiny of a mirror; then, turning out the light, she
went as far as the door. Being an orderly girl, she returned to the bed
and took the cape and the hat to her clothes-closet. She opened the
door of this sanctuary, and, in the dark, hung her cape upon a hook and
placed her hat upon the shelf. Then she closed the door again, having
noted nothing unusual, though she had an impression that the place
needed airing. She descended to the dinner table. The other members of the family were already occupied with the meal, and
the visitor was replying politely, in his non-masticatory intervals, to
inquiries concerning the health of his relatives. So sweet and assured
was the condition of Sam and Penrod that Margaret's arrival from her
room meant nothing to them. Their memories were not stirred, and they
continued eating, their expressions brightly placid. But from out of doors there came the sound of a calling and questing
voice, at first in the distance, then growing louder--coming nearer. "Oh, Ver-er-man! O-o-o-oh, Ver-er-ma-a-an!" It was the voice of Herman. "OO-O-O-O-OH, VER-ER-ER-MA-A-A-AN!" And then two boys sat stricken at that cheerful table and ceased to eat. Recollection awoke with a bang! "Oh, my!" Sam gasped. "What's the matter?" Mr. Schofield said. "Swallow something the wrong
way, Sam?" "Ye-es, sir." "OO-O-O-O-OH, VER-ER-ER-MA-A-A-AN!" And now the voice was near the windows of the dining-room. Penrod, very pale, pushed back his chair and jumped up. "What's the matter with YOU?" his father demanded. "Sit down!" "It's Herman--that coloured boy lives in the alley," Penrod said
hoarsely. "I expect--I think--"

"Well, what's the matter?" "I think his little brother's maybe got lost, and Sam and I better go
help look--"

"You'll do nothing of the kind," Mr. Schofield said sharply. "Sit down
and eat your dinner." In a palsy, the miserable boy resumed his seat. He and Sam exchanged a
single dumb glance; then the eyes of both swung fearfully to Margaret. Her appearance was one of sprightly content, and, from a certain point
of view, nothing could have been more alarming. If she had opened her
closet door without discovering Verman, that must have been because
Verman was dead and Margaret had failed to notice the body. (Such were
the thoughts of Penrod and Sam.) But she might not have opened the
closet door. And whether she had or not, Verman must still be there,
alive or dead, for if he had escaped he would have gone home, and their
ears would not be ringing with the sinister and melancholy cry that now
came from the distance, "Oo-o-oh, Ver-er-ma-an!" Verman, in his seclusion, did not hear that appeal from his brother;
there were too many walls between them. But he was becoming impatient
for release, though, all in all, he had not found the confinement
intolerable or even very irksome. His character was philosophic, his
imagination calm; no bugaboos came to trouble him. When the boys closed
the door upon him, he made himself comfortable upon the floor and, for
a time, thoughtfully chewed a patent-leather slipper that had come under
his hand. He found the patent leather not unpleasant to his palate,
though he swallowed only a portion of what he detached, not being hungry
at that time. The soul-fabric of Verman was of a fortunate weave; he was
not a seeker and questioner. When it happened to him that he was at
rest in a shady corner, he did not even think about a place in the sun. Verman took life as it came. Naturally, he fell asleep. And toward the conclusion of his slumbers, he
had this singular adventure: a lady set her foot down within less than
half an inch of his nose--and neither of them knew it. Verman slept on,
without being wakened by either the closing or the opening of the
door. What did rouse him was something ample and soft falling upon
him--Margaret's cape, which slid from the hook after she had gone. Enveloped in its folds, Verman sat up, corkscrewing his knuckles
into the corners of his eyes. Slowly he became aware of two important
vacuums--one in time and one in his stomach. Hours had vanished
strangely into nowhere; the game of bonded prisoner was something cloudy
and remote of the long, long ago, and, although Verman knew where
he was, he had partially forgotten how he came there. He perceived,
however, that something had gone wrong, for he was certain that he ought
not to be where he found himself. WHITE-FOLKS' HOUSE! The fact that Verman could not have pronounced these
words rendered them no less clear in his mind; they began to stir
his apprehension, and nothing becomes more rapidly tumultuous than
apprehension once it is stirred. That he might possibly obtain release
by making a noise was too daring a thought and not even conceived,
much less entertained, by the little and humble Verman. For, with the
bewildering gap of his slumber between him and previous events, he did
not place the responsibility for his being in White-Folks' House upon
the white folks who had put him there. His state of mind was that of the
stable-puppy who knows he MUST not be found in the parlour. Not thrice
in his life had Verman been within the doors of White-Folks' House, and,
above all things, he felt that it was in some undefined way vital to him
to get out of White-Folks' House unobserved and unknown. It was in his
very blood to be sure of that. Further than this point, the processes of Verman's mind become
mysterious to the observer. It appears, however, that he had a definite
(though somewhat primitive) conception of the usefulness of disguise;
and he must have begun his preparations before he heard footsteps in the
room outside his closed door. These footsteps were Margaret's. Just as Mr. Schofield's coffee was
brought, and just after Penrod had been baffled in another attempt to
leave the table, Margaret rose and patted her father impertinently upon
the head. "You can't bully ME that way!" she said. "I got home too late to dress,
and I'm going to a dance. 'Scuse!" And she began her dancing on the spot, pirouetting herself swiftly out
of the room, and was immediately heard running up the stairs. "Penrod!" Mr. Schofield shouted. "Sit down! How many times am I going to
tell you? What IS the matter with you to-night?" "I GOT to go," Penrod gasped. "I got to tell Margaret sumpthing." "What have you 'got' to tell her?" "It's--it's sumpthing I forgot to tell her." "Well, it will keep till she comes downstairs," Mr. Schofield said
grimly. "You sit down till this meal is finished." Penrod was becoming frantic. "I got to tell her--it's sumpthing Sam's mother told me to tell her,"
he babbled. "Didn't she, Sam? You heard her tell me to tell her; didn't
you, Sam?" Sam offered prompt corroboration. "Yes, sir; she did. She said for us both to tell her. I better go, too,
I guess, because she said--"

He was interrupted. Startlingly upon their ears rang shriek on shriek. Mrs. Schofield, recognizing Margaret's voice, likewise shrieked, and Mr.
Schofield uttered various sounds; but Penrod and Sam were incapable of
doing anything vocally. All rushed from the table. Margaret continued to shriek, and it is not to be denied that there
was some cause for her agitation. When she opened the closet door, her
light-blue military cape, instead of hanging on the hook where she had
left it, came out into the room in a manner that she afterward described
as "a kind of horrible creep, but faster than a creep." Nothing was to
be seen except the creeping cape, she said, but, of course, she could
tell there was some awful thing inside of it. It was too large to be a
cat, and too small to be a boy; it was too large to be Duke, Penrod's
little old dog, and, besides, Duke wouldn't act like that. It crept
rapidly out into the upper hall, and then, as she recovered the use of
her voice and began to scream, the animated cape abandoned its creeping
for a quicker gait--"a weird, heaving flop," she defined it. The Thing then decided upon a third style of locomotion, evidently, for
when Sam and Penrod reached the front hall, a few steps in advance of
Mr. and Mrs. Schofield, it was rolling grandly down the stairs. Mr. Schofield had only a hurried glimpse of it as it reached the bottom,
close by the front door. "Grab that thing!" he shouted, dashing forward. "Stop it! Hit it!" It was at this moment that Sam Williams displayed the presence of mind
that was his most eminent characteristic. Sam's wonderful instinct for
the right action almost never failed him in a crisis, and it did not
fail him now. Leaping to the door, at the very instant when the rolling
cape touched it, Sam flung the door open--and the cape rolled on. With
incredible rapidity and intelligence, it rolled, indeed, out into the
night. Penrod jumped after it, and the next second reappeared in the doorway
holding the cape. He shook out its folds, breathing hard but acquiring
confidence. In fact, he was able to look up in his father's face and
say, with bright ingenuousness:

"It was just laying there. Do you know what I think? Well, it couldn't
have acted that way itself. I think there must have been sumpthing kind
of inside of it!" Mr. Schofield shook his head slowly, in marvelling admiration. "Brilliant--oh, brilliant!" he murmured, while Mrs. Schofield ran to
support the enfeebled form of Margaret at the top of the stairs. ... In the library, after Margaret's departure to her dance, Mr. and
Mrs. Schofield were still discussing the visitation, Penrod having
accompanied his homeward-bound guest as far as the front gate. "No; you're wrong," Mrs. Schofield said, upholding a theory, earlier
developed by Margaret, that the animated behaviour of the cape could be
satisfactorily explained on no other ground than the supernatural. "You
see, the boys saying they couldn't remember what Mrs. Williams wanted
them to tell Margaret, and that probably she hadn't told them anything
to tell her, because most likely they'd misunderstood something she
said--well, of course, all that does sound mixed-up and peculiar;
but they sound that way about half the time, anyhow. No; it couldn't
possibly have had a thing to do with it. They were right there at the
table with us all the time, and they came straight to the table the
minute they entered the house. Before that, they'd been over at Sam's
all afternoon. So, it COULDN'T have been the boys." Mrs. Schofield
paused to ruminate with a little air of pride; then added: "Margaret has
often thought--oh, long before this!--that she was a medium. I mean--if
she would let her self. So it wasn't anything the boys did." Mr. Schofield grunted. "I'll admit this much," he said. "I'll admit it wasn't anything we'll
ever get out of 'em." And the remarks of Sam and Penrod, taking leave of each other, one on
each side of the gate, appeared to corroborate Mr. Schofield's opinion. "Well, g'-night, Penrod," Sam said. "It was a pretty good Saturday,
wasn't it?" "Fine!" said Penrod casually. "G'-night, Sam." CHAPTER III. THE MILITARIST

PENROD SCHOFIELD, having been "kept-in" for the unjust period of twenty
minutes after school, emerged to a deserted street. That is, the street
was deserted so far as Penrod was concerned. Here and there people were
to be seen upon the sidewalks, but they were adults, and they and the
shade trees had about the same quality of significance in Penrod's
consciousness. Usually he saw grown people in the mass, which is to say,
they were virtually invisible to him, though exceptions must be taken in
favour of policemen, firemen, street-car conductors, motormen, and all
other men in any sort of uniform or regalia. But this afternoon none
of these met the roving eye, and Penrod set out upon his homeward way
wholly dependent upon his own resources. To one of Penrod's inner texture, a mere unadorned walk from one
point to another was intolerable, and he had not gone a block without
achieving some slight remedy for the tameness of life. An electric-light
pole at the corner, invested with powers of observation, might have been
surprised to find itself suddenly enacting a role of dubious honour in
improvised melodrama. Penrod, approaching, gave the pole a look of sharp
suspicion, then one of conviction; slapped it lightly and contemptuously
with his open hand; passed on a few paces, but turned abruptly, and,
pointing his right forefinger, uttered the symbolic word, "Bing!" The plot was somewhat indefinite; yet nothing is more certain than that
the electric-light pole had first attempted something against him,
then growing bitter when slapped, and stealing after him to take him
treacherously in the back, had got itself shot through and through by
one too old in such warfare to be caught off his guard. Leaving the body to lie where it was, he placed the smoking pistol in
a holster at his saddlebow--he had decided that he was mounted--and
proceeded up the street. At intervals he indulged himself in other
encounters, reining in at first suspicion of ambush with a muttered,
"Whoa, Charlie!" or "Whoa, Mike!" or even "Whoa, Washington!" for
preoccupation with the enemy outweighed attention to the details of
theatrical consistency, though the steed's varying names were at least
harmoniously masculine, since a boy, in these, creative moments, never
rides a mare. And having brought Charlie or Mike or Washington to
a standstill, Penrod would draw the sure weapon from its holster
and--"Bing! Bing! Bing!" --let them have it. It is not to be understood that this was a noisy performance, or even an
obvious one. It attracted no attention from any pedestrian, and it
was to be perceived only that a boy was proceeding up the street at a
somewhat irregular gait. Three or four years earlier, when Penrod was
seven or eight, he would have shouted "Bing!" at the top of his voice;
he would have galloped openly; all the world might have seen that he
bestrode a charger. But a change had come upon him with advancing years. Although the grown people in sight were indeed to him as walking trees,
his dramas were accomplished principally by suggestion and symbol. His "Whoas" and "Bings" were delivered in a husky whisper, and his
equestrianism was established by action mostly of the mind, the
accompanying artistry of the feet being unintelligible to the passerby. And yet, though he concealed from observation the stirring little scenes
he thus enacted, a love of realism was increasing within him. Early
childhood is not fastidious about the accessories of its drama--a cane
is vividly a gun which may instantly, as vividly, become a horse; but at
Penrod's time of life the lath sword is no longer satisfactory. Indeed,
he now had a vague sense that weapons of wood were unworthy to the point
of being contemptible and ridiculous, and he employed them only when
he was alone and unseen. For months a yearning had grown more and more
poignant in his vitals, and this yearning was symbolized by one of his
most profound secrets. In the inner pocket of his jacket, he carried a
bit of wood whittled into the distant likeness of a pistol, but not even
Sam Williams had seen it. The wooden pistol never knew the light of day,
save when Penrod was in solitude; and yet it never left his side
except at night, when it was placed under his pillow. Still, it did not
satisfy; it was but the token of his yearning and his dream. With all
his might and main Penrod longed for one thing beyond all others. He
wanted a Real Pistol! That was natural. Pictures of real pistols being used to magnificently
romantic effect were upon almost all the billboards in town, the year
round, and as for the "movie" shows, they could not have lived an hour
unpistoled. In the drug store, where Penrod bought his candy and soda
when he was in funds, he would linger to turn the pages of periodicals
whose illustrations were fascinatingly pistolic. Some of the magazines
upon the very library table at home were sprinkled with pictures of
people (usually in evening clothes) pointing pistols at other people. Nay, the Library Board of the town had emitted a "Selected List of
Fifteen Books for Boys," and Penrod had read fourteen of them with
pleasure, but as the fifteenth contained no weapons in the earlier
chapters and held forth little prospect of any shooting at all, he
abandoned it halfway, and read the most sanguinary of the other fourteen
over again. So, the daily food of his imagination being gun, what wonder
that he thirsted for the Real! He passed from the sidewalk into his own yard, with a subdued "Bing!" inflicted upon the stolid person of a gatepost, and, entering the house
through the kitchen, ceased to bing for a time. However, driven back
from the fore part of the house by a dismal sound of callers, he
returned to the kitchen and sat down. "Della," he said to the cook, "do you know what I'd do if you was a
crook and I had my ottomatic with me?" Della was industrious and preoccupied. "If I was a cook!" she repeated
ignorantly, and with no cordiality. "Well, I AM a cook. I'm a-cookin'
right now. Either g'wan in the house where y'b'long, or git out in th'
yard!" Penrod chose the latter, and betook himself slowly to the back fence,
where he was greeted in a boisterous manner by his wistful little old
dog, Duke, returning from some affair of his own in the alley. "Get down!" said Penrod coldly, and bestowed a spiritless "Bing!" upon
him. At this moment a shout was heard from the alley, "Yay, Penrod!" and the
sandy head of comrade Sam Williams appeared above the fence. "Come on over," said Penrod. As Sam obediently climbed the fence, the little old dog, Duke, moved
slowly away, but presently, glancing back over his shoulder and seeing
the two boys standing together, he broke into a trot and disappeared
round a corner of the house. He was a dog of long and enlightening
experience; and he made it clear that the conjunction of Penrod and Sam
portended events which, from his point of view, might be unfortunate. Duke had a forgiving disposition, but he also possessed a melancholy
wisdom. In the company of either Penrod or Sam, alone, affection often
caused him to linger, albeit with a little pessimism, but when he saw
them together, he invariably withdrew in as unobtrusive a manner as
haste would allow. "What you doin'?" Sam asked. "Nothin'. What you?" "I'll show you if you'll come over to our house," said Sam, who was
wearing an important and secretive expression. "What for?" Penrod showed little interest. "Well, I said I'd show you if you came on over, didn't I?" "But you haven't got anything I haven't got," said Penrod indifferently. "I know everything that's in your yard and in your stable, and there
isn't a thing--"

"I didn't say it was in the yard or in the stable, did I?" "Well, there ain't anything in your house," returned Penrod frankly,
"that I'd walk two feet to look at--not a thing!" "Oh, no!" Sam assumed mockery. "Oh, no, you wouldn't! You know what it
is, don't you? Yes, you do!" Penrod's curiosity stirred somewhat. "Well,
all right," he said, "I got nothin' to do. I just as soon go. What is
it?" "You wait and see," said Sam, as they climbed the fence. "I bet YOUR ole
eyes'll open pretty far in about a minute or so!" "I bet they don't. It takes a good deal to get me excited, unless it's
sumpthing mighty--"

"You'll see!" Sam promised. He opened an alley, gate and stepped into his own yard in a manner
signalling caution--though the exploit, thus far, certainly required
none and Penrod began to be impressed and hopeful. They entered the
house, silently, encountering no one, and Sam led the way upstairs,
tiptoeing, implying unusual and increasing peril. Turning, in the upper
hall, they went into Sam's father's bedroom, and Sam closed the door
with a caution so genuine that already Penrod's eyes began to fulfil his
host's prediction. Adventures in another boy's house are trying to the
nerves; and another boy's father's bedroom, when invaded, has a violated
sanctity that is almost appalling. Penrod felt that something was about
to happen--something much more important than he had anticipated. Sam tiptoed across the room to a chest of drawers, and, kneeling,
carefully pulled out the lowest drawer until the surface of its
contents--Mr. Williams' winter underwear--lay exposed. Then he fumbled
beneath the garments and drew forth a large object, displaying it
triumphantly to the satisfactorily dumfounded Penrod. It was a blue-steel Colt's revolver, of the heaviest pattern made in the
Seventies. Mr. Williams had inherited it from Sam's grandfather (a small
man, a deacon, and dyspeptic) and it was larger and more horrible than
any revolver either of the boys had ever seen in any picture, moving or
stationary. Moreover, greenish bullets of great size were to be seen
in the chambers of the cylinder, suggesting massacre rather than mere
murder. This revolver was Real and it was Loaded! CHAPTER IV. BINGISM

Both boys lived breathlessly through a magnificent moment. "Leave me have it!" gasped Penrod. "Leave me have hold of it!" "You wait a minute!" Sam protested, in a whisper. "I want to show you
how I do." "No; you let me show you how _I_ do!" Penrod insisted; and they scuffled
for possession. "Look out!" Sam whispered warningly. "It might go off." "Then you better leave me have it!" And Penrod, victorious and flushed,
stepped back, the weapon in his grasp. "Here," he said, "this is the way
I do: You be a crook; and suppose you got a dagger, and I--"

"I don't want any dagger," Sam protested, advancing. "I want that
revolaver. It's my father's revolaver, ain't it?" "Well, WAIT a minute, can't you? I got a right to show you the way I DO,
first, haven't I?" Penrod began an improvisation on the spot. "Say I'm
comin' along after dark like this--look, Sam! And say you try to make a
jump at me--"

"I won't!" Sam declined this role impatiently. "I guess it ain't YOUR
father's revolaver, is it?" "Well, it may be your father's but it ain't yours," Penrod argued,
becoming logical. "It ain't either'r of us revolaver, so I got as much
right--"

"You haven't either. It's my fath--"

"WATCH, can't you--just a minute!" Penrod urged vehemently. "I'm not
goin' to keep it, am I? You can have it when I get through, can't you? Here's how _I_ do: I'm comin' along after dark, just walkin' along this
way--like this--look, Sam!" Penrod, suiting the action to the word, walked to the other end of the
room, swinging the revolver at his side with affected carelessness. "I'm just walkin' along like this, and first I don't see you," continued
the actor. "Then I kind of get a notion sumpthing wrong's liable to
happen, so I--No!" He interrupted himself abruptly. "No; that isn't
it. You wouldn't notice that I had my good ole revolaver with me. You
wouldn't think I had one, because it'd be under my coat like this, and
you wouldn't see it." Penrod stuck the muzzle of the pistol into the
waistband of his knickerbockers at the left side and, buttoning his
jacket, sustained the weapon in concealment by pressure of his elbow. "So you think I haven't got any; you think I'm just a man comin' along,
and so you--"

Sam advanced. "Well, you've had your turn," he said. "Now, it's mine. I'm goin' to show you how I--"

"WATCH me, can't you?" Penrod wailed. "I haven't showed you how _I_ do,
have I? My goodness! Can't you watch me a minute?" "I HAVE been! You said yourself it'd be my turn soon as you--"

"My goodness! Let me have a CHANCE, can't you?" Penrod retreated to the
wall, turning his right side toward Sam and keeping the revolver still
protected under his coat. "I got to have my turn first, haven't I?" "Well, yours is over long ago." "It isn't either! I--"

"Anyway," said Sam decidedly, clutching him by the right shoulder and
endeavouring to reach his left side--"anyway, I'm goin' to have it now." "You said I could have my turn out!" Penrod, carried away by
indignation, raised his voice. "I did not!" Sam, likewise lost to caution, asserted his denial loudly. "You did, too." "You said--"

"I never said anything!" "You said--Quit that!" "Boys!" Mrs. Williams, Sam's mother, opened the door of the room
and stood upon the threshold. The scuffling of Sam and Penrod ceased
instantly, and they stood hushed and stricken, while fear fell upon
them. "Boys, you weren't quarrelling, were you?" "Ma'am?" said Sam. "Were you quarrelling with Penrod?" "No, ma'am," answered Sam in a small voice. "It sounded like it. What was the matter?" Both boys returned her curious glance with meekness. They were summoning
their faculties--which were needed. Indeed, these are the crises which
prepare a boy for the business difficulties of his later life. Penrod,
with the huge weapon beneath his jacket, insecurely supported by
an elbow and by a waistband which he instantly began to distrust,
experienced distressful sensations similar to those of the owner of too
heavily insured property carrying a gasoline can under his overcoat and
detained for conversation by a policeman. And if, in the coming years
it was to be Penrod's lot to find himself in that precise situation, no
doubt he would be the better prepared for it on account of this present
afternoon's experience under the scalding eye of Mrs. Williams. It
should be added that Mrs. Williams's eye was awful to the imagination
only. It was a gentle eye and but mildly curious, having no remote
suspicion of the dreadful truth, for Sam had backed upon the chest of
drawers and closed the damnatory open one with the calves of his legs. Sam, not bearing the fatal evidence upon his person, was in a better
state than Penrod, though when boys fall into the stillness now assumed
by these two, it should be understood that they are suffering. Penrod,
in fact, was the prey to apprehension so keen that the actual pit of his
stomach was cold. Being the actual custodian of the crime, he understood that his case
was several degrees more serious than that of Sam, who, in the event of
detection, would be convicted as only an accessory. It was a lesson, and
Penrod already repented his selfishness in not allowing Sam to show how
he did, first. "You're sure you weren't quarrelling, Sam?" said Mrs. Williams. "No, ma'am; we were just talking." Still she seemed dimly uneasy, and her eye swung to Penrod. "What were you and Sam talking about, Penrod!" "Ma'am?" "What were you talking about?" Penrod gulped invisibly. "Well," he murmured, "it wasn't much. Different things." "What things?" "Oh, just sumpthing. Different things." "I'm glad you weren't quarrelling," said Mrs. Williams, reassured by
this reply, which, though somewhat baffling, was thoroughly familiar to
her ear. "Now, if you'll come downstairs, I'll give you each one cookie
and no more, so your appetites won't be spoiled for your dinners." She stood, evidently expecting them to precede her. To linger might
renew vague suspicion, causing it to become more definite; and boys
preserve themselves from moment to moment, not often attempting
to secure the future. Consequently, the apprehensive Sam and the
unfortunate Penrod (with the monstrous implement bulking against his
ribs) walked out of the room and down the stairs, their countenances
indicating an interior condition of solemnity. And a curious shade of
behaviour might have here interested a criminologist. Penrod endeavoured
to keep as close to Sam as possible, like a lonely person seeking
company, while, on the other hand, Sam kept moving away from Penrod,
seeming to desire an appearance of aloofness. "Go into the library, boys," said Mrs. Williams, as the three reached
the foot of the stairs. "I'll bring you your cookies. Papa's in there." Under her eye the two entered the library, to find Mr. Williams reading
his evening paper. He looked up pleasantly, but it seemed to Penrod that
he had an ominous and penetrating expression. "What have you been up to, you boys?" inquired this enemy. "Nothing," said Sam. "Different things." "What like?" "Oh--just different things." Mr. Williams nodded; then his glance rested casually upon Penrod. "What's the matter with your arm, Penrod?" Penrod became paler, and Sam withdrew from him almost conspicuously. "Sir?" "I said, What's the matter with your arm?" "Which one?" Penrod quavered. "Your left. You seem to be holding it at an unnatural position. Have you
hurt it?" Penrod swallowed. "Yes, sir. A boy bit me--I mean a dog--a dog bit me." Mr. Williams murmured sympathetically: "That's too bad! Where did he
bite you?" "On the--right on the elbow." "Good gracious! Perhaps you ought to have it cauterized." "Sir?" "Did you have a doctor look at it?" "No, sir. My mother put some stuff from the drug store on it." "Oh, I see. Probably it's all right, then." "Yes, sir." Penrod drew breath more freely, and accepted the warm cookie
Mrs. Williams brought him. He ate it without relish. "You can have only one apiece," she said. "It's too near dinner-time. You needn't beg for any more, because you can't have 'em." They were good about that; they were in no frame of digestion for
cookies. "Was it your own dog that bit you?" Mr. Williams inquired. "Sir? No, sir. It wasn't Duke." "Penrod!" Mrs. Williams exclaimed. "When did it happen?" "I don't remember just when," he answered feebly. "I guess it was day
before yesterday." "Gracious! How did it--"

"He--he just came up and bit me." "Why, that's terrible! It might be dangerous for other children," said
Mrs. Williams, with a solicitous glance at Sam. "Don't you know whom he
belongs to?" "No'm. It was just a dog." "You poor boy! Your mother must have been dreadfully frightened when you
came home and she saw--"

She was interrupted by the entrance of a middle-aged coloured woman. "Miz Williams," she began, and then, as she caught sight of Penrod, she
addressed him directly, "You' ma telefoam if you here, send you home
right away, 'cause they waitin' dinner on you." "Run along, then," said Mrs. Williams, patting the visitor lightly upon
his shoulder; and she accompanied him to the front door. "Tell your
mother I'm so sorry about your getting bitten, and you must take good
care of it, Penrod." "Yes'm." Penrod lingered helplessly outside the doorway, looking at Sam, who
stood partially obscured in the hall, behind Mrs. Williams. Penrod's
eyes, with veiled anguish, conveyed a pleading for help as well as a
horror of the position in which he found himself. Sam, however, pale and
determined, seemed to have assumed a stony attitude of detachment, as if
it were well understood between them that his own comparative innocence
was established, and that whatever catastrophe ensued, Penrod had
brought it on and must bear the brunt of it alone. "Well, you'd better run along, since they're waiting for you at home,"
said Mrs. Williams, closing the door. "Good-night, Penrod." ... Ten minutes later Penrod took his place at his own dinner-table,
somewhat breathless but with an expression of perfect composure. "Can't you EVER come home without being telephoned for?" demanded his
father. "Yes, sir." And Penrod added reproachfully, placing the blame upon
members of Mr. Schofield's own class, "Sam's mother and father kept me,
or I'd been home long ago. They would keep on talkin', and I guess I had
to be POLITE, didn't I?" His left arm was as free as his right; there was no dreadful bulk
beneath his jacket, and at Penrod's age the future is too far away to
be worried about the difference between temporary security and permanent
security is left for grown people. To Penrod, security was security, and
before his dinner was half eaten his spirit had become fairly serene. Nevertheless, when he entered the empty carriage-house of the stable,
on his return from school the next afternoon, his expression was not
altogether without apprehension, and he stood in the doorway looking
well about him before he lifted a loosened plank in the flooring and
took from beneath it the grand old weapon of the Williams family. Not
did his eye lighten with any pleasurable excitement as he sat himself
down in a shadowy corner and began some sketchy experiments with
the mechanism. The allure of first sight was gone. In Mr. Williams'
bedchamber, with Sam clamouring for possession, it had seemed to Penrod
that nothing in the world was so desirable as to have that revolver
in his own hands--it was his dream come true. But, for reasons not
definitely known to him, the charm had departed; he turned the cylinder
gingerly, almost with distaste; and slowly there stole over him a
feeling that there was something repellent and threatening in the heavy
blue steel. Thus does the long-dreamed Real misbehave--not only for Penrod! More out of a sense of duty to bingism in general than for any other
reason, he pointed the revolver at the lawn-mower, and gloomily
murmured, "Bing!" Simultaneously, a low and cautious voice sounded from the yard outside,
"Yay, Penrod!" and Sam Williams darkened the doorway, his eye falling
instantly upon the weapon in his friend's hand. Sam seemed relieved to
see it. "You didn't get caught with it, did you?" he said hastily. Penrod shook his head, rising. "I guess not! I guess I got SOME brains around me," he added, inspired
by Sam's presence to assume a slight swagger. "They'd have to get up
pretty early to find any good ole revolaver, once I got MY hands on it!" "I guess we can keep it, all right," Sam said confidentially. "Because
this morning papa was putting on his winter underclothes and he found it
wasn't there, and they looked all over and everywhere, and he was pretty
mad, and said he knew it was those cheap plumbers stole it that mamma
got instead of the regular plumbers he always used to have, and he said
there wasn't any chance ever gettin' it back, because you couldn't tell
which one took it, and they'd all swear it wasn't them. So it looks like
we could keep it for our revolaver, Penrod, don't it? I'll give you half
of it." Penrod affected some enthusiasm. "Sam, we'll keep it out here in the
stable." "Yes, and we'll go huntin' with it. We'll do lots of things with it!" But Sam made no effort to take it, and neither boy seemed to feel
yesterday's necessity to show the other how he did. "Wait till next
Fourth o' July!" Sam continued. "Oh, oh! Look out!" This incited a genuine spark from Penrod. "Fourth o' July! I guess she'll be a little better than any
firecrackers! Just a little 'Bing!' Bing! Bing!' she'll be goin'. 'Bing! Bing! Bing!'" The suggestion of noise stirred his comrade. "I'll bet she'll go off
louder'n that time the gas-works blew up! I wouldn't be afraid to shoot
her off ANY time." "I bet you would," said Penrod. "You aren't used to revolavers the way
I--"

"You aren't, either!" Sam exclaimed promptly, "I wouldn't be any more
afraid to shoot her off than you would." "You would, too!" "I would not!" "Well, let's see you then; you talk so much!" And Penrod handed the
weapon scornfully to Sam, who at once became less self-assertive. "I'd shoot her off in a minute," Sam said, "only it might break
sumpthing if it hit it." "Hold her up in the air, then. It can't hurt the roof, can it?" Sam, with a desperate expression, lifted the revolver at arm's length. Both boys turned away their heads, and Penrod put his fingers in his
ears--but nothing happened. "What's the matter?" he demanded. "Why don't
you go on if you're goin' to?" Sam lowered his arm. "I guess I didn't have her cocked," he said
apologetically, whereupon Penrod loudly jeered. "Tryin' to shoot a revolaver and didn't know enough to cock her! If I
didn't know any more about revolavers than that, I'd--"

"There!" Sam exclaimed, managing to draw back the hammer until two
chilling clicks warranted his opinion that the pistol was now ready to
perform its office. "I guess she'll do all right to suit you THIS time!" "Well, whyn't you go ahead, then; you know so much!" And as Sam raised
his arm, Penrod again turned away his head and placed his forefingers in
his ears. A pause followed. "Why'n't you go ahead?" Penrod, after waiting in keen suspense, turned to behold his friend
standing with his right arm above his head, his left hand over his left
ear, and both eyes closed. "I can't pull the trigger," said Sam indistinctly, his face convulsed as
in sympathy with the great muscular efforts of other parts of his body. "She won't pull!" "She won't?" Penrod remarked with scorn. "I'll bet _I_ could pull her." Sam promptly opened his eyes and handed the weapon to Penrod. "All right," he said, with surprising and unusual mildness. "You try
her, then." Inwardly discomfited to a disagreeable extent, Penrod attempted to talk
his own misgivings out of countenance. "Poor 'ittle baby!" he said, swinging the pistol at his side with a fair
pretense of careless ease. "Ain't even strong enough to pull a trigger! Poor 'ittle baby! Well, if you can't even do that much, you better watch
me while _I_--"

"Well," said Sam reasonably, "why don't you go on and do it then?" "Well, I AM goin' to, ain't I?" "Well, then, why don't you?" "Oh, I'll do it fast enough to suit YOU, I guess," Penrod retorted,
swinging the big revolver up a little higher than his shoulder and
pointing it in the direction of the double doors, which opened upon the
alley. "You better run, Sam," he jeered. "You'll be pretty scared when I
shoot her off, I guess." "Well, why don't you SEE if I will? I bet you're afraid yourself." "Oh, I am, am I?" said Penrod, in a reckless voice--and his finger
touched the trigger. It seemed to him that his finger no more than
touched it; perhaps he had been reassured by Sam's assertion that the
trigger was difficult. His intentions must remain in doubt, and probably
Penrod himself was not certain of them; but one thing comes to the
surface as entirely definite--that trigger was not so hard to pull as
Sam said it was. BANG! WH-A-A-ACK! A shattering report split the air of the stable, and
there was an orifice of remarkable diameter in the alley door. With
these phenomena, three yells, expressing excitement of different kinds,
were almost simultaneous--two from within the stable and the third from
a point in the alley about eleven inches lower than the orifice just
constructed in the planking of the door. This third point, roughly
speaking, was the open mouth of a gayly dressed young coloured man whose
attention, as he strolled, had been thus violently distracted from some
mental computations he was making in numbers, including, particularly,
those symbols at ecstasy or woe, as the case might be, seven and eleven. His eye at once perceived the orifice on a line enervatingly little
above the top of his head; and, although he had not supposed himself
so well known in this neighbourhood, he was aware that he did, here and
there, possess acquaintances of whom some such uncomplimentary action
might be expected as natural and characteristic. His immediate procedure
was to prostrate himself flat upon the ground, against the stable doors. In so doing, his shoulders came brusquely in contact with one of them,
which happened to be unfastened, and it swung open, revealing to his
gaze two stark-white white boys, one of them holding an enormous pistol
and both staring at him in stupor of ultimate horror. For, to the glassy
eyes of Penrod and Sam, the stratagem of the young coloured man, thus
dropping to earth, disclosed, with awful certainty, a slaughtered body. This dreadful thing raised itself upon its elbows and looked at them,
and there followed a motionless moment--a tableau of brief duration, for
both boys turned and would have fled, shrieking, but the body spoke:

"'At's a nice business!" it said reproachfully. "Nice business! Tryin'
blow a man's head off!" Penrod was unable to speak, but Sam managed to summon the tremulous
semblance of a voice. "Where--where did it hit you?" he gasped. "Nemmine anything 'bout where it HIT me," the young coloured man
returned, dusting his breast and knees as he rose. "I want to know what
kine o' white boys you think you is--man can't walk 'long street
'thout you blowin' his head off!" He entered the stable and, with an
indignation surely justified, took the pistol from the limp, cold hand
of Penrod. "Whose gun you playin' with? Where you git 'at gun?" "It's ours," quavered Sam. "It belongs to us." "Then you' pa ought to be 'rested," said the young coloured man. "Lettin' boys play with gun!" He examined the revolver with an interest
in which there began to appear symptoms of a pleasurable appreciation. "My goo'ness! Gun like'iss blow a team o' steers thew a brick house! LOOK at 'at gun!" With his right hand he twirled it in a manner most
dexterous and surprising; then suddenly he became severe. "You white
boy, listen me!" he said. "Ef I went an did what I OUGHT to did, I'd
march straight out 'iss stable, git a policeman, an' tell him 'rest you
an' take you off to jail. 'At's what you need--blowin' man's head off! Listen me: I'm goin' take 'iss gun an' th'ow her away where you can't do
no mo' harm with her. I'm goin' take her way off in the woods an' th'ow
her away where can't nobody fine her an' go blowin' man's head off with
her. 'At's what I'm goin' do!" And placing the revolver inside his coat
as inconspicuously as possible, he proceeded to the open door and into
the alley, where he turned for a final word. "I let you off 'iss one
time," he said, "but listen me--you listen, white boy: you bet' not tell
you' pa. _I_ ain' goin' tell him, an' YOU ain' goin' tell him. He want
know where gun gone, you tell him you los' her." He disappeared rapidly. Sam Williams, swallowing continuously, presently walked to the alley
door, and remarked in a weak voice, "I'm sick at my stummick." He
paused, then added more decidedly: "I'm goin' home. I guess I've stood
about enough around here for one day!" And bestowing a last glance upon
his friend, who was now sitting dumbly upon the floor in the exact spot
where he had stood to fire the dreadful shot, Sam moved slowly away. The early shades of autumn evening were falling when Penrod emerged from
the stable; and a better light might have disclosed to a shrewd eye some
indications that here was a boy who had been extremely, if temporarily,
ill. He went to the cistern, and, after a cautious glance round the
reassuring horizon, lifted the iron cover. Then he took from the inner
pocket of his jacket an object which he dropped listlessly into the
water: it was a bit of wood, whittled to the likeness of a pistol. And
though his lips moved not, nor any sound issued from his vocal organs,
yet were words formed. They were so deep in the person of Penrod they
came almost from the slowly convalescing profundities of his stomach. These words concerned firearms, and they were:

"Wish I'd never seen one! Never want to see one again!" Of course Penrod had no way of knowing that, as regards bingism in
general, several of the most distinguished old gentlemen in Europe were
at that very moment in exactly the same state of mind. CHAPTER V. THE IN-OR-IN

Georgie Bassett was a boy set apart. Not only that; Georgie knew that he
was a boy set apart. He would think about it for ten or twenty minutes
at a time, and he could not look at himself in a mirror and remain
wholly without emotion. What that emotion was, he would have been unable
to put into words; but it helped him to understand that there was a
certain noble something about him that other boys did not possess. Georgie's mother had been the first to discover that Georgie was a
boy set apart. In fact, Georgie did not know it until one day when he
happened to overhear his mother telling two of his aunts about it. True, he had always understood that he was the best boy in town and
he intended to be a minister when he grew up; but he had never before
comprehended the full extent of his sanctity, and, from that fraught
moment onward, he had an almost theatrical sense of his set-apartness. Penrod Schofield and Sam Williams and the other boys of the
neighbourhood all were conscious that there was something different and
spiritual about Georgie, and, though this consciousness of theirs may
have been a little obscure, it was none the less actual. That is to say,
they knew that Georgie Bassett was a boy set apart; but they did
not know that they knew it. Georgie's air and manner at all times
demonstrated to them that the thing was so, and, moreover, their mothers
absorbed appreciation of Georgie's wonderfulness from the very fount
of it, for Mrs. Bassett's conversation was of little else. Thus, the
radiance of his character became the topic of envious parental comment
during moments of strained patience in many homes, so that altogether
the most remarkable fact to be stated of Georgie Bassett is that he
escaped the consequences as long as he did. Strange as it may seem, no actual violence was done him, except upon the
incidental occasion of a tar-fight into which he was drawn by an obvious
eccentricity on the part of destiny. Naturally, he was not popular with
his comrades; in all games he was pushed aside, and disregarded, being
invariably the tail-ender in every pastime in which leaders "chose
sides"; his counsels were slighted as worse than weightless, and all his
opinions instantly hooted. Still, considering the circumstances fairly
and thoughtfully, it is difficult to deny that his boy companions showed
creditable moderation in their treatment of him. That is, they were
moderate up to a certain date, and even then they did not directly
attack him--there was nothing cold--blooded about it at all. The
thing was forced upon them, and, though they all felt pleased and
uplifted--while it was happening--they did not understand precisely why. Nothing could more clearly prove their innocence of heart than this very
ignorance, and yet none of the grown people who later felt themselves
concerned in the matter was able to look at it in that light. Now, here
was a characteristic working of those reactions that produce what is
sometimes called "the injustice of life", because the grown people were
responsible for the whole affair and were really the guilty parties. It was from grown people that Georgie Bassett learned he was a boy set
apart, and the effect upon him was what alienated his friends. Then
these alienated friends were brought (by odious comparisons on the
part of grown people) to a condition of mind wherein they suffered
dumb annoyance, like a low fever, whenever they heard Georgie's name
mentioned, while association with his actual person became every day
more and more irritating. And yet, having laid this fuse and having kept
it constantly glowing, the grown people expected nothing to happen to
Georgie. The catastrophe befell as a consequence of Sam Williams deciding to have
a shack in his backyard. Sam had somehow obtained a vasty piano-box and
a quantity of lumber, and, summoning Penrod Schofield and the coloured
brethren, Herman and Verman, he expounded to them his building-plans
and offered them shares and benefits in the institution he proposed to
found. Acceptance was enthusiastic; straightway the assembly became
a union of carpenters all of one mind, and ten days saw the shack not
completed but comprehensible. Anybody could tell, by that time, that it
was intended for a shack. There was a door on leather hinges; it drooped, perhaps, but it was a
door. There was a window--not a glass one, but, at least, it could be
"looked out of", as Sam said. There was a chimney made of stovepipe,
though that was merely decorative, because the cooking was done out of
doors in an underground "furnace" that the boys excavated. There were
pictures pasted on the interior walls, and, hanging from a nail, there
was a crayon portrait of Sam's grandfather, which he had brought down
from the attic quietly, though, as he said, it "wasn't any use on earth
up there." There were two lame chairs from Penrod's attic and along
one wall ran a low and feeble structure intended to serve as a bench or
divan. This would come in handy, Sam said, if any of the party "had
to lay down or anything", and at a pinch (such as a meeting of the
association) it would serve to seat all the members in a row. For, coincidentally with the development of the shack, the builders
became something more than partners. Later, no one could remember who
first suggested the founding of a secret order, or society, as a measure
of exclusiveness and to keep the shack sacred to members only; but it
was an idea that presently began to be more absorbing and satisfactory
than even the shack itself. The outward manifestations of it might
have been observed in the increased solemnity and preoccupation of the
Caucasian members and in a few ceremonial observances exposed to the
public eye. As an instance of these latter, Mrs. Williams, happening to
glance from a rearward window, about four o'clock one afternoon, found
her attention arrested by what seemed to be a flag-raising before the
door of the shack. Sam and Herman and Verman stood in attitudes of rigid
attention, shoulder to shoulder, while Penrod Schofield, facing them,
was apparently delivering some sort of exhortation, which he read from a
scribbled sheet of foolscap. Concluding this, he lifted from the ground
a long and somewhat warped clothes-prop, from one end of which hung
a whitish flag, or pennon, bearing an inscription. Sam and Herman and
Verman lifted their right hands, while Penrod placed the other end of
the clothes-prop in a hole in the ground, with the pennon fluttering
high above the shack. He then raised his own right hand, and the four
boys repeated something in concert. It was inaudible to Mrs. Williams;
but she was able to make out the inscription upon the pennon. It
consisted of the peculiar phrase "In-Or-In" done in black paint upon a
muslin ground, and consequently seeming to be in need of a blotter. It recurred to her mind, later that evening, when she happened to find
herself alone with Sam in the library, and, in merest idle curiosity,
she asked: "Sam, what does 'In-Or-In' mean?" Sam, bending over an arithmetic, uncreased his brow till it became of a
blank and marble smoothness. "Ma'am?" "What are those words on your flag?" Sam gave her a long, cold, mystic look, rose to his feet and left the
room with emphasis and dignity. For a moment she was puzzled. But Sam's
older brother was this year completing his education at a university,
and Mrs. Williams was not altogether ignorant of the obligations of
secrecy imposed upon some brotherhoods; so she was able to comprehend
Sam's silent withdrawal, and, instead of summoning him back for further
questions, she waited until he was out of hearing and then began to
laugh. Sam's action was in obedience to one of the rules adopted, at his own
suggestion, as a law of the order. Penrod advocated it warmly. From
Margaret he had heard accounts of her friends in college and thus had
learned much that ought to be done. On the other hand, Herman subscribed
to it with reluctance, expressing a decided opinion that if he and
Verman were questioned upon the matter at home and adopted the line of
conduct required by the new rule, it would be well for them to depart
not only from the room in which the questioning took place but from the
house, and hurriedly at that. "An' STAY away!" he concluded. Verman, being tongue-tied--not without advantage in this case, and
surely an ideal qualification for membership--was not so apprehensive. He voted with Sam and Penrod, carrying the day. New rules were adopted at every meeting (though it cannot be said
that all of them were practicable) for, in addition to the information
possessed by Sam and Penrod, Herman and Verman had many ideas of their
own, founded upon remarks overheard at home. Both their parents belonged
to secret orders, their father to the Innapenent 'Nevolent Lodge (so
stated by Herman) and their mother to the Order of White Doves. From these and other sources, Penrod found no difficulty in compiling
material for what came to be known as the "rixual"; and it was the
rixual he was reading to the members when Mrs. Williams happened to
observe the ceremonial raising of the emblem of the order. The rixual contained the oath, a key to the secret language, or code
(devised by Penrod for use in uncertain emergencies) and passwords for
admission to the shack, also instructions for recognizing a brother
member in the dark, and a rather alarming sketch of the things to be
done during the initiation of a candidate. This last was employed for the benefit of Master Roderick Magsworth
Bitts, Junior, on the Saturday following the flag-raising. He presented
himself in Sam's yard, not for initiation, indeed--having no previous
knowledge of the Society of the In-Or-In--but for general purposes
of sport and pastime. At first sight of the shack he expressed
anticipations of pleasure, adding some suggestions for improving the
architectural effect. Being prevented, however, from entering, and even
from standing in the vicinity of the sacred building, he plaintively
demanded an explanation; whereupon he was commanded to withdraw to the
front yard for a time, and the members held meeting in the shack. Roddy
was elected, and consented to undergo the initiation. He was not the only new member that day. A short time after Roddy
had been taken into the shack for the reading of the rixual and other
ceremonies, little Maurice Levy entered the Williams' gate and strolled
round to the backyard, looking for Sam. He was surprised and delighted
to behold the promising shack, and, like Roddy, entertained fair hopes
for the future. The door of the shack was closed; a board covered the window, but a
murmur of voices came from within. Maurice stole close and listened. Through a crack he could see the flicker of a candle-flame, and he heard
the voice of Penrod Schofield:

"Roddy Bitts, do you solemnly swear?" "Well, all right," said the voice of Roddy, somewhat breathless. "How many fingers you see before your eyes?" "Can't see any," Roddy returned. "How could I, with this thing over my
eyes, and laying down on my stummick, anyway?" "Then the time has come," Penrod announced in solemn tones. "The time
has come." Whack! Evidently a broad and flat implement was thereupon applied to Roddy. "OW!" complained the candidate. "No noise!" said Penrod sternly, and added: "Roddy Bitts must now say
the oath. Say exackly what I say, Roddy, and if you don't--well, you
better, because you'll see! Now, say 'I solemnly swear--'"

"I solemnly swear--" Roddy said. "To keep the secrets--"

"To keep the secrets--" Roddy repeated. "To keep the secrets in infadelaty and violate and sanctuary." "What?" Roddy naturally inquired. Whack! "OW!" cried Roddy. "That's no fair!" "You got to say just what _I_ say," Penrod was heard informing him. "That's the rixual, and anyway, even if you do get it right, Verman's
got to hit you every now and then, because that's part of the rixual,
too. Now go on and say it. 'I solemnly swear to keep the secrets in
infadelaty and violate and sanctuary."' "I solemnly swear--" Roddy began. But Maurice Levy was tired of being no party to such fascinating
proceedings, and he began to hammer upon the door. "Sam! Sam Williams!" he shouted. "Lemme in there! I know lots about
'nishiatin'. Lemme in!" The door was flung open, revealing Roddy Bitts, blindfolded and bound,
lying face down upon the floor of the shack; but Maurice had only a
fugitive glimpse of this pathetic figure before he, too, was recumbent. Four boys flung themselves indignantly upon him and bore him to earth. "Hi!" he squealed. "What you doin'? Haven't you got any SENSE?" And, from within the shack, Roddy added his own protest. "Let me up, can't you?" he cried. "I got to see what's goin' on out
there, haven't I? I guess I'm not goin' to lay here all DAY! What you
think I'm made of?" "You hush up!" Penrod commanded. "This is a nice biznuss!" he continued,
deeply aggrieved. "What kind of a 'nishiation do you expect this is,
anyhow?" "Well, here's Maurice Levy gone and seen part of the secrets," said Sam,
in a voice of equal plaintiveness. "Yes; and I bet he was listenin' out
here, too!" "Lemme up!" 