



Produced by Theresa Armao





THE MALEFACTOR

by E. Phillips Oppenheim




CONTENTS

     BOOK I  Chapter

     I. A Society Scandal
     II. Outside the Pale
     III. A Student of Character
     IV. A Delicate Mission
     V.      The Gospel of Hate
     VI. "Hast Thou Found Me, O Mine Enemy?" VII. Lord of the Manor
     VIII. The Heart of a Child
     IX. The Sword of Damocles
     X. A Forlorn Hope
     XI. Professor Sinclair's Dancing Academy
     XII. Mephistopheles on a Steamer
     XIII. A Cockney Conspirator
     XIV. The Moth and the Candle
     XV. "Devil Take the Hindmost"
     XVI. The Hidden Hand

     BOOK II

     I. "Mr. Wingrave, From America"
     II. The Shadow of a Fear
     III. Juliet Asks Questions
     IV. Lady Ruth's Last Card
     V.      Guardian and Ward
     VI. Ghosts of Dead Things. VII. Spreading the Net
     VIII. In the Toils
     IX. The Indiscretion of the Marchioness
     X. "I am Misanthropos, and Hate Mankind"
     XI. Juliet Gains Experience
     XII. Nemesis at Work
     XIII. Richardson Tries Again
     XIV. "It Was an Accident"
     XV. Aynesworth Plans a Love Story
     XVI. A Deed of Gift
     XVII. For Pity's Sake
     XVIII. A Dream of  Paradise
     XIX. The Awakening
     XX. Revenge is--Bitter
     XXI. The Way of Peace
     XXII. "Love Shall Make all Things New"





BOOK I




A SOCIETY SCANDAL

Tall and burly, with features and skin hardened by exposure to the
sun and winds of many climates, he looked like a man ready to face all
hardships, equal to any emergency. Already one seemed to see the clothes
and habits of civilization falling away from him, the former to be
replaced by the stern, unlovely outfit of the war correspondent who
plays the game. They crowded round him in the club smoking room, for
these were his last few minutes. They had dined him, toasted him, and
the club loving cup had been drained to his success and his safe return. For Lovell was a popular member of this very Bohemian gathering, and he
was going to the Far East, at a few hours' notice, to represent one of
the greatest of English dailies. A pale, slight young man, who stood at this right hand, was speaking. His name was Walter Aynesworth, and he was a writer of short stories--a
novelist in embryo. "What I envy you most, Lovell," he declared, "is your escape from the
deadly routine of our day by day life. Here in London it seems to me
that we live the life of automatons. We lunch, we dine, we amuse or we
bore ourselves, and we sleep--and all the rest of the world does the
same. Passion we have outgrown, emotion we have destroyed by analysis. The storms which shake humanity break over other countries. What is
there left to us of life? Civilization ministers too easily to our
needs, existence has become a habit. No wonder that we are a tired
race." "Life is the same, the world over," another man remarked. "With every
forward step in civilization, life must become more mechanical. London
is no worse than Paris, or Paris than Tokyo." Aynesworth shook his head. "I don't agree with you," he replied. "It
is the same, more or less, with all European countries, but the Saxon
temperament, with its mixture of philosophy and philistinism, more than
any other, gravitates towards the life mechanical. Existence here has
become fossilized. We wear a mask upon our faces; we carry a gauge for
our emotions. Lovell is going where the one great force of primitive
life remains. He is going to see war. He is going to breathe an
atmosphere hot with naked passion; he is going to rub shoulders with men
who walk hand in hand with death. That's the sort of tonic we all want,
to remind us that we are human beings with blood in our veins, and not
sawdust-stuffed dolls." Then Lovell broke silence. He took his pipe from his mouth, and he
addressed Aynesworth. "Walter," he said, "you are talking rot. There is nothing very complex
or stimulating about the passion of war, when men kill one another
unseen; where you feel the sting in your heart which comes from God
knows where, and you crumple up, with never a chance to have a go at the
chap who has potted you from the trenches, or behind a rock, a thousand
yards off. Mine is going to be, except from a spectacular point of view,
a very barren sort of year, compared with what yours might be if the
fire once touched your eyes. I go where life is cruder and fiercer,
perhaps, but you remain in the very city of tragedies." Aynesworth laughed, as he lit a fresh cigarette. "City of tragedies!" he exclaimed. "It sounds all right, but it's bunkum
all the same. Show me where they lie, Lovell, old chap. Tell me where to
stir the waters." Several of those who were watching him noticed a sudden change in
Lovell's face. The good humor and bonhomie called up by this last
evening amongst his old friends had disappeared. His face had fallen
into graver lines, his eyes seemed fixed with a curious introspective
steadiness on a huge calendar which hung from the wall. When at last he
turned towards Aynesworth, his tone was almost solemn. "Some of them don't lie so very far from the surface, Walter," he said. "There is one"--he took out his watch--"there is one which, if you like,
I will tell you about. I have just ten minutes." "Good!" "Go ahead, Lovell, old chap!" "Have a drink first!" He held out his hand. They were all silent. He stood up amongst them, by
far the tallest man there, with his back to the chimney piece, and his
eyes still lingering about that calendar. "Thirteen years ago," he said, "two young men--call them by their
Christian names, Wingrave and Lumley--shared a somewhat extensive
hunting box in Leicestershire. They were both of good family, well
off, and fairly popular, Lumley the more so perhaps. He represented the
ordinary type of young Englishman, with a stronger dash than usual
of selfishness. Wingrave stood for other things. He was reticent and
impenetrable. People called him mysterious." Lovell paused for a moment to refill his pipe. The sudden light upon
his face, as he struck a match, seemed to bring into vivid prominence
something there, indescribable in words, yet which affected his hearers
equally with the low gravity of his speech. The man himself was feeling
the tragedy of the story he told. "They seemed," he continued, "always to get on well together, until they
fell in love with the same woman. Her name we will say was Ruth. She
was the wife of the Master of Hounds with whom they hunted. If I had the
story-writing gifts of Aynesworth here, I would try to describe her. As
I haven't, I will simply give you a crude idea of what she seemed like
to me. "She was neither dark nor fair, short nor tall; amongst a crowd of other
women, she seemed undistinguishable by any special gifts; yet when you
had realized her there was no other woman in the room. She had the eyes
of an angel, only they were generally veiled; she had the figure of a
miniature Venus, soft and with delicate curves, which seemed somehow
to be always subtly asserting themselves, although she affected in
her dress an almost puritanical simplicity. Her presence in a room was
always felt at once. There are some women, beautiful or plain, whose sex
one scarcely recognizes. She was not one of these! She seemed to carry
with her the concentrated essence of femininity. Her quiet
movements, the almost noiseless rustling of her clothes, the quaint,
undistinguishable perfumes which she used, her soft, even voice, were
all things which seemed individual to her. She was like a study in
undernotes, and yet"--Lovell paused a moment--"and yet no Spanish
dancing woman, whose dark eyes and voluptuous figure have won her the
crown of the demi-monde, ever possessed that innate and mystic gift of
kindling passion like that woman. I told you I couldn't describe her! I
can't! I can only speak of effects. If my story interests you, you must
build up your own idea of her." "Becky Sharpe!" Aynesworth murmured. Lovell nodded. "Perhaps," he admitted, "only Ruth was a lady. To go on with my story. A hunting coterie, as you fellows know, means lots of liberty, and a
general free-and-easiness amongst the sexes, which naturally leads to
flirtations more or less serious. Ruth's little affairs were either too
cleverly arranged, or too harmless for gossip. Amongst the other women
of the hunt, she seemed outwardly almost demure. But one day--there was
a row!" Lovell paused, and took a drink from a glass by his side. "I hope you fellows won't think that I'm spinning this out," he said. "It is, after all, in itself only a commonplace story, but I've carried
it locked up in my memory for years, and now that I've let it loose,
it unwinds itself slowly. This is how the row came about. Lumley one
afternoon missed Wingrave and Ruth from the hunting field. Someone most
unfortunately happened to tell him that they had left the run together,
and had been seen riding together towards White Lodge, which was the
name of the house where these two young men lived. Lumley followed them. He rode into the stable yard, and found there Ruth's mare and Wingrave's
covert hack, from which he had not changed when they had left the field. Both animals had evidently been ridden hard, and there was something
ominous in the smile with which the head groom told him that Lady Ruth
and Wingrave were in the house. "The two men had separate dens. Wingrave's was much the better
furnished, as he was a young man of considerable taste, and he had also
fitted it with sporting trophies collected from many countries. This
room was at the back of the house, and Lumley deliberately crossed the
lawn and looked in at the window." Lovell paused for a moment or two to relight his pipe. "Remember," he continued, "that I have to put this story together,
partly from facts which came to my knowledge afterwards, and partly from
reasonable deductions. I may say at once that I do not know what Lumley
saw when he played the spy. The housekeeper had just taken tea in, and
it is possible that Wingrave may have been holding his guest's hand,
or that something in their faces or attitude convinced him that his
jealousy was well founded. Anyhow, it is certain that Lumley was half
beside himself with rage when he strode away from that window. Then in
the avenue he must have heard the soft patter of hounds coming along the
lane, or perhaps seen the pink coats of the huntsmen through the hedge. This much is certain. He hurried down the drive, and returned with
Ruth's husband." Lovell took another drink. No one spoke. No one even made a remark. The
little circle of listeners had caught something of his own gravity. The
story was an ordinary one enough, but something in Lovell's manner
of telling it seemed somehow to bring into their consciousness the
apprehension of the tangled web of passions which burned underneath its
sordid details. "Ruth's husband--Sir William I will call him--stood side by side with
Lumley before the window. What they saw I cannot tell you. They entered
the room. The true story of what happened there I doubt if anyone will
ever know. The evidence of servants spoke of raised voices and the sound
of a heavy fall. When they were summoned, Sir William lay on the floor
unconscious. Lady Ruth had fainted; Lumley and Wingrave were both
bending over the former. On the floor were fragments of paper, which
were afterwards put together, and found to be the remains of a check for
a large amount, payable to Lady Ruth, and signed by Wingrave. "The sequel is very soon told. Sir William died in a few days, and
Wingrave, on the evidence of Lumley and Ruth, was committed for
manslaughter, and sent to prison for fifteen years!" Lovell paused. A murmur went round the little group of listeners. The
story, after all, except for Lovell's manner of telling it, was an
ordinary one. Everyone felt that there was something else behind. So they asked no questions whilst Lovell drank his whisky and soda, and
refilled his pipe. Again his eyes seemed to wander to the calendar. "According to Lady Ruth's evidence," he said thoughtfully, "her husband
entered the room at the exact moment when she was rejecting Wingrave's
advances, and indignantly refusing a check which he was endeavoring to
persuade her to accept. A struggle followed between the two men, with
fatal results for Sir William. That," he added slowly, "is the story
which the whole world read, and which most of it believes. Here,
however, are a few corrections of my own, and a suggestion or two for
you, Aynesworth, and those of you who like to consider yourselves truth
seekers. First, then, Lady Ruth was a self-invited guest at White Lodge. She had asked Wingrave to return with her, and as they sat together in
his room, she confessed that she was worried, and asked for his
advice. She was in some money trouble, ingeniously explained, no doubt. Wingrave, with the utmost delicacy, offered his assistance, which was of
course accepted. It was exactly what she was there for. She was in
the act of taking the check, when she saw her husband and Lumley. Her
reputation was at stake. Her subsequent course of action and evidence
becomes obvious. The check unexplained was ruin. She explained it! "Of the struggle, and of the exact means by which Sir William received
his injuries, I know nothing. There is the evidence! It may or may not
be true. The most serious part of the case, so far as Lady Ruth was
concerned, lay in the facts as to her husband's removal from the White
Lodge. In an unconscious state he was driven almost twelve miles at a
walking pace. No stimulants were administered, and though they passed
two doctors' houses no stop was made. A doctor was not sent for until
half an hour after they reached home, and even then they seemed to have
chosen the one who lived furthest away. The conclusion is obvious enough
to anyone who knows the facts of the case. Sir William was not meant to
live! "Wingrave's trial was a famous one. He had no friends and few
sympathizers, and he insisted upon defending himself. His cross
examination of the man who had been his friend created something like a
sensation. Amongst other things, he elicited the fact that Lumley, after
first seeing the two together, had gone and fetched Sir William. It was
a terrible half hour for Lumley, and when he left the box, amongst the
averted faces of his friends, the sweat was pouring down his face. I can
seem him now, as though it were yesterday. Then Lady Ruth followed. She
was quietly dressed; the effect she produced was excellent. She told
her story. She hinted at the insult. She spoke of the check. She had
imagined no harm in accepting Wingrave's invitation to tea. Men and
women of the hunt, who were on friendly terms, treated one another as
comrades. She spoke of the blow. She had seen it delivered, and so on. And all the time, I sat within a few feet of Wingrave, and I knew that
in the black box before him were burning love letters from this woman,
to the man whose code of honor would ever have protected her husband
from disgrace; and I knew that I was listening to the thing which you,
Aynesworth, and many of your fellow story writers, have so wisely and so
ignorantly dilated upon--the vengeance of a woman denied. Only I heard
the words themselves, cold, earnest words, fall one by one from her
lips like a sentence of doom--and there was life in the thing, life and
death! When she had finished, the whole court was in a state of tension. Everyone was leaning forward. It would be the most piquant, the most
wonderful cross examination every heard--the woman lying to save her
honor and to achieve her vengeance; the man on trial for his life. Wingrave stood up. Lady Ruth raised her veil, and looked at him from
the witness box. There was the most intense silence I ever realized. Who could tell the things which flashed from one to the other across the
dark well of the court; who could measure the fierce, silent scorn which
seemed to blaze from his eyes, as he held her there--his slave until he
chose to give the signal for release? At last he looked away towards
the judge, and the woman fell forward in the box gasping, a crumpled up,
nerveless heap of humanity. "'My lord,' he said, 'I have no questions to ask this witness!' "Everyone staggered. Wingrave's few friends were horrified. After that
there was, of course, no hope for him. He got fifteen years' penal
servitude." Like an echo from that pent-up murmur of feeling which had rippled
through the crowded court many years ago, his little group of auditors
almost gasped as Lovell left his place and strolled down the room. Aynesworth laid his hand upon his shoulder. "All the time," he said, "you were looking at that calendar! Why?" Lovell once more faced them. He was standing with his back to a round
table, strewn with papers and magazines. "It was the date," he said, "and the fact that I must leave England
within a few hours, which forced this story from me. Tomorrow Wingrave
will be free! Listen, Aynesworth," he continued, turning towards him,
"and the rest of you who fancy that it is I who am leaving a humdrum
city for the world of tragedies! I leave you the legacy of a greater one
than all Asia will yield to me! Lady Ruth is married to Lumley, and
they hold today in London a very distinguished social position. Tomorrow
Wingrave takes a hand in the game. He was once my friend; I was in court
when he was tried; I was intimately acquainted with the lawyer's clerk
who had the arrangement of his papers. I know what no one else breathing
knows. He is a man who never forgives; a man who was brutally deceived,
and who for years has had no other occupation than to brood upon
his wrongs. He is very wealthy indeed, still young, he has marvelous
tenacity of purpose, and he has brains. Tomorrow he will be free!" Aynesworth drew a little breath. "I wonder," he murmured, "if anything will happen." Lovell shrugged his shoulders. "Where I go," he said, "the cruder passions may rage, and life and
death be reckoned things of little account. But you who remain--who can
tell?--you may look into the face of mightier things." OUTSIDE THE PALE

Three men were together in a large and handsomely furnished sitting room
of the Clarence Hotel, in Piccadilly. One, pale, quiet, and unobtrusive,
dressed in sober black, the typical lawyer's clerk, was busy gathering
up a collection of papers and documents from the table, over which they
had been strewn. His employer, who had more the appearance of a country
gentleman than the junior partner in the well-known firm of Rocke and
Son, solicitors, had risen to his feet, and was drawing on his gloves. At the head of the table was the client. "I trust, Sir Wingrave, that you are satisfied with this account of our
stewardship," the solicitor said, as his clerk left the room. "We have
felt it a great responsibility at times, but everything seems to
have turned out very well. The investments, of course, are all above
suspicion." "Perfectly satisfied, I thank you," was the quiet reply. "You seem to
have studied my interests in a very satisfactory manner." Mr. Rocke had other things to say, but his client's manner seemed
designed to create a barrier of formality between them. He hesitated,
unwilling to leave, yet finding it exceedingly difficult to say the
things which were in his mind. He temporized by referring back to
matters already discussed, solely for the purpose of prolonging the
interview. "You have quite made up your mind, then, to put the Tredowen property on
the market," he remarked. "You will excuse my reminding you of the fact
that you have large accumulated funds in hand, and nearly a hundred
thousand pounds worth of easily realizable securities. Tredowen has
been in your mother's family for a good many years, and I should doubt
whether it will be easily disposed of." The man at the head of the table raised his head. He looked steadily at
the lawyer, who began to wish that he had left the room with his clerk. Decidedly, Sir Wingrave Seton was not an easy man to get on with. "My mind is quite made up, thank you, on this and all other matters
concerning which I have given you instructions," was the calm reply. "I
have had plenty of time for consideration," he added drily. The lawyer had his opening at last, and he plunged. "Sir Wingrave," he said, "we were at college together, and our
connection is an old one. You must forgive me if I say how glad I am to
see you here, and to know that your bad time is over. I can assure you
that you have had my deepest sympathy. Nothing ever upset me so much as
that unfortunate affair. I sincerely trust that you will do your best
now to make up for lost time. You are still young, and you are rich. Let
us leave business alone now, for the moment. What can I do for you as a
friend, if you will allow me to call you so?" Wingrave turned slightly in his chair. In his altered position, a ray of
sunshine fell for the first time upon his gaunt but striking face. Lined
and hardened, as though by exposure and want of personal care, there was
also a lack of sensibility, an almost animal callousness, on the coldly
lit eyes and unflinching mouth, which readily suggested some terrible
and recent experience--something potent enough to have dried up the
human nature out of the man and left him soulless. His clothes had the
impress of the ready-made, although he wore them with a distinction
which was obviously inherent; and notwithstanding the fact that he
seemed to have been writing, he wore gloves. "I am much obliged to you, Rocke," he said. "Let me repeat your
question. What is there that you can do for me?" Mr. Rocke was apparently a little nonplussed. The absolute
imperturbability of the man who had once been his friend was
disconcerting. "Well," he said, "the governor sent me instead of coming himself,
because he thought that I might be more useful to you. London changes so
quickly--you would hardly know your way about now. I should like you to
come and dine with me tonight, and I'll take you round anywhere you care
to go; and then if you don't want to go back to your old tradespeople, I
could take you to my tailor and bookmaker." "Is that all?" Wingrave asked calmly. Rocke was again taken aback. "Certainly not," he answered. "There must be many ways in which I could
be useful to you, but I can't think of them all at once. I am here to
serve you professionally or as a friend, to the best of my ability. Can
you suggest anything yourself? What do you want?" "That is the question," Wingrave said, "which I have been asking myself. Unfortunately, up to now, I have not been able to answer it. Regarding
myself, however, from the point of view of a third party, I should
say that the thing I was most in need of was the society of my fellow
creatures." "Exactly," Rocke declared. "That is what I thought you would say! It
won't take us long to arrange something of the sort for you." "Can you put me up," Wingrave asked, "at your club, and introduce me to
your friends there?" Rocke flinched before the steady gaze of those cold enquiring eyes, in
which he fancied, too, that a gleam of malice shone. The color mounted
to his cheeks. It was a most embarrassing situation. "I can introduce you to some decent fellows, of course, and to some very
charming ladies," he said hesitatingly, "but as to the club--I--well,
don't you think yourself that it would scarcely be wise to--"

"Exactly," Wingrave interrupted. "And these ladies that you spoke of--"

"Oh! There's no difficulty about that," Rocke declared with an air of
relief. "I can make up a little dinner party for tonight, if you like. There's an awfully smart American woman over here, with the Fanciful Fan
Company--I'm sure you'd like her, and she'd come like a shot. Then I'd
get Daisy Vane--she's all right. They don't know anything, and wouldn't
care if they did. Besides, you could call yourself what you liked." "Thank you," Wingrave said. "I am afraid I did not make myself quite
clear. I was not thinking of play fellows. I was thinking of the men and
women of my own order. Shall I put the matter quite clearly? Can I take
my place in society under my own name, renew my old friendships and
build up new ones? Can I do this even at the risk of a few difficulties
at first? I am not a sensitive man. I am prepared for the usual number
of disagreeable incidents. But can I win my way through?" With his back against the wall, Rocke displayed more courage. Besides,
what was the use of mincing matters with a man who had all the
appearance of a human automaton, who never flinched or changed color,
and whose passions seemed dried up and withered things? "I am afraid not, Sir Wingrave," he said. "I should not recommend you to
try, at any rate for the present." "Give me your reasons," was the cool response. "I will do so with pleasure," Rocke answered. "About the time of the
trial and immediately afterwards, there was a certain amount of
sympathy for you. People felt that you must have received a good deal of
provocation, and there were several unexplained incidents which told
in your favor. Today, I should think that the feeling amongst those
who remember the affair at all is rather the other way. You heard, I
believe, that Lady Ruth married Lumley Barrington?" "Yes." "Barrington has been very successful at the Bar, and they say that he
is certain of a judgeship before long. His wife has backed him up well,
they have entertained lavishly, and today I should think that she is one
of the most popular hostesses in London. In her earlier days, I used to
hear that she was one of the very fast hunting set--that was the time
when you knew her. I can assure you that if ever that was true, she is
a completely altered woman today. She is patroness of half a dozen great
charitable schemes, she writes very clever articles in the Reviews on
the Betterment of the Poor Question, and royalty itself visits at her
house." "I see," Wingrave said drily. "I was not aware of these changes." "If ever," Mr. Rocke continued, "people were inclined to look a little
askance at her, that has all gone by. Today she is one of the last women
in the world of whom people would be likely to believe ill."

Wingrave nodded slowly. "I am very much obliged to you," he said, "for this information. You
seem to have come here today, Mr. Rocke, with good intentions towards
me. Let me ask you to put yourself in my place. I am barely forty
years old, and I am rich. I want to make the most of my life--under the
somewhat peculiar circumstances. How and where should you live?" "It depends a little upon your tastes, of course," Rocke answered. "You
are a sportsman, are you not?" "I am fond of sport," Wingrave answered. "At least I was. At present I
am not conscious of having any positive tastes." "I think," Rocke continued, "that I should first of all change my
name. Then, without making any effort to come into touch with your old
friends, I should seek acquaintance amongst the Bohemian world of London
and Paris. There I might myself, perhaps, be able to help you. For
sport, you might fish in Norway or Iceland, or shoot in Hungary; you
could run to a yacht if you cared about it, and if you fancy big game,
why, there's all Africa before you." Wingrave listened, without changing a muscle of his face. "Your programme," he remarked, "presupposes that I have no ambitions
beyond the pursuit of pleasure." Rocke shrugged his shoulders. He was becoming more at his ease. He felt
that his advice was sound, that he was showing a most comprehensive
grasp of the situation. "I am afraid," he said, "that none of what we call the careers are open
to you. You could not enter Parliament, and you are too old for the
professions. The services, of course, are impossible. You might write,
if your tastes ran that way. Nowadays, it seems to be the fashion to
record one's experiences in print, if--if they should happen to be in
any way exceptional. I can think of nothing else!" "I am very much obliged to you," Wingrave said. "Your suggestions are
eminently practical. I will think them over. Don't let me keep you any
longer!" "About this evening," Rocke remarked. "Shall I fix up that little dinner
party? You have only to say the word!" "I am very much obliged to you, but I think not," answered Wingrave. "I will dine with you alone some evening, with pleasure! Not just as
present!" Rocke looked, as he felt, puzzled. He honestly wished to be of service
to this man, but he was at a loss to know what further suggestion he
could make. There was something impenetrable about his client, something
which he could not arrive at, behind the hard, grim face and measured
words. He could not even guess as to what the man's hopes or intentions
were. Eventually, although with some reluctance, he took up his hat. "Well, Sir Wingrave," he said, "if there is really nothing I can do
for you, I will go. If you should change your mind, you have only to
telephone. You can command me at any time. I am only anxious to be of
service to you." "You have already been of service to me," Wingrave answered quietly. "You have spoken the truth! You have helped me to realize my position
more exactly. Will you give your father my compliments and thanks, and
say that I am entirely satisfied with the firm's conduct of affairs
during my--absence?" Rocke nodded. "Certainly," he said. "That will please the governor! I must be off now. I hope you'll soon be feeling quite yourself again, Sir Wingrave! It
must seem a bit odd at first, I suppose, but it will wear off all right. What you want, after all, is society. Much better let me arrange that
little dinner for tonight!" Wingrave shook his head. "Later on, perhaps," he answered. "Good morning!" A STUDENT OF CHARACTER

Left alone, Wingrave walked for several minutes up and down the room,
his hands behind him, his head bent. He walked, not restlessly, but
with measured footsteps. His mind was fixed steadfastly upon the one
immediate problem of his own future. His interview with Rocke had
unsettled--to a certain extent unnerved--him. Was this freedom for which
he had longed so passionately, this return into civilized life, to mean
simply the exchange of an iron-barred cell for a palace whose outer
gates were as hopelessly locked, even though the key was of gold! Freedom! Was it after all an illusion? Was his to be the hog's paradise
of empty delights; were the other worlds indeed forbidden? He moved
abruptly to the window and threw it open. Below was Piccadilly,
brilliant with May sunshine, surging with life. Motors and carriages,
omnibuses and hansoms, were all jostled together in a block; the
pavements were thronged with a motley and ever-hurrying crowd. It seemed
to him, accustomed to the callous and hopeless appearance of a less
happy tribe, that the faces of these people were all aflame with the
joy of the springtime. The perfume from the great clusters of yellow
daffodils and violets floated up from the flower sellers' baskets
below; the fresh, warm air seemed to bring him poignant memories of
crocus-starred lawns, of trim beds of hyacinths, of the song of birds,
of the perfume of drooping lilac. Grim and motionless, as a figure of
fate, Wingrave looked down from his window, with cold, yet discerning
eyes. He was still an alien, a denizen in another world from that which
flowed so smoothly and pleasantly below. It was something to which he
did not belong, which he doubted, indeed, if ever again he could enter. He had no part in it, no share in that vigorous life, whose throbbings
he could dimly feel, though his own heart was beating to a slower and a
very different tune. They were his fellows in name only. Between him and
them stood the judgment of--Rocke! The evil chances of the world are many! It was whilst his thoughts
traveled in this fashion that the electric landaulette of Lady Ruth
Barrington glided round the corner from St. James' Street, and joined
in the throng of vehicles slowly making their way down Piccadilly. His
attention was attracted first by the white and spotless liveries of the
servants--the form of locomotion itself was almost new to him. Then he
saw the woman who leaned back amongst the cushions. She was elegantly
dressed; she wore no veil; she did not look a day more than thirty. She was attractive, from the tips of her patent shoes, to the white
bow which floated on the top of her lace parasol; a perfectly dressed,
perfectly turned out woman. She had, too, the lazy confident air of
a woman sure of herself and her friends. She knew nothing of the look
which flashed down upon her from the window overhead. Wingrave turned away with a little gasp; a half-stifled exclamation had
crept out from between his teeth. His cheeks seemed paler than ever, and
his eyes unnaturally bright. Nevertheless, he was completely master of
himself. On the table was a large deed box of papers, which Rocke had
left for his inspection. From its recesses he drew out a smaller box,
unlocked it with a key from his chain, and emptied its sole contents--a
small packet of letters--upon the table. He counted them one by one. They were all there--and on top a photograph. A breath of half-forgotten
perfume stole out into the room. He opened one of the letters, and its
few passionate words came back to his memory, linked with a hundred
other recollections, the desire of her eyes, of her lips raised for his,
the caressing touch of her fingers. He found himself wondering, in an
impersonal sort of way, that these things should so little affect him. His blood ran no less coldly, nor did his pulses beat the faster, for
this backward glance into things finished. There was a knock at the door. He raised his head. "Come in!" A slim, fair young man obeyed the summons, and advanced into the room. Wingrave eyed him with immovable face. Nevertheless, his manner somehow
suggested a displeased surprise. "Sir Wingrave Seton, I believe?" the intruder said cheerfully. "That is my name," Wingrave admitted; "but my orders below have
evidently been disobeyed. I am not disposed to receive visitors today." The intruder was not in the least abashed. He laid his hat upon the
table, and felt in his pocket. "I am very sorry," he said. "They did try to keep me out, but I told
them that my business was urgent. I have been a journalist, you see, and
am used to these little maneuvers." Wingrave looked at him steadily, with close-drawn eyebrows. "Am I to understand," he said "that you are in here in your journalistic
capacity?" The newcomer shook his head. "Pray do not think," he said, "that I should be guilty of such an
impertinence. My name is Aynesworth. Walter Aynesworth. I have a letter
for you from Lovell. You remember him, I daresay. Here it is!" He produced it from his breast coat pocket, and handed it over. "Where is Lovell?" Wingrave asked. "He left for the East early this morning," Aynesworth answered. "He had
to go almost at an hour's notice." Wingrave broke the seal, and read the letter through. Afterwards he tore
it into small pieces and threw them into the grate. "What do you want with me, Mr. Aynesworth?" he asked. "I want to be your secretary," Aynesworth answered. "My secretary," Wingrave repeated. "I am much obliged to you, but I am
not requiring anyone in that capacity." "Pardon me," Aynesworth answered, "but I think you are. You may not have
realized it yet, but if you will consider the matter carefully, I think
you will agree with me that a secretary, or companion of some sort, is
exactly what you do need." "Out of curiosity," Wingrave remarked, "I should be glad to know why you
think so." "Certainly," Aynesworth answered. "In the first place, I know the story
of your life, and the unfortunate incident which has kept you out of
society for the last ten years." "From Lovell, I presume," Wingrave interrupted. "Precisely," Aynesworth admitted. "Ten years' absence from English life
today means that you return to it an absolute and complete stranger. You
would be like a Cook's tourist abroad, without a guide or a Baedeker, if
you attempted to rely upon yourself. Now I am rather a Bohemian sort of
person, but I have just the sort of all-round knowledge which would be
most useful to you. I have gone a little way into society, and I know
something about politics. I can bring you up-to-date on both these
matters. I know where to dine well in town, and where to be amused. I
can tell you where to get your clothes, and the best place for all the
etceteras. If you want to travel, I can speak French and German; and I
consider myself a bit of a sportsman." "I am sure," Wingrave answered, "I congratulate you upon your
versatility. I am quite convinced! I shall advertise at once for a
secretary!" "Why advertise?" Aynesworth asked. "I am here!" Wingrave shook his head. "You would not suit me at all," he answered. "Why not?" Aynesworth asked. "I forget whether I mentioned all my
accomplishments. I am an Oxford man with a degree, and I can write
tolerable English. I've a fair head for figures, and I don't require too
large a salary." "Exactly," Wingrave answered drily. "You are altogether too desirable? I
should not require an Admirable Crichton for my purpose." Aynesworth remained unruffled. "All right," he said. "You know best, of course! Suppose you tell me
what sort of a man would satisfy you!" "Why should I?" Wingrave asked coldly. "It would amuse me," Aynesworth answered, "and I've come a mile or so
out of my way, and given up a whole morning to come and see you. Go on! It won't take long!" Wingrave shrugged his shoulders. "I will not remind you," he said, "that you came on your own initiative. I owe you the idea, however, so I will tell you the sort of person I
shall look out for. In the first place, I do not require him to be a
gentleman." "I can be a shocking bounder at times," Aynesworth murmured. "He must be more a sort of an upper servant," Wingrave continued. "I
should require him to obey me implicitly, whatever I told him to do. You
have a conscience, I presume?" "Very little," Aynesworth answered. "I have been a journalist." "You have the remnants of one, at all events," Wingrave said, "quite
sufficient, no doubt, to interfere with your possible usefulness to me. I must have someone who is poor--too poor to question my will, or to
dispute my orders, whatever they might be." "I have never," Aynesworth declared, "possessed a superfluous half-crown
in my life." "You probably possess what is called a sense of honor," Wingrave
continued. "You would certainly disapprove of some of my proceedings,
and you would probably disobey my orders." "Sense of honor!" Aynesworth repeated. "You have too flattering an
opinion of me. I don't know what it is. I always cheat at cards if I get
the chance." Wingrave turned away. "You are a fool," he said, "and you won't suit me." "When can I come?" Aynesworth asked. "You can stay now," Wingrave answered. "Your salary will be four hundred
a year. You will live at my expense. The day you disobey an order of
mine, you go! No notice, mind!" "Agreed," Aynesworth answered. "What should I do first? Send you a
tailor, I should think." Wingrave nodded. "I will give the afternoon to that sort of people," he said. "Here is a
list of the tradesmen I used to deal with. Kindly avoid them." Aynesworth glanced at the slip of paper, and nodded. "All out-of-date now," he remarked. "I'll be back to lunch." A DELICATE MISSION

Aynesworth was back in less than an hour. He carried under his arm a
brown paper parcel, the strings of which he commenced at once to untie. Wingrave, who had been engrossed in the contents of his deed box,
watched him with immovable face. "The tailor will be here at two-thirty," he announced, "and the other
fellows will follow on at half an hour's interval. The manicurist and
the barber are coming at six o'clock." Wingrave nodded. "What have you there?" he asked, pointing to the parcel. "Cigars and cigarettes, and jolly good ones, too," Aynesworth answered,
opening a flat tin box, and smelling the contents appreciatively. "Try
one of these! The finest Turkish tobacco grown!" "I don't smoke," Wingrave answered. "Oh! You've got out of it, but you must pick it up again," Aynesworth
declared. "Best thing out for the nerves--sort of humanizes one, you
know!" "Humanizes one, does it?" Wingrave remarked softly. "Well, I'll try!" He took a cigarette from the box, curtly inviting Aynesworth to do the
same. "What about lunch?" the latter asked. "Would you care to come round with
me to the Cannibal Club? Rather a Bohemian set, but there are always
some good fellows there." "I am much obliged," Wingrave answered. "If you will ask me again in
a few days' time, I shall be very pleased. I do not wish to leave the
hotel just at present." "Do you want me?" Aynesworth asked. "Not until five o'clock," Wingrave answered. "I should be glad if you
would leave me now, and return at that hour. In the meantime, I have a
commission for you." "Good!" Aynesworth declared. "What is it?" "You will go," Wingrave directed, "to No. 13, Cadogan Street, and you
will enquire for Lady Ruth Barrington. If she should be out, ascertain
the time of her return, and wait for her." "If she is out of town?" "She is in London," Wingrave answered. "I have seen her from the window
this morning. You will give her a message. Say that you come from me,
and that I desire to see her tomorrow. The time and place she can fix,
but I should prefer not to go to her house." Aynesworth stooped down to relight his cigarette. He felt that Wingrave
was watching him, and he wished to keep his face hidden. "I am unknown to Lady Ruth," he remarked. "Supposing she should refuse
to see me?" Wingrave looked at him coldly. "I have told you what I wish done," he said. "The task does not seem
to be a difficult one. Please see to it that I have an answer by five
o'clock-----"

Aynesworth lunched with a few of his particular friends at the club. They heard of his new adventure with somewhat doubtful approbation. "You'll never stand the routine, old chap!" "And what about your own work!" "What will the Daily Scribbler people say?" Aynesworth shrugged his shoulders. "I don't imagine it will last very long," he answered, "and I shall get
a fair amount of time to myself. The work I do on the Daily Scribbler
doesn't amount to anything. It was a chance I simply couldn't refuse." The editor of a well-known London paper leaned back in his chair, and
pinched a cigar carefully. "You'll probably find the whole thing a sell," he remarked. "The story,
as Lovell told it, sounded dramatic enough, and if the man were to come
back to life again, fresh and vigorous, things might happen, provided,
of course, that Lovell was right in his suppositions. But ten or twelve
years' solitary confinement, although it mayn't sound much on paper, is
enough to crush all the life and energy out of a man." Aynesworth shook his head. "You haven't seen him," he said. "I have!" "What's he like, Walter?" another man asked. "I can't describe him," Aynesworth answered. "I shouldn't like to try. I'll bring him here some day. You fellows shall see him for yourselves. I find him interesting enough." "The whole thing," the editor declared, "will fizzle out. You see if
it doesn't? A man who's just spent ten or twelve years in prison isn't
likely to run any risk of going there again. There will be no tragedy;
more likely reconciliation." "Perhaps," Aynesworth said imperturbably. "But it wasn't only the
possibility of anything of that sort happening, you know, which
attracted me. It was the tragedy of the man himself, with his numbed,
helpless life, set down here in the midst of us, with a great, blank
chasm between him and his past. What is there left to drive the wheels? The events of one day are simple and monotonous enough to us, because
they lean up against the events of yesterday, and the yesterdays before! How do they seem, I wonder, to a man whose yesterday was more than a
decade of years ago!" The editor nodded. "It must be a grim sensation," he admitted, "but I am afraid with you,
my dear Walter, it is an affair of shop. You wish to cull from your
interesting employer the material for that every-becoming novel of
yours. Let's go upstairs! I've time for one pool." "I haven't," Aynesworth answered. "I've a commission to do." He left the club and walked westwards, humming softly to himself, but
thinking all the time intently. His errand disturbed him. He was to be
the means of bringing together again these two people who had played the
principal parts in Lovell's drama--his new employer and the woman who
had ruined his life. What was the object of it? What manner of vengeance
did he mean to deal out to her? Lovell's words of premonition returned
to him just then with curious insistence--he was so certain that
Wingrave's reappearance would lead to tragical happenings. Aynesworth
himself never doubted it. His brief interview with the man into whose
service he had almost forced himself had impressed him wonderfully. Yet,
what weapon was there, save the crude one of physical force, with which
Wingrave could strike? He rang the bell at No. 13, Cadogan Street, and sent in his card by the
footman. The man accepted it doubtfully. "Her ladyship has only just got up from luncheon, sir, and she is not
receiving this afternoon," he announced. Aynesworth took back his card, and scribbled upon it the name of the
newspaper for which he still occasionally worked. "Her ladyship will perhaps see me," he said, handing the card back to
the man. "It is a matter of business. I will not detain her for more
than a few minutes." The man returned presently, and ushered him into a small sitting room. "Her ladyship will be quite half an hour before she can see you, sir,"
he said. "I will wait," Aynesworth answered, taking up a paper. The time passed slowly. At last, the door was opened. A woman, in
a plain but exquisitely fitting black gown, entered. From Lovell's
description, Aynesworth recognized her at once, and yet, for a moment,
he hesitated to believe that this was the woman whom he had come to see. The years had indeed left her untouched. Her figure was slight, almost
girlish; her complexion as smooth, and her coloring, faint though it
was, as delicate and natural as a child's. Her eyes were unusually
large, and the lashes which shielded them heavy. It was when she looked
at him that Aynesworth began to understand. She carried his card in her hand, and glanced at it as he bowed. "You are the Daily Scribbler," she said. "You want me to tell you about
my bazaar, I suppose." "I am attached to the Daily Scribbler, Lady Ruth Barrington," Aynesworth
answered; "but my business this afternoon has nothing to do with the
paper. I have called with a message from--an old friend of yours." She raised her eyebrows ever so slightly. The graciousness of her manner
was perceptibly abated. "Indeed! I scarcely understand you, Mr.--Aynesworth." "My message," Aynesworth said, "is from Sir Wingrave Seton." The look of enquiry, half impatient, half interrogative, faded slowly
from her face. She stood quite still; her impassive features seemed like
a plaster cast, from which all life and feeling were drawn out. Her eyes
began slowly to dilate, and she shivered as though with cold. Then the
man who was watching her and wondering, knew that this was fear--fear
undiluted and naked. He stepped forward, and placed a chair for her. She felt for the back of
it with trembling fingers and sat down. "Is--Sir Wingrave Seton--out of prison?" she asked in a strange, dry
tone. One would have thought that she had been choking. "Since yesterday," Aynesworth answered. "But his time--is not up yet?" "There is always a reduction," Aynesworth reminded her, "for what is
called good conduct." She was silent for several moments. Then she raised her head. She was a
brave woman, and she was rapidly recovering her self-possession. "Well," she asked, "what does he want?" "To see you," Aynesworth answered, "tomorrow afternoon, either here or
at his apartments in the Clarence Hotel. He would prefer not to come
here!" "Are you his friend?" she asked. "I am his secretary," Aynesworth answered. "You are in his confidence?" "I only entered his service this morning," he said. "How much do you know," she persisted, "of the unfortunate affair which
led--to his imprisonment?" "I have been told the whole story," Aynesworth answered. Her eyes rested thoughtfully upon his. It seemed as though she were
trying to read in his face exactly what he meant by "the whole story." "Then," she said, "do you think that anything but pain and
unpleasantness can come of a meeting between us?" "Lady Ruth," Aynesworth answered, "it is not for me to form an opinion. I am Sir Wingrave Seton's secretary." "What is he going to do?" she asked. "I have no idea," he answered. "Is he going abroad?" "I know nothing of his plans," Aynesworth declared. "What answer shall I
take back to him?" She looked at him earnestly. Gradually her face was softening. The
frozen look was passing away. The expression was coming back to her
eyes. She leaned a little towards him. Her voice, although it was raised
above a whisper, was full of feeling. "Mr. Aynesworth," she murmured, "I am afraid of Sir Wingrave Seton!" Aynesworth said nothing. "I was always a little afraid of him," she continued, "even in the days
when we were friendly. He was so hard and unforgiving. I know he thinks
that he has a grievance against me. He will have been brooding about it
all these years. I dare not see him! I--I am terrified!" "If that is your answer," Aynesworth said, "I will convey it to him!" Her beautiful eyes were full of reproach. "Mr. Aynesworth," she said, in a low tone, "for a young man you are very
unsympathetic." "My position," Aynesworth answered, "does not allow me the luxury of
considering my personal feelings." She looked hurt. "I forgot," she said, looking for a moment upon the floor; "you have
probably been prejudiced against me. You have heard only one story. Listen"--she raised her eyes suddenly, and leaned a little forward in
her chair--"some day, if you will come and see me when I am alone and
we have time to spare, I will tell you the whole truth. I will tell you
exactly what happened! You shall judge for yourself!" Aynesworth bowed. "In the meantime?" Her eyes filled slowly with tears. Aynesworth looked away. He was
miserably uncomfortable. "You cannot be quite so hard-hearted as you try to seem, Mr.
Aynesworth," she said quietly. "I want to ask you a question. You must
answer it? You don't know how much it means to me. You are Sir Wingrave
Seton's secretary; you have access to all his papers. Have you seen any
letters of mine? Do you know if he still has any in his possession?" "My answer to both questions is 'No!'" Aynesworth said a little stiffly. "I only entered the service of Sir Wingrave Seton this morning, and I
know nothing at all, as yet, of his private affairs. And, Lady Ruth,
you must forgive my reminding you that, in any case, I could not discuss
such matters with you," he added. She looked at him with a faint, strange smile. Afterwards, when he tried
to do so, Aynesworth found it impossible to describe the expression
which flitted across her face. He only knew that it left him with the
impression of having received a challenge. "Incorruptible!" she murmured. "Sir Wingrave Seton is indeed a fortunate
man." There was a lingering sweetness in her tone which still had a note of
mockery in it. Her silence left Aynesworth conscious of a vague sense
of uneasiness. He felt that her eyes were raised to his, and for some
reason, which he could not translate even into a definite thought, he
wished to avoid them. The silence was prolonged. For long afterwards he
remembered those few minutes. There was a sort of volcanic intensity in
the atmosphere. He was acutely conscious of small extraneous things, of
the perfume of a great bowl of hyacinths, the ticking of a tiny French
clock, the restless drumming of her finger tips upon the arm of her
chair. All the time he seemed actually to feel her eyes, commanding,
impelling, beseeching him to turn round. He did so at last, and looked
her full in the face. "Lady Ruth," he said, "will you favor me with an answer to my message?" "Certainly," she answered, smiling quite naturally. "I will come and see
Sir Wingrave Seton at four o'clock tomorrow afternoon. You can tell
him that I think it rather an extraordinary request, but under the
circumstances I will do as he suggests. He is staying at the Clarence, I
presume, under his own name? I shall have no difficulty in finding him?" "He is staying there under his own name," Aynesworth answered, "and I
will see that you have no difficulty." "So kind of you," she murmured, holding out her hand. And again there
was something mysterious in her eyes as she raised them to him, as
though there existed between them already some understanding which
mocked the conventionality of her words. Aynesworth left the house, and
lit a cigarette upon the pavement outside with a little sigh of relief. He felt somehow humiliated. Did she fancy, he wondered, that he was a
callow boy to dance to any tune of her piping--that he had never before
seen a beautiful woman who wanted her own way? THE GOSPEL OF HATE

"And what," Wingrave asked his secretary as they sat at dinner that
night, "did you think of Lady Ruth?" "In plain words, I should not like to tell you," Aynesworth answered. "I
only hope that you will not send me to see her again." "Why not?" "Lady Ruth," Aynesworth answered deliberately, "is a very beautiful
woman, with all the most dangerous gifts of Eve when she wanted her own
way. She did me the scanty honor of appraising me as an easy victim, and
she asked questions." "For instance?" "She wanted me to tell her if you still had in your possession certain
letters of hers," Aynesworth said. "Good! What did you say?" "I told her, of course," Aynesworth continued, "that having been in your
service for a few hours only, I was scarcely in a position to know. I
ventured further to remind her that such questions, addressed from her
to me, were, to say the least of it, improper." Wingrave's lips parted in what should have been a smile, but the spirit
of mirth was lacking. "And then?" "There was nothing else," Aynesworth answered. "She simply dismissed
me." "I can see," Wingrave remarked, "your grievance. You are annoyed because
she regarded you as too easy a victim." "Perhaps," Aynesworth admitted. "There was some excuse for her, after all," Wingrave continued coolly. "She possesses powers which you yourself have already admitted, and you,
I should say, are a fairly impressionable person, so far as her sex
is concerned. Confess now, that she did not leave you altogether
indifferent." "Perhaps not," Aynesworth admitted reluctantly. He did not care to say
more. "In case you should feel any curiosity on the subject," Wingrave
remarked, "I may tell you that I have those letters which she was so
anxious to know about, and I shall keep them safe--even from you! You
can amuse yourself with her if you like. You will never be able to tell
her more than I care for her to know." Aynesworth continued his dinner in silence. After all, he was beginning
to fear that he had made a mistake. Lovell had somehow contrived to
impart a subtly tragic note to his story, but the outcome of it all
seemed to assume a more sordid aspect. These two would meet, there
would be recriminations, a tragic appeal for forgiveness, possibly some
melodramatic attempt at vengeance. The glamour of the affair seemed to
him to be fading away, now that he had come into actual contact with
it. It was not until he began to study his companion during a somewhat
prolonged silence that he felt the reaction. It was then that he began
to see new things, that he felt the enthusiasm kindled by Lovell's
strangely told story begin to revive. It was not the watching for events
more or less commonplace which would repay him for the step he had
taken; it was the study of this man, placed in so strange a position,--a
man come back to life, after years of absolute isolation. He had broken
away from the chain which links together men of similar tastes and
occupations, and which goes to the creation of type. He was in a unique
position! He was in the world, but not of it. He was groping about
amongst familiar scenes, over which time had thrown the pall of
unfamiliarity. What manner of place would he find--what manner of
place did he desire to find? It was here that the real interest of the
situation culminated. At least, so Aynesworth thought then. They were dining at a restaurant in the Strand, which Aynesworth had
selected as representing one, the more wealthy, type of Bohemian life. The dinner and wine had been of his choosing. Wingrave had stipulated
only for the best. Wingrave himself had eaten very little, the bottle
of wine stood half empty between them. The atmosphere of the place, the
effect of the wine, the delicate food, and the music, were visible to a
greater or less degree, according to temperament, amongst all the other
little groups of men and women by whom they were surrounded. Wingrave
alone remained unaffected. He was carefully and correctly dressed in
clothes borrowed from his new tailor, and he showed not the slightest
signs of strangeness or gaucherie amongst his unfamiliar surroundings. He looked about him always, with the cold, easy nonchalance of the man
of the world. Of being recognized he had not the slightest fear. His
frame and bearing, and the brightness of his deep, strong eyes, still
belonged to early middle age, but his face itself, worn and hardened,
was the face of an elderly man. The more Aynesworth watched him, the
more puzzled he felt. "I am afraid," he remarked, "that you are disappointed in this place." "Not at all," Wingrave answered. "It is typical of a class, I suppose. It is the sort of place I wished to visit." In a corner of the room Aynesworth had recognized a friend and fellow
clubman, who was acting at a neighboring theater. He was dining with
some young ladies of his company, and beckoned to Aynesworth to come
over and join them. He pointed them out to Wingrave. "Would you care to be introduced?" he asked. "Holiwell is a very good
fellow, and the girls might interest you. Two of them are Americans, and
they are very popular." Wingrave shook his head. "Thank you, no!" he said. "I should be glad to meet your friend some
time when he is alone." It was the first intimation which Aynesworth had received of his
companion's sentiments as regards the other sex. Years afterwards,
when his attitude towards them was often quoted as being one of the
extraordinary features of an extraordinary personality, he remembered
his perseverance on this occasion. "You have not spoken to a woman for so many years," he persisted. "Why
not renew the experience? Nothing so humanizing, you know--not even
cigarettes." Wingrave's face fell, if possible into sterner lines. His tone was cold
and hard. "My scheme of life," he said, "may be reconstructed more than once
before I am satisfied. But I can assure you of this! There will be no
serious place in it for women!" Aynesworth shrugged his shoulders. He never doubted but that in a month
of two his vis-a-vis would talk differently. "Your scheme of life," he repeated thoughtfully. "That sounds
interesting! Have you any objection, I wonder, to telling me what manner
of life you propose to lead?" It was several moments before Wingrave answered him. He was smoking a
cigar in a mechanical sort of way, but he obviously derived no pleasure
from it. Yet Aynesworth noticed that some instinct had led him to choose
the finest brand. "Perhaps," he said, letting his eyes rest coldly upon his questioner,
"if I told you all that was in my mind you would waive your month's
salary and get back to your journalism!" Aynesworth shrugged his shoulders. "Why should you suppose that?" he asked. "I am not a moralist myself,
nor am I the keeper of your conscience. I don't think that you could
frighten me off just yet." "Nevertheless," Wingrave admitted, "there are times when I fear that
we shall not get on together. I begin to suspect that you have a
conscience." "You are the first," Aynesworth assured him, "who has ever flattered me
to that extent." "It may be elastic, of course," Wingrave continued, "but I suspect its
existence. I warn you that association with me will try it hard." "I accept the challenge," Aynesworth answered lightly. "You are rasher than you imagine," Wingrave declared. "For instance,
I have admitted to you, have I not, that I am interested in my fellow
creatures, that I want to mix with them and watch them at their daily
lives. Let me assure you that that interest is not a benevolent one." "I never fancied that you were a budding philanthropist," Aynesworth
remarked, lighting a fresh cigarette. "I find myself," Wingrave continued thoughtfully, "in a somewhat unique
position. I am one of the ordinary human beings with whom the world
is peopled, but I am not conscious of any of the usual weaknesses of
sentiment or morality. For instance, if that gentleman with the red
face, who has obviously eaten and drunk too much, were to have an
apoplectic fit at the moment, and die in his chair, it would not shock
or distress me in the least. On the contrary, I should be disposed to
welcome his removal from a world which he obviously does nothing to
adorn." Aynesworth glanced at the person in question. He was a theatrical agent
and financier of stock companies, whom he knew very well by sight. "I suppose," Wingrave continued, "that I was born with the usual
moral sentiments, and the usual feelings of kinship towards my fellow
creatures. Circumstances, however, have wholly destroyed them. To me,
men have become the puppets and women the dancing dolls of life. My
interest in them, if it exists at all, is malevolent. I should like to
see them all suffer exactly as I have suffered. It would interest me
exceedingly." Still Aynesworth remained silent. He was anxious to hear all that was in
the other's mind, and he feared lest any interruption might divert him. "There are men in the world," Wingrave continued, "called
philanthropists, amiable, obese creatures as a rule, whose professed aim
in life it is to do as much good as possible. I take my stand upon the
other pole. It is my desire to encourage and to work as much evil as
possible. I wish to bring all the suffering I can upon those who come
within the sphere of my influence." "You are likely," Aynesworth remarked, "to achieve popularity." Wingrave regarded him steadfastly. "Your speech," he said, "is flippant, but you yourself do not realize
how near it comes to the truth. Human beings are like dogs--they are
always ready to lick the hand that flogs them. I mean to use the scourge
whenever I can seize the opportunity, but you will find the jackals at
my heels, nevertheless, whenever I choose to whistle." Aynesworth helped himself to a liqueur. He felt that he needed it. "One weakness alone distresses me," Wingrave continued. "In all ordinary
matters of sentiment I am simply a negation. There is one antipathy,
however, which I find it hard to overcome. The very sight of a woman, or
the sound of her voice, distresses me. This is the more unfortunate," he
continued, "because it is upon the shoulders of her sex that the greater
portion of my debt to my fellow creatures rests. However, time may help
me!" Aynesworth leaned back in his chair, and contemplated his companion for
the next few moments in thoughtful silence. It was hard, he felt, to
take a man who talked like this seriously. His manner was convincing,
his speech deliberate and assured. There was not the slightest doubt but
that he meant what he said, yet it seemed to Aynesworth equally certain
that the time would come, and come quickly, when the unnatural hardness
of the man would yield to the genial influence of friendship, of
pleasure, of the subtle joys of freedom. Those past days of hideous
monotony, of profitless, debasing toil, the long, sleepless nights, the
very nightmare of life to a man of Wingrave's culture and habits, might
well have poisoned his soul, have filled him with ideas such as these. But everything was different now! The history of the world could show
no epoch when pleasures so many and various were there for the man who
carries the golden key. Today he was a looker-on, and the ice of his
years of bitterness had not melted. Tomorrow, at any moment, he might
catch a whiff of the fragrance of life, and the blood in his veins would
move to a different tune. This was how it seemed to Aynesworth, as he
studied his companion through the faint blue mist of tobacco smoke. "This expression of your sentiments," he remarked at last, "is
interesting so far as it goes. I am, however, a practical person, and
my connection with you is of a practical order. You don't propose, I
presume, to promenade the streets with a cat-o-nine-tails?" "Your curiosity," Wingrave remarked, "is reasonable. Tomorrow I may
gratify some portion of it after my interview with Lady Ruth. In the
meantime, I might remark that to the observant person who has wits and
money, the opportunities for doing evil present themselves, I think,
with reasonable frequency. I do not propose, however, to leave things
altogether to chance." "A definite scheme of ill-doing," Aynesworth ventured to suggest, "would
be more satisfactory?" "Exactly," he admitted. He called for the bill, and his eyes wandered once more around the room
as the waiter counted out the change. The band were playing the "Valse
Amoureuse"; the air was grown heavy with the odor of tobacco and the
mingled perfumes of flowers and scents. A refrain of soft laughter
followed the music. An after-dinner air pervaded the place. Wingrave's
lip curled. "My lack of kinship with my fellows," he remarked, "is exceedingly well
defined just now. I agree with the one philosopher who declared that
'eating and drinking are functions which are better performed in
private.'" The two men went on to a theater. The play was a society trifle--a
thing of the moment. Wingrave listened gravely, without a smile or any
particular sign of interest. At the end of the second act, he turned
towards his companion. "The lady in the box opposite," he remarked, "desires to attract your
attention." Aynesworth looked up and recognized Lady Ruth. She was fanning herself
languidly, but her eyes were fixed upon the two men. She leaned a little
forward, and her gesture was unmistakable. Aynesworth rose to his feet a little doubtfully. "You had better go," Wingrave said. "Present my compliments and excuses. I feel that a meeting now would amount to an anti-climax." Aynesworth made his way upstairs. Lady Ruth was alone, and he noticed
that she had withdrawn to a chair where she was invisible to the house. Even Aynesworth himself could not see her face clearly at first, for she
had chosen the darkest corner of the box. He gathered an impression of
a gleaming white neck and bosom rising and falling rather more quickly
than was natural, eyes which shone softly through the gloom, and the
perfume of white roses, a great cluster of which lay upon the box ledge. Her voice was scarcely raised above a whisper. "That is--Sir Wingrave with you?" "Yes!" Aynesworth answered. "It was he who saw you first!" She seemed to catch her breath. Her voice was still tremulous. "He is changed," she said. "I should not have recognized him." "They were the best ten years of his life," Aynesworth answered. "Think
of how and in what surroundings he has been compelled to live. No wonder
that he has had the humanity hammered out of him." She shivered a little. "Is he always like this?" she asked. "I have watched him. He never
smiles. He looks as hard as fate itself." "I have known him only a few hours," Aynesworth reminded her. "I dare not come tomorrow," she whispered; "I am afraid of him." "Do you wish me to tell him so?" he asked. "I don't know," she answered. "You are very unfeeling, Mr. Aynesworth." "I hope not," he answered, and looked away towards the orchestra. He did
not wish to meet her eyes. "You are!" she murmured. "I have no one to whom I dare speak--of this. I dare not mention his name to my husband. It was my evidence which
convicted him, and I can see, I know, that he is vindictive. And he has
those letters! Oh! If I could only get them back?" Her voice trembled with an appeal whispered but passionate. It was
wonderful how musical and yet how softly spoken her words were. They
were like live things, and the few feet of darkened space through which
they had passed seemed charged with magnetic influence. "Mr. Aynesworth!" He turned and faced her. "Can't you help me?" 