



Produced by Bill Brewer





LIN McLEAN

By Owen Wister


DEDICATION

MY DEAR HARRY MERCER: When Lin McLean was only a hero in manuscript, he
received his first welcome and chastening beneath your patient roof. By
none so much as by you has he in private been helped and affectionately
disciplined, an now you must stand godfather to him upon this public
page. Always yours,

OWEN WISTER

Philadelphia, 1897




HOW LIN McLEAN WENT EAST

In the old days, the happy days, when Wyoming was a Territory with a
future instead of a State with a past, and the unfenced cattle grazed
upon her ranges by prosperous thousands, young Lin McLean awaked early
one morning in cow camp, and lay staring out of his blankets upon the
world. He would be twenty-two this week. He was the youngest cow-puncher
in camp. But because he could break wild horses, he was earning more
dollars a month than any man there, except one. The cook was a more
indispensable person. None save the cook was up, so far, this morning. Lin's brother punchers slept about him on the ground, some motionless,
some shifting their prone heads to burrow deeper from the increasing
day. The busy work of spring was over, that of the fall, or beef
round-up, not yet come. It was mid-July, a lull for these hard-riding
bachelors of the saddle, and many unspent dollars stood to Mr. McLean's
credit on the ranch books. "What's the matter with some variety?" muttered the boy in his blankets. The long range of the mountains lifted clear in the air. They slanted
from the purple folds and furrows of the pines that richly cloaked them,
upward into rock and grassy bareness until they broke remotely into
bright peaks, and filmed into the distant lavender of the north and the
south. On their western side the streams ran into Snake or into Green
River, and so at length met the Pacific. On this side, Wind River flowed
forth from them, descending out of the Lake of the Painted Meadows. A
mere trout-brook it was up there at the top of the divide, with easy
riffles and stepping-stones in many places; but down here, outside
the mountains, it was become a streaming avenue, a broadening course,
impetuous between its two tall green walls of cottonwood-trees. And so
it wound away like a vast green ribbon across the lilac-gray sage-brush
and the yellow, vanishing plains. "Variety, you bet!" young Lin repeated, aloud. He unrolled himself from his bed, and brought from the garments that
made his pillow a few toilet articles. He got on his long boy legs and
limped blithely to the margin. In the mornings his slight lameness was
always more visible. The camp was at Bull Lake Crossing, where the
fork from Bull Lake joins Wind River. Here Lin found some convenient
shingle-stones, with dark, deepish water against them, where he plunged
his face and energetically washed, and came up with the short curly hair
shining upon his round head. After enough looks at himself in the dark
water, and having knotted a clean, jaunty handkerchief at his throat, he
returned with his slight limp to camp, where they were just sitting at
breakfast to the rear of the cook-shelf of the wagon. "Bugged up to kill!" exclaimed one, perceiving Lin's careful dress. "He sure has not shaved again?" another inquired, with concern. "I ain't got my opera-glasses on," answered a third. "He has spared that pansy-blossom mustache," said a fourth. "My spring crop," remarked young Lin, rounding on this last one, "has
juicier prospects than that rat-eaten catastrophe of last year's hay
which wanders out of your face." "Why, you'll soon be talking yourself into a regular man," said the
other. But the camp laugh remained on the side of young Lin till breakfast was
ended, when the ranch foreman rode into camp. Him Lin McLean at once addressed. "I was wantin' to speak to you," said
he. The experienced foreman noticed the boy's holiday appearance. "I
understand you're tired of work," he remarked. "Who told you?" asked the bewildered Lin. The foreman touched the boy's pretty handkerchief. "Well, I have a way
of taking things in at a glance," said he. "That's why I'm foreman, I
expect. So you've had enough work?" "My system's full of it," replied Lin, grinning. As the foreman stood
thinking, he added, "And I'd like my time." Time, in the cattle idiom, meant back-pay up to date. "It's good we're not busy," said the foreman. "Meanin' I'd quit all the same?" inquired Lin, rapidly, flushing. "No--not meaning any offence. Catch up your horse. I want to make the
post before it gets hot." The foreman had come down the river from the ranch at Meadow Creek,
and the post, his goal, was Fort Washakie. All this part of the country
formed the Shoshone Indian Reservation, where, by permission, pastured
the herds whose owner would pay Lin his time at Washakie. So the young
cow-puncher flung on his saddle and mounted. "So-long!" he remarked to the camp, by way of farewell. He might
never be going to see any of them again; but the cow-punchers were not
demonstrative by habit. "Going to stop long at Washakie?" asked one. "Alma is not waiter-girl at the hotel now," another mentioned. "If there's a new girl," said a third, "kiss her one for me, and tell
her I'm handsomer than you." "I ain't a deceiver of women," said Lin. "That's why you'll tell her," replied his friend. "Say, Lin, why are you quittin' us so sudden, anyway?" asked the cook,
grieved to lose him. "I'm after some variety," said the boy. "If you pick up more than you can use, just can a little of it for me!" shouted the cook at the departing McLean. This was the last of camp by Bull Lake Crossing, and in the foreman's
company young Lin now took the road for his accumulated dollars. "So you're leaving your bedding and stuff with the outfit?" said the
foreman. "Brought my tooth-brush," said Lin, showing it in the breast-pocket of
his flannel shirt. "Going to Denver?" "Why, maybe." "Take in San Francisco?" "Sounds slick." "Made any plans?" "Gosh, no!" "Don't want anything on your brain?" "Nothin' except my hat, I guess," said Lin, and broke into cheerful
song:

   "'Twas a nasty baby anyhow,
         And it only died to spite us;
    'Twas afflicted with the cerebrow
         Spinal meningitis!'" They wound up out of the magic valley of Wind River, through the
bastioned gullies and the gnome-like mystery of dry water-courses,
upward and up to the level of the huge sage-brush plain above. Behind
lay the deep valley they had climbed from, mighty, expanding, its trees
like bushes, its cattle like pebbles, its opposite side towering also
to the edge of this upper plain. There it lay, another world. One step
farther away from its rim, and the two edges of the plain had flowed
together over it like a closing sea, covering without a sign or ripple
the great country which lay sunk beneath. "A man might think he'd dreamed he'd saw that place," said Lin to the
foreman, and wheeled his horse to the edge again. "She's sure there,
though," he added, gazing down. For a moment his boy face grew
thoughtful. "Shucks!" said he then, abruptly, "where's any joy in
money that's comin' till it arrives? I have most forgot the feel o'
spot-cash." He turned his horse away from the far-winding vision of the river, and
took a sharp jog after the foreman, who had not been waiting for him. Thus they crossed the eighteen miles of high plain, and came down to
Fort Washakie, in the valley of Little Wind, before the day was hot. His roll of wages once jammed in his pocket like an old handkerchief,
young Lin precipitated himself out of the post-trader's store and away
on his horse up the stream among the Shoshone tepees to an unexpected
entertainment--a wolf-dance. He had meant to go and see what the new
waiter-girl at the hotel looked like, but put this off promptly to
attend the dance. This hospitality the Shoshone Indians were extending
to some visiting Ute friends, and the neighborhood was assembled to
watch the ring of painted naked savages. The post-trader looked after the galloping Lin. "What's he quitting his
job for?" he asked the foreman. "Same as most of 'em quit." "Nothing?" "Nothing." "Been satisfactory?" "Never had a boy more so. Good-hearted, willing, a plumb dare-devil with
a horse." "And worthless," suggested the post-trader. "Well--not yet. He's headed that way." "Been punching cattle long?" "Came in the country about seventy-eight, I believe, and rode for the
Bordeaux Outfit most a year, and quit. Blew in at Cheyenne till he went
broke, and worked over on to the Platte. Rode for the C. Y. Outfit most
a year, and quit. Blew in at Buffalo. Rode for Balaam awhile on Butte
Creek. Broke his leg. Went to the Drybone Hospital, and when the
fracture was commencing to knit pretty good he broke it again at the
hog-ranch across the bridge. Next time you're in Cheyenne get Dr. Barker
to tell you about that. McLean drifted to Green River last year and went
up over on to Snake, and up Snake, and was around with a prospecting
outfit on Galena Creek by Pitchstone Canyon. Seems he got interested
in some Dutchwoman up there, but she had trouble--died, I think they
said--and he came down by Meteetsee to Wind River. He's liable to go to
Mexico or Africa next." "If you need him," said the post-trader, closing his ledger, "you can
offer him five more a month." "That'll not hold him." "Well, let him go. Have a cigar. The bishop is expected for Sunday, and
I've got to see his room is fixed up for him." "The bishop!" said the foreman. "I've heard him highly spoken of." "You can hear him preach to-morrow. The bishop is a good man." "He's better than that; he's a man," stated the foreman--"at least so
they tell me." Now, saving an Indian dance, scarce any possible event at the Shoshone
agency could assemble in one spot so many sorts of inhabitants as a
visit from this bishop. Inhabitants of four colors gathered to view the
wolf-dance this afternoon--red men, white men, black men, yellow men. Next day, three sorts came to church at the agency. The Chinese laundry
was absent. But because, indeed (as the foreman said), the bishop was
not only a good man but a man, Wyoming held him in respect and went
to look at him. He stood in the agency church and held the Episcopal
service this Sunday morning for some brightly glittering army officers
and their families, some white cavalry, and some black infantry; the
agency doctor, the post-trader, his foreman, the government scout, three
gamblers, the waiter-girl from the hotel, the stage-driver, who was
there because she was; old Chief Washakie, white-haired and royal in
blankets, with two royal Utes splendid beside him; one benchful of
squatting Indian children, silent and marvelling; and, on the back
bench, the commanding officer's new hired-girl, and, beside her, Lin
McLean. Mr. McLean's hours were already various and successful. Even at the
wolf-dance, before he had wearied of its monotonous drumming and
pageant, his roving eye had rested upon a girl whose eyes he caught
resting upon him. A look, an approach, a word, and each was soon content
with the other. Then, when her duties called her to the post from him
and the stream's border, with a promise for next day he sought the hotel
and found the three gamblers anxious to make his acquaintance; for when
a cow-puncher has his pay many people will take an interest in him. The
three gamblers did not know that Mr. McLean could play cards. He left
them late in the evening fat with their money, and sought the tepees of
the Arapahoes. They lived across the road from the Shoshones, and among
their tents the boy remained until morning. He was here in church now,
keeping his promise to see the bishop with the girl of yesterday; and
while he gravely looked at the bishop, Miss Sabina Stone allowed his arm
to encircle her waist. No soldier had achieved this yet, but Lin was the
first cow-puncher she had seen, and he had given her the handkerchief
from round his neck. The quiet air blew in through the windows and door, the pure, light
breath from the mountains; only, passing over their foot-hills it had
caught and carried the clear aroma of the sage-brush. This it brought
into church, and with this seemed also to float the peace and great
silence of the plains. The little melodeon in the corner, played by one
of the ladies at the post, had finished accompanying the hymn, and now
it prolonged a few closing chords while the bishop paused before his
address, resting his keen eyes on the people. He was dressed in a
plain suit of black with a narrow black tie. This was because the Union
Pacific Railroad, while it had delivered him correctly at Green River,
had despatched his robes towards Cheyenne. Without citing chapter and verse the bishop began:

"And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck and kissed him." The bishop told the story of that surpassing parable, and then proceeded
to draw from it a discourse fitted to the drifting destinies in whose
presence he found himself for one solitary morning. He spoke unlike many
clergymen. His words were chiefly those which the people round him used,
and his voice was more like earnest talking than preaching. Miss Sabina Stone felt the arm of her cow-puncher loosen slightly, and
she looked at him. But he was looking at the bishop, no longer gravely
but with wide-open eyes, alert. When the narrative reached the elder
brother in the field, and how he came to the house and heard sounds of
music and dancing, Miss Stone drew away from her companion and let him
watch the bishop, since he seemed to prefer that. She took to reading
hymns vindictively. The bishop himself noted the sun-browned boy face
and the wide-open eyes. He was too far away to see anything but the
alert, listening position of the young cow-puncher. He could not discern
how that, after he had left the music and dancing and begun to draw
morals, attention faded from those eyes that seemed to watch him, and
they filled with dreaminess. It was very hot in church. Chief Washakie
went to sleep, and so did a corporal; but Lin McLean sat in the same
alert position till Miss Stone pulled him and asked if he intended to
sit down through the hymn. Then church was out. Officers, Indians, and
all the people dispersed through the great sunshine to their dwellings,
and the cow-puncher rode beside Sabina in silence. "What are you studying over, Mr. McLean?" inquired the lady, after a
hundred yards. "Did you ever taste steamed Duxbury clams?" asked Lin, absently. "No, indeed. What's them?" "Oh, just clams. Yu' have drawn butter, too." Mr. McLean fell silent
again. "I guess I'll be late for settin' the colonel's table. Good-bye," said
Sabina, quickly, and swished her whip across the pony, who scampered
away with her along the straight road across the plain to the post. Lin caught up with her at once and made his peace. "Only," protested Sabina, "I ain't used to gentlemen taking me out
and--well, same as if I was a collie-dog. Maybe it's Wind River
politeness." But she went riding with him up Trout Creek in the cool of the
afternoon. Out of the Indian tepees, scattered wide among the flat
levels of sage-brush, smoke rose thin and gentle, and vanished. They
splashed across the many little running channels which lead water
through that thirsty soil, and though the range of mountains came no
nearer, behind them the post, with its white, flat buildings and green
trees, dwindled to a toy village. "My! but it's far to everywheres here," exclaimed Sabina, "and it's
little you're sayin' for yourself to-day, Mr. McLean. I'll have to do
the talking. What's that thing now, where the rocks are?" "That's Little Wind River Canyon," said the young man. "Feel like goin'
there, Miss Stone?" "Why, yes. It looks real nice and shady like, don't it? Let's." So Miss Stone turned her pony in that direction. "When do your folks eat supper?" inquired Lin. "Half-past six. Oh, we've lots of time! Come on." "How many miles per hour do you figure that cayuse of yourn can travel?" Lin asked. "What are you a-talking about, anyway? You're that strange to-day," said
the lady. "Only if we try to make that canyon, I guess you'll be late settin' the
colonel's table," Lin remarked, his hazel eyes smiling upon her. "That
is, if your horse ain't good for twenty miles an hour. Mine ain't, I
know. But I'll do my best to stay with yu'." "You're the teasingest man--" said Miss Stone, pouting. "I might have
knowed it was ever so much further nor it looked." "Well, I ain't sayin' I don't want to go, if yu' was desirous of campin'
out to-night." "Mr. McLean! Indeed, and I'd do no such thing!" and Sabina giggled. A sage-hen rose under their horses' feet, and hurtled away heavily over
the next rise of ground, taking a final wide sail out of sight. "Something like them partridges used to," said Lin, musingly. "Partridges?" inquired Sabina. "Used to be in the woods between Lynn and Salem. Maybe the woods are
gone by this time. Yes, they must be gone, I guess." Presently they dismounted and sought the stream bank. "We had music and dancing at Thanksgiving and such times," said Lin, his
wiry length stretched on the grass beside the seated Sabina. He was not
looking at her, but she took a pleasure in watching him, his curly head
and bronze face, against which the young mustache showed to its full
advantage. "I expect you used to dance a lot," remarked Sabina, for a subject. "Yes. Do yu' know the Portland Fancy?" Sabina did not, and her subject died away. "Did anybody ever tell you you had good eyes?" she inquired next. "Why, sure," said Lin, waking for a moment; "but I like your color best. A girl's eyes will mostly beat a man's." "Indeed, I don't think so!" exclaimed poor Sabina, too much expectant
to perceive the fatal note of routine with which her transient admirer
pronounced this gallantry. He informed her that hers were like the sea,
and she told him she had not yet looked upon the sea. "Never?" said he. "It's a turruble pity you've never saw salt water. It's different from fresh. All around home it's blue--awful blue in
July--around Swampscott and Marblehead and Nahant, and around the
islands. I've swam there lots. Then our home bruck up and we went to
board in Boston." He snapped off a flower in reach of his long arm. Suddenly all dreaminess left him. "I wonder if you'll be settin' the colonel's table when I come back?" he
said. Miss Stone was at a loss. "I'm goin' East to-morrow--East, to Boston." Yesterday he had told her that sixteen miles to Lander was the farthest
journey from the post that he intended to make--the farthest from the
post and her. "I hope nothing ain't happened to your folks?" said she. "I ain't got no folks," replied Lin, "barring a brother. I expect he is
taking good care of himself." "Don't you correspond?" "Well, I guess he would if there was anything to say. There ain't been
nothin'." Sabina thought they must have quarrelled, but learned that they had not. It was time for her now to return and set the colonel's table, so Lin
rose and went to bring her horse. When he had put her in her saddle she
noticed him step to his own. "Why, I didn't know you were lame!" cried she. "Shucks!" said Lin. "It don't cramp my style any." He had sprung on
his horse, ridden beside her, leaned and kissed her before she got any
measure of his activity. "That's how," said he; and they took their homeward way galloping. "No,"
Lin continued, "Frank and me never quarrelled. I just thought I'd have
a look at this Western country. Frank, he thought dry-goods was good
enough for him, and so we're both satisfied, I expect. And that's a lot
of years now. Whoop ye!" he suddenly sang out, and fired his six-shooter
at a jack-rabbit, who strung himself out flat and flew over the earth. Both dismounted at the parade-ground gate, and he kissed her again when
she was not looking, upon which she very properly slapped him; and he
took the horses to the stable. He sat down to tea at the hotel, and
found the meal consisted of black potatoes, gray tea, and a guttering
dish of fat pork. But his appetite was good, and he remarked to himself
that inside the first hour he was in Boston he would have steamed
Duxbury clams. Of Sabina he never thought again, and it is likely that
she found others to take his place. Fort Washakie was one hundred and
fifty miles from the railway, and men there were many and girls were
few. The next morning the other passengers entered the stage with
resignation, knowing the thirty-six hours of evil that lay before them. Lin climbed up beside the driver. He had a new trunk now. "Don't get full, Lin," said the clerk, putting the mail-sacks in at the
store. "My plans ain't settled that far yet," replied Mr. McLean. "Leave it out of them," said the voice of the bishop, laughing, inside
the stage. It was a cool, fine air. Gazing over the huge plain down in which lies
Fort Washakie, Lin heard the faint notes of the trumpet on the parade
ground, and took a good-bye look at all things. He watched the American
flag grow small, saw the circle of steam rising away down by the hot
springs, looked at the bad lands beyond, chemically pink and rose amid
the vast, natural, quiet-colored plain. Across the spreading distance
Indians trotted at wide spaces, generally two large bucks on one small
pony, or a squaw and pappoose--a bundle of parti-colored rags. Presiding
over the whole rose the mountains to the west, serene, lifting into the
clearest light. Then once again came the now tiny music of the trumpet. "When do yu' figure on comin' back?" inquired the driver. "Oh, I'll just look around back there for a spell," said Lin. "About a
month, I guess." He had seven hundred dollars. At Lander the horses are changed; and
during this operation Lin's friends gathered and said, where was any
sense in going to Boston when you could have a good time where you
were? But Lin remained sitting safe on the stage. Toward evening, at the
bottom of a little dry gulch some eight feet deep, the horses decided
it was a suitable place to stay. It was the bishop who persuaded them
to change their minds. He told the driver to give up beating, and
unharness. Then they were led up the bank, quivering, and a broken trace
was spliced with rope. Then the stage was forced on to the level ground,
the bishop proving a strong man, familiar with the gear of vehicles. They crossed through the pass among the quaking asps and the pines,
and, reaching Pacific Springs, came down again into open country. That
afternoon the stage put its passengers down on the railroad platform
at Green River; this was the route in those days before the mid-winter
catastrophes of frozen passengers led to its abandonment. The bishop was
going west. His robes had passed him on the up stage during the night. When the reverend gentleman heard this he was silent for a very short
moment, and then laughed vigorously in the baggage-room. "I can understand how you swear sometimes," he said to Lin McLean; "but
I can't, you see. Not even at this." The cow-puncher was checking his own trunk to Omaha. "Good-bye and good luck to you," continued the bishop, giving his hand
to Lin. "And look here--don't you think you might leave that 'getting
full' out of your plans?" Lin gave a slightly shamefaced grin. "I don't guess I can, sir," he
said. "I'm givin' yu' straight goods, yu' see," he added. "That's right. But you look like a man who could stop when he'd had
enough. Try that. You're man enough--and come and see me whenever we're
in the same place." He went to the hotel. There were several hours for Lin to wait. He
walked up and down the platform till the stars came out and the bright
lights of the town shone in the saloon windows. Over across the way
piano-music sounded through one of the many open doors. "Wonder if the professor's there yet?" said Lin, and he went across the
railroad tracks. The bartender nodded to him as he passed through into
the back room. In that place were many tables, and the flat clicking and
rattle of ivory counters sounded pleasantly through the music. Lin
did not join the stud-poker game. He stood over a table at which sat a
dealer and a player, very silent, opposite each other, and whereon were
painted sundry cards, numerals, and the colors red and black in squares. The legend "Jacks pay" was also clearly painted. The player placed chips
on whichever insignia of fortune he chose, and the dealer slid cards
(quite fairly) from the top of a pack that lay held within a skeleton
case made with some clamped bands of tin. Sometimes the player's pile of
chips rose high, and sometimes his sumptuous pillar of gold pieces was
lessened by one. It was very interesting and pretty to see; Lin had
much better have joined the game of stud-poker. Presently the eye of
the dealer met the eye of the player. After that slight incident the
player's chip pile began to rise, and rose steadily, till the dealer
made admiring comments on such a run of luck. Then the player stopped,
cashed in, and said good-night, having nearly doubled the number of his
gold pieces. "Five dollars' worth," said Lin, sitting down in the vacant seat. The
chips were counted out to him. He played with unimportant shiftings
of fortune until a short while before his train was due, and then,
singularly enough, he discovered he was one hundred and fifty dollars
behind the game. "I guess I'll leave the train go without me," said Lin, buying five
dollars' worth more of ivory counters. So that train came and went,
removing eastward Mr. McLean's trunk. During the hour that followed his voice grew dogged and his remarks
briefer, as he continually purchased more chips from the now surprised
and sympathetic dealer. It was really wonderful how steadily Lin
lost--just as steadily as his predecessor had won after that meeting of
eyes early in the evening. When Lin was three hundred dollars out, his voice began to clear of its
huskiness and a slight humor revolved and sparkled in his eye. When his
seven hundred dollars had gone to safer hands and he had nothing left at
all but some silver fractions of a dollar, his robust cheerfulness was
all back again. He walked out and stood among the railroad tracks with
his hands in his pockets, and laughed at himself in the dark. Then his
fingers came on the check for Omaha, and he laughed loudly. The trunk by
this hour must be nearing Rawlins; it was going east anyhow. "I'm following it, you bet," he declared, kicking the rail. "Not yet
though. Nor I'll not go to Washakie to have 'em josh me. And yonder lays
Boston." He stretched his arm and pointed eastward. Had he seen another
man going on in this fashion alone in the dark, among side-tracked
freight cars, he would have pitied the poor fool. "And I guess Boston'll
have to get along without me for a spell, too," continued Lin. "A man
don't want to show up plumb broke like that younger son did after eatin'
with the hogs the bishop told about. His father was a Jim-dandy, that
hog chap's. Hustled around and set 'em up when he come back home. Frank,
he'd say to me 'How do you do, brother?' and he'd be wearin' a good suit
o' clothes and--no, sir, you bet!" Lin now watched the great headlight of a freight train bearing slowly
down into Green River from the wilderness. Green River is the end of a
division, an epoch in every train's journey. Lanterns swung signals,
the great dim thing slowed to its standstill by the coal chute, its
locomotive moved away for a turn of repose, the successor backed
steaming to its place to tackle a night's work. Cars were shifted,
heavily bumping and parting. "Hello, Lin!" A face was looking from the window of the caboose. "Hello!" responded Mr. McLean, perceiving above his head Honey Wiggin, a
good friend of his. They had not met for three years. "They claimed you got killed somewheres. I was sorry to hear it." Honey
offered his condolence quite sincerely. "Bruck my leg," corrected Lin, "if that's what they meant." "I expect that's it," said Honey. "You've had no other trouble?" "Been boomin'," said Lin. From the mere undertone in their voices it was plain they were good
friends, carefully hiding their pleasure at meeting. "Wher're yu' bound?" inquired Honey. "East," said Lin. "Better jump in here, then. We're goin' west." "That just suits me," said Lin. The busy lanterns wagged among the switches, the steady lights of the
saloons shone along the town's wooden facade. From the bluffs that
wall Green River the sweet, clean sage-brush wind blew down in currents
freshly through the coal-smoke. A wrench passed through the train from
locomotive to caboose, each fettered car in turn strained into motion
and slowly rolled over the bridge and into silence from the steam and
the bells of the railroad yard. Through the open windows of the caboose
great dull-red cinders rattled in, and the whistles of distant Union
Pacific locomotives sounded over the open plains ominous and long, like
ships at sea. Honey and Lin sat for a while, making few observations and far between,
as their way is between whom flows a stream of old-time understanding. Mutual whiskey and silence can express much friendship, and eloquently. "What are yu' doing at present?" Lin inquired. "Prospectin'." Now prospecting means hunting gold, except to such spirits as the boy
Lin. To these it means finding gold. So Lin McLean listened to the talk
of his friend Honey Wiggin as the caboose trundled through the night. He
saw himself in a vision of the near future enter a bank and thump down
a bag of gold-dust. Then he saw the new, clean money the man would hand
him in exchange, bills with round zeroes half covered by being folded
over, and heavy, satisfactory gold pieces. And then he saw the blue
water that twinkles beneath Boston. His fingers came again on his trunk
check. He had his ticket, too. And as dawn now revealed the gray country
to him, his eye fell casually upon a mile-post: "Omaha, 876." He began
to watch for them:--877, 878. But the trunk would really get to Omaha. "What are yu' laughin' about?" asked Honey. "Oh, the wheels." "Wheels?" "Don't yu' hear 'em?" said Lin. "'Variety,' they keep a-sayin'. 'Variety, variety.'" "Huh!" said Honey, with scorn. "'Ker-chunka-chunk' 's all I make it." "You're no poet," observed Mr. McLean. As the train moved into Evanston in the sunlight, a gleam of dismay shot
over Lin's face, and he ducked his head out of sight of the window, but
immediately raised it again. Then he leaned out, waving his arm with a
certain defiant vigor. But the bishop on the platform failed to notice
this performance, though it was done for his sole benefit, nor would Lin
explain to the inquisitive Wiggin what the matter was. Therefore, very
naturally, Honey drew a conclusion for himself, looked quickly out of
the window, and, being disappointed in what he expected to see remarked,
sulkily, "Do yu' figure I care what sort of a lookin' girl is stuck on
yu' in Evanston?" And upon this young Lin laughed so loudly that his
friend told him he had never seen a man get so foolish in three years. By-and-by they were in Utah, and, in the company of Ogden friends,
forgot prospecting. Later they resumed freight trains and journeyed
north In Idaho they said good-bye to the train hands in the caboose,
and came to Little Camas, and so among the mountains near Feather Creek. Here the berries were of several sorts, and growing riper each day, and
the bears in the timber above knew this, and came down punctually
with the season, making variety in the otherwise even life of the
prospectors. It was now August, and Lin sat on a wet hill making
mud-pies for sixty days. But the philosopher's stone was not in the wash
at that placer, nor did Lin gather gold-dust sufficient to cover the
nail of his thumb. Then they heard of an excitement at Obo, Nevada, and,
hurrying to Obo, they made some more mud-pies. Now and then, eating their fat bacon at noon, Honey would say, "Lin,
wher're yu' goin'?" And Lin always replied, "East." This became a signal for drinks. For beauty and promise, Nevada is a name among names. Nevada! Pronounce
the word aloud. Does it not evoke mountains and clear air, heights
of untrodden snow and valleys aromatic with the pine and musical with
falling waters? Nevada! But the name is all. Abomination of desolation
presides over nine-tenths of the place. The sun beats down as on a roof
of zinc, fierce and dull. Not a drop of water to a mile of sand. The
mean ash-dump landscape stretches on from nowhere to nowhere, a spot
of mange. No portion of the earth is more lacquered with paltry,
unimportant ugliness. There is gold in Nevada, but Lin and Honey did not find it. Prospecting
of the sort they did, besides proving unfruitful, is not comfortable. Now and again, losing patience, Lin would leave his work and stalk about
and gaze down at the scattered men who stooped or knelt in the water. Passing each busy prospector, Lin would read on every broad, upturned
pair of overalls the same label, "Levi Strauss, No. 2," with a picture
of two lusty horses hitched to one of these garments and vainly
struggling to split them asunder. Lin remembered he was wearing a label
just like that too, and when he considered all things he laughed to
himself. Then, having stretched the ache out of his long legs, he would
return to his ditch. As autumn wore on, his feet grew cold in the mushy
gravel they were sunk in. He beat off the sand that had stiffened on his
boots, and hated Obo, Nevada. But he held himself ready to say "East"
whenever he saw Honey coming along with the bottle. The cold weather
put an end to this adventure. The ditches froze and filled with snow,
through which the sordid gravel heaps showed in a dreary fashion; so the
two friends drifted southward. Near the small new town of Mesa, Arizona, they sat down again in the
dirt. It was milder here, and, when the sun shone, never quite froze. But this part of Arizona is scarcely more grateful to the eye than
Nevada. Moreover, Lin and Honey found no gold at all. Some men near them
found a little. Then in January, even though the sun shone, it quite
froze one day. "We're seein' the country, anyway," said Honey. "Seein' hell," said Lin, "and there's more of it above ground than I
thought." "What'll we do?" Honey inquired. "Have to walk for a job--a good-payin' job," responded the hopeful
cow-puncher. And he and Honey went to town. Lin found a job in twenty-five minutes, becoming assistant to the
apothecary in Mesa. Established at the drug-store, he made up the
simpler prescriptions. He had studied practical pharmacy in
Boston between the ages of thirteen and fifteen, and, besides this
qualification, the apothecary had seen him when he first came into Mesa,
and liked him. Lin made no mistakes that he or any one ever knew of;
and, as the mild weather began, he materially increased the apothecary's
business by persuading him to send East for a soda-water fountain. The
ladies of the town clustered around this entertaining novelty, and while
sipping vanilla and lemon bought knickknacks. And the gentlemen of
the town discovered that whiskey with soda and strawberry syrup was
delicious, and produced just as competent effects. A group of them were
generally standing in the shop and shaking dice to decide who should
pay for the next, while Lin administered to each glass the necessary
ingredients. Thus money began to come to him a little more steadily than
had been its wont, and he divided with the penniless Honey. But Honey found fortune quickly, too. Through excellent card-playing he
won a pinto from a small Mexican horse-thief who came into town from the
South, and who cried bitterly when he delivered up his pet pony to the
new owner. The new owner, being a man of the world and agile on his
feet, was only slightly stabbed that evening as he walked to the
dance-hall at the edge of the town. The Mexican was buried on the next
day but one. The pony stood thirteen two, and was as long as a steamboat. He had
white eyelashes, pink nostrils, and one eye was bright blue. If you
spoke pleasantly to him, he rose instantly on his hind-legs and tried
to beat your face. He did not look as if he could run, and that was what
made him so valuable. Honey travelled through the country with him, and
every gentleman who saw the pinto and heard Honey became anxious to get
up a race. Lin always sent money for Wiggin to place, and he soon
opened a bank account, while Honey, besides his racing-bridle, bought a
silver-inlaid one, a pair of forty-dollar spurs, and a beautiful saddle
richly stamped. Every day (when in Mesa) Honey would step into the
drug-store and inquire, "Lin, wher're yu' goin'?" But Lin never answered any more. He merely came to the soda-water
fountain with the whiskey. The passing of days brought a choked season
of fine sand and hard blazing sky. Heat rose up from the ground and hung
heavily over man and beast. Many insects sat out in the sun rattling
with joy; the little tearing river grew clear from the swollen mud, and
shrank to a succession of standing pools; and the fat, squatting cactus
bloomed everywhere into butter-colored flowers big as tulips in the
sand. There were artesian wells in Mesa, and the water did not taste
very good; but if you drank from the standing pools where the river
had been, you repaired to the drug-store almost immediately. A troop of
wandering players came dotting along the railroad, and, reaching Mesa,
played a brass-band up and down the street, and announced the powerful
drama of "East Lynne." Then Mr. McLean thought of the Lynn marshes that
lie between there and Chelsea, and of the sea that must look so cool. He forgot them while following the painful fortunes of the Lady Isabel;
but, going to bed in the back part of the drug-store, he remembered how
he used to beat everybody swimming in the salt water. "I'm goin'," he said. Then he got up, and, striking the light, he
inspected his bank account. "I'm sure goin'," he repeated, blowing the
light out, "and I can buy the fatted calf myself, you bet!" for he had
often thought of the bishop's story. "You bet!" he remarked once more in
a muffled voice, and was asleep in a minute. The apothecary was sorry to
have him go, and Honey was deeply grieved. "I'd pull out with yer," he said, "only I can do business round Yuma and
westward with the pinto." For three farewell days Lin and Honey roved together in all sorts of
places, where they were welcome, and once more Lin rode a horse and
was in his native element. Then he travelled to Deming, and so through
Denver to Omaha, where he was told that his trunk had been sold for
some months. Besides a suit of clothes for town wear, it had contained a
buffalo coat for his brother--something scarce to see in these days. "Frank'll have to get along without it," he observed, philosophically,
and took the next eastbound train. If you journey in a Pullman from Mesa to Omaha without a waistcoat, and
with a silk handkerchief knotted over the collar of your flannel shirt
instead of a tie, wearing, besides, tall, high-heeled boots, a soft,
gray hat with a splendid brim, a few people will notice you, but not
the majority. New Mexico and Colorado are used to these things. As Iowa,
with its immense rolling grain, encompasses you, people will stare a
little more, for you're getting near the East, where cow-punchers are
not understood. But in those days the line of cleavage came sharp-drawn
at Chicago. West of there was still tolerably west, but east of
there was east indeed, and the Atlantic Ocean was the next important
stopping-place. In Lin's new train, good gloves, patent-leathers, and
silence prevailed throughout the sleeping-car, which was for Boston
without change. Had not home memories begun impetuously to flood
his mind, he would have felt himself conspicuous. Town clothes and
conventions had their due value with him. But just now the boy's
single-hearted thoughts were far from any surroundings, and he was
murmuring to himself, "To-morrow! tomorrow night!" There were ladies in that blue plush car for Boston who looked at Lin
for thirty miles at a stretch; and by the time Albany was reached
the next day one or two of them commented that he was the most
attractive-looking man they had ever seen! Whereas, beyond his tallness,
and wide-open, jocular eyes, eyes that seemed those of a not highly
conscientious wild animal, there was nothing remarkable about young
Lin except stage effect. The conductor had been annoyed to have such
a passenger; but the cow-puncher troubled no one, and was extremely
silent. So evidently was he a piece of the true frontier that curious
and hopeful fellow-passengers, after watching him with diversion, more
than once took a seat next to him. He met their chatty inquiries with
monosyllables so few and so unprofitable in their quiet politeness that
the passengers soon gave him up. At Springfield he sent a telegram to
his brother at the great dry-goods establishment that employed him. The train began its homestretch after Worcester, and whirled and swung
by hills and ponds he began to watch for, and through stations with old
wayside names. These flashed on Lin's eye as he sat with his hat off
and his forehead against the window, looking: Wellesley. Then, not long
after, Riverside. That was the Charles River, and did the picnic woods
used to be above the bridge or below? West Newton; Newtonville; Newton. "Faneuil's next," he said aloud in the car, as the long-forgotten
home-knowledge shone forth in his recollection. The traveller seated
near said, "Beg pardon?" but, turning, wondered at the all-unconscious
Lin, with his forehead pressed against the glass. The blue water flashed
into sight, and soon after they were running in the darkness between
high walls; but the cow-puncher never moved, though nothing could be
seen. When the porter announced "Boston," he started up and followed
like a sheep in the general exodus. Down on the platform he moved along
with the slow crowd till some one touched him, and, wheeling round, he
seized both his brother's hands and swore a good oath of joy. There they stood--the long, brown fellow with the silk handkerchief
knotted over his flannel shirt, greeting tremendously the spruce
civilian, who had a rope-colored mustache and bore a fainthearted
resemblance to him. The story was plain on its face to the passers-by;
and one of the ladies who had come in the car with Lin turned twice, and
smiled gently to herself. But Frank McLean's heart did not warm. He felt that what he had been
afraid of was true; and he saw he was being made conspicuous. He saw men
and women stare in the station, and he saw them staring as he and his
Western brother went through the streets. Lin strode along, sniffing the
air of Boston, looking at all things, and making it a stretch for his
sleek companion to keep step with him. Frank thought of the refined
friends he should have to introduce his brother to; for he had
risen with his salary, and now belonged to a small club where the
paying-tellers of banks played cards every night, and the head clerk at
the Parker House was president. Perhaps he should not have to reveal
the cow-puncher to these shining ones. Perhaps the cow-puncher would
not stay very long. Of course he was glad to see him again, and he would
take him to dine at some obscure place this first evening. But this was
not Lin's plan. Frank must dine with him, at the Parker House. Frank
demurred, saying it was he that should be host. "And," he added, "they charge up high for wines at Parker's." Then for
the twentieth time he shifted a sidelong eye over his brother's clothes. "You're goin' to take your grub with me," said Lin. "That's all right, I
guess. And there ain't any 'no' about it. Things is not the same like
as if father was livin'--(his voice softened)--and here to see me come
home. Now I'm good for several dinners with wines charged up high, I
expect, nor it ain't nobody in this world, barrin' just Lin McLean, that
I've any need to ask for anything. 'Mr. McLean,' says I to Lin, 'can
yu' spare me some cash?' 'Why, to be sure, you bet!' And we'll start off
with steamed Duxbury clams." The cow-puncher slapped his pocket, where
the coin made a muffled chinking. Then he said, gruffly, "I suppose
Swampscott's there yet?" "Yes," said Frank. "It's a dead little town, is Swampscott." "I guess I'll take a look at the old house tomorrow," Lin pursued. "Oh, that's been pulled down since--I forget the year they improved that
block." Lin regarded in silence his brother, who was speaking so jauntily of the
first and last home they had ever had. "Seventy-nine is when it was," continued Frank. "So you can save the
trouble of travelling away down to Swampscott." "I guess I'll go to the graveyard, anyway," said the cow-puncher in his
offish voice, and looking fixedly in front of him. They came into Washington Street, and again the elder McLean uneasily
surveyed the younger's appearance. But the momentary chill had melted from the heart of the genial Lin. "After to-morrow," said he, laying a hand on his brother's shoulder,
"yu' can start any lead yu' please, and I guess I can stay with yu'
pretty close, Frank." Frank said nothing. He saw one of the members of his club on the other
side of the way, and the member saw him, and Frank caught diverted
amazement on the member's face. Lin's hand weighed on his shoulder, and
the stress became too great. "Lin," said he, "while you're running with
our crowd, you don't want to wear that style of hat, you know." It may be that such words can in some way be spoken at such a time, but
not in the way that these were said. The frozen fact was irrevocably
revealed in the tone of Frank's voice. The cow-puncher stopped dead short, and his hand slid off his brother's
shoulder. "You've made it plain," he said, evenly, slanting his steady
eyes down into Frank's. "You've explained yourself fairly well. Run
along with your crowd, and I'll not bother yu' more with comin' round
and causin' yu' to feel ashamed. It's a heap better to understand these
things at once, and save making a fool of yourself any longer 'n yu'
need to. I guess there ain't no more to be said, only one thing. If yu'
see me around on the street, don't yu' try any talk, for I'd be liable
to close your jaw up, and maybe yu'd have more of a job explainin' that
to your crowd than you've had makin' me see what kind of a man I've got
for a brother." Frank found himself standing alone before any reply to these sentences
had occurred to him. He walked slowly to his club, where a friend joked
him on his glumness. Lin made a sore failure of amusing himself that night; and in the
bright, hot morning he got into the train for Swampscott. At the
graveyard he saw a woman lay a bunch of flowers on a mound and kneel,
weeping. "There ain't nobody to do that for this one," thought the cow-puncher,
and looked down at the grave he had come to see, then absently gazed at
the woman. She had stolen away from her daily life to come here where her grief
was shrined, and now her heart found it hard to bid the lonely place
goodbye. So she lingered long, her thoughts sunk deep in the motionless
past. When she at last looked up, she saw the tall, strange man re-enter
from the street among the tombs, and deposit on one of them an ungainly
lump of flowers. They were what Lin had been able hastily to buy in
Swampscott. He spread them gently as he had noticed the woman do, but
her act of kneeling he did not imitate. He went away quickly. For some
hours he hung about the little town, aimlessly loitering, watching the
salt water where he used to swim. "Yu' don't belong any more, Lin," he miserably said at length, and took
his way to Boston. The next morning, determined to see the sights, he was in New York, and
drifted about to all places night and day, till his money was mostly
gone, and nothing to show for it but a somewhat pleasure-beaten face and
a deep hatred of the crowded, scrambling East. So he suddenly bought a
ticket for Green River, Wyoming, and escaped from the city that seemed
to numb his good humor. When, after three days, the Missouri lay behind him and his holiday, he
stretched his legs and took heart to see out of the window the signs
of approaching desolation. And when on the fourth day civilization
was utterly emptied out of the world, he saw a bunch of cattle, and,
galloping among them, his spurred and booted kindred. And his manner
took on that alertness a horse shows on turning into the home road. As
the stage took him toward Washakie, old friends turned up every fifty
miles or so, shambling out of a cabin or a stable, and saying, in casual
tones, "Hello, Lin, where've you been at?" At Lander, there got into the stage another old acquaintance, the Bishop
of Wyoming. He knew Lin at once, and held out his hand, and his greeting
was hearty. "It took a week for my robes to catch up with me," he said, laughing. Then, in a little while, "How was the East?" "First-rate," said Lin, not looking at him. He was shy of the
conversation's taking a moral turn. But the bishop had no intention of
reverting--at any rate, just now--to their last talk at Green River, and
the advice he had then given. "I trust your friends were all well?" he said. "I guess they was healthy enough," said Lin. "I suppose you found Boston much changed? It's a beautiful city." "Good enough town for them that likes it, I expect," Lin replied. The bishop was forming a notion of what the matter must be, but he had
no notion whatever of what now revealed itself. "Mr. Bishop," the cow-puncher said, "how was that about that fellow you
told about that's in the Bible somewheres?--he come home to his folks,
and they--well there was his father saw him comin'"--He stopped,
embarrassed. Then the bishop remembered the wide-open eyes, and how he had noticed
them in the church at the agency intently watching him. And, just
now, what were best to say he did not know. He looked at the young man
gravely. "Have yu' got a Bible?" pursued Lin. "For, excuse me, but I'd like yu'
to read that onced." So the bishop read, and Lin listened. And all the while this good
clergyman was perplexed how to speak--or if indeed to speak at this time
at all--to the heart of the man beside him for whom the parable had gone
so sorely wrong. When the reading was done, Lin had not taken his eyes
from the bishop's face. "How long has that there been wrote?" he asked. He was told about how long. "Mr. Bishop," said Lin, "I ain't got good knowledge of the Bible, and I
never figured it to be a book much on to facts. And I tell you I'm more
plumb beat about it's having that elder brother, and him being angry,
down in black and white two thousand years ago, than--than if I'd seen
a man turn water into wine, for I'd have knowed that ain't so. But the
elder brother is facts--dead-sure facts. And they knowed about that, and
put it down just the same as life two thousand years ago!" "Well," said the bishop, wisely ignoring the challenge as to miracles,
"I am a good twenty years older than you, and all that time I've been
finding more facts in the Bible every day I have lived." Lin meditated. "I guess that could be," he said. "Yes; after that yu've
been a-readin', and what I know for myself that I didn't know till
lately, I guess that could be." Then the bishop talked with exceeding care, nor did he ask uncomfortable
things, or moralize visibly. Thus he came to hear how it had fared with
Lin his friend, and Lin forgot altogether about its being a parson he
was delivering the fulness of his heart to. "And come to think," he
concluded, "it weren't home I had went to back East, layin' round them
big cities, where a man can't help but feel strange all the week. No,
sir! Yu' can blow in a thousand dollars like I did in New York, and
it'll not give yu' any more home feelin' than what cattle has put in
a stock-yard. Nor it wouldn't have in Boston neither. Now this country
here" (he waved his hand towards the endless sage-brush), "seein' it
onced more, I know where my home is, and I wouldn't live nowheres else. Only I ain't got no father watching for me to come up Wind River." The cow-puncher stated this merely as a fact, and without any note of
self-pity. But the bishops face grew very tender, and he looked away
from Lin. Knowing his man--for had he not seen many of this kind in his
desert diocese?--he forbore to make any text from that last sentence the
cow-puncher had spoken. Lin talked cheerfully on about what he should
now do. The round-up must be somewhere near Du Noir Creek. He would
join it this season, but next he should work over to the Powder River
country. More business was over there, and better chances for a man to
take up some land and have a ranch of his own. As they got out at Fort
Washakie, the bishop handed him a small book, in which he had turned
several leaves down, carefully avoiding any page that related of
miracles. "You need not read it through, you know," he said, smiling; "just
read where I have marked, and see if you don't find some more facts. Goodbye--and always come and see me." The next morning he watched Lin riding slowly out of the post towards
Wind River, leading a single pack-horse. By-and-by the little moving
dot went over the ridge. And as the bishop walked back into the
parade-ground, thinking over the possibilities in that untrained manly
soul, he shook his head sorrowfully. THE WINNING OF THE BISCUIT-SHOOTER

It was quite clear to me that Mr. McLean could not know the news. Meeting him to-day had been unforeseen--unforeseen and so pleasant that
the thing had never come into my head until just now, after both of us
had talked and dined our fill, and were torpid with satisfaction. I had found Lin here at Riverside in the morning. At my horse's
approach to the cabin, it was he and not the postmaster who had come
precipitately out of the door. "I'm turruble pleased to see yu'," he had said, immediately. "What's happened?" said I, in some concern at his appearance. And he piteously explained: "Why, I've been here all alone since
yesterday!" This was indeed all; and my hasty impressions of shooting and a corpse
gave way to mirth over the child and his innocent grievance that he had
blurted out before I could get off my horse. Since when, I inquired of him, had his own company become such a shock
to him? "As to that," replied Mr. McLean, a thought ruffled, "when a man expects
lonesomeness he stands it like he stands anything else, of course. But when he has figured on finding company--say--" he broke off (and
vindictiveness sparkled in his eye)--"when you're lucky enough to
catch yourself alone, why, I suppose yu' just take a chair and chat to
yourself for hours.--You've not seen anything of Tommy?" he pursued with
interest. I had not; and forthwith Lin poured out to me the pent-up complaints and
sociability with which he was bursting. The foreman had sent him over
here with a sackful of letters for the post, and to bring back the
week's mail for the ranch. A day was gone now, and nothing for a man
to do but sit and sit. Tommy was overdue fifteen hours. Well, you could
have endured that, but the neighbors had all locked their cabins and
gone to Buffalo. It was circus week in Buffalo. Had I ever considered
the money there must be in the circus business? Tommy had taken the
outgoing letters early yesterday. Nobody had kept him waiting. By all
rules he should have been back again last night. Maybe the stage was
late reaching Powder River, and Tommy had had to lay over for it. Well, that would justify him. Far more likely he had gone to the circus
himself and taken the mail with him. Tommy was no type of man for
postmaster. Except drawing the allowance his mother in the East gave
him first of every month, he had never shown punctuality that Lin could
remember. Never had any second thoughts, and awful few first ones. Told
bigger lies than a small man ought, also. "Has successes, though," said I, wickedly. "Huh!" went on Mr. McLean. "Successes! One ice-cream-soda success. And
she"--Lin's still wounded male pride made him plaintive--"why, even that
girl quit him, once she got the chance to appreciate how insignificant
he was as compared with the size of his words. No, sir. Not one of 'em
retains interest in Tommy." Lin was unsaddling and looking after my horse, just because he was
glad to see me. Since our first acquaintance, that memorable summer of
Pitchstone Canyon when he had taken such good care of me and such bad
care of himself, I had learned pretty well about horses and camp craft
in general. He was an entire boy then. But he had been East since, East
by a route of his own discovering--and from his account of that journey
it had proved, I think, a sort of spiritual experience. And then the
years of our friendship were beginning to roll up. Manhood of the
body he had always richly possessed; and now, whenever we met after a
season's absence and spoke those invariable words which all old friends
upon this earth use to each other at meeting--"You haven't changed, you
haven't changed at all!" --I would wonder if manhood had arrived in Lin's
boy soul. And so to-day, while he attended to my horse and explained the
nature of Tommy (a subject he dearly loved just now), I looked at him
and took an intimate, superior pride in feeling how much more mature I
was than he, after all. There's nothing like a sense of merit for making one feel aggrieved,
and on our return to the cabin Mr. McLean pointed with disgust to some
firewood. "Look at those sorrowful toothpicks," said he: "Tommy's work." So Lin, the excellent hearted, had angrily busied himself, and chopped a
pile of real logs that would last a week. He had also cleaned the stove,
and nailed up the bed, the pillow-end of which was on the floor. It
appeared the master of the house had been sleeping in it the reverse
way on account of the slant. Thus had Lin cooked and dined alone, supped
alone, and sat over some old newspapers until bed-time alone with his
sense of virtue. And now here it was long after breakfast, and no Tommy
yet. "It's good yu' come this forenoon," Lin said to me. "I'd not have had
the heart to get up another dinner just for myself. Let's eat rich!" Accordingly, we had richly eaten, Lin and I. He had gone out among the
sheds and caught some eggs (that is how he spoke of it), we had opened
a number of things in cans, and I had made my famous dish of evaporated
apricots, in which I managed to fling a suspicion of caramel throughout
the stew. "Tommy'll be hot about these," said Lin, joyfully, as we ate the eggs. "He don't mind what yu' use of his canned goods--pickled salmon and
truck. He is hospitable all right enough till it comes to an egg. Then
he'll tell any lie. But shucks! Yu' can read Tommy right through his
clothing. 'Make yourself at home, Lin,' says he, yesterday. And he
showed me his fresh milk and his stuff. 'Here's a new ham,' says he;
'too bad my damned hens ain't been layin'. The sons-o'guns have quit on
me ever since Christmas.' And away he goes to Powder River for the mail. 'You swore too heavy about them hens,' thinks I. Well, I expect he may
have travelled half a mile by the time I'd found four nests." I am fond of eggs, and eat them constantly--and in Wyoming they were
always a luxury. But I never forget those that day, and how Lin and
I enjoyed them thinking of Tommy. Perhaps manhood was not quite
established in my own soul at that time--and perhaps that is the reason
why it is the only time I have ever known which I would live over again,
those years when people said, "You are old enough to know better"--and
one didn't care! Salmon, apricots, eggs, we dealt with them all properly, and I had some
cigars. It was now that the news came back into my head. "What do you think of--" I began, and stopped. I spoke out of a long silence, the slack, luxurious silence of
digestion. I got no answer, naturally, from the torpid Lin, and then it
occurred to me that he would have asked me what I thought, long before
this, had he known. So, observing how comfortable he was, I began
differently. "What is the most important event that can happen in this country?" said
I.

Mr. McLean heard me where he lay along the floor of the cabin on his
back, dozing by the fire; but his eyes remained closed. He waggled one
limp, open hand slightly at me, and torpor resumed her dominion over
him. "I want to know what you consider the most important event that can
happen in this country," said I, again, enunciating each word with slow
clearness. The throat and lips of Mr. McLean moved, and a sulky sound came forth
that I recognized to be meant for the word "War." Then he rolled over so
that his face was away from me, and put an arm over his eyes. "I don't mean country in the sense of United States," said I. "I mean
this country here, and Bear Creek, and--well, the ranches southward for
fifty miles, say. Important to this section." "Mosquitoes'll be due in about three weeks," said Lin. "Yu' might leave
a man rest till then." "I want your opinion," said I. "Oh, misery! Well, a raise in the price of steers." "No." "Yu' said yu' wanted my opinion," said Lin. "Seems like yu' merely
figure on givin' me yours." "Very well," said I. "Very well, then." I took up a copy of the Cheyenne Sun. It was five weeks old, and I soon
perceived that I had read it three weeks ago; but I read it again for
some minutes now. "I expect a railroad would be more important," said Mr. McLean,
persuasively, from the floor. "Than a rise in steers?" said I, occupied with the Cheyenne Sun. "Oh
yes. Yes, a railroad certainly would." "It's got to be money, anyhow," stated Lin, thoroughly wakened. "Money
in some shape." "How little you understand the real wants of the country!" said I,
coming to the point. "It's a girl." Mr. McLean lay quite still on the floor. "A girl," I repeated. "A new girl coming to this starved country." The cow-puncher took a long, gradual stretch and began to smile. "Well,"
said he, "yu' caught me--if that's much to do when a man is half-witted
with dinner and sleep." He closed his eyes again and lay with a specious
expression of indifference. But that sort of thing is a solitary
entertainment, and palls. "Starved," he presently muttered. "We are kind
o' starved that way I'll admit. More dollars than girls to the square
mile. And to think of all of us nice, healthy, young--bet yu' I know who
she is!" he triumphantly cried. He had sat up and levelled a finger at
me with the throw-down jerk of a marksman. "Sidney, Nebraska." I nodded. This was not the lady's name--he could not recall her
name--but his geography of her was accurate. One day in February my friend, Mrs. Taylor over on Bear Creek, had
received a letter--no common event for her. Therefore, during several
days she had all callers read it just as naturally as she had them all
see the new baby, and baby and letter had both been brought out for me. The letter was signed,

"Ever your afectionite frend. "Katie Peck,"

and was not easy to read, here and there. But you could piece out the
drift of it, and there was Mrs. Taylor by your side, eager to help you
when you stumbled. Miss Peck wrote that she was overworked in Sidney,
Nebraska, and needed a holiday. When the weather grew warm she should
like to come to Bear Creek and be like old times. "Like to come and be
like old times" filled Mrs. Taylor with sentiment and the cow-punchers
with expectation. But it is a long way from February to warm weather on
Bear Creek, and even cow-punchers will forget about a new girl if she
does not come. For several weeks I had not heard Miss Peck mentioned,
and old girls had to do. Yesterday, however, when I paid a visit to Miss
Molly Wood (the Bear Creek schoolmistress), I found her keeping in
order the cabin and the children of the Taylors, while they were gone
forty-five miles to the stage station to meet their guest. "Well," said Lin, judicially, "Miss Wood is a lady." "Yes," said I, with deep gravity. For I was thinking of an occasion when
Mr. McLean had discovered that truth somewhat abruptly. Lin thoughtfully continued. "She is--she's--she's--what are you laughin'
at?" "Oh, nothing. You don't see quite so much of Miss Wood as you used to,
do you?" "Huh! So that's got around. Well, o' course I'd ought t've knowed
better, I suppose. All the same, there's lots and lots of girls do like
gettin' kissed against their wishes--and you know it." "But the point would rather seem to be that she--"

"Would rather seem! Don't yu' start that professor style o' yours, or
I'll--I'll talk more wickedness in worse language than ever yu've heard
me do yet." "Impossible!" I murmured, sweetly, and Master Lin went on. "As to point--that don't need to be explained to me. She's a lady all
right." He ruminated for a moment. "She has about scared all the boys
off, though," he continued. "And that's what you get by being refined,"
he concluded, as if Providence had at length spoken in this matter. "She has not scared off a boy from Virginia, I notice," said I. "He
was there yesterday afternoon again. Ridden all the way over from Sunk
Creek. Didn't seem particularly frightened." "Oh, well, nothin' alarms him--not even refinement," said Mr. McLean,
with his grin. "And she'll fool your Virginian like she done the balance
of us. You wait. Shucks! If all the girls were that chilly, why, what
would us poor punchers do?" "You have me cornered," said I, and we sat in a philosophical silence,
Lin on the floor still, and I at the window. There I looked out upon
a scene my eyes never tired of then, nor can my memory now. Spring
had passed over it with its first, lightest steps. The pastured levels
undulated in emerald. Through the many-changing sage, that just this
moment of to-day was lilac, shone greens scarce a week old in the
dimples of the foot-hills; and greens new-born beneath today's sun
melted among them. Around the doubling of the creek in the willow
thickets glimmered skeined veils of yellow and delicate crimson. The
stream poured turbulently away from the snows of the mountains behind
us. It went winding in many folds across the meadows into distance
and smallness, and so vanished round the great red battlement of wall
beyond. Upon this were falling the deep hues of afternoon--violet, rose,
and saffron, swimming and meeting as if some prism had dissolved and
flowed over the turrets and crevices of the sandstone. Far over there I
saw a dot move. "At last!" said I.

Lin looked out of the window. "It's more than Tommy," said he, at
once; and his eyes made it out before mine could. "It's a wagon. That's
Tommy's bald-faced horse alongside. He's fooling to the finish," Lin
severely commented, as if, after all this delay, there should at least
be a homestretch. Presently, however, a homestretch seemed likely to occur. The bald-faced
horse executed some lively manoeuvres, and Tommy's voice reached us
faintly through the light spring air. He was evidently howling the
remarkable strain of yells that the cow-punchers invented as the speech
best understood by cows--"Oi-ee, yah, whoop-yahye-ee, oooo-oop, oop,
oop-oop-oop-oop-yah-hee!" But that gives you no idea of it. Alphabets
are worse than photographs. It is not the lungs of every man that can
produce these effects, nor even from armies, eagles, or mules were such
sounds ever heard on earth. The cow-puncher invented them. And when
the last cow-puncher is laid to rest (if that, alas! have not already
befallen) the yells will be forever gone. Singularly enough, the cattle
appeared to appreciate them. Tommy always did them very badly, and that
was plain even at this distance. Nor did he give us a homestretch,
after all. The bald-faced horse made a number of evolutions and returned
beside the wagon. "Showin' off," remarked Lin. "Tommy's showin' off." Suspicion crossed
his face, and then certainty. "Why, we might have knowed that!" he
exclaimed, in dudgeon. "It's her." He hastened outside for a better
look, and I came to the door myself. "That's what it is," said he. "It's
the girl. Oh yes. That's Taylor's buckskin pair he traded Balaam for. She come by the stage all right yesterday, yu' see, but she has been
too tired to travel, yu' see, or else, maybe, Taylor wanted to rest his
buckskins--they're four-year-olds. Or else--anyway, they laid over last
night at Powder River, and Tommy he has just laid over too, yu'
see, holdin' the mail back on us twenty-four hours--and that's your
postmaster!" It was our postmaster, and this he had done, quite as the virtuously
indignant McLean surmised. Had I taken the same interest in the new
girl, I suppose that I too should have felt virtuously indignant. Lin and I stood outside to receive the travellers. As their cavalcade
drew near, Mr. McLean grew silent and watchful, his whole attention
focused upon the Taylors' vehicle. Its approach was joyous. Its gear
made a cheerful clanking, Taylor cracked his whip and encouragingly
chirruped to his buckskins, and Tommy's apparatus jingled musically. For
Tommy wore upon himself and his saddle all the things you can wear in
the Wild West. Except that his hair was not long, our postmaster might
have conducted a show and minted gold by exhibiting his romantic person
before the eyes of princes. He began with a black-and-yellow rattlesnake
skin for a hat-band, he continued with a fringed and beaded shirt of
buckskin, and concluded with large, tinkling spurs. Of course, there
were things between his shirt and his heels, but all leather and deadly
weapons. He had also a riata, a cuerta, and tapaderos, and frequently
employed these Spanish names for the objects. I wish that I had not lost
Tommy's photograph in Rocky Mountain costume. You must understand that
he was really pretty, with blue eyes, ruddy cheeks, and a graceful
figure; and, besides, he had twenty-four hours' start of poor dusty Lin,
whose best clothes were elsewhere. You might have supposed that it would be Mrs. Taylor who should present
us to her friend from Sidney, Nebraska; but Tommy on his horse undertook
the office before the wagon had well come to a standstill. "Good friends
of mine, and gentlemen, both," said he to Miss Peck; and to us, "A lady
whose acquaintance will prove a treat to our section." We all bowed at each other beneath the florid expanse of these
recommendations, and I was proceeding to murmur something about its
being a long journey and a fine day when Miss Peck cut me short, gaily:

"Well," she exclaimed to Tommy, "I guess I'm pretty near ready for them
eggs you've spoke so much about." I have not often seen Mr. McLean lose his presence of mind. He needed
merely to exclaim, "Why, Tommy, you told me your hens had not been
laying since Christmas!" and we could have sat quiet and let Tommy
try to find all the eggs that he could. But the new girl was a sore
embarrassment to the cow-puncher's wits. Poor Lin stood by the wheels
of the wagon. He looked up at Miss Peck, he looked over at Tommy, his
features assumed a rueful expression, and he wretchedly blurted,

"Why, Tommy, I've been and eat 'em." "Well, if that ain't!" cried Miss Peck. She stared with interest at Lin
as he now assisted her to descend. "All?" faltered Tommy. "Not the four nests?" "I've had three meals, yu' know," Lin reminded him, deprecatingly. "I helped him," said I. "Ten innocent, fresh eggs. But we have left some
ham. Forgive us, please." "I declare!" said Miss Peck, abruptly, and rolled her sluggish, inviting
eyes upon me. "You're a case, too, I expect." But she took only brief note of me, although it was from head to foot. In her stare the dull shine of familiarity grew vacant, and she turned
back to Lin McLean. "You carry that," said she, and gave the pleased
cow-puncher a hand valise. "I'll look after your things, Miss Peck," called Tommy, now springing
down from his horse. The egg tragedy had momentarily stunned him. "You'll attend to the mail first, Mr. Postmaster!" said the lady,
but favoring him with a look from her large eyes. "There's plenty of
gentlemen here." With that her glance favored Lin. She went into the
cabin, he following her close, with the Taylors and myself in the rear. "Well, I guess I'm about collapsed!" said she, vigorously, and sank upon
one of Tommy's chairs. The fragile article fell into sticks beneath her, and Lin leaped to her
assistance. He placed her upon a firmer foundation. Mrs. Taylor brought
a basin and towel to bathe the dust from her face, Mr. Taylor produced
whiskey, and I found sugar and hot water. Tommy would doubtless have
done something in the way of assistance or restoratives, but he was gone
to the stable with the horses. "Shall I get your medicine from the valise, deary?" inquired Mrs.
Taylor. "Not now," her visitor answered; and I wondered why she should take such
a quick look at me. "We'll soon have yu' independent of medicine," said Lin, gallantly. "Our
climate and scenery here has frequently raised the dead." "You're a case, anyway!" exclaimed the sick lady with rich conviction. The cow-puncher now sat himself on the edge of Tommy's bed, and,
throwing one leg across the other, began to raise her spirits with
cheerful talk. She steadily watched him--his face sometimes, sometimes
his lounging, masculine figure. While he thus devoted his attentions to
her, Taylor departed to help Tommy at the stable, and good Mrs. Taylor,
busy with supper for all of us in the kitchen, expressed her joy at
having her old friend of childhood for a visit after so many years. "Sickness has changed poor Katie some," said she. "But I'm hoping she'll
get back her looks on Bear Creek." "She seems less feeble than I had understood," I remarked. "Yes, indeed! I do believe she's feeling stronger. She was that tired
and down yesterday with the long stage-ride, and it is so lonesome! But
Taylor and I heartened her up, and Tommy came with the mail, and to-day
she's real spruced-up like, feeling she's among friends." "How long will she stay?" I inquired. "Just as long as ever she wants! Me and Katie hasn't met since we was
young girls in Dubuque, for I left home when I married Taylor, and he
brought me to this country right soon; and it ain't been like Dubuque
much, though if I had it to do over again I'd do just the same, as
Taylor knows. Katie and me hasn't wrote even, not till this February,
for you always mean to and you don't. Well, it'll be like old times. Katie'll be most thirty-four, I expect. Yes. I was seventeen and she was
sixteen the very month I was married. Poor thing! She ought to have got
some good man for a husband, but I expect she didn't have any chance,
for there was a big fam'ly o' them girls, and old Peck used to act real
scandalous, getting drunk so folks didn't visit there evenings scarcely
at all. And so she quit home, it seems, and got a position in the
railroad eating-house at Sidney, and now she has poor health with
feeding them big trains day and night." "A biscuit-shooter!" said I. Loyal Mrs. Taylor stirred some batter in silence. "Well," said she then,
"I'm told that's what the yard-hands of the railroad call them poor
waiter-girls. You might hear it around the switches at them division
stations." I had heard it in higher places also, but meekly accepted the reproof. If you have made your trans-Missouri journeys only since the new era of
dining-cars, there is a quantity of things you have come too late for,
and will never know. Three times a day in the brave days of old you
sprang from your scarce-halted car at the summons of a gong. You
discerned by instinct the right direction, and, passing steadily through
doorways, had taken, before you knew it, one of some sixty chairs in
a room of tables and catsup bottles. Behind the chairs, standing
attention, a platoon of Amazons, thick-wristed, pink-and-blue, began
immediately a swift chant. It hymned the total bill-of-fare at a blow. In this inexpressible ceremony the name of every dish went hurtling into
the next, telescoped to shapelessness. Moreover, if you stopped your
Amazon in the middle, it dislocated her, and she merely went back and
took a fresh start. The chant was always the same, but you never learned
it. As soon as it began, your mind snapped shut like the upper berth
in a Pullman. You must have uttered appropriate words--even a parrot
will--for next you were eating things--pie, ham, hot cakes--as fast as
you could. Twenty minutes of swallowing, and all aboard for Ogden, with
your pile-driven stomach dumb with amazement. The Strasburg goose is
not dieted with greater velocity, and "biscuit-shooter" is a grand word. Very likely some Homer of the railroad yards first said it--for what
men upon the present earth so speak with imagination's tongue as we
Americans? If Miss Peck had been a biscuit-shooter, I could account readily for her
conversation, her equipped deportment, the maturity in her round, blue,
marble eye. Her abrupt laugh, something beyond gay, was now sounding
in response to Mr. McLean's lively sallies, and I found him fanning her
into convalescence with his hat. She herself made but few remarks, but
allowed the cow-puncher to entertain her, merely exclaiming briefly
now and then, "I declare!" and "If you ain't!" Lin was most certainly
engaging, if that was the lady's meaning. His wide-open eyes sparkled
upon her, and he half closed them now and then to look at her more
effectively. I suppose she was worth it to him. I have forgotten to say
that she was handsome in a large California-fruit style. They made a
good-looking pair of animals. But it was in the presence of Tommy that
Master Lin shone more energetically than ever, and under such shining
Tommy was transparently restless. He tried, and failed, to bring
the conversation his way, and took to rearranging the mail and the
furniture. "Supper's ready," he said, at length. "Come right in, Miss Peck; right
in here. This is your seat--this one, please. Now you can see my fields
out of the window." "You sit here," said the biscuit-shooter to Lin; and thus she was
between them. "Them's elegant!" she presently exclaimed to Tommy. "Did
you cook 'em?" I explained that the apricots were of my preparation. "Indeed!" said she, and returned to Tommy, who had been telling her of
his ranch, his potatoes, his horses. "And do you punch cattle, too?" she
inquired of him. "Me?" said Tommy, slightingly; "gave it up years ago; too empty a
life for me. I leave that to such as like it. When a man owns his own
property"--Tommy swept his hand at the whole landscape--"he takes to
more intellectual work." "Lickin' postage-stamps," Mr. McLean suggested, sourly. "You lick them and I cancel them," answered the postmaster; and it does
not seem a powerful rejoinder. But Miss Peck uttered her laugh. "That's one on you," she told Lin. 