



Produced by Jim Grinsfelder





THE KINGDOM OF THE BLIND

by E. Phillips Oppenheim




CHAPTER I

Lady Anselman stood in the centre of the lounge at the Ritz Hotel and
with a delicately-poised forefinger counted her guests. There was the
great French actress who had every charm but youth, chatting vivaciously
with a tall, pale-faced man whose French seemed to be as perfect as his
attitude was correct. The popular wife of a great actor was discussing
her husband's latest play with a Cabinet Minister who had the air of a
school-boy present at an illicit feast. A very beautiful young woman,
tall and fair, with grey-blue eyes and a wealth of golden, almost
yellow hair, was talking to a famous musician. A little further in
the background, a young man in the uniform of a naval lieutenant was
exchanging what seemed to be rather impressive chaff with a petite but
exceedingly good-looking girl. Lady Anselman counted them twice, glanced
at the clock and frowned. "I can't remember whom we are waiting for!" she exclaimed a little
helplessly to the remaining guest, a somewhat tired-looking publisher
who stood by her side. "I am one short. I dare say it will come to me in
a minute. You know every one, I suppose, Mr. Daniell?" The publisher shook his head. "I have met Lord Romsey and also Madame Selarne," he observed. "For the
rest, I was just thinking what a stranger I felt." "The man who talks French so well," Lady Anselman told him, dropping her
voice a little, "is Surgeon-Major Thomson. He is inspector of hospitals
at the front, or something of the sort. The tall, fair girl--isn't she
pretty!--is Geraldine Conyers, daughter of Admiral Sir Seymour Conyers. That's her brother, the sailor over there, talking to Olive Moreton;
their engagement was announced last week. Lady Patrick of course you
know, and Signor Scobel, and Adelaide Cunningham--you do know her, don't
you, Mr. Daniell? She is my dearest friend. How many do you make that?" The publisher counted them carefully. "Eleven including ourselves," he announced. "And we should be twelve," Lady Anselman sighed. "Of course!" she added,
her face suddenly brightening. "What an idiot I am! It's Ronnie we are
waiting for. One can't be cross with him, poor fellow. He can only just
get about." The fair girl, who had overheard, leaned across. The shade of newly
awakened interest in her face, and the curve of her lips as she spoke,
added to her charm. A gleam of sunlight flashed upon the yellow-gold of
her plainly coiled hair. "Is it your nephew, Captain Ronald Granet, who is coming?" she asked a
little eagerly. Lady Anselman nodded. "He only came home last Tuesday with dispatches from the front," she
said. "This is his first day out." "Ah! but he is wounded, perhaps?" Madame Selarne inquired solicitously. "In the left arm and the right leg," Lady Anselman assented. "I believe
that he has seen some terrible fighting, and we are very proud of his D.
S. O. The only trouble is that he is like all the others--he will tell
us nothing." "He shows excellent judgment," Lord Romsey observed. Lady Anselman glanced at her august guest a little querulously. "That is the principle you go on, nowadays, isn't it?" she remarked. "I
am not sure that you are wise. When one is told nothing, one fears
the worst, and when time after time the news of these small disasters
reaches us piecemeal, about three weeks late, we never get rid of our
forebodings, even when you tell us about victories.... Ah! Here he comes
at last," she added, holding out both her hands to the young man who was
making his somewhat difficult way towards them. "Ronnie, you are a few
minutes late but we're not in the least cross with you. Do you know that
you are looking better already? Come and tell me whom you don't know of
my guests and I'll introduce you." The young man, leaning upon his stick, greeted his aunt and murmured a
word of apology. He was very fair, and with a slight, reddish moustache
and the remains of freckles upon his face. His grey eyes were a little
sunken, and there were lines about his mouth which one might have
guessed had been brought out recently by pain or suffering of some sort. His left arm reclined uselessly in a black silk sling. He glanced around
the little assembly. "First of all," he said, bowing to the French actress and raising her
fingers to his lips, "there is no one who does not know Madame Selarne. Lady Patrick, we have met before, haven't we? I am going to see your
husband in his new play the first night I am allowed out. Mr. Daniell
I have met, and Lord Romsey may perhaps do me the honour of remembering
me," he added, shaking hands with the Cabinet Minister. He turned to face Geraldine Conyers, who had been watching him with
interest. Lady Anselman at once introduced them. "I know that you haven't met Miss Conyers because she has been asking
about you. This is my nephew Ronnie, Geraldine. I hope that you will be
friends." The girl murmured something inaudible as she shook hands. The young
soldier looked at her for a moment. His manner became almost serious. "I hope so, too," he said quietly. "Olive, come and make friends with my nephew if you can spare a moment
from your young man," Lady Anselman continued. "Captain Granet--Miss
Olive Moreton. And this is Geraldine's brother--Lieutenant Conyers." The two men shook hands pleasantly. Lady Anselman glanced at the clock
and turned briskly towards the corridor. "And now, I think," she announced, "luncheon." As she moved forward, she was suddenly conscious of the man who had been
talking to Madame Selarne. He had drawn a little on one side and he was
watching the young soldier with a curious intentness. She turned back to
her nephew and touched him on the arm. "Ronnie," she said, "I don't know whether you have met Surgeon-Major
Thomson in France? Major Thomson, this is my nephew, Captain Granet." Granet turned at once and offered his hand to the other man. Only
Geraldine Conyers, who was a young woman given to noticing things,
and who had also reasons of her own for being interested, observed the
rather peculiar scrutiny with which each regarded the other. Something
which might almost have been a challenge seemed to pass from one to the
other. "I may not have met you personally," Granet admitted, "but if you are
the Surgeon-Major Thomson who has been doing such great things with
the Field Hospitals at the front, then like nearly every poor crock out
there I owe you a peculiar debt of gratitude. You are the man I mean,
aren't you?" the young soldier concluded cordially. Major Thomson bowed, and a moment later they all made their way along
the corridor, across the restaurant, searched for their names on the
cards and took their places at the table which had been reserved for
them. Lady Anselman glanced around with the scrutinising air of the
professional hostess, to see that her guests were properly seated before
she devoted herself to the Cabinet Minister. She had a word or two to
say to nearly every one of them. "I have put you next Miss Conyers, Ronnie," she remarked, "because we
give all the good things to our men when they come home from the war. And I have put you next Olive, Ralph," she went on, turning to the
sailor, "because I hear you are expecting to get your ship to-day or
to-morrow, so you, too, have to be spoiled a little. As a general rule
I don't approve of putting engaged people together, it concentrates
conversation so. And, Lord Romsey," she added, turning to her neighbour,
"please don't imagine for a moment that I am going to break my promise. We are going to talk about everything in the world except the war. I know quite well that if Ronnie has had any particularly thrilling
experiences, he won't tell us about them, and I also know that your
brain is packed full of secrets which nothing in the world would induce
you to divulge. We are going to try and persuade Madame to tell us about
her new play," she concluded, smiling at the French actress, "and there
are so many of my friends on the French stage whom I must hear about." Lord Romsey commenced his luncheon with an air of relief. He was a man
of little more than middle-age, powerfully built, inclined to be sombre,
with features of a legal type, heavily jawed. "Always tactful,
dear hostess," he murmured. "As a matter of fact, nothing but the
circumstance that it was your invitation and that Madame Selarne was to
be present, brought me here to-day. It is so hard to avoid speaking of
the great things, and for a man in my position," he added, dropping his
voice a little, "so difficult to say anything worth listening to about
them, without at any rate the semblance of indiscretion." "We all appreciate that," Lady Anselman assured him sympathetically. "Madame Selarne has promised to give us an outline of the new play which
she is producing in Manchester." "If that would interest you all," Madame Selarne assented, "it
commences--so!" For a time they nearly all listened in absorbed silence. Her
gestures, the tricks of her voice, the uplifting of her eyebrows and
shoulders--all helped to give life and colour to the little sketch she
expounded. Only those at the remote end of the table ventured upon an
independent conversation. Mrs. Cunningham, the woman whom her hostess
had referred to as being her particular friend, and one who shared
her passion for entertaining, chatted fitfully to her neighbour, Major
Thomson. It was not until luncheon was more than half-way through that
she realised the one-sidedness of their conversation. She studied
him for a moment curiously. There was something very still and
expressionless in his face, even though the sunshine from the broad high
windows which overlooked the Park, was shining full upon him. "Tell me about yourself!" she insisted suddenly. "I have been talking
rubbish quite long enough. You have been out, haven't you?" He assented gravely. "I went with the first division. At that time I was in charge of a field
hospital." "And now?" "I am Chief Inspector of Field Hospitals," he replied. "You are home on leave?" "Not exactly," he told her, a shade of stiffness in his manner. "I have
to come over very often on details connected with the administration of
my work." "I should have known quite well that you were a surgeon," she observed. "You are a physiognomist, then?" "More or less," she admitted. "You see, I love people. I love having
people around me. My friends find me a perfect nuisance, for I am always
wanting to give parties. You have the still, cold face of a surgeon--and
the hands, too," she added, glancing at them. "You are very observant," he remarked laconically. "I am also curious," she laughed, "as you are about to discover. Tell me
why you are so interested in Ronnie Granet? You hadn't met him before,
had you?" Almost for the first time he turned and looked directly at his
neighbour. She was a woman whose fair hair was turning grey,
well-dressed, sprightly, agreeable. She had a humorous mouth and an
understanding face. "Captain Granet was a stranger to me," he assented. "One is naturally
interested in soldiers, however." "You must have met thousands like him," she remarked,--"good-looking,
very British, keen sportsman, lots of pluck, just a little careless,
hating to talk about himself and serious things. I have known him since
he was a boy." Major Thomson continued to be gravely interested. "Granet!" he said to himself thoughtfully, "Do I know any of his people,
I wonder?" "You know some of his connections, of course," Mrs. Cunningham replied
briskly. "Sir Alfred Anselman, for instance, his uncle." "His father and mother?" "They are both dead. There is a large family place in Warwickshire, and
a chateau, just now, I am afraid, in the hands of the Germans. It was
somewhere quite close to the frontier. Lady Granet was an Alsatian. He
was to have gone out with the polo team, you know, to America, but broke
a rib just as they were making the selection. He played cricket for
Middlesex once or twice, too and he was Captain of Oxford the year that
they did so well." "An Admirable Crichton," Major Thomson murmured. "In sport, at any rate," his neighbour assented. "He has always been one
of the most popular young men about town, but of course the women will
spoil him now." "Is it my fancy," he asked, "or was he not reported a prisoner?" "He was missing twice, once for over a week," Mrs. Cunningham replied. "There are all sorts of stories as to how he got back to the lines. A
perfect young dare-devil, I should think. I must talk to Mr. Daniell for
a few minutes or he will never publish my reminiscences." She leaned towards her neighbour on the other side and Major Thomson
was able to resume the role of attentive observer, a role which seemed
somehow his by destiny. He listened without apparent interest to the
conversation between Geraldine Conyers and the young man whom they had
been discussing. "I think," Geraldine complained, "that you are rather overdoing your
diplomatic reticence, Captain Granet. You haven't told me a single
thing. Why, some of the Tommies I have been to see in the hospitals have
been far more interesting than you." He smiled. "I can assure you," he protested, "it isn't my fault. You can't imagine
how fed up one gets with things out there, and the newspapers can tell
you ever so much more than we can. One soldier only sees a little bit of
his own corner of the fight, you know." "But can't you tell me some of your own personal experiences?" she
persisted. "They are so much more interesting than what one reads in
print." "I never had any," he assured her. "Fearfully slow time we had for
months." "Of course, I don't believe a word you say," she declared, laughing. "You're not taking me for a war correspondent, by any chance, are you?" he asked. She shook her head. "Your language isn't sufficiently picturesque! Tell me, when are you
going back?" "As soon as I can pass the doctors-in a few days, I hope." "You hope?" she repeated. "Do you really mean that, or do you say it
because it is the proper thing to say?" He appeared for the moment to somewhat resent her question. "The fact that I hope to get back," he remarked coldly, "has nothing
whatever to do with my liking my job when I get there. As a matter of
fact, I hate it. At the same time, you can surely understand that there
isn't any other place for a man of my age and profession." "Of course not," she agreed softly. "I really am sorry that I bothered
you. There is one thing I should like to know, though and that is how
you managed to escape?" He shook his head but his amiability seemed to have wholly returned. His
eyes twinkled as he looked at her. "There we're up against a solid wall of impossibility," he replied. "You
see, some of our other chaps may try the dodge. I gave them the tip and
I don't want to spoil their chances. By-the-bye, do you know the man two
places down on your left?" he added dropping his voice a little. "Looks
almost like a waxwork figure, doesn't he?" "You mean Major Thomson? Yes, I know him," she assented, after a
moment's hesitation. "He is very quiet to-day, but he is really most
interesting." Their hostess rose and beamed on them all from her end of the table. "We have decided," she announced, "to take our coffee out in the
lounge." CHAPTER II

The little party trooped out of the restaurant and made their way to a
corner of the lounge, where tables had already been prepared with coffee
and liqueurs. Geraldine Conyers and Captain Granet, who had lingered
behind, found a table to themselves. Lady Anselman laid her fingers upon
Major Thomson's arm. "Please talk for a few more minutes to Selarne," she begged. "Your
French is such a relief to her." He obeyed immediately, although his eyes strayed more than once towards
the table at which Captain Granet and his companion were seated. Madame
Selarne was in a gossipy mood and they found many mutual acquaintances. "To speak a foreign language as you do," she told him, "is wonderful. Is it in French alone, monsieur, that you excel, or are you, perhaps, a
great linguist?" "I can scarcely call myself that," he replied, "but I do speak several
other languages. In my younger days I travelled a good deal." "German, perhaps, too?" she inquired with a little grimace. "I was at a hospital in Berlin," he confessed. Lady Anselman's party was suddenly increased by the advent of some
acquaintances from an adjoining table, all of whom desired to be
presented to Madame Selarne. Major Thomson, set at liberty, made his way
at once towards the small table at which Captain Granet and Geraldine
Conyers were seated. She welcomed him with a smile. "Are you coming to have coffee with us?" she asked? "If I may," he answered. "I shall have to be off in a few minutes." A waiter paused before their table and offered a salver on which were
several cups of coffee and liqueur glasses. Captain Granet leaned
forward in his place and stretched out his hand to serve his companion. Before he could take the cup, however, the whole tray had slipped from
the waiter's fingers, caught the corner of the table, and fallen with
its contents on to the carpet. The waiter himself--a small, undersized
person with black, startled eyes set at that moment in a fixed and
unnatural stare--made one desperate effort to save himself and then
fell backwards. Every one turned around, attracted by the noise of the
falling cups and the sharp, half-stifled groan which broke from the
man's lips. Captain Granet sprang to his feet. "Good heavens! The fellow's in a fit!" he exclaimed. The maitre d'hotel and several waiters came hurrying up towards the
prostrate figure, by the side of which Major Thomson was already
kneeling. The manager, who appeared upon the scene as though by magic,
and upon whose face was an expression of horror that his clients should
have been so disturbed, quickly gave his orders. The man was picked up
and carried away. Major Thomson followed behind. Two or three waiters
in a few seconds succeeded in removing the debris of the accident, the
orchestra commenced a favourite waltz. The maitre d'hotel apologised
to the little groups of people for the commotion--they were perhaps to
blame for having employed a young man so delicate--he was scarcely fit
for service. "He seemed to be a foreigner," Lady Anselman remarked, as the man
addressed his explanations to her. "He was a Belgian, madam. He was seriously wounded at the commencement
of the war. We took him direct from the hospital." "I hope the poor fellow will soon recover," Lady Anselman declared. "Please do not think anything more of the affair so far as we are
concerned. You must let me know later on how he is." The maitre d'hotel retreated with a little bow. Geraldine turned to
Captain Granet. "I think," she said, "that you must be very kind-hearted, for a
soldier." He turned and looked at her. "Why?" "You must have been so many horrible sights--so many dead people, and
yet--"

"Well?" he persisted. "There was something in your face when the man staggered back, a kind of
horror almost. I am sure you felt it quite as much as any of us." He was silent for a moment. "In a battlefield," he observed slowly, "one naturally becomes a little
callous, but here it is different. The fellow did look ghastly ill,
didn't he? I wonder what was really the matter with him." "We shall know when Major Thomson returns," she said. Granet seemed scarcely to hear her words. A curious fit of abstraction
had seized him. His head was turned towards the corridor, he seemed to
be waiting. "Queer sort of stick, Thomson," he remarked presently. "Is he a great
friend of yours, Miss Conyers?" She hesitated for a moment. "I have known him for some time." Something in her tone seemed to disturb him. He leaned towards her
quickly. His face had lost its good-humoured indifference. He was
evidently very much in earnest. "Please don't think me impertinent," he begged, "but--is he a very great
friend?" She did not answer. She was looking over his shoulder towards where
Major Thomson, who had just returned, was answering a little stream of
questions. "The man is in a shockingly weak state," he announced. "He is a Belgian,
has been wounded and evidently subjected to great privations. His heart
is very much weakened. He had a bad fainting fit, but with a long rest
he may recover." The little party broke up once more into groups. Granet, who had drawn
for a moment apart and seemed to be adjusting the knots of his sling,
turned to Thomson. "Has he recovered consciousness yet?" he asked. "Barely," was the terse reply. "There was no special cause for his going off like that, I suppose?" Surgeon-Major Thomson's silence was scarcely a hesitation. He was
standing perfectly still, his eyes fixed upon the young soldier. "At present," he said, "I am not quite clear about that. If you are
ready, Geraldine?" She nodded and they made their farewells to Lady Anselman. Granet looked
after them with a slight frown. He drew his aunt on one side for a
moment. "Why is Miss Conyers here without a chaperon?" he asked. "And why did
she go away with Thomson?" Lady Anselman laughed. "Didn't she tell you?" "Tell me what?" he insisted eagerly. Lady Anselman looked at her nephew curiously. "Evidently," she remarked, "your progress with the young lady was not
so rapid as it seemed, or she would have told you her secret--which,
by-the-bye, isn't a secret at all. She and Major Thomson are engaged to
be married." CHAPTER III

A few rays of fugitive sunshine were brightening Piccadilly when
Geraldine and her escort left the Ritz. The momentary depression
occasioned by the dramatic little episode of a few minutes ago, seemed
already to have passed from the girl's manner. She walked on, humming
to herself. As they paused to cross the road, she glanced as though
involuntarily at her companion. His dark morning clothes and rather
abstracted air created an atmosphere of sombreness about him of which
she was suddenly conscious. "Hugh, why don't you wear uniform in town?" she asked. "Why should I?" he replied. "After all, I am not really a fighting man,
you see." "It's so becoming," she sighed. He seemed to catch the reminiscent flash in her eyes as she looked down
the street, and a shadow of foreboding clouded his mind. "You found Captain Granet interesting?" "Very," she assented heartily. "I think he is delightful, don't you?" "He certainly seems to be a most attractive type of young man," Thomson
admitted. "And how wonderful to have had such adventures!" she continued. "Life
has become so strange, though, during the last few months. To think that
the only time I ever saw him before was at a polo match, and to-day we
sit side by side in a restaurant, and, although he won't speak of them,
one knows that he has had all manner of marvellous adventures. He was
one of those who went straight from the playing fields to look for
glory, wasn't he, Hugh? He made a hundred and thirty-two for Middlesex
the day before the war was declared." "That's the type of young soldier who's going to carry us through, if
any one can," Major Thomson agreed cheerfully. She suddenly clutched at his arm. "Hugh," she exclaimed, pointing to a placard which a newsboy was
carrying, "that is the one thing I cannot bear, the one thing which I
think if I were a man would turn me into a savage!" They both paused and read the headlines--

PASSENGER STEAMER TORPEDOED WITHOUT WARNING IN THE IRISH SEA. TWENTY-TWO
LIVES LOST. "That is the sort of thing," she groaned, "which makes one long to be
not a man but a god, to be able to wield thunderbolts and to deal out
hell!" "Good for you, Gerry," a strong, fresh voice behind them declared. "That's my job now. Didn't you hear us shouting after you, Olive and I? Look!" Her brother waved a telegram. "You've got your ship?" Thomson inquired. "I've got what I wanted," the young man answered enthusiastically. "I've
got a destroyer, one of the new type--forty knots an hour, a dear little
row of four-inch guns, and, my God! something else, I hope, that'll
teach those murderers a lesson," he added, shaking his fist towards the
placard. Geraldine laid her hand upon her brother's arm. "When do you join, Ralph?" "To-morrow night at Portsmouth," he replied. "I'm afraid we shall be
several days before we are at work. It's the _Scorpion_ they're giving
me, Gerald--or the mystery ship, as they call it in the navy." "Why?" she asked. His rather boyish face, curiously like his sister's, was suddenly
transformed. "Because we've got a rod in pickle for those cursed pirates--"

"Conyers!" Thomson interrupted. The young man paused in his sentence. Thomson was looking towards him
with a slight frown upon his forehead. "Don't think I'm a fearful old woman," he said. "I know we are all
rather fed up with these tales of spies and that sort of thing, but do
you think it's wise to even open your lips about a certain matter?" "What the dickens do you know about it?" Conyers demanded. "Nothing," Thomson assured him hastily, "nothing at all. I am only going
by what you said yourself. If there is any device on the _Scorpion_ for
dealing with these infernal craft, I'd never breathe a word about it,
if I were you. I'd put out to sea with a seal upon my lips, even before
Geraldine here and Miss Moreton." The young man's cheeks were a little flushed. "Perhaps you're right," he admitted. "I was a little over-excited. To
get the _Scorpion_ was more, even, than I had dared to hope for. Still,
before the girls it didn't seem to matter very much. There are no spies,
anyhow, hiding in the trees of Berkeley Street," he added, glancing
about them. Thomson held up his finger and stopped a taxicab. "You won't be annoyed with me, will you?" he said to Conyers. "If you'd
heard half the stories I had of the things we have given away quite
innocently--"

"That's all right," the young man interrupted, "only you mustn't think
I'm a gas-bag just because I said a word or two here before Gerry and
Olive and you, old fellow." "Must you go, Hugh?" Geraldine asked. "I am so sorry," he replied, "but I must. I really have rather an
important appointment this afternoon." "An appointment!" she grumbled. "You are in London for so short a time
and you seem to be keeping appointments all the while. I sha'n't let you
go unless you tell me what it's about." "I have to inspect a new pattern of camp bedstead," he explained calmly. "If I may, I will telephone directly I am free and see if you are at
liberty." She shrugged her shoulders but gave him a pleasant little nod as he
stepped into the taxi. "Sober old stick, Thomson," her brother observed, as they started off. "I didn't like his pulling me up like that but I expect he was right." "I don't see what business it was of his and I think it was rather
horrid of him," Olive declared. "As though Gerry or I mattered!" "A chap like Thomson hasn't very much discretion, you see," Ralph
Conyers remarked. "You'll have to wake him up a bit, Gerry, if you mean
to get any fun out of life." There was just the faintest look of trouble in Geraldine's face. She
remained perfectly loyal, however. "Some of us take life more seriously than others," she sighed. "Hugh
is one of them. When one remembers all the terrible things he must have
seen, though, it is very hard to find fault with him." They turned into the Square and paused before Olive's turning. "You're coming down with me, Ralph, and you too, Geraldine?" she
invited. Conyers shook his head regretfully. "I'm due at the Admiralty at four to receive my final instructions," he
said. "I must move along at once." The smile suddenly faded from his lips. He seemed to be listening to
the calling of the newsboys down the street. "I don't know what my
instructions are going to be," he continued, dropping his voice a
little, "but I'm sick of making war the way our chaps are doing it. If
ever I'm lucky enough to get one of those murderous submarines, I can
promise you one thing--there'll be no survivors." For a moment or two they neither of them spoke. From out of the windows
of the house before which they were standing came the music of a popular
waltz. Olive turned a way with a little shiver. "You think I'm brutal, dear," Conyers went on, as he patted her hand. "Remember, I've seen men killed--that's what makes the difference,
Olive. Yes, I am different! We are all different, we who've tackled the
job. Thomson's different. Your young man at luncheon, Geraldine--what's
his name?--Granet--he's different. There's something big and serious
grown up inside us, and the brute is looking out. It has to be. I'll come in later, Olive. Tell the mater I shall be home to dinner,
Geraldine. The governor's waiting down at the Admiralty for me. Good-bye, girls!" He waved his hand and strode down towards the corner of the Square. Both
girls watched him for a few moments. His shoulders were as square as
ever but something had gone from the springiness of his gait. There was
nothing left of the sailor's jaunty swagger. "They are all like that," Geraldine whispered "when they've been face to
face with the real thing. And we are only women, Olive." CHAPTER IV

Surgeon-Major Thomson had apparently forgotten his appointment to view
camp bedsteads, for, a few minutes after he had left Geraldine and
her brother, his taxicab set him down before a sombre-looking house in
Adelphi Terrace. He passed through the open doorway, up two flights of
stairs, drew a key of somewhat peculiar shape from his pocket and opened
a door in front of him. He found himself in a very small hall, from
which there was no egress save through yet another door, through
which he passed and stepped into a large but singularly bare-looking
apartment. Three great safes were ranged along one side of the wall,
piles of newspapers and maps were strewn all over a long table, and
a huge Ordnance map of the French and Belgian Frontiers stood upon an
easel. The only occupant of the apartment was a man who was sitting
before a typewriter in front of the window. He turned his head and rose
at Thomson's entrance, a rather short, keen-looking young man, his
face slightly pitted with smallpox, his mouth hard and firm, his eyes
deep-set and bright. "Anything happened, Ambrose?" "A dispatch, sir," was the brief reply. "From the War Office?" "No, sir, it came direct." Thomson drew the thin sheet of paper from its envelope and swept a space
for himself at the corner of the table. Then he unlocked one of the
safes and drew out from an inner drawer a parchment book bound in brown
vellum. He spread out the dispatch and read it carefully. It had
been handed in at a town near the Belgian frontier about eight hours
before:--

Fifty thousand camp bedsteads are urgently required for neighbourhood
of La Guir. Please do your best for us, the matter is urgent. Double
mattress if possible. London. For a matter of ten minutes Thomson was busy with his pencil and the
code-book. When he had finished, he studied thoughtfully the message
which he had transcribed:--

Plans for attack on La Guir communicated. Attack foiled. Believe Smith
in London. "Anything important, sir?" the young man at the typewriter asked. Thomson nodded but made no immediate reply. He first of all carefully
destroyed the message which he had received, and the transcription, and
watched the fragments of paper burn into ashes. Then he replaced the
code-book in the safe, which he carefully locked, and strolled towards
the window. He stood for several minutes looking out towards the Thames. "The same thing has happened again at La Guir," he said at last. "Any clue?" "None. They say that he is in London now." The two men looked at one another for a moment in grave silence. Ambrose
leaned back in his chair and frowned heavily. "Through our lines, through Boulogne, across the Channel, through Dover
Station, out of Charing-Cross, through our own men and the best that
Scotland Yard could do for us. In London, eh?" Thomson's face twitched convulsively. His teeth had come together with a
little snap. "You needn't play at being headquarters, Ambrose," he said hoarsely. "I
know it seems like a miracle but there's a reason for that." "What is it?" Ambrose asked. "Only a few weeks after the war began," Thomson continued thoughtfully,
"two French generals, four or five colonels, and over twenty junior
and non-commissioned officers were court-martialled for espionage. The
French have been on the lookout for that sort of thing. We haven't. There isn't one of these men who are sitting in judgment upon us to-day,
Ambrose, who would listen to me for a single moment if I were to
take the bull by the horns and say that the traitor we seek is one of
ourselves." "You're right," Ambrose murmured, "but do you believe it?" "I do," Thomson asserted. "It isn't only the fact of the attacks
themselves miscarrying, but it's the knowledge on the other side of
exactly how best to meet that attack. It's the exact knowledge they have
as to our dispositions, our most secret and sudden change of tactics. We've suffered enough, Ambrose, in this country from civil spies--the
Government are to blame for that. But there are plenty of people who go
blustering about, declaring that two of our Cabinet Ministers ought
to be hung, who'd turn round and give you the life if you hinted for a
moment that the same sort of thing in a far worse degree was going on
amongst men who are wearing the King's uniform." "It's ugly," Ambrose muttered, "damned ugly!" "Look at me," Major Thomson continued thoughtfully. "Every secret
connected with our present and future plans practically passes through
my hands, yet no one watches me. Whisper a word at the War Office that
perhaps it would be as well--just for a week, say--to test a few of
my reports, and they'd laugh at you with the air of superior beings
listening to the chatter of a fool. Yet what is there impossible about
it? I may have some secret vice--avarice, perhaps. Germany would give me
the price of a kingdom for all that I could tell them. Yet because I am
an English officer I am above all suspicion. It's magnificent, Ambrose,
but it's damnably foolish." The young man watched his chief for several moments. Thomson was
standing before the window, the cold spring light falling full upon his
face, with its nervous lines and strongly-cut, immobile features. He
felt a curious indisposition to speak, a queer sort of desire to wait on
the chance of hearing more. "A single kink in my brain," Thomson continued, "a secret weakness,
perhaps even a dash of lunacy, and I might be quite reasonably the
master-spy of the world. I was in Berlin six weeks ago, Ambrose. There
wasn't a soul who ever knew it. I made no report, on purpose." "Perhaps they knew and said nothing," Ambrose suggested softly. There was a moment's silence. Thomson seemed to be considering the idea
with strange intensity. Then he shook his head. "I think not," he decided. "When the history of this war is written,
Ambrose, with flamboyant phrases and copious rhetoric, there will be
unwritten chapters, more dramatic, having really more direct effect
upon the final issue than even the great battles which have seemed the
dominant factors. Sit tight here, Ambrose, and wait. I may be going over
to Boulogne at any hour." Thomson pushed on one side the curtains which concealed an inner room,
and passed through. In a quarter of an hour he reappeared, dressed in
uniform. His tone, his bearing, his whole manner were changed. He walked
with a springier step, he carried a little cane and he was whistling
softly to himself. "I am going to one or two places in the Tottenham Court Road, by
appointment," he announced, "to inspect some new patterns of camp
bedsteads. You can tell them, if they ring up from Whitehall, that I'll
report myself later in the evening." Curiously enough, the other man, too had changed as though in
sympathetic deference to his superior officer. He had become simply the
obedient and assiduous secretary. "Very good, sir," he said smoothly. "I'll do my best to finish the
specifications before you return." CHAPTER V

Lord Romsey, after his luncheon-party, spent an hour at his official
residence in Whitehall and made two other calls on his way home. His
secretary met him in the spacious hall of his house in Portland Square,
a few moments after he had resigned his coat and hat to the footman. "There is a gentleman here to see you who says that he made an
appointment by telephone, sir," he announced. "His name is Sidney--the
Reverend Horatio Sidney, he calls himself." Lord Romsey stood for a moment without reply. His lips had come together
in a hard, unpleasant line. It was obvious that this was by no means a
welcome visitor. "I gave no appointment, Ainsley," he remarked. "I simply said that I
would see the gentleman when he arrived in England. You had better bring
him to my study," he continued, "and be careful that no one interrupts
us." The young man withdrew and the Cabinet Minister made his way to his
study. A little of the elasticity, however, had gone from his footsteps
and he seated himself before his desk with the air of a man who faces
a disagreeable quarter of an hour. He played for a moment with a
pen-holder. "The skeleton in the cupboard," he muttered to himself gloomily. "Even
the greatest of us," he added, with a momentary return of his more
inflated self, "have them." There was a knock at the door and the secretary reappeared, ushering in
this undesired visitor. "This is Mr. Sidney, sir," he announced quietly. The Cabinet Minister rose in his place and held out his hand in his best
official style, a discrete mixture of reserve and condescension. His
manner changed, however, the moment the door was closed. He withdrew his
hand, which the other had made no attempt to grasp. "I am according you the interview you desire," he said, pointing to
a chair, "but I shall be glad if you will explain the purport of your
visit in as few words as possible. You will, I hope, appreciate the fact
that your presence here is a matter of grave embarrassment to me." Mr. Sidney bowed. He was a tall and apparently an elderly man, dressed
with the utmost sobriety. He accepted the chair without undue haste,
adjusted a pair of horn-rimmed spectacles and took some papers from his
pocket. "Sir," he began, speaking deliberately but without any foreign accent,
"I am here to make certain proposals to you on behalf of a person who at
your own request shall be nameless." Lord Romsey frowned ponderously and tapped the desk by his side with his
thick forefinger. "I cannot prevent your speaking, of course," he said, "but I wish you to
understand from the first that I am not in a position to deal with any
messages or communications from your master, whoever he may be, or any
one else in your country." "Nevertheless," the other remarked drily, "my message must be
delivered." An impulse of curiosity struggled through the gloom and apprehension of
Lord Romsey's manner. He gazed at his visitor with knitted brows. "Who are you?" he demanded. "An Englishman?" "It is of no consequence," was the colourless reply. "But it is of consequence," Lord Romsey insisted. "You have dared to
proclaim yourself an ambassador to me from a country with whom England
is at war. Even a discussion between us amounts almost to treason. On
second thoughts I decline to receive you." He held out his hand towards the electric bell which stood on his study
table. His visitor shook his head. "I wouldn't adopt that attitude, if I were you," he said calmly. "You
know why. If you are really curious about my nationality, there is no
harm in telling you that I am an American citizen, that I have held for
three years the post of American chaplain at Brussels. Better let me say
what I have come to say." Lord Romsey hesitated. His natural propensity for temporising asserted
itself and his finger left the bell. The other continued. "You are in the unfortunate position, Lord Romsey, of having failed
absolutely in your duty towards your own country, and having grossly and
traitorously deceived a personage who has always treated you with the
greatest kindness. I am here to see if it is possible for you to make
some amends." "I deny every word you say," the Minister declared passionately, "and I
refuse to hear your proposition." Mr Sidney's manner suddenly changed. He leaned forward in his chair. "Do not be foolish," he advised. "Your last letter to a certain
personage was dated June second. I have a copy of it with me. Shall I
read it to you, word by word?" "Thank you, I remember enough of it," Lord Romsey groaned. "You will listen, then to what I have to say," the envoy proceeded, "or
that letter will be published in the Times to-morrow morning. You know
what that will mean--your political ruin, your everlasting disgrace. What use will this country, blinded at the present moment by prejudice,
have for a statesman, who without authority, pledged his Government to
an alliance with Germany, who over his own signature--"

"Stop!" Lord Romsey interrupted. "There is no purpose in this. What is
it you want?" "Your influence in the Cabinet. You are responsible for this war. It is
for you to end it." "Rubbish!" the other exclaimed hoarsely. "You are attempting to
saddle me with a responsibility like this, simply because my personal
sympathies have always been on the side of the country you are
representing." "It is not a question of your personal sympathies," Mr. Sidney returned
swiftly. "In black and white you pledged your Government to abstain from
war against Germany." "How could I tell," the statesman protested, "that Germany was thinking
of tearing up treaties, of entering into a campaign of sheer and
scandalous aggression?" "You made no stipulations or conditions in what you wrote," was the calm
reply. "You pledged your word that your Government would never declare
war against Germany. You alluded to the French entente as an unnatural
one. You spoke eloquently of the kinship of spirit between England and
Germany." Lord Romsey moved uneasily in his chair. He had expected to find this an
unpleasant interview and he was certainly not being disappointed. "Well, I was mistaken," he admitted. "What I said was true enough. I
never did believe that the Government with which I was associated would
declare war against Germany. Even now, let me tell you that there isn't
a soul breathing who knows how close the real issue was. If your people
had only chosen any other line of advance!" "I have not come here to recriminate," Mr. Sidney declared. "That is
not my mission. I am here to state our terms for refraining from sending
your letters--your personal letters to the Kaiser--to the English
Press." Lord Romsey sprang to his feet. "Good God, man! Do you know what you are saying?" he exclaimed. "Perfectly," the other replied. "I told you that my errand was a serious
one. Shall I proceed?" The Minister slowly resumed his seat. From behind the electric lamp his
face was ghastly white. In that brief pause which followed he seemed
to be looking through the walls of the room into an ugly chapter of his
future. He saw the headlines in the newspapers, the leading articles,
the culmination of all the gossip and mutterings of the last few months,
the end of his political career--a disgraceful and ignoble end! Surely
no man had ever been placed in so painful a predicament. It was treason
to parley. It was disgraceful to send this man away. "Germany wants peace," his visitor continued calmly. "She may not have
accomplished all she wished to have accomplished by this war, and she
is still as strong as ever from a military point of view, but she wants
peace. I need say no more than that." Lord Romsey shook his head. "Even if I had the influence, which I haven't," he began, "it isn't a
matter of the Government at all. The country would never stand it." "Then you had better convert the country," was the prompt reply. "Look
upon it as your duty. Remember this--you are the man in all this world,
and not the Kaiser, who is responsible for this war. But for your solemn
words pledging your country to neutrality, Germany would never have
forced the issue as she has done. Now it is for you to repair the evil. I tell you that we want peace. The first overtures may come ostensibly
through Washington, if you will, but they must come in reality from
you." The Minister leaned back in his chair. His was the calmness of despair. "You might as well ask me," he said simply, "to order our Fleet out of
the North Sea." Mr. Sidney rose to his feet. "I think," he advised, "that you had better try what you can do, Lord
Romsey. We shall give you little time. We may even extend it, if we find
traces of your influence. You have two colleagues, at least, who are
pacifists at heart. Take them on one side, talk in a whisper at first. Plant just a little seed but be careful that it grows. We do not expect
impossibilities, only--remember what failure will mean to you." Lord Romsey looked steadfastly at his visitor. Mr. Sidney was tall and
spare, and there was certainly nothing of the Teuton or the American
in his appearance or accent. His voice was characterless, his restraint
almost unnatural. Relieved of his more immediate fears, the Minister was
conscious of a renewed instinct of strong curiosity. "How can I communicate with you, Mr.--Sidney?" he asked. "In no way," the other replied. "When I think it advisable I shall come
to see you again." "Are you an American or a German or an Englishman?" "I am whichever I choose for the moment," was the cool response. "If you
doubt my credentials, I can perhaps establish myself in your confidence
by repeating the conversation which took place between you and the
Kaiser on the terrace of the Imperial Palace at Potsdam between three
and four o'clock on the afternoon of April the seventh. You gave the
Kaiser a little character sketch of your colleagues in the Cabinet, and
you treated with ridicule the bare idea that one or two of them, at any
rate, would ever consent--"

"That will do," the Minister interrupted hoarsely. "Just as you will," the other observed. "I wish you good-day, sir. The
issue is before you now quite plainly. Let us soon be able to appreciate
the effect of your changed attitude." Lord Romsey touched his bell in silence and his visitor took a grave and
decorous leave. He walked with the secretary down the hall. "These are sad days for all of us," he said benignly. "I have been
telling Lord Romsey of some of my experiences in Brussels. I was
American chaplain at the new church there when the war broke out. I have
seen sights which I shall never forget, horrors the memory of which will
never leave me." The secretary nodded sympathetically. He was trying to get off early,
however, and he had heard a good deal already about Belgium. "Will you let one of the servants fetch you a taxicab?" he suggested. "I prefer to walk a little distance," Mr. Sidney replied. "I am quite
at home in London. I was once, in fact, invited to take up a pastorate
here. I wish you good-day, sir. I have had a most interesting
conversation with your chief, a conversation which will dwell for a long
time in my memory." The secretary bowed and Mr. Sidney walked slowly to the corner of the
Square. Arrived there, he hailed a passing taxicab which drew up at once
by the side of the kerb. In stepping in, he brushed the shoulder of a
man who had paused to light a cigarette. He lingered for a moment to
apologise. "I beg your pardon," he commenced--

For a single moment his self-possession seemed to desert him. He looked
into the cold, incurious face of the man in an officer's uniform who was
already moving away, as though he had seen a ghost. His hesitation was a
matter of seconds only, however. "It was very clumsy of me," he concluded. Major Thomson touched his cap as he moved off. "Quite all right," he said serenely. CHAPTER VI

The room was a study in masculine luxury. The brown walls were hung
with a choice selection of sporting prints, varied here and there with
silverpoint etchings of beautiful women in various poses. There were
a good many photographs, mostly signed, above the mantelpiece; a cigar
cabinet, a case of sporting-rifles and shot guns, some fishing tackle, a
case of books, distributed appropriately about the apartment. There
were some warlike trophies displayed without ostentation, a handsome
writing-table on which stood a telephone. On a thick green rug stretched
in front of the fireplace, a fox terrier lay blinking at the wood fire. The room was empty and silent except for the slow ticking of an ancient
clock which stood underneath an emblazoned coat of arms in the far
corner. The end of a log broke off and fell hissing into the hearth. The fox terrier rose reluctantly to his feet, shook himself and stood
looking at the smoking fragment in an aggrieved manner. Satisfied that
no personal harm was intended to him, however, he presently curled
himself up once more. Again the apartment seemed to become the
embodiment of repose. The clock, after a hoarse wheezing warning, struck
seven. The dog opened one eye and looked up at it. A few minutes later,
the peace of the place was broken in a different fashion. There was the
sound of a key being hastily fitted into the lock of the outside door. The dog rose to his feet expectantly. The door which led into the
apartment was thrown open and hastily slammed to. A man, breathing
heavily, stood for a moment upon the threshold, his head stooped a
little as though listening. Then, without a glance, even, at the dog who
jumped to greet him, he crossed the room with swift, stealthy footsteps. Before he could reach the other side, however, the door which faced him
was opened. A man-servant looked inquiringly out. "My bath and clothes, Jarvis, like hell!" The man gilded away, his master following close behind. From somewhere
further inside the flat, the sound of water running into a bath was
heard. The door was closed, again there was silence. The fox terrier,
after a few moments' scratching at the door, resumed his place upon the
rug and curled himself up to renewed slumber. The next interruption was of a different nature. The sharp, insistent
summons of an electric bell from outside rang through the room. In a
moment or two the man-servant appeared from the inner apartment, crossed
the floor and presently reappeared, ushering in a visitor. "Captain Granet is changing for dinner at present, sir," he explained. "If you will take a seat, however, he will be out presently. What name
shall I say?" "Surgeon-Major Thomson." The servant wheeled an easy-chair up towards the fire and placed by its
side a small table on which were some illustrated papers. Then, with a
little bow, he disappeared through the inner door. Major Thomson, who
had been fingering the Sketch, laid it down the moment the door was
closed. He leaned forward, his face a little strained. He had the air of
listening intently. After a brief absence the man returned. "Captain Granet will be with you in a few moments, sir," he announced. "Please ask him not to hurry," Major Thomson begged. "Certainly, sir." The man withdrew and once more Thomson and the dog were alone. The latter, having made a few overtures of friendship which passed
unnoticed, resumed his slumbers. Major Thomson sat upright in his
easy-chair, an illustrated paper in his hand. All the time, however,
his eyes seemed to be searching the room. His sense of listening
was obviously quickened; he had the air, even, of thinking rapidly. Five--ten minutes passed. Then voices were heard from within and the
door was suddenly opened. Captain Granet emerged and crossed the room,
hobbling slightly towards his visitor. "Awfully sorry to keep you like this," he remarked pleasantly. "The fact
is I'd just got into my bath." "I ought to apologise," his visitor replied, "for calling at such a
time." "Glad to see you, anyway," the other declared, pausing at his
smoking-cabinet and bringing out some cigarettes. "Try one of these,
won't you?" "Not just now, thanks." There was a moment's pause. Major Thomson seemed in no hurry to explain
himself. "Jolly luncheon party, wasn't it?" Granet remarked, lighting a cigarette
for himself with some difficulty. "What an idiot it makes a fellow feel
to be strapped up like this!" "From what one reads of the fighting around Ypres," the other replied,
"you were lucky to get out of it so well. Let me explain, if I may, why
I have paid you this rather untimely call." Captain Granet nodded amiably. He had made himself comfortable in an
easy-chair and was playing with the dog, who had jumped on to his knee. "I had some conversation on Thursday last," Major Thomson began, "with
the Provost-Marshal of Boulogne. As you, of course, know, we have
suffered a great deal, especially around Ypres, from the marvellous
success of the German Intelligence Department. The Provost-Marshal,
who is a friend of mine, told me that there was a special warning out
against a person purporting to be an American chaplain who had escaped
from Belgium. You don't happen to have heard of him, I suppose, do you?" Captain Granet looked doubtful. "Can't remember that I have," he replied. "They've been awfully clever,
those fellows, though. The last few nights before our little scrap they
knew exactly what time our relief parties came along. Several times we
changed the hour. No use! They were on to us just the same." Major Thompson nodded. "Well," he continued, "I happened to catch sight of a man who exactly
resembled the photograph which my friend the Provost-Marshal showed
me, only a few minutes ago, and although I could not be sure of it, I
fancied that he entered this building. It occurred to me that he might
be paying a call upon you." "Upon me?" he repeated. "He is an exceedingly plausible fellow," Thomson explained, "and as
you are just back from the Front, and brought dispatches, he might very
possibly regard you as a likely victim." "Can't make bricks without straw," Granet laughed, "and I know no
more about the campaign than my two eyes have seen. I was saying only
yesterday that, unless you have a staff billet, it's wonderful how
little the ordinary soldier picks up as to what is going on. As a matter
of fact, though," he went on, twisting the fox terrier's ear a little,
"no one has called here at all except yourself, during the last hour or
two. There aren't many of my pals know I'm back yet." "Are there many other people living in the building?" Major Thomson
asked. "The ground-floor here," the other replied, "belongs to a prosperous
cigarette manufacturer who lives himself upon the first floor. This is
the second and above us are nothing but the servants' quarters. I should
think," he concluded thoughtfully, "that you must have been mistaken
about the fellow turning in here at all." Thomson nodded. "Very likely," he admitted. "It was just a chance, any way." "By-the-bye," Granet inquired curiously, looking up from the dog, "how
did you know that I roomed here?" "I happened to see you come in, or was it go out, the other day--I can't
remember which," Major Thomson replied. The telephone upon the table tinkled out a summons. Granet crossed the
room and held the receiver to his ear. "This is Captain Granet speaking," he said. "Who are you, please?" The reply seemed to surprise him. He glanced across at his visitor. "I shall be delighted," he answered into the instrument. "It is really
very kind of you.... About a quarter past eight?... Certainly! You'll
excuse my not being able to get into mufti, won't you?... Ever so many
thanks.... Good-bye!" He laid down the receiver and turned to Thomson. "Rather a coincidence," he observed. "Seems I am going to see you
to-night at dinner. That was Miss Geraldine Conyers who just rang
up--asked me if I'd like to meet her brother again before he goes off. He is spending the afternoon at the Admiralty and she thought I might be
interested." Major Thomson's face was expressionless and his murmured word
non-committal. Granet had approached the dark mahogany sideboard and was
fingering some bottles. "Let me mix you a cocktail," he suggested. "By Jove! That fellow Conyers
would be the fellow for your American chaplain to get hold of. If he is
spending the afternoon down at the Admiralty, he'll have all the latest
tips about how they mean to deal with the submarines. I hear there are
at least three or four new inventions which they are keeping dark. You
like yours dry, I suppose?" Thomson had risen to his feet and leaned forward towards the mirror for
a moment to straighten his tie. When he turned around, he glanced at the
collection of bottles Granet had been handling. "I am really very sorry," he said. "I did not mean to put you to this
trouble. I never drink cocktails." Granet paused in shaking the silver receptacle, and laid it down. "Have a whisky and soda instead?" Thomson shook his head. "If you will excuse me," he said, "I will drink your health at
dinner-time. I have no doubt that your cocktails are excellent but I
never seem to have acquired the habit. What do you put in them?" "Oh! just both sorts of vermouth and gin, and a dash of something to
give it a flavour," Granet explained carelessly. Thomson touched a small black bottle, smelt it and put it down. "What's that?" he asked. "A mixture of absinth and some West Indian bitters," Granet replied. "A chap who often goes to the States brought it back for me. Gives a
cocktail the real Yankee twang, he says." Thomson nodded slowly. "Rather a curious odour," he remarked. "We shall meet again, then,
Captain Granet." They walked towards the door. Granet held it open, leaning upon his
stick. "Many times, I trust," he observed politely. There was a second's pause. His right hand was half extended but his
departing guest seemed not to notice the fact. He merely nodded and put
on his hat. "It is a small world," he said, "especially, although it sounds
paradoxical, in the big places." He passed out. Granet listened to the sound of his retreating footsteps
with a frown upon his forehead. Then he came back and stood for a moment
upon the rug in front of the fire, deep in thought. The fox terrier
played unnoticed about his feet. His face seemed suddenly to have become
older and more thoughtful. He glanced at the card which Thomson had left
upon the sideboard. "Surgeon-Major Thomson," he repeated quietly to himself. "I wonder!" Thomson walked slowly to the end of Sackville Street, crossed the road
and made his way to the Ritz Hotel. He addressed himself to the head
clerk of the reception counter. "I am Surgeon-Major Thomson," he announced. "I was lunching here to-day and attended one of the waiters who was
taken ill afterwards. I should be very glad to know if I can see him for
a few moments." The man bowed politely. "I remember you quite well, sir," he said. "A Belgian waiter, was it
not? He has been taken away by a lady this afternoon." "Taken away?" Thomson repeated, puzzled. "The lady who was giving the luncheon--Lady Anselman--called and saw
the manager about an hour ago," the man explained. "She has interested
herself very much in the matter of Belgian refugees and is entertaining
a great many of them at a house of hers near the seaside. The man is
really not fit to work, so we were very glad indeed to pass him on to
her." "He recovered consciousness before he was removed, I suppose?" Thomson
inquired. "I believe so, sir. He seemed very weak and ill, though. In fact he had
to be carried to the automobile." "I suppose he didn't give any reason for his sudden attack?" "None that I am aware of, sir." Thomson stood for a moment deep in thought, then he turned away from the
desk. "Thank you very much indeed," he said to the clerk. "The man's case
rather interested me. I think I shall ask Lady Anselman to allow me to
visit him. Where did you say the house was?" "Her ladyship did not mention the exact locality," the man replied. "I
believe, however, that it is near the Isle of Wight." "A most suitable neighbourhood," Major Thomson murmured, as he turned
away from the hotel. CHAPTER VII

"I wonder why you don't like Captain Granet?" Geraldine asked her
fiance, as they stood in the drawing-room waiting for dinner. "Not like him?" Thomson repeated. "Have I really given you that
impression, Geraldine?" The girl nodded. "Perhaps I ought not to say that, though," she confessed. "You are never
particularly enthusiastic about people, are you?" One of his rare smiles transfigured his face. He leaned a little towards
her. "Not about many people, Geraldine," he whispered. She made a charming little grimace but a moment afterwards she was
serious again. "But really," she continued, "to me Captain Granet seems just the type
of young Englishman who is going to save the country. He is a keen
soldier, clever, modest, and a wonderful sportsman. I can't think what
there is about him for any one to dislike." Major Thomson glanced across the room. In a way, he and the man whom he
felt instinctively was in some sense of the word his rival, even though
an undeclared one, were of exactly opposite types. Granet was the
centre of a little group of people who all seemed to be hanging upon his
conversation. He was full of high spirits and humour, debonair, with all
the obvious claims to popularity. Thomson, on the other hand, although
good-looking, even distinguished in his way, was almost too slim and
pale. His face was more the face of a scholar than of one interested
in or anxious to shine in the social side of life. His manners and his
speech were alike reserved, his air of breeding was apparent, but he had
not the natural ease or charm which was making Granet, even in those few
minutes, persona grata with Geraldine's mother and a little circle of
newly-arrived guests. "At least I appreciate your point of view," Major Thomson admitted, with
a faint sigh. "Don't be such a dear old stick," Geraldine laughed. "I want you to like
him because I find him so interesting. You see, as he gets to know one a
little better he doesn't seem to mind talking about the war. You others
will scarcely say a word of what you have seen or of what is being done
out there. I like to be told things by people who have actually seen
them. He happened to be ten minutes early this evening and he gave me a
most fascinating description of some skirmishing near La Bassee." "You must remember," Thomson told her, "that personally I do not, in an
ordinary way, see a great deal of fighting until the whole show is
over. It may be a fine enough panorama when an attack is actually taking
place, but there is nothing very inspiring in the modern battlefield
when the living have passed away from it." Geraldine shivered for a moment. "Really, I almost wish that you were a soldier, too," she declared. "Your work seems to me so horribly gruesome. Come along, you know you
are going to take me to dinner. Think of something nice to say. I really
want to be amused." "I will make a suggestion, then," he remarked as they took their places. "I don't know whether you will find it amusing, though. Why shouldn't we
do like so many of our friends, and get married?" She stared at him for a moment. Then she laughed heartily. "Hugh," she exclaimed, "I can see through you! You've suddenly realised
that this is your chance to escape a ceremony and a reception, and all
that sort of thing. I call it a most cowardly suggestion." "It rather appeals to me," he persisted. "It may be," he added, dropping
his voice a little, "because you are looking particularly charming this
evening, or it may be--"

She looked at him curiously. "Go on, please," she murmured. "Or it may be," he repeated, "a man's desire to be absolutely sure of
the thing he wants more than anything else in the world." There was a moment's silence. As though by some curious instinct which
they both shared, they glanced across the table to where Granet had
become the centre of a little babble of animated conversation. Geraldine
averted her eyes almost at once, and looked down at her plate. There was
a shade of uneasiness in her manner. "You sounds very serious, Hugh," she observed. "That is rather a failing of mine, isn't it?" he replied. "At any rate,
I am very much in earnest." There was another brief silence, during which Geraldine was addressed by
her neighbour on the other side. Thomson, who was watching her closely,
fancied that she accepted almost eagerly the opportunity of diversion. It was not until dinner was almost over that she abandoned a conversion
into which she had thrown herself with spirit. "My little suggestion," Thomson reminded her, "remains unanswered." She looked down at her plate. "I don't think you are really in earnest," she said. "Am I usually a farceur?" he replied. "I think that my tendencies are
rather the other way. I really mean it, Geraldine. Shall we talk about
it later on this evening?" "If you like," she agreed simply, "but somehow I believe that I would
rather wait. Look at mother's eye, roving around the table. Give me my
gloves, please, Hugh. Don't be long." Thomson moved his chair next to his host's Geraldine's father, Admiral
Sir Seymour Conyers, was a very garrulous old gentleman with fixed ideas
about everything, a little deaf and exceedingly fond of conversation. He proceeded to give his prospective son-in-law a detailed lecture
concerning the mismanagement of the field hospitals at the front, and
having disposed of that subject, he opened a broadside attack upon
the Admiralty. The rest of the men showed indications of breaking into
little groups. Ralph Conyers and Granet were sitting side by side,
engrossed in conversation. More than once Thomson glanced towards them. "Wish I understood more about naval affairs," Granet sighed. "I'm a
perfect ass at any one's job but my own. I can't see how you can deal
with submarines at all. The beggars can stay under the water as long as
they like, they just pop up and show their heads, and if they don't like
the look of anything near, down they go again. I don't see how you can
get at them, any way." The young sailor smiled in a somewhat superior manner. "We've a few ideas left still which the Germans haven't mopped up," he
declared. "Personally," the Admiral observed, joining in the conversation, "I
consider the submarine danger the greatest to which this country has
yet been exposed. No one but a nation of pirates, of ferocious and
conscienceless huns, could have inaugurated such a campaign." "Good for you, dad!" his son exclaimed. "They're a rotten lot of
beggars, of course, although some of them have behaved rather decently. There's one thing," he added, sipping his port, "there isn't a job in
the world I'd sooner take on than submarine hunting." "Every one to his taste," Granet remarked good-humouredly. "Give me
my own company at my back, my artillery well posted, my reserves in
position, the enemy not too strongly entrenched, and our dear old
Colonel's voice shouting 'At them, boys!' That's my idea of a scrap." There was a little murmur of sympathy. Ralph Conyers, however, his cigar
in the corner of his mouth, smiled imperturbably. "Sounds all right," he admitted, "but for sheer excitement give me a
misty morning, the bows of a forty-knot destroyer cutting the sea into
diamonds, decks cleared for action, and old Dick in oilskins on the
salute--'Enemy's submarine, sir, on the port bow, sir.'" "And what would you do then?" Granet asked. "See page seven Admiralty instructions this afternoon," the other
replied, smiling. "We're not taking it sitting down, I can tell you." The Admiral rose and pushed back his chair. "I think," he said, "if you are quite sure, all of you, that you will
take no more port, we should join the ladies." They trooped out of the room together. Thomson kept close behind Ralph
Conyers and Captain Granet, who were talking no more of submarines,
however, but of the last ballet at the Empire. Geraldine came towards
them as they entered the drawing-room. "Hugh," she begged, passing her arm through his, "would you mind playing
bridge? The Mulliners are going on, and mother does miss her rubber so. And we can talk afterwards, if you like," she added. Thomson glanced across the room to where Granet was chatting with some
other guests. Young Conyers for the moment was nowhere to be seen. "I'll play, with pleasure, Geraldine," he assented, "but I want to have
a word with Ralph first." "He's at the telephone," she said. "The Admiralty rang up about
something and he is talking to them. I'll tell him, if you like, when he
comes up." "If you'll do that," Thomson promised, "I won't keep him a minute." The little party settled down to their game--Lady Conyers, Sir Charles
Hankins,--a celebrated lawyer,--another man and Thomson. Geraldine, with
Olive Moreton and Captain Granet, found a sofa in a remote corner of the
room and the trio were apparently talking nonsense with great success. Presently Ralph reappeared and joined them. "Hugh wants to speak to you," Geraldine told him. Ralph glanced at the little bridge-table and made a grimace. "Hugh can wait," he declared, as he passed his arm through Olive's. "This is my last night on shore for heaven knows how long and I am going
to take Olive off to see my photographs of the _Scorpion._ Old Wilcock
handed them to me out of his drawer this afternoon." The two young people disappeared. Captain Granet and Geraldine remained
upon the couch, talking in low voices. Once Thomson, when he was dummy,
crossed the room and approached them. Their conversation was suddenly
suspended. "I told Ralph," Geraldine said, looking up, "that you wanted to speak
to him, but he and Olive have gone off somewhere. By-the-bye, Hugh,"
she went on curiously, "you didn't tell me that you'd called on Captain
Granet this evening." "Well, it wasn't a matter of vital importance, was it?" he answered,
smiling. "My call, in any case, arose from an accident." "Major Thomson," came a voice from the other side of the room, "it is
your deal." Thomson returned obediently to the bridge-table. The rubber was over a
few minutes later and the little party broke up. Thomson glanced around
but the room was empty. 