



Produced by Suzanne Shell, Graeme Mackreth and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. THE KEEPER OF THE DOOR


By ETHEL M. DELL


AUTHOR OF "The Way of an Eagle," "The Knave of Diamonds," "The Rocks of
Valpre," Etc. A.L. BURT COMPANY

Publishers New York

Published by Arrangements with G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS, 1915

BY

ETHEL M. DELL


Fourth Impression


BY ETHEL M. DELL

   The Way of an Eagle
   The Knave of Diamonds
   The Rocks of Valpre
   The Swindler
   The Keeper of the Door
   Bars of Iron
   Rosa Mundi
   The Obstacle Race
   Tetherstones
   The Passerby and Other Stories
   The Hundredth Chance
   The Safety Curtain
   Greatheart
   The Lamp in the Desert
   The Tidal Wave
   The Top of the World
   The Odds and Other Stories
   Charles Rex
   The Unknown Quantity
   A Man Under Authority


This edition is issued under arrangement with the publishers G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS, NEW YORK AND LONDON


The Knickerbocker Press, New York Made in the United States of America




I DEDICATE THIS BOOK TO THE DEAR MEMORY OF ONE WHO WAITS BEYOND THE
DOOR FOR THOSE HE LOVES

"And the keepers before the door kept the prison." _Acts xii. 6._


   "A deep below the deep
       And a height beyond the height! Our hearing is not hearing,
       And our seeing is not sight." _The Voice and the Peak._

ALFRED TENNYSON. CONTENTS

   _PART ONE_

   CHAPTER                                         PAGE

   I. THE LESSON                                    1

   II. THE ALLY                                    16

   III. THE OBSTACLE                               27

   IV. THE SETTING OF THE WATCH                    37

   V. THE CHAPERON                                 47

   VI. THE PAIN-KILLER                             62

   VII. THE PUZZLE                                 74

   VIII. THE ELASTIC BOND                          86

   IX. THE PROJECT                                 97

   X. THE DOOR                                    108

   XI. THE IMPOSSIBLE                             120

   XII. THE PAL                                   129

   XIII. HER FATE                                 149

   XIV. THE DARK HOUR                             155

   XV. THE AWAKENING                              167

   XVI. SECRETS                                   177

   XVII. THE VERDICT                              189

   XVIII. SOMETHING LOST                          198

   XIX. THE REVELATION                            205

   XX. THE SEARCH                                 217

   XXI. ON THE BRINK                              228

   XXII. OVER THE EDGE                            235

   XXIII. AS GOOD AS DEAD                         243

   XXIV. THE OPENING OF THE DOOR                  252

   XXV. THE PRICE                                 264


   _PART TWO_

   I. COURTSHIP                                   281

   II. THE SELF-INVITED GUEST                     287

   III. THE NEW LIFE                              297

   IV. THE PHANTOM                                305

   V. THE EVERLASTING CHAIN                       317

   VI. CHRISTMAS MORNING                          327

   VII. THE WILDERNESS OF NASTY POSSIBILITIES     340

   VIII. THE SOUL OF A HERO                       350

   IX. THE MAN WITH THE GUN                       357

   X. A TALK IN THE OPEN                          367

   XI. THE FAITHFUL WOUND OF A FRIEND             376

   XII. A LETTER FROM AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE         390

   XIII. A WOMAN'S PREJUDICE                      403

   XIV. SMOKE FROM THE FIRE                       414

   XV. THE SPREADING OF THE FLAME                 426

   XVI. THE GAP                                   437

   XVII. THE EASIEST COURSE                       452

   XVIII. ONE MAN'S LOSS                          462

   XIX. A FIGHT WITHOUT A FINISH                  472

   XX. THE POWER OF THE ENEMY                     487

   XXI. THE GATHERING STORM                       503

   XXII. THE REPRIEVE                             510

   XXIII. THE GIFT OF THE RAJAH                   518

   XXIV. THE BIG, BIG GAME OF LIFE                528

   XXV. MEMORIES THAT HURT                        537

   XXVI. A FOOL'S ERRAND                          548

   XXVII. LOVE MAKES ALL THE DIFFERENCE           556

   XXVIII. A SOLDIER AND A GENTLEMAN              570

   XXIX. THE MAN'S POINT OF VIEW                  578

   XXX. THE LINE OF RETREAT                       588




PART I

CHAPTER I

THE LESSON


"Then he's such a prig!" said Olga. "You should never use a word you can't define," observed Nick, from the
depths of the hammock in which his meagre person reposed at length. She made a face at him, and gave the hammock a vicious twitch which
caused him to rock with some violence for several seconds. As he was
wont pathetically to remark, everyone bullied him because he was small
and possessed only one arm, having shed the other by inadvertence
somewhere on the borders of the Indian Empire. Certainly Olga--his half-brother's eldest child--treated him with scant
respect, though she never allowed anyone else to be other than polite to
him in her hearing. But then she and Nick had been pals from the
beginning of things, and this surely entitled her to a certain licence
in her dealings with him. Nick, too, was such a darling; he never minded
anything. Having duly punished him for snubbing her, she returned with serenity to
the work upon her lap. "You see," she remarked thoughtfully, "the worst of it is he really is
a bit of a genius. And one can't sit on genius--with comfort. It sort of
flames out where you least expect it." "Highly unpleasant, I should think," agreed Nick. "Yes; and he has such a disgusting fashion of behaving as if--as if one
were miles beneath his notice," proceeded Olga. "And I'm not a chicken,
you know, Nick, I'm twenty." "A vast age!" said Nick. For which remark she gave him another jerk which set him swinging like a
pendulum. "Well, I've got a little sense anyhow," she remarked. "But not much," said Nick. "Or you would know that that sort of
treatment after muffins for tea is calculated to produce indigestion in
a very acute form, peculiarly distressing to the beholder." "Oh, I'm sorry! I forgot the muffins." Olga laid a restraining hand upon
the hammock. "But do you like him, Nick? Honestly now!" "My dear child, I never like anyone till I've seen him at his worst. Drawing-room manners never attract me." "But this man hasn't got any manners at all," objected Olga. "And he's
so horribly satirical. It's like having a stinging-nettle in the house. I believe--just because he's clever in his own line--that he's been
spoilt. As if everybody couldn't do something!" "Ah! That's the point," said Nick sententiously. "Everybody can, but it
isn't everybody who does. Now this young man apparently knows how to
make the most of his opportunities. He plays a rattling hand at bridge,
by the way." "I wonder if he cheats," said Olga. "I'm sure he's quite unscrupulous." Nick turned his head, and surveyed her from under his restless eyelids. "I begin to think you must be falling in love with the young man," he
observed. "Don't be absurd, Nick!" Olga did not even trouble to look up. She was
stitching with neat rapidity. "I'm not. That's just how my wife fell in love with me. I assure you it
often begins that way." Nick shook his head wisely. "I should take steps
to be nice to him if I were you, before the mischief spreads." Olga tossed her head. She was slightly flushed. "I shall never make a
fool of myself over any man, Nick," she said. "I'm quite determined on
that point." "Dear, dear!" said Nick. "How old did you say you were?" "I am woman enough to know my own mind," said Olga. "Heaven forbid!" said Nick. "You wouldn't be a woman at all if you did
that." "I don't think you are a good judge on that subject, Nick," remarked his
niece judiciously. "In fact, even Dr. Wyndham knows better than that. I
assure you the antipathy is quite mutual. He regards everyone who isn't
desperately ill as superfluous and uninteresting. He was absolutely
disappointed the other day because, when I slipped on the stairs, I
didn't break any bones." "What a fiend!" said Nick. "And yet Dad likes him," said Olga. "I can't understand it. The poor
people like him too in a way. Isn't it odd? They seem to have such faith
in him." "I believe Jim has faith in him," remarked Nick. "He wouldn't turn him
loose on his patients if he hadn't." "Of course, Sir Kersley Whitton recommended him," conceded Olga. "And he
is an absolutely wonderful man, Dad says. He calls him the greatest
medicine-man in England. He took up Max Wyndham years ago, when he was
only a medical student. And he has been like a father to him ever
since. In fact, I don't believe Dr. Wyndham would ever have come here if
Sir Kersley hadn't made him. He was overworked and wouldn't take a rest,
so Sir Kersley literally forced him to come and be Dad's assistant for a
while. He told Dad that he was too brilliant a man to stay long in the
country, and Dad gathered that he contemplated making him his own
partner in the course of time. The sooner the better, I should say. He
obviously thinks himself quite thrown away on the likes of us." "Altogether he seems to be a very interesting young man," said Nick. "I
must really cultivate his acquaintance. Is he going to be present
to-night?" "Oh, I suppose so. It's a great drawback having him living in the house. You see, being his hostess, I have to be more or less civil to him. It's
very horrid," said Olga, upon whom, in consequence of her mother's death
three years before, the duties of housekeeper had devolved. "And Dad is
so fearfully strict too. He won't let me be the least little bit rude,
though he is often quite rude himself. You know Dad." "I know him," said Nick. "He's licked me many a time, bless his heart,
and richly I deserved it. Help me to get out of this like a good kid! I
see James the Second and the twins awaiting me on the tennis-court. I
promised them a sett after tea." He rolled on to his feet with careless agility, his one arm encircling
his young niece's shoulders. "I shouldn't worry if I were you," protested Olga. "It's much too hot. Don't waste your energies amusing the children! They can quite well play
about by themselves." "And get up to mischief," said Nick. "No, I'm on the job, overlooking
the whole crowd of you, and I'll do it thoroughly. When old Jim comes
home he'll find a model household awaiting him. By the way, I had a
letter from him this afternoon. The kiddie is stronger already, and
Muriel as happy as a queen. I shall hear from her to-morrow." "Don't you wish you were with them?" questioned Olga. "It would be much
more fun than staying here to chaperone me." Nick looked quizzical. "Oh, there's plenty of fun to be had out of that
too," he assured her. "I take a lively interest in you, my child; always
have." "You're a darling," said Olga, raising her face impulsively. "I shall
write and tell Dad what care you are taking of us all." She kissed him warmly and let him go, smiling at the tuneless humming
that accompanied his departure. Who at a casual glance would have taken
Nick Ratcliffe for one of the keenest politicians of his party, a man
whom friend and foe alike regarded as too brilliant to be ignored? He
had even been jestingly described as "that doughty champion of the
British Empire"--an epithet that Olga cherished jealously because it had
not been bestowed wholly in jest. His general appearance was certainly the reverse of imposing, and in
this particular, to her intense gratification, Olga resembled him. She
had the same quick, pale eyes, with the shrewdness of observation that
never needed to look twice, the same colourless brows and lashes and
insignificant features; but she possessed one redeeming point which Nick
lacked. What with him was an impish grin of sheer exuberance, with her
was a smile of rare enchantment, very fleeting, with a fascination quite
indescribable but none the less capable of imparting to her pale young
face a charm that only the greatest artists have ever been able to
depict. People were apt to say of Olga Ratcliffe that she had a face
that lighted up well. Her ready intelligence was ardent enough to
illuminate her. No one was ever dull in her society. Certainly in her
temperament at least there was nothing colorless. Where she loved she
loved intensely, and she hated in the same way, quite thoroughly and
without dissimulation. Maxwell Wyndham, for instance, the subject of her recent conversation
with Nick, she had disliked wholeheartedly from the commencement of
their acquaintance, and he was perfectly aware of the fact. He could not
well have been otherwise, but he was by no means disconcerted thereby. It even seemed as if he took a malicious pleasure in developing her
dislike upon every opportunity that presented itself, and since he was
living in the house as her father's assistant, opportunities were by no
means infrequent. But there was no open hostility between them. Under Dr. Ratcliffe's eye,
his daughter was always frigidly polite to the unwelcome outsider, and
the outsider accepted her courtesy with a sarcastic smile, knowing
exactly how much it was worth. Perhaps he was a little curious to know how she meant to treat him
during her father's absence, or it may have been sheer chance that
actuated him on that sultry evening in August, but Nick and his three
playfellows had only just settled down to a serious sett when the
doctor's assistant emerged from the house with his hands deep in his
pockets and a peculiarly evil-smelling cigarette between his firm lips,
and strolled across to the shady corner under the walnut-trees where the
doctor's daughter was sitting. She was stitching so busily that she did not observe his approach until
escape was out of the question; but she would not have retreated in any
case. It was characteristic of her to display a bold front to the people
she disliked. She threw him one of her quick glances as he reached her, and noted with
distaste the extreme fieriness of his red hair in the light of the
sinking sun. His hair had always been an offence to her. It was so
obtrusive. But she could have borne with that alone. It was the green
eyes that mocked at everything from under shaggy red brows that had
originally given rise to her very decided antipathy, and these Olga
found it impossible to condone. People had no right to mock, whatever
the colour of their eyes. He joined her as though wholly unaware of her glance of disparagement. "I fear I am spoiling a charming picture," he observed as he did so. "But since there was none but myself to admire it, I felt at liberty to
do so." Again momentarily Olga's eyes flashed upwards, comprehending the whole
of his thick-set figure in a single sweep of the eyelids. He was
exceedingly British in build, possessing in breadth what he lacked in
height. There was a bull-dog strength about his neck and shoulders that
imparted something of a fighting look to his general demeanour. He bore
himself with astounding self-assurance. "Have you had any tea?" Olga inquired somewhat curtly. She was inwardly
wondering what he had come for. He usually had a very definite reason
for all he did. "Many thanks," he replied, balancing himself on the edge of the hammock. "I am deeply touched by your solicitude for my welfare. I partook of tea
at the Campions' half an hour ago." "At the Campions'!" There was quick surprise in Olga's voice. It elicited no explanation however. He sat and swayed in the hammock as
though he had not noticed it. After a moment she turned and looked at him fully. The green eyes were
instantly upon her, alert and critical, holding that gleam of satirical
humour that she invariably found so exasperating. "Well?" said Olga at last. "Well, fair lady?" he responded, with bland serenity. She frowned. He was the only person in her world who ever made her take
the trouble to explain herself, and he did it upon every possible
occasion, with unvarying regularity. She hated him for it very
thoroughly, but she always had to yield. "Why did you go to the Campions'?" she asked, barely restraining her
irritation. "That, fair lady," he coolly responded, "is a question which with regret
I must decline to answer." Olga flushed. "How absurd!" she said quickly. "Dad would tell me like a
shot." "I am not Dad," said the doctor's assistant, with unruffled urbanity. "Moreover, fair lady--"

"I prefer to be called by my name if you have no objection, Dr.
Wyndham," cut in Olga, with rising wrath. He smiled at something over her head. "Thank you, Olga. It saves trouble
certainly. Would you like to call me by mine? Max is what I generally
answer to." Olga turned a vivid scarlet. "I am Miss Ratcliffe to you," she said. He accepted the rebuff with unimpaired equanimity. "I thought it must be
too good to be true. Pardon my presumption! When you are as old as I am
you will realize how little it really matters. You are genuinely angry,
I suppose? Not pretending?" Olga bit her lip in silence and returned to her work, conscious of
unsteady fingers, conscious also of a scrutiny that marked and derided
the fact. "Yes," he said, after a moment, "I should think your pulse must be about
a hundred. Leave off working for a minute and let it steady down!" Olga stitched on in spite of growing discomfiture. The shakiness was
increasing very perceptibly. She could feel herself becoming hotter
every moment. It was maddening to feel those ironical eyes noting and
ridiculing her agitation. From exasperation she had passed to something
very nearly resembling fury. "Leave off!" he said again; and then, because she would not, he laid a
detaining hand upon her work. Instantly and fiercely her needle stabbed downwards. It was done in a
moment, almost before she realized the nature of the impulse that
possessed her. Straight into the back of his hand the weapon drove, and
there from the sheer force of the impact broke off short. Olga exclaimed in horror, but Max Wyndham made no sound of any sort. The
cigarette remained between his lips, and not a muscle of his face moved. His hand with the broken needle in it was not withdrawn. It clenched
slowly, that was all. The blood welled up under Olga's dismayed eyes, and began to trickle
over the brown fist. She threw a frightened glance into his grim face. Her anger had wholly evaporated and she was keenly remorseful. But it
was no matter for an apology. The thing was beyond words. "And now," said Max Wyndham, coolly removing the ash from his cigarette,
"perhaps you will come to the surgery with me and get it out." "I?" stammered Olga, turning very white. "Even so, fair lady. It will be a little lesson for you--in surgery. I
hope the sight of blood doesn't make you feel green," said Max, with a
one-sided twitch of the lips that was scarcely a smile. He removed his hand to her relief, and stood up. Olga stood up too, but
she was trembling all over. "Oh, I can't! Indeed, I can't! Dr. Wyndham, please!" She glanced round
desperately. "There's Nick! Couldn't you ask him?" "Unfortunately this is a job that requires two hands," said Max. "Besides, you did the mischief, remember." Olga gasped and said no more. Meekly she laid her work on the chair by
the hammock and accompanied him to the house. It was the most painful
predicament she had ever been in. She knew that there was no escape for
her, knew, moreover, that she richly deserved her punishment; yet, as he
held open the surgery-door for her, she made one more appeal. "I'm sure I can't do it. I shall do more harm than good, and hurt you
horribly." "Oh, but you'll enjoy that," he said. "Indeed, I shan't!" Olga was almost in tears by this time. "Couldn't you
do it yourself with--with a forceps?" "Afraid not," said Max. He went to a cupboard and took out a bottle containing something which
he measured into a glass and filled up with water. "Fortify yourself with this," he said, handing it to her, "while I
select the instruments of torture." Olga shuddered visibly. "I don't want it. I only want to go." "Well, you can't go," he returned, "until you have extracted that bit of
needle of yours. So drink that, and be sensible!" He pulled out a drawer with the words, and she watched him, fascinated,
as he made his selection. He glanced up after a moment. "Olga, if you don't swallow that stuff soon, I shall be--annoyed with
you." She raised it at once to her lips, feeling as if she had no choice, and
drank with shuddering distaste. "I always have hated _sal volatile_," she said, as she finished the
draught. "You can't have everything you like in this world," returned Max
sententiously. "Come over here by the window! Now you are to do exactly
what I tell you. Understand? Put your own judgment in abeyance. Yes, I
know it's bleeding; but you needn't shudder like that. Give me your
hand!" She gave it, trembling. He held it firmly, looking straight into
her quivering face. "We won't proceed," he said, "until you have quite
recovered your self-control, or you may go and slit a large vein, which
would be awkward for us both. Just stand still and pull yourself
together." She found herself obliged to obey. The shrewd green eyes watched her
mercilessly, and under their unswerving regard her agitation gradually
died down. "That's better," he said at length, and released her hand. "Now see what
you can do." It seemed to Olga later that he took so keen an interest in the
operation as to be quite insensible of the pain it involved. She obeyed
his instructions herself with a set face and a quaking heart,
suppressing a sick shudder from time to time, finally achieving the
desired end with a face so ghastly that the victim of her efforts
laughed outright. "Whom are you most sorry for, yourself or me?" he wanted to know. "I
say, please don't faint till you have bandaged me up! I can't attend to
you properly if you do, and I shall probably spill blood over you and
make a beastly mess." Again his insistence carried the day. Olga bandaged the torn hand
without a murmur. "And now," said Dr. Max Wyndham, "tell me what you did it for!" She looked at him then with quick defiance. She had endured much in
silence, mainly because she had known that she had deserved it; but
there was a limit. She was not going to be brought to book as though she
had been a naughty child. "You had yourself alone to thank for it," she declared with indignation. "If--if you hadn't interfered and behaved intolerably, it wouldn't have
happened." "What a naive way of expressing it!" said Max. "Shall I tell you how I
regard the 'happening'?" "You can do as you like," she flung back. She was longing to go, but
stood her ground lest departure should look like flight. Max took out and lighted another cigarette before he spoke again. Then:
"I regard it," he said very deliberately, "as a piece of spiteful
mischief for which you deserve a sound whipping--which it would give me
immense pleasure to administer." Olga's pale face flamed scarlet. Her eyes flashed up to his in fiery
disdain. "You!" she said, with withering scorn. "You!" "Well, what about me?" Carelessly, his hands in his pockets, Max put the question. Quite
obviously he did not care in the smallest degree what answer she made. And so Olga, being stung to rage by his unbearable superiority, cast
scruples to the wind. "I'd do the same to you again--and worse," she declared vindictively,
"if I got the chance!" Max smiled at that superciliously, one corner of his mouth slightly
higher than the other. "Oh, no, you wouldn't," he said. "For one thing,
you wouldn't care to run the risk of having to sew me up again. And for
another, you wouldn't dare!" "Not dare! Do you think I am afraid of you?" Olga stood in a streak of sunlight that slanted through the wire blind
of the doctor's surgery and fell in chequers upon her white dress. Her
pale eyes fairly blazed. No one who had ever seen her thus would have
described her as colourless. She was as vivid in that moment as the
flare of the sunset; and into the eyes of the man who leaned against the
table coolly appraising her there came an odd little gleam of
satisfaction--the gleam that comes into the eyes of the treasure-hunter
at the first glint of gold. Olga came a step towards him. She saw the gleam and took it for
ridicule. The situation was intolerable. She would be mocked no longer. "Dr. Wyndham," she said, her voice pitched rather low, "do you call
yourself a gentleman?" "I really don't know," he answered. "It's a question I've never asked
myself." "Because," she said, speaking rather quickly, "I think you a cad." "Not really!" said Max, smiling openly. "Now I wonder why! Sit down,
won't you, and tell me?" The colour was fading from her face again. She had made a mistake in
thus assailing him, and already she knew it. He only laughed at her puny
efforts to hurt him, laughed and goaded her afresh. "Why am I not a gentleman?" he asked, and drew in a mouthful of smoke
which he puffed at the ceiling. "Because I said I should like to give
you a whipping? But you would like to tar and feather me, I gather. Isn't that even more barbarous?" He watched the smoke ascend, with eyes
screwed up, then, as she did not speak, looked down at her again. She no longer stood in the sunlight, and the passing of the splendour
seemed to have left her cold. She looked rather small and pinched--there
was even a hint of forlornness about her. But she had learned her
lesson. As he looked at her, she clenched her hands, drew a deep breath, and
spoke. "Dr. Wyndham, I beg your pardon for hurting you, and for being
rude to you. I can't help my thoughts, of course, but I was wrong to put
them into words. Please forget--all I've said!" "Oh, I say!" said Max, opening his eyes, "that's the cruellest thing
you've done yet. You've taken all the wind out of my sails, and left me
stranded. What is one expected to say to an apology of that sort? It's
outside my experience entirely." Olga had turned to the door, but at his words she paused, looking back. A glimmer of resentment still shone in her eyes. "If I were in your place," she said, "I should apologize too." "Oh, no, you wouldn't," said Max. "Not if you wished to achieve the
desired effect. You see, I've nothing to apologize for." "How like a man!" exclaimed Olga. "Yes, isn't it? Thanks for the compliment! Strange to say, I am much
more like a man than anything else under the sun. I say, are you really
going? Well, I forgive you for being naughty, if that's what you want. And I'm sorry I can't grovel to you, but I don't feel justified in so
doing, and it would be very bad for you in any case. By the
way--er--Miss Ratcliffe, I think you will be interested to learn that my
visit to the Campions was of a social and not of a professional
character. That was all you wanted to know, I think?" Olga, holding the door open, looked across at him with surprise that
turned almost instantly to half-scornful enlightenment. "Oh, that's it, is it?" she said. "That's it," said Max. "Quite sure you don't want to know anything
else?" Again he puffed the smoke upwards and watched it ascend. "Why on earth couldn't you have said so before?" said Olga. He turned at that and surveyed her quite seriously. "Oh, that was
entirely for your sake," he said. "For my sake!" said Olga. Sheer curiosity impelled her to remain and
probe this mystery. "Yes," said Max, with a sudden twinkle in his green eyes. "You know, it
isn't good for little girls to know too much." As the door banged upon her retreat, he leaned back, holding to the edge
of the table, and laughed with his chin in the air. Life in the country, notwithstanding its many drawbacks, was turning out
to be more diverting than he had anticipated. CHAPTER II

THE ALLY


"Ah, my dear, there you are! I was just wondering if I would come over
and see you." Violet Campion reined in her horse with a suddenness that made him chafe
indignantly, and leaned from the saddle to greet Olga, who had just
turned in at the Priory gates. Olga was bicycling. She sprang from her machine, and reached up an
impetuous hand, as regardless of the trampling animal as its rider. "Pluto is in a tiresome mood to-day," remarked his mistress. "I know he
won't be satisfied till he has had a good beating. Perhaps you will go
on up to the house while I give him a lesson." "Oh, don't beat him!" Olga pleaded. "He's only fresh." "No, he isn't. He's vicious. He snapped at me before I mounted. It's no
good postponing it. He'll have to have it." Violet spoke as if she were
discussing the mechanism of a machine. "You go on up the drive, my dear,
while I take him across the turf." But Olga lingered. "Violet, really--I know he will throw you or bolt
with you. I wish you wouldn't." Violet's laugh had a ring of scorn. "My dear child, if I were afraid of
that, I had better give up riding him altogether." "I wish you would," said Olga. "He is much too strong for a woman to
manage." Violet laughed again, this time with sheer amusement, and then, with
dark eyes that flashed in the sunlight, she slashed the animal's flank
with her riding-whip. He uttered a snort that was like an exclamation of
rage, and leaped clean off the ground. Striking it again, he reared, but
received a stinging cut over the ears that brought him down. Then
furiously he kicked and plunged, catching the whip all over his glossy
body, till with a furious squeal he flung himself forward and galloped
headlong away. Olga stood on the drive and watched with lips slightly compressed. She
knew that as an exhibition of skilled horsemanship the spectacle she had
just witnessed was faultless; but it gave her no pleasure, and there was
no admiration in the eyes that followed the distant galloping figure
with the merciless whip that continued active as long as she could see
it. As horse and rider passed from sight beyond a clump of trees, she
remounted her bicycle, and rode slowly towards the house. Old and grey and weather-stained, the walls of Brethaven Priory shone in
the hot sunlight. It had been built in Norman days a full mile and a
half inland; but more than the mile had disappeared in the course of the
crumbling centuries, and only a stretch of gleaming hillside now
intervened between it and the sea. The wash and roar of the Channel and
the crying of gulls swept over the grass-clad space as though already
claim had been laid to the old grey building that had weathered so many
gales. Undoubtedly the place was doomed. There was something eerily
tragic about it even on that shining August afternoon, a shadow
indefinable of which Olga had been conscious even in her childish days. She looked over her shoulder several times as she rode in the direction
in which her friend had disappeared, but she saw no sign of her. Finally, reaching the house, she went round to a shed at the back, in
which she was accustomed to lodge her bicycle. Here she was joined by an immense Irish wolf-hound, who came from the
region of the stables to greet her. She stopped to fondle him. She and Cork were old friends. As she finally
returned to the carriage-drive in front of the house, he accompanied
her. The front door stood open, and she went in through its Gothic archway,
glad to escape from the glare outside. The great hall she thus entered
had been the chapel in the days of the monks, and it had the clammy
atmosphere of a vault. Passing in from the brilliant sunshine, Olga felt
actually cold. It was dark also, the only light, besides that from the open door,
proceeding from a stained-glass window at the farther end--a gruesome
window representing in vivid colours the death of St. John the Baptist. A carved oak chest, long and low, stood just within, and upon this the
girl seated herself, with the great dog close beside her. Her ten-mile
bicycle ride in the heat had tired her. There was no sound in the house save the ticking of an invisible clock. It might have been a place bewitched, so intense and so uncanny was the
silence, broken only by that grim ticking that sounded somehow as if it
had gone on exactly the same for untold ages. "What a ghostly old place it is, Cork!" Olga remarked to her companion. "And you actually spend the night here! I can't think how you dare." In response to which Cork smiled with a touch of superiority and gave
her to understand that he was too sensible to be afraid of shadows. They were still sitting there conversing, with their faces to the
sunlit garden, when there came the sound of a careless footfall and
Violet Campion, her riding-whip dangling from her wrist, strolled round
the corner of the house, and in at the open door. She was laughing as she came, evidently at some joke that clung to her
memory. "Look at me!" she said. "I'm all foam. But I've conquered his majesty
King Devil for once. He's come back positively abject. My dear, do get
up! You're sitting on my coffin!" Olga got up quickly. "Violet, what extraordinary things you think of!" The other girl laughed again, and stooping raised the oaken lid. "It's
not in the least extraordinary. Look inside, and picture to yourself how
comfy I shall be! You can come and see me if you like, and spread
flowers--red ones, mind. I like plenty of colour." She dropped the lid again carelessly, and took a gold cigarette-case
from her pocket. The sunlight shone generously upon her at that moment,
and Olga Ratcliffe told herself for the hundredth time that this friend
of hers was the loveliest girl she had ever seen. Certainly her beauty
was superb, of the Spanish-Irish type that is world-famous,--black hair
that clustered in soft ringlets about the forehead, black brows very
straight and delicate, skin of olive and rose, features so exquisite as
to make one marvel, long-lashed eyes that were neither black nor grey,
but truest, deepest violet. "Don't look at me like that!" she said, with gay imperiousness. "You
pale-eyed folk have a horrible knack of making one feel as if one is
under a microscope. Your worthy uncle is just the same. If I weren't so
deeply in love with him, I might resent it. But Nick is a privileged
person, isn't he, wherever he goes? Didn't someone once say of him that
he rushes in where angels fear to tread? It's rather an apt
description. How is he, by the way? And why didn't you bring him too?" She stood on the step, with the sunlight pouring over her, and daintily
smoked her cigarette. Olga came and stood beside her. They formed a
wonderful contrast--a contrast that might have seemed cruel but for the
keen intelligence that gave such vitality to the face of the doctor's
daughter. "Oh, Nick is playing cricket with the boys," she said. "He is
wonderfully good, you know, and takes immense care of us all." "A positive paragon, my dear! Don't I know it? A pity he saw fit to
throw himself away upon that very lethargic young woman! I should have
made him a much more suitable wife--if he had only had the sense to wait
a few years instead of snatching the first dark-eyed damsel who came his
way!" "Oh, really, Violet! And fancy calling Muriel lethargic! She is one of
the deepest people I know, and absolutely devoted to Nick--and he to
her." "Doubtless! doubtless!" Violet flicked the ash delicately from her
cigarette. "I am sure he is the soul of virtue. But how comes it that
the devoted Muriel can tear herself from his side to go a-larking on the
Continent with the grim and masterful Dr. Jim?" "Oh, I thought you knew that. It is for the child's benefit. Poor little
Reggie has a delicate chest, and Redlands doesn't altogether suit him. Dad positively ordered him abroad, and when Muriel demurred about taking
him out of Dad's reach (she has such faith in him, you know), he
arranged to go too if Nick would leave Redlands and come and help me
keep house. You see, Dad couldn't very well leave me to look after Dr.
Wyndham singlehanded." "My dear, of course not!" Up went the violet eyes in horror at the bare
suggestion. "You scandalize me. An innocent child like you! Not to be
thought of for a moment! Rather than that, I would have come and shared
the burden with you myself!" "That's exactly what I have come to ask you to do," said Olga eagerly. "Do say you can! You can't think how welcome you will be!" "My dear, you're so impetuous!" Violet was just a year her junior, but
this fact was never recognized. "Pray give me time to deliberate. You
forget that I also have a family to consider. What will Bruce say if I
desert him at a moment's notice?" "I'm sure Bruce won't mind. Can't we go and ask him?" "Presently, my child. He is not at home just at present. Neither is Mrs. Bruce." The daintiest grimace in the world testified to the opinion
entertained by the speaker for the latter. "Moreover, Bruce and I had a
difference of opinion this morning and are not upon speaking terms. So
unfortunate that he is so _difficile_. By the way, he is hand and glove
with the new assistant. Were you aware of that?" "I knew that he came to tea here yesterday," said Olga. "Oh! And how did you find that out?" "He told me." "You mean you asked him!" "Indeed, I didn't!" Olga refuted the charge with indignation. "I don't
take the smallest interest in his doings." "Not really?" Her friend looked at her with a comprehending smile. "Don't you like the young man?" she enquired. "I detest him!" Olga declared with vehemence. Again the slender little finger flicked the ash from the cigarette. "But
what a mistake, dear!" murmured the owner thereof. "Young men don't grow
on every gooseberry bush. Besides, one can never tell! The object of
one's detestation might turn out to be the one and only, and it's so
humiliating to have to change one's mind." "I shall never change mine with regard to Dr. Wyndham," Olga said with
great determination. "I should hate him quite as badly even if he were
the only man in the world." But at that the cigarette was suddenly whisked from the soft lips and
pointed full at her. "Allegro,"--it was Violet Campion's special name
for her, and she uttered it weightily,--"mark my words and ponder them
well! You have met your fate!" "Violet! How dare you say such a thing?" Olga turned crimson with
indignant protest. "I haven't! I wouldn't! It's horrid of you to talk
like that!" "Quite indecent, dear, I admit. But have you never noticed how indecent
the truth can be? What a pity to waste such a lovely blush on me! I
presume he hasn't begun to make love to you yet?" "Of course he hasn't! No man would be such a fool with you within
reach!" thrust back Olga, goaded to self-defence. "But I am not within reach," said Violet, with a twirl of the cigarette. "Far more so than I," returned Olga with spirit. "Anyhow, he never went
out of his way to have tea with me." A peal of laughter from her companion put a swift end to her
indignation. Violet was absolutely irresistible when she laughed. It was
utterly impossible to be indignant with her. "Then you think if I am there perhaps he will be persuaded to stay at
home to tea?" she chuckled mischievously. "Well, my dear, I'll come, and
we will play at battledore and shuttlecock to your heart's content. But
if the young man turns and rends us for our pains--and I have a shrewd
notion that that's the sort of young man he is--you mustn't blame me." She tossed away her cigarette with the words, and turned inwards,
sweeping Olga with her with characteristic energy. She was never still
for long in this mood. They passed through the great hall to a Gothic archway in the south
wall, close to the wonderful stained window. Olga glanced up at it with
a slight shiver as she passed below. "Isn't it horribly realistic?" she said. The girl beside her laughed lightly. "I rather like it myself; but then
I have an appetite for the horrors. And they've made the poor man so
revoltingly sanctimonious that one really can't feel sorry for him. I'd
cut off the head of anybody with a face like that. It's a species that
still exists, but ought to have been exterminated long ago." With her hand upon Olga's arm, she led her through the Gothic archway to
a second smaller hall, and on up a wide oak staircase with a carved
balustrade that was lighted half-way up by another great window of
monastic design but clear glass. Olga always liked to pause by this window, for the view from it was
magnificent. Straight out to the open sea it looked, and the width of
the outlook was superb. "Oh, it's better than Redlands," she said. "I don't think so," returned Violet. "Redlands is civilized. This isn't. Picture to yourself the cruelty of bottling up a herd of monks here in
full view of their renounced liberty. Imagine being condemned to pass
this window a dozen times in the day, on the way to that dreary chapel
of theirs. A refinement of torture with which the window downstairs
simply can't compete. How they must have hated the smell of the sea,
poor dears! But I daresay they didn't open their windows very often. It
wasn't the fashion in those days." She drew Olga on to the corridor above, and so to her own room, a
cheerful apartment that faced the Priory grounds. "If I am really coming to stay with you, I suppose I must pack some
clothes. Does the young man dress for dinner, by the way?" "Oh, yes. It's very ridiculous. We all do it now. It's such a waste of
time," said the practical Olga. "And I never have anything to wear." "Poor child! That is a drawback certainly. I wonder if you could wear
any of my things. I shouldn't like to eclipse you." "I'm sure I couldn't, thank you all the same." Olga's reply was very
prompt. "As to eclipsing me, you'll do that in any case, whatever you
wear." Violet looked at her with dancing eyes. "I believe you actually want to
be eclipsed! What on earth has the young man been doing? He seems to
have scared you very effectually." "Oh, I'm not afraid of him!" Olga spoke with her chin in the air. "But I
detest him with all my heart, and he detests me." "In fact, you are at daggers drawn," commented Violet. "And you want me
to come and divert the enemy's attention while you strengthen your
defences. Well, my dear, as I said before, I'll come. But--from what I
have seen of Dr. Maxwell Wyndham--I don't think I shall make much
impression. If he means to gobble you up, he certainly will do so,
whether I interfere or not. I've a notion you might do worse, green eyes
and red hair notwithstanding. He will probably whip you soundly now and
then and put you in the corner till you are good. But you will get to
like that in time. And I daresay he will be kind enough to let you lace
up his boots for a treat in between whiles." Olga's pale eyes flashed. "You are positively mad this afternoon,
Violet!" "Oh, no, I'm not. I haven't had a mad spell for a long time. I am only
extraordinarily shrewd and far-seeing. Well, dear, what shall I bring to
wear? Do you think I shall be appreciated in my red silk? Or will that
offend the eye of the virtuous Nick?" "No, you are not to wear that red thing. Wear white. I like you best in
white." "And black?" "Yes, black too. But not colours. You are too beautiful for colours." "Ridiculous child! That red thing, as you call it, suits me to
perfection." "I know it does. But I don't like it. You make me think of Lady Macbeth
in that. Besides, it's much too splendid for ordinary occasions. Yes,
that pale mauve is exquisite. You will look lovely in that. And this
maize suits you too. But you look positively dangerous in red." "I must leave the business of selection to you, it seems," laughed
Violet. "Well, I am to be your guest, so you shall make your own choice. By the way, how shall I get to Weir? Mrs. Bruce has the car, and will
probably not return till late. And Bruce is using the dog-cart. That
only leaves the luggage-cart for me." "I'll fly round to Redlands for the motor. Nick won't mind. You get your
things packed while I'm gone." Olga deposited an armful of her friend's belongings upon the bed, and
turned to go. Nick's property of Redlands was less than a mile away, and all that Nick
possessed was at her disposal. In fact, she had almost come to look upon
Redlands as a second home. It would not take her long to run across to
the garage and fetch the little motor which Nick himself had taught her
years ago to drive. Lightly she ran down the oak stairs and through the
echoing hall once more. The vault-like chill of the place struck her
afresh as she passed to the open door. And again involuntarily she
shivered, quickening her steps, eager to leave the clammy atmosphere
behind. Passing into the hot sunshine beyond the great nail-studded door was
like entering another world. She turned her face up to the brightness
and rejoiced. CHAPTER III

THE OBSTACLE


Redlands had always been a bower of delight to Olga's vivid fancy. The
house, long, low, and rambling, stood well back from the cliffs in the
midst of a garden which to her childhood's mind had always been the
earthly presentment of Paradise. Not the owner of it himself loved it as
did Olga. Many were the hours she had spent there, and not one of them
but held a treasured place in her memory. As she turned in at the iron gate, the music of the stream that ran
through the glen rose refreshingly through the August stillness. She
wished Nick were with her to enjoy it too. The temptation to run down to the edge of the water was irresistible. It
babbled with such delicious coolness between its ferns. The mossy
pathway gleamed emerald green. Surely there was no need for haste! She
could afford to give herself five minutes in her paradise. Violet
certainly would not be ready yet. She sat down therefore on the edge of the stream, and gave herself up to
the full enjoyment of her surroundings. An immense green dragon-fly
whirred past her and shot away into the shadows. She watched its flight
with fascinated eyes, so sudden was it, so swift, and so unerringly
direct. It reminded her of something, she could not remember what. She
wrestled with her memory vainly, and finally dismissed the matter with
slight annoyance, turning her attention to a wonderful coloured moth
that here flitted across her line of vision. It was an exquisite thing,
small, but red as coral. Only in this fairyland of Nick's had she ever
seen its like. Lightly it fluttered through the chequered light and
shade above the water, shining like a jewel above the shallows, the
loveliest thing in sight. And then, even under her watching eyes came
tragedy. Swift as an arrow, the green dragon-fly darted back again, and
in an instant flashed away. In that instant the coral butterfly vanished
also. Olga exclaimed in incredulous horror. The happening had been too quick
for her eyes to follow, but her comprehension leaped to the truth. And
in that moment she realized what it was of which the dragon-fly reminded
her. It was of Max Wyndham sitting on the surgery-table watching her
with that mocking gleam in his green eyes, as though he knew her to be
at his mercy whether she stayed or fled. It was unreasonable of course, but that fairy tragedy in the glen
increased her dislike of the man a hundredfold. She felt as if he had
darted into her life, armed in some fashion with the power to destroy. And she longed almost passionately to turn him out; for no disturbing
force had ever entered there before. But she knew that she could not. She went on up to the house in sober mood. It had been left to the care
of the servants since Nick's departure. She found a French window
standing open, and entered. It was the drawing-room, all swathed in
brown holland. Its dim coolness was very different from the stony chill
of the Priory. She looked around her with a restful feeling of being at
home, despite the brown coverings. Many were the happy hours she had
spent here both before and after Nick's marriage. It had always been her
palace of delight. As she paused in the room, she remembered that there was a book Nick
had said he wanted out of the library. This room was a somewhat recent
addition to the house and shut away from the rest of the building by a
long passage. She passed from the drawing-room, and made her way
thither. It surprised her a little to find the door standing open, but it was
only a passing wonder. The light that came in through green sun-blinds
made her liken it in her own mind to a chamber under the sea. She went
to a book-shelf in a dark corner, and commenced her hunt. "If you are looking for Farrow's _Treatise on Party Government_,"
remarked a casual voice behind her, "I've got it here." Olga started violently. Any voice would have given her a surprise at
that moment, but the voice of Max Wyndham was an absolute shock that set
every nerve on edge. He laughed at her from the sofa, on which he sprawled at length. "My
good child, your nerves are like fiddle-strings after a frost. Remind me
to make you up a tonic when we get back! Did you bicycle over?" Olga ignored the question. She was for the moment too angry to speak. "Sit down," he said. "You ought to know better than to scorch on a day
like this. You deserve a sunstroke." "I didn't scorch," declared Olga, stung by this injustice. "I'm not such
an idiot. You seem to think I haven't any sense at all!" "My thoughts are my own," said Max. "Why didn't you say you were coming? You could have motored over with me." "I didn't so much as know you would be in this direction. How could I?" said Olga. "And even if I had known--" she, paused. "You would have preferred sunstroke?" he suggested. "That I can quite believe. Well, here is the book!" He swung his legs
off the sofa. "I dropped in to fetch it myself, as your good uncle
seemed to want it, and then became so absorbed in its pages that I
couldn't put it down. We seem to have a rotten Constitution altogether. Wonder whose fault it is." Olga took the book with a slight, contemptuous glance. That he had been
interested in the subject for a single moment she did not believe. She
wondered that he deemed it worth his while to feign interest. "Are you taking a holiday to-day?" she enquired bluntly. He smiled at that. "I cut off an old man's toe at the cottage hospital
this morning, vaccinated four babies, pulled out a tooth, and dressed a
scald. What more would you have? I suppose you don't want to be
vaccinated by any chance?" Olga passed the flippant question over. "It's a half-holiday then, is
it?" she said. "Well, as it happens, fair lady, it is, all thanks to Dame Stubbs of
'The Ship Inn' who summoned me hither with great urgency and then was
ungrateful enough to die before I reached her." "Oh!" exclaimed Olga. "Is old Mrs. Stubbs dead?" "She is," said Max. She turned upon him. "And you've just come--from her death-bed?" He arose and stretched himself. "Even so, fair lady." Olga stared at him incredulously. "You actually--don't care?" she asked
slowly. "Not much good caring," said Max. "What did she die of?" questioned Olga. He hesitated for a second. Then, "cancer," he said briefly. "Did she suffer much?" She asked the question nervously as if she feared
the answer. "It doesn't matter, does it?" said Max, thrusting his hands into his
pockets. "I don't see why you shouldn't tell me that." Olga spoke with a flash of
indignation. "It does matter in my opinion." "Nothing that's past matters," said Max. "I don't agree with you!" Hotly she made answer, inexplicably hurt by
his callous tone. "It matters a lot to me. She was a friend of mine. If
I had known she was seriously ill, I'd have gone to see her. You--I
think you might have told me." She turned with the words as if to go, but Max coolly stepped to the
door before her. He stretched a hand as if to open it, but paused,
holding it closed. "I was not aware that the old woman was a friend of yours," he said. "But it wouldn't have done much good to anyone if you had seen her. She
probably wouldn't have known you." "I might have taken her things at least," said Olga. "Which she wouldn't have touched," he rejoined. She clenched her hands unconsciously. Why was he so maddeningly
cold-blooded? "Do you mind opening the door?" she said. But he remained motionless, his hand upon it. "Do you mind telling me
where you are going?" he said. Her eyes blazed. "Really, Dr. Wyndham, what is that to you?" He stood up squarely and faced her, his back against the door. "I will
answer your question when you have answered mine." She restrained herself with an effort. How she hated the man! Conflict
with him made her feel physically sick; and yet she had no choice. "I am going down to 'The Ship' at once," she said, "to see her
daughter." "Pardon me!" said Max. "I thought that was your intention. I am sorry
to have to frustrate it, but I must. I assure you Mrs. Briggs will have
plenty of other visitors to keep her amused." "I am going nevertheless," said Olga. She saw his jaw coming into sudden prominence, and her heart gave a hard
quick throb of misgiving. They stood face to face in the dimness,
neither uttering a word. Several seconds passed. The green eyes were staring at the bookshelves
beyond Olga, but it was a stony, pitiless stare. Had he any idea as to
how formidable he looked, she wondered? Surely--surely he did not mean
to keep her against her will! He could not! She collected herself and spoke. "Dr. Wyndham, will you let me go?" Instantly his eyes met hers. "Certainly," he said, "if you will promise
me first not to go to 'The Ship' till after the funeral." She felt her face gradually whitening. "But I mean to go. Why shouldn't
I?" "Simply because it wouldn't be good for you," he made calm reply. "How ridiculous!" They were the only words that occurred to her. She
spoke them with vehemence. He received them in silence, and she saw that a greater effort would be
necessary if she hoped to assert her independence with any success. It was essential that she should do so, and she braced herself for a
more determined attempt. "Dr. Wyndham," she said, throwing as much
command into her voice as she could muster, "open that door--at once!" She saw again that glint in his eyes that seemed to mock her weakness. He stood his ground. "Fair lady," he said, "with regret I refuse." She made a sharp movement forward, nerved for the fray by sheer
all-possessing anger. She gripped the handle of the door above his hand
and gave it a sharp wrench. He would not--surely he would not--struggle
with her! Surely she must discomfit him--rout him utterly--by this
means! Yes, she had won! The sheer unexpectedness of her action had gained the
day! Her heart gave a great leap of triumph as he took his hand away. But the next instant it stood still. For in the twinkling of an eye he
had taken her by the shoulders holding her fast. "That is the most foolish thing you ever did in your life," he said, and
his words came curt and clipped as though he spoke them through his
teeth. Something about him restrained her from offering any resistance. She
stood in silence, her heart jerking on again with wild palpitations. The
grip of his hands was horribly close; she almost thought he was going to
shake her. But his eyes under their bristling brows held her even more
securely. Under their look she was suddenly hotly ashamed. "You are going to make me that promise," he said. But she stood silent, trying to muster strength to defy him. "What do you want to go for?" he demanded. "I want to know--I want to know--" She stammered over her answer; it was
uttered against her will. "Well? What?" Still holding her, he put the question. "I can tell you
anything you want to know." "But you won't!" Olga plucked up her spirit at this. "It's no good
asking you anything. You never answer." "I will answer you," he said. "And besides--" said Olga. "Yes?" said Max. "You're so horrid," she burst out, "so cold-blooded, so--so--so
unsympathetic!" To her own amazement and dismay, she found herself in tears. In the
same instant she was free and the door left unguarded; but she did not
use her freedom to escape. Somehow she did not think of that. She only
leaned against the wall with her hands over her face and wept. Max, with his hands deep in his pockets, strolled about the room,
whistling below his breath. The gleam had died out of his eyes, but the
brows met fiercely above them. His face was the face of a man working
out a difficult problem. Suddenly he walked up to her, and stood still. "Look here," he said; "can't you manage to be sensible for a minute? If
you go on in this way you will soon get hysterical, and I don't think my
treatment for hysterics would appeal to you. Olga, are you listening?" Yes, she was listening--listening tensely, because she could not help
herself. "I'm sorry you think me a brute," he proceeded. "I don't think anyone
else does, but that's a detail. I am also sorry that you're upset about
old Mrs. Stubbs, though I don't see much sense in crying for her now her
troubles are over. I think myself that it was just as well I didn't
reach her in time. I should only have prolonged her misery. That's one
of the grand obstacles in the medical career. I've kicked against it a
good many times." He paused. "She did suffer then?" whispered Olga, commanding herself with an
effort. "When she wasn't under the influence of morphia--yes. That was the only
peace she knew. But of course it affected her brain. It always does, if
you keep on with it." Olga's hands fell. She straightened herself. "Then--you think she is
better dead?" she said. He squared his great shoulders, and she felt infinitely small. "If I
could have followed my own inclination with that old woman," he said, "I
should have given her a free pass long ago. But--I am not authorized to
distribute free passes. On the contrary, it's my business to hang on to
people to the bitter end, and not to let them through till they've paid
for their liberty to the uttermost farthing." She glanced at him quickly. Cynical as were his words, she was aware of
a touch of genuine feeling somewhere. She made swift response to it,
almost before she realized what she was doing. "Oh, but surely the help you give far outweighs that!" she said. "I
often think I will be a nurse when I am old enough, if Dad can spare
me." "Good heavens, child!" he said. "Do you want to be a gaoler too?" "No," she answered quickly. "I'll be a deliverer." He smiled his one-sided smile. "And I wonder how long you will call
yourself that," he said. She had no answer ready, for he seemed to utter his speculation out of
knowledge and not ignorance. It made her feel a little cold, and after a
moment she turned from the subject. "I am going back to the Priory," she said. "Shall I take that book, or
will you?" It was capitulation, but he gave no sign that he so much as remembered
that there had been a battle. Obviously then her defeat had been a
foregone conclusion from the outset. "You needn't bicycle back," he said. "I've got the car here. And I'm
going to the Priory myself." Olga's eyes opened wide at the announcement. "In--deed!" she said, with
somewhat daring significance. "In--deed!" he responded imperturbably. "Is it a joke?" She felt herself colouring, and considered it safer to leave the
question unanswered. "I can't go back in our car," she said. "Violet
Campion will be with me, so I have come to fetch Nick's." "Oh--ho!" said Max keenly. "Coming to stay?" Very curiously she resented his keenness. "I suppose you have no
objection," she said coldly. "I am enchanted," he declared. "But why not come with me in the car? If
you take the one from here, you will only have to bring it back, for you
can't house it at Weir." "But I should have to come back in any case to fetch my bicycle," Olga
pointed out. "No, you needn't! Mitchel can ride that home, and you can drive the
motor. You can drive, I'm told?" "Of course, I can. I often drive Dad." Olga spoke with pride. 