

E-text prepared by Al Haines



THE BARONET'S BRIDE

Or, A Woman's Vengeance

by

MAY AGNES FLEMING

Author of _Lady Evelyn_, _Queen of the Isle_, _Who Wins?_,
_Estella's Husband_, _The Heiress of Glendower_, etc. New York
The New York Book Company

1910







  ALL'S WELL. The clouds, which rise with thunder, slake
    Our thirsty souls with rain;
  The blow most dreaded falls to break
    From off our limbs a chain;
  And wrongs of man to man but make
    The love of God more plain. As through the shadowy lens of even
  The eye looks farthest into heaven
  On gleams of star and depths of blue
  The glaring sunshine never knew! JOHN G. WHITTIER. SHADOW. It falls before, it follows behind,
    Darkest still when the day is bright;
  No light without the shadow we find,
    And never shadow without the light. From our shadow we cannot flee away;
    It walks when we walk, it runs when we run;
  But it tells which way to look for the sun;
    We may turn our backs on it any day. Ever mingle the sight and shade
    That make this human world so dear;
  Sorrow of joy is ever made,
    And what were a hope without a fear? A morning shadow o'er youth is cast,
    Warning from pleasure's dazzling snare;
  A shadow lengthening across the past,
    Fixes our fondest memories there. One shadow there is, so dark, so drear,
    So broad we see not the brightness round it;
  Yet 'tis but the dark side of the sphere
    Moving into the light unbounded. ISA CRAIG-KNOX. CHAPTER I. THE BARONET'S BRIDE. "And there is danger of death--for mother and child?" "Well, no, Sir Jasper--no, sir; no certain danger, you know; but in
these protracted cases it can do no harm, Sir Jasper, for the clergyman
to be here. He may not be needed but your good lady is very weak, I am
sorry to say, Sir Jasper Kingsland." "I will send for the clergyman," Sir Jasper Kingsland said. "Do your
best, Doctor Godroy, and for God's sake let me know the worst or best
as soon as may be. This suspense is horrible." Doctor Parker Godroy looked sympathetically at him through his
gold-bowed spectacles. "I will do my best, Sir Jasper," he said, gravely. "The result is in
the hands of the Great Dispenser of life and death. Send for the
clergyman, and wait and hope." He quitted the library as he spoke. Sir Jasper Kingsland seized the
bell and rang a shrill peal. "Ride to the village--ride for your life!" he said, imperatively, to
the servant who answered, "and fetch the Reverend Cyrus Green here at
once." The man bowed and departed, and Sir Jasper Kingsland, Baronet, of
Kingsland Court, was alone--alone in the gloomy grandeur of the vast
library; alone with his thoughts and the wailing midnight storm. A little toy time-piece of buhl on the stone mantel chimed musically
its story of the hour, and Sir Jasper Kingsland lifted his gloomy eyes
for a moment at the sound. A tall, spare middle-aged man, handsome
once--handsome still, some people said--with iron-gray hair and a
proud, patrician face. "Twelve," his dry lips whispered to themselves--"midnight, and for
three hours I have endured this maddening agony of suspense! Another
day is given to the world, and before its close all I love best may be
cold and stark in death! Oh, my God! have mercy, and spare her!" He lifted his clasped hands in passionate appeal. There was a picture
opposite--a gem of Raphael's--the Man of Sorrows fainting under the
weight of the cross, and the fire's shine playing upon it seemed to
light the pallid features with a derisive smile. "The mercy you showed to others, the same shall be shown to you. Tiger
heart, you were merciless in the days gone by. Let your black, bad
heart break, as you have broken others!" No voice had sounded, yet he was answered. Conscience had spoken in
trumpet-tones, and with a hollow groan the baronet turned away and
began pacing up and down. It was a large and spacious apartment, this library of Kingsland Court,
dimly lighted now by the flickering wood-fire and the mellow glow of a
branch of wax-lights. Huge book-cases filled to overflowing lined the
four walls, and pictures precious as their weight in rubies looked
duskily down from their heavy frames. Busts and bronzes stood on
brackets and surmounted doors; a thick, rich carpet of moss-green,
sprinkled with oak leaves and acorns, muffled the tread; voluminous
draperies of dark green shrouded the tall, narrow windows. The massive
chairs and tables, fifty years old at least, were spindle-legged and
rich in carving, upholstered in green velvet and quaintly embroidered,
by hands moldered to dust long ago. Everything was old and grand, and
full of storied interest. And there, on the wall, was the crest of the
house--the uplifted hand grasping a dagger--and the motto, in old
Norman French, "Strike once, and strike well." It is a very fine thing to be a baronet--a Kingsland of Kingsland, with
fifteen thousand a year, and the finest old house in the county; but if
Death will stalk grimly over your threshold and snatch away the life
you love more than your own, then even that glory is not omniscient. For this wintery midnight, while Sir Jasper Kingsland walks moodily up
and down--up and down--Lady Kingsland, in the chamber above, lies ill
unto death. An hour passes--the clock in the turret and the buhl toy on the stone
mantel toll solemnly one. The embers drop monotonously through the
grate--a dog bays deeply somewhere in the quadrangle below--the wailing
wind of coming morning sighs lamentingly through the tossing
copper-beeches, and the roar of the surf afar off comes ever and anon
like distant thunder. The house is silent as the tomb--so horribly
silent that the cold drops start out on the face of the tortured man. Who knows? Death has been on the threshold of that upper chamber all
night, waiting for his prey. This awful hush may be the paean that
proclaims that he is master! A tap at the door. The baronet paused in his stride and turned his
bloodshot eyes that way. His very voice was hollow and unnatural as he
said:

"Come in." A servant entered--the same who had gone his errand. "The Reverend Cyrus Green is here, sir. Shall I show him up?" "Yes--no--I cannot see him. Show him into the drawing-room until he is
needed." "He will not be needed," said a voice at his elbow, and Doctor Parker
Godroy came briskly forward. "My dear Sir Jasper, allow me to
congratulate you! All is well, thank Heaven, and--it is a son!" Sir Jasper Kingsland sunk into a seat, thrilling from head to foot,
turning sick and faint in the sudden revulsion from despair to hope. "Saved?" he said, in a gasping whisper. "_Both_?" "Both, my dear Sir Jasper!" the doctor responded, cordially. "Your
good lady is very much prostrated--exhausted--but that was to be looked
for, you know; and the baby--ah! the finest boy I have had the pleasure
of presenting to an admiring world within ten years. Come and see
them!" "May I?" the baronet cried, starting to his feet. "Certainly, my dear Sir Jasper--most certainly. There is nothing in
the world to hinder--only be a little cautious, you know. Our good
lady must be kept composed and quiet, and left to sleep; and you will
just take one peep and go. We won't need the Reverend Cyrus." He led the way from the library, rubbing his hands as your brisk little
physicians do, up a grand stair-way where you might have driven a coach
and four, and into a lofty and most magnificently furnished bed-chamber. "Quiet, now--quiet," the doctor whispered, warningly. "Excite her, and
I won't be answerable for the result." Sir Jasper Kingsland replied with a rapid gesture, and walked forward
to the bed. His own face was perfectly colorless, and his lips were
twitching with intense suppressed feeling. He bent above the still
form. "Olivia," he said, "my darling, my darling!" The heavy eyelids fluttered and lifted, and a pair of haggard, dark
eyes gazed up at him. A wan smile parted those pallid lips. "Dear Jasper! I knew you would come. Have you seen the baby? It is a
boy." "My own, I have thought only of you. My poor pale wife, how awfully
death-like you look!" "But I am not going to die--Doctor Godroy says so," smiling gently. "And now you must go, for I cannot talk. Only kiss me first, and look
at the baby." Her voice was the merest whisper. He pressed his lips passionately to
the white face and rose up. Nurse and baby sat in state by the fire,
and a slender girl of fifteen years knelt beside them, and gazed in a
sort of rapture at the infant prodigy. "Look, papa--look? The loveliest little thing, and nurse says the very
picture of you!" Not very lovely, certainly; but Sir Jasper Kingsland's eyes lighted
with pride and joy as he looked. For was it not a boy? Had he not at
last, after weary, weary waiting, the desire of his heart--a son to
inherit the estate and perpetuate the ancient name? "It is so sweet, papa!" Miss Mildred whispered, her small, rather
sickly face quite radiant; "and its eyes are the image of yours. He's
asleep now, you know, and you can't see them. And look at the dear,
darling little hands and fingers and feet, and the speck of a nose and
the dot of a mouth! Oh papa! isn't it splendid to have a baby in the
house?" "Very splendid," said papa, relaxing into a smile. "A fine little
fellow, nurse! There, cover him up again and let him sleep. We must
take extra care of the heir of Kingsland Court. And Mildred, child,
you should be in bed. One o'clock is no hour for little girls to be
out of their nests." "Oh, papa! as if I could sleep and not see the baby!" "Well, you have seen it, and now run away to your room. Mamma and baby
both want to sleep, and nurse doesn't need you, I am sure." "That I don't," said nurse, "nor the doctor, either. So run away, Miss
Milly, and go to sleep yourself. The baby will be here, all safe for
you, in the morning." The little girl--a flaxen-haired, pretty-featured child--kissed the
baby, kissed papa, and dutifully departed. Sir Jasper followed her out
of the room, down the stairs, and back into the library, with the face
of a man who has just been reprieved from sudden death. As he
re-entered the library, he paused and started a step back, gazing
fixedly at one of the windows. The heavy curtain had been partially
drawn back, and a white, spectral face was glued to the glass, glaring
in. "Who have we here?" said the baronet to himself; "that face can belong
to no one in the house." He walked straight to the window--the face never moved. A hand was
raised and tapped on the glass. A voice outside spoke:

"For Heaven's sake, open and let me in, before I perish in this bitter
storm." Sir Jasper Kingsland opened the window and flung it wide. "Enter! whoever you are," he said. "No one shall ask in vain at
Kingsland, this happy night." He stepped back, and, all covered with snow, the midnight intruder
entered and stood before him. And Sir Jasper Kingsland saw the
strangest-looking creature he had ever beheld in the whole course of
his life. CHAPTER II. ACHMET THE ASTROLOGER. An old man, yet tall and upright, wearing a trailing cloak of dull
black, long gray hair flowing over the shoulders, and tight to the
scalp a skull-cap of black velvet. A patriarchal board, abundant and
silver-white, streamed down his breast, and out of a dull, white face,
seamed and wrinkled, looked a pair of eyes piercing and black. Sir Jasper took a stop backward, and regarded this singular apparition
in wonder. The old man folded his arms across his bosom--and made him
a profound Oriental salaam. "The Lord of Kingsland gazes in amaze at the uninvited stranger. And
yet I think destiny has sent me hither." "Who are you?" the baronet demanded. "What jugglery is this? Are you
dressed for an Eastern dervish in a melodrama, and have you come here
to play a practical joke? I am afraid I can not appreciate the humor
of the masquerade. Who are you?" sternly. "Men call me Achmet the Astrologer." "An astrologer? Humph! your black art, it seems, could not protect you
from a January storm," retorted Sir Jasper, with a cynical sneer. "But
come in--come in. Astrologer or demon, or whatever you are, you look
too old a man to be abroad such a night, when we would not turn an
enemy's dog from the house. The doors of Kingsland are never closed to
the tired wayfarer, and of all nights in the year they should not he
closed to-night." "When an heir is born to an ancient name and a princely inheritance,
you speak rightly, my Lord of Kingsland." "How say you? What do you know of the events of this night, Sir
Astrologer?" "Much, Sir Jasper Kingsland, and for the very reason you
deride--because I am an astrologer. I read the stars, and I lift the
veil of the future, and, lo! I behold your life years before you have
lived it!" Sir Jasper Kingsland laughed a cynical, unbelieving laugh. "You jeer at me, you scoff at my words," murmured the old man, in soft,
steady tones, "and yet there was no one to tell me on my way here that
a son and heir had been born to the house of Kingsland within the past
hour." He lifted his arm and pointed to the clock, his dark eyes fixed upon
the baronet's changing face. "You deride the power I profess, yet every day you quote your English
poet, and believe him when he says: 'There are more things in heaven
and earth than are dreamed of in your philosophy.' But I am accustomed
to derision, and it does not offend me. Let me prove my power, so that
even the most resolute skeptic dare doubt no longer. Judge of my skill
to read the future by my ability in reading the past. I have come
here--I have taken a long journey to look into the future of your
new-born son. Before I begin, let me look into the past of his father. Sir Jasper Kingsland, let me read your palm." But Sir Jasper drew back. "You have taken a long journey to look into the future of my son? Pray, what is my son to you?" "That is my secret, Sir Jasper, and my secrets I keep. Come, hold
forth your hand, and test my skill." "Why should I? Even if you can bring before me my past life, of what
use will it be, since I must know all better than you?" "My power to read the past may prove my power to read the future." "Nay, you may easily know the past, without magical skill. Many
thanks, my venerable friend, but I will not put your necromancy to the
test." "Is Sir Jasper Kingsland afraid?" he said. "Surely not, for he comes
of a daring race. And yet it seems like it." "By Heaven! if a younger man had spoken those words I would have hurled
him by the throat from yonder window. Be careful of your words, old
man, else even your hoary hairs may fail to save you." Once more the astrologer bent servilely. "I cry your mercy, my haughty Lord of Kingsland. It shall be as you
say. I will depart as I came. I will not serve you nor your new-born
son, since you refuse to be served. I will depart at once. I fear no
earthly storm. Good-night, Sir Jasper Kingsland. Look to the heir of
your house yourself. When 'angels unaware' visit you again, treat them
better than you have treated me." With a gesture indescribably grand and kingly, the silver-haired old
man turned to go, folding his long cloak about him. But the voice of
the baronet called him back. "Stay," he said. "You speak of serving my son. What danger threatens
his infant life that you can avert?" "I know of none. I have not cast the horoscope yet." "Then you wish to do so?" "With your good permission. I have taken a long journey for that very
purpose, Sir Jasper." "Then you shall," the baronet cried, yielding to a swift impulse--"you
shall cast his horoscope. If it can avert no evil, it can, at least,
cause none. But, first, there is no action without its ruling motive. What are me or mine to you, to make you take a long and toilsome
journey on our account?" The old man paused, drawn up to his fullest height, imposing as a new
King Lear, his deep, dark eyes glowing with inward fire. "I will tell you," he said. "Years ago, Sir Jasper, when you were a
young man, you did an honor and a service to one I dearly love; that I
have never forgotten and never will forget! You have ceased to
remember it years ago, no doubt; but I never have, nor ever will until
my dying day." "A service! an honor! What could it have been? I recollect nothing of
it." "I expected as much; but my memory is a good one. It is stamped on my
heart forever. Great men like Sir Jasper Kingsland, grandees of the
land, forget these little things. I owe you a long debt, Sir Jasper,
and I will pay it to the uttermost farthing, so help me God!" His black eyes blazed, his low voice rose, his arm uplifted fiercely
for an instant in dire menace. Then, quick as lightning flashes, all
was transformed. The eyes were bent upon the carpet, the arms folded,
the voice sunk, soft and servile. "Forgive me!" he murmured. "In my gratitude I forget myself. But you
have my motive in coming here--the desire to repay you; to look into
the future of your son; to see the evils that may threaten his youth
and manhood, and to place you on your guard against them. 'Forwarned
is fore-armed,' you know. Do not doubt my power. In far-off Oriental
lands, under the golden stars of Syria, I learned the lore of the wise
men of the East. I learned to read the stars as you Englishmen read
your printed books. Believe and trust, and let me cast the horoscope
of your son." "First let me test your vaunted power. Show me my past, before you
show me my son's future." He held forth his hand with a cynical smile,

"As you will. Past and future are alike to me--save that the past is
easier to read. Ah! a palm seamed and crossed and marked with troubled
lines. Forty years have not gone and left no trace behind--"

"Forty years!" interrupted Sir Jasper, with sneering emphasis. "Pray
do not bungle in the very beginning." "I bungle not," answered Achmet, sternly. "Forty years ago, on the
third of next month, you, Jasper Southdown Kingsland, were born beneath
this very roof." "Right!" he said. "You know my age. But go on." "Your boyhood you passed here--quiet, eventless years--with a
commonplace mother and a dull, proud father. At ten, your mother went
to her grave. At twelve, the late Sir Noel followed her. At thirteen,
you, a lonely orphan, were removed from this house to London in the
charge of a guardian that you hated. Am I not right?" "You are. Pray go on." "At fourteen, you went to Rugby to school. From that time until you
attained your majority your life passed in public schools and
universities, harmlessly and monotonously enough. At twenty-one, you
left Cambridge, and started to make the grand tour. You were tolerably
clever; you were young and handsome, and heir to a noble inheritance. Your life was to be the life of a great and good man--a benefactor to
the human race. Your memory was to be a magnificent memento for a
whole world to honor. Your dreams were wild, vague, and impracticable,
and ended in--nothing." Sir Jasper Kingsland listened and stared like a man in a dream. Achmet
the Astrologer continued to read the palm with a fixed, stony face. "And now the lines are crossed, and the trouble begins. As usual, a
woman is at the bottom of it. Sir Jasper Kingsland is in love." There was a pause. The baronet winced a little. "It is in Spain--glowing, gorgeous Spain--and she is one of its
loveliest children. The oranges and pomegranates scent the burning
air, the vineyards glow in the tropic sun, and golden summer forever
reigns. But the glowing southern sun is not more brilliant than the
Spanish gypsy's flashing black eyes, nor the pomegranate blossoms half
so ripe and red as her cheeks. She is Zenith, the Zingara, and you
love her!" "In the fiend's name!" Sir Jasper Kingsland cried, "what jugglery is
this?" "One moment more, my Lord of Kingsland," he said, "and I have done. Let me see how your love-dream ends. Ah! the old, old story. Surely I
might have known. She is beautiful as the angels above, and as
innocent, and she loves you with a mad abandon that is worse than
idolatry--as only women ever love. And you? You are grand and noble,
a milor Inglese, and you take her love--her crazy worship--as a
demi-god might, with uplifted grace, as your birthright; and she is
your pretty toy of an hour. And then careless and happy, you are gone. Sunny Spain, with its olives and its vineyards, its pomegranates and
its Zenith the Gitana, is left far behind, and you are roaming, happy
and free, through La Belle France. And lo! Zenith the forsaken lies
prone upon the ground, and goes stark mad for the day-god she has lost. There, Sir Jasper Kingsland! the record is a black one. I wish to read
no more." He flung the baronet's hand away, and once more his eyes glowed like
the orbs of a demon. But Sir Jasper Kingsland, pale as a dead man, saw
it not. "Are you man or devil?" he said, in an awe-struck tone. "No living
mortal knows what you have told me this night." Achmet the Astrologer smiled--a dire, dark smile. "Man, in league with the dark potentate you have named, if you like. Whatever I am, I have truthfully told you the past, as I will
truthfully tell your son's future." "By palmistry?" "No, by the stars. And behold!" drawing aside the curtain, "yonder
they shine!" "Take me to an upper room," the astrologer exclaimed, in an inspired
tone, "and leave me. Destiny is propitious. The fate that ruled your
son's birth has set forth the shining stars for Achmet to read. Lead
on!" Like a man in a dreamy swoon, Sir Jasper Kingsland obeyed. He led the
astrologer up the grand sweeping staircases--up and up, to the very top
of the house--to the lofty, lonely battlements. Cloudless spread the
wide night sky; countless and brilliant shone the stars; peaceful and
majestic slept, the purple sea; spotless white gleamed the snowy earth. A weird, witching scene. "Leave me," said the astrologer, "and watch and wait. When the first
little pink cloud of sunrise blushes in the sky, come to me. My task
will have ended." He waved him away with a regal motion. He stood there gazing at the
stars, as a king looking upon his subjects. And the haughty baronet,
without a word, turned and left him. The endless hours wore on--two, three, and four--and still the baronet
watched and waited, and looked for the coming of dawn. Faintly the
silver light broke in the Orient, rosy flushed the first red ray. Sir
Jasper mounted to the battlements, still like a man in a dazed dream. Achmet the Astrologer turned slowly round. The pale, frosty sunrise
had blanched his ever-white face with a livid hue of death. In one
hand he held a folded paper, in the other a pencil. He had been
writing. "Have you done?" the baronet asked. "I am done. Your son's fate is here." He touched the paper. "Is that for me?" he asked, shrinking palpably from it even while he
spoke. "This is for you." The astrologer handed him the paper as he spoke. "It is for you to read--to do with after as you see fit. I have but
one word to say: not I, but a mightier power traced the words you will
read--your son's irrevocable fate. Don't hope to shirk it. My task is
ended, and I go. Farewell!" "No, no," the baronet cried; "not so! Remain and breakfast here. The
morning is but just breaking." "And before yonder sun is above the horizon I will be far away. No,
Sir Jasper Kingsland, I break no bread under your roof. I have done my
work, and depart forever. Look to your son!" He spoke the last words slowly, with a tigerish glare of hate leaping
out of his eyes, with deadly menace in every syllable. Then he was
gone down the winding stair-way like a black ghost, and so out and away. Sir Jasper Kingsland took the folded paper and sought his room. There
in the pale day-dawn he tore it open. One side was covered with
cabalistic characters, Eastern symbols, curious marks and
hieroglyphics. The other side was written in French, in long, clear,
legible characters. There was a heading: "Horoscope of the Heir of
Kingsland." Sir Jasper sat down and began to read. Nearly an hour after, a servant, entering to replenish the faded fire,
fled out of the room and startled the household with his shrieks. Two
or three domestics rushed in. There lay Sir Jasper Kingsland prone on
his face on the floor, stiff and stark as a dead man. A paper,
unintelligible to all, was clutched tightly as a death grip in his
hand. Reading that crumpled paper, the strong man had fallen there
flat on the floor in a dead swoon. CHAPTER III. THE HUT ON THE HEATH. Far away from the lofty, battlemented ancestral home of Sir Jasper
Kingsland--straight to the seashore went Achmet the Astrologer. A long
strip of bleak marshland spreading down the hill-side and sloping to
the sea, arid and dry in the summer-time--sloppy and sodden now--that
was his destination. It was called Hunsden's Heath--a forlorn and
desolate spot, dotted over with cottages of the most wretched kind. To
one of these wretched hovels, standing nearest the sea and far removed
from the rest, Achmet swiftly made his way. The sun was high in the heavens; the sea lay all a-glitter beneath it. The astrologer had got over the ground at a swift, swinging stride, and
he had walked five miles at least; but he paused now, with little sign
of fatigue in his strange white face. Folding his arms over his
breast, he surveyed the shining sky, the glittering sea, with a slow,
dreamy smile. "The sun shines and the sea sparkles on the natal day of the heir of
Kingsland," he said to himself; "but for all that it is a fatal day to
him. 'The sins of the father shall be visited on the children even to
the third and fourth generation,' saith the Book Christians believe in. Christians!" he laughed a harsh, strident laugh. "Sir Jasper Kingsland
is a Christian! The religion that produces such men must be a glorious
one. He was a Christian when he perjured himself and broke her heart. 'Tis well. As a Christian he can not object to the vengeance
Christianity teaches." He turned away, approached the lonely hut, and tapped thrice--sharp
staccato knocks--at the door. The third one was answered. The door
swung back, and a dark damsel looked out. "Is it thee, Pietro?" "It is I, Zara." He stepped in as he spoke, closed the door, took her face between his
hands, and kissed both brown cheeks. The girl's dark face lighted up
into the splendor of absolute beauty as she returned his caress. "And how is it with thee, my Zara, and thy little one?" "It is well. And thyself, Pietro?" "Very well. And the mother?" "Ah, the mother! Poor mother! She lies as you saw her last--as you
will always see her in this lower world--dead in life! And he"--the
girl Zara's eyes lighted fiercely up--"didst see him, Pietro?" "I have seen him, spoken to him, told him the past, and terrified him
for the future. There is a son, Zara--a new-born son." "Dog and son of a dog!" Zara cried, furiously. "May curses light upon
him in the hour of his birth, and upon all who bear his hated name! Say, Pietro, why didst thou not strangle the little viper as you would
any other poisonous reptile?" "My Zara, I did not even see him. He lies cradled in rose leaves, no
doubt, and the singing of the west wind is not sweet enough for his
lullaby. No profane eye must rest on this sacred treasure fresh from
the hands of the gods! Is he not the heir of Kingsland? But Achmet
the Astrologer has cast his horoscope, and Achmet, and Zara, his wife,
wilt see that the starry destiny is fulfilled. Shall we not?" "If I only had him here," Zara cried, clawing the air with her two
hands, "I would throttle the baby snake, and fling him dead in his
father's face. And that father! Oh, burning alive would be far too
merciful for him!" Achmet smiled, and drew her long black braids caressingly through his
fingers. "You know how to hate, and you will teach our little one. Yes, the
fate I have foretold shall come to pass, and the son of Sir Jasper will
live to curse the day of his birth. And now I will remove my disguise,
and wash and breakfast, for I feel the calls of hunger." The lower apartment of the hut on the heath was the very picture of
abject poverty and dreary desolation. The earthen floor was broken and
rough; the sunlight came sifting through the chinks in the broken
walls. A smoky fire of wet driftwood smoldered, under a pot on the
crook. There was neither table nor chairs. A straw pallet with a
wretched coverlet lay in one corner; a few broken stools were scattered
around; a few articles of clothing hung on the wall. That was all. "The little one sleeps," the man said, casting a swift glance over at
the pallet. "Our pretty baby, Zara. Ah, if Sir Jasper Kingsland loves
his first-born son as we love our child, or half so well, we are almost
avenged already!" "He had need to love it better than his first-born daughter!" Zara
said, fiercely. "The lion loves its whelp, the tiger its cub; but he,
less human than the brutes, casts off his offspring in the hour of its
birth!" "Meaning yourself, my Zara?" the man said, with his slow, soft smile. "What would you have, degraded daughter of a degraded mother--his toy
of an hour? And there is another daughter--a fair-haired, insipid
nonentity of a dozen years, no more like our beautiful one here than a
farthing rush-light is like the stars of heaven." He drew down the tattered quilt, and gazed with shining eyes of love
and admiration at the sleeping face of a child, a baby girl of scarce
two years, the cherub face rosy with sleep, smiling in her dreams; the
long, silky black lashes sweeping the flushed cheek; the abundant,
feathery, jet-black curls floating loosely about--an exquisite picture
of blooming, healthful, beautiful childhood. Zara came to where the man knelt. "My beautiful one! my rosebud!" she murmured. "Pietro, the sun shines
on nothing half so lovely in this lower world!" "And yet the black, bad blood of the Gitana flows in her veins, too. She is a Spanish gypsy, as her mother and grandmother before her. Nay,
not her mother, since the blue blood of all the Kingsland's flows in
her veins." "Never!" cried Zara, her eyes ablaze. "If I thought one drop of that
man's bitter blood throbbed in my heart, the first knife I met should
let it forth. Look at me!" she wildly cried, "look at me,
Pietro--Zara, your wife! Have I one look of him or his abhorred
English race?" "My Zara, no! You are Sir Jasper Kingsland's daughter, but there is no
look of the great Sir Jasper in your gypsy face, nor in the face of our
darling, either. She is all our own!" "I would strangle her in her cradle, dearly as I love her, else!" the
woman said, her passionate face aflame. "Pietro, my blood is like
liquid fire when I think of him and my mother's wrongs." "Wait, Zara--wait. The wheel will turn and our time come. And now for
breakfast!" She whipped off the pot, removed the lid, and a savory gush of steam
filled the room. The man Pietro laughed. "Our poached hare smells appetizing. Keep the choicest morsel for the
mother, Zara, and tell her I will be with her presently. There! Achmet the Astrologer lies in a heap." He had deftly taken off his flowing cloak, his long, silvery beard and
hair, and flung them together in a corner, and now he stood in the
center of the room, a stalwart young fellow of thirty or thereabouts,
with great Spanish eyes and profuse curling hair of an inky blackness. "Let me but wash this white enamel off my face," he said, giving
himself a shake, "and Pietro is himself again. Sir Jasper would hardly
recognize Achmet, I fancy, if he saw him now." He walked to a shelf on which was placed a wash-bowl and towel, and
plunged his face and head into the cold water. Five minutes' vigorous
splashing and rubbing, and he emerged, his pallid face brown as a
berry, his black hair in a snarl of crisp curls. "And now to satisfy the inner man," he said, walking over to the pot,
seizing a wooden spoon, and drawing up a cricket. "My tramp of last
night and this morning has made me famously hungry, Zara." "And the hare soup is good," said Zara. "While you breakfast, Pietro,
I will go to mother. Come up when you finish." A steep stair-way that was like a ladder led to the loft. Zara
ascended this with agile fleetness, and the late astrologer was left
alone at his very unmagician-like work of scraping the pot with a
wooden spoon. Once or twice, as the fancy crossed him of the contrast
between Achmet, the Astrologer reading the stars, and Pietro the tramp
scraping the bones of the stolen hare, he laughed grimly to himself. "And the world is made up of just such contrasts," he thought, "and
Pietro at his homely breakfast is more to be dreaded than Achmet
casting the horoscope. Ah! Sir Jasper Kingsland, it is a very fine
thing to be a baronet with fifteen thousand pounds a year, a noble
ancestral seat, a wife you love, and a son you adore. And yet Pietro,
the vagabond tramp--the sunburned gypsy, with stolen hares to eat, and
rags to wear, and a hut to lodge in--would not exchange places with you
this bright March day. We have sworn vendetta to you and all of your
blood, and we will keep our vow!" His swarthy face darkened with passionate vindictiveness as he arose. "'As a man sows so shall he reap,'" he muttered between his clinched
teeth, setting his face toward Kingsland Court. "You, my Lord of
Kingsland, have sown the wind. You shall learn what it is to reap the
whirlwind!" "Pietro! Pietro!" crowed a little voice, gleefully. "Papa Pietro! take Sunbeam!" The little sleeper in the bed had sat up, her bright, dark face
sparkling, two little dimpled arms outstretched. The man turned, his vindictive face growing radiant. "Papa Pietro's darling! his life! his angel! And how does the little
Sunbeam?" He caught her up, covering her face with kisses. "My love! my life! my darling! When Pietro is dead, and Zara is old
and feeble, and Zenith dust and ashes, you will live, my radiant angel,
my black-eyed beauty, to perpetuate the malediction. When his son is a
man, you will be a woman, with all a woman's subtle power and more than
a woman's beauty, and you will be his curse, and his bane, and his
blight, as his father has been ours! Will you not, my little Sunbeam?" "Yes, papa--yes, papa!" lisped the little one. "Pietro!" called his wife, "if you have done breakfast, come up. Mother is awake and would see you." "Coming, _carissima_!" He kissed the baby girl, placed her on the pallet, and sprung lightly
up the steep stair. The loft was just a shade less wretched than the apartment below. There was a bed on the floor, more decently covered, two broken chairs,
a table with some medicine bottles and cups, and a white curtain on the
one poor window. On the bed lay a woman, over whom Pietro bent reverently the moment he
entered the room. It was the wreck of a woman who, in the days gone
by, must have been gloriously beautiful; who was beautiful still,
despite the ravages years, sickness, and poverty had wrought. The eyes that blazed brilliant and black were the eyes of Zara--the
eyes of the baby Sunbeam below--and this woman was the mother of one,
the grandmother of the other. Pietro knelt by the pallet and tenderly kissed one transparent hand. The great black eyes turned upon him wild and wide. "Thou hast seen him, Pietro?" in a breathless sort of way. "Zara says
so." "I have seen him, my mother; I have spoken to him. I spent hours with
Sir Jasper Kingsland last night." "Thou didst?" Her words came pantingly, while passion throbbed in
every line of her face. "And there is a son--an heir?" "There is." She snatched her hand away and threw up her withered arms with a
vindictive shriek. "And I lie here, a helpless log, and he triumphs! I, Zenith, the Queen
of the Tribe--I, once beautiful and powerful, happy and free! I lie
here, a withered hulk, what he has made me! And a son and heir is born
to him!" As if the thought had goaded her to madness, she leaped up in bed,
tossing her gaunt arms and shrieking madly:

"Take me to him--take me to him! Zara! Pietro! Take me to him, if ye
are children of mine, that I may hurl my burning curse upon him and his
son before I die!" She fell back with an impotent scream, and the man Pietro caught her in
his arms. Quivering and convulsed, she writhed in an epileptic fit. "She will kill herself yet," Pietro said. "Hand me the drops, Zara." Zara poured something out of a bottle into a cup, and Pietro held it to
the sick woman's livid lips. She choked and swallowed, and, as if by magic, lay still in his arms. Very tenderly he laid her back on the bed. "She will sleep now, Zara," he said. "Let us go." They descended the stairs. Down below, the man laid his hands on his
wife's shoulders and looked into her face. "Watch her, Zara," he said, "for she is mad, and the very first
opportunity she will make her escape and seek out Sir Jasper Kingsland;
and that is the very last thing I want. So watch your mother well." CHAPTER IV. AN UNINVITED GUEST. Sir Jasper Kingsland stood moodily alone. He was in the library,
standing by the window--that very window through which, one stormy
night scarcely a month before, he had admitted Achmet the Astrologer. He stood there with a face of such dark gloom that all the brightness
of the sunlit April day could not cast one enlivening gleam. He stood there scowling darkly upon it all, so lost in his own somber
thoughts that he did not hear the library door open, nor the soft
rustle of a woman's dress as she halted on the threshold. A fair and stately lady, with a proud, colorless face lighted up with
pale-blue eyes, and with bands of pale flaxen hair pushed away under a
dainty lace cap--a lady who looked scarce thirty, although almost ten
years older, unmistakably handsome, unmistakably proud. It was Olivia,
Lady Kingsland. "Alone, Sir Jasper!" a musical voice said. "May I come in, or do you
prefer solitude and your own thoughts?" The sweet voice--soft and low, as a lady's voice should be--broke the
somber spell that bound him. He wheeled round, his dark, moody face
lighting up at sight of her, as all the glorious morning sunshine never
could have lighted it. That one radiant look would have told you how
he loved his wife. "You, Olivia?" he cried, advancing. "Surely this is a surprise! My
dearest, is it quite prudent in you to leave your room?" He took the slender, white-robed figure in his arms, and kissed her as
tenderly as a bridegroom of a week might have done. Lady Kingsland
laughed a soft, tinkling little laugh. "A month is quite long enough to be a prisoner, Jasper, even although a
prisoner of state. And on my boy's christening fete--the son and heir
I have desired so long--ah, surely a weaker mother than I might essay
to quit her room." The moody darkness, like a palpable frown, swept over the baronet's
face again at her words. "Is he dressed?" he asked. "He is dressed and asleep, and Lady Helen and Mr. Carlyon, his
godmother and godfather, are hovering over the crib like twin guardian
angels. And Mildred sits _en grande tenue_ on her cricket, in a
speechless trance of delight, and nurse rustles about in her new silk
gown and white lace cap with an air of importance and self-complacency
almost indescribable. The domestic picture only wants papa and mamma
to make it complete." She laughed as she spoke, a little sarcastically; but Sir Jasper's
attempt even to smile was a ghastly failure. Lady Kingsland folded both her hands on his shoulder, and looked up in
his face with anxious, searching eyes. "What is it?" she asked. The baronet laughed uneasily. "What is what?" "This gloom, this depression, this dark, mysterious moodiness. Jasper,
what has changed you of late?" "Mysterious moodiness! changed me of late! Nonsense, Olivia! I don't
know what you mean." Again he strove to laugh, and again it was a wretched failure. Lady Kingsland's light-blue eyes never left his face. "I think you do, Jasper. Since the night of our boy's birth you have
been another man. What is it?" A spasm crossed the baronet's face; his lips twitched convulsively; his
face slowly changed to a gray, ashen pallor. "What is it?" the lady slowly reiterated. "Surely my husband, after
all these years, has no secrets from me?" The tender reproach of her tone, of her eyes, stung the husband, who
loved her, to the quick. "For God's sake, Olivia, don't ask me!" he cried passionately. "It
would be sheerest nonsense in your eyes, I know. You would but laugh
at what half drives me mad!" Jasper!" "Don't look at me with that reproachful face, Olivia! It is true. You
would look upon it as sheerest folly, I tell you, and laugh at me for a
credulous fool." "No," said Lady Kingsland, quietly, and a little coldly. "You know me
better. I could never laugh at what gives my husband pain." "Pain! I have lived in torment ever since, and yet--who knows?--it may
be absurdest jugglery. But he told me the past so truly--my very
thoughts! And no one could know what happened in Spain so many years
ago! Oh, I must believe it--I can not help it--and that belief will
drive me mad!" Lady Kingsland stood looking and listening, in pale wonder. "I don't understand a word of this," she said, slowly. "Will you tell
me, Sir Jasper, or am I to understand you have secrets your wife may
not share?" "My own dear wife," he said--"my best beloved--Heaven knows, if I have
one secret from you, I keep it that I may save you sorrow. Not one
cloud should ever darken the sunshine of your sky, if I had my way. You are right--I have a secret--a secret of horror, and dread, and
dismay--a terrible secret that sears my brain and burns my heart! Olivia, my darling, its very horror prevents my telling it to you!" "Does it concern our boy?" she asked, quickly. "Yes!" with a groan. "Now you can understand its full terror. It
menaces the son I love more than life. I thought to keep it from you;
I tried to appear unchanged; but it seems I have failed miserably." "And you will not tell me what this secret is?" "I dare not! I would not have you suffer as I suffer." "A moment ago you said I would laugh at it and you. Your terms are
inconsistent, Sir Jasper." "Spare me, Olivia!--I scarce know what I say--and do not be angry." She drew her hands coldly and haughtily away from his grasp. She was a
thoroughly proud woman, and his secrecy stung her. "I am not angry, Sir Jasper. Keep your secret, if you will. I was
foolish enough to fancy I had right to know of any danger that menaces
my baby, but it appears I was mistaken. In half an hour the carriages
will start for the church. You will find us all in the nursery." She was sweeping proudly away in silent anger, but the baronet strode
after her and caught her arm. "You will know this!" he said, huskily. "Olivia, Olivia! you are cruel
to yourself and to me, but you shall hear--part, at least. I warn you,
however, you will be no happier for knowing." "Go on," she said, steadily. He turned from her, walked to the window, and kept his back to her
while he spoke. "You have no faith in fortune-tellers, clairvoyants, astrologers, and
the like, have you, Olivia?" "Most certainly not!" "Then what I have to say will scarcely trouble you as it troubles
me--for I believe; and the prediction of an astrologer has ruined my
peace for the past month." "Is that all? The mountain in labor has brought forth a mouse. My
dear Sir Jasper, how can you be so simply credulous?" "I knew you would laugh," said Sir Jasper, moodily; "I said so. But
laugh if you can. I believe!" "Was the prediction very terrible, then?" asked his wife, with a smile. "Pray tell me all about it." "It was terrible," her husband replied, sternly. "The living horror it
has cast over me might have told you that. Listen, Olivia! On that
night of our baby boy's birth, after I left you and came here, I stood
by this window and saw a spectral face gleaming through the glass. It
was the face of a man--a belated wayfarer--who adjured me, in the
Savior's name, to let him in." "Well, you let him in, I suppose?" "I let him in--a strange-looking object, Olivia, like no creature I
ever saw before, with flowing beard and hair silver-white--"

"False, no doubt." "He wore a long, disguising cloak and a skull-cap," went on Sir Jasper,
"and his face was blanched to a dull dead white. He would have looked
like a resuscitated corpse, only for a pair of burning black eyes." "Quite a startling apparition! Melodramatic in the extreme! And this
singular being--what was he? Clairvoyant, astrologer, what?" "Astrologer--an Eastern astrologer--Achmet by name." "And who, probably, never was further than London in his life-time. A
well-got-up charlatan, no doubt." "Charlatan he may have been; Englishman he was not. His face, his
speech, convinced me of that. And, Olivia, charlatan or no, he told me
my past life as truly as I knew it myself." Lady Kingsland listened with a quiet smile. "No doubt he has been talking to the good people of the village and to
the servants in the house." "Neither the people of the village nor the servants of the house know
aught of what he told me. He showed me what transpired twenty years
ago. "Twenty years ago?" "Yes, when I was fresh from Cambridge, and making my first tour. Events that occurred in Spain--that no one under heaven save myself can
know of--he told me." "That was strange!" "Olivia, it was astounding--incomprehensible! I should never have
credited one word he said but for that. He told me the past as I know
it myself. Events that transpired in a far foreign land a score of
years ago, known, as I thought, to no creature under heaven, he told me
of as if they had transpired yesterday. The very thoughts that I
thought in that by-gone time he revealed as if my heart lay open before
him. How, then, could I doubt? If he could lift the veil of the
irrevocable past, why not be able to lift the veil of the mysterious
future? He took the hour of our child's birth and ascended to the
battlements, and there, alone with the stars of heaven, he cast his
horoscope. Olivia, men in all ages have believed in this power of
astrology, and I believe as firmly as I believe in Heaven." Lady Kingsland listened, and that quiet smile of half amusement, half
contempt never left her lips. "And the horoscope proved a horrorscope, no doubt," she said, the smile
deepening. "You paid your astrologer handsomely, I presume, Sir
Jasper?" "I gave him nothing. He would take nothing--not even a cup of water. Of his own free will he cast the horoscope, and, without reward of any
kind, went his way when he had done." "What did you say the name was?" "Achmet the Astrologer." "Melodramatic again! And now, Sir Jasper, what awful fate betides our
boy?" "Ask me not! You do not believe. What the astrologer foretold I shall
tell no one." "The carriage waits, my lady," a servant said, entering. "Lady Helen
bade me remind you, my lady, it is time to start for church." Lady Kingsland hastily glanced at her watch. "Why, so it is! I had nearly forgotten. Come, Sir Jasper, and forget
your fears on this happy day." She led him from the room. Baby, in its christening-robes, slept in
nurse's arms, and Lady Helen and Mr. Carlyon stood impatiently waiting. "We will certainly be late!" Lady Helen, who was god-mamma, said,
fussily. "Had we not better depart at once, Sir Jasper?" "I am quite at your ladyship's service. We will not delay an instant
longer. Proceed, nurse." Nurse, with her precious burden, went before. Sir Jasper drew Lady
Helen's arm within his own, and Mr. Carlyon followed with little
Mildred Kingsland. Lady Kingsland watched the carriage out of sight, and then went slowly
and thoughtfully back to her room. "How extremely foolish and weak of Sir Jasper," she was thinking, "to
pay the slightest attention to the canting nonsense of these
fortune-telling impostors! If I had been in his place I would have had
him horsewhipped from my gates for his pains. I must find out what
this terrible prediction was and laugh it out of my husband's mind." Meantime the carriage rolled down the long avenue, under the majestic
copper-beeches, through the lofty gates, and along the bright sunlit
road leading to the village. In stole and surplice, within the village church, the Reverend Cyrus
Green, Rector of Stonehaven, stood by the baptismal font, waiting to
baptize the heir of all the Kingslands. Stately, Sir Jasper Kingsland strode up the aisle, with Lady Helen upon
his arm. No trace of the trouble within showed in his pale face as he
heard his son baptized Everard Jasper Carew Kingsland. The ceremony was over. Nurse took the infant baronet again; Lady Helen
adjusted her mantle, and the Reverend Cyrus Green was blandly offering
his congratulations to the greatest man in the parish, when a sudden
commotion at the door startled all. Some one striving to enter, and
some other one refusing admission. "Let me in, I tell you!" cried a shrill, piercing voice--the voice of
an angry woman. "Stand aside, woman! I will see Sir Jasper Kingsland." With the last ringing words the intruder burst past the pew-opener, and
rushed wildly into the church. A weird and unearthly figure--like one
of Macbeth's witches--with streaming black hair floating over a long,
red cloak, and two black eyes of flame. All recoiled as the spectral
figure rushed up like a mad thing and confronted Sir Jasper Kingsland. "At last!" she shrilly cried, in a voice that pierced even to the
gaping listeners without--"at last, Sir Jasper Kingsland! At last we
meet again!" There was a horrible cry as the baronet started back, putting up both
hands, with a look of unutterable horror. "Good God! Zenith!" "Yes, Zenith!" shrieked the woman; "Zenith, the beautiful, once! Zenith, the hag, the crone, the madwoman, now! Look at me well, Sir
Jasper Kingsland--for the ruin is your own handiwork!" He stood like a man paralyzed--speechless, stunned--his face the livid
hue of death. The wretched woman stood before him with streaming hair, blazing eyes,
and uplifted arm, a very incarnate fury. "Look at me well!" she fiercely shrieked, tossing her locks of old off
her fiery face. "Am I like the Zenith of twenty years ago--young and
beautiful, and bright enough even for the fastidious Englishman to
love? Look at me now--ugly and old, wrinkled and wretched, deserted
and despised--and tell me if I have not greater reason to hate you than
ever woman had to hate man?" She tossed her arms aloft with a madwoman's shriek--crying out her
words in a long, wild scream. "I hate you--I hate you! Villain! dastard! perjured wretch! I hate
you, and I curse you, here in the church you call holy! I curse you
with a ruined woman's curse, and hot and scathing may it burn on your
head and on the heads of your children's children!" The last horrible words aroused the listeners from their petrified
trance. The Reverend Cyrus Green lifted up his voice in a tone of
command:

"This woman is mad! She is a furious lunatic! Dawson! Humphreys! come here and secure her!" "The child! the child!" she cried, with a screech of demoniac delight;
"the spawn of the viper is within my grasp!" One plunge forward and the infant heir was in her arms, held high
aloft. One second later, and its blood and brains would have
bespattered the stone floor, but Mr. Carlyon sprung forward and
wrenched it from her grasp. The two men summoned by the clergyman closed upon her and held her
fast; her frantic shrieks rang to the roof. Then suddenly, all ceased,
and, foaming and livid, she fell between them in a fit. CHAPTER V.

ZENITH'S MALEDICTION. A dead pause of blank consternation; the faces around a sight to see;
horror and wonder in every countenance--most of all in the countenance
of Sir Jasper Kingsland. The clergyman was the first to speak. "The woman is stark mad," he said. "We must see about this. Such
violent lunatics must not be allowed to go at large. Here, Humphreys,
do you and Dawson lift her up and carry her to my house. It is the
nearest, and she can be properly attended to there." "You know her, Sir Jasper, do you not?" asked Lady Helen, with quick
womanly intuition. "Know her?" Sir Jasper replied, "know Zenith? Great Heaven! I thought
she was dead." The Reverend Cyrus Green and Lady Helen exchanged glances. Mr. Carlyon
looked in sharp surprise at the speaker. "Then she is not mad, after all! I thought she mistook you for some
one else. If you know her, you have the best right to deal with her. Shall these men take her to Kingsland Court?" "Not for ten thousand worlds!" Sir Jasper cried, impetuously. "The
woman is nothing--less than nothing--to me. I knew her once, years
ago. I thought her dead and buried; hence the shock her sudden
entrance gave me. A lunatic asylum is the proper place for such as
she. Let Mr. Green send her there, and the sooner the better." The Reverend Cyrus Green looked with grave, suspicious eyes for a
moment at the leaden face of the speaker. "There is wrong and mystery about this," he thought--"a dark mystery of
guilt. This woman is mad, but her wrongs have driven her mad, and you,
Sir Jasper Kingsland, are her wronger." "It shall be as you say, Sir Jasper," he said, aloud; "that is, if I
find this poor creature has no friends. Are you aware whether she has
any?" "I tell you I know nothing of her!" the baronet cried, with fierce
impatience. "What should I know of such a wretch as that?" "More than you dare tell, Sir Jasper Kingsland!" cried a high, ringing
voice, as a young woman rushed impetuously into the church and up the
aisle. "Coward and liar! False, perjured wretch! You are too
white-livered a hound even to tell the truth! What should you know of
such a wretch as that, forsooth! Double-dyed traitor and dastard! Look me in the face and tell me you don't know her!" Every one shrunk in terror and dismay; Sir Jasper stood as a man might
stand suddenly struck by lightning. And if looks were lightning, the
blazing eyes of the young woman might have blasted him where he stood. A tall and handsome young woman, with black eyes of fire, streaming,
raven hair, and a brown gypsy face. "Who are you, in mercy's name?" cried the Reverend Cyrus Green. "I am the daughter of this wretch, as your baronet yonder is pleased to
call my mad mother. Yes, Mr. Green, she is my mother. If you want to
know who my father is, you had better ask Sir Jasper Kingsland!" "It is false!" the baronet cried, "I know nothing of you or your
father. I never set eyes on you before." "Wait, wait, wait!" the Reverend Cyrus Green cried, imploringly. "For
Heaven's sake, young woman, don't make a scene before all these
listeners. We will have your mother conveyed into the vestry until she
recovers; and if she ever recovers, no time is to be lost in attending
to her. Sir Jasper, I think the child had better be sent home
immediately. My lady will wonder at the delay." A faint wail from the infant lying in the nurse's arms seconded the
suggestion. That feeble cry and the mention of his wife acted as a
magic spell upon the baronet. "Your mad intruders have startled us into forgetting everything else. Proceed, nurse. Lady Helen, take my arm. Mr. Carlyon, see to Mildred. The child looks frightened to death, and little wonder!" "Little, indeed!" sighed Lady Helen. "I shall not recover from the
shock for a month. It was like a scene in a melodrama--like a chapter
of a sensation novel. And you know that dreadful creature, Sir Jasper?" "I used to know her," the baronet said, with emphasis, "so many years
ago that I had almost forgotten she ever existed. She was always more
or less mad, I fancy, and it seems hereditary. Her daughter--if
daughter she be--seems as distraught as her mother." "And her name, Sir Jasper? You called her by some name, I think." "Zenith, I suppose. To tell the truth, Lady Helen, the woman is
neither more nor less than a gypsy fortune-teller crazed by a
villainous life and villainous liquor. But, for the sake of the days
gone by, when she was young and pretty and told my fortune, I think I
will go back and see what Mr. Green intends doing with her. Such crazy
vagrants should not be allowed to go at large." The light tone was a ghastly failure, and the smile but a death's-head
grin. He placed Lady Helen in the carriage--Mr. Carlyon assisted the
nurse and little Mildred. Then Sir Jasper gave the order, "Home," and
the stately carriage of the Kingslands, with its emblazoned crest,
whirled away in a cloud of dust. For an instant he stood looking after
it. "Curses on it!" he muttered between set teeth. "After all these years,
are those dead doings to be flung in my face? I thought her dead and
gone; and lo! in the hour of my triumph she rises as if from the grave
to confound me. Her daughter, too! I never knew she had a child! Good heavens! how these wild oats we sow in youth flourish and multiply
with their bitter, bad fruit!" He turned and strode into the vestry. On the floor the miserable woman
lay, her eyes closed, her jaw fallen. By her side, supporting her
head, the younger woman knelt, holding a glass of water to her lips. The Reverend Cyrus Green stood gravely looking on. "Is she dead?" Sir Jasper asked, in a hard voice. It was to the clergyman he spoke, but the girl looked fiercely up, her
tones like a serpent's hiss. "Not dead, Sir Jasper Kingsland! No thanks to you for it! Murderer--as much a murderer as if you had cut her throat--look on her,
and be proud of the ruin you have wrought!" "Silence, woman!" Mr. Green ordered, imperiously. "We will have none
of your mad recriminations here. She is not dead, Sir Jasper, but she
is dying, I think. This young woman wishes to remove her--whither, I
know not--but it is simply impossible. That unfortunate creature will
not be alive when to-morrow dawns." "What do you propose doing with her?" the baronet asked, steadily. "We will convey her to the sexton's house--it is very near. I have
sent Dawson for a stretcher; he and Humphreys will carry her. This
young woman declines to give her name, or tell who she is, or where she
lives." "Where I live is no affair of yours, if I can not take my mother
there," the young woman answered, sullenly. "Who I am, you know. I
told you I am this woman's daughter." "And a gypsy, I take it?" said Mr. Green. "You guess well, sir, but only half the truth. Half gypsy I am, and
half gentlewoman. A mongrel, I suppose, that makes; and yet it is well
to have good blood in one's veins, even on the father's side." There was a sneering emphasis in her words, and the snaky black eyes
gleamed like daggers on the baronet. But that proud face was set and rigid as stone now. He returned her
look with a haughty stare. "It is a pity the whipping-post has been abolished," he said, harshly. "Your impertinence makes you a fit subject for it, mistress! Take care
we don't commit you to prison as a public vagrant, and teach that
tongue of yours a little civility when addressing your betters." "My betters!" the girl hissed, in a fierce, sibilant whisper. "Why,
yes, I suppose a daughter should look upon a father in that light. As
to the whipping-post and prison, try it at your peril! Try it, if you
dare, Sir Jasper." Before he could speak the door opened, and Dawson entered with the
stretcher. "Lay her upon it and remove her at once," the rector said. "Here,
Humphreys, this side. Gently, my men--gently. Be very careful on the
way." The two men placed the seemingly lifeless form of Zenith on the
stretcher and bore her carefully away. The daughter Zara followed. "She will not live until to-morrow morning," the rector said; "and it
is better so, poor soul! She is evidently hopelessly insane." "And the daughter appears but little better. By the way, Mr. Green,
Lady Kingsland desires me to fetch you back to dinner." The rector bowed. "Her ladyship is very good. Has your carriage gone? I will order out
the pony-phaeton, if you like." Ten minutes later the two gentlemen were bowling along the pleasant
country road leading to the Court. It was a very silent drive, for the
baronet sat moodily staring at vacancy, his mouth set in hard, wordless
pain. "They will tell Olivia," he was thinking, gloomily. "What will she say
to all this?" But his fears seemed groundless. Lady Kingsland treated the matter
with cool indifference. To be sure, she had not heard quite all. A
madwoman had burst into the church, had terrified Lady Helen pretty
nearly to death with her crazy language, and had tried to tear away the
baby. That was the discreet story my lady heard, and which she was
disposed to treat with calm surprise. Baby was safe, and it had ended
in nothing; the madwoman was being properly cared for. Lady Kingsland
quietly dismissed the incident altogether before the end of dinner. The hours of the evening wore on--very long hours to the lord of
Kingsland Court, seated at the head of his table, dispensing his
hospitalities and trying to listen to the long stories of Mr. Carlyon
and the rector. It was worse in the drawing-room, with the lights and the music, and
his stately wife at the piano, and Lady Helen at his side, prattling
with little Mildred over a pile of engravings. All the time, in a
half-distracted sort of way, his thoughts were wandering to the
sexton's cottage and the woman dying therein--the woman he had thought
dead years ago--dying there in desolation and misery--and here the
hours seemed strung on roses. It was all over at last. The guests were gone, the baby baronet slept
in his crib, and Lady Kingsland had gone to her chamber. But Sir
Jasper lingered still--wandering up and down the long drawing-room like
a restless ghost. A clock on the mantel chimed twelve. Ere its last chime had sounded a
sleepy valet stood in the doorway. "A messenger for you, Sir Jasper--sent by the Reverend Mr. Green. Here--come in." Thus invoked, Mr. Dawson entered, pulling his forelock. "Parson, he sent me, zur. She be a-doying, she be." He knew instantly who the man meant. "And she wishes to see me?" "She calls for you all the time, zur. She be a-doying uncommon hard. Parson bid me come and tell 'ee." "Very well, my man," the baronet said. "That will do. I will go at
once. Thomas, order my horse, and fetch my riding-cloak and gloves." The valet stared in astonishment, but went to obey. It was something
altogether without precedent, this queer proceeding on the part of his
master, and, taken in connection with that other odd event in church,
looked remarkably suspicious. The night was dark and starless, and the wind blew raw and bleak as the
baronet dashed down the avenue and out into the high-road. He almost
wondered at himself for complying with the dying woman's desire, but
some inward impulse beyond his control seemed driving him on. He rode rapidly, and a quarter of an hour brought him to the sexton's
cottage. A feeble light glimmered from the window out into the
blackness of the night. A moment later and he stood within, in the
presence of the dying. The Reverend Cyrus Green sat by the table, a Bible in his hand. Kneeling by the bedside, her face ghastly white, her burning black eyes
dry and tearless, was the young woman. And like a dead woman already,
stretched on the bed, lay Zenith. But she was not dead. At the sound of the opening door, at the sound
of his entrance, she opened her eyes, dulling fast in death, and fixed
them on Sir Jasper. "I knew you would come," she said, in a husky whisper. "You dare not
stay away! The spirit of the dying Zenith drove you here in spite of
yourself. Come nearer--nearer! Sir Jasper Kingsland, don't hover
aloof. Once you could never be near enough. Ah, I was young and fair
then! I'm old and ugly now. Come nearer, for I can not speak aloud,
and listen. Do you know why I have sent for you?" He had approached the bedside. She caught his hand and held it in a
vise-like clutch. "No," he said, recoiling. "To give you my dying malediction--to curse you with my latest breath! I hate you, Sir Jasper Kingsland, falsest of all mankind! and if the
dead can return and torment the living, then do you beware of me!" She spoke in panting gasps, the death-rattle sounding in her skinny
throat. Shocked and scandalized, the rector interposed:

"My good woman, don't--for pity's sake, don't say such horrible things!" But she never heeded him. "I hate you!" she said, with a last effort. 