

E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Project Gutenberg Beginners Projects,
Norma Elloitt, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team



ISHMAEL

Or, In the Depths

by

Mrs. E. D. E. N. Southworth

Author of
_Self-Raised_, _The Hidden Hand_, _Capitola's Peril_,
_The Bride's Fate_, _The Changed Brides_, etc. A.L. Burt Company, Publishers
New York







  "Light was his footstep in the dance
   And firm his stirrup in the lists,
   And O! he had that merry glance
   That seldom lady's heart resists." *     *     *     *     *     *



POPULAR BOOKS
By MRS. E. D. E. N. SOUTHWORTH

In Handsome Cloth Binding
Price per volume      60 Cents


Beautiful Fiend, A

Brandon Coyle's Wife
  Sequel to A Skeleton in the Closet

Bride's Fate, The
  Sequel to The Changed Brides

Bride's Ordeal, The

Capitola's Peril
  Sequel to the Hidden Hand

Changed Brides, The

Cruel as the Grave

David Lindsay
  Sequel to Gloria

Deed Without a Name, A

Dorothy Harcourt's Secret
  Sequel to A Deed Without a Name

"Em"

Em's Husband
  Sequel to "Em"

Fair Play

For Whose Sake
  Sequel to Why Did He Wed Her? For Woman's Love

Fulfilling Her Destiny
  Sequel to When Love Commands

Gloria

Her Love or Her life
  Sequel to The Bride's Ordeal

Her Mother's Secret

Hidden Hand, The

How He Won Her
  Sequel to Fair Play

Ishmael

Leap in the Dark, A

Lilith
  Sequel to the Unloved Wife

Little Nea's Engagement
  Sequel to Nearest and Dearest

Lost Heir, The

Lost Lady of Lone, The

Love's Bitterest Cup
  Sequel to Her Mother's Secret

Mysterious Marriage, The
  Sequel to A Leap in the Dark

Nearest and Dearest

Noble Lord, A
  Sequel to The Lost Heir

Self-Raised
  Sequel to Ishmael

Skeleton in the Closet, A

Struggle of a Soul, The
  Sequel to The Lost Lady of Lone

Sweet Love's Atonement

Test of Love, The
  Sequel to A Tortured Heart

To His Fate
  Sequel to Dorothy Harcourt's Secret

Tortured Heart, A
  Sequel to The Trail of the Serpent

Trail of the Serpent, The

Tried for Her Life
  Sequel to Cruel as the Grave

Unloved Wife, The

Unrequited Love, An
  Sequel to For Woman's Love

Victor's Triumph
  Sequel to A Beautiful Fiend

When Love Commands

When Shadows Die
  Sequel to Love's Bitterest Cup

Why Did He Wed Her? Zenobia's Suitors
  Sequel to Sweet Love's Atonement


For Sale by all Booksellers or will be sent postpaid on receipt of price,

             A.L. BURT COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
             52 Duane Street      New York



     *     *     *     *     *     *




PREFACE. This story, in book form, has been called for during several years past,
but the author has reserved it until now; not only because she considers
it to be her very best work, but because it is peculiarly a national
novel, being founded on the life and career of one of the noblest of our
countrymen, who really lived, suffered, toiled, and triumphed in this
land; one whose inspirations of wisdom and goodness were drawn from the
examples of the heroic warriors and statesmen of the Revolution, and who
having by his own energy risen from the deepest obscurity to the highest
fame, became in himself an illustration of the elevating influence of
our republican institutions. "In the Depths" he was born indeed--in the very depths of poverty,
misery, and humiliation. But through Heaven's blessing on his
aspirations and endeavors, he raised himself to the summit of fame. He was good as well as great. His goodness won the love of all who knew
him intimately. His greatness gained the homage of the world. He became,
in a word, one of the brightest stars in Columbia's diadem of light. His identity will be recognized by those who were familiar with his
early personal history; but for obvious reasons his real name must be
veiled under a fictitious one here. His life is a guiding-star to the youth of every land, to show them that
there is no depth of human misery from which they may not, by virtue,
energy and perseverance, rise to earthly honors as well as to eternal
glory. Emma D. E. N. Southworth. Prospect Cottage,
Georgetown, D.C. CONTENTS. I. THE SISTERS
II. LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT
III. PASSION
IV. THE FATAL DEED
V.       LOVE AND FATE
VI. A SECRET REVEALED
VII. MOTHER- AND DAUGHTER-IN-LAW
VIII. END OF THE SECRET MARRIAGE
IX. THE VICTIM
X. THE RIVALS
XI. THE MARTYRS OF LOVE
XII. HERMAN'S STORY
XIII. THE FLIGHT OF HERMAN
XIV. OVER NORA'S GRAVE
XV. NORA'S SON
XVI. THE FORSAKEN WIFE
XVII. THE COUNTESS AND THE CHILD
XVIII. BERENICE
XIX. NOBODY'S SON
XX. NEWS FROM HERMAN
XXI. ISHMAEL'S ADVENTURE
XXII. ISHMAEL GAINS HIS FIRST VERDICT
XXIII. ISHMAEL'S PROGRESS
XXIV. CLAUDIA TO THE RESCUE
XXV. A TURNING POINT IN ISHMAEL'S LIFE
XXVI. THE FIRE AT BRUDENELL HALL
XXVII. ISHMAEL'S FIRST STEP ON THE LADDER
XXVIII. ISHMAEL AND CLAUDIA
XXIX. YOUNG LOVE
XXX. ISHMAEL AND CLAUDIA
XXXI. ISHMAEL HEARS A SECRET FROM AN ENEMY
XXXII. AT HIS MOTHER'S GRAVE
XXXIII. LOVE AND GENIUS
XXXIV. UNDER THE OLD ELM TREE
XXXV. THE DREAM AND THE AWAKENING
XXXVI. DARKNESS
XXXVII. THE NEW HOME
XXXVIII. ISHMAEL'S STRUGGLES
XXXIX. ISHMAEL IN TANGLEWOOD
XL. THE LIBRARY
XLI. CLAUDIA
XLII. ISHMAEL AT TANGLEWOOD
XLIII. THE HEIRESS
XLIV. CLAUDIA'S PERPLEXITIES
XLV. THE INTERVIEW
XLVI. NEW LIFE
XLVII. RUSHY SHORE
XLVIII. ONWARD
XLIX. STILL ONWARD
L.       CLAUDIA'S CITY HOME
LI. HEIRESS AND BEAUTY
LII. AN EVENING AT THE PRESIDENT'S
LIII. THE VISCOUNT VINCENT
LIV. ISHMAEL AT THE BALL
LV. A STEP HIGHER
LVI. TRIAL AND TRIUMPH
LVII. THE YOUNG CHAMPION
LVIII. HERMAN BRUDENELL
LIX. FIRST MEETING OF FATHER AND SON
LX. HERMAN AND HANNAH
LXI. ENVY
LXII. FOILED MALICE
LXIII. THE BRIDE ELECT
LXIV. CLAUDIA'S WOE
LXV. ISHMAEL'S WOE
LXVI. THE MARRIAGE MORNING
LXVII. BEE'S HANDKERCHIEF




ISHMAEL

OR,

"IN THE DEPTHS." CHAPTER I. THE SISTERS. But if thou wilt be constant then,
    And faithful of thy word,
  I'll make thee glorious by my pen
    And famous by my sword. I'll serve thee in such noble ways
    Was never heard before;
  I'll crown and deck thee all with bays,
    And love thee evermore. --_James Graham_. "Well, if there be any truth in the old adage, young Herman Brudenell
will have a prosperous life; for really this is a lovely day for the
middle of April--the sky is just as sunny and the air as warm as if it
were June," said Hannah Worth, looking out from the door of her hut upon
a scene as beautiful as ever shone beneath the splendid radiance of an
early spring morning. "And what is that old adage you talk of, Hannah?" inquired her younger
sister, who stood braiding the locks of her long black hair before the
cracked looking-glass that hung above the rickety chest of drawers. "Why, la, Nora, don't you know? The adage is as old as the hills and as
true as the heavens, and it is this, that a man's twenty-first birthday
is an index to his after life:--if it be clear, he will be fortunate; if
cloudy, unfortunate." "Then I should say that young Mr. Brudenell's fortune will be a splendid
one; for the sun is dazzling!" said Nora, as she wound the long sable
plait of hair around her head in the form of a natural coronet, and
secured the end behind with--a thorn! "And, now, how do I look? Aint you
proud of me?" she archly inquired, turning with "a smile of conscious
beauty born" to the inspection of her elder sister. That sister might well have answered in the affirmative had she
considered personal beauty a merit of high order; for few palaces in
this world could boast a princess so superbly beautiful as this peasant
girl that this poor hut contained. Beneath those rich sable tresses was
a high broad forehead as white as snow; slender black eyebrows so well
defined and so perfectly arched that they gave a singularly open and
elevated character to the whole countenance; large dark gray eyes, full
of light, softened by long, sweeping black lashes; a small, straight
nose; oval, blooming cheeks; plump, ruddy lips that, slightly parted,
revealed glimpses of the little pearly teeth within; a well-turned chin;
a face with this peculiarity, that when she was pleased it was her eyes
that smiled and not her lips; a face, in short, full of intelligence and
feeling that might become thought and passion. Her form was noble--being
tall, finely proportioned, and richly developed. Her beauty owed nothing to her toilet--her only decoration was the
coronet of her own rich black hair; her only hair pin was a thorn; her
dress indeed was a masterpiece of domestic manufacture,--the cotton from
which it was made having been carded, spun, woven, and dyed by Miss
Hannah's own busy hands; but as it was only a coarse blue fabric, after
all, it would not be considered highly ornamental; it was new and clean,
however, and Nora was well pleased with it, as with playful impatience
she repeated her question:

"Say! aint you proud of me now?" "No," replied the elder sister, with assumed gravity; "I am proud of
your dress because it is my own handiwork, and it does me credit; but as
for you--"

"I am Nature's handiwork, and I do her credit!" interrupted Nora, with
gay self-assertion. "I am quite ashamed of you, you are so vain!" continued Hannah,
completing her sentence. "Oh, vain, am I? Very well, then, another time I will keep my vanity to
myself. It is quite as easy to conceal as to confess, you know; though
it may not be quite as good for the soul," exclaimed Nora, with merry
perversity, as she danced off in search of her bonnet. She had not far to look; for the one poor room contained all of the
sisters' earthly goods. And they were easily summed up--a bed in one
corner, a loom in another, a spinning-wheel in the third, and a
corner-cupboard in the fourth; a chest of drawers sat against the wall
between the bed and the loom, and a pine table against the opposite wall
between the spinning-wheel and the cupboard; four wooden chairs sat just
wherever they could be crowded. There was no carpet on the floor, no
paper on the walls. There was but one door and one window to the hut,
and they were in front. Opposite them at the back of the room was a wide
fire-place, with a rude mantle shelf above it, adorned with old brass
candlesticks as bright as gold. Poor as this hut was, the most
fastidious fine lady need not have feared to sit down within it, it was
so purely clean. The sisters were soon ready, and after closing up their wee hut as
cautiously as if it contained the wealth of India, they set forth, in
their blue cotton gowns and white cotton bonnets, to attend the grand
birthday festival of the young heir of Brudenell Hall. Around them spread out a fine, rolling, well-wooded country; behind them
stood their own little hut upon the top of its bare hill; below them lay
a deep, thickly-wooded valley, beyond which rose another hill, crowned
with an elegant mansion of white free-stone. That was Brudenell Hall. Thus the hut and the hall perched upon opposite hills, looked each other
in the face across the wooded valley. And both belonged to the same vast
plantation--the largest in the county. The morning was indeed delicious,
the earth everywhere springing with young grass and early flowers; the
forest budding with tender leaves; the freed brooks singing as they ran;
the birds darting about here and there seeking materials to build their
nests; the heavens benignly smiling over all; the sun glorious; the air
intoxicating; mere breath joy; mere life rapture! All nature singing a
Gloria in Excelsis! And now while the sisters saunter leisurely on,
pausing now and then to admire some exquisite bit of scenery, or to
watch some bird, or to look at some flower, taking their own time for
passing through the valley that lay between the hut and the hall, I must
tell you who and what they were. Hannah and Leonora Worth were orphans, living alone together in the hut
on the hill and supporting themselves by spinning and weaving. Hannah, the eldest, was but twenty-eight years old, yet looked forty;
for, having been the eldest sister, the mother-sister, of a large
family of orphan children, all of whom had died except the youngest,
Leonora,--her face wore that anxious, haggard, care-worn and prematurely
aged look peculiar to women who have the burdens of life too soon and
too heavily laid upon them. Her black hair was even streaked here and
there with gray. But with all this there was not the least trace of
impatience or despondency in that all-enduring face. When grave, its
expression was that of resignation; when gay--and even she could be gay
at times--its smile was as sunny as Leonora's own. Hannah had a lover as
patient as Job, or as herself, a poor fellow who had been constant to
her for twelve years, and whose fate resembled her own; for he was the
father of all his orphan brothers and sisters as she had been the mother
of hers. Of course, these poor lovers could not dream of marriage; but
they loved each other all the better upon that very account, perhaps. Lenora was ten years younger than her sister, eighteen, well grown, well
developed, blooming, beautiful, gay and happy as we have described her. She had not a care, or regret, or sorrow in the world. She was a bird,
the hut was her nest and Hannah her mother, whose wings covered her. These sisters were very poor; not, however, as the phrase is understood
in the large cities, where, notwithstanding the many charitable
institutions for the mitigation of poverty, scores of people perish
annually from cold and hunger; but as it is understood in the rich lower
counties of Maryland, where forests filled with game and rivers swarming
with fish afford abundance of food and fuel to even the poorest hutters,
however destitute they might be of proper shelter, clothing, or
education. And though these orphan sisters could not hunt or fish, they could buy
cheaply a plenty of game from the negroes who did. And besides this,
they had a pig, a cow, and a couple of sheep that grazed freely in the
neighboring fields, for no one thought of turning out an animal that
belonged to these poor girls. In addition, they kept a few fowls and
cultivated a small vegetable garden in the rear of their hut. And to
keep the chickens out of the garden was one of the principal occupations
of Nora. Their spinning-wheel and loom supplied them with the few
articles of clothing they required, and with a little money for the
purchase of tea, sugar, and salt. Thus you see their living was good,
though their dress, their house, and their schooling were so very bad. They were totally ignorant of the world beyond their own neighborhood;
they could read and write, but very imperfectly; and their only book was
the old family Bible, that might always be seen proudly displayed upon
the rickety chest of drawers. Notwithstanding their lowly condition, the sisters were much esteemed
for their integrity of character by their richer neighbors, who would
have gladly made them more comfortable had not the proud spirit of
Hannah shrunk from dependence. They had been invited to the festival to be held at Brudenell Hall in
honor of the young heir's coming of age and entering upon his estates. This gentlemen, Herman Brudenell, was their landlord; and it was as his
tenants, and not by any means as his equals, that they had been bidden
to the feast. And now we will accompany them to the house of rejoicing. They were now emerging from the valley and climbing the opposite hill. Hannah walking steadily on in the calm enjoyment of nature, and Nora
darting about like a young bird and caroling as she went in the
effervescence of her delight. CHAPTER II. LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT. Her sweet song died, and a vague unrest
  And a nameless longing filled her breast. --_Whittier_. The sisters had not seen their young landlord since he was a lad of ten
years of age, at which epoch he had been sent to Europe to receive his
education. He had but recently been recalled home by his widowed mother,
for the purpose of entering upon his estate and celebrating his majority
in his patrimonial mansion by giving a dinner and ball in the house to
all his kindred and friends, and a feast and dance in the barn to all
his tenants and laborers. It was said that his lady mother and his two young lady sisters, haughty
and repellent women that they were, had objected to entertaining his
dependents, but the young gentleman was resolved that they should enjoy
themselves. And he had his way. Nora had no recollection whatever of Herman Brudenell, who had been
taken to Europe while she was still a baby; so now, her curiosity being
stimulated, she plied Hannah with a score of tiresome questions about
him. "Is he tall, Hannah, dear? Is he very handsome?" "How can I tell? I have not seen him since he was ten years old." "But what is his complexion--is he fair or dark? and what is the color
of his hair and eyes? Surely, you can tell that at least." "Yes; his complexion, as well as I can recollect it, was freckled, and
his hair sandy, and his eyes green." "Oh-h! the horrid fright! a man to scare bad children into good
behavior! But then that was when he was but ten years old; he is
twenty-one to-day; perhaps he is much improved." "Nora, our sheep have passed through here, and left some of their wool
on the bushes. Look at that little bird, it has found a flake and is
bearing it off in triumph to line its little nest," said Hannah, to
change the subject. "Oh, I don't care about the bird; I wish you to tell me about the young
gentleman!" said Nora petulantly, adding the question: "I wonder who
he'll marry?" "Not you, my dear; so you had better not occupy your mind with him,"
Hannah replied very gravely. Nora laughed outright. "Oh, I'm quite aware of that; and as for me, I
would not marry a prince, if he had red hair and a freckled face; but
still one cannot help thinking of one's landlord, when one is going to
attend the celebration of his birthday." They had now reached the top of the hill and come upon a full view of
the house and grounds. The house, as I said, was a very elegant edifice of white free-stone; it
was two stories in height, and had airy piazzas running the whole length
of the front, both above and below; a stately portico occupied the
center of the lower piazza, having on each side of it the tall windows
of the drawing-rooms. This portico and all these windows were now wide
open, mutely proclaiming welcome to all comers. The beautifully laid out
grounds were studded here and there with tents pitched under the shade
trees, for the accommodation of the out-door guest, who were now
assembling rapidly. But the more honored guests of the house had not yet begun to arrive. And none of the family were as yet visible. On reaching the premises the sisters were really embarrassed, not
knowing where to go, and finding no one to direct them. At length a strange figure appeared upon the scene--a dwarfish mulatto,
with a large head, bushy hair, and having the broad forehead and high
nose of the European, with the thick lips and heavy jaws of the African;
with an ashen gray complexion, and a penetrating, keen and sly
expression of the eyes. With this strange combination of features he had
also the European intellect with the African utterance. He was a very
gifted original, whose singularities of genius and character will reveal
themselves in the course of this history, and he was also one of those
favored old family domestics whose power in the house was second only to
that of the master, and whose will was law to all his fellow servants;
he had just completed his fiftieth year, and his name was Jovial. And he now approached the sisters, saying:

"Mornin', Miss Hannah--mornin', Miss Nora. Come to see de show? De young
heir hab a fool for his master for de fust time to-day." "We have come to the birthday celebration; but we do not know where we
ought to go--whether to the house or the tents," said Hannah. The man tucked his tongue into his cheek and squinted at the sisters,
muttering to himself:

"I should like to see de mist'ess' face, ef you two was to present
yourselves at de house!" Then, speaking aloud, he said:

"De house be for de quality, an' de tents for de colored gemmen and
ladies; an' de barn for de laborin' classes ob de whites. Shall I hab de
honor to denounce you to de barn?" "I thank you, yes, since it is there we are expected to go," said
Hannah. Jovial led the way to an immense barn that had been cleaned out and
decorated for the occasion. The vast room was adorned with festoons of
evergreens and paper flowers. At the upper end was hung the arms of the
Brudenells. Benches were placed along the walls for the accommodation of
those who might wish to sit. The floor was chalked for the dancers. "Dere, young women, dere you is," said Jovial loftily, as he introduced
the sisters into this room, and retired. There were some thirty-five or forty persons present, including men,
women, and children, but no one that was known to the sisters. They
therefore took seats in a retired corner, from which they watched the
company. "How many people there are! Where could they all have come from?" inquired Nora. "I do not know. From a distance, I suppose. People will come a long way
to a feast like this. And you know that not only were the tenants and
laborers invited, but they were asked to bring all their friends and
relations as well!" said Hannah. "And they seemed to have improved the opportunity," added Nora. "Hush, my dear; I do believe here come Mr. Brudenell and the ladies,"
said Hannah. And even as she spoke the great doors of the barn were thrown open, and
the young landlord and his family entered. First came Mr. Brudenell, a young gentleman of medium height, and
elegantly rather than strongly built; his features were regular and
delicate; his complexion fair and clear; his hair of a pale, soft,
golden tint; and in contrast to all this, his eyes were of a deep, dark,
burning brown, full of fire, passion, and fascination. There was no
doubt about it--he was beautiful! I know that is a strange term to apply
to a man, but it is the only true and comprehensive one to characterize
the personal appearance of Herman Brudenell. He was attired in a neat
black dress suit, without ornaments of any kind; without even a
breastpin or a watch chain. Upon his arm leaned his mother, a tall, fair woman with light hair,
light blue eyes, high aquiline features, and a haughty air. She wore a
rich gray moire antique, and a fine lace cap. Behind them came the two young lady sisters, so like their mother that
no one could have mistaken them. They wore white muslin dresses, sashes
of blue ribbon, and wreaths of blue harebells. They advanced with smiles
intended to be gracious, but which were only condescending. The eyes of all the people in the barn were fixed upon this party,
except those of Nora Worth, which were riveted upon the young heir. And this was destiny! There was nothing unmaidenly in her regard. She looked upon him as a
peasant girl might look upon a passing prince--as something grand,
glorious, sunlike, and immeasurably above her sphere; but not as a
human being, not as a young man precisely like other young men. While thus, with fresh lips glowingly apart, and blushing cheeks, and
eyes full of innocent admiration, she gazed upon him, he suddenly turned
around, and their eyes met full. He smiled sweetly, bowed lowly, and
turned slowly away. And she, with childlike delight, seized her sister's
arm and exclaimed:

"Oh, Hannah, the young heir bowed to me, he did indeed!" "He could do no less, since you looked at him so hard," replied the
sister gravely. "But to me, Hannah, to me--just think of it! No one ever bowed to me
before, not even the negroes! and to think of him--Mr. Brudenell--bowing
to me--me!" "I tell you he could do no less; he caught you looking at him; to have
continued staring you in the face would have been rude; to have turned
abruptly away would have been equally so; gentlemen are never guilty of
rudeness, and Mr. Brudenell is a gentleman; therefore he bowed to you,
as I believe he would have bowed to a colored girl even." "Oh, but he smiled! he smiled so warmly and brightly, just for all the
world like the sun shining out, and as if, as if--"

"As if what, you little goose?" "Well, then, as if he was pleased." "It was because he was amused; he was laughing at you, you silly child!" "Do you think so?" asked Nora, with a sudden change of tone from gay to
grave. "I am quite sure of it, dear," replied the elder sister, speaking her
real opinion. "Laughing at me," repeated Nora to herself, and she fell into thought. Meanwhile, with a nod to one a smile to another and a word to a third,
the young heir and his party passed down the whole length of the room,
and retired through an upper door. As soon as they were gone the negro
fiddlers, six in number, led by Jovial, entered, took their seats, tuned
their instruments, and struck up a lively reel. There was an, immediate stir; the rustic beaus sought their belles, and
sets were quickly formed. A long, lanky, stooping young man, with a pale, care-worn face and
grayish hair, and dressed in a homespun jacket and trousers, came up to
the sisters. "Dance, Hannah?" he inquired. "No, thank you, Reuben; take Nora out--she would like to." "Dance, Nora?" said Reuben Gray, turning obediently to the younger
sister. "Set you up with it, after asking Hannah first, right before my very
eyes. I'm not a-going to take anybody's cast-offs, Mr. Reuben!" "I hope you are not angry with, me for that, Nora? It was natural I
should prefer to dance with your sister. I belong to her like, you know. Don't be mad with me," said Reuben meekly. "Nonsense, Rue! you know I was joking. Make Hannah dance; it will do her
good; she mopes too much," laughed Nora. "Do, Hannah, do, dear; you know I can't enjoy myself otherways," said
the docile fellow. "And it is little enjoyment you have in this world, poor soul!" said
Hannah Worth, as she rose and placed her hand in his. "Ah, but I have a great deal, Hannah, dear, when I'm along o' you," he
whispered gallantly, as he led her off to join the dancers. And they were soon seen tritting, whirling, heying, and selling with the
best of them--forgetting in the contagious merriment of the music and
motion all their cares. Nora was besieged with admirers, who solicited her hand for the dance. But to one and all she returned a negative. She was tired with her long
walk, and would not dance, at least not this set; she preferred to sit
still and watch the others. So at last she was left to her chosen
occupation. She had sat thus but a few moments, her eyes lovingly
following the flying forms of Reuben and Hannah through the mazes of the
dance, her heart rejoicing in their joy, when a soft voice murmured at
her ear. "Sitting quite alone, Nora? How is that? The young men have not lost
their wits, I hope?" She started, looked up, and with a vivid blush recognized her young
landlord. He was bending over her with the same sweet ingenuous smile
that had greeted her when their eyes first met that morning. She drooped
the long, dark lashes over her eyes until they swept her carmine cheeks,
but she did not answer. "I have just deposited my mother and sisters in their drawing-room, and
I have returned to look at the dancers. May I take this seat left vacant
by your sister?" he asked. "Certainly you may, sir," she faltered forth, trembling with, a vague
delight. "How much they enjoy themselves--do they not?" he asked, as he took the
seat and looked upon the dancers with a benevolent delight that
irradiated his fair, youthful countenance. "Oh, indeed they do, sir," said Nora, unconsciously speaking more from
her own personal experience of present happiness than from her
observation of others. I wish I could arrive at my majority every few weeks, or else have some
other good excuse for giving a great feast. I do so love to see people
happy, Nora. It is the greatest pleasure I have in the world." "Yet you must have a great many other pleasures, sir; all wealthy people
must," said Nora, gaining courage to converse with one so amiable as she
found her young landlord. "Yes, I have many others; but the greatest of all is the happiness of
making others happy. But why are you not among these dancers, Nora?" "I was tired with my long walk up and down hill and dale. So I would not
join them this set." "Are you engaged for the next?" "No, sir." "Then be my partner for it, will you?" "Oh, sir!" And the girl's truthful face flashed with surprise and
delight. "Will you dance with me, then, for the next set?" "Yes, sir, please." "Thank you, Nora. But now tell me, did you recollect me as well as I
remembered you?" "No, sir." "But that is strange; for I knew you again the instant I saw you." "But, sir, you know I was but a baby when you went away?" "That is true." "But how, then, did you know me again?" she wonderingly inquired. "Easily enough. Though you have grown up into such a fine young woman,
your face has not changed its character, Nora. You have the same broad,
fair forehead and arched brows; the same dark gray eyes and long lashes;
the same delicate nose and budding mouth; and the same peculiar way of
smiling only with your eyes; in a word--but pardon me, Nora, I forgot
myself in speaking to you so plainly. Here is a new set forming already. Your sister and her partner are going to dance together again; shall we
join them?" he suddenly inquired, upon seeing that his direct praise, in
which he had spoken in ingenuous frankness, had brought the blushes
again to Nora's cheeks. She arose and gave him her hand, and he led her forth to the head of the
set that was now forming, where she stood with downcast and blushing
face, admired by all the men, and envied by all the women that were
present. This was not the only time he danced with her. He was cordial to all his
guests, but he devoted himself to Nora. This exclusive attention of the
young heir to the poor maiden gave anxiety to her sister and offense to
all the other women. "No good will come of it," said one. "No good ever does come of a rich young man paying attention to a poor
girl," added another. "He is making a perfect fool of himself," said a third indignantly. "He is making a perfect fool of her, you had better say," amended a
fourth, more malignant than the rest. "Hannah, I don't like it! I'm a sort of elder brother-in-law to her, you
know, and I don't like it. Just see how he looks at her, Hannah! Why, if
I was to melt down my heart and pour it all into my face, I couldn't
look at you that-a-way, Hannah, true as I love you. Why, he's just
eating of her up with his eyes, and as for her, she looks as if it was
pleasant to be swallowed by him!" said honest Reuben Gray, as he watched
the ill-matched young pair as they sat absorbed in each other's society
in a remote corner of the barn. "Nor do I like it, Reuben," sighed Hannah. "I've a great mind to interfere! I've a right to! I'm her brother-in-law
to be." "No, do not, Reuben; it would do more harm than good; it would make her
and everybody else think more seriously of these attentions than they
deserve. It is only for to-night, you know. After this, they will
scarcely ever meet to speak to each other again." "As you please, Hannah, you are wiser than I am; but still, dear, I must
say that a great deal of harm may be done in a day. Remember, dear, that
(though I don't call it harm, but the greatest blessing of my life) it
was at a corn-shucking, where we met for the first time, that you and I
fell in love long of each other, and have we ever fell out of it yet? No, Hannah, nor never will. But as you and I are both poor, and
faithful, and patient, and broken in like to bear things cheerful, no
harm has come of our falling in love at that corn-shucking. But now,
s'pose them there children fall in love long of each other by looking
into each other's pretty eyes--who's to hinder it? And that will be the
end of it? He can't marry her; that's impossible; a man of his rank and
a girl of hers! his mother and sisters would never let him! and if they
would, his own pride wouldn't! And so he'd go away and try to forget
her, and she'd stop home and break her heart. Hannah, love is like a
fire, easy to put out in the beginning, unpossible at the end. You just
better let me go and heave a bucket of water on to that there love while
it is a-kindling and before the blaze breaks out." "Go then, good Reuben, and tell Nora that I am going home and wish her
to come to me at once." Reuben arose to obey, but was interrupted by the appearance of a negro
footman from the house, who came up to him and said:

"Mr. Reuben, de mistess say will you say to de young marster how de
gemmen an' ladies is all arrive, an' de dinner will be sarve in ten
minutes, an' how she 'sires his presence at de house immediate." "Certainly, John! This is better, Hannah, than my interference would
have been," said Reuben Gray, as he hurried off to execute his mission. So completely absorbed in each other's conversation were the young pair
that they did not observe Reuben's approach until he stood before them,
and, touching his forehead, said respectfully:

"Sir, Madam Brudenell has sent word as the vis'ters be all arrived at
the house, and the dinner will be ready in ten minutes, so she wishes
you, if you please, to come directly." "So late!" exclaimed the young man, looking at his watch, and starting
up, "how time flies in some society! Nora, I will conduct you to your
sister, and then go and welcome our guests at the house; although I had
a great deal rather stay where I am," he added, in a whisper. "If you please, sir, I can take her to Hannah," suggested Reuben. But without paying any attention to this friendly offer, the young man
gave his hand to the maiden and led her down the whole length of the
barn, followed by Reuben, and also by the envious eyes of all the
assembly. "Here she is, Hannah. I have brought her back to you quite safe, not
even weary with dancing. I hope I have helped her to enjoy herself,"
said the young heir gayly, as he deposited the rustic beauty by the side
of her sister. "You are very kind, sir," said Hannah coldly. "Ah, you there, Reuben! Be sure you take good care of this little girl,
and see that she has plenty of pleasant partners," said the young
gentleman, on seeing Gray behind. "Be sure I shall take care of her, sir, as if she was my sister, as I
hope some day she may be," replied the man. "And be careful that she gets a good place at the supper-table--there
will be a rush, you know." "I shall see to that, sir." "Good evening, Hannah; good evening, Nora," said the young heir, smiling
and bowing as he withdrew from the sisters. Nora sighed; it might have been from fatigue. Several country beaus
approached, eagerly contending, now that the coast was clear, for the
honor of the beauty's hand in the dance. But Nora refused one and all. She should dance no more this evening, she said. Supper came on, and
Reuben, with one sister on each arm, led them out to the great tent
where it was spread. There was a rush. The room was full and the table
was crowded; but Reuben made good places for the sisters, and stood
behind their chairs to wait on them. Hannah, like a happy, working,
practical young woman in good health, who had earned an appetite, did
ample justice to the luxuries placed before them. Nora ate next to
nothing. In vain Hannah and Reuben offered everything to her in turn;
she would take nothing. She was not hungry, she said; she was tired and
wanted to go home. "But wouldn't you rather stay and see the fireworks, Nora?" inquired
Reuben Gray, as they arose from the table to give place to someone else. "I don't know. Will--will Mr.--I mean Mrs. Brudenell and the young
ladies come out to see them, do you think?" "No, certainly, they will not; these delicate creatures would never
stand outside in the night air for that purpose." "I--I don't think I care about stopping to see the fireworks, Reuben,"
said Nora. "But I tell you what, John said how the young heir, the old madam, the
young ladies, and the quality folks was all a-going to see the fireworks
from the upper piazza. They have got all the red-cushioned settees and
arm-chairs put out there for them to sit on." "Reuben, I--I think I will stop and see the fireworks; that is, if
Hannah is willing," said Nora musingly. And so it was settled. The rustics, after having demolished the whole of the plentiful supper,
leaving scarcely a bone or a crust behind them, rushed out in a body,
all the worse for a cask of old rye whisky that had been broached, and
began to search for eligible stands from which to witness the exhibition
of the evening. Reuben conducted the sisters to a high knoll at some distance from the
disorderly crowd, but from which they could command a fine view of the
fireworks, which were to be let off in the lawn that lay below their
standpoint and between them and the front of the dwelling-house. Here
they sat as the evening closed in. As soon as it was quite dark the
whole front of the mansion-house suddenly blazed forth in a blinding
illumination. There were stars, wheels, festoons, and leaves, all in
fire. In the center burned a rich transparency, exhibiting the arms of
the Brudenells. During this illumination none of the family appeared in front, as their
forms must have obscured a portion of the lights. It lasted some ten or
fifteen minutes, and then suddenly went out, and everything was again
dark as midnight. Suddenly from the center of the lawn streamed up a
rocket, lighting up with a lurid fire all the scene--the mansion-house
with the family and their more honored guests now seated upon the upper
piazza, the crowds of men, women, and children, white, black, and mixed,
that stood with upturned faces in the lawn, the distant knoll on which
were grouped the sisters and their protector, the more distant forests
and the tops of remote hills, which all glowed by night in this red
glare. This seeming conflagration lasted a minute, and then all was
darkness again. This rocket was but the signal for the commencement of
the fireworks on the lawn. Another and another, each more brilliant
than the last, succeeded. There were stars, wheels, serpents, griffins,
dragons, all flashing forth from the darkness in living fire, filling
the rustic spectators with admiration, wonder, and terror, and then as
suddenly disappearing as if swallowed up in the night from which they
had sprung. One instant the whole scene was lighted up as by a general
conflagration, the next it was hidden in darkness deep as midnight. The
sisters, no more than their fellow-rustics, had never witnessed the
marvel of fireworks, so now they gazed from their distant standpoint on
the knoll with interest bordering upon consternation. "Don't you think they're dangerous, Reuben?" inquired Hannah. "No, dear; else such a larned gentleman as Mr. Brudenell, and such a
prudent lady as the old madam, would never allow them," answered Gray. Nora did not speak; she was absorbed not only by the fireworks
themselves, but by the group on the balcony that each illumination
revealed; or, to be exact, by one face in that group--the face of Herman
Brudenell. At length the exhibition closed with one grand tableau in many colored
fire, displaying the family group of Brudenell, surmounted by their
crest, arms, and supporters, all encircled by wreaths of flowers. This
splendid transparency illumined the whole scene with dazzling light. It
was welcomed by deafening huzzas from the crowd. When the noise had
somewhat subsided, Reuben Gray, gazing with the sisters from their knoll
upon all this glory, touched Nora upon the shoulder and said:

"Look!" "I am looking," she said. "What do you see?" "The fireworks, of course." "And what beyond them?" "The great house--Brudenell Hall." "And there?" "The party on the upper piazza." "With Mr. Brudenell in the midst?" "Yes." "Now, then, observe! You see him, but it is across the glare of the
fireworks! There is fire between you and him, girl--a gulf of fire! See
that you do not dream either he or you can pass it! For either to do so
would be to sink one, and that is yourself, in burning fire--in
consuming shame! Oh, Nora, beware!" He had spoken thus! he, the poor unlettered man who had scarcely ever
opened his mouth before without a grievous assault upon good English! he
had breathed these words of eloquent warning, as if by direct
inspiration, as though his lips, like those of the prophet of old, had
been touched by the living coal from Heaven. His solemn words awed
Hannah, who understood them by sympathy, and frightened Nora, who did
not understand them at all. The last rays of the finale were dying out,
and with their expiring light the party on the upper piazza were seen to
bow to the rustic assembly on the lawn, and then to withdraw into the
house. And thus ended the fete day of the young heir of Brudenell Hall. The guests began rapidly to disperse. Reuben Gray escorted the sisters home, talking with Hannah all the way,
not upon the splendors of the festival--a topic he seemed willing to
have forgotten, but upon crops, stock, wages, and the price of tea and
sugar. This did not prevent Nora from dreaming on the interdicted
subject; on the contrary, it left her all the more opportunity to do so,
until they all three reached the door of the hill hut, where Reuben Gray
bade them good-night. CHAPTER III. PASSION. If we are nature's, this is ours--this thorn
  Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
  It is the show and seal of nature's truth
  When love's strong passion is impressed in youth. --_Shakspere_. What a contrast! the interior of that poor hut to all the splendors they
had left! The sisters both were tired, and quickly undressed and went to
bed, but not at once to sleep. Hannah had the bad habit of laying awake at night, studying how to make
the two ends of her income and her outlay meet at the close of the year,
just as if loss of rest ever helped on the solution to that problem! Nora, for her part, lay awake in a disturbance of her whole nature,
which she could neither understand nor subdue! Nora had never read a
poem, a novel, or a play in her life; she had no knowledge of the world;
and no instructress but her old maiden sister. Therefore Nora knew no
more of love than does the novice who has never left her convent! She
could not comprehend the reason why after meeting with Herman Brudenell
she had taken such a disgust at the rustic beaus who had hitherto
pleased her; nor yet why her whole soul was so very strangely troubled;
why at once she was so happy and so miserable; and, above all, why she
could not speak of these things to her sister Hannah. She tossed about
in feverish excitement. "What in the world is the matter with you, Nora? You are as restless as
a kitten; what ails you?" asked Hannah. "Nothing," was the answer. Now everyone who has looked long upon life knows that of all the
maladies, mental or physical, that afflict human nature, "nothing" is
the most common, the most dangerous, and the most incurable! When you
see a person preoccupied, downcast, despondent, and ask him, "What is
the matter?" and he answers, "Nothing," be sure that it is something
great, unutterable, or fatal! Hannah Worth knew this by instinct, and so
she answered:

"Nonsense, Nora! I know there is something that keeps you awake; what is
it now?" "Really--and indeed it is nothing serious; only I am thinking over what
we have seen to-day!" "Oh! but try to go to sleep now, my dear," said Hannah, as if satisfied. "I can't; but, Hannah, I say, are you and Reuben Gray engaged?" "Yes, dear." "How long have you been engaged?" "For more than twelve years, dear." "My--good--gracious--me--alive! Twelve years! Why on earth don't you get
married, Hannah?" "He cannot afford it, dear; it takes everything he can rake and scrape
to keep his mother and his little brothers and sisters, and even with
all that they often want." "Well, then, why don't he let you off of your promise?" "Nora!--what! why we would no sooner think of breaking with each other
than if we had been married, instead of being engaged all these twelve
years!" "Well, then, when do you expect to be married?" "I do not know, dear; when his sisters and brothers are all grown up and
off his hands, I suppose." "And that won't be for the next ten years--even if then! Hannah, you
will be an elderly woman, and he an old man, before that!" "Yes, dear, I know that; but we must be patient; for everyone in this
world has something to bear, and we must accept our share. And even if
it should be in our old age that Reuben and myself come together, what
of that? We shall have all eternity before us to live together; for,
Nora, dear, I look upon myself as his promised wife for time and
eternity. Therefore, you see there is no such thing possible as for me
to break with Reuben. We belong to each other forever, and the Lord
himself knows it. And now, dear, be quiet and try to sleep; for we must
rise early to-morrow to make up by industry for the time lost to-day;
so, once more, good-night, dear." Nora responded to this good-night, and turned her head to the wall--not
to sleep, but to muse on those fiery, dark-brown eyes that had looked
such mysterious meanings into hers, and that thrilling deep-toned voice
that had breathed such sweet praise in her ears. And so musing, Nora
fell asleep, and her reverie passed into dreams. Early the next morning the sisters were up. The weather had changed with
the usual abruptness of our capricious climate. The day before had been
like June. This day was like January. A dark-gray sky overhead, with
black clouds driven by an easterly wind scudding across it, and
threatening a rain storm. The sisters hurried through their morning work, got their frugal
breakfast over, put their room in order, and sat down to their daily
occupation--Hannah before her loom, Nora beside her spinning-wheel. The
clatter of the loom, the whir of the wheel, admitted of no conversation
between the workers; so Hannah worked, as usual, in perfect silence, and
Nora, who ever before sung to the sound of her humming wheel, now mused
instead. The wind rose in occasional gusts, shaking the little hut in
its exposed position on the hill. "How different from yesterday," sighed Nora, at length. "Yes, dear; but such is life," said Hannah. And there the conversation
ended, and only the clatter of the loom and the whir of the wheel was
heard again, the sisters working on in silence. But hark! Why has the
wheel suddenly stopped and the heart of Nora started to rapid beating? A step came crashing through the crisp frost, and a hand was on the
door-latch. "It is Mr. Brudenell! What can he want here?" exclaimed Hannah, in a
tone of impatience, as she arose and opened the door. The fresh, smiling, genial face of the young man met her there. His
kind, cordial, cheery voice addressed her: "Good morning, Hannah! I have
been down to the bay this morning, you see, bleak as it is, and the fish
bite well! See this fine rock fish! will you accept it from me? And oh,
will you let me come in and thaw out my half-frozen fingers by your
fire? or will you keep me standing out here in the cold?" he added,
smiling. "Walk in, sir," said Hannah, inhospitably enough, as she made way for
him to enter. He came in, wearing his picturesque fisherman's dress, carrying his
fishing-rod over his right shoulder, and holding in his left hand the
fine rock fish of which he had spoken. His eyes searched for and found
Nora, whose face was covered with the deepest blushes. "Good morning, Nora! I hope you enjoyed yourself yesterday. Did they
take care of you after I left?" he inquired, going up to her. "Yes, thank you, sir." "Mr. Brudenell, will you take this chair?" said Hannah, placing one
directly before the fire, and pointing to it without giving him time to
speak another word to Nora. "Thank you, yes, Hannah; and will you relieve me of this fish?" "No, thank you, sir; I think you had better take it up to the madam,"
said Hannah bluntly. "What! carry this all the way from here to Brudenell, after bringing it
from the bay? Whatever are you thinking of, Hannah?" laughed the young
man, as he stepped outside for a moment and hung the fish on a nail in
the wall. "There it is, Hannah," he said, returning and taking his seat
at the fire; "you can use it or throw it away, as you like." Hannah made no reply to this; she did not wish to encourage him either
to talk or to prolong his stay. Her very expression of countenance was
cold and repellent almost to rudeness. Nora saw this and sympathized
with him, and blamed her sister. "To think," she said to herself, "that he was so good to us when we went
to see him; and Hannah is so rude to him, now he has come to see us! It
is a shame! And see how well he bears it all, too, sitting there warming
his poor white hands." In fact, the good humor of the young man was imperturbable. He sat
there, as Nora observed, smiling and spreading his hands out over the
genial blaze and seeking to talk amicably with Hannah, and feeling
compensated for all the rebuffs he received from the elder sister
whenever he encountered a compassionate glance from the younger,
although at the meeting of their eyes her glance was instantly withdrawn
and succeeded by fiery blushes. He stayed as long as he had the least
excuse for doing so, and then arose to take his leave, half smiling at
Hannah's inhospitable surliness and his own perseverance under
difficulties. He went up to Nora to bid her good-by. He took her hand,
and as he gently pressed it he looked into her eyes; but hers fell
beneath his gaze; and with a simple "Good-day, Nora," he turned away. Hannah stood holding the cottage door wide open for his exit. "Good morning, Hannah," he said smilingly, as he passed out. She stepped after him, saying:

"Mr. Brudenell, sir, I must beg you not to come so far out of your way
again to bring us a fish. We thank you; but we could not accept it. This
also I must request you to take away." And detaching the rock fish from
the nail where it hung, she put it in his hands. He laughed good-humoredly as he took it, and without further answer than
a low bow walked swiftly down the hill. Hannah re-entered the hut and found herself in the midst of a tempest in
a tea-pot. Nora had a fiery temper of her own, and now it blazed out upon her
sister--her beautiful face was stormy with grief and indignation as she
exclaimed:

"Oh, Hannah! how could you act so shamefully? To think that yesterday
you and I ate and drank and feasted and danced all day at his place, and
received so much kindness and attention from him besides, and to-day you
would scarcely let him sit down and warm his feet in ours! You treated
him worse than a dog, you did, Hannah. And he felt it, too. I saw he
did, though he was too much of a gentleman to show it! And as for me, I
could have died from mortification!" "My child," answered Hannah gravely, "however badly you or he might have
felt, believe me, I felt the worse of the three, to be obliged to take
the course I did." "He will never come here again, never!" sobbed Nora, scarcely heeding
the reply of her sister. "I hope to Heaven he never may!" said Hannah, as she resumed her seat at
her loom and drove the shuttle "fast and furious" from side to side of
her cloth. But he did come again. Despite the predictions of Nora and the prayers
of Hannah and the inclemency of the weather. The next day was a tempestuous one, with rain, snow, hail, and sleet all
driven before a keen northeast wind, and the sisters, with a great
roaring fire in the fireplace between them, were seated the one at her
loom and the other at her spinning-wheel, when there came a rap at the
door, and before anyone could possibly have had time to go to it, it was
pushed open, and Herman Brudenell, covered with snow and sleet, rushed
quickly in. "For Heaven's sake, my dear Hannah, give me shelter from the storm! I
couldn't wait for ceremony, you see! I had to rush right in after
knocking! pardon me! Was ever such a climate as this of ours! What a day
for the seventeenth of April! It ought to be bottled up and sent abroad
as a curiosity!" he exclaimed, all in a breath, as he unceremoniously
took off his cloak and shook it and threw it over a chair. "Mr. Brudenell! You here again! What could have brought you out on such
a day?" cried Hannah, starting up from her loom in extreme surprise. "The spirit of restlessness, Hannah! It is so dull up there, and
particularly on a dull day! How do you do, Nora? Blooming as a rose,
eh?" he said, suddenly breaking off and going to shake hands with the
blushing girl. "Never mind Nora's roses, Mr. Brudenell; attend to me; I ask did you
expect to find it any livelier here in this poor hut than in your own
princely halls?" said Hannah, as she placed a chair before the fire for
his accommodation. "A great deal livelier, Hannah," he replied, with boyish frankness, as
he took his seat and spread out his hands before the cheerful blaze. "No
end to the livelier. Why, Hannah, it is always lively where there's
nature, and always dull where there's not! Up yonder now there's too
much art; high art indeed--but still art! From my mother and sisters all
nature seems to have been educated, refined, and polished away. There
we all sat this morning in the parlor, the young ladies punching holes
in pieces of muslin, to sew them up again, and calling the work
embroidery; and there was my mother, actually working a blue lamb on red
grass, and calling her employment worsted work. There was no talk but of
patterns, no fire but what was shut up close in a horrid radiator. Really, out of doors was more inviting than in. I thought I would just
throw on my cloak and walk over here to see how you were getting along
this cold weather, and what do I find here? A great open blazing
woodfire--warm, fragrant, and cheerful as only such a fire can be! and a
humming wheel and a dancing loom, two cheerful girls looking bright as
two chirping birds in their nest! This _is_ like a nest! and it is worth
the walk to find it. You'll not turn me out for an hour or so, Hannah?" There was scarcely any such thing as resisting his gay, frank, boyish
appeal; yet Hannah answered coldly:

"Certainly not, Mr. Brudenell, though I fancy you might have found more
attractive company elsewhere. There can be little amusement for you in
sitting there and listening to the flying shuttle or the whirling wheel,
for hours together, pleasant as you might have first thought them." "Yes, but it will! I shall hear music in the loom and wheel, and see
pictures in the fire," said the young man, settling himself,
comfortable. Hannah drove her shuttle back and forth with a vigor that seemed to owe
something to temper. Herman heard no music and saw no pictures; his whole nature was absorbed
in the one delightful feeling of being near Nora, only being near her,
that was sufficient for the present to make him happy. To talk to her
was impossible, even if he had greatly desired to do so; for the music
of which he had spoken made too much noise. He stayed as long as he
possibly could, and then reluctantly arose to leave. He shook hands with
Hannah first, reserving the dear delight of pressing Nora's hand for the
last. The next day the weather changed again; it was fine; and Herman
Brudenell, as usual, presented himself at the hut; his excuse this time
being that he wished to inquire whether the sisters would not like to
have some repairs put upon the house--a new roof, another door and
window, or even a new room added; if so, his carpenter was even now at
Brudenell Hall, attending to some improvements there, and as soon as he
was done he should be sent to the hut. But no; Hannah wanted no repairs whatever. The hut was large enough for
her and her sister, only too small to entertain visitors. So with this
pointed home-thrust from Hannah, and a glance that at once healed the
wound from Nora, he was forced to take his departure. The next day he called again; he had, unluckily, left his gloves behind
him during his preceding visit. They were very nearly flung at his head by the thoroughly exasperated
Hannah. But again he was made happy by a glance from Nora. And, in short, almost every day he found some excuse for coming to the
cottage, overlooking all Hannah's rude rebuffs with the most
imperturbable good humor. At all these visits Hannah was present. She
never left the house for an instant, even when upon one occasion she saw
the cows in her garden, eating up all the young peas and beans. She let
the garden be utterly destroyed rather than leave Nora to hear words of
love that for her could mean nothing but misery. This went on for some
weeks, when Hannah was driven to decisive measures by an unexpected
event. Early one morning Hannah went to a village called "Baymouth," to
procure coffee, tea, and sugar. She went there, did her errand, and
returned to the hut as quickly as she could possibly could. As she
suddenly opened the door she was struck with consternation by seeing the
wheel idle and Nora and Herman seated close together, conversing in a
low, confidential tone. They started up on seeing her, confusion on
their faces. Hannah was thoroughly self-possessed. Putting her parcels in Nora's
hands, she said:

"Empty these in their boxes, dear, while I speak to Mr. Brudenell." Then
turning to the young man, she said: "Sir, your mother, I believe, has
asked to see me about some cloth she wishes to have woven. I am going
over to her now; will you go with me?" "Certainly, Hannah," replied Mr. Brudenell, seizing his hat in nervous
trepidation, and forgetting or not venturing to bid good-by to Nora. When they had got a little way from the hut, Hannah said:

"Mr. Brudenell, why do you come to our poor little house so often?" The question, though it was expected, was perplexing. "Why do I come, Hannah? Why, because I like to." "Because you like to! Quite a sufficient reason for a gentleman to
render for his actions, I suppose you think. But, now, another question:
'What are your intentions towards my sister?'" "My intentions!" repeated the young man, in a thunderstruck manner. "What in the world do you mean, Hannah?" "I mean to remind you that you have been visiting Nora for the last two
months, and that to-day, when I entered the house, I found you sitting
together as lovers sit; looking at each other as lovers look; and
speaking in the low tones that lovers use; and when I reached you, you
started in confusion--as lovers do when discovered at their love-making. Now I repeat my question, 'What are your intentions towards Nora
Worth?'" Herman Brudenell was blushing now, if he had never blushed before; his
very brow was crimson. Hannah had to reiterate her question before his
hesitating tongue could answer it. "My intentions, Hannah? Nothing wrong, I do swear to you! Heaven knows,
I mean no harm." "I believe that, Mr. Brudenell! I have always believed it, else be sure
that I should have found means to compel your absence. But though you
might have meant no harm, did you mean any good, Mr. Brudenell?" "Hannah, I fear that I meant nothing but to enjoy the great pleasure I
derived from--from--Nora's society, and--"

"Stop there, Mr. Brudenell; do not add--mine; for that would be an
insincerity unworthy of you! Of me you did not think, except as a
marplot! You say you came for the great pleasure you enjoyed in Nora's
society! Did it ever occur to you that she might learn to take too much
pleasure in yours? Answer me truly." "Hannah, yes, I believed that she was very happy in my company." "In a word, you liked her, and you knew you were winning her liking! And
yet you had no intentions of any sort, you say; you meant nothing, you
admit, but to enjoy yourself! How, Mr. Brudenell, do you think it a
manly part for a gentleman to seek to win a poor girl's love merely for
his pastime?" "Hannah, you are severe on me! Heaven knows I have never spoken one word
of love to Nora." "'Never spoken one word!' What of that? What need of words? Are not
glances, are not tones, far more eloquent than words? With these glances
and tones you have a thousand times assured my young sister that you
love her, that you adore her, that you worship her!" "Hannah, if my eyes spoke this language to Nora, they spoke Heaven's own
truth! There! I have told you more than I ever told her, for to her my
eyes only have spoken!" said the young man fervently. "Of what were you talking with your heads so close together this
morning?" asked Hannah abruptly. "How do I know? Of birds, of flowers, moonshine, or some such rubbish. I
was not heeding my words." "No, your eyes were too busy! And now, Mr. Brudenell, I repeat my
question: Was yours a manly part--discoursing all this love to Nora, and
having no ultimate intentions?" "Hannah, I never questioned my conscience upon that point; I was too
happy for such cross-examination." "But now the question is forced upon you, Mr. Brudenell, and we must
have an answer now and here." "Then, Hannah, I will answer truly! I love Nora; and if I were free to
marry, I would make her my wife to-morrow; but I am not; therefore I
have been wrong, and very wrong, to seek her society. I acted, however,
from want of thought, not from want of principle; I hope you will
believe that, Hannah." "I do believe it, Mr. Brudenell." "And now I put myself in your hands, Hannah! Direct me as you think
best; I will obey you. What shall I do?" "See Nora no more; from this day absent yourself from our house." He turned pale as death, reeled, and supported himself against the trunk
of a friendly tree. Hannah looked at him, and from the bottom of her heart she pitied him;
for she knew what love was--loving Reuben. "Mr. Brudenell," she said, "do not take this to heart so much: why
should you, indeed, when you know that your fate is in your own hands? You are master of your own destiny, and no man who is so should give way
to despondency. The alternative before you is simply this: to cease to
visit Nora, or to marry her. To do the first you must sacrifice your
love, to do the last you must sacrifice your pride. Now choose between
the courses of action! Gratify your love or your pride, as you see fit,
and cheerfully pay down the price! This seems to me to be the only
manly, the only rational, course." "Oh, Hannah, Hannah, you do not understand! you do not!" he cried in a
voice full of anguish. "Yes, I do; I know how hard it would be to you in either case. On the
one hand, what a cruel wrench it will give your heart to tear yourself
from Nora--"

"Yes, yes; oh, Heaven, yes!" "And, on the other hand, I know what an awful sacrifice you would make
in marrying her--"

"It is not that! Oh, do me justice! I should not think it a sacrifice! She is too good for me! Oh, Hannah, it is not that which hinders!" "It is the thought of your mother and sisters, perhaps; but surely if
they love you, as I am certain they do, and if they see your happiness
depends upon this marriage--in time they will yield!" "It is not my family either, Hannah! Do you think that I would sacrifice
my peace--or hers--to the unreasonable pride of my family? No, Hannah,
no!" "Then what is it? What stands in the way of your offering your hand to
her to whom you have given your heart?" "Hannah, I cannot tell you! Oh, Hannah, I feel that I have been very
wrong, criminal even! But I acted blindly; you have opened my eyes, and
now I see I must visit your house no more; how much it costs me to say
this--to do this--you can never know!" He wiped the perspiration from his pale brow, and, after a few moments
given to the effort of composing himself, he asked:

"Shall we go on now?" She nodded assent and they walked onward. "Hannah," he said, as they went along, "I have one deplorable weakness." She looked up suddenly, fearing to hear the confession of some fatal
vice. He continued:

"It is the propensity to please others, whether by doing so I act well
or ill!" "Mr. Brudenell!" exclaimed Hannah, in a shocked voice. "Yes, the pain I feel in seeing others suffer, the delight I have in
seeing them enjoy, often leads--leads me to sacrifice not only my own
personal interests, but the principles of truth and justice!" "Oh, Mr. Brudenell!" "It is so, Hannah! And one signal instance of such a sacrifice at once
of myself and of the right has loaded my life with endless regret! However, I am ungenerous to say this; for a gift once given, even if it
is of that which one holds most precious in the world, should be
forgotten or at least not be grudged by the giver! Ah, Hannah--" He
stopped abruptly. "Mr. Brudenell, you will excuse me for saying that I agree with you in
your reproach of yourself. That trait of which you speak is a weakness
which should be cured. I am but a poor country girl. But I have seen
enough to know that sensitive and sympathizing natures like your own are
always at the mercy of all around them. The honest and the generous take
no advantage of such; but the selfish and the calculating make a prey of
them! You call this weakness a propensity to please others! Mr.
Brudenell, seek to please the Lord and He will give you strength to
resist the spoilers," said Hannah gravely. "Too late, too late, at least as far as this life is concerned, for I am
ruined, Hannah!" "Ruined! Mr. Brudenell!" "Ruined, Hannah!" "Good Heaven! I hope you have not endorsed for anyone to the whole
extent of your fortune?" "Ha, ha, ha! You make me laugh, Hannah! laugh in the very face of ruin,
to think that you should consider loss of fortune a subject of such
eternal regret as I told you my life was loaded with!" "Oh, Mr. Brudenell, I have known you from childhood! I hope, I hope you
haven't gambled or--"

"Thank Heaven, no, Hannah! I have never gambled, nor drank, nor--in
fact, done anything of the sort!" "You have not endorsed for anyone, nor gambled, nor drank, nor anything
of that sort, and yet you are ruined!" "Ruined and wretched, Hannah! I do not exaggerate in saying so!" "And yet you looked so happy!" "Grasses grow and flowers bloom above burning volcanoes, Hannah." "Ah, Mr. Brudenell, what is the nature of this ruin then? Tell me! I am
your sincere friend, and I am older than you; perhaps I could counsel
you." "It is past counsel, Hannah." "What is it then?" "I cannot tell you except this! that the fatality of which I speak is
the only reason why I do not overstep the boundary of conventional rank
and marry Nora! Why I do not marry anybody! Hush! here we are at the
house." Very stately and beautiful looked the mansion with its walls of white
free-stone and its porticos of white marble, gleaming through its groves
upon the top of the hill. When they reached it Hannah turned to go around to the servants' door,
but Mr. Brudenell called to her, saying:

"This way! this way, Hannah!" and conducted her up the marble steps to
the visitors' entrance. He preceded her into the drawing-room, a spacious apartment now in its
simple summer dress of straw matting, linen covers, and lace curtains. Mrs. Brudenell and the two young ladies, all in white muslin morning
dresses, were gathered around a marble table in the recess of the back
bay window, looking over newspapers. On seeing the visitor who accompanied her son, Mrs. Brudenell arose with
a look of haughty surprise. "You wished to see Hannah Worth, I believe, mother, and here she is,"
said Herman. "My housekeeper did. Touch the bell, if you please, Herman." Mr. Brudenell did as requested, and the summons was answered by Jovial. "Take this woman to Mrs. Spicer, and say that she has come about the
weaving. When she leaves show her where the servants' door is, so that
she may know where to find it when she comes again," said Mrs. Brudenell
haughtily. As soon as Hannah had left the room Herman said:

"Mother, you need not have hurt that poor girl's feelings by speaking so
before her." "She need not have exposed herself to rebuke by entering where she did." "Mother, she entered with me. I brought her in." "Then you were very wrong. These people, like all of their class,
require to be kept down--repressed." "Mother, this is a republic!" "Yes; and it is ten times more necessary to keep the lower orders down,
in a republic like this, where they are always trying to rise, than it
is in a monarchy, where they always keep their place," said the lady
arrogantly. "What have you there?" inquired Herman, with a view of changing the
disagreeable subject. "The English papers. The foreign mail is in. And, by the way, here is a
letter for you." Herman received the letter from her hand, changed color as he looked at
the writing on the envelope, and walked away to the front window to read
it alone. His mother's watchful eyes followed him. As he read, his face flushed and paled; his eyes flashed and smoldered;
sighs and moans escaped his lips. At length, softly crumpling up the
letter, he thrust it into his pocket, and was stealing from the room to
conceal his agitation, when his mother, who had seen it all, spoke:

"Any bad news, Herman?" "No, madam," he promptly answered. "What is the matter, then?" He hesitated, and answered:

"Nothing." "Who is that letter from?" "A correspondent," he replied, escaping from the room. "Humph! I might have surmised that much," laughed the lady, with angry
scorn. But he was out of hearing. "Did you notice the handwriting on the envelope of that letter,
Elizabeth?" she inquired of her elder daughter. "Which letter, mamma?" "That one for your brother, of course." "No, mamma, I did not look at it." "You never look at anything but your stupid worsted work. You will be an
old maid, Elizabeth. Did you notice it, Elinor?" "Yes, mamma. The superscription was in a very delicate feminine
handwriting; and the seal was a wounded falcon, drawing the arrow from
its own breast--surmounted by an earl's coronet." "'Tis the seal of the Countess of Hurstmonceux." CHAPTER IV. THE FATAL DEED. I am undone; there is no living, none,
  If Bertram be away. It were all one,
  That I should love a bright particular star,
  And think to wed it, he is so above me. The hind that would be mated by the lion,
  Must die for love. 'Twas pretty though a plague
  To see him every hour; to sit and draw
  His arched brow, his hawking eyes, his curls
  In our heart's table; heart too capable
  Of every line and trick of his sweet favor. --_Shakspere_. Hannah Worth walked home, laden like a beast of burden, with an enormous
bag of hanked yarn on her back. She entered her hut, dropped the burden
on the floor, and stopped to take breath. "I think they might have sent a negro man to bring that for you,
Hannah," said Nora, pausing in her spinning. "As if they would do that!" panted Hannah. Not a word was said upon the subject of Herman Brudenell's morning
visit. Hannah forebore to allude to it from pity; Nora from modesty. Hannah sat down to rest, and Nora got up to prepare their simple
afternoon meal. For these sisters, like many poor women, took but two
meals a day. The evening passed much as usual; but the next morning, as the sisters
were at work, Hannah putting the warp for Mrs. Brudenell's new web of
cloth in the loom, and Nora spinning, the elder noticed that the younger
often paused in her work and glanced uneasily from the window. Ah, too
well Hannah understood the meaning of those involuntary glances. Nora
was "watching for the steps that came not back again!" Hannah felt sorry for her sister; but she said to herself:

"Never mind, she will be all right in a few days. She will forget him." This did not happen so, however. As day followed day, and Herman
Brudenell failed to appear, Nora Worth grew more uneasy, expectant, and
anxious. Ah! who can estimate the real heart-sickness of "hope
deferred!" Every morning she said to herself: "He will surely come
to-day !" Every day each sense of hearing and of seeing was on the qui
vive to catch the first sound or the first sight of his approach. Every
night she went to bed to weep in silent sorrow. All other sorrows may be shared and lightened by sympathy except that of
a young girl's disappointment in love. With that no one intermeddles
with impunity. To notice it is to distress her; to speak of it is to
insult her; even her sister must in silence respect it; as the expiring
dove folds her wing over her mortal wound, so does the maiden jealously
conceal her grief and die. Days grew into weeks, and Herman did not
come. And still Nora watched and listened as she spun--every nerve
strained to its utmost tension in vigilance and expectancy. Human
nature--especially a girl's nature--cannot bear such a trial for any
long time together. Nora's health began to fail; first she lost her
spirits, and then her appetite, and finally her sleep. She grew pale,
thin, and nervous. Hannah's heart ached for her sister. "This will never do," she said; "suspense is killing her. I must end
it." So one morning while they were at work as usual, and Nora's hand was
pausing on her spindle, and her eyes were fixed upon the narrow path
leading through the Forest Valley, Hannah spoke:

"It will not do, dear; he is not coming! he will never come again; and
since he cannot be anything to you, he ought not to come!" "Oh, Hannah, I know it; but it is killing me!" These words were surprised from the poor girl; for the very next instant
her waxen cheeks, brow, neck, and very ears kindled up into fiery
blushes, and hiding her face in her hands she sank down in her chair
overwhelmed. Hannah watched, and then went to her, and began to caress her, saying:

"Nora, Nora, dear; Nora, love; Nora, my own darling, look up!" "Don't speak to me; I am glad he does not come; never mention his name
to me again, Hannah," said the stricken girl, in a low, peremptory
whisper. Hannah felt that this order must be obeyed, and so she went back to her
loom and worked on in silence. After a few minutes Nora arose and resumed her spinning, and for some
time the wheel whirled briskly and merrily around. But towards the
middle of the day it began to turn slowly and still more slowly. At length it stopped entirely, and the spinner said:

"Hannah, I feel very tired; would you mind if I should lay down a little
while?" "No, certainly not, my darling. Are you poorly, Nora?" "No, I am quite well, only tired," replied the girl, as she threw
herself upon the bed. Perhaps Hannah had made a fatal mistake in saying to her sister, "He
will never come again," and so depriving her of the last frail plank of
hope, and letting her sink in the waves of despair. Perhaps, after all,
suspense is not the worst of all things to bear; for in suspense there
is hope, and in hope, life! Certain it is that a prop seemed withdrawn
from Nora, and from this day she rapidly sunk. She would not take to her
bed. Every morning she would insist upon rising and dressing, though
daily the effort was more difficult. Every day she would go to her wheel
and spin slowly and feebly, until by fatigue she was obliged to stop and
throw herself upon the bed. To all Hannah's anxious questions she
answered:

"I am very well! indeed there is nothing ails me; only I am so tired!" One day about this time Reuben Gray called to see Hannah. Reuben was one
of the most discreet of lovers, never venturing to visit his beloved
more than once in each month. "Look at Nora!" said Hannah, in a heart-broken tone, as she pointed to
her sister, who was sitting at her wheel, not spinning, but gazing from
the window down the narrow footpath, and apparently lost in mournful
reverie. "I'll go and fetch a medical man," said Reuben, and he left the hut for
that purpose. But distances from house to house in that sparsely settled neighborhood
were great, and doctors were few and could not be had the moment they
were called for. So it was not until the next day that Doctor Potts, the
round-bodied little medical attendant of the neighborhood, made his
appearance at the hut. He was welcomed by Hannah, who introduced him to her sister. Nora received his visit with a great deal of nervous irritability,
declaring that nothing at all ailed her, only that she was tired. "Tired," repeated the doctor, as he felt her pulse and watched her
countenance. "Yes, tired of living! a serious fatigue this, Hannah. Her
malady is more on the mind than the body! You must try to rouse her,
take her into company, keep her amused. If you were able to travel, I
should recommend change of scene; but of course that is out of the
question. However, give her this, according to the directions. I will
call in again to see her in a few days." And so saying, the doctor left
a bottle of medicine and took his departure. That day the doctor had to make a professional visit of inspection to
the negro quarters at Brudenell Hall; so he mounted his fat little white
cob and trotted down the hill in the direction of the valley. When he arrived at Brudenell Hall he was met by Mrs. Brudenell, who said
to him:

"Dr. Potts, I wish before you leave, you would see my son. I am
seriously anxious about his health. He objected to my sending for you;
but now that you are here on a visit to the quarters, perhaps his
objections may give way." "Very well, madam; but since he does not wish to be attended, perhaps he
had better not know that my visit is to him; I will just make you a call
as usual." "Join us at lunch, doctor, and you can observe him at your leisure." "Thank you, madam. What seems the matter with Mr. Brudenell?" "A general failure without any particular disease. If it were not that I
know better, I would say that something lay heavily upon his mind." "Humph! a second case of that kind to-day! Well, madam, I will join you
at two o'clock," said the doctor, as he trotted off towards the negro
quarters. Punctually at the hour the doctor presented himself at the luncheon
table of Mrs. Brudenell. There were present Mrs. Brudenell, her two
daughters, her son, and a tall, dark, distinguished looking man, whom
the lady named as Colonel Mervin. The conversation, enlivened by a bottle of fine champagne, flowed
briskly and cheerfully around the table. But through all the doctor
watched Herman Brudenell. He was indeed changed. He looked ill, yet he
ate, drank, laughed, and talked with the best there. But when his eye
met that of the doctor fixed upon him, it flashed with a threatening
glance that seemed to repel scrutiny. The doctor, to turn the attention of the lady from her son, said:

"I was at the hut on the hill to-day. One of those poor girls, the
youngest, Nora, I think they call her, is in a bad way. She seems to me
to be sinking into a decline." As he said this he happened to glance at
Herman Brudenell. That gentleman's eyes were fixed upon his with a gaze
of wild alarm, but they sank as soon as noticed. "Poor creatures! that class of people scarcely ever get enough to eat or
drink, and thus so many of them die of decline brought on from
insufficiency of nourishment. I will send a bag of flour up to the hut
to-morrow," said Mrs. Brudenell complacently. Soon after they all arose from the table. The little doctor offered his arm to Mrs. Brudenell, and as they walked
to the drawing-room he found an opportunity of saying to her:

"It is, I think, as you surmised. There is something on his mind. Try to
find out what it is. That is my advice. It is of no use to tease him
with medical attendance." When they reached the drawing room they found the boy with the mail bag
waiting for his mistress. She quickly unlocked and distributed its
contents. "Letters for everybody except myself! But here is a late copy of the
'London Times' with which I can amuse myself while you look over your
epistles, ladies and gentlemen," said Mrs. Brudenell, as she settled
herself to the perusal of her paper. She skipped the leader, read the
court circular, and was deep in the column of casualties, when she
suddenly cried out:

"Good Heaven, Herman! what a catastrophe!" "What is it, mother?" "A collision on the London and Brighton Railway, and ever so many killed
or wounded, and--Gracious goodness!" "What, mother?" "Among those instantly killed are the Marquis and Marchioness of
Brambleton and the Countess of Hurstmonceux!" "No!" cried the young man, rushing across the room, snatching the paper
from his mother's hand, and with starting eyes fixed upon the paragraph
that she hastily pointed out, seeming to devour the words. A few days after this Nora Worth sat propped up in an easy-chair by the
open window that commanded the view of the Forest Valley and of the
opposite hill crowned with the splendid mansion of Brudenell Hall. But Nora was not looking upon this view; at least except upon a very
small part of it--namely, the little narrow footpath that led down her
own hill and was lost in the shade of the valley. The doctor's
prescriptions had done Nora no good; how should they? Could he, more
than others, "minister to a mind diseased"? In a word, she had now grown
so weak that the spinning was entirely set aside, and she passed her
days propped up in the easy-chair beside the window, through which she
could watch that little path, which was now indeed so disused, so
neglected and grass grown, as to be almost obliterated. Suddenly, while Nora's eyes were fixed abstractedly upon this path, she
uttered a great cry and started to her feet. Hannah stopped the clatter of her shuttle to see what was the matter. Nora was leaning from the window, gazing breathlessly down the path. "What is it, Nora, my dear? Don't lean so far out; you will fall! What
is it?" "Oh, Hannah, he is coming! he is coming!" "Who is coming, my darling? I see no one!" said the elder sister,
straining her eyes down the path. "But I feel him coming! He is coming fast! He will be in sight
presently! There! what did I tell you? There he is!" And truly at that moment Herman Brudenell advanced from the thicket and
walked rapidly up the path towards the hut. Nora sank back in her seat, overcome, almost fainting. Another moment and Herman Brudenell was in the room, clasping her form,
and sobbing:

"Nora! Nora, my beloved! my beautiful! you have been ill and I knew it
not! dying, and I knew it not! Oh! oh! oh!" "Yes, but I am well, now that you are here!" gasped the girl, as she
thrilled and trembled with returning life. But the moment this
confession had been surprised from her she blushed fiery red to the very
tips of her ears and hid her face in the pillows of her chair. "My darling girl! My own blessed girl! do not turn your face away! look
at me with your sweet eyes! See, I am here at your side, telling you how
deep my own sorrow had been at the separation from you, and how much
deeper at the thought that you also have suffered! Look at me! Smile on
me! Speak to me, beloved! I am your own!" These and many other wild, tender, pleading words of love he breathed in
the ear of the listening, blushing, happy girl; both quite heedless of
the presence of Hannah, who stood petrified with consternation. At length, however, by the time Herman had seated himself beside Nora,
Hannah recovered her presence of mind and power of motion; and she went
to him and said:

"Mr. Brudenell! Is this well? Could you not leave her in peace?" "No, I could not leave her! Yes, it is well, Hannah! The burden I spoke
of is unexpectedly lifted from my life! I am a restored man. And I have
come here to-day to ask Nora, in your presence, and with your consent,
to be my wife!" "And with your mother's consent, Mr. Brudenell?" "Hannah, that was unkind of you to throw a damper upon my joy. And look
at me, I have not been in such robust health myself since you drove me
away!" As he said this, Nora's hand, which he held, closed convulsively on his,
and she murmured under her breath:

"Have you been ill? You are not pale!" "No, love, I was only sad at our long separation; now you see I am
flushed with joy; for now I shall see you every day!" he replied,
lifting her hand to his lips. Hannah was dreadfully disturbed. She was delighted to see life, and
light, and color flowing back to her sister's face; but she was dismayed
at the very cause of this--the presence of Herman Brudenell. The
instincts of her affections and the sense of her duties were at war in
her bosom. 