



Produced by Theresa Armao





WHEN A MAN MARRIES

By Mary Roberts Rinehart




Contents

     I     At Least I Meant Well
     II    The Way It Began
     III   I Might Have Known It
     IV    The Door Was Closed
     V     From The Tree  Of  Love
     VI    A Mighty Poor Joke
     VII   We Make An Omelet
     VIII  Correspondents'  Department
     IX    Flannigan's Find
     X     On The Stairs
     XI    I Make A Discovery
     XII   The Roof Garden
     XIII  He Does Not Deny It
     XIV   Almost, But Not Quite
     XV    Suspicion and Discord
     XVI   I Face Flannigan
     XVII  A Clash and A Kiss
     XVIII It's All My Fault
     XIX   The Harbison Man
     XX    Breaking Out In A New Place
     XXI   A Bar of Soap
     XXII  It Was A Delirium
     XXIII Coming




                    Needles and pins
                    Needles and pins,
                    When a man marries
                    His trouble begins. Chapter I. AT LEAST I MEANT WELL

When the dreadful thing occurred that night, every one turned on me. The injustice of it hurt me most. They said I got up the dinner, that
I asked them to give up other engagements and come, that I promised all
kinds of jollification, if they would come; and then when they did come
and got in the papers and every one--but ourselves--laughed himself
black in the face, they turned on ME! I, who suffered ten times to their
one! I shall never forget what Dallas Brown said to me, standing with a
coal shovel in one hand and a--well, perhaps it would be better to tell
it all in the order it happened. It began with Jimmy Wilson and a conspiracy, was helped on by a
foot-square piece of yellow paper and a Japanese butler, and it
enmeshed and mixed up generally ten respectable members of society and
a policeman. Incidentally, it involved a pearl collar and a box of soap,
which sounds incongruous, doesn't it? It is a great misfortune to be stout, especially for a man. Jim was
rotund and looked shorter than he really was, and as all the lines of
his face, or what should have been lines, were really dimples, his face
was about as flexible and full of expression as a pillow in a tight
cover. The angrier he got the funnier he looked, and when he was raging,
and his neck swelled up over his collar and got red, he was entrancing. And everybody liked him, and borrowed money from him, and laughed at his
pictures (he has one in the Hargrave gallery in London now, so people
buy them instead), and smoked his cigarettes, and tried to steal his
Jap. The whole story hinges on the Jap. The trouble was, I think, that no one took Jim seriously. His ambition
in life was to be taken seriously, but people steadily refused to. His
art was a huge joke--except to himself. If he asked people to dinner,
every one expected a frolic. When he married Bella Knowles, people
chuckled at the wedding, and considered it the wildest prank of Jimmy's
career, although Jim himself seemed to take it awfully hard. We had all known them both for years. I went to Farmington with Bella,
and Anne Brown was her matron of honor when she married Jim. My first
winter out, Jimmy had paid me a lot of attention. He painted my portrait
in oils and had a studio tea to exhibit it. It was a very nice picture,
but it did not look like me, so I stayed away from the exhibition. Jim
asked me to. He said he was not a photographer, and that anyhow the rest
of my features called for the nose he had given me, and that all the
Greuze women have long necks. I have not. After I had refused Jim twice he met Bella at a camp in the Adirondacks
and when he came back he came at once to see me. He seemed to think I
would be sorry to lose him, and he blundered over the telling for twenty
minutes. Of course, no woman likes to lose a lover, no matter what she
may say about it, but Jim had been getting on my nerves for some time,
and I was much calmer than he expected me to be. "If you mean," I said finally in desperation, "that you and Bella
are--are in love, why don't you say so, Jim? I think you will find that
I stand it wonderfully." He brightened perceptibly. "I didn't know how you would take it, Kit," he said, "and I hope we will
always be bully friends. You are absolutely sure you don't care a whoop
for me?" "Absolutely," I replied, and we shook hands on it. Then he began about
Bella; it was very tiresome. Bella is a nice girl, but I had roomed with her at school, and I was
under no illusions. When Jim raved about Bella and her banjo, and Bella
and her guitar, I had painful moments when I recalled Bella, learning
her two songs on each instrument, and the old English ballad she had
learned to play on the harp. When he said she was too good for him, I
never batted an eye. And I shook hands solemnly across the tea-table
again, and wished him happiness--which was sincere enough, but
hopeless--and said we had only been playing a game, but that it was time
to stop playing. Jim kissed my hand, and it was really very touching. We had been the best of friends ever since. Two days before the wedding
he came around from his tailor's, and we burned all his letters to me. He would read one and say: "Here's a crackerjack, Kit," and pass it
to me. And after I had read it we would lay it on the firelog, and Jim
would say, "I am not worthy of her, Kit. I wonder if I can make her
happy?" Or--"Did you know that the Duke of Belford proposed to her in
London last winter?" Of course, one has to take the woman's word about a thing like that, but
the Duke of Belford had been mad about Maude Richard all that winter. You can see that the burning of the letters, which was meant to be
reminiscently sentimental, a sort of how-silly-we-were-but-it-is
all-over-now occasion, became actually a two hours' eulogy of Bella. And
just when I was bored to death, the Mercer girls dropped in and heard
Jim begin to read one commencing "dearest Kit." And the next day after
the rehearsal dinner, they told Bella! There was very nearly no wedding at all. Bella came to see me in a
frenzy the next morning and threw Jim and his two-hundred odd pounds in
my face, and although I explained it all over and over, she never quite
forgave me. That was what made it so hard later--the situation would
have been bad enough without that complication. They went abroad on their wedding journey, and stayed several months. And when Jim came back he was fatter than ever. Everybody noticed it. Bella had a gymnasium fitted up in a corner of the studio, but he would
not use it. He smoked a pipe and painted all day, and drank beer and
WOULD eat starches or whatever it is that is fattening. But he adored
Bella, and he was madly jealous of her. At dinners he used to glare at
the man who took her in, although it did not make him thin. Bella was
flirting, too, and by the time they had been married a year, people
hitched their chairs together and dropped their voices when they were
mentioned. Well, on the anniversary of the day Bella left him--oh yes, she left him
finally. She was intense enough about some things, and she said it got
on her nerves to have everybody chuckle when they asked for her husband. They would say, "Hello, Bella! How's Bubbles? Still banting?" And Bella
would try to laugh and say, "He swears his tailor says his waist is
smaller, but if it is he must be growing hollow in the back." But she got tired of it at last. Well, on the second anniversary of
Bella's departure, Jimmy was feeling pretty glum, and as I say, I am
very fond of Jim. The divorce had just gone through and Bella had taken
her maiden name again and had had an operation for appendicitis. We
heard afterward that they didn't find an appendix, and that the one they
showed her in a glass jar WAS NOT HERS! But if Bella ever suspected, she
didn't say. Whether the appendix was anonymous or not, she got box after
box of flowers that were, and of course every one knew that it was Jim
who sent them. To go back to the anniversary, I went to Rothberg's to see the
collection of antique furniture--mother was looking for a sideboard
for father's birthday in March--and I met Jimmy there, boring into a
worm-hole in a seventeenth-century bedpost with the end of a match, and
looking his nearest to sad. When he saw me he came over. "I'm blue today, Kit," he said, after we had shaken hands. "Come and
help me dig bait, and then let's go fishing. If there's a worm in every
hole in that bedpost, we could go into the fish business. It's a good
business." "Better than painting?" I asked. But he ignored my gibe and swelled up
alarmingly in order to sigh. "This is the worst day of the year for me," he affirmed, staring
straight ahead, "and the longest. Look at that crazy clock over there. If you want to see your life passing away, if you want to see the steps
by which you are marching to eternity, watch that clock marking the
time. Look at that infernal hand staying quiet for sixty seconds and
then jumping forward to catch up with the procession. Ugh!" "See here, Jim," I said, leaning forward, "you're not well. You can't go
through the rest of the day like this. I know what you'll do; you'll
go home to play Grieg on the pianola, and you won't eat any dinner." He
looked guilty. "Not Grieg," he protested feebly. "Beethoven." "You're not going to do either," I said with firmness. "You are going
right home to unpack those new draperies that Harry Bayles sent you from
Shanghai, and you are going to order dinner for eight--that will be two
tables of bridge. And you are not going to touch the pianola." He did not seem enthusiastic, but he rose and picked up his hat, and
stood looking down at me where I sat on an old horse-hair covered sofa. "I wish to thunder I had married you!" he said savagely. "You're the
finest girl I know, Kit, WITHOUT EXCEPTION, and you are going to throw
yourself away on Jack Manning, or Max, or some other--"

"Nothing of the sort," I said coldly, "and the fact that you didn't
marry me does not give you the privilege of abusing my friends. Anyhow,
I don't like you when you speak like that." Jim took me to the door and stopped there to sigh. "I haven't been well," he said heavily. "Don't eat, don't sleep. Wouldn't you think I'd lose flesh? Kit"--he lowered his voice
solemnly--"I have gained two pounds!" I said he didn't look it, which appeared to comfort him somewhat, and,
because we were old friends, I asked him where Bella was. He said he
thought she was in Europe, and that he had heard she was going to marry
Reggie Wolfe. Then he signed again, muttered something about ordering
the funeral baked meats to be prepared and left me. That was my entire share in the affair. I was the victim, both of
circumstances and of their plot, which was mad on the face of it. During the entire time they never once let me forget that I got up the
dinner, that I telephoned around for them. They asked me why I couldn't
cook--when not one of them knew one side of a range from the other. And
for Anne Brown to talk the way she did--saying I had always been crazy
about Jim, and that she believed I had known all along that his aunt was
coming--for Anne to talk like that was sheer idiocy. Yes, there was an
aunt. The Japanese butler started the trouble, and Aunt Selina carried
it along. Chapter II. THE WAY IT BEGAN

It makes me angry every time I think how I tried to make that dinner a
success. I canceled a theater engagement, and I took the Mercer girls in
the electric brougham father had given me for Christmas. Their chauffeur
had been gone for hours with their machine, and they had telephoned all
the police stations without success. They were afraid that there had
been an awful smash; they could easily have replaced Bartlett, as Lollie
said, but it takes so long to get new parts for those foreign cars. Jim had a house well up-town, and it stood just enough apart from
the other houses to be entirely maddening later. It was a three-story
affair, with a basement kitchen and servants' dining room. Then, of
course, there were cellars, as we found out afterward. On the first
floor there was a large square hall, a formal reception room, behind it
a big living room that was also a library, then a den, and back of all
a Georgian dining room, with windows high above the ground. On the
top floor Jim had a studio, like every other one I ever saw--perhaps a
little mussier. Jim was really a grind at his painting, and there
were cigarette ashes and palette knives and buffalo rugs and shields
everywhere. It is strange, but when I think of that terrible house, I
always see the halls, enormous, covered with heavy rugs, and stairs that
would have taken six housemaids to keep in proper condition. I dream
about those stairs, stretching above me in a Jacob's ladder of shining
wood and Persian carpets, going up, up, clear to the roof. The Dallas Browns walked; they lived in the next block. And they brought
with them a man named Harbison, that no one knew. Anne said he would
be great sport, because he was terribly serious, and had the most
exaggerated ideas of society, and loathed extravagance, and built
bridges or something. She had put away her cigarettes since he had been
with them--he and Dallas had been college friends--and the only chance
she had to smoke was when she was getting her hair done. And she had
singed off quite a lot--a burnt offering, she called it. "My dear," she said over the telephone, when I invited her, "I want you
to know him. He'll be crazy about you. That type of man, big and deadly
earnest, always falls in love with your type of girl, the appealing
sort, you know. And he has been too busy, up to now, to know what love
is. But mind, don't hurt him; he's a dear boy. I'm half in love with him
myself, and Dallas trots around at his heels like a poodle." But all Anne's geese are swans, so I thought little of the Harbison man
except to hope that he played respectable bridge, and wouldn't mark the
cards with a steel spring under his finger nail, as one of her "finds"
had done. We all arrived about the same time, and Anne and I went upstairs
together to take off our wraps in what had been Bella's dressing room. It was Anne who noticed the violets. "Look at that!" she nudged me, when the maid was examining her wrap
before she laid it down. "What did I tell you, Kit? He's still quite mad
about her." Jim had painted Bella's portrait while they were going up the Nile on
their wedding trip. It looked quite like her, if you stood well off in
the middle of the room and if the light came from the right. And just
beneath it, in a silver vase, was a bunch of violets. It was really
touching, and violets were fabulous. It made me want to cry, and
to shake Bella soundly, and to go down and pat Jim on his generous
shoulder, and tell him what a good fellow I thought him, and that
Bella wasn't worth the dust under his feet. I don't know much about
psychology, but it would be interesting to know just what effect those
violets and my sympathy for Jim had in influencing my decision a half
hour later. It is not surprising, under the circumstances, that for some
time after the odor of violets made me ill.

We all met downstairs in the living room, quite informally, and Dallas
was banging away at the pianola, tramping the pedals with the delicacy
and feeling of a football center rush kicking a goal. Mr. Harbison was
standing near the fire, a little away from the others, and he was all
that Anne had said and more in appearance. He was tall--not too tall,
and very straight. And after one got past the oddity of his face being
bronze-colored above his white collar, and of his brown hair being
sun-bleached on top until it was almost yellow, one realized that he was
very handsome. He had what one might call a resolute nose and chin, and
a pleasant, rather humorous, mouth. And he had blue eyes that were,
at that moment, wandering with interest over the lot of us. Somebody
shouted his name to me above the Tristan and Isolde music, and I held
out my hand. Instantly I had the feeling one sometimes has, of having done just that
same thing, with the same surroundings, in the same place, years before,
I was looking up at him, and he was staring down at me and holding my
hand. And then the music stopped and he was saying:

"Where was it?" "Where was what?" I asked. The feeling was stronger than ever with his
voice. "I beg your pardon," he said, and let my hand drop. "Just for a second
I had an idea that we had met before somewhere, a long time ago. I
suppose--no, it couldn't have happened, or I should remember." He was
smiling, half at himself. "No," I smiled back at him. "It didn't happen, I'm afraid--unless we
dreamed it." "We?" "I felt that way, too, for a moment." "The Brushwood Boy!" he said with conviction. "Perhaps we will find a
common dream life, where we knew each other. You remember the Brushwood
Boy loved the girl for years before they really met." But this was a
little too rapid, even for me. "Nothing so sentimental, I'm afraid," I retorted. "I have had exactly
the same sensation sometimes when I have sneezed." Betty Mercer captured him then and took him off to see Jim's newest
picture. Anne pounced on me at once. "Isn't he delicious?" she demanded. "Did you ever see such shoulders? And such a nose? And he thinks we are parasites, cumberers of the earth,
Heaven knows what. He says every woman ought to know how to earn her
living, in case of necessity! I said I could make enough at bridge, and
he thought I was joking! He's a dear!" Anne was enthusiastic. I looked after him. Oddly enough the feeling that we had met before
stuck to me. Which was ridiculous, of course, for we learned afterward
that the nearest we ever came to meeting was that our mothers had been
school friends! Just then I saw Jim beckoning to me crazily from the
den. He looked quite yellow, and he had been running his fingers through
his hair. "For Heaven's sake, come in, Kit!" he said. "I need a cool head. Didn't
I tell you this is my calamity day?" "Cook gone?" I asked with interest. I was starving. He closed the door and took up a tragic attitude in front of the fire. "Did you ever hear of Aunt Selina?" he demanded. "I knew there WAS one," I ventured, mindful of certain gossip as to
whence Jimmy derived the Wilson income. Jim himself was too worried to be cautious. He waved a brazen hand at
the snug room, at the Japanese prints on the walls, at the rugs, at the
teakwood cabinets and the screen inlaid with pearl and ivory. "All this," he said comprehensively, "every bite I eat, clothes I wear,
drinks I drink--you needn't look like that; I don't drink so darned
much--everything comes from Aunt Selina--buttons," he finished with a
groan. "Selina Buttons," I said reflectively. "I don't remember ever having
known any one named Buttons, although I had a cat once--"

"Damn the cat!" he said rudely. "Her name isn't Buttons. Her name is
Caruthers, my Aunt Selina Caruthers, and the money comes from buttons." "Oh!" feebly. "It's an old business," he went on, with something of proprietary pride. "My grandfather founded it in 1775. Made buttons for the Continental
Army." "Oh, yes," I said. "They melted the buttons to make bullets, didn't
they? Or they melted bullets to make buttons? Which was it?" But again he interrupted. "It's like this," he went on hurriedly. "Aunt Selina believes in me. She
likes pictures, and she wanted me to paint, if I could. I'd have given
up long ago--oh, I know what you think of my work--but for Aunt Selina. She has encouraged me, and she's done more than that; she's paid the
bills." "Dear Aunt Selina," I breathed. "When I got married," Jim persisted, "Aunt Selina doubled my allowance. I always expected to sell something, and begin to make money, and in
the meantime what she advanced I considered as a loan." He was eyeing me
defiantly, but I was growing serious. It was evident from the preamble
that something was coming. "To understand, Kit," he went on dubiously, "you would have to know her. She won't stand for divorce. She thinks it is a crime." "What!" I sat up. I have always regarded divorce as essentially
disagreeable, like castor oil, but necessary. "Oh, you know well enough what I'm driving at," he burst out savagely. "She doesn't know Bella has gone. She thinks I am living in a little
domestic heaven, and--she is coming tonight to hear me flap my wings." "Tonight!" I don't think Jimmy had known that Dallas Brown had come in and was
listening. I am sure I had not. Hearing his chuckle at the doorway
brought us up with a jerk. "Where has Aunt Selina been for the last two or three years?" he asked
easily. Jim turned, and his face brightened. "Europe. Look here, Dal, you're a smart chap. She'll only be here about
four hours. Can't you think of some way to get me out of this? I want to
let her down easy, too. I'm mighty fond of Aunt Selina. Can't we--can't
I say Bella has a headache?" "Rotten!" laconically. "Gone out of town?" Jim was desperate. "And you with a houseful of dinner guests! Try again, Jim." "I have it," Jim said suddenly. "Dallas, ask Anne if she won't play
hostess for tonight. Be Mrs. Wilson pro tem. Anne would love it. Aunt
Selina never saw Bella. Then, afterward, next year, when I'm hung in
the Academy and can stand on my feet"--("Not if you're hung," Dallas
interjected.) --"I'll break the truth to her." But Dallas was not enthusiastic. "Anne wouldn't do at all," he declared. "She'd be talking about the
kids before she knew it, and patting me on the head." He said it
complacently; Anne flirts, but they are really devoted. "One of the Mercer girls?" I suggested, but Jimmy raised a horrified
hand. "You don't know Aunt Selina," he protested. "I couldn't offer Leila in
the gown she's got on, unless she wore a shawl, and Betty is too fair." Anne came in just then, and the whole story had to be told again to her. She was ecstatic. She said it was good enough for a play, and that of
course she would be Mrs. Jimmy for that length of time. "You know," she finished, "if it were not for Dal, I would be Mrs. Jimmy
for ANY length of time. I have been devoted to you for years, Billiken." But Dallas refused peremptorily. "I'm not jealous," he explained, straightening and throwing out his
chest, "but--well, you don't look the part, Anne. You're--you are
growing matronly, not but what you suit ME all right. And then I'd
forget and call you 'mammy,' which would require explanation. I think
it's up to you, Kit." "I shall do nothing of the sort!" I snapped. "It's ridiculous!" "I dare you!" said Dallas. I refused. I stood like a rock while the storm surged around me and beat
over me. I must say for Jim that he was merely pathetic. He said that my
happiness was first; that he would not give me an uncomfortable minute
for anything on earth; and that Bella had been perfectly right to
leave him, because he was a sinking ship, and deserved to be turned out
penniless into the world. After which mixed figure, he poured himself
something to drink, and his hands were shaking. Dal and Anne stood on each side of him and patted him on the shoulders
and glared across at me. I felt that if I was a rock, Jim's ship had
struck on me and was sinking, as he said, because of me. I began to
crumble. "What--what time does she leave?" I asked, wavering. "Ten: nine; KIT, are you going to do it?" "No!" I gave a last clutch at my resolution. "People who do that kind
of thing always get into trouble. She might miss her train. She's almost
certain to miss her train." "You're temporizing," Dallas said sternly. "We won't let her miss her
train; you can be sure of that." "Jim," Anne broke in suddenly, "hasn't she a picture of Bella? There's
not the faintest resemblance between Bella and Kit." Jim became downcast again. "I sent her a miniature of Bella a couple of
years ago," he said despondently. "Did it myself." But Dal said he remembered the miniature, and it looked more like me
than Bella, anyhow. So we were just where we started. And down inside of
me I had a premonition that I was going to do just what they wanted
me to do, and get into all sorts of trouble, and not be thanked for it
after all. Which was entirely correct. And then Leila Mercer came and
banged at the door and said that dinner had been announced ages ago and
that everybody was famishing. With the hurry and stress, and poor Jim's
distracted face, I weakened. "I feel like a cross between an idiot and a criminal," I said shortly,
"and I don't know particularly why every one thinks I should be the
victim for the sacrifice. But if you will promise to get her off early
to her train, and if you will stand by me and not leave me alone with
her, I--I might try it." "Of course, we'll stand by you!" they said in chorus. "We won't let you
stick!" And Dal said, "You're the right sort of girl, Kit. And after
it's all over, you'll realize that it's the biggest kind of lark. Think
how you are saving the old lady's feeling! When you are an elderly
person yourself, Kit, you will appreciate what you are doing tonight." Yes, they said they would stand by me, and that I was a heroine and the
only person there clever enough to act the part, and that they wouldn't
let me stick! I am not bitter now, but that is what they promised. Oh, I
am not defending myself; I suppose I deserved everything that happened. But they told me that she would be there only between trains, and that
she was deaf, and that I had an opportunity to save a fellow-being from
ruin. So in the end I capitulated. When they opened the door into the living room, Max Reed had arrived and
was helping to hide a decanter and glasses, and somebody said a cab was
at the door. And that was the way it began. Chapter III. I MIGHT HAVE KNOWN IT

The minute I had consented I regretted it. After all, what were Jimmy's
troubles to me? Why should I help him impose on an unsuspecting elderly
woman? And it was only putting off discovery anyhow. Sooner or later,
she would learn of the divorce, and--Just at that instant my eyes fell
on Mr. Harbison--Tom Harbison, as Anne called him. He was looking on
with an amused, half-puzzled smile, while people were rushing around
hiding the roulette wheel and things of which Miss Caruthers might
disapprove, and Betty Mercer was on her knees winding up a toy bear that
Max had brought her. What would he think? It was evident that he thought
badly of us already--that he was contemptuously amused, and then to have
to ask him to lend himself to the deception! With a gasp I hurled myself after Jimmy, only to hear a strange voice in
the hall and to know that I was too late. I was in for it, whatever was
coming. It was Aunt Selina who was coming--along the hall, followed by
Jim, who was mopping his face and trying not to notice the paralyzed
silence in the library. Aunt Selina met me in the doorway. To my frantic eyes she seemed to
tower above us by at least a foot, and beside her Jimmy was a red,
perspiring cherub. "Here she is," Jimmy said, from behind a temporary eclipse of black
cloak and traveling bag. He was on top of the situation now, and he was
mendaciously cheerful. He had NOT said, "Here is my wife." That would
have been a lie. No, Jimmy merely said, "Here she is." If Aunt Selina
chose to think me Bella, was it not her responsibility? And if I chose
to accept the situation, was it not mine? Dallas Brown came forward
gravely as Aunt Selina folded over and kissed me, and surreptitiously
patted me with one hand while he held out the other to Miss Caruthers. I
loathed him! "We always expect something unusual from James, Miss Caruthers," he
said, with his best manner, "but THIS--this is beyond our wildest
dreams." Well, it's too awful to linger over. Anne took her upstairs and into
Bella's bedroom. It was a fancy of Jim's to leave that room just as
Bella had left it, dusty dance cards and favors hanging around and a
pair of discarded slippers under the bed. I don't think it had been
swept since Bella left it. I believe in sentiment, but I like it brushed
and dusted and the cobwebs off of it, and when Aunt Selina put down her
bonnet, it stirred up a gray-white cloud that made her cough. She did
not say anything, but she looked around the room grimly, and I saw her
run her finger over the back of a chair before she let Hannah, the maid,
put her cloak on it. Anne looked frightened. She ran into Bella's bath and wet the end of a
towel and when Hannah was changing Aunt Selina's collar--her concession
to evening dress--Anne wiped off the obvious places on the furniture. She did it stealthily, but Aunt Selina saw her in the glass. "What's that young woman's name?" she asked me sharply, when Anne had
taken the towel out to hide it. "Anne Brown, Mrs. Dallas Brown," I replied meekly. Every one replied
meekly to Aunt Selina. "Does she live here?" "Oh, no," I said airily. "They are here to dinner, she and her husband. They are old friends of Jim's--and mine." "Seems to have a good eye for dirt," said Aunt Selina and went on
fastening her brooch. When she was finally ready, she took a bead purse
from somewhere about her waist and took out a half dollar. She held it
up before Hannah's eyes. "Tomorrow morning," she said sternly, "You take off that white cap
and that fol-de-rol apron and that black henrietta cloth, and put on
a calico wrapper. And when you've got this room aired and swept, Mrs.
Wilson will give you this." Hannah took two steps back and caught hold of a chair; she stared
helplessly from Aunt Selina to the half dollar, and then at me. Anne was
trying not to catch my eye. "And another thing," Aunt Selina said, from the head of the stairs, "I
sent those towels over from Ireland. Tell her to wash and bleach the one
Mrs. What's-her-name Brown used as a duster." Anne was quite crushed as we went down the stairs. I turned once,
half-way down, and her face was a curious mixture of guilt and hopeless
wrath. Over her shoulder, I could see Hannah, wide-eyed and puzzled,
staring after us. Jim presented everybody, and then he went into the den and closed the
door and we heard him unlock the cellarette. Aunt Selina looked at
Leila's bare shoulders and said she guessed she didn't take cold
easily, and conversation rather languished. Max Reed was looking like a
thundercloud, and he came over to me with a lowering expression that I
had learned to dread in him. "What fool nonsense is this?" he demanded. "What in the world possessed
you, Kit, to put yourself in such an equivocal position? Unless"--he
stopped and turned a little white--"unless you are going to marry Jim." I am sorry for Max. He is such a nice boy, and good looking, too, if
only he were not so fierce, and did not want to make love to me. No
matter what I do, Max always disapproves of it. I have always had a
deeply rooted conviction that if I should ever in a weak moment marry
Max, he would disapprove of that, too, before I had done it very long. "Are you?" he demanded, narrowing his eyes--a sign of unusually bad
humor. "Am I what?" "Going to marry him?" "If you mean Jim," I said with dignity, "I haven't made up my mind yet. Besides, he hasn't asked me." Aunt Selina had been talking Woman's Suffrage in front of the fireplace,
but now she turned to me. "Is this the vase Cousin Jane Whitcomb sent you as a wedding present?" she demanded, indicating a hideous urn-shaped affair on the mantel. It
came to me as an inspiration that Jim had once said it was an ancestral
urn, so I said without hesitation that it was. And because there was a
pause and every one was looking at us, I added that it was a beautiful
thing. Aunt Selina sniffed. "Hideous!" she said. "It looks like Cousin Jane, shape and coloring." Then she looked at it more closely, pounced on it, turned it upside down
and shook it. A card fell out, which Dallas picked up and gave her with
a bow. Jim had come out of the den and was dancing wildly around and
beckoning to me. By the time I had made out that that was NOT the vase
Cousin Jane had sent us as a wedding present, Aunt Selina had examined
the card. Then she glared across at me and, stooping, put the card in
the fire. I did not understand at all, but I knew I had in some way done
the unforgivable thing. Later, Dal told me it was HER card, and that
she had sent the vase to Jim at Christmas, with a generous check inside. When she straightened from the fireplace, it was to a new theme, which
she attacked with her usual vigor. The vase incident was over, but she
never forgot it. She proved that she never did when she sent me two
urn-shaped vases with Paul and Virginia on them, when I--that is, later
on. "The Cause in England has made great strides," she announced from the
fireplace. "Soon the hand that rocks the cradle will be the hand that
actually rules the world." Here she looked at me. "I'm not up on such things," Max said blandly, having recovered some of
his good humor, "but--isn't it usually a foot that rocks the cradle?" Aunt Selina turned on him and Mr. Harbison, who were standing together,
with a snort. "What have you, or YOU, ever done for the independence of woman?" she
demanded. Mr. Harbison smiled. He had been looking rather grave until then. "We
have at least remained unmarried," he retorted. And then dinner was
again announced. He was to take me out, and he came across the room to where I sat
collapsed in a chair, and bent over me. "Do you know," he said, looking down at me with his clear, disconcerting
gaze, "do you know that I have just grasped the situation? There was
such a noise that I did not hear your name, and I am only realizing now
that you are my hostess! I don't know why I got the impression that this
was a bachelor establishment, but I did. Odd, wasn't it?" I positively couldn't look away from him. My features seemed frozen, and
my eyes were glued to his. As for telling him the truth--well, my
tongue refused to move. I intended to tell him during dinner if I had
an opportunity; I honestly did. But the more I looked at him and saw
how candid his eyes were, and how stern his mouth might be, the more I
shivered at the plunge. And, of course, as everybody knows now, I didn't
tell him at all. And every moment I expected that awful old woman to
ask me what I paid my cook, and when I had changed the color of my
hair--Bella's being black. Dinner was a half hour late when we finally went out, Jimmy leading off
with Aunt Selina, and I, as hostess, trailing behind the procession with
Mr. Harbison. Dallas took in the two Mercer girls, for we were one man
short, and Max took Anne. Leila Mercer was so excited that she wriggled,
and as for me, the candles and the orchids--everything--danced around
in a circle, and I just seemed to catch the back of my chair as it flew
past. Jim had ordered away the wines and brought out some weak and cheap
Chianti. Dallas looked gloomy at the change, but Jim explained in
an undertone that Aunt Selina didn't approve of expensive vintages. Naturally, the meal was glum enough. Aunt Selina had had her dinner on the train, so she spent her time in
asking me questions the length of the table, and in getting acquainted
with me. She had brought a bottle of some sort of medicine downstairs
with her, and she took a claret-glassful, while she talked. The stuff
was called Pomona; shall I ever forget it? It was Mr. Harbison who first noticed Takahiro. Jimmy's Jap had been the
only thing in the menage that Bella declared she had hated to leave. But he was doing the strangest things: his little black eyes shifted
nervously, and he looked queer. "What's wrong with him?" Mr. Harbison asked me finally, when he saw that
I noticed. "Is he ill?" Then Aunt Selina's voice from the other end of the table:

"Bella," she called, in a high shrill tone, "do you let James eat
cucumbers?" "I think he must be," I said hurriedly aside to Mr. Harbison. "See how
his hands shake!" But Selina would not be ignored. "Cucumbers and strawberries," she repeated impressively. "I was
saying, Bella, that cucumbers have always given James the most fearful
indigestion. And yet I see you serve them at your table. Do you remember
what I wrote you to give him when he has his dreadful spells?" I was quite speechless; every one was looking, and no one could help. It
was clear Jim was racking his brain, and we sat staring desperately at
each other across the candles. Everything I had ever known faded from
me, eight pairs of eyes bored into me, Mr. Harbison's politely amused. "I don't remember," I said at last. "Really, I don't believe--" Aunt
Selina smiled in a superior way. "Now, don't you recall it?" she insisted. "I said: 'Baking soda in water
taken internally for cucumbers; baking soda and water externally, rubbed
on, when he gets that dreadful, itching strawberry rash.'" I believe the dinner went on. Somebody asked Aunt Selina how much
over-charge she had paid in foreign hotels, and after that she was as
harmless as a dove. Then half way through the dinner we heard a crash in Takahiro's
pantry, and when he did not appear again, Jim got up and went out to
investigate. He was gone quite a little while, and when he came back he
looked worried. "Sick," he replied to our inquiring glances. "One of the maids will come
in. They have sent for a doctor." Aunt Selina was for going out at once and "fixing him up," as she put
it, but Dallas gently interfered. "I wouldn't, Miss Caruthers," he said, in the deferential manner he had
adopted toward her. "You don't know what it may be. He's been looking
spotty all evening." "It might be scarlet fever," Max broke in cheerfully. "I say, scarlet
fever on a Mongolian--what color would he be, Jimmy? What do yellow and
red make? Green?" "Orange," Jim said shortly. "I wish you people would remember that we
are trying to eat." The fact was, however, that no one was really eating, except Mr.
Harbison who had given up trying to understand us, considering, no
doubt, our subdued excitement as our normal condition. Ages afterward
I learned that he thought my face almost tragic that night, and that he
supposed from the way I glared across the table, that I had quarreled
with my husband! "I am afraid you are not well," he said at last, noticing my food
untouched on my plate. "We should not have come, any of us." "I am perfectly well," I replied feverishly. "I am never ill. I--I ate a
late luncheon." He glanced at me keenly. "Don't let them stay and play bridge tonight,"
he urged. "Miss Caruthers can be an excuse, can she not? And you are
really fagged. You look it." "I think it is only ill humor," I said, looking directly at him. "I am
angry at myself. I have done something silly, and I hate to be silly." Max would have said "Impossible," or something else trite. The Harbison
man looked at me with interested, serious eyes. "Is it too late to undo it?" he asked. And then and there I determined that he should never know the truth. He
could go back to South America and build bridges and make love to the
Spanish girls (or are they Spanish down there?) and think of me always
as a married woman, married to a dilettante artist, inclined to be
stout--the artist, not I--and with an Aunt Selina Caruthers who made
buttons and believed in the Cause. But never, NEVER should he think of
me as a silly little fool who pretended that she was the other man's
wife and had a lump in her throat because when a really nice man came
along, a man who knew something more than polo and motors, she had to
carry on the deception to keep his respect, and be sedate and
matronly, and see him change from perfect open admiration at first to a
hands-off-she-is-my-host's-wife attitude at last. "It can never be undone," I said soberly. Well, that's the picture as nearly as I can draw it: a round table
with a low centerpiece of orchids in lavenders and pink, old silver
candlesticks with filigree shades against the somber wainscoting; nine
people, two of them unhappy--Jim and I; one of them complacent--Aunt
Selina; one puzzled--Mr. Harbison; and the rest hysterically mirthful. Add one sick Japanese butler and grind in the mills of the gods. Every one promptly forgot Takahiro in the excitement of the game we were
all playing. Finally, however, Aunt Selina, who seemed to have Takahiro
on her mind, looked up from her plate. "That Jap was speckled," she asserted. "I wouldn't be surprised if it's
measles. Has he been sniffling, James?" "Has he been sniffling?" Jim threw across at me. "I hadn't noticed it," I said meekly, while the others choked. Max came to the rescue. "She refused to eat it," he explained,
distinctly and to everybody, apropos absolutely of nothing. "It said on
the box,'ready cooked and predigested.' She declared she didn't care who
cooked it, but she wanted to know who predigested it." As every one wanted to laugh, every one did it then, and under cover
of the noise I caught Anne's eye, and we left the dining room. The men
stayed, and by the very firmness with which the door closed behind us, I
knew that Dallas and Max were bringing out the bottles that Takahiro had
hidden. I was seething. When Aunt Selina indicated a desire to go over
the house (it was natural that she should want to; it was her house, in
a way) I excused myself for a minute and flew back to the dining room. It was as I had expected. Jim hadn't cheered perceptibly, and the
rest were patting him on the back, and pouring things out for him, and
saying, "Poor old Jim" in the most maddening way. And the Harbison man
was looking more and more puzzled, and not at all hilarious. I descended on them like a thunderbolt. "That's it," I cried shrewishly, with my back against the door. "Leave
her to me, all of you, and pat each other on the back, and say it's gone
splendidly! Oh, I know you, every one!" Mr. Harbison got up and pulled
out a chair, but I couldn't sit; I folded my arms on the back. "After a
while, I suppose, you'll slip upstairs, the four of you, and have your
game." They looked guilty. "But I will block that right now. I am going
to stay--here. If Aunt Selina wants me, she can find me--here!" The first indication those men had that Mr. Harbison didn't know the
state of affairs was when he turned and faced them. "Mrs. Wilson is quite right," he said gravely. "We're a selfish lot. If
Miss Caruthers is a responsibility, let us share her." "To arms!" Jim said, with an affectation of lightness, as they put their
glasses down, and threw open the door. Dal's retort, "Whose?" was
lost in the confusion, and we went into the library. On the way Dallas
managed to speak to me. "If Harbison doesn't know, don't tell him," he said in an undertone. "He's a queer duck, in some ways; he mightn't think it funny." "Funny," I choked. "It's the least funny thing I ever experienced. Deceiving that Harbison man isn't so bad--he thinks me crazy, anyhow. He's been staring his eyes out at me--"

"I don't wonder. You're really lovely tonight, Kit, and you look like a
vixen." "But to deceive that harmless old lady--well, thank goodness, it's nine,
and she leaves in an hour or so." But she didn't and that's the story. Chapter IV. THE DOOR WAS CLOSED

It was infuriating to see how much enjoyment every one but Jim and
myself got out of the situation. They howled with mirth over the
feeblest jokes, and when Max told a story without any point whatever,
they all had hysteria. Immediately after dinner Aunt Selina had begun
on the family connection again, and after two bad breaks on my part, Jim
offered to show her the house. The Mercer girls trailed along, unwilling
to lose any of the possibilities. They said afterward that it was
terrible: she went into all the closets, and ran her hand over the tops
of doors and kept getting grimmer and grimmer. In the studio they came
across a life study Jim was doing and she shut her eyes and made the
girls go out while he covered it with a drapery. Lollie! Who did the
Bacchante dance at three benefits last winter and was learning a new one
called "Eve"! When they heard Aunt Selina on the second floor, Anne, Dal and Max
sneaked up to the studio for cigarettes, which left Mr. Harbison to me. I was in the den, sitting in a low chair by the wood fire when he came
in. He hesitated in the doorway. "Would you prefer being alone, or may I come in?" he asked. "Don't mind
being frank. I know you are tired." "I have a headache, and I am sulking," I said unpleasantly, "but at
least I am not actively venomous. Come in." So he came in and sat down across the hearth from me, and neither of us
said anything. The firelight flickered over the room, bringing out the
faded hues of the old Japanese prints on the walls, gleaming in the
mother-of-pearl eyes of the dragon on the screen, setting a grotesque
god on a cabinet to nodding. And it threw into relief the strong profile
of the man across from me, as he stared at the fire. "I am afraid I am not very interesting," I said at last, when he
showed no sign of breaking the silence. "The--the illness of the butler
and--Miss Caruthers' arrival, have been upsetting." He suddenly roused with a start from a brown reverie. "I beg your pardon," he said, "I--oh, of course not! I was wondering
if I--if you were offended at what I said earlier in the evening;
the--Brushwood Boy, you know, and all that." "Offended?" I repeated, puzzled. "You see, I have been living out of the world so long, and never seeing
any women but Indian squaws"--so there were no Spanish girls!--"that I'm
afraid I say what comes into my mind without circumlocution. And then--I
did not know you were married." "No, oh, no," I said hastily. "But, of course, the more a woman is
married--I mean, you can not say too many nice things to married women. They--need them, you know." I had floundered miserably, with his eyes on me, and I half expected him
to be shocked, or to say that married women should be satisfied with the
nice things their husbands say to them. But he merely remarked apropos
of nothing, or following a line of thought he had not voiced, that it
was trite but true that a good many men owed their success in life to
their wives. "And a good many owe their wives to their success in life," I retorted
cynically. At which he stared at me again. It was then that the real complexity of the situation began to develop. Some one had rung the bell and been admitted to the library and a maid
came to the door of the den. When she saw us she stopped uncertainly. Even then it struck me that she looked odd, and she was not in uniform. However, I was not informed at that time about bachelor establishments,
and the first thing she said, when she had asked to speak to me in the
hall, knocked her and her clothes clear out of my head. Evidently she
knew me. "Miss McNair," she said in a low tone. "There is a lady in the drawing
room, a veiled person, and she is asking for Mr. Wilson." "Can you not find him?" I asked. "He is in the house, probably in the
studio." The girl hesitated. "Excuse me, miss, but Miss Caruthers--"

Then I saw the situation. "Never mind," I said. "Close the door into the drawing room, and I will
tell Mr. Wilson." But as the girl turned toward the doorway, the person in question
appeared in it, and raised her veil. I was perfectly paralyzed. It was
Bella! Bella in a fur coat and a veil, with the most tragic eyes I ever
saw and entirely white except for a dab of rouge in the middle of each
cheek. We stared at each other without speech. The maid turned and went
down the hall, and with that Bella came over to me and clutched me by
the arm. "Who was being carried out into that ambulance?" she demanded, glaring
at me with the most awful intensity. "I'm sure I don't know, Bella," I said, wriggling away from her fingers. "What in the world are you doing here? I thought you were in Europe." "You are hiding something from me!" she accused. "It is Jim! I see it in
your face." "Well, it isn't," I snapped. "It seems to me, really, Bella, that you
and Jim ought to be able to manage your own affairs, without dragging me
in." It was not pleasant, but if she was suffering, so was I. "Jim is as
well as he ever was. He's upstairs somewhere. I'll send for him." She gripped me again, and held on while her color came back. "You'll do nothing of the kind," she said, and she had quite got hold of
herself again. "I do not want to see him: I hope you don't think, Kit,
that I came here to see James Wilson. Why, I have forgotten that there
IS such a person, and you know it." Somebody upstairs laughed, and I was growing nervous. What if Aunt
Selina should come down, or Mr. Harbison come out of the den? "Why DID you come, then, Bella?" I inquired. "He may come in." "I was passing in the motor," she said, and I honestly think she hoped I
would believe her, "and I saw that am--" She stopped and began again. "I thought Jim was out of town, and I came to see Takahiro," she said
brazenly. "He was devoted to me, and Evans is going to leave. I'll tell
you what to do, Kit. I'll go back to the dining room, and you send Taka
there. If any one comes, I can slip into the pantry." "It's immoral," I protested. "It's immoral to steal your--"

"My own butler!" she broke in impatiently. "You're not usually so
scrupulous, Kit. Hurry! I hear that hateful Anne Brown." So we slid back along the hall, and I rang for Takahiro. But no one
came. "I think I ought to tell you, Bella," I said as we waited, and Bella was
staring around the room--"I think you ought to know that Miss Caruthers
is here." Bella shrugged her shoulders. "Well, thank goodness," she said, "I don't have to see her. The only
pleasant thing I remember about my year of married life is that I did
NOT meet Aunt Selina." I rang again, but still there was no answer. And then it occurred to
me that the stillness below stairs was almost oppressive. Bella was
noticing things, too, for she began to fasten her veil again with a
malicious little smile. "One of the things I remember my late husband saying," she observed,
"was that HE could manage this house, and had done it for years, with
flawless service. Stand on the bell, Kit." I did. We stood there, with the table, just as it had been left, between
us, and waited for a response. Bella was growing impatient. She raised
her eyebrows (she is very handsome, Bella is) and flung out her chin as
if she had begun to enjoy the horrible situation. I thought I heard a rattle of silver from the pantry just then, and I
hurried to the door in a rage. But the pantry was empty of servants and
full of dishes, and all the lights were out but one, which was burning
dimly. I could have sworn that I saw one of the servants duck into the
stairway to the basement, but when I got there the stairs were empty,
and something was burning in the kitchen below. Bella had followed me and was peering over my shoulder curiously. "There isn't a servant in the house," she said triumphantly. And when we
went down to the kitchen, she seemed to be right. It was in disgraceful
order, and one of the bottles of wine that had ben banished from the
dining room sat half empty on the floor. "Drunk!" Bella said with conviction. But I didn't think so. There had
not been time enough, for one thing. Suddenly I remembered the ambulance
that had been the cause of Bella's appearance--for no one could believe
her silly story about Takahiro. I didn't wait to voice my suspicion to
her; I simply left her there, staring helplessly at the confusion, and
ran upstairs again: through the dining room, past Jimmy and Aunt Selina,
past Leila Mercer and Max, who were flirting on the stairs, up, up to
the servants' bedrooms, and there my suspicions were verified. There was
every evidence of a hasty flight; in three bedrooms five trunks stood
locked and ominous, and the closets yawned with open doors, empty. Bella
had been right; there was not a servant in the house. As I emerged from the untidy emptiness of the servants' wing, I met Mr.
Harbison coming out of the studio. "I wish you would let me do some of this running about for you, Mrs.
Wilson," he said gravely. "You are not well, and I can't think of
anything worse for a headache. Has the butler's illness clogged the
household machinery?" "Worse," I replied, trying not to breathe in gasps. "I wouldn't be
running around--like this--but there is not a servant in the house! They
have gone, the entire lot." "That's odd," he said slowly. "Gone! Are you sure?" In reply I pointed to the servants' wing. "Trunks packed," I said
tragically, "rooms empty, kitchen and pantries, full of dishes. Did you
ever hear of anything like it?" "Never," he asserted. "It makes me suspect--" What he suspected he did
not say; instead he turned on his heel, without a word of explanation,
and ran down the stairs. I stood staring after him, wondering if every
one in the place had gone crazy. Then I heard Betty Mercer scream and
the rest talking loud and laughing, and Mr. Harbison came up the stairs
again two at a time. "How long has that Jap been ailing, Mrs. Wilson?" he asked. "I--I don't know," I replied helplessly. "What is the trouble, anyhow?" "I think he probably has something contagious," he said, "and it
has scared the servants away. As Mr. Brown said, he looked spotty. I
suggested to your husband that it might be as well to get the house
emptied--in case we are correct." "Oh, yes, by all means," I said eagerly. I couldn't get away too soon. "I'll go and get my--" Then I stopped. Why, the man wouldn't expect me
to leave; I would have to play out the wretched farce to the end! "I'll go down and see them off," I finished lamely, and we went together
down the stairs. Just for the moment I forgot Bella altogether. I found Aunt Selina
bonneted and cloaked, taking a stirrup cup of Pomona for her nerves,
and the rest throwing on their wraps in a hurry. Downstairs Max was
telephoning for his car, which wasn't due for an hour, and Jim was
walking up and down, swearing under his breath. With the prospect of
getting rid of them all, and, of going home comfortably to try to forget
the whole wretched affair, I cheered up quite a lot. I even played up my
part of hostess, and Dallas told me, aside, that I was a brick. Just then Jim threw open the front door. There was a man on the top step, with his mouth full of tacks, and he
was nailing something to the door, just below Jim's Florentine bronze
knocker, and standing back with his head on one side to see if it was
straight. "What are you doing?" Jim demanded fiercely, but the man only drove
another tack. It was Mr. Harbison who stepped outside and read the card. It said "Smallpox." "Smallpox," Mr. Harbison read, as if he couldn't believe it. Then he
turned to us, huddled in the hall. "It seems it wasn't measles, after all," he said cheerfully. "I move we
get into Mr. Reed's automobile out there, and have a vaccination party. I suppose even you blase society folk have not exhausted that kind of
diversion." But the man on the step spat his tacks in his hand and spoke for the
first time. "No, you don't," he said. "Not on your life. Just step back, please, and
close the door. This house is quarantined." Chapter V. FROM THE TREE OF LOVE

There is hardly any use trying to describe what followed. Anne Brown
began to cry, and talk about the children. (She went to Europe once and
stayed until they all got over the whooping cough.) And Dallas said he
had a pull, because his mill controlled I forget how many votes, and the
thing to do was to be quiet and comfortable and we would get out in
the morning. Max took it as a huge joke, and somebody found him at
the telephone, calling up his club. The Mercer girls were hysterically
giggling, and Aunt Selina sat on a stiff-backed chair and took aromatic
spirits of ammonia. As for Jim, he had collapsed on the lowest step of
the stairs, and sat there with his head in his hands. When he did look
up, he didn't dare to look at me. The Harbison man was arguing with the impassive individual on the top
step outside, and I saw him get out his pocketbook and offer a crisp
bundle of bills. But the man from the board of health only smiled and
tacked at his offensive sign. After a while Mr. Harbison came in and
closed the door, and we stared at one another. "I know what I'm going to do," I said, swallowing a lump in my throat. "I'm going to get out through a basement window at the back. I'm going
home." "Home!" Aunt Selina gasped, jumping up and almost dropping her ammonia
bottle. "My dear Bella! Home?" Jimmy groaned at the foot of the stairs, but Anne Brown was getting over
her tears and now she turned on me in a temper. "It's all your fault," she said. "I was going to stay at home and get a
little sleep--"

"Well, you can sleep now," Dallas broke in. "There'll be nothing to do
but sleep." "I think you haven't grasped the situation, Dal," I said icily. "There
will be plenty to do. There isn't a servant in the house!" "No servants!" everybody cried at once. The Mercer girls stopped
giggling. "Holy cats!" Max stopped in the act of hanging up his overcoat. "Do you
mean--why, I can't shave myself! I'll cut my head off." "You'll do more than that," I retorted grimly. "You will carry coal and
tend fires and empty ash pans, and when you are not doing any of those
things there will be pots and pans to wash and beds to make." Then there WAS a row. We had worked back to the den now, and I stood in
front of the fireplace and let the storm beat around me, and tried
to look perfectly cold and indifferent, and not to see Mr. Harbison's
shocked face. No wonder he thought them a lot of savages, browbeating
their hostess the way they did. "It's a fool thing anyhow," Max Reed wound up, "to celebrate the
anniversary of a divorce--especially--" Here he caught Jim's eye and
stopped. But I had suddenly remembered. BELLA DOWN IN THE BASEMENT! Could anything have been worse? And of course she would have hysteria
and then turn on me and blame me for it all. It all came over me at once
and overwhelmed me, while Anne was crying and saying she wouldn't cook
if she starved for it, and Aunt Selina was taking off her wraps. I felt
queer all over, and I sat down suddenly. Mr. Harbison was looking at me,
and he brought me a glass of wine. "It won't be so bad as you fear," he said comfortingly. "There will be
no danger once we are vaccinated, and many hands make light work. They
are pretty raw now, because the thing is new to them, but by morning
they will be reconciled." "It isn't the work; it is something entirely different," I said. And it
was. Bella and work could hardly be spoken in the same breath. If I had only turned her out as she deserved to be, when she first came,
instead of allowing her to carry through the wretched farce about seeing
Takahiro! Or if I had only run to the basement the moment the house was
quarantined, and got her out the areaway or the coal hole! And now time
was flying, and Aunt Selina had me by the arm, and any moment I expected
Bella to pounce on us through the doorway and the whole situation to
explode with a bang. It was after eleven before they were rational enough to discuss ways and
means, and, of course, the first thing suggested was that we all adjourn
below stairs and clean up after dinner. I could have slain Max Reed for
the notion, and the Mercer girls for taking him up. "Of course we will," they said in a duet. "What a lark!" And they
actually began to pin up their dinner gowns. It was Jim who stopped
that. "Oh, look here, you people," he objected, "I'm not going to let you do
that. We'll get some servants in tomorrow. I'll go down and put out the
lights. There will be enough clean dishes for breakfast." It was lucky for me that they started a new discussion then and there
about who would get the breakfast. In the midst of the excitement I
slipped away to carry the news to Bella. She was where I had left her,
and she had made herself a cup of tea, and was very much at home, which
was natural. "Do you know," she said ominously, "that you have been away for two
hours; and that I have gone through agonies of nervousness for fear Jim
Wilson would come down and think I came here to see him?" "No one would think that, Bella," I soothed her. "Everybody knows you
loathe him--Jim, too." She looked at me over the edge of her cup. "I'll run along now," she said, "since Takahiro isn't here. And if Jim
has any sense at all, he will clear out every maid in the house. I never
saw such a kitchen in all my life. Well, lead the way, Kit. I suppose
they are deep in bridge, or roulette, or something." She was fixing her veil, and I saw I would have to tell her. Personally,
I would much rather have told her the house was on fire. "Wait a minute, Bella," I said. "You see, something queer has happened. You know this is the anniversary--well, you know what it is--and Jim was
awfully glum. So we thought we would come--"

"What are you driving at?" she demanded. "You are sea-green, Kit. What's
the matter? You needn't think I mind because Jim has a jollification to
celebrate his divorce." "It--it was Takahiro--in the ambulance," I blurted. "Smallpox. We--Bella, we are shut in, quarantined." She didn't faint. She just sat down and stared at me, and I stared back
at her. Then a miserable alarm clock on the table suddenly went off like
an explosion, and Bella began to laugh. I knew what that was--hysteria. She always had attacks like that when things went wrong. I was quite
despairing by that time; I hoped they would all hear her and come
downstairs and take her up and put her to bed like a Christian, so she
could giggle her soul out. But after a bit she quieted down and began to
cry softly, and I knew the worst was over. I gave her a shake, and she
was so angry that she got over it altogether. "Kit, you are horrid," she choked. "Don't you see what a position I am
in? I am not going upstairs to face Anne and the rest of them. You can
just put me in the coal cellar." "Isn't there a window you could get through?" I asked desperately. "Locking the door doesn't shut up a whole house." Bella's courage revived at that, and she said yes, there were windows,
plenty of them, only she didn't see how she could get out. And I
said she would HAVE to get out, because I was playing Bella in the
performance, and I didn't care to have an understudy. Then the situation
dawned on her, and she sat down and laughed herself weak in the knees. Of course she wanted to stay, then, and see the fun out. But I was firm;
she would have to go, and I told her so. Things were complicated enough
without her. Well, we looked funny, no doubt, Bella in a Russian pony automobile coat
over the black satin she had worn at the Clevelands' dinner, and I in
cream lace, the skirt gathered up from the kitchen floor, with Bella's
ermine pelerine around my bare shoulders, and dishes and overturned
chairs everywhere. Bella knew more about the lower regions of her ex-home than I would have
thought. She opened a door in a corner and led the way through a narrow
hall past the refrigerating room, to a huge, cemented cellar, with a
furnace in the center, and a half-dozen electric lights making it really
brilliant. "Get a chair," Bella said over her shoulder, excitedly. "I can get out
easily here, through the coal hole. Imagine my--"

But it was my turn to grip Bella. From behind the furnace were coming
the most terrible sounds, rasping noises that fairly frayed the silk of
my nerves. We stood petrified for an instant. Then Bella laughed. "They
are not all gone," she said carefully. "Some one is asleep there." We tiptoed to where we could see around the furnace, and, sure enough,
some one WAS asleep there. Only, it was not one of the servants; it was
a portly policeman, with a newspaper and an empty plate on the floor on
one side, and a champagne bottle on the other. He had slid down in his
chair, with his chin on his brass buttons, and his helmet had rolled a
dozen feet away. Bella had to clap her hand over her mouth. "Fairly caught!" she whispered. "Sartor Resartus, the arrester arrested. Oh, Jim and his flawless service!" But after we got over our surprise, we saw the situation was serious. The policeman was threatening to awaken. Once he stopped snoring to yawn
noisily, and we beat a hasty retreat. Bella switched off the lights in
a hurry and locked the door behind us. We hardly breathed until we were
back in the kitchen again, and everything quiet. And then Jimmy called
my name from up above somewheres. "I am going to call him down, Bella," I said firmly. "Let him help you
out. I'm sure I don't see why I should have all this when the two of
you--"

"Oh, no, no! Surely, Kit, you wouldn't be so cruel!" she whispered
pleadingly. "You know what he would think. He--oh, Kit, let them all get
settled for the night, and then come down, like a dear, and help me out. I know loads of ways--honestly I do." "If I leave you here," I debated, "what about the policeman?" "Never mind him"--frantically. "Listen! There's Jim up in the pantry. Run, for the sake of Heaven!" So--I ran. At the top of the stairs I met Jimmy, very crumpled as to
shirt-front and dejected as to face. "I've been hunting everywhere for you," he said dismally. "I thought you
had added to the general merriment by falling downstairs and breaking
your neck." I went past him with my chin up. Now that I had time to think about it,
I was furiously angry with him. "Kit!" he called after me appealingly, but I would not hear. Then he
adopted different tactics. He took advantage of my catching my foot in
the lace of my gown to pass me, and to stand with his back against the
door. "You're not going until you hear me, Kit," he declared miserably. "In
the first place, for all you are down on me, is it my fault? Honestly,
now IS IT MY FAULT?" I refused to speak. "I was coming home to be miserable alone," he went on, "and--oh, I know
you meant well, Kit; but YOU asked all these crazy people here." "Perhaps you will give me credit for some things," I said wearily. "I
did NOT give Takahiro smallpox, for instance, and--if you will permit me
to mention the fact--Aunt Selina is not MY Aunt Selina." "That's what I wanted to speak to you about," Jimmy went on wretchedly,
trying not to look at me. "You see, when they were rowing so about who
would get the breakfast--I never saw such a lot of people; half of
them never touch breakfast, but of course now they want all kinds of
things--when they were talking, Aunt Selina said she knew YOU would get
it, being the hostess, and responsible, besides knowing where things
are kept." He had fixed his eyes on the orchids, and he looked shrunken,
actually shrunken. "I thought," he finished, "you might give me a few
pointers now, and I could come down in the morning, and--and fuss up
something, coffee and so on. I would say you did it! Oh, hang it all,
Kit, why don't you say something?" "What do you want me to say?" I demanded. "That I love to cook, and of
course I'll fix trays and carry them up in the morning to Anne Brown
and Leila Mercer and the rest; and that I will have the shaving water
ready--"

"I know what I'm going to do," Jimmy said, with a sudden resolution. "Aunt Selina and her money can go to blazes. I am going right upstairs
and tell her the truth, tell her who you are, what I am, and all the
rest of it." He opened the door. "You'll do nothing of the kind," I gasped, catching him in time. "Don't
you dare, Jimmy Wilson! Why, what would they think of me? After letting
her call me Bella, and him--Jim, if Mr. Harbison ever learns the
truth--I--I will take poison. If we are going to be shut up here
together, we will have to carry it on. I couldn't stand the disgrace." In spite of an heroic effort, Jim looked relieved. "They have been
hunting for the linen closet," he said, more cheerfully, "and there will
be room enough, I think. Harbison and I will hang out in the studio;
there are two couches there. I'm afraid you'll have to take Aunt Selina,
Kit." "Certainly," I said coldly. That was the way it was all along. Whenever
there was something to do that no one else would undertake--any
unpleasant responsibility--that entire mongrel household turned with one
gesture and pointed its finger at me! Well, it is over now, and I ought
not to be bitter, considering everything. It was quite characteristic of that memorable evening (that is quite
novelesque, I think) that my interview with Jimmy should have a
sensational ending. He was terribly down, of course, and as I was trying
to pass him to get to the door, he caught my hand. "You're a girl in a thousand, Kit," he said forlornly. "If I were not so
damnably, hopelessly, idiotically in love with--somebody else, I should
be crazy about you." "Don't be maudlin," I retorted. "Would you mind letting my hand go?" I
felt sure Bella could hear. "Oh, come now, Kit," he implored, "we've always got along so well. It's
a shame to let a thing like this make us bad friends. Aren't you ever
going to forgive me?" "Never," I said promptly. "When I once get away, I don't want ever to
see you again. I was never so humiliated in my life. I loathe you!" Then I turned around, and, of course, there was Aunt Selina with her
eyes protruding until you could have knocked them off with a stick, and
beside her, very red and uncomfortable, Mr. Harbison! "Bella!" she said in a shocked voice, "is that the way you speak to your
husband! It is high time I came here, I think, and took a hand in this
affair." "Oh, never mind, Aunt Selina," Jim said, with a sheepish grin. "Kit--Bella is tired and nervous. This is a h--deuce of a situation. No--er--servants, and all that." But Aunt Selina did mind, and showed it. She pulled the unlucky Harbison
man through the door and closed it, and then stood glaring at both of
us. "Every little quarrel is an apple knocked from the tree of love," she
announced oratorically. "This was a very little quarrel," Jim said, edging toward the door;
"a--a green apple, Aunt Selina, a colicky little green apple." But she
was not to be diverted. "Bella," she said severely, "you said you loathed him. You didn't mean
that." "But I do!" I cried hysterically. "There isn't any word to tell how
I--how I detest him." Then I swept past them all and flew to Bella's dressing room and locked
myself in. Aunt Selina knocked until she was tired, then gave up and
went to bed. That was the night Anne Brown's pearl collar was stolen! Chapter VI. A MIGHTY POOR JOKE

Of course, one knows that there are people who in a different grade of
society would be shoplifters and pickpockets. When they are restrained
by obligation or environment they become a little overkeen at bridge,
or take the wrong sables, or stuff a gold-backed brush into a muff at
a reception. You remember the ivory dressing set that Theodora Bucknell
had, fastened with fine gold chains? And the sensation it caused at the
Bucknell cotillion when Mrs. Van Zire went sweeping to her carriage with
two feet of gold chain hanging from the front of her wrap? But Anne's pearl collar was different. In the first place, instead of
three or four hundred people, the suspicion had to be divided among ten. And of those ten, at least eight of us were friends, and the other two
had been vouched for by the Browns and Jimmy. It was a horrible mix-up. For the necklace was gone--there couldn't be any doubt of that--and
although, as Dallas said, it couldn't get out of the house, still, there
were plenty of places to hide the thing. The worst of our trouble really originated with Max Reed, after all. For it was Max who made the silly wager over the telephone, with Dick
Bagley. He bet five hundred even that one of us, at least, would break
quarantine within the next twenty-four hours, and, of course, that
settled it. Dick told it around the club as a joke, and a man who owns
a newspaper heard him and called up the paper. Then the paper called up
the health office, after setting up a flaming scare-head, "Will Money
Free Them? Board of Health versus Millionaire." It was almost three when the house settled down--nobody had any night
clothes, although finally, through Dallas, who gave them to Anne, who
gave them to the rest, we got some things of Jimmy's--and I was still
dressed. The house was perfectly quiet, and, after listening carefully,
I went slowly down the stairs. There was a light in the hall, and
another back in the dining room, and I got along without any trouble. But the pantry, where the stairs led down, was dark, and the wretched
swinging door would not stay open. I caught my skirt in the door as I went through, and I had to stop to
loosen it. And in that awful minute I heard some one breathing just
beside me. I had stooped to my gown, and I turned my head without
straightening--I couldn't have raised myself to an erect posture, for
my knees were giving way under me--and just at my feet lay the still
glowing end of a match! 