



Transcribed from the Thomas Nelson and Sons edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





THE PEOPLE OF THE ABYSS


The chief priests and rulers cry:-

   "O Lord and Master, not ours the guilt,
   We build but as our fathers built;
   Behold thine images how they stand
   Sovereign and sole through all our land. "Our task is hard--with sword and flame,
   To hold thine earth forever the same,
   And with sharp crooks of steel to keep,
   Still as thou leftest them, thy sheep." Then Christ sought out an artisan,
   A low-browed, stunted, haggard man,
   And a motherless girl whose fingers thin
   Crushed from her faintly want and sin. These set he in the midst of them,
   And as they drew back their garment hem
   For fear of defilement, "Lo, here," said he,
   "The images ye have made of me." JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL. PREFACE


The experiences related in this volume fell to me in the summer of 1902. I went down into the under-world of London with an attitude of mind which
I may best liken to that of the explorer. I was open to be convinced by
the evidence of my eyes, rather than by the teachings of those who had
not seen, or by the words of those who had seen and gone before. Further,
I took with me certain simple criteria with which to measure the life of
the under-world. That which made for more life, for physical and
spiritual health, was good; that which made for less life, which hurt,
and dwarfed, and distorted life, was bad. It will be readily apparent to the reader that I saw much that was bad. Yet it must not be forgotten that the time of which I write was
considered "good times" in England. The starvation and lack of shelter I
encountered constituted a chronic condition of misery which is never
wiped out, even in the periods of greatest prosperity. Following the summer in question came a hard winter. Great numbers of
the unemployed formed into processions, as many as a dozen at a time, and
daily marched through the streets of London crying for bread. Mr. Justin
McCarthy, writing in the month of January 1903, to the New York
_Independent_, briefly epitomises the situation as follows:-

   "The workhouses have no space left in which to pack the starving
   crowds who are craving every day and night at their doors for food and
   shelter. All the charitable institutions have exhausted their means
   in trying to raise supplies of food for the famishing residents of the
   garrets and cellars of London lanes and alleys. The quarters of the
   Salvation Army in various parts of London are nightly besieged by
   hosts of the unemployed and the hungry for whom neither shelter nor
   the means of sustenance can be provided." It has been urged that the criticism I have passed on things as they are
in England is too pessimistic. I must say, in extenuation, that of
optimists I am the most optimistic. But I measure manhood less by
political aggregations than by individuals. Society grows, while
political machines rack to pieces and become "scrap." For the English,
so far as manhood and womanhood and health and happiness go, I see a
broad and smiling future. But for a great deal of the political
machinery, which at present mismanages for them, I see nothing else than
the scrap heap. JACK LONDON. PIEDMONT, CALIFORNIA. CHAPTER I--THE DESCENT


"But you can't do it, you know," friends said, to whom I applied for
assistance in the matter of sinking myself down into the East End of
London. "You had better see the police for a guide," they added, on
second thought, painfully endeavouring to adjust themselves to the
psychological processes of a madman who had come to them with better
credentials than brains. "But I don't want to see the police," I protested. "What I wish to do is
to go down into the East End and see things for myself. I wish to know
how those people are living there, and why they are living there, and
what they are living for. In short, I am going to live there myself." "You don't want to _live_ down there!" everybody said, with
disapprobation writ large upon their faces. "Why, it is said there are
places where a man's life isn't worth tu'pence." "The very places I wish to see," I broke in. "But you can't, you know," was the unfailing rejoinder. "Which is not what I came to see you about," I answered brusquely,
somewhat nettled by their incomprehension. "I am a stranger here, and I
want you to tell me what you know of the East End, in order that I may
have something to start on." "But we know nothing of the East End. It is over there, somewhere." And
they waved their hands vaguely in the direction where the sun on rare
occasions may be seen to rise. "Then I shall go to Cook's," I announced. "Oh yes," they said, with relief. "Cook's will be sure to know." But O Cook, O Thomas Cook & Son, path-finders and trail-clearers, living
sign-posts to all the world, and bestowers of first aid to bewildered
travellers--unhesitatingly and instantly, with ease and celerity, could
you send me to Darkest Africa or Innermost Thibet, but to the East End of
London, barely a stone's throw distant from Ludgate Circus, you know not
the way! "You can't do it, you know," said the human emporium of routes and fares
at Cook's Cheapside branch. "It is so--hem--so unusual." "Consult the police," he concluded authoritatively, when I had persisted. "We are not accustomed to taking travellers to the East End; we receive
no call to take them there, and we know nothing whatsoever about the
place at all." "Never mind that," I interposed, to save myself from being swept out of
the office by his flood of negations. "Here's something you can do for
me. I wish you to understand in advance what I intend doing, so that in
case of trouble you may be able to identify me." "Ah, I see! should you be murdered, we would be in position to identify
the corpse." He said it so cheerfully and cold-bloodedly that on the instant I saw my
stark and mutilated cadaver stretched upon a slab where cool waters
trickle ceaselessly, and him I saw bending over and sadly and patiently
identifying it as the body of the insane American who _would_ see the
East End. "No, no," I answered; "merely to identify me in case I get into a scrape
with the 'bobbies.'" This last I said with a thrill; truly, I was
gripping hold of the vernacular. "That," he said, "is a matter for the consideration of the Chief Office." "It is so unprecedented, you know," he added apologetically. The man at the Chief Office hemmed and hawed. "We make it a rule," he
explained, "to give no information concerning our clients." "But in this case," I urged, "it is the client who requests you to give
the information concerning himself." Again he hemmed and hawed. "Of course," I hastily anticipated, "I know it is unprecedented, but--"

"As I was about to remark," he went on steadily, "it is unprecedented,
and I don't think we can do anything for you." However, I departed with the address of a detective who lived in the East
End, and took my way to the American consul-general. And here, at last,
I found a man with whom I could "do business." There was no hemming and
hawing, no lifted brows, open incredulity, or blank amazement. In one
minute I explained myself and my project, which he accepted as a matter
of course. In the second minute he asked my age, height, and weight, and
looked me over. And in the third minute, as we shook hands at parting,
he said: "All right, Jack. I'll remember you and keep track." I breathed a sigh of relief. Having burnt my ships behind me, I was now
free to plunge into that human wilderness of which nobody seemed to know
anything. But at once I encountered a new difficulty in the shape of my
cabby, a grey-whiskered and eminently decorous personage who had
imperturbably driven me for several hours about the "City." "Drive me down to the East End," I ordered, taking my seat. "Where, sir?" he demanded with frank surprise. "To the East End, anywhere. Go on." The hansom pursued an aimless way for several minutes, then came to a
puzzled stop. The aperture above my head was uncovered, and the cabman
peered down perplexedly at me. "I say," he said, "wot plyce yer wanter go?" "East End," I repeated. "Nowhere in particular. Just drive me around
anywhere." "But wot's the haddress, sir?" "See here!" I thundered. "Drive me down to the East End, and at once!" It was evident that he did not understand, but he withdrew his head, and
grumblingly started his horse. Nowhere in the streets of London may one escape the sight of abject
poverty, while five minutes' walk from almost any point will bring one to
a slum; but the region my hansom was now penetrating was one unending
slum. The streets were filled with a new and different race of people,
short of stature, and of wretched or beer-sodden appearance. We rolled
along through miles of bricks and squalor, and from each cross street and
alley flashed long vistas of bricks and misery. Here and there lurched a
drunken man or woman, and the air was obscene with sounds of jangling and
squabbling. At a market, tottery old men and women were searching in the
garbage thrown in the mud for rotten potatoes, beans, and vegetables,
while little children clustered like flies around a festering mass of
fruit, thrusting their arms to the shoulders into the liquid corruption,
and drawing forth morsels but partially decayed, which they devoured on
the spot. Not a hansom did I meet with in all my drive, while mine was like an
apparition from another and better world, the way the children ran after
it and alongside. And as far as I could see were the solid walls of
brick, the slimy pavements, and the screaming streets; and for the first
time in my life the fear of the crowd smote me. It was like the fear of
the sea; and the miserable multitudes, street upon street, seemed so many
waves of a vast and malodorous sea, lapping about me and threatening to
well up and over me. "Stepney, sir; Stepney Station," the cabby called down. I looked about. It was really a railroad station, and he had driven
desperately to it as the one familiar spot he had ever heard of in all
that wilderness. "Well," I said. He spluttered unintelligibly, shook his head, and looked very miserable. "I'm a strynger 'ere," he managed to articulate. "An' if yer don't want
Stepney Station, I'm blessed if I know wotcher do want." "I'll tell you what I want," I said. "You drive along and keep your eye
out for a shop where old clothes are sold. Now, when you see such a
shop, drive right on till you turn the corner, then stop and let me out." I could see that he was growing dubious of his fare, but not long
afterwards he pulled up to the curb and informed me that an old-clothes
shop was to be found a bit of the way back. "Won'tcher py me?" he pleaded. "There's seven an' six owin' me." "Yes," I laughed, "and it would be the last I'd see of you." "Lord lumme, but it'll be the last I see of you if yer don't py me," he
retorted. But a crowd of ragged onlookers had already gathered around the cab, and
I laughed again and walked back to the old-clothes shop. Here the chief difficulty was in making the shopman understand that I
really and truly wanted old clothes. But after fruitless attempts to
press upon me new and impossible coats and trousers, he began to bring to
light heaps of old ones, looking mysterious the while and hinting darkly. This he did with the palpable intention of letting me know that he had
"piped my lay," in order to bulldose me, through fear of exposure, into
paying heavily for my purchases. A man in trouble, or a high-class
criminal from across the water, was what he took my measure for--in
either case, a person anxious to avoid the police. But I disputed with him over the outrageous difference between prices and
values, till I quite disabused him of the notion, and he settled down to
drive a hard bargain with a hard customer. In the end I selected a pair
of stout though well-worn trousers, a frayed jacket with one remaining
button, a pair of brogans which had plainly seen service where coal was
shovelled, a thin leather belt, and a very dirty cloth cap. My
underclothing and socks, however, were new and warm, but of the sort that
any American waif, down in his luck, could acquire in the ordinary course
of events. "I must sy yer a sharp 'un," he said, with counterfeit admiration, as I
handed over the ten shillings finally agreed upon for the outfit. "Blimey, if you ain't ben up an' down Petticut Lane afore now. Yer
trouseys is wuth five bob to hany man, an' a docker 'ud give two an' six
for the shoes, to sy nothin' of the coat an' cap an' new stoker's singlet
an' hother things." "How much will you give me for them?" I demanded suddenly. "I paid you
ten bob for the lot, and I'll sell them back to you, right now, for
eight! Come, it's a go!" But he grinned and shook his head, and though I had made a good bargain,
I was unpleasantly aware that he had made a better one. I found the cabby and a policeman with their heads together, but the
latter, after looking me over sharply, and particularly scrutinizing the
bundle under my arm, turned away and left the cabby to wax mutinous by
himself. And not a step would he budge till I paid him the seven
shillings and sixpence owing him. Whereupon he was willing to drive me
to the ends of the earth, apologising profusely for his insistence, and
explaining that one ran across queer customers in London Town. But he drove me only to Highbury Vale, in North London, where my luggage
was waiting for me. Here, next day, I took off my shoes (not without
regret for their lightness and comfort), and my soft, grey travelling
suit, and, in fact, all my clothing; and proceeded to array myself in the
clothes of the other and unimaginable men, who must have been indeed
unfortunate to have had to part with such rags for the pitiable sums
obtainable from a dealer. Inside my stoker's singlet, in the armpit, I sewed a gold sovereign (an
emergency sum certainly of modest proportions); and inside my stoker's
singlet I put myself. And then I sat down and moralised upon the fair
years and fat, which had made my skin soft and brought the nerves close
to the surface; for the singlet was rough and raspy as a hair shirt, and
I am confident that the most rigorous of ascetics suffer no more than I
did in the ensuing twenty-four hours. The remainder of my costume was fairly easy to put on, though the
brogans, or brogues, were quite a problem. As stiff and hard as if made
of wood, it was only after a prolonged pounding of the uppers with my
fists that I was able to get my feet into them at all. Then, with a few
shillings, a knife, a handkerchief, and some brown papers and flake
tobacco stowed away in my pockets, I thumped down the stairs and said
good-bye to my foreboding friends. As I paused out of the door, the
"help," a comely middle-aged woman, could not conquer a grin that twisted
her lips and separated them till the throat, out of involuntary sympathy,
made the uncouth animal noises we are wont to designate as "laughter." No sooner was I out on the streets than I was impressed by the difference
in status effected by my clothes. All servility vanished from the
demeanour of the common people with whom I came in contact. Presto! in
the twinkling of an eye, so to say, I had become one of them. My frayed
and out-at-elbows jacket was the badge and advertisement of my class,
which was their class. It made me of like kind, and in place of the
fawning and too respectful attention I had hitherto received, I now
shared with them a comradeship. The man in corduroy and dirty
neckerchief no longer addressed me as "sir" or "governor." It was "mate"
now--and a fine and hearty word, with a tingle to it, and a warmth and
gladness, which the other term does not possess. Governor! It smacks of
mastery, and power, and high authority--the tribute of the man who is
under to the man on top, delivered in the hope that he will let up a bit
and ease his weight, which is another way of saying that it is an appeal
for alms. This brings me to a delight I experienced in my rags and tatters which is
denied the average American abroad. The European traveller from the
States, who is not a Croesus, speedily finds himself reduced to a chronic
state of self-conscious sordidness by the hordes of cringing robbers who
clutter his steps from dawn till dark, and deplete his pocket-book in a
way that puts compound interest to the blush. In my rags and tatters I escaped the pestilence of tipping, and
encountered men on a basis of equality. Nay, before the day was out I
turned the tables, and said, most gratefully, "Thank you, sir," to a
gentleman whose horse I held, and who dropped a penny into my eager palm. Other changes I discovered were wrought in my condition by my new garb. In crossing crowded thoroughfares I found I had to be, if anything, more
lively in avoiding vehicles, and it was strikingly impressed upon me that
my life had cheapened in direct ratio with my clothes. When before I
inquired the way of a policeman, I was usually asked, "Bus or 'ansom,
sir?" But now the query became, "Walk or ride?" Also, at the railway
stations, a third-class ticket was now shoved out to me as a matter of
course. But there was compensation for it all. For the first time I met the
English lower classes face to face, and knew them for what they were. When loungers and workmen, at street corners and in public-houses, talked
with me, they talked as one man to another, and they talked as natural
men should talk, without the least idea of getting anything out of me for
what they talked or the way they talked. And when at last I made into the East End, I was gratified to find that
the fear of the crowd no longer haunted me. I had become a part of it. The vast and malodorous sea had welled up and over me, or I had slipped
gently into it, and there was nothing fearsome about it--with the one
exception of the stoker's singlet. CHAPTER II--JOHNNY UPRIGHT


I shall not give you the address of Johnny Upright. Let it suffice that
he lives in the most respectable street in the East End--a street that
would be considered very mean in America, but a veritable oasis in the
desert of East London. It is surrounded on every side by close-packed
squalor and streets jammed by a young and vile and dirty generation; but
its own pavements are comparatively bare of the children who have no
other place to play, while it has an air of desertion, so few are the
people that come and go. Each house in this street, as in all the streets, is shoulder to shoulder
with its neighbours. To each house there is but one entrance, the front
door; and each house is about eighteen feet wide, with a bit of a brick-
walled yard behind, where, when it is not raining, one may look at a
slate-coloured sky. But it must be understood that this is East End
opulence we are now considering. Some of the people in this street are
even so well-to-do as to keep a "slavey." Johnny Upright keeps one, as I
well know, she being my first acquaintance in this particular portion of
the world. To Johnny Upright's house I came, and to the door came the "slavey." Now,
mark you, her position in life was pitiable and contemptible, but it was
with pity and contempt that she looked at me. She evinced a plain desire
that our conversation should be short. It was Sunday, and Johnny Upright
was not at home, and that was all there was to it. But I lingered,
discussing whether or not it was all there was to it, till Mrs. Johnny
Upright was attracted to the door, where she scolded the girl for not
having closed it before turning her attention to me. No, Mr. Johnny Upright was not at home, and further, he saw nobody on
Sunday. It is too bad, said I. Was I looking for work? No, quite the
contrary; in fact, I had come to see Johnny Upright on business which
might be profitable to him. A change came over the face of things at once. The gentleman in question
was at church, but would be home in an hour or thereabouts, when no doubt
he could be seen. Would I kindly step in?--no, the lady did not ask me, though I fished for
an invitation by stating that I would go down to the corner and wait in a
public-house. And down to the corner I went, but, it being church time,
the "pub" was closed. A miserable drizzle was falling, and, in lieu of
better, I took a seat on a neighbourly doorstep and waited. And here to the doorstep came the "slavey," very frowzy and very
perplexed, to tell me that the missus would let me come back and wait in
the kitchen. "So many people come 'ere lookin' for work," Mrs. Johnny Upright
apologetically explained. "So I 'ope you won't feel bad the way I
spoke." "Not at all, not at all," I replied in my grandest manner, for the nonce
investing my rags with dignity. "I quite understand, I assure you. I
suppose people looking for work almost worry you to death?" "That they do," she answered, with an eloquent and expressive glance; and
thereupon ushered me into, not the kitchen, but the dining room--a
favour, I took it, in recompense for my grand manner. This dining-room, on the same floor as the kitchen, was about four feet
below the level of the ground, and so dark (it was midday) that I had to
wait a space for my eyes to adjust themselves to the gloom. Dirty light
filtered in through a window, the top of which was on a level with a
sidewalk, and in this light I found that I was able to read newspaper
print. And here, while waiting the coming of Johnny Upright, let me explain my
errand. While living, eating, and sleeping with the people of the East
End, it was my intention to have a port of refuge, not too far distant,
into which could run now and again to assure myself that good clothes and
cleanliness still existed. Also in such port I could receive my mail,
work up my notes, and sally forth occasionally in changed garb to
civilisation. But this involved a dilemma. A lodging where my property would be safe
implied a landlady apt to be suspicious of a gentleman leading a double
life; while a landlady who would not bother her head over the double life
of her lodgers would imply lodgings where property was unsafe. To avoid
the dilemma was what had brought me to Johnny Upright. A detective of
thirty-odd years' continuous service in the East End, known far and wide
by a name given him by a convicted felon in the dock, he was just the man
to find me an honest landlady, and make her rest easy concerning the
strange comings and goings of which I might be guilty. His two daughters beat him home from church--and pretty girls they were
in their Sunday dresses; withal it was the certain weak and delicate
prettiness which characterises the Cockney lasses, a prettiness which is
no more than a promise with no grip on time, and doomed to fade quickly
away like the colour from a sunset sky. They looked me over with frank curiosity, as though I were some sort of a
strange animal, and then ignored me utterly for the rest of my wait. Then
Johnny Upright himself arrived, and I was summoned upstairs to confer
with him. "Speak loud," he interrupted my opening words. "I've got a bad cold, and
I can't hear well." Shades of Old Sleuth and Sherlock Holmes! I wondered as to where the
assistant was located whose duty it was to take down whatever information
I might loudly vouchsafe. And to this day, much as I have seen of Johnny
Upright and much as I have puzzled over the incident, I have never been
quite able to make up my mind as to whether or not he had a cold, or had
an assistant planted in the other room. But of one thing I am sure:
though I gave Johnny Upright the facts concerning myself and project, he
withheld judgment till next day, when I dodged into his street
conventionally garbed and in a hansom. Then his greeting was cordial
enough, and I went down into the dining-room to join the family at tea. "We are humble here," he said, "not given to the flesh, and you must take
us for what we are, in our humble way." The girls were flushed and embarrassed at greeting me, while he did not
make it any the easier for them. "Ha! ha!" he roared heartily, slapping the table with his open hand till
the dishes rang. "The girls thought yesterday you had come to ask for a
piece of bread! Ha! ha! ho! ho! ho!" This they indignantly denied, with snapping eyes and guilty red cheeks,
as though it were an essential of true refinement to be able to discern
under his rags a man who had no need to go ragged. And then, while I ate bread and marmalade, proceeded a play at cross
purposes, the daughters deeming it an insult to me that I should have
been mistaken for a beggar, and the father considering it as the highest
compliment to my cleverness to succeed in being so mistaken. All of
which I enjoyed, and the bread, the marmalade, and the tea, till the time
came for Johnny Upright to find me a lodging, which he did, not half-a-
dozen doors away, in his own respectable and opulent street, in a house
as like to his own as a pea to its mate. CHAPTER III--MY LODGING AND SOME OTHERS


From an East London standpoint, the room I rented for six shillings, or a
dollar and a half, per week, was a most comfortable affair. From the
American standpoint, on the other hand, it was rudely furnished,
uncomfortable, and small. By the time I had added an ordinary typewriter
table to its scanty furnishing, I was hard put to turn around; at the
best, I managed to navigate it by a sort of vermicular progression
requiring great dexterity and presence of mind. Having settled myself, or my property rather, I put on my knockabout
clothes and went out for a walk. Lodgings being fresh in my mind, I
began to look them up, bearing in mind the hypothesis that I was a poor
young man with a wife and large family. My first discovery was that empty houses were few and far between--so far
between, in fact, that though I walked miles in irregular circles over a
large area, I still remained between. Not one empty house could I find--a
conclusive proof that the district was "saturated." It being plain that as a poor young man with a family I could rent no
houses at all in this most undesirable region, I next looked for rooms,
unfurnished rooms, in which I could store my wife and babies and
chattels. There were not many, but I found them, usually in the
singular, for one appears to be considered sufficient for a poor man's
family in which to cook and eat and sleep. When I asked for two rooms,
the sublettees looked at me very much in the manner, I imagine, that a
certain personage looked at Oliver Twist when he asked for more. Not only was one room deemed sufficient for a poor man and his family,
but I learned that many families, occupying single rooms, had so much
space to spare as to be able to take in a lodger or two. When such rooms
can be rented for from three to six shillings per week, it is a fair
conclusion that a lodger with references should obtain floor space for,
say, from eightpence to a shilling. He may even be able to board with
the sublettees for a few shillings more. This, however, I failed to
inquire into--a reprehensible error on my part, considering that I was
working on the basis of a hypothetical family. Not only did the houses I investigated have no bath-tubs, but I learned
that there were no bath-tubs in all the thousands of houses I had seen. Under the circumstances, with my wife and babies and a couple of lodgers
suffering from the too great spaciousness of one room, taking a bath in a
tin wash-basin would be an unfeasible undertaking. But, it seems, the
compensation comes in with the saving of soap, so all's well, and God's
still in heaven. However, I rented no rooms, but returned to my own Johnny Upright's
street. What with my wife, and babies, and lodgers, and the various
cubby-holes into which I had fitted them, my mind's eye had become narrow-
angled, and I could not quite take in all of my own room at once. The
immensity of it was awe-inspiring. Could this be the room I had rented
for six shillings a week? Impossible! But my landlady, knocking at the
door to learn if I were comfortable, dispelled my doubts. "Oh yes, sir," she said, in reply to a question. "This street is the
very last. All the other streets were like this eight or ten years ago,
and all the people were very respectable. But the others have driven our
kind out. Those in this street are the only ones left. It's shocking,
sir!" And then she explained the process of saturation, by which the rental
value of a neighbourhood went up, while its tone went down. "You see, sir, our kind are not used to crowding in the way the others
do. We need more room. The others, the foreigners and lower-class
people, can get five and six families into this house, where we only get
one. So they can pay more rent for the house than we can afford. It
_is_ shocking, sir; and just to think, only a few years ago all this
neighbourhood was just as nice as it could be." I looked at her. Here was a woman, of the finest grade of the English
working-class, with numerous evidences of refinement, being slowly
engulfed by that noisome and rotten tide of humanity which the powers
that be are pouring eastward out of London Town. Bank, factory, hotel,
and office building must go up, and the city poor folk are a nomadic
breed; so they migrate eastward, wave upon wave, saturating and degrading
neighbourhood by neighbourhood, driving the better class of workers
before them to pioneer, on the rim of the city, or dragging them down, if
not in the first generation, surely in the second and third. It is only a question of months when Johnny Upright's street must go. He
realises it himself. "In a couple of years," he says, "my lease expires. My landlord is one
of our kind. He has not put up the rent on any of his houses here, and
this has enabled us to stay. But any day he may sell, or any day he may
die, which is the same thing so far as we are concerned. The house is
bought by a money breeder, who builds a sweat shop on the patch of ground
at the rear where my grapevine is, adds to the house, and rents it a room
to a family. There you are, and Johnny Upright's gone!" And truly I saw Johnny Upright, and his good wife and fair daughters, and
frowzy slavey, like so many ghosts flitting eastward through the gloom,
the monster city roaring at their heels. But Johnny Upright is not alone in his flitting. Far, far out, on the
fringe of the city, live the small business men, little managers, and
successful clerks. They dwell in cottages and semi-detached villas, with
bits of flower garden, and elbow room, and breathing space. They inflate
themselves with pride, and throw out their chests when they contemplate
the Abyss from which they have escaped, and they thank God that they are
not as other men. And lo! down upon them comes Johnny Upright and the
monster city at his heels. Tenements spring up like magic, gardens are
built upon, villas are divided and subdivided into many dwellings, and
the black night of London settles down in a greasy pall. CHAPTER IV--A MAN AND THE ABYSS


"I say, can you let a lodging?" These words I discharged carelessly over my shoulder at a stout and
elderly woman, of whose fare I was partaking in a greasy coffee-house
down near the Pool and not very far from Limehouse. "Oh yus," she answered shortly, my appearance possibly not approximating
the standard of affluence required by her house. I said no more, consuming my rasher of bacon and pint of sickly tea in
silence. Nor did she take further interest in me till I came to pay my
reckoning (fourpence), when I pulled all of ten shillings out of my
pocket. The expected result was produced. "Yus, sir," she at once volunteered; "I 'ave nice lodgin's you'd likely
tyke a fancy to. Back from a voyage, sir?" "How much for a room?" I inquired, ignoring her curiosity. She looked me up and down with frank surprise. "I don't let rooms, not
to my reg'lar lodgers, much less casuals." "Then I'll have to look along a bit," I said, with marked disappointment. But the sight of my ten shillings had made her keen. "I can let you have
a nice bed in with two hother men," she urged. "Good, respectable men,
an' steady." "But I don't want to sleep with two other men," I objected. "You don't 'ave to. There's three beds in the room, an' hit's not a very
small room." "How much?" I demanded. "'Arf a crown a week, two an' six, to a regular lodger. You'll fancy the
men, I'm sure. One works in the ware'ouse, an' 'e's been with me two
years now. An' the hother's bin with me six--six years, sir, an' two
months comin' nex' Saturday. 'E's a scene-shifter," she went on. "A
steady, respectable man, never missin' a night's work in the time 'e's
bin with me. An' 'e likes the 'ouse; 'e says as it's the best 'e can do
in the w'y of lodgin's. I board 'im, an' the hother lodgers too." "I suppose he's saving money right along," I insinuated innocently. "Bless you, no! Nor can 'e do as well helsewhere with 'is money." And I thought of my own spacious West, with room under its sky and
unlimited air for a thousand Londons; and here was this man, a steady and
reliable man, never missing a night's work, frugal and honest, lodging in
one room with two other men, paying two dollars and a half per month for
it, and out of his experience adjudging it to be the best he could do! And here was I, on the strength of the ten shillings in my pocket, able
to enter in with my rags and take up my bed with him. The human soul is
a lonely thing, but it must be very lonely sometimes when there are three
beds to a room, and casuals with ten shillings are admitted. "How long have you been here?" I asked. "Thirteen years, sir; an' don't you think you'll fancy the lodgin'?" The while she talked she was shuffling ponderously about the small
kitchen in which she cooked the food for her lodgers who were also
boarders. When I first entered, she had been hard at work, nor had she
let up once throughout the conversation. Undoubtedly she was a busy
woman. "Up at half-past five," "to bed the last thing at night,"
"workin' fit ter drop," thirteen years of it, and for reward, grey hairs,
frowzy clothes, stooped shoulders, slatternly figure, unending toil in a
foul and noisome coffee-house that faced on an alley ten feet between the
walls, and a waterside environment that was ugly and sickening, to say
the least. "You'll be hin hagain to 'ave a look?" she questioned wistfully, as I
went out of the door. And as I turned and looked at her, I realized to the full the deeper
truth underlying that very wise old maxim: "Virtue is its own reward." I went back to her. "Have you ever taken a vacation?" I asked. "Vycytion!" "A trip to the country for a couple of days, fresh air, a day off, you
know, a rest." "Lor' lumme!" she laughed, for the first time stopping from her work. "A
vycytion, eh? for the likes o' me? Just fancy, now!--Mind yer
feet!" --this last sharply, and to me, as I stumbled over the rotten
threshold. Down near the West India Dock I came upon a young fellow staring
disconsolately at the muddy water. A fireman's cap was pulled down
across his eyes, and the fit and sag of his clothes whispered
unmistakably of the sea. "Hello, mate," I greeted him, sparring for a beginning. "Can you tell me
the way to Wapping?" "Worked yer way over on a cattle boat?" he countered, fixing my
nationality on the instant. And thereupon we entered upon a talk that extended itself to a public-
house and a couple of pints of "arf an' arf." This led to closer
intimacy, so that when I brought to light all of a shilling's worth of
coppers (ostensibly my all), and put aside sixpence for a bed, and
sixpence for more arf an' arf, he generously proposed that we drink up
the whole shilling. "My mate, 'e cut up rough las' night," he explained. "An' the bobbies
got 'm, so you can bunk in wi' me. Wotcher say?" I said yes, and by the time we had soaked ourselves in a whole shilling's
worth of beer, and slept the night on a miserable bed in a miserable den,
I knew him pretty fairly for what he was. And that in one respect he was
representative of a large body of the lower-class London workman, my
later experience substantiates. He was London-born, his father a fireman and a drinker before him. As a
child, his home was the streets and the docks. He had never learned to
read, and had never felt the need for it--a vain and useless
accomplishment, he held, at least for a man of his station in life. He had had a mother and numerous squalling brothers and sisters, all
crammed into a couple of rooms and living on poorer and less regular food
than he could ordinarily rustle for himself. In fact, he never went home
except at periods when he was unfortunate in procuring his own food. Petty pilfering and begging along the streets and docks, a trip or two to
sea as mess-boy, a few trips more as coal-trimmer, and then a
full-fledged fireman, he had reached the top of his life. And in the course of this he had also hammered out a philosophy of life,
an ugly and repulsive philosophy, but withal a very logical and sensible
one from his point of view. When I asked him what he lived for, he
immediately answered, "Booze." A voyage to sea (for a man must live and
get the wherewithal), and then the paying off and the big drunk at the
end. After that, haphazard little drunks, sponged in the "pubs" from
mates with a few coppers left, like myself, and when sponging was played
out another trip to sea and a repetition of the beastly cycle. "But women," I suggested, when he had finished proclaiming booze the sole
end of existence. "Wimmen!" He thumped his pot upon the bar and orated eloquently. "Wimmen
is a thing my edication 'as learnt me t' let alone. It don't pay, matey;
it don't pay. Wot's a man like me want o' wimmen, eh? jest you tell me. There was my mar, she was enough, a-bangin' the kids about an' makin' the
ole man mis'rable when 'e come 'ome, w'ich was seldom, I grant. An' fer
w'y? Becos o' mar! She didn't make 'is 'ome 'appy, that was w'y. Then,
there's the other wimmen, 'ow do they treat a pore stoker with a few
shillin's in 'is trouseys? A good drunk is wot 'e's got in 'is pockits,
a good long drunk, an' the wimmen skin 'im out of his money so quick 'e
ain't 'ad 'ardly a glass. I know. I've 'ad my fling, an' I know wot's
wot. An' I tell you, where's wimmen is trouble--screechin' an' carryin'
on, fightin', cuttin', bobbies, magistrates, an' a month's 'ard labour
back of it all, an' no pay-day when you come out." "But a wife and children," I insisted. "A home of your own, and all
that. Think of it, back from a voyage, little children climbing on your
knee, and the wife happy and smiling, and a kiss for you when she lays
the table, and a kiss all round from the babies when they go to bed, and
the kettle singing and the long talk afterwards of where you've been and
what you've seen, and of her and all the little happenings at home while
you've been away, and--"

"Garn!" he cried, with a playful shove of his fist on my shoulder. "Wot's
yer game, eh? A missus kissin' an' kids clim'in', an' kettle singin',
all on four poun' ten a month w'en you 'ave a ship, an' four nothin' w'en
you 'aven't. I'll tell you wot I'd get on four poun' ten--a missus
rowin', kids squallin', no coal t' make the kettle sing, an' the kettle
up the spout, that's wot I'd get. Enough t' make a bloke bloomin' well
glad to be back t' sea. A missus! Wot for? T' make you mis'rable? Kids? Jest take my counsel, matey, an' don't 'ave 'em. Look at me! I
can 'ave my beer w'en I like, an' no blessed missus an' kids a-crying for
bread. I'm 'appy, I am, with my beer an' mates like you, an' a good ship
comin', an' another trip to sea. So I say, let's 'ave another pint. Arf
an' arf's good enough for me." Without going further with the speech of this young fellow of two-and-
twenty, I think I have sufficiently indicated his philosophy of life and
the underlying economic reason for it. Home life he had never known. The
word "home" aroused nothing but unpleasant associations. In the low
wages of his father, and of other men in the same walk in life, he found
sufficient reason for branding wife and children as encumbrances and
causes of masculine misery. An unconscious hedonist, utterly unmoral and
materialistic, he sought the greatest possible happiness for himself, and
found it in drink. A young sot; a premature wreck; physical inability to do a stoker's work;
the gutter or the workhouse; and the end--he saw it all as clearly as I,
but it held no terrors for him. From the moment of his birth, all the
forces of his environment had tended to harden him, and he viewed his
wretched, inevitable future with a callousness and unconcern I could not
shake. And yet he was not a bad man. He was not inherently vicious and brutal. He had normal mentality, and a more than average physique. His eyes were
blue and round, shaded by long lashes, and wide apart. And there was a
laugh in them, and a fund of humour behind. The brow and general
features were good, the mouth and lips sweet, though already developing a
harsh twist. The chin was weak, but not too weak; I have seen men
sitting in the high places with weaker. His head was shapely, and so gracefully was it poised upon a perfect neck
that I was not surprised by his body that night when he stripped for bed. I have seen many men strip, in gymnasium and training quarters, men of
good blood and upbringing, but I have never seen one who stripped to
better advantage than this young sot of two-and-twenty, this young god
doomed to rack and ruin in four or five short years, and to pass hence
without posterity to receive the splendid heritage it was his to
bequeath. It seemed sacrilege to waste such life, and yet I was forced to confess
that he was right in not marrying on four pounds ten in London Town. Just
as the scene-shifter was happier in making both ends meet in a room
shared with two other men, than he would have been had he packed a feeble
family along with a couple of men into a cheaper room, and failed in
making both ends meet. And day by day I became convinced that not only is it unwise, but it is
criminal for the people of the Abyss to marry. They are the stones by
the builder rejected. There is no place for them, in the social fabric,
while all the forces of society drive them downward till they perish. At
the bottom of the Abyss they are feeble, besotted, and imbecile. If they
reproduce, the life is so cheap that perforce it perishes of itself. The
work of the world goes on above them, and they do not care to take part
in it, nor are they able. Moreover, the work of the world does not need
them. There are plenty, far fitter than they, clinging to the steep
slope above, and struggling frantically to slide no more. In short, the London Abyss is a vast shambles. Year by year, and decade
after decade, rural England pours in a flood of vigorous strong life,
that not only does not renew itself, but perishes by the third
generation. Competent authorities aver that the London workman whose
parents and grand-parents were born in London is so remarkable a specimen
that he is rarely found. Mr. A. C. Pigou has said that the aged poor, and the residuum which
compose the "submerged tenth," constitute 71 per cent, of the population
of London. Which is to say that last year, and yesterday, and to-day, at
this very moment, 450,000 of these creatures are dying miserably at the
bottom of the social pit called "London." As to how they die, I shall
take an instance from this morning's paper. SELF-NEGLECT

   Yesterday Dr. Wynn Westcott held an inquest at Shoreditch, respecting
   the death of Elizabeth Crews, aged 77 years, of 32 East Street,
   Holborn, who died on Wednesday last. Alice Mathieson stated that she
   was landlady of the house where deceased lived. Witness last saw her
   alive on the previous Monday. She lived quite alone. Mr. Francis
   Birch, relieving officer for the Holborn district, stated that
   deceased had occupied the room in question for thirty-five years. When
   witness was called, on the 1st, he found the old woman in a terrible
   state, and the ambulance and coachman had to be disinfected after the
   removal. Dr. Chase Fennell said death was due to blood-poisoning from
   bed-sores, due to self-neglect and filthy surroundings, and the jury
   returned a verdict to that effect. The most startling thing about this little incident of a woman's death is
the smug complacency with which the officials looked upon it and rendered
judgment. That an old woman of seventy-seven years of age should die of
SELF-NEGLECT is the most optimistic way possible of looking at it. It
was the old dead woman's fault that she died, and having located the
responsibility, society goes contentedly on about its own affairs. Of the "submerged tenth" Mr. Pigou has said: "Either through lack of
bodily strength, or of intelligence, or of fibre, or of all three, they
are inefficient or unwilling workers, and consequently unable to support
themselves . . . They are often so degraded in intellect as to be
incapable of distinguishing their right from their left hand, or of
recognising the numbers of their own houses; their bodies are feeble and
without stamina, their affections are warped, and they scarcely know what
family life means." Four hundred and fifty thousand is a whole lot of people. The young
fireman was only one, and it took him some time to say his little say. I
should not like to hear them all talk at once. I wonder if God hears
them? CHAPTER V--THOSE ON THE EDGE


My first impression of East London was naturally a general one. Later
the details began to appear, and here and there in the chaos of misery I
found little spots where a fair measure of happiness reigned--sometimes
whole rows of houses in little out-of-the-way streets, where artisans
dwell and where a rude sort of family life obtains. In the evenings the
men can be seen at the doors, pipes in their mouths and children on their
knees, wives gossiping, and laughter and fun going on. The content of
these people is manifestly great, for, relative to the wretchedness that
encompasses them, they are well off. But at the best, it is a dull, animal happiness, the content of the full
belly. The dominant note of their lives is materialistic. They are
stupid and heavy, without imagination. The Abyss seems to exude a
stupefying atmosphere of torpor, which wraps about them and deadens them. Religion passes them by. The Unseen holds for them neither terror nor
delight. They are unaware of the Unseen; and the full belly and the
evening pipe, with their regular "arf an' arf," is all they demand, or
dream of demanding, from existence. This would not be so bad if it were all; but it is not all. The
satisfied torpor in which they are sunk is the deadly inertia that
precedes dissolution. There is no progress, and with them not to
progress is to fall back and into the Abyss. In their own lives they may
only start to fall, leaving the fall to be completed by their children
and their children's children. Man always gets less than he demands from
life; and so little do they demand, that the less than little they get
cannot save them. At the best, city life is an unnatural life for the human; but the city
life of London is so utterly unnatural that the average workman or
workwoman cannot stand it. Mind and body are sapped by the undermining
influences ceaselessly at work. Moral and physical stamina are broken,
and the good workman, fresh from the soil, becomes in the first city
generation a poor workman; and by the second city generation, devoid of
push and go and initiative, and actually unable physically to perform the
labour his father did, he is well on the way to the shambles at the
bottom of the Abyss. If nothing else, the air he breathes, and from which he never escapes, is
sufficient to weaken him mentally and physically, so that he becomes
unable to compete with the fresh virile life from the country hastening
on to London Town to destroy and be destroyed. Leaving out the disease germs that fill the air of the East End, consider
but the one item of smoke. Sir William Thiselton-Dyer, curator of Kew
Gardens, has been studying smoke deposits on vegetation, and, according
to his calculations, no less than six tons of solid matter, consisting of
soot and tarry hydrocarbons, are deposited every week on every quarter of
a square mile in and about London. This is equivalent to twenty-four
tons per week to the square mile, or 1248 tons per year to the square
mile. From the cornice below the dome of St. Paul's Cathedral was
recently taken a solid deposit of crystallised sulphate of lime. This
deposit had been formed by the action of the sulphuric acid in the
atmosphere upon the carbonate of lime in the stone. And this sulphuric
acid in the atmosphere is constantly being breathed by the London workmen
through all the days and nights of their lives. It is incontrovertible that the children grow up into rotten adults,
without virility or stamina, a weak-kneed, narrow-chested, listless
breed, that crumples up and goes down in the brute struggle for life with
the invading hordes from the country. The railway men, carriers, omnibus
drivers, corn and timber porters, and all those who require physical
stamina, are largely drawn from the country; while in the Metropolitan
Police there are, roughly, 12,000 country-born as against 3000 London-
born. So one is forced to conclude that the Abyss is literally a huge
man-killing machine, and when I pass along the little out-of-the-way
streets with the full-bellied artisans at the doors, I am aware of a
greater sorrow for them than for the 450,000 lost and hopeless wretches
dying at the bottom of the pit. They, at least, are dying, that is the
point; while these have yet to go through the slow and preliminary pangs
extending through two and even three generations. And yet the quality of the life is good. All human potentialities are in
it. Given proper conditions, it could live through the centuries, and
great men, heroes and masters, spring from it and make the world better
by having lived. I talked with a woman who was representative of that type which has been
jerked out of its little out-of-the-way streets and has started on the
fatal fall to the bottom. Her husband was a fitter and a member of the
Engineers' Union. That he was a poor engineer was evidenced by his
inability to get regular employment. He did not have the energy and
enterprise necessary to obtain or hold a steady position. The pair had two daughters, and the four of them lived in a couple of
holes, called "rooms" by courtesy, for which they paid seven shillings
per week. They possessed no stove, managing their cooking on a single
gas-ring in the fireplace. Not being persons of property, they were
unable to obtain an unlimited supply of gas; but a clever machine had
been installed for their benefit. By dropping a penny in the slot, the
gas was forthcoming, and when a penny's worth had forthcome the supply
was automatically shut off. "A penny gawn in no time," she explained,
"an' the cookin' not arf done!" Incipient starvation had been their portion for years. Month in and
month out, they had arisen from the table able and willing to eat more. And when once on the downward slope, chronic innutrition is an important
factor in sapping vitality and hastening the descent. Yet this woman was a hard worker. From 4.30 in the morning till the last
light at night, she said, she had toiled at making cloth dress-skirts,
lined up and with two flounces, for seven shillings a dozen. Cloth dress-
skirts, mark you, lined up with two flounces, for seven shillings a
dozen! This is equal to $1.75 per dozen, or 14.75 cents per skirt. The husband, in order to obtain employment, had to belong to the union,
which collected one shilling and sixpence from him each week. Also, when
strikes were afoot and he chanced to be working, he had at times been
compelled to pay as high as seventeen shillings into the union's coffers
for the relief fund. One daughter, the elder, had worked as green hand for a dressmaker, for
one shilling and sixpence per week--37.5 cents per week, or a fraction
over 5 cents per day. However, when the slack season came she was
discharged, though she had been taken on at such low pay with the
understanding that she was to learn the trade and work up. After that
she had been employed in a bicycle store for three years, for which she
received five shillings per week, walking two miles to her work, and two
back, and being fined for tardiness. As far as the man and woman were concerned, the game was played. They
had lost handhold and foothold, and were falling into the pit. But what
of the daughters? Living like swine, enfeebled by chronic innutrition,
being sapped mentally, morally, and physically, what chance have they to
crawl up and out of the Abyss into which they were born falling? As I write this, and for an hour past, the air has been made hideous by a
free-for-all, rough-and-tumble fight going on in the yard that is back to
back with my yard. When the first sounds reached me I took it for the
barking and snarling of dogs, and some minutes were required to convince
me that human beings, and women at that, could produce such a fearful
clamour. Drunken women fighting! It is not nice to think of; it is far worse to
listen to. Something like this it runs--

Incoherent babble, shrieked at the top of the lungs of several women; a
lull, in which is heard a child crying and a young girl's voice pleading
tearfully; a woman's voice rises, harsh and grating, "You 'it me! Jest
you 'it me!" then, swat! challenge accepted and fight rages afresh. The back windows of the houses commanding the scene are lined with
enthusiastic spectators, and the sound of blows, and of oaths that make
one's blood run cold, are borne to my ears. Happily, I cannot see the
combatants. A lull; "You let that child alone!" child, evidently of few years,
screaming in downright terror. "Awright," repeated insistently and at
top pitch twenty times straight running; "you'll git this rock on the
'ead!" and then rock evidently on the head from the shriek that goes up. A lull; apparently one combatant temporarily disabled and being
resuscitated; child's voice audible again, but now sunk to a lower note
of terror and growing exhaustion. Voices begin to go up the scale, something like this:-

"Yes?" "Yes!" "Yes?" "Yes!" "Yes?" "Yes!" "Yes?" "Yes!" Sufficient affirmation on both sides, conflict again precipitated. One
combatant gets overwhelming advantage, and follows it up from the way the
other combatant screams bloody murder. Bloody murder gurgles and dies
out, undoubtedly throttled by a strangle hold. Entrance of new voices; a flank attack; strangle hold suddenly broken
from the way bloody murder goes up half an octave higher than before;
general hullaballoo, everybody fighting. Lull; new voice, young girl's, "I'm goin' ter tyke my mother's part;"
dialogue, repeated about five times, "I'll do as I like, blankety, blank,
blank!" "I'd like ter see yer, blankety, blank, blank!" renewed
conflict, mothers, daughters, everybody, during which my landlady calls
her young daughter in from the back steps, while I wonder what will be
the effect of all that she has heard upon her moral fibre. CHAPTER VI--FRYING-PAN ALLEY AND A GLIMPSE OF INFERNO


Three of us walked down Mile End Road, and one was a hero. He was a
slender lad of nineteen, so slight and frail, in fact, that, like Fra
Lippo Lippi, a puff of wind might double him up and turn him over. He
was a burning young socialist, in the first throes of enthusiasm and ripe
for martyrdom. As platform speaker or chairman he had taken an active
and dangerous part in the many indoor and outdoor pro-Boer meetings which
have vexed the serenity of Merry England these several years back. Little
items he had been imparting to me as he walked along; of being mobbed in
parks and on tram-cars; of climbing on the platform to lead the forlorn
hope, when brother speaker after brother speaker had been dragged down by
the angry crowd and cruelly beaten; of a siege in a church, where he and
three others had taken sanctuary, and where, amid flying missiles and the
crashing of stained glass, they had fought off the mob till rescued by
platoons of constables; of pitched and giddy battles on stairways,
galleries, and balconies; of smashed windows, collapsed stairways,
wrecked lecture halls, and broken heads and bones--and then, with a
regretful sigh, he looked at me and said: "How I envy you big, strong
men! I'm such a little mite I can't do much when it comes to fighting." And I, walking head and shoulders above my two companions, remembered my
own husky West, and the stalwart men it had been my custom, in turn, to
envy there. Also, as I looked at the mite of a youth with the heart of a
lion, I thought, this is the type that on occasion rears barricades and
shows the world that men have not forgotten how to die. But up spoke my other companion, a man of twenty-eight, who eked out a
precarious existence in a sweating den. "I'm a 'earty man, I am," he announced. "Not like the other chaps at my
shop, I ain't. They consider me a fine specimen of manhood. W'y, d' ye
know, I weigh ten stone!" I was ashamed to tell him that I weighed one hundred and seventy pounds,
or over twelve stone, so I contented myself with taking his measure. Poor, misshapen little man! His skin an unhealthy colour, body gnarled
and twisted out of all decency, contracted chest, shoulders bent
prodigiously from long hours of toil, and head hanging heavily forward
and out of place! A "'earty man,' 'e was!" "How tall are you?" "Five foot two," he answered proudly; "an' the chaps at the shop . . . " "Let me see that shop," I said. The shop was idle just then, but I still desired to see it. Passing
Leman Street, we cut off to the left into Spitalfields, and dived into
Frying-pan Alley. A spawn of children cluttered the slimy pavement, for
all the world like tadpoles just turned frogs on the bottom of a dry
pond. In a narrow doorway, so narrow that perforce we stepped over her,
sat a woman with a young babe, nursing at breasts grossly naked and
libelling all the sacredness of motherhood. In the black and narrow hall
behind her we waded through a mess of young life, and essayed an even
narrower and fouler stairway. Up we went, three flights, each landing
two feet by three in area, and heaped with filth and refuse. There were seven rooms in this abomination called a house. In six of the
rooms, twenty-odd people, of both sexes and all ages, cooked, ate, slept,
and worked. In size the rooms averaged eight feet by eight, or possibly
nine. The seventh room we entered. It was the den in which five men
"sweated." It was seven feet wide by eight long, and the table at which
the work was performed took up the major portion of the space. On this
table were five lasts, and there was barely room for the men to stand to
their work, for the rest of the space was heaped with cardboard, leather,
bundles of shoe uppers, and a miscellaneous assortment of materials used
in attaching the uppers of shoes to their soles. In the adjoining room lived a woman and six children. In another vile
hole lived a widow, with an only son of sixteen who was dying of
consumption. The woman hawked sweetmeats on the street, I was told, and
more often failed than not to supply her son with the three quarts of
milk he daily required. Further, this son, weak and dying, did not taste
meat oftener than once a week; and the kind and quality of this meat
cannot possibly be imagined by people who have never watched human swine
eat. "The w'y 'e coughs is somethin' terrible," volunteered my sweated friend,
referring to the dying boy. "We 'ear 'im 'ere, w'ile we're workin', an'
it's terrible, I say, terrible!" And, what of the coughing and the sweetmeats, I found another menace
added to the hostile environment of the children of the slum. My sweated friend, when work was to be had, toiled with four other men in
his eight-by-seven room. In the winter a lamp burned nearly all the day
and added its fumes to the over-loaded air, which was breathed, and
breathed, and breathed again. In good times, when there was a rush of work, this man told me that he
could earn as high as "thirty bob a week." --Thirty shillings! Seven
dollars and a half! "But it's only the best of us can do it," he qualified. "An' then we
work twelve, thirteen, and fourteen hours a day, just as fast as we can. An' you should see us sweat! Just running from us! If you could see us,
it'd dazzle your eyes--tacks flyin' out of mouth like from a machine. Look at my mouth." I looked. The teeth were worn down by the constant friction of the
metallic brads, while they were coal-black and rotten. "I clean my teeth," he added, "else they'd be worse." After he had told me that the workers had to furnish their own tools,
brads, "grindery," cardboard, rent, light, and what not, it was plain
that his thirty bob was a diminishing quantity. "But how long does the rush season last, in which you receive this high
wage of thirty bob?" I asked. "Four months," was the answer; and for the rest of the year, he informed
me, they average from "half a quid" to a "quid" a week, which is
equivalent to from two dollars and a half to five dollars. The present
week was half gone, and he had earned four bob, or one dollar. And yet I
was given to understand that this was one of the better grades of
sweating. I looked out of the window, which should have commanded the back yards of
the neighbouring buildings. But there were no back yards, or, rather,
they were covered with one-storey hovels, cowsheds, in which people
lived. The roofs of these hovels were covered with deposits of filth, in
some places a couple of feet deep--the contributions from the back
windows of the second and third storeys. I could make out fish and meat
bones, garbage, pestilential rags, old boots, broken earthenware, and all
the general refuse of a human sty. "This is the last year of this trade; they're getting machines to do away
with us," said the sweated one mournfully, as we stepped over the woman
with the breasts grossly naked and waded anew through the cheap young
life. We next visited the municipal dwellings erected by the London County
Council on the site of the slums where lived Arthur Morrison's "Child of
the Jago." While the buildings housed more people than before, it was
much healthier. But the dwellings were inhabited by the better-class
workmen and artisans. The slum people had simply drifted on to crowd
other slums or to form new slums. "An' now," said the sweated one, the 'earty man who worked so fast as to
dazzle one's eyes, "I'll show you one of London's lungs. This is
Spitalfields Garden." And he mouthed the word "garden" with scorn. The shadow of Christ's Church falls across Spitalfields Garden, and in
the shadow of Christ's Church, at three o'clock in the afternoon, I saw a
sight I never wish to see again. There are no flowers in this garden,
which is smaller than my own rose garden at home. Grass only grows here,
and it is surrounded by a sharp-spiked iron fencing, as are all the parks
of London Town, so that homeless men and women may not come in at night
and sleep upon it. As we entered the garden, an old woman, between fifty and sixty, passed
us, striding with sturdy intention if somewhat rickety action, with two
bulky bundles, covered with sacking, slung fore and aft upon her. She
was a woman tramp, a houseless soul, too independent to drag her failing
carcass through the workhouse door. Like the snail, she carried her home
with her. In the two sacking-covered bundles were her household goods,
her wardrobe, linen, and dear feminine possessions. We went up the narrow gravelled walk. On the benches on either side
arrayed a mass of miserable and distorted humanity, the sight of which
would have impelled Dore to more diabolical flights of fancy than he ever
succeeded in achieving. It was a welter of rags and filth, of all manner
of loathsome skin diseases, open sores, bruises, grossness, indecency,
leering monstrosities, and bestial faces. A chill, raw wind was blowing,
and these creatures huddled there in their rags, sleeping for the most
part, or trying to sleep. Here were a dozen women, ranging in age from
twenty years to seventy. Next a babe, possibly of nine months, lying
asleep, flat on the hard bench, with neither pillow nor covering, nor
with any one looking after it. Next half-a-dozen men, sleeping bolt
upright or leaning against one another in their sleep. In one place a
family group, a child asleep in its sleeping mother's arms, and the
husband (or male mate) clumsily mending a dilapidated shoe. On another
bench a woman trimming the frayed strips of her rags with a knife, and
another woman, with thread and needle, sewing up rents. Adjoining, a man
holding a sleeping woman in his arms. Farther on, a man, his clothing
caked with gutter mud, asleep, with head in the lap of a woman, not more
than twenty-five years old, and also asleep. It was this sleeping that puzzled me. Why were nine out of ten of them
asleep or trying to sleep? But it was not till afterwards that I
learned. _It is a law of the powers that be that the homeless shall not
sleep by night_. On the pavement, by the portico of Christ's Church,
where the stone pillars rise toward the sky in a stately row, were whole
rows of men lying asleep or drowsing, and all too deep sunk in torpor to
rouse or be made curious by our intrusion. "A lung of London," I said; "nay, an abscess, a great putrescent sore." "Oh, why did you bring me here?" demanded the burning young socialist,
his delicate face white with sickness of soul and stomach sickness. "Those women there," said our guide, "will sell themselves for
thru'pence, or tu'pence, or a loaf of stale bread." He said it with a cheerful sneer. But what more he might have said I do not know, for the sick man cried,
"For heaven's sake let us get out of this." CHAPTER VII--A WINNER OF THE VICTORIA CROSS


I have found that it is not easy to get into the casual ward of the
workhouse. I have made two attempts now, and I shall shortly make a
third. The first time I started out at seven o'clock in the evening with
four shillings in my pocket. Herein I committed two errors. In the
first place, the applicant for admission to the casual ward must be
destitute, and as he is subjected to a rigorous search, he must really be
destitute; and fourpence, much less four shillings, is sufficient
affluence to disqualify him. In the second place, I made the mistake of
tardiness. Seven o'clock in the evening is too late in the day for a
pauper to get a pauper's bed. For the benefit of gently nurtured and innocent folk, let me explain what
a ward is. It is a building where the homeless, bedless, penniless man,
if he be lucky, may _casually_ rest his weary bones, and then work like a
navvy next day to pay for it. My second attempt to break into the casual ward began more auspiciously. I started in the middle of the afternoon, accompanied by the burning
young socialist and another friend, and all I had in my pocket was
thru'pence. They piloted me to the Whitechapel Workhouse, at which I
peered from around a friendly corner. It was a few minutes past five in
the afternoon but already a long and melancholy line was formed, which
strung out around the corner of the building and out of sight. It was a most woeful picture, men and women waiting in the cold grey end
of the day for a pauper's shelter from the night, and I confess it almost
unnerved me. Like the boy before the dentist's door, I suddenly
discovered a multitude of reasons for being elsewhere. Some hints of the
struggle going on within must have shown in my face, for one of my
companions said, "Don't funk; you can do it." Of course I could do it, but I became aware that even thru'pence in my
pocket was too lordly a treasure for such a throng; and, in order that
all invidious distinctions might be removed, I emptied out the coppers. Then I bade good-bye to my friends, and with my heart going pit-a-pat,
slouched down the street and took my place at the end of the line. Woeful
it looked, this line of poor folk tottering on the steep pitch to death;
how woeful it was I did not dream. Next to me stood a short, stout man. Hale and hearty, though aged,
strong-featured, with the tough and leathery skin produced by long years
of sunbeat and weatherbeat, his was the unmistakable sea face and eyes;
and at once there came to me a bit of Kipling's "Galley Slave":-

   "By the brand upon my shoulder, by the gall of clinging steel;
   By the welt the whips have left me, by the scars that never heal;
   By eyes grown old with staring through the sun-wash on the brine,
   I am paid in full for service . . . " How correct I was in my surmise, and how peculiarly appropriate the verse
was, you shall learn. "I won't stand it much longer, I won't," he was complaining to the man on
the other side of him. "I'll smash a windy, a big 'un, an' get run in
for fourteen days. Then I'll have a good place to sleep, never fear, an'
better grub than you get here. Though I'd miss my bit of bacey"--this as
an after-thought, and said regretfully and resignedly. "I've been out two nights now," he went on; "wet to the skin night before
last, an' I can't stand it much longer. I'm gettin' old, an' some
mornin' they'll pick me up dead." He whirled with fierce passion on me: "Don't you ever let yourself grow
old, lad. Die when you're young, or you'll come to this. I'm tellin'
you sure. Seven an' eighty years am I, an' served my country like a man. Three good-conduct stripes and the Victoria Cross, an' this is what I get
for it. I wish I was dead, I wish I was dead. Can't come any too quick
for me, I tell you." The moisture rushed into his eyes, but, before the other man could
comfort him, he began to hum a lilting sea song as though there was no
such thing as heartbreak in the world. Given encouragement, this is the story he told while waiting in line at
the workhouse after two nights of exposure in the streets. As a boy he had enlisted in the British navy, and for two score years and
more served faithfully and well. Names, dates, commanders, ports, ships,
engagements, and battles, rolled from his lips in a steady stream, but it
is beyond me to remember them all, for it is not quite in keeping to take
notes at the poorhouse door. He had been through the "First War in
China," as he termed it; had enlisted with the East India Company and
served ten years in India; was back in India again, in the English navy,
at the time of the Mutiny; had served in the Burmese War and in the
Crimea; and all this in addition to having fought and toiled for the
English flag pretty well over the rest of the globe. Then the thing happened. A little thing, it could only be traced back to
first causes: perhaps the lieutenant's breakfast had not agreed with him;
or he had been up late the night before; or his debts were pressing; or
the commander had spoken brusquely to him. The point is, that on this
particular day the lieutenant was irritable. The sailor, with others,
was "setting up" the fore rigging. Now, mark you, the sailor had been over forty years in the navy, had
three good-conduct stripes, and possessed the Victoria Cross for
distinguished service in battle; so he could not have been such an
altogether bad sort of a sailorman. The lieutenant was irritable; the
lieutenant called him a name--well, not a nice sort of name. It referred
to his mother. When I was a boy it was our boys' code to fight like
little demons should such an insult be given our mothers; and many men
have died in my part of the world for calling other men this name. However, the lieutenant called the sailor this name. At that moment it
chanced the sailor had an iron lever or bar in his hands. He promptly
struck the lieutenant over the head with it, knocking him out of the
rigging and overboard. And then, in the man's own words: "I saw what I had done. I knew the
Regulations, and I said to myself, 'It's all up with you, Jack, my boy;
so here goes.' An' I jumped over after him, my mind made up to drown us
both. An' I'd ha' done it, too, only the pinnace from the flagship was
just comin' alongside. Up we came to the top, me a hold of him an'
punchin' him. This was what settled for me. If I hadn't ben strikin'
him, I could have claimed that, seein' what I had done, I jumped over to
save him." Then came the court-martial, or whatever name a sea trial goes by. He
recited his sentence, word for word, as though memorised and gone over in
bitterness many times. And here it is, for the sake of discipline and
respect to officers not always gentlemen, the punishment of a man who was
guilty of manhood. To be reduced to the rank of ordinary seaman; to be
debarred all prize-money due him; to forfeit all rights to pension; to
resign the Victoria Cross; to be discharged from the navy with a good
character (this being his first offence); to receive fifty lashes; and to
serve two years in prison. "I wish I had drowned that day, I wish to God I had," he concluded, as
the line moved up and we passed around the corner. At last the door came in sight, through which the paupers were being
admitted in bunches. And here I learned a surprising thing: _this being
Wednesday, none of us would be released till Friday morning_. Furthermore, and oh, you tobacco users, take heed: _we would not be
permitted to take in any tobacco_. This we would have to surrender as we
entered. Sometimes, I was told, it was returned on leaving and sometimes
it was destroyed. The old man-of-war's man gave me a lesson. Opening his pouch, he emptied
the tobacco (a pitiful quantity) into a piece of paper. This, snugly and
flatly wrapped, went down his sock inside his shoe. Down went my piece
of tobacco inside my sock, for forty hours without tobacco is a hardship
all tobacco users will understand. Again and again the line moved up, and we were slowly but surely
approaching the wicket. At the moment we happened to be standing on an
iron grating, and a man appearing underneath, the old sailor called down
to him,--

"How many more do they want?" "Twenty-four," came the answer. We looked ahead anxiously and counted. Thirty-four were ahead of us. Disappointment and consternation dawned upon the faces about me. It is
not a nice thing, hungry and penniless, to face a sleepless night in the
streets. But we hoped against hope, till, when ten stood outside the
wicket, the porter turned us away. "Full up," was what he said, as he banged the door. Like a flash, for all his eighty-seven years, the old sailor was speeding
away on the desperate chance of finding shelter elsewhere. I stood and
debated with two other men, wise in the knowledge of casual wards, as to
where we should go. They decided on the Poplar Workhouse, three miles
away, and we started off. As we rounded the corner, one of them said, "I could a' got in 'ere to-
day. I come by at one o'clock, an' the line was beginnin' to form
then--pets, that's what they are. They let 'm in, the same ones, night
upon night." CHAPTER VIII--THE CARTER AND THE CARPENTER


The Carter, with his clean-cut face, chin beard, and shaved upper lip, I
should have taken in the United States for anything from a master workman
to a well-to-do farmer. The Carpenter--well, I should have taken him for
a carpenter. He looked it, lean and wiry, with shrewd, observant eyes,
and hands that had grown twisted to the handles of tools through forty-
seven years' work at the trade. The chief difficulty with these men was
that they were old, and that their children, instead of growing up to
take care of them, had died. Their years had told on them, and they had
been forced out of the whirl of industry by the younger and stronger
competitors who had taken their places. These two men, turned away from the casual ward of Whitechapel Workhouse,
were bound with me for Poplar Workhouse. Not much of a show, they
thought, but to chance it was all that remained to us. It was Poplar, or
the streets and night. Both men were anxious for a bed, for they were
"about gone," as they phrased it. The Carter, fifty-eight years of age,
had spent the last three nights without shelter or sleep, while the
Carpenter, sixty-five years of age, had been out five nights. But, O dear, soft people, full of meat and blood, with white beds and
airy rooms waiting you each night, how can I make you know what it is to
suffer as you would suffer if you spent a weary night on London's
streets! Believe me, you would think a thousand centuries had come and
gone before the east paled into dawn; you would shiver till you were
ready to cry aloud with the pain of each aching muscle; and you would
marvel that you could endure so much and live. Should you rest upon a
bench, and your tired eyes close, depend upon it the policeman would
rouse you and gruffly order you to "move on." You may rest upon the
bench, and benches are few and far between; but if rest means sleep, on
you must go, dragging your tired body through the endless streets. Should
you, in desperate slyness, seek some forlorn alley or dark passageway and
lie down, the omnipresent policeman will rout you out just the same. It
is his business to rout you out. It is a law of the powers that be that
you shall be routed out. But when the dawn came, the nightmare over, you would hale you home to
refresh yourself, and until you died you would tell the story of your
adventure to groups of admiring friends. It would grow into a mighty
story. Your little eight-hour night would become an Odyssey and you a
Homer. Not so with these homeless ones who walked to Poplar Workhouse with me. And there are thirty-five thousand of them, men and women, in London Town
this night. Please don't remember it as you go to bed; if you are as
soft as you ought to be you may not rest so well as usual. But for old
men of sixty, seventy, and eighty, ill-fed, with neither meat nor blood,
to greet the dawn unrefreshed, and to stagger through the day in mad
search for crusts, with relentless night rushing down upon them again,
and to do this five nights and days--O dear, soft people, full of meat
and blood, how can you ever understand? I walked up Mile End Road between the Carter and the Carpenter. Mile End
Road is a wide thoroughfare, cutting the heart of East London, and there
were tens of thousands of people abroad on it. I tell you this so that
you may fully appreciate what I shall describe in the next paragraph. As
I say, we walked along, and when they grew bitter and cursed the land, I
cursed with them, cursed as an American waif would curse, stranded in a
strange and terrible land. And, as I tried to lead them to believe, and
succeeded in making them believe, they took me for a "seafaring man," who
had spent his money in riotous living, lost his clothes (no unusual
occurrence with seafaring men ashore), and was temporarily broke while
looking for a ship. This accounted for my ignorance of English ways in
general and casual wards in particular, and my curiosity concerning the
same. The Carter was hard put to keep the pace at which we walked (he told me
that he had eaten nothing that day), but the Carpenter, lean and hungry,
his grey and ragged overcoat flapping mournfully in the breeze, swung on
in a long and tireless stride which reminded me strongly of the plains
wolf or coyote. Both kept their eyes upon the pavement as they walked
and talked, and every now and then one or the other would stoop and pick
something up, never missing the stride the while. I thought it was cigar
and cigarette stumps they were collecting, and for some time took no
notice. Then I did notice. _From the slimy, spittle-drenched, sidewalk, they were picking up bits of
orange peel, apple skin, and grape stems, and, they were eating them. The
pits of greengage plums they cracked between their teeth for the kernels
inside. They picked up stray bits of bread the size of peas, apple cores
so black and dirty one would not take them to be apple cores, and these
things these two men took into their mouths, and chewed them, and
swallowed them; and this, between six and seven o'clock in the evening of
August 20, year of our Lord 1902, in the heart of the greatest,
wealthiest, and most powerful empire the world has ever seen_. These two men talked. They were not fools, they were merely old. And,
naturally, their guts a-reek with pavement offal, they talked of bloody
revolution. They talked as anarchists, fanatics, and madmen would talk. And who shall blame them? In spite of my three good meals that day, and
the snug bed I could occupy if I wished, and my social philosophy, and my
evolutionary belief in the slow development and metamorphosis of
things--in spite of all this, I say, I felt impelled to talk rot with
them or hold my tongue. Poor fools! Not of their sort are revolutions
bred. And when they are dead and dust, which will be shortly, other
fools will talk bloody revolution as they gather offal from the spittle-
drenched sidewalk along Mile End Road to Poplar Workhouse. Being a foreigner, and a young man, the Carter and the Carpenter
explained things to me and advised me. Their advice, by the way, was
brief, and to the point; it was to get out of the country. "As fast as
God'll let me," I assured them; "I'll hit only the high places, till you
won't be able to see my trail for smoke." They felt the force of my
figures, rather than understood them, and they nodded their heads
approvingly. "Actually make a man a criminal against 'is will," said the Carpenter. "'Ere I am, old, younger men takin' my place, my clothes gettin' shabbier
an' shabbier, an' makin' it 'arder every day to get a job. I go to the
casual ward for a bed. Must be there by two or three in the afternoon or
I won't get in. You saw what happened to-day. What chance does that
give me to look for work? S'pose I do get into the casual ward? Keep me
in all day to-morrow, let me out mornin' o' next day. What then? The
law sez I can't get in another casual ward that night less'n ten miles
distant. Have to hurry an' walk to be there in time that day. What
chance does that give me to look for a job? S'pose I don't walk. S'pose
I look for a job? In no time there's night come, an' no bed. No sleep
all night, nothin' to eat, what shape am I in the mornin' to look for
work? Got to make up my sleep in the park somehow" (the vision of
Christ's Church, Spitalfield, was strong on me) "an' get something to
eat. An' there I am! Old, down, an' no chance to get up." "Used to be a toll-gate 'ere," said the Carter. "Many's the time I've
paid my toll 'ere in my cartin' days." "I've 'ad three 'a'penny rolls in two days," the Carpenter announced,
after a long pause in the conversation. "Two of them I ate yesterday,
an' the third to-day," he concluded, after another long pause. "I ain't 'ad anything to-day," said the Carter. "An' I'm fagged out. My
legs is hurtin' me something fearful." "The roll you get in the 'spike' is that 'ard you can't eat it nicely
with less'n a pint of water," said the Carpenter, for my benefit. And,
on asking him what the "spike" was, he answered, "The casual ward. It's
a cant word, you know." But what surprised me was that he should have the word "cant" in his
vocabulary, a vocabulary that I found was no mean one before we parted. I asked them what I might expect in the way of treatment, if we succeeded
in getting into the Poplar Workhouse, and between them I was supplied
with much information. Having taken a cold bath on entering, I would be
given for supper six ounces of bread and "three parts of skilly." "Three
parts" means three-quarters of a pint, and "skilly" is a fluid concoction
of three quarts of oatmeal stirred into three buckets and a half of hot
water. "Milk and sugar, I suppose, and a silver spoon?" I queried. "No fear. Salt's what you'll get, an' I've seen some places where you'd
not get any spoon. 'Old 'er up an' let 'er run down, that's 'ow they do
it." "You do get good skilly at 'Ackney," said the Carter. "Oh, wonderful skilly, that," praised the Carpenter, and each looked
eloquently at the other. "Flour an' water at St. George's in the East," said the Carter. The Carpenter nodded. He had tried them all. "Then what?" I demanded

And I was informed that I was sent directly to bed. "Call you at half
after five in the mornin', an' you get up an' take a 'sluice'--if there's
any soap. Then breakfast, same as supper, three parts o' skilly an' a
six-ounce loaf." "'Tisn't always six ounces," corrected the Carter. "'Tisn't, no; an' often that sour you can 'ardly eat it. When first I
started I couldn't eat the skilly nor the bread, but now I can eat my own
an' another man's portion." "I could eat three other men's portions," said the Carter. "I 'aven't
'ad a bit this blessed day." "Then what?" "Then you've got to do your task, pick four pounds of oakum, or clean an'
scrub, or break ten to eleven hundredweight o' stones. I don't 'ave to
break stones; I'm past sixty, you see. They'll make you do it, though. You're young an' strong." "What I don't like," grumbled the Carter, "is to be locked up in a cell
to pick oakum. It's too much like prison." "But suppose, after you've had your night's sleep, you refuse to pick
oakum, or break stones, or do any work at all?" I asked. "No fear you'll refuse the second time; they'll run you in," answered the
Carpenter. "Wouldn't advise you to try it on, my lad." "Then comes dinner," he went on. "Eight ounces of bread, one and a arf
ounces of cheese, an' cold water. Then you finish your task an' 'ave
supper, same as before, three parts o' skilly any six ounces o' bread. Then to bed, six o'clock, an' next mornin' you're turned loose, provided
you've finished your task." We had long since left Mile End Road, and after traversing a gloomy maze
of narrow, winding streets, we came to Poplar Workhouse. On a low stone
wall we spread our handkerchiefs, and each in his handkerchief put all
his worldly possessions, with the exception of the "bit o' baccy" down
his sock. And then, as the last light was fading from the drab-coloured
sky, the wind blowing cheerless and cold, we stood, with our pitiful
little bundles in our hands, a forlorn group at the workhouse door. Three working girls came along, and one looked pityingly at me; as she
passed I followed her with my eyes, and she still looked pityingly back
at me. The old men she did not notice. Dear Christ, she pitied me,
young and vigorous and strong, but she had no pity for the two old men
who stood by my side! She was a young woman, and I was a young man, and
what vague sex promptings impelled her to pity me put her sentiment on
the lowest plane. Pity for old men is an altruistic feeling, and
besides, the workhouse door is the accustomed place for old men. So she
showed no pity for them, only for me, who deserved it least or not at
all. Not in honour do grey hairs go down to the grave in London Town. On one side the door was a bell handle, on the other side a press button. "Ring the bell," said the Carter to me. And just as I ordinarily would at anybody's door, I pulled out the handle
and rang a peal. "Oh! Oh!" they cried in one terrified voice. "Not so 'ard!" I let go, and they looked reproachfully at me, as though I had imperilled
their chance for a bed and three parts of skilly. Nobody came. Luckily
it was the wrong bell, and I felt better. "Press the button," I said to the Carpenter. "No, no, wait a bit," the Carter hurriedly interposed. From all of which I drew the conclusion that a poorhouse porter, who
commonly draws a yearly salary of from seven to nine pounds, is a very
finicky and important personage, and cannot be treated too fastidiously
by--paupers. So we waited, ten times a decent interval, when the Carter stealthily
advanced a timid forefinger to the button, and gave it the faintest,
shortest possible push. I have looked at waiting men where life or death
was in the issue; but anxious suspense showed less plainly on their faces
than it showed on the faces of these two men as they waited on the coming
of the porter. He came. He barely looked at us. "Full up," he said and shut the door. "Another night of it," groaned the Carpenter. In the dim light the
Carter looked wan and grey. Indiscriminate charity is vicious, say the professional philanthropists. Well, I resolved to be vicious. "Come on; get your knife out and come here," I said to the Carter,
drawing him into a dark alley. He glared at me in a frightened manner, and tried to draw back. Possibly
he took me for a latter-day Jack-the-Ripper, with a penchant for elderly
male paupers. Or he may have thought I was inveigling him into the
commission of some desperate crime. Anyway, he was frightened. It will be remembered, at the outset, that I sewed a pound inside my
stoker's singlet under the armpit. This was my emergency fund, and I was
now called upon to use it for the first time. Not until I had gone through the acts of a contortionist, and shown the
round coin sewed in, did I succeed in getting the Carter's help. Even
then his hand was trembling so that I was afraid he would cut me instead
of the stitches, and I was forced to take the knife away and do it
myself. Out rolled the gold piece, a fortune in their hungry eyes; and
away we stampeded for the nearest coffee-house. Of course I had to explain to them that I was merely an investigator, a
social student, seeking to find out how the other half lived. And at
once they shut up like clams. I was not of their kind; my speech had
changed, the tones of my voice were different, in short, I was a
superior, and they were superbly class conscious. "What will you have?" I asked, as the waiter came for the order. "Two slices an' a cup of tea," meekly said the Carter. "Two slices an' a cup of tea," meekly said the Carpenter. Stop a moment, and consider the situation. Here were two men, invited by
me into the coffee-house. They had seen my gold piece, and they could
understand that I was no pauper. One had eaten a ha'penny roll that day,
the other had eaten nothing. And they called for "two slices an' a cup
of tea!" Each man had given a tu'penny order. "Two slices," by the way,
means two slices of bread and butter. This was the same degraded humility that had characterised their attitude
toward the poorhouse porter. But I wouldn't have it. Step by step I
increased their order--eggs, rashers of bacon, more eggs, more bacon,
more tea, more slices and so forth--they denying wistfully all the while
that they cared for anything more, and devouring it ravenously as fast as
it arrived. "First cup o' tea I've 'ad in a fortnight," said the Carter. "Wonderful tea, that," said the Carpenter. They each drank two pints of it, and I assure you that it was slops. It
resembled tea less than lager beer resembles champagne. Nay, it was
"water-bewitched," and did not resemble tea at all. It was curious, after the first shock, to notice the effect the food had
on them. At first they were melancholy, and talked of the divers times
they had contemplated suicide. The Carter, not a week before, had stood
on the bridge and looked at the water, and pondered the question. Water,
the Carpenter insisted with heat, was a bad route. He, for one, he knew,
would struggle. A bullet was "'andier," but how under the sun was he to
get hold of a revolver? That was the rub. They grew more cheerful as the hot "tea" soaked in, and talked more about
themselves. The Carter had buried his wife and children, with the
exception of one son, who grew to manhood and helped him in his little
business. Then the thing happened. The son, a man of thirty-one, died
of the smallpox. No sooner was this over than the father came down with
fever and went to the hospital for three months. Then he was done for. He came out weak, debilitated, no strong young son to stand by him, his
little business gone glimmering, and not a farthing. The thing had
happened, and the game was up. No chance for an old man to start again. Friends all poor and unable to help. He had tried for work when they
were putting up the stands for the first Coronation parade. "An' I got
fair sick of the answer: 'No! no! no!' It rang in my ears at night when
I tried to sleep, always the same, 'No! no! no!'" Only the past week he
had answered an advertisement in Hackney, and on giving his age was told,
"Oh, too old, too old by far." The Carpenter had been born in the army, where his father had served
twenty-two years. Likewise, his two brothers had gone into the army;
one, troop sergeant-major of the Seventh Hussars, dying in India after
the Mutiny; the other, after nine years under Roberts in the East, had
been lost in Egypt. The Carpenter had not gone into the army, so here he
was, still on the planet. "But 'ere, give me your 'and," he said, ripping open his ragged shirt. "I'm fit for the anatomist, that's all. I'm wastin' away, sir, actually
wastin' away for want of food. Feel my ribs an' you'll see." I put my hand under his shirt and felt. The skin was stretched like
parchment over the bones, and the sensation produced was for all the
world like running one's hand over a washboard. "Seven years o' bliss I 'ad," he said. "A good missus and three bonnie
lassies. But they all died. Scarlet fever took the girls inside a
fortnight." "After this, sir," said the Carter, indicating the spread, and desiring
to turn the conversation into more cheerful channels; "after this, I
wouldn't be able to eat a workhouse breakfast in the morning." "Nor I," agreed the Carpenter, and they fell to discussing belly delights
and the fine dishes their respective wives had cooked in the old days. "I've gone three days and never broke my fast," said the Carter. "And I, five," his companion added, turning gloomy with the memory of it. "Five days once, with nothing on my stomach but a bit of orange peel, an'
outraged nature wouldn't stand it, sir, an' I near died. Sometimes,
walkin' the streets at night, I've ben that desperate I've made up my
mind to win the horse or lose the saddle. You know what I mean, sir--to
commit some big robbery. But when mornin' come, there was I, too weak
from 'unger an' cold to 'arm a mouse." As their poor vitals warmed to the food, they began to expand and wax
boastful, and to talk politics. I can only say that they talked politics
as well as the average middle-class man, and a great deal better than
some of the middle-class men I have heard. What surprised me was the
hold they had on the world, its geography and peoples, and on recent and
contemporaneous history. As I say, they were not fools, these two men. They were merely old, and their children had undutifully failed to grow
up and give them a place by the fire. One last incident, as I bade them good-bye on the corner, happy with a
couple of shillings in their pockets and the certain prospect of a bed
for the night. Lighting a cigarette, I was about to throw away the
burning match when the Carter reached for it. I proffered him the box,
but he said, "Never mind, won't waste it, sir." And while he lighted the
cigarette I had given him, the Carpenter hurried with the filling of his
pipe in order to have a go at the same match. "It's wrong to waste," said he. "Yes," I said, but I was thinking of the wash-board ribs over which I had
run my hand. CHAPTER IX--THE SPIKE


First of all, I must beg forgiveness of my body for the vileness through
which I have dragged it, and forgiveness of my stomach for the vileness
which I have thrust into it. I have been to the spike, and slept in the
spike, and eaten in the spike; also, I have run away from the spike. After my two unsuccessful attempts to penetrate the Whitechapel casual
ward, I started early, and joined the desolate line before three o'clock
in the afternoon. They did not "let in" till six, but at that early hour
I was number twenty, while the news had gone forth that only twenty-two
were to be admitted. By four o'clock there were thirty-four in line, the
last ten hanging on in the slender hope of getting in by some kind of a
miracle. Many more came, looked at the line, and went away, wise to the
bitter fact that the spike would be "full up." Conversation was slack at first, standing there, till the man on one side
of me and the man on the other side of me discovered that they had been
in the smallpox hospital at the same time, though a full house of sixteen
hundred patients had prevented their becoming acquainted. But they made
up for it, discussing and comparing the more loathsome features of their
disease in the most cold-blooded, matter-of-fact way. I learned that the
average mortality was one in six, that one of them had been in three
months and the other three months and a half, and that they had been
"rotten wi' it." Whereat my flesh began to creep and crawl, and I asked
them how long they had been out. One had been out two weeks, and the
other three weeks. Their faces were badly pitted (though each assured
the other that this was not so), and further, they showed me in their
hands and under the nails the smallpox "seeds" still working out. Nay,
one of them worked a seed out for my edification, and pop it went, right
out of his flesh into the air. I tried to shrink up smaller inside my
clothes, and I registered a fervent though silent hope that it had not
popped on me. In both instances, I found that the smallpox was the cause of their being
"on the doss," which means on the tramp. Both had been working when
smitten by the disease, and both had emerged from the hospital "broke,"
with the gloomy task before them of hunting for work. So far, they had
not found any, and they had come to the spike for a "rest up" after three
days and nights on the street. It seems that not only the man who becomes old is punished for his
involuntary misfortune, but likewise the man who is struck by disease or
accident. Later on, I talked with another man--"Ginger" we called
him--who stood at the head of the line--a sure indication that he had
been waiting since one o'clock. A year before, one day, while in the
employ of a fish dealer, he was carrying a heavy box of fish which was
too much for him. Result: "something broke," and there was the box on
the ground, and he on the ground beside it. At the first hospital, whither he was immediately carried, they said it
was a rupture, reduced the swelling, gave him some vaseline to rub on it,
kept him four hours, and told him to get along. But he was not on the
streets more than two or three hours when he was down on his back again. This time he went to another hospital and was patched up. But the point
is, the employer did nothing, positively nothing, for the man injured in
his employment, and even refused him "a light job now and again," when he
came out. As far as Ginger is concerned, he is a broken man. His only
chance to earn a living was by heavy work. He is now incapable of
performing heavy work, and from now until he dies, the spike, the peg,
and the streets are all he can look forward to in the way of food and
shelter. The thing happened--that is all. He put his back under too
great a load of fish, and his chance for happiness in life was crossed
off the books. Several men in the line had been to the United States, and they were
wishing that they had remained there, and were cursing themselves for
their folly in ever having left. England had become a prison to them, a
prison from which there was no hope of escape. It was impossible for
them to get away. They could neither scrape together the passage money,
nor get a chance to work their passage. The country was too overrun by
poor devils on that "lay." I was on the seafaring-man-who-had-lost-his-clothes-and-money tack, and
they all condoled with me and gave me much sound advice. 