

E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations. See 17938-h.htm or 17938-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/9/3/17938/17938-h/17938-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/9/3/17938/17938-h.zip)





CONTRARY MARY

by

TEMPLE BAILEY

Author of
Glory of Youth

Illustrations by Charles S. Corson







[Frontispiece: She flashed a quick glance at him.] New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers
Copyright
1914 by
The Penn Publishing Company
  First printing, December, 1914
  Second printing, February, 1915
  Third printing, March, 1915
  Fourth printing, March, 1915
  Fifth printing, April, 1915
  Sixth printing, July, 1915
  Seventh printing, November, 1915




To My Sister




Contents


CHAPTER I

In Which Silken Ladies Ascend One Stairway, and a Lonely Wayfarer
Ascends Another and Comes Face to Face with Old Friends. CHAPTER II

In Which Rose-Leaves and Old Slippers Speed a Happy Pair; and in Which
Sweet and Twenty Speaks a New and Modern Language, and Gives a Reason
for Renting a Gentleman's Library. CHAPTER III

In Which a Lonely Wayfarer Becomes Monarch of All He Surveys; and in
Which One Who Might Have Been Presented as the Hero of this Tale is
Forced, Through No Fault of His Own, to Take His Chances with the Rest. CHAPTER IV

In Which a Little Bronze Boy Grins in the Dark; and in Which Mary
Forgets that There is Any One Else in the House. CHAPTER V

In Which Roger Remembers a Face and Delilah Remembers a Voice; and in
Which a Poem and a Pussy Cat Play an Important Part. CHAPTER VI

In Which Mary Brings Christmas to the Tower Rooms, and in Which Roger
Declines a Privilege for Which Porter Pleads. CHAPTER VII

In Which Aunt Frances Speaks of Matrimony as a Fixed Institution and is
Met by Flaming Arguments; and in Which a Strange Voice Sings Upon the
Stairs. CHAPTER VIII

In Which Little-Lovely Leila Sees a Picture in an Unexpected Place; and
in Which Perfect Faith Speaks Triumphantly Over the Telephone. CHAPTER IX

In Which Roger Sallies Forth in the Service of a Damsel in Distress;
and in Which He Meets Dragons Along the Way. CHAPTER X

In Which a Scarlet Flower Blooms in the Garden; and in Which a Light
Flares Later in the Tower. CHAPTER XI

In Which Roger Writes a Letter; and in Which a Rose Blooms Upon the
Pages of a Book. CHAPTER XII

In Which Mary and Roger Have Their Hour; and in Which a Tea-Drinking
Ends in What Might Have Been a Tragedy. CHAPTER XIII

In Which the Whole World is at Sixes and Sevens; and in Which Life is
Looked Upon as a Great Adventure. CHAPTER XIV

In Which Mary Writes from the Tower Rooms; and in Which Roger Answers
from Among the Pines. CHAPTER XV

In Which Barry and Leila Go Over the Hills and Far Away; and in Which a
March Moon Becomes a Honeymoon. CHAPTER XVI

In Which a Long Name is Bestowed Upon a Beautiful Baby; and in Which a
Letter in a Long Envelope Brings Freedom to Mary. CHAPTER XVII

In Which an Artist Finds What All His Life He Has Been Looking For; and
in Which He Speaks of a Little Saint in Red. CHAPTER XVIII

In Which Mary Writes of the Workaday World; and in Which Roger Writes
of the Dreams of a Boy. CHAPTER XIX

In Which Porter Plants an Evil Seed Which Grows and Flourishes, and in
Which Ghosts Rise and Confront Mary. CHAPTER XX

In Which Mary Faces the Winter of Her Discontent; and in Which Delilah
Sees Things in a Crystal Ball. CHAPTER XXI

In Which a Little Lady in Black Comes to Washington to Witness the
Swearing-in of a Gentleman and a Scholar. CHAPTER XXII

In Which the Garden Begins to Bloom; and in Which Roger Dreamt. CHAPTER XXIII

In Which Little-Lovely Leila Looks Forward to the Month of May; and in
Which Barry Rides Into a Town With Narrow Streets. CHAPTER XXIV

In Which Roger Comes Once More to the Tower Rooms; and in Which a Duel
is Fought in Modern Fashion. CHAPTER XXV

In Which Mary Bids Farewell to the Old Life, and in Which She Finds
Happiness on the High Seas. CHAPTER XXVI

In Which a Strange Craft Anchors in a Sea of Emerald Light; and in
Which Mocking-Birds Sing in the Moonlight. Illustrations


She flashed a quick glance at him . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

"What have I done?" "You don't know what you are doing." "Again I question your right." Contrary Mary


CHAPTER I

_In Which Silken Ladies Ascend One Stairway, and a Lonely Wayfarer
Ascends Another and Comes Face to Face With Old Friends._


The big house, standing on a high hill which overlooked the city,
showed in the moonlight the grotesque outlines of a composite
architecture. Originally it had been a square substantial edifice of
Colonial simplicity. A later and less restrained taste had aimed at a
castellated effect, and certain peaks and turrets had been added. Three of these turrets were excrescences stuck on, evidently, with an
idea of adornment. The fourth tower, however, rounded out and enlarged
a room on the third floor. This room was one of a suite, and the rooms
were known as the Tower Rooms, and were held by those who had occupied
them to be the most desirable in the barn-like building. To-night the house had taken on an unwonted aspect of festivity. Its
spaciousness was checkered by golden-lighted windows. Delivery wagons
and automobiles came and went, some discharging loads of deliciousness
at the back door, others discharging loads of loveliness at the front. Following in the wake of one of the front door loads of fluttering
femininity came a somewhat somber pedestrian. His steps lagged a
little, so that when the big door opened, he was still at the foot of
the terrace which led up to it. He waited until the door was shut
before he again advanced. In the glimpse that he thus had of the
interior, he was aware of a sort of pink effulgence, and in that
shining light, lapped by it, and borne up, as it were, by it toward the
wide stairway, he saw slender girls in faint-hued frocks--a shimmering
celestial company. As he reached the top of the terrace the door again flew open, and he
gave a somewhat hesitating reason for his intrusion. "I was told to ask for Miss Ballard--Miss Mary Ballard." It seemed that he was expected, and that the guardian of the doorway
understood the difference between his business and that of the
celestial beings who had preceded him. He was shown into a small room at the left of the entrance. It was
somewhat bare, with a few law books and a big old-fashioned desk. He
judged that the room might have been put to office uses, but to-night
the desk was heaped with open boxes, and odd pieces of furniture were
crowded together, so that there was left only a small oasis of cleared
space. On the one chair in this oasis, the somber gentleman seated
himself. He had a fancy, as he sat there waiting, that neither he nor this room
were in accord with the things that were going on in the big house. Outside of the closed door the radiant guests were still ascending the
stairway on shining wings of light. He could hear the music of their
laughter, and the deeper note of men's voices, rising and growing
fainter in a sort of transcendent harmony. When the door was finally opened, it was done quickly and was shut
quickly, and the girl who had entered laughed breathlessly as she
turned to him. "Oh, you must forgive me--I've kept you waiting?" If their meeting had been in Sherwood forest, he would have known her
at once for a good comrade; if he had met her in the Garden of
Biaucaire, he would have known her at once for more than that. But,
being neither a hero of ballad nor of old romance, he knew only that
here was a girl different from the silken ladies who had ascended the
stairs. Here was an air almost of frank boyishness, a smile of
pleasant friendliness, with just enough of flushing cheek to show
womanliness and warm blood. Even her dress was different. It was simple almost to the point of
plainness. Its charm lay in its glimmering glistening sheen, like the
inside of a shell. Its draperies were caught up to show slender feet
in low-heeled slippers. A quaint cap of silver tissue held closely the
waves of thick fair hair. Her eyes were like the sea in a storm--deep
gray with a glint of green. These things did not come to him at once. He was to observe them as
she made her explanation, and as he followed her to the Tower Rooms. But first he had to set himself straight with her, so he said: "I was
sorry to interrupt you. But you said--seven?" "Yes. It was the only time that the rooms could be seen. My sister
and I occupy them--and Constance is to be married--to-night." This, then, was the reason for the effulgence and the silken ladies. It was the reason, too, for the loveliness of her dress. "I am going to take you this way." She preceded him through a narrow
passage to a flight of steps leading up into the darkness. "These
stairs are not often used, but we shall escape the crowds in the other
hall." Her voice was lost as she made an abrupt turn, but, feeling his way, he
followed her. Up and up until they came to a third-floor landing, where she stopped
him to say, "I must be sure no one is here. Will you wait until I see?" She came back, presently, to announce that the coast was clear, and
thus they entered the room which had been enlarged and rounded out by
the fourth tower. It was a big room, ceiled and finished in dark oak, The furniture was
roomy and comfortable and of worn red leather. A strong square table
held a copper lamp with a low spreading shade. There was a fireplace,
and on the mantel above it a bust or two. But it was not these things which at once caught the attention of Roger
Poole. Lining the walls were old books in stout binding, new books in cloth
and fine leather--the poets, the philosophers, the seers of all ages. As his eyes swept the shelves, he knew that here was the living,
breathing collection of a true book-lover--not a musty, fusty
aggregation brought together through mere pride of intellect. The
owner of this library had counted the heart-beats of the world. "This is the sitting-room," his guide was telling him, "and the bedroom
and bath open out from it." She had opened a connecting door. "This
room is awfully torn up. But we have just finished dressing Constance. She is down-stairs now in the Sanctum. We'll pack her trunks to-morrow
and send them, and then if you should care to take the rooms, we can
put back the bedroom furniture that father had. He used this suite,
and brought his books up after mother died." He halted on the threshold of that inner room. If the old house below
had seemed filled with rosy effulgence, this was the heart of the rose. Two small white beds were side by side in an alcove. Their covers were
of pink overlaid with lace, and the chintz of the big couch and chairs
reflected the same enchanting hue. With all the color, however, there
was the freshness of simplicity. Two tall glass candlesticks on the
dressing table, a few photographs in silver and ivory frames--these
were the only ornaments. Yet everywhere was lovely confusion--delicate things were thrown
half-way into open trunks, filmy fabrics floated from unexpected
places, small slippers were held by receptacles never designed for
shoes, radiant hats bloomed in boxes. On a chair lay a bridesmaid's bunch of roses. This bunch Mary Ballard
picked up as she passed, and it was over the top of it that she asked,
with some diffidence, "Do you think you'd care to take the rooms?" Did he? Did the Peri outside the gates yearn to enter? Here within
his reach was that from which he had been cut off for five years. Five
years in boarding-houses and cheap hotels, and now the chance to live
again--as he had once lived! "I do want them--awfully--but the price named in your letter seems
ridiculously small----"

"But you see it is all I shall need," she was as blissfully
unbusinesslike as he. "I want to add a certain amount to my income, so
I ask you to pay that," she smiled, and with increasing diffidence
demanded, "Could you make up your mind--now? It is important that I
should know--to-night." She saw the question in his eyes and answered it, "You see--my family
have no idea that I am doing this. If they knew, they wouldn't want me
to rent the rooms--but the house is mine---I shall do as I please." She seemed to fling it at him, defiantly. "And you want me to be accessory to your--crime." She gave him a startled glance. "Oh, do you look at it--that way? Please don't. Not if you like them." For a moment, only, he wavered. There was something distinctly unusual
in acquiring a vine and fig tree in this fashion. But then her
advertisement had been unusual--it was that which had attracted him,
and had piqued his interest so that he had answered it. And the books! As he looked back into the big room, the rows of
volumes seemed to smile at him with the faces of old friends. Lonely, longing for a haven after the storms which had beaten him, what
better could he find than this? As for the family of Mary Ballard, what had he to do with it? His
business was with Mary Ballard herself, with her frank laugh and her
friendliness--and her arms full of roses! "I like them so much that I shall consider myself most fortunate to get
them." "Oh, really?" She hesitated and held out her hand to him. "You don't
know how you have helped me out--you don't know how you have helped
me----"

Again she saw a question in his eyes, but this time she did not answer
it. She turned and went into the other room, drawing back the curtains
of the deep windows of the round tower. "I haven't shown you the best of all," she said. Beneath them lay the
lovely city, starred with its golden lights. From east to west the
shadowy dimness of the Mall, beyond the shadows, a line of river,
silver under the moonlight. A clock tower or two showed yellow faces;
the great public buildings were clear-cut like cardboard. Roger drew a deep breath. "If there were nothing else," he said, "I
should take the rooms for this." And now from the lower hall came the clamor of voices. "_Mary! Mary!_"

"I must not keep you," he said at once. "_Mary!_"

Poised for flight, she asked, "Can you find your way down alone? I'll
go by the front stairs and head them off." "_Mary----!_"

With a last flashing glance she was gone, and as he groped his way down
through the darkness, it came to him as an amazing revelation that she
had taken his coming as a thing to be thankful for, and it had been so
many years since a door had been flung wide to welcome him. CHAPTER II

_In Which Rose-Leaves and Old Slippers Speed a Happy Pair; and in Which
Sweet and Twenty Speaks a New and Modern Language, and Gives a Reason for
Renting a Gentleman's Library._


In spite of the fact that Mary Ballard had seemed to Roger Poole like a
white-winged angel, she was not looked upon by the family as a beauty. It was Constance who was the "pretty one," and tonight as she stood in
her bridal robes, gazing up at her sister who was descending the stairs,
she was more than pretty. Her tender face was illumined by an inner
radiance. She was two years older than Mary, but more slender, and her
coloring was more strongly emphasized. Her eyes were blue and her hair
was gold, as against the gray-green and dull fairness of Mary's hair. She seemed surrounded, too, by a sort of feminine _aura_, so that one
knew at a glance that here was a woman who would love her home, her
husband, her children; who would lean upon masculine protection, and
suffer from masculine neglect. Of Mary Ballard these things could not be said at once. In spite of her
simplicity and frankness, there was about her a baffling atmosphere. She
was like a still pool with the depths as yet unsounded, an uncharted
sea--with its mystery of undiscovered countries. The contrast between the sisters had never been more marked than when
Mary, leaning over the stair-rail, answered the breathless, "Dearest,
where have you been?" with her calm:

"There's plenty of time, Constance." And Constance, soothed as always by her sister's tranquillity, repeated
Mary's words for the benefit of a ponderously anxious Personage in amber
satin. "There's plenty of time, Aunt Frances." That Aunt Frances _was_ a Personage was made apparent by certain exterior
evidences. One knew it by the set of her fine shoulders, the carriage of
her head, by the diamond-studded lorgnette, by the string of pearls about
her neck, by the osprey in her white hair, by the golden buckles on her
shoes. "It is five minutes to eight," said Aunt Frances, "and Gordon is waiting
down-stairs with his best man, the chorus is freezing on the side porch,
and _everybody_ has arrived. I don't see _why_ you are waiting----"

"We are waiting for it to be eight o'clock, Aunt Frances," said Mary. "At just eight, I start down in front of Constance, and if you don't
hurry you and Aunt Isabelle won't be there ahead of me." The amber train slipped and glimmered down the polished steps, and the
golden buckles gleamed as Mrs. Clendenning, panting a little and with a
sense of outrage that her nervous anxiety of the preceding moment had
been for naught, made her way to the drawing-room, where the guests were
assembled. Aunt Isabelle followed, gently smiling. Aunt Isabelle was to Aunt
Frances as moonlight unto sunlight. Aunt Frances was married, Aunt
Isabelle was single; Aunt Frances wore amber, Aunt Isabelle silver gray;
Aunt Frances held up her head like a queen, Aunt Isabelle dropped hers
deprecatingly; Aunt Frances' quick ears caught the whispers of admiration
that followed her, Aunt Isabelle's ears were closed forever to all the
music of the universe. No sooner had the two aunts taken their places to the left of a floral
bower than there was heard without the chanted wedding chorus, from a
side door stepped the clergyman and the bridegroom and his best man; then
from the hall came the little procession with Mary in the lead and
Constance leaning on the arm of her brother Barry. They were much alike, this brother and sister. More alike than Mary and
Constance. Barry had the same gold in his hair, and blue in his eyes,
and, while one dared not hint it, in the face of his broad-shouldered
strength, there was an almost feminine charm in the grace of his manner
and the languor of his movements. There were no bridesmaids, except Mary, but four pretty girls held the
broad white ribbons which marked an aisle down the length of the rooms. These girls wore pink with close caps of old lace. Only one of them had
dark hair, and it was the dark-haired one, who, standing very still
throughout the ceremony, with the ribbon caught up to her in lustrous
festoons, never took her eyes from Barry Ballard's face. And when, after the ceremony, the bride turned to greet her friends, the
dark-haired girl moved forward to where Barry stood, a little apart from
the wedding group. "Doesn't it seem strange?" she said to him with quick-drawn breath. He smiled down at her. "What?" "That a few words should make such a difference?" "Yes. A minute ago she belonged to us. Now she's Gordon's." "And he's taking her to England?" "Yes. But not for long. When he gets the branch office started over
there, they'll come back, and he'll take his father's place in the
business here, and let the old man retire." She was not listening. "Barry," she interrupted, "what will Mary do? She can't live here alone--and she'll miss Constance." "Oh, Aunt Frances has fixed that," easily; "she wants Mary to shut up the
house and spend the winter in Nice with herself and Grace--it's a great
chance for Mary." "But what about you, Barry?" "Me?" He shrugged his shoulders and again smiled down at her. "I'll find
quarters somewhere, and when I get too lonesome, I'll come over and talk
to you, Leila." The rich color flooded her cheeks. "Do come," she said, again with
quick-drawn breath, then like a child who has secured its coveted
sugar-plum, she slipped through the crowd, and down into the dining-room,
where she found Mary taking a last survey. "Hasn't Aunt Frances done things beautifully?" Mary asked; "she insisted
on it, Leila. We could never have afforded the orchids and the roses;
and the ices are charming--pink hearts with cupids shooting at them with
silver arrows----"

"Oh, Mary," the dark-haired girl laid her flushed cheek against the arm
of her taller friend. "I think weddings are wonderful." Mary shook her head. "I don't," she said after a moment's silence. "I
think they're horrid. I like Gordon Richardson well enough, except when
I think that he is stealing Constance, and then I hate him." But the bride was coming down, with all the murmuring voices behind her,
and now the silken ladies were descending the stairs to the dining-room,
which took up the whole lower west wing of the house and opened out upon
an old-fashioned garden, which to-night, under a chill October moon,
showed its rows of box and of formal cedars like sharp shadows against
the whiteness. Into this garden came, later, Mary. And behind her Susan Jenks. Susan Jenks was a little woman with gray hair and a coffee-colored skin. Being neither black nor white, she partook somewhat of the nature of both
races. Back of her African gentleness was an almost Yankee shrewdness,
and the firm will which now and then degenerated into obstinacy. "There ain't no luck in a wedding without rice, Miss Mary. These paper
rose-leaf things that you've got in the bags are mighty pretty, but how
are you going to know that they bring good luck?" "Aunt Frances thought they would be charming and foreign, Susan, and they
look very real, floating off in the air. You must stand there on the
upper porch, and give the little bags to the guests." Susan ascended the terrace steps complainingly. "You go right in out of
the night, Miss Mary," she called back, "an' you with nothin' on your
bare neck!" Mary, turning, came face to face with Gordon's best man, Porter Bigelow. "Mary," he said, impetuously, "I've been looking for you everywhere. I
couldn't keep my eyes off you during the service--you were--heavenly." "I'm not a bit angelic, Porter," she told him, "and I'm simply freezing
out here. I had to show Susan about the confetti." He drew her in and shut the door. "They sent me to hunt for you," he
said. "Constance wants you. She's going up-stairs to change. But I
heard just now that you are going to Nice. Leila told me. Mary--you
can't go--not so far away--from me." His hand was on her arm. She shook it off with a little laugh. "You haven't a thing to do with it, Porter. And I'm not going--to Nice." "But Leila said----"

Her head went up. It was a characteristic gesture. "It doesn't make any
difference what _any one_ says. I'm not going to Nice." Once more in the Tower Rooms, the two sisters were together for the last
time. Leila was sent down on a hastily contrived errand. Aunt Frances,
arriving, was urged to go back and look after the guests. Only Aunt
Isabelle was allowed to remain. She could be of use, and the things
which were to be said she could not hear. "Dearest," Constance's voice had a break in it, "dearest, I feel so
selfish--leaving you----"

Mary was kneeling on the floor, unfastening hooks. "Don't worry, Con. I'll get along." "But you'll have to bear--things--all alone. It isn't as if any one
knew, and you could talk it out." "I'd rather die than speak of it," fiercely, "and I sha'n't write
anything to you about it, for Gordon will read your letters." "Oh, Mary, he won't." "Oh, yes, he will, and you'll want him to--you'll want to turn your heart
inside out for him to read, to say nothing of your letters." She stood up and put both of her hands on her sister's shoulders. "But
you mustn't tell him, Con. No matter how much you want to, it's my
secret and Barry's--promise me, Con----"

"But, Mary, a wife can't." "Yes, she _can_ have secrets from her husband. And this belongs to us,
not to him. You've married him, Con, but we haven't." Aunt Isabelle, gentle Aunt Isabelle, shut off from the world of sound,
could not hear Con's little cry of protest, but she looked up just in
time to see the shimmering dress drop to the floor, and to see the bride,
sheathed like a lily in whiteness, bury her head on Mary's shoulder. Aunt Isabelle stumbled forward. "My dear," she asked, in her thin
troubled voice, "what makes you cry?" "It's nothing, Aunt Isabelle." Mary's tone was not loud, but Aunt
Isabelle heard and nodded. "She's dead tired, poor dear, and wrought up. I'll run and get the
aromatic spirits." With Aunt Isabella out of the way, Mary set herself to repair the damage
she had done. "I've made you cry on your wedding day, Con, and I wanted
you to be so happy. Oh, tell Gordon, if you must. But you'll find that
he won't look at it as you and I have looked at it. He won't make the
excuses." "Oh, yes he will." Constance's happiness seemed to come back to her
suddenly in a flood of assurance. "He's the best man in the world, Mary,
and so kind. It's because you don't know him that you think as you do." Mary could not quench the trust in the blue eyes. "Of course he's good,"
she said, "and you are going to be the happiest ever, Constance." Then Aunt Isabelle came back and found that the need for the aromatic
spirits was over, and together the loving hands hurried Constance into
her going away gown of dull blue and silver, with its sable trimmed wrap
and hat. "If it hadn't been for Aunt Frances, how could I have faced Gordon's
friends in London?" said Constance. "Am I all right now, Mary?" "Lovely, Con, dear." But it was Aunt Isabelle's hushed voice which gave the appropriate
phrase. "She looks like a bluebird--for happiness." At the foot of the stairway Gordon was waiting for his bride--handsome
and prosperous as a bridegroom should be, with a dark sleek head and
eager eyes, and beside him Porter Bigelow, topping him by a head, and a
red head at that. As Mary followed Constance, Porter tucked her hand under his arm. "Oh, Mary, Mary, quite contrary,
  Your eyes they are so bright,
  That the stars grow pale, as they tell the tale
  To the other stars at night,"

he improvised under his breath. "Oh, Mary Ballard, do you know that I am
holding on to myself with all my might to keep from shouting to the
crowd, 'Mary isn't going away. Mary isn't going away.'" "Silly----"

"You say that, but you don't mean it. Mary, you can't be hard-hearted on
such a night as this. Say that I may stay for five minutes--ten--after
the others have gone----"

They were out on the porch now, and he had folded about her the wrap
which she had brought down with her. "Of course you may stay," she said,
"but much good may it do you. Aunt Frances is staying and General
Dick--there's to be a family conclave in the Sanctum--but if you want to
listen you may." And how the rose-leaves began to flutter! Susan Jenks had handed out the
bags, and secretly, and with much elation had leaned over the rail as
Constance passed down the steps, and had emptied her own little offering
of rice in the middle of the bride's blue hat! It was Barry, aided and abetted by Leila, who brought out the old
slippers. There were Constance's dancing slippers, high-heeled and of
delicate hues, Mary's more individual low-heeled ones, Barry's outworn
pumps, decorated hurriedly by Leila for the occasion with lovers' knots
of tissue paper. And it was just as the bride waved "Good-bye" from Gordon's limousine
that a new slipper followed the old ones, for Leila, carried away by the
excitement, and having at the moment no other missile at hand, reached
down, and plucking off one of her own pink sandals, hurled it with all
her might at the moving car. It landed on top, and Leila, with a gasp,
realized that it was gone forever. "It serves you right." Looking up, she met Barry's laughing eyes. She sank down on the step. "And they were a new pair!" "Lucky that it's your birthday next week," he said. "Do you want pink
ones?'" "_Barry!_"

Her delight was overwhelming. "Heavens, child," he condoned her, "don't
look as if I were the grand Mogul. Do you know I sometimes think you are
eight instead of eighteen? And now, if you'll take my arm, you can
hippity-hop into the house. And I hope that you'll remember this, that
if I give you pink slippers you are not to throw them away." In the hall they met Leila's father--General Wilfred Dick. The General
had married, in late bachelorhood, a young wife. Leila was like her
mother in her dark sparkling beauty and demure sweetness. But she showed
at times the spirit of her father--the spirit which had carried the
General gallantly through the Civil War, and had led him after the war to
make a success of the practice of law. He had been for years the
intimate friend and adviser of the Ballards, and it was at Mary's request
that he was to stay to share in the coming conclave. He told Leila this. "You'll have to wait, too," he said. "And now, why
are you hopping on one foot in that absurd fashion?" "Dad, dear, I lost my shoe----"

"Her very best pink one," Barry explained; "she threw it after the bride,
and now I've got to give her another pair for her birthday." The General's old eyes brightened as he surveyed the young pair. This
was as it should be, the son of his old friend and the daughter of his
heart. He tried to look stern, however. "Haven't I always kept you supplied
with pink shoes and blue shoes and all the colors of the rainbow shoes!" he demanded. "And why should you tax Barry?" "But, Dad, he wants to." She looked eagerly at Barry for confirmation. "He wants to give them to me--for my birthday----"

"Of course I do," said Barry, lightly. "If I didn't give her slippers, I
should have to give her something else--and far be it from me to know
what--little--lovely--Leila--wants----"

And to the tune of his chant, they hippity-hopped together up the stairs
in a hunt for some stray shoe that should fit little-lovely-Leila's foot! A little later, the silken ladies having descended the stairway for the
last time, Aunt Frances took her amber satin stateliness to the Sanctum. Behind her, a silver shadow, came Aunt Isabelle, and bringing up the
rear, General Dick, and the four young people; Leila in a pair of
mismated slippers, hippity-hopping behind with Barry, and Porter assuring
Mary that he knew he "hadn't any business to butt in to a family party,"
but that he was coming anyhow. The Sanctum was the front room on the second floor. It had been the
Little Mother's room in the days when she was still with them, and now it
had been turned into a retreat where the young people drifted when they
wanted quiet, or where they met for consultation and advice. Except that
the walnut bed and bureau had been taken out nothing had been changed,
and their mother's books were still in the low bookcases; religious
books, many of them, reflecting the gentle faith of the owner. On mantel
and table and walls were photographs of her children in long clothes and
short, and then once more in long ones; there was Barry in wide collars
and knickerbockers, and Constance and Mary in ermine caps and capes;
there was Barry again in the military uniform of his preparatory school;
Constance in her graduation frock, and Mary with her hair up for the
first time. There was a picture of their father on porcelain in a blue
velvet case, and another picture of him above the mantel in an oval
frame, with one of the Little Mother's, also in an oval frame, to flank
it. In the fairness of the Little Mother one traced the fairness of
Barry and Constance. But the fairness and features of the father were
Mary's. Mary had never looked more like her father than now when, sitting under
his picture, she stated her case. What she had to say she said simply. But when she had finished there was the silence of astonishment. In a day, almost in an hour, little Mary had grown up! With Constance as
the nominal head of the household, none of them had realized that it was
Mary's mind which had worked out the problems of making ends meet, and
that it was Mary's strength and industry which had supplemented Susan's
waning efforts in the care of the big house. "I want to keep the house," Mary repeated. "I had to talk it over
to-night, Aunt Frances, because you go back to New York in the morning,
and I couldn't speak of it before to-night because I was afraid that some
hint of my plan would get to Constance and she would be troubled. She'll
learn it later, but I didn't want her to have it on her mind now. I want
to stay here. I've always lived here, and so has Barry--and while I
appreciate your plans for me to go to Nice, I don't think it would be
fair or right for me to leave Barry." Barry, a little embarrassed to be brought into it, said, "Oh, you needn't
mind about me----"

"But I do mind." Mary had risen and was speaking earnestly. "I am sure
you must see it, Aunt Frances. If I went with you, Barry would be left
to--drift--and I shouldn't like to think of that. Mother wouldn't have
liked it, or father." Her voice touched an almost shrill note of protest. Porter Bigelow, sitting unobtrusively in the background, was moved by her
earnestness. "There's something back of it," his quick mind told him;
"she knows about--Barry----"

But Barry, too, was on his feet. "Oh, look here, Mary," he was
expostulating, "I'm not going to have you stay at home and miss a winter
of good times, just because I'll have to eat a few meals in a
boarding-house. And I sha'n't have to eat many. When I get starved for
home cooking, I'll hunt up my friends. You'll take me in now and then,
for Sunday dinner, won't you, General?--Leila says you will; and it isn't
as if you were never coming back--Mary." "If we close the house now," Mary said, "it will mean that it won't be
opened again. You all know that." Her accusing glance rested on Aunt
Frances and the General. "You all think it ought to be sold, but if we
sell what will become of Susan Jenks, who nursed us and who nursed
mother, and what shall we do with all the dear old things that were
mother's and father's, and who will live in the dear old rooms?" She was
struggling for composure. "Oh, don't you see that I--I can't go?" It was Aunt Frances' crisp voice which brought her back to calmness. "But, my dear, you can't afford to keep it open. Your income with what
Barry earns isn't any more than enough to pay your running expenses;
there's nothing left for taxes or improvements. I'm perfectly willing to
finance you to the best of my ability, but I think it very foolish to
sink any more money--here----"

"I don't want you to sink it, Aunt Frances. Constance begged me to use
her little part of our income, but I wouldn't. We sha'n't need it. I've
fixed things so that we shall have money for the taxes. I--I have rented
the Tower Rooms, Aunt Frances!" They stared at her stunned. Even Leila tore her adoring eyes from
Barry's face, and fixed them on the girl who made this astounding
statement. "Mary," Aunt Frances gasped, "do you meant that you are going to
take--lodgers----?" "Only one, Aunt Frances. And he's perfectly respectable. I advertised
and he answered, and he gave me a bank reference." "_He_. Mary, is it a man?" Mary nodded. "Of course. I should hate to have a woman fussing around. And I set the rent for the suite at exactly the amount I shall need to
take me through this year, and he was satisfied." She turned and picked up a printed slip from the table. "This is the way I wrote my ad," she said, "and I had twenty-seven
answers. And this seemed the best----"

"Twenty-seven!" Aunt Frances held out her hand. "Will you let me see
what you wrote to get such remarkable results?" Mary handed it to her, and through the diamond-studded lorgnette Aunt
Frances read:

"To let: Suite of two rooms and bath; with Gentleman's Library. House on
top of a high hill which overlooks the city. Exceptional advantages for
a student or scholar." "I consider," said Mary, as Aunt Frances paused, "that the Gentleman's
Library part was an inspiration. It was the bait at which they all
nibbled." The General chuckled, "She'll do. Let her have her own way, Frances. She's got a head on her like a man's." Aunt Frances turned on him. "Mary speaks what is to me a rather new
language of independence. And she can't stay here alone. She _can't_. It isn't proper--without an older woman in the house." "But I want an older woman. Oh, Aunt Frances, please, may I have Aunt
Isabelle?" She had raised her voice so that Aunt Isabelle caught the name. "What
does she want, Frances?" asked the deaf woman; "what does she want?" "She wants you to live with her--here." Aunt Frances was thinking
rapidly; it wasn't such a bad plan. It was always a problem to take
Isabelle when she and her daughter traveled. And if they left her in New
York there was always the haunting fear that she might be ill, or that
they might be criticized for leaving her. "Mary wants you to live with her," she said, "While we are abroad, would
you like it--a winter in Washington?" Aunt Isabelle's gentle face was illumined. "Do you really _want_ me, my
dear?" she asked in her hushed voice. It had been a long time since Aunt
Isabelle had felt that she was wanted anywhere. It seemed to her that
since the illness which had sent her into a world of silence, that her
presence had been endured, not coveted. Mary came over and put her arms about her. "Will you, Aunt Isabelle?" she asked. "I shall miss Constance so, and it would almost be like
having mother to have--you----"

No one knew how madly the hungry heart was beating under the silver-gray
gown. Aunt Isabella was only forty-eight, twelve years younger than her
sister Frances, but she had faded and drooped, while Frances had stood up
like a strong flower on its stem. And the little faded drooping lady
yearned for tenderness, was starved for it, and here was Mary in her
youth and beauty, promising it. "I want you so much, and Barry wants you--and Susan Jenks----"

She was laughing tremulously, and Aunt Isabelle laughed too, holding on
to herself, so that she might not show in face or gesture the wildness of
her joy. "You won't mind, will you, Frances?" she asked. Aunt Frances rose and shook out her amber skirts "I shall of course be
much disappointed," she pitched her voice high and spoke with chill
stateliness, "I shall be very much disappointed that neither you nor Mary
will be with us for the winter. And I shall have to cross alone. But
Grace can meet me in London. She's going there to see Constance, and I
shall stay for a while and start the young people socially. I should
think you'd want to see Constance, Mary." Mary drew a quick breath. "I do want to see her--but I have to think
about Barry--and for this winter, at least, my place--is here." Then from the back of the room spoke Porter Bigelow. "What's the name of your lodger?" "Roger Poole." "There are Pooles in Gramercy Park," said Aunt Frances. "I wonder if
he's one of them." Mary shook her head. "He's from the South." "I should think," said Porter, slowly, "that you'd want to know something
of him besides his bank reference before you took him into your house." "Why?" Mary demanded. "Because he might be--a thief, or a rascal," Porter spoke hotly. Over the heads of the others their eyes met. "He is neither," said Mary. "I know a gentleman when I see one, Porter." Then the temper of the redhead flamed. "Oh, do you? Well, for my part I
wish that you were going to Nice, Mary." CHAPTER III

_In Which a Lonely Wayfarer Becomes Monarch of All He Surveys; and in
Which One Who Might Have Been Presented as the Hero of This Tale is
Forced, Through No Fault of His Own, to Take His Chances With the Rest._


When Roger Poole came a week later to the big house on the hill, it was
on a rainy day. He carried his own bag, and was let in at the lower
door by Susan Jenks. Her smiling brown face gave him at once a sense of homeyness. She led
the way through the wide hall and up the front stairs, crisp and
competent in her big white apron and black gown. As he followed her, Roger was aware that the house had lost its
effulgence. The flowers were gone, and the radiance, and the stairs
that the silken ladies had once ascended showed, at closer range,
certain signs of shabbiness. The carpet was old and mended. There was
a chilliness about the atmosphere, as if the fire, too, needed mending. But when Susan Jenks opened the door of the Tower Room, he was met by
warmth and brightness. Here was the light of leaping flames and of a
low-shaded lamp. On the table beside the lamp was a pot of pink
hyacinths, and their fragrance made the air sweet. The inner room was
no longer a rosy bower, but a man's retreat, with its substantial
furniture, its simplicity, its absence of non-essentials. In this room
Roger set down his bag, and Susan Jenks, hanging big towels and little
ones in the bathroom, drawing the curtains, and coaxing the fire,
flitted cozily back and forth for a few minutes and then withdrew. It was then that Roger surveyed his domain. He was monarch of all of
it. The big chair was his to rest in, the fire was his, the low lamp,
all the old friends in the bookcases! He went again into the inner room. The glass candlesticks were gone
and the photographs in their silver and ivory frames, but over the
mantel there was a Corot print with forest vistas, and another above
his little bedside table. On the table was a small electric lamp with
a green shade, a new magazine, and a little old bulging Bible with a
limp leather binding. As he stood looking down at the little table, he was thrilled by the
sense of safety after a storm. Outside was the world with its harsh
judgments. Outside was the rain and the beating wind. Within were
these signs of a heart-warming hospitality. Here was no bleak
cleanliness, no perfunctory arrangement, but a place prepared as for an
honored guest. Down-stairs Mary was explaining to Aunt Isabelle. "I'll have Susan
Jenks take some coffee to him. He's to get his dinners in town, and
Susan will serve his breakfast in his room. But I thought the coffee
to-night after the rain--might be comfortable." The two women were in the dining-room. The table had been set for
three, but Barry had not come. The dinner had been a simple affair--an unfashionably nourishing soup,
a broiled fish, a salad and now the coffee. Thus did Mary and Susan
Jenks make income and expenses meet. Susan's good cooking,
supplementing Mary's gastronomic discrimination, made a feast of the
simple fare. "What's his business, my dear?" "Mr. Poole's? He's in the Treasury. But I think he's studying
something. He seemed to be so eager for the books----"

"Your father's books?" "Yes. I left them all up there. I even left father's old Bible. Somehow I felt that if any one was tired or lonely that the old Bible
would open at the right page." "Your father was often lonely?" "Yes. After mother's death. And he worked too hard, and things went
wrong with his business. I used to slip up to his bedroom sometimes in
the last days, and there he'd be with the old Bible on his knee, and
mother's picture in his hand." Mary's eyes were wet. "He loved your mother and missed her." "It was more than that. He was afraid of the future for Constance and
me. He was afraid of the future for--Barry----"

Susan Jenks, carrying a mahogany tray on which was a slender silver
coffee-pot flanked by a dish of cheese and toasted biscuit, asked as
she went through the room: "Shall I save any dinner for Mr. Barry?" "He'll be here," Mary said. "Porter Bigelow is taking us to the
theater, and Barry's to make the fourth." Barry was often late, but to-night it was half-past seven when he came
rushing in. "I don't want anything to eat," he said, stopping at the door of the
dining-room where Mary and Aunt Isabelle still waited. "I had tea
down-town with General Dick and Leila's crowd. And we danced. There
was a girl from New York, and she was a little queen." Mary smiled at him. To Aunt Isabella's quick eyes it seemed to be a
smile of relief. "Oh, then you were with the General and Leila," she
said. "Yes. Where did you think I was?" "Nowhere," flushing. He started up-stairs and then came back. "I wish you'd give me credit
for being able to keep a promise, Mary. You know what I told Con----"

"It wasn't that I didn't believe----"  Mary crossed the dining-room and
stood in the door. "Yes, it was. You thought I was with the old crowd. I might as well
go with them as to have you always thinking it." "I'm not always thinking it." "Yes, you are, too," hotly. "Barry--please----"

He stood uneasily at the foot of the stairs. "You can't understand how
I feel. If you were a boy----"

She caught him up. "If I were a boy? Barry, if I were a boy I'd make
the world move. Oh, you | men, you have things all your own way, and
you let it stand still----"

She had raised her voice, and her words floating up and up reached the
ears of Roger Poole, who appeared at the top of the stairway. There was a moment's startled silence, then Mary spoke. "Barry, it is Mr. Poole. You don't know each other, do you?" The two men, one going up the stairway, the other coming down, met and
shook hands. Then Barry muttered something about having to run away
and dress, and Roger and Mary were left alone. It was the first time that they had seen each other, since the night of
the wedding. They had arranged everything by telephone, and on the
second short visit that Roger had made to his rooms, Susan Jenks had
looked after him. It seemed to Roger now that, like the house, Mary had taken on a new
and less radiant aspect. She looked pale and tired. Her dress of
white with its narrow edge of dark fur made her taller and older. Her
fair waved hair was parted at the side and dressed compactly without
ornament or ribbon. He was again, however, impressed by the almost
frank boyishness of her manner as she said:

"I want you to meet Aunt Isabella. She can't hear very well, so you'll
have to raise your voice." As they went in together, Mary was forced to readjust certain opinions
which she had formed of her lodger. The other night he had been
divorced from the dapper youths of her own set by his lack of
up-to-dateness, his melancholy, his air of mystery. But to-night he wore a loose coat which she recognized at once as good
style. His dark hair which had hung in an untidy lock was brushed back
as smoothly and as sleekly as Gordon Richardson's. His dark eyes had a
waked-up look. And there was a hint of color in his clean-shaven olive
cheeks. "I came down," he told her as he walked beside her, "to thank you for
the coffee, for the hyacinths; for the fire, for the--welcome that my
room gave me." "Oh, did you like it? We were very busy up there all the morning, Aunt
Isabelle and I and Susan Jenks." "I felt like thanking Susan Jenks for the big bath towels; they seemed
to add the final perfect touch." She laughed and repeated his remark to Aunt Isabelle. "Think of his being grateful for bath towels, Aunt Isabelle." After his presentation to Aunt Isabelle, he said, smiling:

"And there was another touch--the big gray pussy cat. She was in the
window-seat, and when I sat down to look at the lights, she tucked her
head under my hand and sang to me." "_Pittiwitz_? Oh, Aunt Isabelle, we left Pittiwitz up there. She
claims your room as hers," she explained to Roger. "We've had her for
years. And she was always there with father, and then with Constance
and me. If she's a bother, just put her on the back stairs and she
will come down." "But she isn't a bother. It is very pleasant to have something alive
to bear me company." The moment that his remark was made he was afraid that she might
interpret it as a plea for companionship. And he had no right----
What earthly right had he to expect to enter this charmed circle? Susan Jenks came in with her arms full of wraps. "Mr. Porter's
coming," she said, "and it's eight o'clock now." "We are going out----"  Mary was interested to note that her lodger had
taken Aunt Isabelle's wrap, and was putting her into it without
self-consciousness. Her own wrap was of a shimmering gray-green velvet which matched her
eyes, and there was a collar of dark fur. "It's a pretty thing," Roger said, as he held it for her. "It's like
the sea in a mist." She flashed a quick glance at him. "I like that," she said in her
straightforward way. "It is lovely. Aunt Frances brought it to me
last year from Paris. Whenever you see me wear anything that is
particularly nice, you'll know that it came from Aunt Frances--Aunt
Isabelle's sister. She's the rich member of the family. And all the
rest of us are as poor as poverty." Outside a motor horn brayed. Then Porter Bigelow came in--a perfectly
put together young man, groomed, tailored, outfitted according to the
mode. "Are you ready, Contrary Mary?" he said, then saw Roger and stopped. Porter was a gentleman, so his manner to Roger Poole showed no hint of
what he thought of lodgers in general, and this one in particular. He
shook hands and said a few pleasant and perfunctory things. Personally
he thought the man looked down and out. But no one could tell what
Mary might think. Mary's standards were those of the dreamer and the
star gazer. What she was seeking she would never find in a Mere Man. The danger lay however, in the fact that she might mistakenly hang her
affections about the neck of some earth-bound Object and call it an
Ideal. As for himself, in spite of his Buff-Orpington crest, and his
cock-o'-the-walk manner, Porter was, as far Mary was concerned,
saturated with humility. He knew that his money, his family's social
eminence were as nothing in her eyes. If underneath the weight of
these things Mary could find enough of a man in him to love that could
be his only hope. And that hope had held him for years to certain
rather sedate ambitions, and had given him moral standards which had
delighted his mother and had puzzled his father. "Whatever I am as a man, you've made me," he said to Mary two hours
later, in the intermission between the second and third acts of the
musical comedy, which, for a time, had claimed their attention. Aunt
Isabelle, in front of the box, was smiling gently, happy in the golden
light and the nearness of the music. Barry was visiting Leila and the
General who were just below, in orchestra chairs. "Whatever I am as a man, you've made me," Porter repeated, "and now, if
you'll only let me take care of you----"

Hitherto, Mary had treated his love-making lightly, but to-night she
turned upon him her troubled eyes. "Porter, you know I can't. But
there are times when I wish--I could----"

"Then why not?" She stopped him with a gesture. "It wouldn't be right. I'm simply
feeling lonely and lost because Constance is so far away. But that
isn't any reason for marrying you. You deserve a woman who cares, who
really cares, heart and soul. And I can't, dear boy." "I was a fool to think you might," savagely, "a man with a red head is
always a joke." "As if that had anything to do with it." "But it has, Mary. You know as well as I do that when I was a
youngster I was always Reddy Bigelow to our crowd--Reddy Bigelow with a
carrot-head and freckles. If I had been poor and common, life wouldn't
have been worth living. But mother's family and Dad's money fixed that
for me. And I had an allowance big enough to supply the neighborhood
with sweets. You were a little thing, but you were sorry for me, and I
didn't have to buy you. But I'd buy you now--with a house in town and
a country house, and motor cars and lovely clothes--if I thought it
would do any good, Mary." "You wouldn't want me that way, Porter." "I want you--any way." He stopped as the curtain went up, and darkness descended. But
presently out of the darkness came his whisper, "I want you--any way." They had supper after the play, Leila and the General joining them at
Porter's compelling invitation. Pending the serving of the supper, Barry detained Leila for a moment in
a palm-screened corner of the sumptuous corridor. "That girl from New York, Leila--Miss Jeliffe? What is her first name?" "Delilah." "It isn't." Leila's light laughter mocked him. "Yes, it is, Barry. She calls
herself Lilah and pronounces it as I do mine. But she signs her
cheques De-lilah." Barry recovered. "Where did you meet her?" "At school. Her father's in Congress. They are coming to us
to-morrow. Dad has asked me to invite them as house guests until they
find an apartment." "Well, she's dazzling." Leila flamed. "I don't see how you can like--her kind----"

"Little lady," he admonished, "you're jealous. I danced four dances
with her, and only one with your new pink slippers." She stuck out a small foot. "They're lovely, Barry," she said,
repentantly, "and I haven't thanked you." "Why should you? Just look pleasant, please. I've had enough scolding
for one day." "Who scolded?" "Mary." Leila glanced into the dining-room, where, in her slim fairness, Mary
was like a pale lily, among all the tulip women, and poppy women, and
orchid women, and night-shade women of the social garden. "If Mary scolded you, you deserved it," she said, loyally. "You too? Leila, if you don't stick to me, I might as well give up." His face was moody, brooding. She forgot the Delilah-dancer of the
afternoon, forgot everything except that this wonderful man-creature
was in trouble. "Barry," she said, simply, like a child, "I'll stick to you until
I--die." He looked down into the adoring eyes. "I believe you would, Leila," he
said, with a boyish catch in his voice; "you're the dearest thing on
God's great earth!" The chilled fruit was already on the table when they went in, and it
was followed by a chafing dish over which the General presided. Red-faced and rapturous, he seasoned and stirred, and as the result of
his wizardry there was placed before them presently such plates of
Creole crab as could not be equaled north of New Orleans. "To cook," said the General, settling himself back in his chair and
beaming at Mary who was beside him, "one must be a poet--to me there is
more in that dish than merely something to eat. There's color--the red
of tomatoes, the green of the peppers, the pale ivory of mushrooms, the
snow white of the crab--there's atmosphere--aroma." "The difference," Mary told him, smiling, "between your cooking and
Susan Jenks' is the difference between an epic--and a nursery rhyme. They're both good, but Susan's is unpremeditated art." "I take off my hat to Susan Jenks," said the General--"when her poetry
expresses itself in waffles and fried chicken." Mary was devoting herself to the General. Porter Bigelow who was on
the other side of her, was devoting himself to Aunt Isabelle. Aunt Isabelle was serenely content in her new office of chaperone. "I can hear so much better in a crowd." she said, "and then there's so
much to see." "And this is the time for the celebrities," said Porter, and wrote on
the corner of the supper card the name of a famous Russian countess at
the table next to them. Beyond was the Speaker of the House; the
British Ambassador with his fair company of ladies; the Spanish
Ambassador at a table of darker beauties. Mary, listening to Porter's pleasant voice, was constrained to admit
that he could be charming. As for the freckles and "carrot-head," they
had been succeeded by a fine if somewhat florid complexion, and the
curled thickness of his brilliant crown gave to his head an almost
classic beauty. As she studied him, his eyes met hers, and he surprised her by a quick
smile of understanding. "Oh, Contrary Mary," he murmured, so that the rest could not hear,
"what do you think of me?" She found herself blushing, "_Porter._"

"You were weighing me in the balance? Red head against my lovely
disposition?" Before she could answer, he had turned back to Aunt Isabelle, leaving
Mary with her cheeks hot. After supper, the young host insisted that Leila and the General should
go home in his limousine with Barry and Aunt Isabelle. "Mary and I will follow in a taxi," he said in the face of their
protests. "Young man," demanded the twinkling General, "if I accept, will you
look upon me in the light of an incumbrance or a benefactor?" "A benefactor, sir," said Porter, promptly, and that settled it. "And now," said Porter, as, having seen the rest of the party off, he
took his seat beside the slim figure in the green velvet wrap, "now I
am going to have it out with you." "But--Porter!" "I've a lot to say. And we are going to ride around the Speedway while
I say it." "But--it's raining." "All the better. It will be we two and the world away, Mary." "And there isn't anything to say." "Oh, yes, there is--_oodles_." "And Aunt Isabelle will be worried." He drew the rug up around her and settled back as placidly as if the
hands on the moon face of the clock on the post-office tower were not
pointing to midnight. "Aunt Isabelle has been told," he informed her,
"that you may be a bit late. I wrote it on the supper card, and she
read it--and smiled." He waited in silence until they had left the avenue, and were on the
driveway back of the Treasury which leads toward the river. "Porter, this is a wild thing to do." "I'm in a wild mood--a mood that fits in with the rain and wind, Mary. I'm in such a mood that if the times were different and the age more
romantic, I would pick you up and put you on my champing steed and
carry you off to my castle." He laughed, and for the moment she was thrilled by his masterfulness. "But, alas, my steed is a taxi--the age is prosaic--and you--I'm afraid
of you, Contrary Mary." They were on the Speedway now, faintly illumined, showing a row of
waving willow trees, spectrally outlined against a background of gray
water. "I'm afraid of you. I have always been. Even when you were only ten
and I was fifteen. I would shake in my shoes when you looked at me,
Mary; you were the only one then--you are the only one--now." Her hand lay on the outside of the rug. He put his own over it. "Ever since you said to-night that you didn't care--there's been
something singing--in my brain, and it has said, 'make her care, make
her care.' And I'm going to do it. I'm not going to trouble you or
worry you with it--and I'm going to take my chances with the rest. But
in the end I'm going to--win." "There aren't any others." "If there aren't there will be. You've kept yourself protected so far
by that little independent manner of yours, which scares men off. But
some day a man will come who won't be scared--and then it will be a
fight to the finish between him--and me." "Oh, Porter, I don't want to think of marrying--not for ten million
years." "And yet," he said prophetically, "if to-morrow you should meet some
man who could make you think he was the Only One, you'd marry him in
the face of all the world." "No man of that kind will ever come." "What kind?" "That will make me willing to lose the world." The rain was beating against the windows of the cab. "Porter, please. We must go home." "Not unless you'll promise to let me prove it--to let me show that I'm
a man--not a--boy." "You're the best friend I've ever had. I wish you wouldn't insist on
being something else." "But I do insist----"

"And I insist upon going home. Be good and take me." It was said with decision, and he gave the order to the driver. And so
they whirled at last up the avenue of the Presidents and along the
edges of the Park, and arrived at the foot of the terrace of the big
house. There was a light in the tower window. "That fellow is up yet," Porter said. He had an umbrella over her, and
was shielding her as best he could from the rain. "I don't like to
think of him in the house." "Why not?" "Oh, he sees you every day. Talks to you every day. And what do you
know of him? And I who've known you all my life must be content with
scrappy minutes with other people around. And anyhow--I believe I'd be
jealous of Satan himself, Mary." They were under the porch now, and she drew away from him a bit,
surveying him with disapproving eyes. "You aren't like yourself to-night, Porter." He put one hand on her shoulder and stood looking down at her. "How
can I be? What am I going to do when I leave you, Mary, and face the
fact that you don't care--that I'm no more to you--than that fellow up
there in the--tower?" He straightened himself, then with the madness of his earlier mood upon
him, he said one thing more before he left her:

"Contrary Mary, if I weren't such a coward, and you weren't
so--wonderful--I'd kiss you now--and _make_ you--care----"




CHAPTER IV

_In Which a Little Bronze Boy Grins in the Dark; and in Which Mary
Forgets That There is Any One Else in the House._


Up-stairs among his books Roger Poole heard Mary come in. With the
curtains drawn behind him to shut out the light, he looked down into
the streaming night, and saw Porter drive away alone. Then Mary's footstep on the stairs; her raised voice as she greeted
Aunt Isabelle, who had waited up for her. A door was shut, and again
the house sank into silence. Roger turned to his books, but not to read. The old depression was
upon him. In the glow of his arrival, he had been warmed by the hope
that things could be different; here in this hospitable house he had,
perchance, found a home. So he had gone down to find that he was an
outsider--an alien--old where they were young, separated from Barry and
Porter and Mary by years of dark experience. To him, at this moment, Mary Ballard stood for a symbol of the things
which he had lost. Her youth and light-heartedness, her high courage,
and now, perhaps, her romance. He knew the look that was in Porter
Bigelow's eyes when they had rested upon her. The look of a man who
claims--his own. And behind Bigelow's pleasant and perfunctory
greeting Roger had felt a subtle antagonism. He smiled bitterly. No
man need fear him. He was out of the running. He was done with love,
with romance, with women, forever. A woman had spoiled his life. Yet, if before the other, he had met Mary Ballard? The possibilities
swept over him. His life to-day would have been different. He would
be facing the world, not turning his back to it. Brooding over the dying fire, his eyes were stern. If it had been his
fault, he would have taken his punishment without flinching. But to be
overthrown by an act of chivalry--to be denied the expression of that
which surged within him. Daily he bent over a desk, doing the work
that any man might do, he who had been carried on the shoulders of his
fellow students, he whose voice had rung with a clarion call! In the lower hall, a door was again opened, and now there were
footsteps ascending. Then he heard a little laugh. "I've found
her--Aunt Isabelle, she insists upon going up." He clicked off his light and very carefully opened his door. Mary was
in the lower hall, the heavy gray cat hugged up in her arms. She wore
a lace boudoir cap, and a pale blue dressing-gown trailed after her. Seen thus, she was exquisitely feminine. Faintly through his
consciousness flitted Porter Bigelow's name for her--Contrary Mary. Why Contrary? Was there another side which he had not seen? He had
heard her flaming words to Barry, "If I were a man--I'd make the world
move----" and he had been for the moment repelled. He had no sympathy
with modern feminine rebellions. Women were women. Men were men. The
things which they had in common were love, and that which followed, the
home, the family. Beyond these things their lives were divided,
necessarily, properly. He groped his way back through the darkness to the tower window, opened
it and leaned out. The rain beat upon his face, the wind blew his hair
back, and fluttered the ends of his loose tie. Below him lay the
storm-swept city, its lights faint and flickering. He remembered a
test which he had chosen on a night like this. "O Lord, Thou art my God. I will exalt Thee, I will praise Thy name,
for Thou hast done wonderful things; Thou hast been a strength to the
poor, a strength to the needy in distress . . . a refuge from the
storm----"

How the words came back to him, out of that vivid past. But
to-night--why, there was no--God! Was he the fool who had once seen
God--in a storm? He shut the window, and finding a heavy coat and an old cap put them
on. Then he made his way, softly, down the tower steps to the side
door. Mary had pointed out to him that this entrance would make it
possible for him to go and come as he pleased. To-night it pleased him
to walk in the beating rain. At the far end of the garden there was an old fountain, in which a
bronze boy rode on a bronze dolphin. The basin of the fountain was
filled with sodden leaves. A street lamp at the foot of the terrace
illumined the bronze boy's face so that it seemed to wear a twisted
grin. It was as if he laughed at the storm and at life, defying the
elements with his sardonic mirth. Back and forth, restlessly, went the lonely man, hating to enter again
the rooms which only a few hours before had seemed a refuge. It would
have been better to have stayed in his last cheap boarding-house,
better to have kept away from this place which brought memories--better
never to have seen this group of young folk who were gay as he had once
been gay--better never to have seen--Mary Ballard! He glanced up at the room beneath his own where her light still burned. He wondered if she had stayed awake to think of the young Apollo of the
auburn head. Perhaps he was already her accepted lover. And why not? Why should he care who loved Mary Ballard? He had never believed in love at first sight. He didn't believe in it
now. He only knew that he had been thrilled by a look, warmed by a
friendliness, touched by a frankness and sincerity such as he had found
in no other woman. And because he had been thrilled and warmed and
touched by these things, he was feeling to-night the deadly mockery of
a fate which had brought her too late into his life. *      *      *      *      *      *

Coming in, shivering and excited after her ride with Porter, Mary had
found evidence of Aunt Isabelle's solicitous care for her. Her fire
was burning brightly, the covers of her bed were turned down, her blue
dressing-gown and the little blue slippers were warming in front of the
blaze. "No one ever did such things for me before," Mary said with
appreciation, as the gentle lady came in to kiss her niece good-night. "Mother wasn't that kind. We all waited on her. And Susan Jenks is
too busy; it isn't right to keep her up. And anyway I've always been
more like a boy, taking care of myself. Constance was the one we
petted, Con and mother." "I love to do it," Aunt Isabelle said, eagerly. "When I am at Frances'
there are so many servants, and I feel pushed out. There's nothing
that I can do for any one. Grace and Frances each have a maid. So I
live my own life, and sometimes it has been--lonely." "You darling." Mary laid her cool young lips against the soft cheek. "I'm dead lonely, too. That's why I wanted you." Aunt Isabelle stood for a moment looking into the fire. "It has been
years since anybody wanted me," she said, finally. There was no bitterness in her tone; she simply stated a fact. Yet in
her youth she had been the beauty of the family, and the toast of a
county. "Aunt Isabelle," Mary said, suddenly, "is marriage the only way out for
a woman?" "The only way?" "To freedom. It seems to me that a single woman always seems to belong
to her family. Why shouldn't you do as you please? Why shouldn't I? And yet you've never lived your own life. And I sha'n't be able to
live mine except by fighting every inch of the way." A flush stained Aunt Isabelle's cheeks. "I have always been poor,
Mary----"

"But that isn't it," fiercely. "There are poor girls who aren't
tied--I mean by conventions and family traditions. Why, Aunt Isabelle,
I rented the Tower Rooms not only in defiance of the living--but of the
dead. I can see mother's face if we had thought of such a thing while
she lived. Yet we needed the money then. We needed it to help Dad--to
save him----"  The last words were spoken under her breath, and Aunt
Isabelle did not catch them. "And now everybody wants me to get married. Oh, Aunt Isabelle, sit
down and let's talk it out. I'm not sleepy, are you?" She drew the
little lady beside her on the high-backed couch which faced the fire. "Everybody wants me to get married, Aunt Isabelle. And to-night I had
it out with--Porter." "You don't love him?" "Not--that way. But sometimes--he makes me feel as if I couldn't
escape him--as if he would persist and persist, until he won. But I
don't want love to come to me that way. It seems to me that if one
loves, one knows. One doesn't have to be shown." "My dear, sometimes it is a tragedy when a woman knows." "But why?" "Because men like to conquer. When they see love in a woman's eyes,
their own love--dies." "I should hate a man like that," said Mary, frankly. "If a man only
loves you because of the conquest, what's going to happen when you are
married and the chase is over? No, Aunt Isabelle, when I fall in love,
it will be with a man who will know that I am the One Woman. He must
love me because I am Me--Myself. Not because some one else admires me,
or because I can keep him guessing. He will know me as I know him--as
his Predestined Mate!" Thus spoke Sweet and Twenty, glowing. And Sweet and Forty, meeting
that flame with her banked fires, faltered. "But, my dear, how can you
know?" "How did you know?" The abrupt question drove every drop of blood from Aunt Isabelle's
face. "Who told you?" "Mother. One night when I asked her why you had never married. You
don't mind, do you?" Aunt Isabelle shook her head. "No. And, Mary, dear, I've faced all
the loneliness, all the dependence, rather than be untrue to that which
he gave me and I gave him. There was one night, in this old garden. I
was visiting your mother, and he was in Congress at the time, and the
garden was full of roses--and it was--moonlight. And we sat by the
fountain, and there was the soft splash of the water, and he said:
'Isabelle, the little bronze boy is throwing kisses at you--do you see
him--smiling?' And I said, 'I want no kisses but yours'--and that was
the last time. The next day he was killed--thrown from his horse while
he was riding out here to see--me. "It was after that I was so ill.  And something teemed to snap in my
head, and one day when I sat beside the fountain I found that I
couldn't hear the splash of the water, and things began to go; the
voices I loved seemed far away, and I could tell that the wind was
blowing only by the movement of the leaves, and the birds rounded out
their little throats--but I heard--no music----"

Her voice trailed away into silence. "But before the stillness, there were others who--wanted me--for I
hadn't lost my prettiness, and Frances did her best for me. And she
didn't like it when I said I couldn't marry, Mary. But now I am glad. For in the silence, my love and I live, in a world of our own." "Aunt Isabelle--darling. How lovely and sweet, and sad----"  Mary was
kneeling beside her aunt, her arm thrown around her, and Aunt Isabelle,
reading her lips, did not need to hear the words. "If I had been strong, like you, Mary, I could have held my own against
Frances and have made something of myself. But I'm not strong, and
twenty-five years ago women did not ask for freedom. They asked
for--love." "But I want to find freedom in my love. Not be bound as Porter wants
to bind me. He'd put me on a pedestal and worship me, and I'd rather
stand shoulder to shoulder with my husband and be his comrade. I don't
want him to look up too far, or to look down as Gordon looks down on
Constance." "Looks down? Why, he adores her, Mary." "Oh, he loves her. And he'll do everything for her, but he will do it
as if she were a child. He won't ask her opinion in any vital matter. He won't share his big interests with her, and so he'll never discover
the big fine womanliness. And she'll shrivel to his measure of her." Aunt Isabelle shook her head, smiling. "Don't analyze too much, Mary. Men and women are human--and you may lose yourself in a search for the
Ideal." "Do you know what Porter calls me, Aunt Isabelle? Contrary Mary. He
says I never do things the way the people expect. Yet I do them the
way that I must. It is as if some force were inside of me--driving
me--on." She stood up as she said it, stretching out her arms in an eager
gesture. "Aunt Isabelle, if I were a man, there'd be something in the
world for me to do. Yet here I am, making ends meet, holding up my
part of the housekeeping with Susan Jenks, and taking from the hands of
my rich friends such pleasures as I dare accept without return." Aunt Isabelle pulled her down beside her. "Rebellious Mary," she said,
"who is going to tame you?" They laughed a little, clinging to each other, and than Mary said, "You
must go to bed, Aunt Isabelle. I'm keeping you up shamefully." They kissed again and separated, and Mary made ready for bed. She took
off her cap, and all her lovely hair fell about her. That was another
of her contrary ways. She and Constance had been taught to braid it
neatly, but from little girlhood Mary had protested, and on going to
bed with two prim pigtails had been known to wake up in the middle of
the night and take them down, only to be discovered in the morning with
all her fair curls in a tangle. Scolding had not availed. Once, as
dire punishment, the curls had been cut off. But Mary had rejoiced. "It makes me look like a boy," she had told her mother, calmly, "and I
like it." Another of her little girl fancies had been to say her prayers aloud. She said them that way to-night, kneeling by her bed with her fair head
on her folded hands. Then she turned out the light, and drew her curtains back. As she
looked out at the driving rain, the flare of the street lamp showed a
motionless figure on the terrace. For a moment she peered,
palpitating, then flew into Aunt Isabelle's room. "There's some one in the garden." "Perhaps it's Barry." "Didn't he come with you?" "No. He went on with Leila and the General." "But it is two o'clock, Aunt Isabelle." "I didn't know; I thought perhaps he had come." Going back into her room, Mary threw on her blue dressing-gown and
slippers and opened her door. The light was still burning in the hall. Barry always turned it out when he came. She stood undecided, then
started down the back stairs, but halted as the door opened and a dark
figure appeared. "Barry----"

Roger Poole looked up at her. "It isn't your brother," he said. "I--I
must beg your pardon for disturbing you. I could not sleep, and I went
out----"  He stopped and stammered. Poised there above him with all
the wonder of her unbound hair about her, she was like some celestial
vision. She smiled at him. "It doesn't matter," she said; "please don't
apologize. It was foolish of me to be--frightened. But I had
forgotten that there was any one else in the house." She was unconscious of the effect of her words. But his soul shrank
within him. To her he was the lodger who paid the rent. To him she
was, well, just now she was, to him, the Blessed Damosel! Faintly in the distance they heard the closing of a door. "It's
Barry," Mary said, and suddenly a wave of self-consciousness swept over
her. What would Barry think to find her at this hour talking to Roger
Poole? And what would he think of Roger Poole, who walked in the
garden on a rainy night? Roger saw her confusion. "I'll turn out this light," he said, "and
wait----"

And she waited, too, in the darkness until Barry was safe in his own
room, then she spoke softly. "Thank you so much," she said, and was
gone. CHAPTER V

_In Which Roger Remembers a Face and Delilah Remembers a Voice--and in
Which a Poem and a Pussy Cat Play an Important Part._


Since the night of his arrival, Roger had not intruded upon the family
circle. He had read hostility in Barry's eyes as the boy had looked up
at him; and Mary, in spite of her friendliness, had forgotten that he was
in the house! Well, they had set the pace, and he would keep to it. Here in the tower he could live alone--yet not be lonely, for the books
were there--and they brought forgetfulness. He took long walks through the city, now awakening to social and
political activities. Back to town came the folk who had fled from the
summer heat; back came the members of House and of Senate, streaming in
from North, South, East and West for the coming Congress. Back came the
office-seekers and the pathetic patient group whose claims were waiting
for the passage of some impossible bill. There came, too, the sightseers and trippers, sweeping from one end of
the town to the other, climbing the dome of the Capitol, walking down the
steps of the Monument, venturing into the White House, piloted through
the Bureau where the money is made, riding on "rubber-neck wagons,"
sailing about in taxis, stampeding Mt. Vernon, bombarding Fort Myer, and
doing it all gloriously under golden November skies. And because of the sightseers and statesmen, and the folk who had been
away for the summer, the shops began to take on beauty. Up F Street and
around Fourteenth into H swept the eager procession, and all the windows
were abloom for them. Roger walked, too, in the country. In other lands, or at least so their
poets have it, November is the month of chill and dreariness. But to the
city on the Potomac it comes with soft pink morning mists and toward
sunset, with amethystine vistas. And if, beyond the city, the fields are
frosted, it is frost of a feathery whiteness which melts in the glory of
a warmer noon. And if the trees are bare, there is yet pale yellow under
foot and pale rose, where the leaves wait for the winter winds which
shall whirl them later in a mad dance like brown butterflies. And
there's the green of the pines, and the flaming red of five-fingered
creepers. It was on a sunny November day, therefore, as he followed Rock Creek
through the Park that Roger came to the old Mill where a little tea room
supplied afternoon refreshment. As it was far away from car lines, its patronage came largely from those
who arrived in motors or on horseback, and a few courageous pedestrians. Here Roger sat down to rest, ordering a rather substantial repast, for
the long walk had made him hungry. It was while he waited that a big car arrived with five passengers. He
recognized Porter Bigelow at once, and there were besides two older men
and two young women. The taller of the two young women had eyes that roved. 