



Produced by Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






WORKS OF MAURUS JOKAI

HUNGARIAN EDITION

THE POOR PLUTOCRATS

_Translated from the Hungarian_

_By_

R. NISBET BAIN

NEW YORK
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY

COPYRIGHT, 1899, BY DOUBLEDAY & McCLURE CO. PREFACE


"Szegeny Gazdagok" is, perhaps, the most widely known of all Maurus
Jokai's masterpieces. It was first published at Budapest, in 1860, in
four volumes, and has been repeatedly translated into German, while good
Swedish, Danish, Dutch and Polish versions sufficiently testify to its
popularity on the Continent. Essentially a tale of incident and
adventure, it is one of the best novels of that inexhaustible type with
which I am acquainted. It possesses in an eminent degree the quality of
vividness which R. L. Stevenson prized so highly, and the ingenuity of
its plot, the dramatic force of its episodes, and the startling
unexpectedness of its _denouement_ are all in the Hungarian master's
most characteristic style. I know of no more stirring incident in
contemporary fiction than the terrible wrestling match between strong
Juon the goatherd and the supple bandit Fatia Negra in the presence of
two trembling, defenceless women, who can do nothing but look on, though
their fate depends upon the issue of the struggle,--and we must go back
to the pages of that unsurpassed master of the weird and thrilling
Sheridan Le Fanu to find anything approaching the terror of poor
Henrietta's awful midnight vigil in the deserted _csarda_ upon the
lonely heath when, at the very advent of her mysterious peril, she
discovers, to her horror, that her sole companion and guardian, the
brave old squire, cannot be aroused from his drugged slumbers. There is naturally not so much scope for the display of Jokai's peculiar
and delightful humour, in a novel of incident like the present tale as
there is in that fine novel of manners: "A Hungarian Nabob." Yet even in
"Szegeny Gazdagok," many of the minor characters (e.g., the parasite
Margari, the old miser Demetrius, the Hungarian Miggs, Clementina, the
frivolous Countess Kengyelesy), are not without a mild Dickensian
flavour, while in that rugged but good-natured and chivalrous Nimrod,
Mr. Gerzson, the Hungarian novelist has drawn to the life one of the
finest types we possess of the better sort of sporting Magyar squires. Finally, this fascinating story possesses in an eminent degree the charm
of freshness and novelty, a charm becoming rarer every year in these
globe-trotting days, when the ubiquitous tourist boasts that he has
been everywhere and seen everything. Yet it may well be doubted whether
even he has penetrated to the heart of the wild, romantic, sylvan
regions of the Wallachian and Transylvanian Alps, which is the theatre
of the exploits of that prince of robber chieftains, the mighty and
mysterious Fatia Negra, and the home of those picturesque Roumanian
peasants whom Jokai loves to depict and depicts so well. R. NISBET BAIN. Contents


CHAPTER

    I.  BOREDOM
   II. A NEW MODE OF DUELLING
  III. AN AMIABLE MAN
   IV. CHILDISH NONSENSE
    V.  SHE IS NOT FOR YOU
   VI. BRINGING HOME THE BRIDE
  VII. THE CAVERN OF LUCSIA
 VIII. STRONG JUON
   IX. THE GEINA MAID-MARKET
    X. THE BLACK JEWELRY
   XI. TWO TALES, OF WHICH ONLY ONE IS TRUE
  XII. THE SOIREES AT ARAD
 XIII. TIT FOR TAT
  XIV. THE MIKALAI CSARDA
   XV. WHO IT WAS THAT RECOGNIZED FATIA NEGRA
  XVI. LEANDER BABEROSSY
 XVII. MR. MARGARI
XVIII. THE UNDISCOVERABLE LADY
  XIX. THE SHAKING HAND
   XX. THE FIGHT FOR THE GOLD
  XXI. THE HUNTED BEAST
 XXII. THE SIGHT OF TERROR
XXIII. THE ACCOMMODATION
 XXIV. CONCLUSION




POOR PLUTOCRATS

CHAPTER I

BOREDOM


"Was it you who yawned so, Clementina?" Nobody answered. The questioner was an old gentleman in his eightieth year or so, dressed
in a splendid flowered silk Kaftan, with a woollen night-cap on his
head, warm cotton stockings on his feet, and diamond, turquoise, and
ruby rings on his fingers. He was reclining on an atlas ottoman, his
face was as wooden as a mummy's, a mere patch-work of wrinkles, he had a
dry, thin, pointed nose, shaggy, autumnal-yellow eyebrows, and his large
prominent black eyes protected by irritably sensitive eyelids, lent
little charm to his peculiar cast of countenance. "Well! Will nobody answer? Who yawned so loudly behind my back just
now?" he asked again, with an angry snort. "Will nobody answer?" Nobody answered, and yet there was a sufficient number of people in the
room to have found an answer between them. In front of the hearth was
sitting a young woman about thirty or thirty-five, with just such a
strongly-pronounced pointed nose, with just such high raised eyebrows as
the old gentleman's, only her face was still red (though the favour of
Nature had not much to do with that perhaps) and her eyebrows were still
black; but her thin lips were just as hermetically sealed as the old
man's, when she was not speaking. This young woman was playing at
Patience. In one of the windows sat a young girl of sixteen, a delicate creature
of rapid growth, whose every limb and feature seemed preternaturally
thin and fragile. She was occupied with some sort of sewing. At another
little sewing-table, immediately opposite to her, was a red-cheeked
damsel with a frightful mop of light hair and a figure which had all the
possibilities of stoutness before it. She was a sort of governess, and
was supposed to be English, though they had only her word for it. She
was reading a book. On the silk ottoman behind lay the already-mentioned Clementina, who
ought to have confessed to the sin of yawning. She was a spinster
already far advanced in the afternoon of life, and had cinder-coloured
ringlets around her temples and a little bit of beard on her chin. She
was no blood relation of the family but, as an ancient companion to a
former mistress of the house, had long eaten the bread of charity under
that roof. She was now engaged upon some eye-tormenting, fine fancy
work which could not have afforded the poor creature very much
amusement. The old gentleman on the sofa used to divert himself the whole day by
assembling as many human beings around him as possible and driving them
to desperation by his unendurable nagging and chiding; they, on the
other hand, had by this time discovered that the best defence against
this domestic visitation was never to answer so much as a word. "Of course! Of course!" continued the old gentleman with stinging
sarcasm. "I know what a bore it is to be near me and about me. I see
through it all. Yes, I _know_ that I am an unendurable old fellow on
whom not a single word should be wasted. I know well enough that you are
not sitting here beside me because you like to be here. Who compels you
to? I certainly shall not prevent anybody's petticoat from going away by
laying hold of it. The gate is not closed. Nothing easier than to be
off. Yet nobody likes the idea, eh? Ah-ha! It is possible that when the
eye of old Lapussa no longer sees, the heart of old Lapussa may no
longer remember. Besides, nobody can tell exactly when the old man may
die. Indeed they are waiting for his death every hour--he is beyond
eighty already. A most awful bore certainly. Ah ha! The old fool is
unable to get up any more, he is not even able to strike anybody. If he
cries out, nobody is afraid of him; but, at any rate, he has strength
enough to pull the bell-rope, send for his steward, tell him to go to
the office of the _alispan_[1] there ferret out and bring back his last
will and testament--and then he can dictate another will to his lawyer
quite cosily at his ease." [Footnote 1: Vice-lieutenant of the county.] And in order to emphasize his words more terribly, he there and then
gave a tug at the bell-rope. Yet for all that nobody turned towards him; the lady kept dealing out
the cards, the young girl continued working beads into her sampler, the
governess went on reading, and the old spinster was still intent upon
some delicate operation with her needle--just as if nobody had spoken a
word. In answer to the bell an ancient serving-man appeared in the doorway,
and the old gentleman, after waiting a little to see from the
countenances of those present (he could observe them in the mirror
opposite) whether his allusion to his will had produced any effect, and
finding no notice taken of it whatever, said in a sharp, petulant voice:
"Louis!" The servant approached the sofa and then stood still again. "My dinner!" This was the end of the awe-inspiring threat. The old gentleman observed, or rather, suspected, some slight amusement
in the company present. "Miss Kleary!" he observed irritably, "don't you observe that Henrietta
is looking out of the window again? I am bound, Miss, to direct your
attention to the fact that I consider such a thing decidedly unbecoming
in a young lady." "Dear Grandpapa.....!" began the accused. "Silence! I did not speak to Henrietta, I spoke to Miss Kleary. Miss
Henrietta is still a child who understands nothing. I neither address
her nor attempt to explain anything to her. But I keep Miss Kleary in
this house, I pay Miss Kleary a princely salary, in order that I may
have some one at hand to whom I can explain my educational ideas. Now my
educational ideas are good; nay, Miss, I think I may even say that they
are very good. I will therefore beg you to do me the favour to stick to
them. I know what ought and what ought not to be allowed young girls; I
know that....."

The young girl's face blushed beneath the reproachful look of the old
tyrant, whilst the governess rose defiantly from her place, and in order
that she might wreak her anger upon some one, industriously proceeded to
pick holes in Henrietta's sewing and effectually spoil her whole day's
work. Thus, it will be perceived, only one person had the right to speak; the
only right the other people had was not to listen to him. But there was someone else in the background who had better rights than
anybody, and this someone now began to hammer with his fists on the
door, that very door at which the oldest and most trusty domestics
hardly dared to tap--began, I say, to hammer with his fists and kick
with his heels till everyone was downright scared. This was the little grandson, the old gentleman's spoiled darling little
Maksi. "Why don't you let in little Maksi?" cried the old gentleman, when he
heard him. "Open the door for little Maksi; don't you know that he is
not tall enough to reach the door-handle? Why don't you let him come to
me when he wants to come?" At that moment the footman opened the door and the little family prince
bounded in. It was a pale little mouldy sort of flower, with red eyes
and a cornerless mouth like a carp, but with the authentic family nose
and the appurtenances thereof, which took up so much room as to
seriously imperil the prospects of the rest of the head growing in
proportion. The little favourite was wearing a complete Uhlan costume,
even the four-cornered chako was stuck on the side of his head; he was
flourishing a zinc sword and grumbling bitterly. "What's the matter with little Maksi? Has anybody been annoying him?" Grandpapa succeeded at last in making out that on running out Maksi had
tripped over his sword, that his tutor had wanted to take it away, that
Maksi had thereupon drawn his weapon and made the aggressor's hand smart
with it, and that finally he had fled for refuge to grandpapa's room as
the only place where he was free from the persecutions of his
instructors. Grandpapa, in a terrible to do, began to question him: "Come here! Where
did you hit yourself? On the head, eh! Let us see! Why, it is swollen
up--quite red in fact! Put some opodeldoc on it! Clementina, do you
hear?--some opodeldoc for Maksi!" So the family medicament had to be
fetched at once; but Maksi, snatching it from the worthy spinster's
hand, threw it violently to the ground, so that the whole carpet was
bespattered with it. Nobody was allowed to scold him for this, however, as grandpapa was
instantly ready with an excuse: "Maksi must not be vexed," said he. "Does not Maksi wear a sword by his side already? Maksi will be a great
soldier one of these days!" "Yes," replied the lad defiantly, "I'll be a general!" "Yes, Maksi shall be a general; nothing less than a general, of course. But come, my boy, take your finger out of your mouth." The English governess here thought she saw an opportunity of insinuating
a professional remark. "He who would be a general, must, first of all, learn a great deal." "I don't want to learn. I mean to know everything without learning it. I
say, grandpapa, if you've lots of money, you will know everything at
once without learning it, won't you?" The old man looked around him triumphantly. "Now that I call genius, wit!" cried he. And with that he tenderly pressed the little urchin's head to his breast
and murmured: "Ah! he is my very grandson, my own flesh and blood." He was well aware how aggravated all the others would be at these words. Meanwhile the footman was laying a table. This table was of palisander
wood and supported by the semblance of a swan. It could be placed close
beside the ottoman and was filled with twelve different kinds of dishes. All these meats were cold, for the doctor forbade his patient hot food. The old gentleman tasted each one of the dishes with the aid of his
finger-tips, and not one of them pleased him. This was too salt, that
was too sweet, a third was burnt, a fourth was tainted. He threatened to
discharge the cook, and bitterly complained that as he did not die
quickly enough for them, they were conspiring to starve him. They might
have replied that he had ordered all these things himself yesterday; but
nobody took the trouble to contradict him any longer, so gradually the
storm died away of its own accord and the old man, turning towards
Maksi, tenderly invited him to partake of the disparaged dishes. "Come and eat with me, Maksi, my darling." "That I will," cried the little horror, grabbing at everything
simultaneously with both hands. "Oh, fie, fie!" said grandpapa gently. "Take Maksi out for a ride and
let the lacquey go with him instead of his tutor!" The old gentleman
then pushed the little round table aside and signalled to the footman
that he was to put all the dishes carefully away, as he should want to
see them again on the morrow. The footman conscientiously obeyed this
command--which was given regularly every day--and locked up all the
dishes well aware that he would get a sound jacketting if he failed to
produce a single one of them when required to do so. The old man knew well enough that there was not a servant in the house
who, for any reward on earth, would think of touching any food that had
ever lain on his table; indeed, they held it in such horror that they
used regularly to distribute it among the poor. In order therefore that
the very beggars might have nothing to thank him for, he had the food
kept till it was almost rotten before he let them have it. As for his
own family, he had not dined at the same table with them for ten years. It was certainly not a sociable family. For example, the old gentleman's
widowed daughter, red-cheeked Madame Langai, did not exchange a single
word with her father for weeks at a time. At first he had expected her
to remain in the same room with him till nine o'clock every evening,
dealing out cards for him or boring herself to death in some other way
for his amusement. She endured it for a whole month without a word; but
at last, one evening, at seven o'clock, she appeared before him in
evening dress and said that she was going to the theatre. Old Lapussa glared at her with all his eyes. "To the theatre?" cried he. "Yes, I have ordered a box." "Really? Well, I hope you will enjoy yourself!" The lady quitted him with a shrug. She knew that from that moment she
would inherit a million less than her elder brother; but nevertheless
she went to the theatre regularly every day, and never stirred from her
box so long as there was any one on the stage who had a word to say. The Lapussa family was of too recent an origin for the great world to
take much notice of it, and the fame of its fabulous wealth went hand in
hand with the rumour of a sordid avarice which was not a recommendable
quality in the eyes of the true gentry. The Lapussas were, in fact, not
of gentle blood at all, but simply rich. Madame Langai's elder brother,
John, was notoriously the greatest bore in the town, whom nobody, from
the members of his own family down to his coffee-house acquaintances,
could endure for a moment. Only his father made much of him. For all his
great wealth, he was very stingy and greedy; he even lent money at usury
to his best friends. Our amusing little friend Maksi was this man's son. The slender, fanciful damsel, Henrietta, who appeared in that family
like an errant angel specially sent there to be tormented for the sins
of her whole race, was the orphan daughter of another son of old
Lapussa, who had lost father and mother at the same time in the most
tragical manner; they had both been drowned by the capsizing of a small
boat on the Danube. Henrietta herself had only been saved with the
utmost difficulty. She was only twelve years old at the time, and the
catastrophe had had such an effect upon her nerves that ever afterwards
she collapsed at the least sign of anger, and often fell a weeping for
no appreciable cause. Since the death of her parents, who had loved her
dearly, Henrietta had been obliged to live at her grandfather's house,
where nobody loved anybody. But no, I am mistaken. She had a brother, Koloman by name, who was a
somewhat simple but thoroughly good-natured youth. He used to appear
very rarely among his relations because they always fell foul of him. The poor fellow's sole fault was that he was in the habit of regularly
selling his new clothes. Still, I am doubtful, after all, whether this
can fairly be imputed to him as a fault at all, for although it was
always being dinned into his ears that his family was immensely rich, he
was never blessed with a penny to spend in amusing himself with his
comrades, and therefore had to do the best he could to raise the wind. Another failing of Koloman's was that he would not learn Latin, and in
consequence thereof he had to suffer many things. Old Lapussa and his
son John indeed had no notion whatever of the Latin tongue. The former
in his youthful days had never gone to school at all, because he was
occupied in building up a business. The latter had not gone to school in
_his_ youth because by that time his people were already rich and he
considered it beneath him. The consequence was that neither father nor
son had a proper idea on the simplest subjects, except what they picked
up on their travels. Still that was no reason why Koloman should not
learn, but as the tutor had his hands full already with little Maksi,
Koloman was obliged to go to the national school in order to become a
wiser man than his forbears. Poor Henrietta often slaved away for hours at a time with her younger
brother sitting at the table by her side, helping him to struggle
through the genders, declensions, conjugations, or whatever else the
infernal things were called; and the end of it all was that, at last,
she learnt to know Latin better than Koloman, and secretly translated
all his exercises from Cornelius Nepos and the Bucolics of Virgil for
him. But we must not linger any longer over these Latin lessons, for a much
more important event claims our attention--Mr. John is coming home, and
we must hasten forward to admire him. Mr. John Lapussa was a perfect prototype of the whole family. His
extraordinarily lanky pinched figure seemed even lankier than it was by
nature because he always carried his head so high: he peered down from
that elevation upon humanity at large as if there was something the
matter with his eyes which prevented him from properly raising the lids. In him the dimensions of the family nose were made still more remarkable
by an inordinately tiny chin and thin compressed lips. His moustache was
shaved down to the very corners of his mouth, only a little mouse-tail
sort of arrangement being left on each side, which was twisted upwards
and dyed black with infinite skill. His costume was elegant and
ultra-refined, and only differed from the fashion in being extra stiff
and tight-fitting. Moreover, all the buttons of his shirt and his
waistcoat were precious stones, and he had a plenitude of rings on his
fingers which he delighted to show off by ostentatiously adjusting his
cravat in the course of conversation, or softly stroking the surface of
his superfine coat. Mr. John entered the room without looking at a soul, and paced up and
down it with his hands behind his back. Then he suddenly caught sight of
his father, kissed his hand and resumed his dignified saunter. It was
evident that he was bursting for some one to speak and ask him what was
the matter. Clementina was the first to speak. "Your honour!" said she. "What is it?" he asked, lifting his head still higher. "I have finished the embroidery for your shirt front which your honour
was pleased to command." His honour with a haughty curl of the lip condescended to glance down
upon the proffered embroidery. I am afraid Clementina was a poor
physiognomist, she might have noticed from his face how utterly
indifferent he was to her and her embroidery, which he regarded with
puckered eyes and screwed-up mouth. "No good. Those flowers are too big; it is the sort of thing the
Wallachian peasants stitch on to their shirts." And with that he took up
Clementina's scissors from the work-table and deliberately snipped into
little bits the whole of the difficult piece of work which the worthy
woman had been slaving away at for a week and more, finally pitching it
away contemptuously while she sat there and stared at him dumfoundered. "John, John!" said the old man in mild remonstrance. "To show me such rubbish when I am mad! When I am wroth! When I am
beside myself with fury!" "Why are you angry, and with whom?" John went on as if he did not mean to tell the cause of his anger. He
flung himself into an armchair, crossed his legs, plunged his hands into
the depths of his pockets and then, starting up, began to pace the room
again. "I am furious." "Then what's the matter?" enquired the old man anxiously. John again flung himself into an armchair and cocked one leg over the
arm of the chair: "It is all that good-for-nothing Hatszegi!" he cried. "The fellow is a villain, a scoundrel, a robber!" "What has he done?" "What has he done?" cried John, leaping to his feet again, "I'll tell
you. Yesterday he sent word to me by his broker that he would like to
buy those houses of ours in the Szechenyi Square which I have offered
for sale. Wishing to save broker's expenses I went to see him myself at
twelve o'clock. Surely that is the most convenient time for paying
business calls. At least I have always supposed so. I entered his
ante-chamber and there stood a flunkey. He told me I must wait! Told
_me_ forsooth--_me_, John Lapussa--that I must cool my heels in an
ante-chamber, at an inn, to please that wretched Hatszegi. Very well. I
waited. I sent him a message that I _would_ wait. Meanwhile I found I
could not sit down anywhere, for the rascal had piled dirty boots and
brushes on all the chairs. Presently the rascal of a servant came back
and told me that his master could not see me then, would I come back
again in the afternoon--I, John Lapussa, forsooth! Absolutely would not
speak to me, but told me to come again another time! Thou dog, thou
wretched rascal! But wait, I say, that's all!" At this the old man also grew excited. "Why did you not box his ears?" cried he. "I'll do it, and do it well. I'll not stand it. What! send a Lapussa
packing! It cannot be overlooked. I shall immediately go and find two
seconds and challenge him to a duel." "Nay, John, don't do that! Don't even box his ears in the street, but
give a street-porter ten shillings to cudgel him well as he comes out of
the theatre; that will be best!" "No, I will kill him. I will shed his blood. He who insults me in a
gentlemanly manner must be shown that I can revenge myself like a
gentleman. I will wipe off the score with pistols--with pistols I say." The old man and the female members of the family were duly impressed by
this bragging, or rather all except Madame Langai, who was getting ready
for the theatre and took no notice of the general conversation. Mr. John was much put out by her indifference. "Matilda," he asked,
"what do _you_ say? Ought I not to fight, after such an insult?" Madame Langai answered the unavoidable question with a cold smile: "I
would only say that if anyone angers you another time you had better
expend your wrath upon him before dinner, for if you nurse your wrath
till after dinner you spoil the whole thing." Mr. John listened to her in silence and then resumed his promenade with
his hands behind his back snorting furiously. Suddenly he snatched up
his cap and rushed out. "John, John, what are you going to do?" the old man called after him in
a supplicating voice. "You'll very soon see, I'll warrant you," and he banged the door behind
him. The old man turned reproachfully towards Madame Langai. "Why did you
irritate him when he was mad enough already?" he cried. "What will you
gain by his death? He has a son who will inherit everything, you know. Yes, everything will belong to little Maksi." Madame Langai calmly went on tying her bonnet strings. "I know what fiery blood he has," mumbled the old man. "When he is angry
he will listen to nobody, and is capable of facing a whole army. We must
prevent this duel somehow. And you are actually preparing to go to the
theatre when things have come to such a pass? You are actually going to
see a comedy!" "The actor Ladislaus plays just the same parts on the stage as John does
off the stage," replied Madame Langai bitterly. "And I am as little
afraid of John's rhodomontade as I am of the result of stage duels. Don't be afraid! He'll come to no harm." A lacquey now entered to announce that the coach was ready, and Madame
Langai, adjusting her mantilla, went to the playhouse where the actors
were, at least, amusing. CHAPTER II

A NEW MODE OF DUELLING


Old Lapussa always liked to have under his eye, night and day, some one
or other whom he could plague and worry. Till eight o'clock every
evening he was fully occupied in tormenting the whole family. Then
Madame Langai went to the theatre and Henrietta and the governess had to
sit down at the piano in the large drawing-room till it was time to put
the child to bed. But when Clementina and the domestics had had supper
and there was no longer anybody else with him, the turn of the night
nurse began. The duties of a night nurse are never very enviable or diverting at the
best of times, yet penal servitude for life was a fate almost preferable
to being the nocturnal guardian of old Demetrius Lapussa. The unhappy
wretch who was burdened with this heavy charge had to sit at Mr.
Lapussa's bed from nine o'clock at night till early the following
morning and read aloud to him all sorts of things the whole time. Old
Demetrius was a very bad sleeper. The whole night long he scarcely slept
more than an hour at a time. His eyes would only close when the droaning
voice of some one reading aloud made his head dizzy, and then he would
doze off for a short time. But at the slightest pause he would
instantly awake and angrily ask the reader why he left off, and urge him
on again. The reader in question was a student more than fifty years old, who,
time out of mind, had been making a living by fair-copying all sorts of
difficult manuscripts. He was an honest, simple creature who, in his
time, had tried hard to push his way into every conceivable business and
profession without ever succeeding till, at last, when he was well over
fifty, he was fortunate enough to fall in with an editor who happened to
know that Demetrius Lapussa wanted a reader, and recommended the poor
devil for the post. He knew Hungarian, Latin, and Slovack well enough to
mix them all up together; German he could read, though he did not
understand it, but this was not necessary, for he was not expected to
read for his own edification. This worthy man, then, grew prematurely old in reading, year out year
in, aloud to Mr. Demetrius, one after another, all the German
translations of French novels procurable at Robert Lempel's circulating
library without understanding a single word of them. Mr. Demetrius had,
naturally, no library of his own, for reading to him, in his condition,
was pretty much the same as medicine, and who would ever think of
keeping a dispensary on his own premises? I may add that the reader
received free board and lodging and ten florins a month pocket-money for
his services. On that particular night when Mr. John flung out of the house in such a
violent rage, Mr. Demetrius was particularly sleepless. I know not
whether Monte Cristo, the first volume of which honest Margari happened
to be reading just then, was the cause of this, or whether it was due to
the old man's nervousness about the terrible things John was likely to
do, but the fact remains that poor Margari on this occasion got no
respite from his labours. At other times Margari did manage to get a
little relief. Whenever he observed that Mr. Demetrius was beginning to
draw longer breaths than usual he would let his head sink down on his
book and fall asleep immediately till the awakened tyrant roused him out
of his slumbers and made him go on again. But now he was not suffered to
have a moment's peace. Monte Cristo had already been sitting in his dungeon for some time when
Madame Langai's carriage returned from the theatre. Then Mr. Demetrius
rang up the porters to inquire whether Mr. John had also returned home. No, was the answer. At eleven o'clock Mr. John had still not returned. Meanwhile Monte Cristo's neighbour had traced the figure on the floor of
the dungeon. Mr. Demetrius here demanded a fuller explanation of the
circumstances. "How was that, Margari?" he enquired. "I humbly beg your honour's pardon, but I don't understand." "Very well, proceed!" Every time a door below was opened or shut, Mr. Demetrius rang up the
porter to enquire whether Mr. John had come in, to the intense
aggravation of the porter, who appeared in the door of the saloon with a
surlier expression and his hair more and more ruffled on each occasion,
inwardly cursing the fool of a student who had not even wit enough to
send an old man asleep, and envying the other servants who at least were
able to sleep at night without interruption. And still Margari went on reading. By this time Monte Cristo had had himself sewn up in a sack and flung
into the sea as a corpse. "Would you have dared to have that done to you, Margari?" interrupted
Mr. Demetrius. "If I had a lot of money I might, begging your honour's pardon, but a
poor devil like me is only too glad to live at any price," replied
Margari, whose answer naturally had no relation whatever to the text,
not a word of which he understood. "You are a simple fellow, Margari; but go on, go on!" Margari gaped violently, he would have liked to have stretched himself
too, but he bethought him in time that his coat had already burst
beneath his armpits, and he had no wish to make the rent still larger,
so he let it alone and proceeded with his bitter labour. By the time Monte Cristo had swum back to dry land, Margari's eyelids
were almost glued to his eyes and still the old gentleman showed no
sign of drowsiness. Mr. John's threat had kept Mr. Demetrius awake all
night, and consequently had kept poor Margari awake too. Once or twice
an unusually interesting episode excited the old man's attention, and
for the time he forgot all about John's duel--for example, when Monte
Cristo discovered the enormous treasure on the island--and he would then
rouse up Margari and make him go and find a map and point out the exact
position of Monte Cristo's island. Margari searched every corner of the
sea for it, and at last looked for it on the dry land also without
finding it. Tiring at length with the fruitless search he proposed, as
the best way out of the difficulty, that he should write on the
afternoon of the following day to Monsieur Alexander Dumas himself to
explain to his honour where the island used to be and whether it still
existed. "What a blockhead you are," said the old man, "but go on, go on!" Margari gave a great sigh and looked at the clock on the wall, but,
alas! it was still a long way from six o'clock. At last, however, while
he was still reading, the clock _did_ strike six. Margari instantly
stood up in the middle of a sentence, marked the passage with his
thumb-nail so as to know at what word to begin again on the following
evening, turned down the leaf and closed the book. "Well! is that the end of it?" enquired Mr. Demetrius in angry
amazement. "I humbly beg your honour's pardon," said Margari with meek intrepidity,
"there's nothing about reading _after six_ in our agreement"--and off he
went. Mr. Demetrius thereupon flew into a violent rage, cursed and
swore, vowed that he would dismiss his reader on the spot, and as the
morning grew lighter fell into a deep, death-like, narcotic sleep from
which he would not have awakened if the house had come tumbling about
his ears. When he did awake, about ten o'clock, his first care was to
make enquiries about Mr. John. Then he sent the porter to the police
station to inform the authorities that his son and Mr. Hatszegi, who
were both staying at the Queen of England inn, were going to fight a
duel, which should be prevented at all hazards. A police constable, at
this announcement, flung himself into a hackney-coach and set off at
full speed to make enquiries. Half an hour later a heyduke was sent back
to the porter to tell him that either the whole affair must be a hoax,
as nothing was known of a duel, or else that the two combatants must
already be dead and buried, as not a word could be heard of either of
them. Luckily, towards the afternoon, Mr. John himself arrived in a
somewhat dazed condition, like one who has been up drinking all night. The members of the family were all sitting together as usual in Mr.
Demetrius's room, listening in silence to his heckling, when the tidings
of Mr. John's arrival reached him. Demetrius immediately summoned him. He sent back word at first that he was lying down to try to sleep, which
was an absurd excuse for even the richest man to give in the forenoon;
on being summoned a second time he threatened to box the porter's ears;
only the third time, when Clementina was sent with the message that if
he did not come at once, his sick father would come and fetch him, did
he respond to the call and appear before them in a pet. "Well, thou bloodthirsty man, what has happened? What was the end of
it?" "What has happened?" repeated John with monstrously dilated eyes. "What
marvel do you expect me to relate?" "Clementina, Miss Kleary, Henrietta, retire," cried the old man;
"retire, go into the next room. These are not the sort of things that
children should hear." When they had all withdrawn except Madame Langai, Demetrius again
questioned his son: "Now then, what about this affair, this _rencontre_
with Hatszegi; did you challenge him, did you meet him?" "Eh? Oh--yes! Naturally. Of course I sought him out, I have only just
come from him. We have been making a night of it together at the Queen
of England. I can honestly say that he is a splendid fellow, a gallant,
charming gentleman. He has really noble qualities. I am going to bring
him here this afternoon. You shall all see him. Even you will like him,
Matilda. But now, adieu, I must really have a little sleep, we were
drinking champagne together all night. Oh, he is a magnificent, a truly
magnificent character." Mr. Demetrius said not a word in reply, but he compressed his thin lips
and wagged his head a good deal. Nobody made any observation. Mr. John
was allowed to go to bed according to his desire. A little time after he
had withdrawn, however, the old man said to Madame Langai: "What are you
doing Matilda?" "I am trying to guess a rebus which has just appeared in 'The Iris.'" "Don't you think that what John has just said is rather odd?" "I have not troubled my head about it one way or the other." "I can see through it though. John wants to pay off Hatszegi in his own
coin. He has invited him here this afternoon in order to keep him
waiting in the ante-chamber, and then send him word that he can't see
him till to-morrow. Oh! Jack is a sly lad, a very sly lad, but I can see
through him. I can see through him." *       *       *       *       *

Mr. John passed the whole afternoon in his father's room; he did not
even go to his club. No doubt he was awaiting his opportunity for
revenge. He amused himself by sitting down beside his niece, stroking
her hand, admiring the whiteness of her skin, and, drawing the
governess into the conversation, enquired how Henrietta was getting on
with her studies, whether she had still much to learn in English and
French, and whether she was not, by this time, quite a virtuoso at the
piano. He insinuated at the same time that it would be just as well,
perhaps, if she made haste to learn all that was necessary as soon as
possible, because she was no longer a child, and when once a woman is
married she has not very much time for study. "By the way, Henrietta," he added suddenly, "have you chosen a lover
yet?" Henrietta was too much afraid of him even to blush at this question, she
only glanced at him with timid, suspicious eyes and said nothing. "Don't be afraid, sisterkin," continued Mr. John encouragingly. "I'll
bring you such a nice bridegroom that even your grandpapa, when he sees
him, will snatch up his crutches in order to go and meet him half-way." Here the old man growled something which John smothered with a laugh. "Yes, and if he won't give you up we'll carry you off by force." Henrietta shuddered once or twice at her uncle's blandishments, like one
who has to swallow a loathsome medicine and has caught a whiff of it
beforehand. The porter interrupted this cheerful family chat by announcing that his
lordship Baron Hatszegi wished to pay his respects to Mr. Lapussa. Mr. Demetrius immediately raised himself on his elbows to read from Mr.
John's features what he was going to do. Would he tell the lacqueys to
turn Hatszegi out of the house? or would he send him word to wait in the
ante-chamber, as he himself had waited at Hatszegi's, and then put him
off till the morrow? Oh! John would be sure to do something of the sort,
for a very proud fellow was John. But, so far from doing any of these things, Mr. John rushed to the door
to meet the arriving guest and greeted him aloud from afar in the most
obliging, not to say obsequious, terms, bidding him come in without
ceremony and not make a stranger of himself. And with that he passed his
arm through the arm of his distinguished guest and, radiant with joy,
drew him into the midst of the domestic sanctum sanctorum and presenting
him in a voice that trembled with emotion: "His lordship, Baron Leonard
Hatszegi, my very dear friend!" And then he was guilty of the impropriety of introducing his guest first
of all to his father and his niece, simply because they happened to be
the nearest, only afterward he bethought him of turning towards Matilda
to introduce her, whereupon Matilda's face assumed a stony expression
like that of the marble maiden in Zampa, to the great confusion of John,
who felt bound to enquire in a half-whisper: "Why, what's the matter?" "You dolt," she whispered back, "have you not learnt yet that the lady
of the house should be introduced to her guests not last, but first?" John's first impulse was to be shocked, his second was to be furious,
but finally he thought it best to turn with a smile to Baron Hatszegi,
who courteously helped him out of his embarrassment by observing: "It is
my privilege to be able to greet your ladyship as an old acquaintance
already. Many a time have I had the opportunity of secretly admiring you
in your box at the theatre." "Pray be seated, sir...!" CHAPTER III

AN AMIABLE MAN


Baron Hatszegi was certainly a very amiable man. He had a handsome face
full of manly pride, sparkling eyes, and a powerful yet elegant figure. He moved and spoke with graceful ease, bore himself nobly, picked his
words--in short, was a perfect gentleman. Mr. Demetrius was quite taken
with him, although Hatszegi hardly exchanged a word with him, naturally
devoting himself principally to the widowed lady who played the part of
hostess. What the conversation was really about nobody distinctly
recollected--the usual commonplaces no doubt, balls, soirees,
horse-racing. Henrietta took no part in the talk; Mr. John, on the other
hand, had a word to say on every subject, and, although nobody paid any
attention to him, he enjoyed himself vastly. When Hatszegi had departed, John, with a beaming face, asked Madame
Langai what she thought of the young man. Instead of replying, Madame Langai asked what had induced him to bring
him there. "Well, but he's a splendid fellow, isn't he?" "You said yesterday that he was a vagabond." "I said so, I know, but it is not true." "You said, too, that he was a robber." "What! I said that? Impossible. I didn't say that." Old Demetrius here intervened as a peacemaker. "You said it, John, you did indeed; but you were angry, and at such
times a man says more than he means." "So far from being a robber or a vagabond," replied John, "he is one of
the principal landowners in the Hatszegi district. How _could_ I have
said such things! He has a castle that is like a fortress. He is like a
prince, a veritable prince in his own domains. He is just like a petty
sovereign. I must have been downright mad to call him a vagabond. . . ." "Yet, yesterday, you would have called him out," continued Madame Langai
teasingly. "Yes, I was angry with him then, but there are circumstances which may
reconcile a couple of would-be duellists, are there not?" "Oh, certainly, if a man is a man of business before all things, or has
perhaps a valuable house or two on his hands." "This has nothing to do with business or selling houses. If you must
know," he continued, lowering his voice, "it is about something entirely
different, but of the very greatest importance." "Indeed?" returned Madame Langai, "a new Alexander the Great, I suppose,
who has gone forth to conquer, and who has come to look not for a house,
but for a house and home perhaps?" She thought to herself that it was some adventurer whom her brother
John would palm off upon her as a husband so as to get her away from the
old man. "Something of the sort," replied John. "Yes, you have guessed half--but
the wrong half." "I am glad to hear it." "Ah!" put in the old man sarcastically, "Matilda will never marry again,
I'm sure; she loves her old dad too much and feels far too happy at home
to do that." "Ho, ho, ho!" laughed John scornfully, "I did not mean Matilda, I was
not thinking of her. Ho, ho, ho! Madame Langai imagines that _she_ is
the only person in the house whose hand can be wooed and won." Dame Langai, with a shrug, looked incredulously round the room to see if
there was anybody else who could possibly become the object of the
baron's sighs. All at once her eyes accidentally encountered those of
Henrietta, and immediately she knew even more than her brother John did. For she now clearly understood three things: the first was that
Henrietta had taken in John's meaning more quickly than she had done,
the second was that John had brought the suitor to the house on
Henrietta's account, and the third was that Henrietta loathed the man. She at once bade Miss Kleary give Henrietta an extra lesson on the piano
in the adjoining room, and when they had taken her at her word and
disappeared, she said to John in her usual quiet, mincing tone:

"You surely do not mean to give Henrietta to that man?" "Why not, pray?" "Because she is still a mere child, a mere schoolgirl; five years hence
it will be quite time enough to provide her with a husband." "But the girl is sixteen if she is a day." "Yes, and delicate, sickly, and nervous." "She will soon be well enough when she is married." "And who, may I ask, _is_ this suitor of yours. Is it not your duty,
Demetrius Lapussa, as the girl's grandfather, to make the fullest
enquiries about any man who may sue for your grand-daughter's hand? Is
it not your duty, I say, to find out who and what he is and everything
relating to him? For brother John may be very much mistaken in fancying
his dear friend to be a wealthy and amiable nobleman. Whether he be
amiable or not does not concern you personally, I know; but you ought
certainly to know how he stands, for he may have castles and mansions
and yet be up to the very ears in debt. In such a case if he is a
nobleman so much the worse for you: for he will then have all the
greater claim upon you. It may cost you dearly to admit a ruined baron
into the bosom of your family." John grew yellow with rage: "How dare you talk like that of anyone you
do not know?" he cried. "Then, do you know him any better?" But here the old man intervened:

"You're a fool, John," said he. "Matilda is right. I will send for my
lawyer, Mr. Sipos. He understands all about such things and will advise
us in the matter. We _must_ find out how the baron stands." CHAPTER IV

CHILDISH NONSENSE


Meanwhile Hatszegi continued to call every day, dividing his attention
equally between the widow and Henrietta; and at the end of a fortnight
everyone was charmed with his personal qualities. It could not be denied
that he was a delightful companion, always merry, lively, frank, and
entertaining. He even made the old gentleman laugh aloud more than once;
in fact Demetrius Lapussa grew quite impatient if Hatszegi was five
minutes late. Mr. John was more delighted with him than ever. They took
walks together, invariably drove in the same carriage to the park, and
John was to be seen every night in the baron's box at the theatre,
talking at the top of his voice so that everybody might become aware of
the fact. Nay, he succeeded, through the courtesy of his new friend, in
making the acquaintance of one or two magnates who subsequently lifted
their hats to John in the street and thus gratified the dearest desire
of his heart. The enquiries made about Hatszegi also proved extremely satisfactory. He
was certainly sound and solid financially, had never had a bill
dishonoured, had no dealings with usurers, always paid cash and was
never even in temporary embarrassment, as is so often the case with most
landed proprietors when the crops fail. In fact, he seemed to have
unlimited funds constantly at his disposal and to be scarcely less
wealthy than old Lapussa himself. So far then, everything was as it should be, and everyone was enchanted
with him personally. But what of Henrietta, the intended bride? Oh! she was not even consulted in the matter; it is not usual, and
besides she had neither mind nor will enough to have a voice in so
important a matter as the disposal of her hand. Nay, she was not even
told that she was going to be married. She only got an inkling of it
from various phenomena that struck her from time to time, such as the
polite attentions of the baron, the whispering of the domestics, the
altered attitude towards her of the various members of the family--who
now addressed her in the tone you employ when speaking to a baroness
that is to be. And then there was Clementina's chatter! Clementina was
now for ever talking of all the sewing and stitching that had to be done
for the young lady, and of the frightful quantities of linen and lace
and silk that were being made up into dresses and other garments. Six
seamstresses were hard at work, she said, and she was helping them and
yet they had to make night into day in order to get the necessary things
ready in time. So gradually they accustomed her to the idea of it, till at last one
day Madame Langai took her aside and lectured her solemnly as to the
duties of women in general and of women of rank in particular, pointing
out at the same time how much such women owed to their own families for
looking after and providing for them and expressing the hope that
Henrietta would be duly grateful to the end of her days to _her_
family--from all which she was able to gather that any opposition on her
part would not be tolerated for a moment. The day was already fixed for the exchange of the bridal rings, but the
night before that day, Henrietta suddenly fell ill, and, what is more,
dangerously ill, so that they had to run off for the family physician
incontinently. The doctor was much struck by the symptoms of the illness
and the first thing he did was to make the patient swallow a lot of milk
and oil. Then he drove the servants headlong to the chemist's, and
descending into the kitchen closely examined every copper vessel there
by candle light, scolded the cook and the scullery maids till they were
in tears, and terrified Clementina by telling her she was the cause of
it all to the speechless confusion of the innocent creature. Not content
with this, he made his way at once to Mr. Demetrius's room and there
cross-examined everyone with the acerbity of an Old Bailey judge. What
had the young lady been in the habit of eating and drinking? They must
fetch what had been left over from her meals, he must see and examine
everything. What had she eaten yesterday evening? Preserves? Then what
sort of sugar was used, and where was the spoon? He insisted on seeing
everything. "But doctor," whined old Lapussa, "you surely don't mean to say that the
child has been poisoned?" "I do indeed, and with copper oxide too." "How is that possible?" "Why, simply because some of her food, preserve, for instance, has been
allowed to stand too long in a copper or silver vessel and copperas has
been developed." The old man did not know enough of chemistry to understand how copperas
could be developed from silver, but he was seriously alarmed. "I hope there's no danger?" said he. "It is a good job you sent for me when you did," replied the doctor,
"for otherwise she would have been dead before morning. Copperas is a
very dangerous poison, and if it gets into one's food in large
quantities there is practically no antidote. A vigorous constitution,
indeed, has a good chance of throwing it off; but, taking into
consideration the state of the young lady's nerves and her general
debility, I should say that her case was downright dangerous; anyhow she
will be ailing for some time." "Oh, doctor, doctor! and we all love Hetty so much, she is the very
light of our eyes! I cannot tell you how anxious I am, on her account I
should be so glad, doctor, if you could stay with her night and day and
never leave the house. I would richly recompense you." "I will do all I can, though I can't do that, and unless any unforeseen
accident arise, I think I can answer for the result. But one thing I
must insist upon, all these copper and silver vessels of yours must go
to the devil. I'll come to-morrow and examine thoroughly the whole lot
of them by daylight. The health of the family must not be endangered by
such recklessness. And let me tell your honour something else. Are you
aware that your honour's business-man, Mr. Sipos, who is only a lawyer
and, therefore, can ill afford to do so in comparison with your honour,
are you aware, I say, that he has on this very occasion sent all his
copper vessels to the lumber-room?" "On this occasion! what do you mean?" enquired the old man eagerly. "I mean that I have just come from him and a similar case has happened
in his house. His assistant--a fine young fellow, you know him,
perhaps?--has also been poisoned by copperas. I have only this instant
quitted him." "What an odd coincidence." "Very odd, indeed. Two exactly similar cases of poisoning at the same
time and all because copper vessels were used and not properly cleaned." "And how is the young man progressing? Is he out of danger?" "Fortunately; although at the outset his was an even worse case than the
young lady's. But then he is so much stronger. Well, good-bye! I will
look in again to-morrow." "But I should be so much easier, doctor, if you never left my
grandchild's side." "I would willingly do even that if I had not other patients in the town
to attend to." "Could you not entrust them to someone else?" "Impossible. My reputation would be at stake. Besides I do not often
have the chance of studying two such interesting parallel cases of
poisoning at the same time." "Very well, doctor. All I ask of you is to cure our little one." "I hope to save the pair of them. And now I'll go up and have a look at
her, and then I must return to Mr. Sipos's house. But I shall be here
again in an hour or so." And with that the old man had to be content. During the whole course of Henrietta's illness he sent to enquire after
his grandchild every hour. Clementina and an old maid-servant took it in
turns to watch by her bedside. It was strictly forbidden to leave
Henrietta alone for an instant, and Mr. Demetrius gave special orders
that her brother Koloman was not to be allowed to approach within six
paces of her bed because he was sure to bring cold air into the room, or
convey to her surreptitiously something which she ought not to have and
behave like a blockhead generally. So he was obliged to keep his
distance. At last when weeks and weeks had flown by, God and blessed nature
helped the doctor to triumph over the effects of the poison. Henrietta
slowly began to mend. She was still very weak, but the doctor assured
them that she was quite out of danger and that the little capricious
fancies of convalescence might now be safely humoured. Madame Langai, in the doctor's presence, asked the sick girl whether
there was anything in particular she would like, any food she fancied,
any pastime she preferred. The pale, delicate-looking child languidly cast down her eyes as if she
would say: "I should like to lie in the grave--deep, deep, down." But
what she really did say was: "I should like to read something. I feel so
dull." "That I cannot allow," said the doctor, "it would make your head ache,
but I have no objection to someone reading to you some nice, amusing
novel, Dickens's "Pickwick Papers," for instance, or a story of
Marryat's, something light and amusing, I mean, which will not excite
you too much." "I should like that," said Henrietta and the choice fell on the
"Pickwick Papers." But as the English governess complained that she
could never read aloud for ten minutes at a time without growing hoarse
and Clementina's eyes were too weak for any such office, it was
suggested that Margari should be asked to submit to this extra
sacrifice, and Clementina succeeded in persuading him to do so by
promising him a liberal reward. So she brought him back with her and
seated him behind a curtain so that he could not see the invalid (that
would have been scarcely proper), and put the book into his hand. But scarcely had Margari struggled through a few lines when Henrietta
again became fidgety and said she longed for something to eat. The
good-natured Clementina jumped with joy at this sign of returning
appetite, and asked her what she would like and how she would like it. Henrietta thereupon directed her to have prepared a soup of such a
complicated character (only the morbid imagination of an invalid could
have conceived such a monstrosity), that Clementina felt obliged to
descend to the kitchen herself to superintend its concoction herself,
for it was certain that any servant would have forgotten half the
ingredients before she could get down stairs. Scarcely had Clementina shut the door behind her when Henrietta
interrupted Margari's elocution. "For Heaven's sake, come nearer to me," she said, "I want to speak to
you." The worthy man was so frightened by this unexpected summons that he had
half a mind to rush out and call for assistance. He fancied that the
young lady had become delirious--it was such an odd thing to ask him to
draw nearer. But the sick girl, pressing together her trembling hands,
looked at him so piteously that he could hesitate no longer but
approached her bedside. Henrietta did not scruple to seize the hand of the embarrassed
gentleman. "For God's sake, help me, my good Margari," she whispered. "I am plagued
by an anxiety which prevents me from closing my eyes. Even here when I
sleep it follows me into my dreams. You can free me from it. In you
alone have I confidence. You suffer in this house as much as I do. You
have no cause to torment or persecute me. Will you do what I ask you, my
dear, good Margari?" It occurred to Margari that the young lady was wandering in her mind, so
to humour her, he promised to do whatever she asked him without
hesitation. "I will be very good to you, I will never forget all my life long the
kindness you are about to do me." "Your humble servant, Miss! but you have always been good to me. As far
as I can remember, while the others took a delight in vexing me, you
were the only one who always took my part. I don't forget that either. Command me! I will go through fire and water for you." "Look, then!" said the girl, drawing from her bosom a little key
attached to a black cord, "this is the key of my toilet casket. Open it
and you will find a bundle of documents tied together with a blue
ribbon, take them. All through my illness I trembled at the thought that
they might ransack my things and find them, and when I came to myself I
was worrying myself with the idea that I might perhaps have spoken about
these papers in my delirium. Oh! it would have been frightful if my
relations had seized them. Take them, quickly, before Clementina
returns. I must conceal everything, even from her." Margari accomplished the task with tolerable dexterity. He only broke
the looking-glass while he was opening the casket, and that was little
enough for him. There the documents were right enough, nicely tied
together. And then Henrietta seized his hand and pressed it so warmly and looked
at him with her lovely, piteous, imploring eyes--a very lunatic might
have been healed by such a look. "I know you for an honourable man," continued she, "promise me not to
look at these papers, but give them to my brother Koloman, he will know
what to do with them. You will do this for my sake, dear Margari, will
you not? It is just as though one of the dead were to come back to you
from the world beyond the grave and implore you, with desperate
supplications, to free its soul from a thought which rested upon it like
a curse and would not let it rest in the grave." Margari shuddered at these words. A corpse that returns from the world
beyond the grave! This young gentlewoman certainly had a terrifying
imagination. Nevertheless he swore by his hope of salvation that he
would not bestow a glance upon the papers, but would give them to young
Koloman. "Hide them, pray!" And indeed it was high time that he should bestow them in the well-like
pocket of his long coat, for Clementina's steps were already audible in
the adjoining chamber. When she appeared, however, he was sitting behind
the curtain again, reading away as if nothing had happened. When the clock struck four, at which time Koloman usually returned from
school, Henrietta said to Margari that she had had enough of
romance-reading for that day, but thanked him for his kindness and asked
him to come again on the morrow if he would be so good. Margari
protested that he should consider it the highest honour, the greatest
joy. He would willingly read even English to her, if she liked, and
without any special honorarium either, and then off he went to seek
young Koloman. Now it so happened that young Koloman did not come home at the usual
time that day, and Margari after looking for him in vain became very
curious as to the contents of the packet entrusted to him. What sort of
mysterious letters could they be which Miss Henrietta was afraid of
falling into the hands of her family. Hum! how nice it would be to find
out! The packet was tied up--naturally! But it was possible to undo and then
retie the knots in just the same way as before, so that nobody would be
any the wiser. To an honourable man, indeed, the mere knowledge that
another's secret was concealed therein which he was bidden to guard
would have been as invincible an impediment as unbreakable bolts and
bars; but the worthy fellow reassured himself with the reflection that,
after all, he was not going to tell anybody the contents of these
documents, and he so very much longed to know what it could be that Miss
Henrietta was so anxious to hide away, and old Lapussa would so much
like to find out. As if he would ever betray the secret of such a nice,
kindly creature to such an old dragon! Why, he would rather have his
tongue torn out than betray it!--but know it he must and would! So he locked himself up in his little room on the third storey, and very
cautiously opened the bundle which was enwrapped in I know not how many
folds of paper and greedily devoured the contents of the various
documents. But how great was his fury when, instead of the expected secrets, he
found nothing but dull Latin exercises, wearisome rhetorical
commonplaces on such subjects as the charms of spring and summer, the
excellence of agriculture, the advantages of knowledge, the danger of
the passions, and similar interesting themes. He was just about to tie
the bundle up again, when it occurred to him to read one of these
tiresome dissertations to the end, just to see what sort of style the
young scholar affected. And now a great surprise awaited him, for he
found that after the first five or six lines the theme suddenly broke
off and there followed something altogether different, which though also
written in the Latin tongue had nothing whatever to do, either with the
beauties of spring or the excellencies of agriculture, but was,
nevertheless, of the most interesting and engrossing character. Now, indeed, he read every one of the exercises from beginning to end,
and, when he had done so, he clearly perceived that if old Demetrius
Lapussa had very particular reasons for ferreting out these things, Miss
Henrietta had still greater reason for concealing them. After having neatly tied up the packet again, he bethought him what he
had better do next. Miss Henrietta had confided the secret to his
safe-keeping, but Mr. Demetrius had commanded him to keep an eye upon
Koloman and his Latin exercises--which of them had the best right to
command in that house? But was it right to divulge a secret? Ah! that
was another question. It is true that, as a general rule, it is wrong to
betray secrets; yet, it is nevertheless true, that to betray a secret
that ought to be known is at least justifiable. Moreover, was it not a
Christian duty to let the grandfather know as soon as possible what
extraordinary things his granddaughter was turning over in her noddle? And finally--there was money in it!--good solid cash! If old Lapussa did
not choose to pay a price for it, and a liberal price too, he should be
told nothing at all and Margari would show the old miser that he had a
man of character to deal with. For after all poor Margari had to live,
and this was worth as much as a thousand florins to him or its
equivalent anyhow. Surely Miss Henrietta could not be so unreasonable as
to expect poor Margari to chuck such a piece of good fortune out of the
window, especially as she had given him nothing herself. At that moment someone knocked at the door and enquired whether Mr.
Margari was there. Margari was so frightened that he bawled out: "No, I am not!" --so of
course he was obliged to open the door, but he concealed the packet of
letters in his pocket first. It was the lacquey who came to ask whether Mr. Margari was aware that it
was past seven o'clock; he must come and read to the old gentleman. Margari could not endure to hear the domestics speaking to him
familiarly. "Seven o'clock! What do you mean?" said he. "Am I bound to know when it
is seven o'clock? Am I a clockmaker or a bell-ringer? If your master
wants me to know what a clock it is, let him send me, not a lacquey, but
a gold repeater watch!" And salving his wounded dignity with these and similar effusions,
Margari trotted alongside the lacquey to the room of Mr. Demetrius, to
whom he immediately notified the change in the situation by sinking
down into a soft and cosey arm-chair instead of sitting down on the edge
of the hard leather-chair, expressly provided for him. Demetrius measured him from head to foot with his terrible eagle eyes
and observed in an even more stridently moral voice than usual: "Well,
Margari, when are we going to have our novel reading?" "We will have our reading presently, but it won't be a novel to-day." "What do you mean, sir?" "I humbly beg to remind your honour that you were pleased to commission
me to lay hands upon certain Latin exercises of your grandson Koloman. I
humbly beg to inform you that they are now in my possession." "Oh!" said old Lapussa, with a forced assumption of _sang froid_, "you
may give them to me to-morrow, I will look them through." "Crying your honour's pardon, they are in Latin." "Well, I can get someone to look them through for me." "I beg humbly to represent that it would not be well to put them into
anybody's hands, for strange things are contained therein." "What!" cried the old man angrily, "you don't mean to say _you_ have
looked into them?" "Yes, I have read them all through." "I did not tell you to do that." "No, but you were graciously pleased _not_ to forbid me to do so. Now,
I know everything. I know the cause of the young lady's illness. I know
why she does not wish to become the wife of Count Hatszegi. Nay, I even
know what will happen in case she does. I know all that I say--and here
it is in my pocket." "And what presumption on your part to read other people's letters!" "I beg your honour's pardon, but it is not presumption; I only wanted to
know the value of the wares I have obtained for your honour. I wanted to
know whether they were worth one florin, two florins, a hundred florins,
a thousand florins, lest you should do me the favour to say to me:
'look, ye, Margari, my son, here are some coppers, go and drink my
health!' --and so get the better of me." "You are becoming impertinent! Do you want me to ring for the footman?" "Pray do not give yourself the trouble! If you are determined to take
the documents away from me by force I will fling them into the fire that
is burning there on the hearth before the footman can come in and there
will be an end to them." "Then it is money you want, eh? How much?" This question made Margari still more bumptious. "How much do I want? A good deal, a very good deal, I can tell you. In
fact I cannot tell at present how much." But then he suddenly reassumed his obsequious cringing mien and added:
"I tell you what, your honour, procure me some petty office at Count
Hatszegi's. I don't care what it is, so long as I get a life-long
sinecure--suppose we say his bailiff, or his librarian, or his
secretary? A single word from your honour would do it." An idea suddenly occurred to Mr. Demetrius. "Very good, Margari, very good. So it shall be. I give you my word upon
it--you shall be Hatszegi's secretary." "But it must be life-long. I humbly beg of you, it must be till the term
not of his but of my natural life." "Yes, yes, till the term of your natural life." "But if he won't have it?" "I'll pay you myself. You shall receive your regular salary from me
without including whatever you may get over and above from him. Will you
be satisfied with a yearly salary of three hundred florins with your
board and keep?" At these words Margari's breath failed him. It was not without
difficulty that he put the rapacious question: "Will your honour do me
the favour to give me this promise in writing?" "Certainly! Bring writing materials and I will dictate it to you on the
spot." And so an agreement was duly drawn up whereby Mr. Margari, in
consideration of a yearly salary of 300 florins to be punctually sent to
him at the beginning of every quarter, undertook in his capacity of
secretary to Baron Hatszegi, to keep his Honour Demetrius Lapussa
informed of all that he saw and heard at the residence of that
gentleman, Henrietta's future husband, and this obligation of
maintaining Margari was to be transferred on the death of Mr. Demetrius
to his son John. And no doubt Mr. Demetrius knew very well what he was
about. This document signed and sealed, Mr. Margari, with the greatest
alacrity, produced the Latin exercises in question, first of all,
however, respectfully kissing the hand of his patron. It took till midnight to read and translate all these documents one by
one. Mr. Demetrius was very well satisfied with the result, that is to
say so far as concerned the fidelity of the translation,--with the tenor
of the original text he had not the slightest reason to be pleased. When, shortly after midnight, these revelations were concluded, Mr.
Demetrius commanded Margari to go up into his room and have a complete
translation of all this Latin rigmarole written down in honest Hungarian
by the morning and to encourage him in his task he gave him two guldens
and an order on the butler for as much punch as he could drink. By the
morning all the punch was drunk, but the translation also was finished,
to the tune of bacchanalian songs which Margari kept up with great
spirit all night long. *       *       *       *       *

Next day, punctually at the appointed hour, the lawyer, Mr. Sipos,
appeared at the house of the Lapussas, with the necessary documents
neatly tied up with tape, under his arm as usual; he was not like our
modern lawyers who carry their masterpieces in portfolios as if they are
ashamed of them. The only persons in the reception room besides the old
man, were Madame Langai and Mr. John. Henrietta, still an invalid, had
been allowed to take a stroll to the woods near the town in order to
visit her favourite flowers once more and possibly take leave of them
for ever. She had received no invitation-card for this lecture. Why,
indeed, should a bride know anything of her bridegroom's biography
before marriage! The lawyer took his place at the table, untied his pile
of documents and began to read. It appeared from these documents that the founder of the Hatszegi
family, the great grandfather of the present baron, was one Mustafa, who
had been a Defterdar[2] at Stamboul, and had used his unrivalled
opportunities for making money so well that he found it expedient to fly
from Jassy to Transylvania, where he made haste to get baptized and
naturalized. His son, now an Hungarian nobleman, cut a fine figure at
court and gallantly distinguished himself in the Turkish wars against
his former compatriots, his exploits winning for him the estate of
Hidvar and the title of baron. His son again was a miser of the first
water who could be enticed neither to court nor into the houses of his
neighbours. He was continually scraping money together and was not over
particular in the choice of his scraper. By adroit chicanery he acquired
possession of the gold mines of Verespatak, which he exploited with
immense advantage, and by means of money lending and mortgages got into
his hands the vast estate of Hatszegi in the counties of Hunyad and
Feher, so that when he died it took thirty heavy wagons to convey his
ready money in gold and silver alone from the Vadormi caverns, where he
had concealed it to the castle of Hidvar, which his only son, Leonard,
chose as his residence after his father's death. All these details were
certified by unimpeachable documents in schedules B. C. and D.

[Footnote 2: The chief of the financial department in the Turkish
vilagets.] Moreover, the blood of many nationalities circulated in the veins of
Baron Leonard. The Defterdar himself was a Turk of Roumelian origin,
whose only son was the child of his Hindu concubine. He again married
the daughter of a Polish countess at the court of Vienna. The wife of
Baron Leonard's father was a wallachized Hungarian lady, whom he married
for her wealth. It was not wonderful, therefore, if the noble baron
possessed the qualities of five distinct races. Thus he had something of
the voluptuousness of the Turk, the ostentation of the Hindu, the
flightiness of the Pole, the foolhardiness of the Hungarian, and the
obstinacy of the Wallach. "For, I speak of his faults first," the lawyer proceeded, "because I
consider that they outweigh his good qualities. That the baron is a
rich man is evident from the accounts and inventories classed under
schedule E; that the baron is a handsome man is evident from the
photograph under schedule H; that the baron is physically sound is clear
from the certificates annexed to schedules I and K, one of which is
supplied by his physician and the other by his hunting comrades. Those
who require nothing from a man save health, wealth, strength, and
beauty, will of course consider him fit and proper to make a woman
happy. Yet having regard to the following facts (1) that the aforesaid
baron is not merely unstable in love affairs but capricious to the verge
of eccentricity, and a winebibber and gourmand to boot; (2) that he is
as vain as an Indian prince who takes unto him a wife for the mere pomp
and show of the thing; (3) that he is violent and brutal, sparing nobody
in his sudden fits of passion and, as the documents testify, has
frequently inflicted mortal injuries on those who have come in his way
while he was in an ill-humour; (4) that he has an odd liking for rowdy
adventures, which do not reflect much credit upon him; and (5) that,
according to the whispers of those nearest to him there is a strange
mystery pervading his whole life, inasmuch as mysterious disappearances,
which nobody can make head or tail of, occupy an incalculable number of
his days and weeks which remain unaccounted for, and make a pretty
considerable hiatus in every year of his life--taking all these things
into consideration, I am constrained to give it as my opinion that I do
not consider such a man a fit and proper husband for such a tender,
sympathetic young lady as the Miss Henrietta in question, and let the
world if it likes consider such a match as the greatest piece of good
fortune imaginable, I, for my part, would nevertheless call it a
calamity to be avoided at any price. And now would you do me the honour
to examine the original documents I have brought with me as exhibits in
corroboration of my statements--though I would mention," he quickly
added, perceiving that Madame Langai had greedily clutched hold of them,
"that among those documents there are sundry by no means suited for a
lady's perusal." "When I come across any such I will pass them over," said she. Of course
these were the very passages she proceeded to search for straight away. Meanwhile Mr. Demetrius also had drawn a packet of papers from
underneath the cushions of his sofa and handed them to Mr. Sipos. "Then you do not advise me to give Henrietta to Baron Hatszegi to wife? Good! And now, perhaps, while we run through the exhibits and schedules,
perhaps you'll be so good as to cast your eye over these papers. I don't
think they will bore you." These documents, by the way, were the Latin documents discovered by Mr.
Margari--_in natura_. Mr. John was marching pettishly up and down the room, and Madame Langai
was reading her documents with the greatest attention so that nobody
observed the surprise, the confusion reflected in the countenance of the
lawyer as he looked through the fatal Latin manuscripts. He kept shaking
his head and twisting his moustache right and left, fidgeted in his
armchair, and the beads of perspiration which stood out on his forehead
gave him enough to do to wipe them away with his pocket-handkerchief; at
last he had read the papers, and then he laid the whole bundle on the
table and stared silently before him like one whose reason for the
moment had no counsel to give him. Just about the same time Madame Langai had completed the perusal of
_her_ documents, and now she too seemed to be in an extreme state of
agitation. During the course of her reading, she had been unable to
restrain herself from exclaiming at intervals: "the monster! the
scoundrel!" Mr. Demetrius had been amusing himself all this time by carefully
observing the various mutations of expression in the faces of the
readers, which certainly afforded considerable entertainment to an
onlooker with any sense of humour. When every document had produced its expression, he remarked in a soft
gentle voice: "Well, my daughter, what do _you_ think of the affair?" Madame Langai clapped to her eyeglass and, with the air of one who had
made up his mind once for all, replied instantly: "I would not allow a
decent chambermaid to become Baron Hatszegi's wife, let alone a
Henrietta Lapussa." "And what is your opinion, Mr. Lawyer?" enquired the old man turning to
Mr. Sipos. "I?" replied the honest man, visibly perturbed, with a voice full of
emotion: "I would advise that the young lady should be married to the
baron as quickly as possible." Madame Langai regarded him with wide-open eyes. "What! After all that is in these papers?" "No, after all that is in those other documents." "What are they?" cried Madame Langai pouncing upon them incontinently
and extremely vexed, the next moment, to find them all written in Latin. She perceived that they were Koloman's exercises, and that was all. She
did not understand their connection with the case in point. "I'll take those documents back please," said old Demetrius, stretching
out a skinny hand towards them. "They will be of use to us though I have
a translation of them besides. Then, you think, Mr. Lawyer, it will be
as well to marry Henrietta to the baron, eh? Very well! Let me add that
on the day when Henrietta goes to the altar with Baron Leonard, I will
make you a present of all this scribble. Till then I shall require them. Do you understand?" Mr. Sipos was completely beaten; you might have knocked him down with a
feather. He had never been so badly worsted in his professional
capacity. Madame Langai would have besieged him with questions, but he
avoided her, put on his hat and departed. Madame Langai thereupon turned to her father: "What is the cause of this
wondrous change?" she cried. "What secrets do those miraculous papers
contain?" Mr. Demetrius tucked the documents in question well beneath him and
replied: "They contain secrets the discovery whereof will be a great
misfortune and yet a great benefit to the parties concerned." "Have they any connection with Henrietta's wedding?" "They have a direct bearing thereupon, and, indeed, necessitate it!" "Poor girl!" sighed Madame Langai. *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Sipos passed by his own dwelling three times before he knew that he
had reached home, so confused was he by what he had just learnt. When he
_did_ get inside the house he walked for a long time up and down his
consulting room as if he were trying to find a beginning for a business
he would very much have liked to be at the end of. At last he gave the
bellrope a very violent pull and told the clerk who answered the bell to
send him his assistant, Mr. Szilard, at once. Szilard appeared on the very heels of the messenger. His was one of
those faces which women never forget. There was ardent passion in every
feature and the large flaming black eyes, which spoke of courage and
high enthusiasm, harmonized so well with the wan hue of the pallid face. "Well, my dear fellow, do you feel quite well again now?" asked Mr.
Sipos in a tone of friendly familiarity; "did the doctor call to see you
to-day?" "I have no need of him, there's nothing the matter with me." "Nay, nay! Not so reckless! You have been working again, I see. You know
the doctor has forbidden it." "I only work to distract my thoughts." "You should seek amusement rather. Why don't you mix in society like
other young men? Why don't you frequent the coffee-houses and go to a
dance occasionally? Why, you slave away like a street-porter! Young
blood needs relaxation." "Oh, I am all right. My dear uncle, you are very kind, but you worry
about me more than I deserve." "That is my duty, my dear nephew. Don't you know that your poor father
confided you to my care on his death-bed, bade me be a father to you. Don't you remember?" "I do," replied the young man, and catching hold of his guardian's hand
he pressed it, murmuring in a scarcely audible voice: "You have indeed
been a second father to me!" But Mr. Sipos tore his hand passionately from the young man's grasp and
said in a somewhat rougher tone: "But suppose your dead father were to
say: 'That is not true! You have _not_ watched over my son as a father
should! You have lightly left him to himself. He was in danger and you
were unaware of it. He hovered on the edge of the abyss and you were
blind and saw nothing. And if God and my dead hand had not defended him,
he would have become a suicide and you knew it not--wherefore?'" --

The young man trembled at these words, he grew even paler than before
and gazed with a look of stupefaction at his chief. Then the old man
approached him, and took him by the hand as if he would say: "I am going
to scold you, but fear nothing. I am on your side." "My dear Szilard," said he, "don't you recollect that when you were a
little child and did anything you should not have done, and your father
questioned you about it, did he not always say to you: 'when you have
done wrong and are ashamed to confess it, keep silence! press your teeth
together! but don't lie, don't deny it, never think of taking refuge
behind any false excuse, for your name is Szilard,[3] and cowardice does
not become the bearer of such a name!' You understood him. You acted as
he would have had you act. And now I also would remind you once more
that you were christened Szilard and I ask you therefore to listen
calmly to what I am about to say to you. Don't interrupt, don't attempt
to deceive me. If you don't want to answer my questions, simply shake
your head! And now sit down, my son! You are still barely convalescent. Your head is weak and what I have to say to you might very well make it
reel again." [Footnote 3: Strong, firm.] Then the old lawyer tenderly pressed the youth into a chair and sighing
deeply, thus continued: "You fell in love with the daughter of a great
family and she with you. You got acquainted at a dance and the intimacy
did not stop there. Every conceivable obstacle intervened between you,
but love is artful and inventive and you found a way. The rich girl had
a neglected brother whom his relations sent to the grammar school and
the rascal frequently took refuge with me, the family attorney, when he
was ill-treated at home, and here you came across him. You cared for him
and explained to him the difficulties in his lessons which he was unable
to do for himself. The boy grew very fond of you. He spoke to you of
your beloved, and he spoke to her of you, and he was always praising
each of you to the other. The grandfather, the uncle, the aunt, the
governess, the domestics who never took their eyes off the girl for an
instant, had no idea that she was already involved in a love affair. But
amazing is the ingenuity of love and lovers! You knew that none of the
older members of the family understood the classical language of the
orators, and the girl loved so dearly that she did not consider it too
great a labour to learn a dead tongue which could be of no further use
to her in order to be able to say to her beloved: _Ego te in aeternum
amabo!_ One must admit that that was a great and noble sacrifice. Every
day you corresponded with each other. Before school time the girl
dictated his lessons to her young brother, beginning with the usual
scholastic flowers of rhetoric but ending in the passionate voice of
love, and after school was over, you, in your turn dictated a similar
lesson for the lad to carry back with him. Naturally, _this_ lesson book
he _never_ took to school with him; you kept the other here, the genuine
one which he had to show to his masters. And this ingenious smuggling
was carried on beneath the very eyes of the family without their
perceiving it. Yet at last it _was_ discovered. This very day, only an
hour ago, the old head of the family placed these papers in my hands
that I might read them, informing me at the same time that he had
already read a translation of them. Terrible were the things I
discovered in these papers. The appearance of a rich and noble suitor
who, according to the notions of the world, was just made for the girl,
frustrated all your plans of waiting patiently for better times. The
family forced this union upon the girl. You, in your despair, racked
your brain as to what you should do. At first you resolved upon an
elopement, but the redoubled vigilance with which every step of the
young girl was watched made this impossible. Then a black and terrible
thought occurred to you both. You resolved to kill yourselves--it was
your one remaining means of deliverance. Yes, you resolved to kill
yourselves at once, on the self-same day, in the self-same manner. For
many days you deliberated together as to the best way of accomplishing
your design. Great caution was necessary. You had to pick your words
lest the little brother who wrote them down from dictation should have
guessed your intentions. The girl asked you, at last, to send her a book
on natural science. You sent it to her. She, with the help of it tried
to find out what sorts of poisons could be most easily procured. For two
whole days you deliberated together as to the best way of obtaining
matches, the phosphorus of which is the most efficacious of poisons. But
in vain. In great houses only the domestics have charge of the matches,
it was impossible to get any. At last the girl hit on an expedient. She
discovered that if you put a copper coin in a glass dish and pour strong
vinegar over it, verdegris will be formed and verdegris is poison. Your
minds were at once made up. The girl prepared poison for herself and
taught you to do the same. . . . Merciful Heaven! what notions children
do get into their heads to be sure." CHAPTER V

SHE IS NOT FOR YOU


Up to this moment the youth had listened to the lecture in silence, but
now he arose and said in a calm clear voice: "'Tis all true; it is so!" "I should say it was all very bad, very bad indeed!" said the lawyer
vehemently, as if completing a broken sentence. "What! Children to
meditate suicide because things in this world don't go exactly according
to their liking! Have you never regarded the affair from its practical
side? Did you imagine that the girl's relations would support you? And
would you yourself endure to be their pensioner, their butt, the scorn
of the very domestics, for a poor son-in-law is the standing jest of the
very flunkeys--you ought to know that!" Szilard's face burned like fire at these words, but the old man hastened
to soothe him. "No, you could never reconcile yourself to that, I am sure. But you
thought, perhaps, that the girl might descend to your level and share
your poverty. There are in the world many a poor lad and lass who endow
one another with nothing but their ardent love and yet make happy
couples enough. So, no doubt, you argued, and herein lies the fallacy
that has deceived you. If you had been enamoured of a poor girl, I
should have said: it is rather early to think of marriage, but if it be
God's will, take her! Work and fight your way through the world where
there is room enough for every one. The lass, too, is used to
deprivation, and you are also. She will be content with little. She can
sew, she will do your cooking for you, and, if need be, your washing
likewise! She can make one penny go as far as two. When there is a lot
to do she will sing to make the work lighter, and when your supper is
slender, her good humour and her loving embraces will make it more. But
my dear boy! how are you going to make a poor housewife out of a girl
who has been rich? How can she ever feel at home in a wretched,
out-of-the-way shanty, where she will not even have you always by her
side, for you will have to be looking after your daily bread? She will
say nothing, she will make no complaint, but you will perceive that she
misses something. She will not ask you for a new dress, but you will see
that the one she wears is shabby and it would break your heart to
reflect that you have fettered the girl you love to your step-motherly
destiny, and your manly pride would one day blush for the recklessness
which led you to drag her down with you." "My dear guardian," said Szilard, "to prove to you that I did think of
all these things let me tell you that I have put by from my salary and
commissions enough to enable us to live comfortably for at least a
twelvemonth. For a whole year I have lived on two pence a day in order
to save, and during all that time I am sure you have not heard from me
one word of complaint." Mr. Sipos was horrified. It was an even worse case than he had imagined. What! to live for a whole year on two pence a day in order to scrape
together a small capital for one's beloved! It would be very difficult
to cure a madness which took such a practical turn as this! "But my dear boy!" he resumed, "what is the good of it all? What can you
do now that your secrets are discovered? It would have served you right
if the girl's parents had proceeded against you on a charge of murder,
for you were an accomplice in this poisoning business; but I am pretty
sure they will only threaten to do so in case she refuses the baron. And
what, pray, can you do in case they thus compel her to become his wife?" "Whoever the baron may be," rejoined Szilard, "I suppose he is at least
a gentleman; and if a woman looks him straight in the face on the
wedding day and says to him: 'I cannot love you because I love another
and always will love another,'--I cannot think he will be so devoid of
feeling as to make her his wife notwithstanding." "And if she does not say this, but voluntarily gives him her hand in
order to save you from the persecutions of her family, what then?" "Hearken, my dear guardian! She may be compelled to write to me that
she loves me no more and I must forget her, but I shall not believe it
till she pronounces or writes down a word the meaning of which only we
two understand and nobody else in the world can discover. So long as
this one word does not get into the possession of a third person, I
shall know that she has not broken with me and no power in this world
shall tear her from my heart. She may be silent, because she is not free
to speak; she may speak because she is commanded to speak; yet, for all
that, this religiously guarded word tells me what she really feels--and
what no other human intelligence can understand. If you like, my dear
guardian, you may betray this confession of mine to Henrietta's
relatives and they will torment the girl till they get her to pronounce
the mysterious word which once pronounced will burst the bonds that
unite us. She will be driven to say something. But oh! women who love
are very crafty. The word they will report to me will not be the right
one. It is possible, too, that they may take her far away from me. Let
them guard her well I say, let those who watch over her never close an
eye. And if they give her a husband, they had best pray for his life for
they know not what a fated thing it is to give away in marriage a girl
who bears about in her heart the secret of a third person." "My dear young friend, I see that we shall not come to an understanding
with each other. You are bent upon plunging into ruin a poor
defenceless girl in the name of what you call love, and will not
renounce, though you have not the slightest hope of winning her--that I
do not understand. I, on the other hand, am the legal adviser of the
young lady's family, and, in that capacity, I considered it my duty to
protest very energetically against the match in question. But when they
placed those precious papers in my hands, I said at once that they must
marry her to this man in any case. Otherwise they would have fancied I
was advocating your crazy hopes, that I was an interested party and
simply opposed the family candidate in order to smuggle in a kinsman of
my own in his stead. That idea I was determined to knock out of their
heads, happen what would. But that of course you do not understand. And
now you had better return to your room. Destiny will one day explain to
all of us what we do not understand now." *       *       *       *       *

At about the same hour the second act of this drama was proceeding in
the torture-chamber of the Lapussa family. Henrietta had returned home from her little tour laden with flowers,
when old Demetrius sent word to her that he would like to see her in his
room. He had taken the precaution of sending Madame Langai away shortly
before and Mr. John was absent at the Corn Exchange. "My little maid, Hetty, come nearer to me," said the old gentleman,
turning sideways on his couch and ferreting out from beneath his
pillows a concave snuff-box, "pray do not be angry with me for putting
you to inconvenience. Bear with me for the little time I have still to
live. But if you find living under the same roof with me unendurable,
all the greater reason for you to seize the opportunity of releasing
yourself as quickly as possible." Henrietta was too much used to these choleric outbursts to think of
replying to them. "Pray, put your hand beneath my pillow. You will find a packet of papers
there. Take them out and look at them." Henrietta did with stolid indifference what the old man bade her and
drew forth from this peculiar repository--which served as a sort of lair
for snuff-boxes, pill-boxes and odd bits of pastry--a large bundle of
manuscripts which she recognized at the first glance. The apprehended
papers, which during her illness had prevented her from sleeping, which
had made it impossible for her to get well, were now in the possession
of him from whom she had been most anxious to conceal them. The criminal
stood face to face with the witness whose damning evidence was to
condemn her. There was no escape, no defence. "My little maid," said the old man, exultantly stuffing his eagle nose
full of that infernal heating material which goes by the name of snuff,
"don't be angry with me for directing your attention to this scribble. I
don't want to make any use of it. I know quite enough of it already,
but be so good as to listen to me!" Henrietta absolutely could not look away from her grandfather's
blood-shot eyes; it seemed to her as if those eyes must gradually bore
through to her very heart. "You won't marry an eminent and wealthy man who bestows an honour upon
your family by asking for your hand, and yet you would run away with a
worthless fellow who does not even know why he was put into the world,
and when your family steps in to prevent it, you would violently put
yourself to death in order to die with him, to our eternal shame and
dishonour. That was not nice of you. But sit down. I see you are all of
a tremble. I would fetch you a chair myself if it was not for this
infernal gout of mine." Henrietta accepted the invitation and sat down, otherwise she must have
collapsed. "Now look ye, my dear little girl! if you had to deal with an
unmerciful, austere old fellow, a veritable old tiger, in fact, as I
have no doubt you fancy I am, he would make no bones about it but pack
you straight off to a nunnery and so cut you off from the world for
ever." Henrietta sighed. Such a threat as that sounded to her like a
consolation. "In the second place, an old tyrant, such as I am imagining, would have
sent that rip of a brother of yours, who is not ashamed to lend a hand
in the seduction of his own sister, would have sent him, I say, to a
reformatory. I may tell you there are several such institutions,
celebrated for their rigour, whither it is usual to send precocious and
incorrigible young scapegraces. And richly he would have deserved it,
too." "Poor Koloman!" thought the little sister. They were tenderly devoted to
each other. "In the third place, our old tiger would have prosecuted at law that
reckless youth who had a share in this fine suicide project of yours. For death, my dear, is no plaything and jests with poison are strictly
forbidden. He would certainly be condemned to hard labour for five or
six years, which would be a very wholesome lesson for him." "Grandfather!" screamed the tortured child. This last allusion dissolved
her voice in tears. She fell down on her knees before him and shed
innocent tears enough on his hand to wash out all the old specks and
stains on it. "I am glad to see those tears, my dear little girl, they show that you
have confidence in me. I am not a tiger who eats little children, what I
have said _might_ happen but I don't say it necessarily _must_. I don't
want to be cruel and vindictive. I don't want to recollect anything of
the insults showered upon me in that scribble of yours, all I ask of you
is that you will not stand in your own way. Get up and don't cry any
more or you will be ill again. Go up into your own room and ponder
deeply what you ought to do! In two hours' time I shall send for you
again, and in the meantime make up your mind about it. You have the
choice between accepting as your husband an honourable gentleman of
becoming rank and at the same time renouncing and forgetting a fellow
who will never be able to raise himself to your level, or of taking the
veil and bidding good-bye to this world. In the latter case, however,
your brother will be sent to a reformatory and an action will be
commenced against your accomplice. It is for you to choose. You have two
whole hours to turn the matter over in your mind. In the meantime I
shall send for my lawyer and, according to your decision, I shall get
him to draw up a marriage contract or a summons to the criminal court. It all depends upon you. And now put back those documents beneath my
head. Remember that you will only receive them back from me as a bridal
gift. Go now to your own room and reflect. For two hours nobody shall
disturb you." The girl mechanically complied with his commands. She put back the
ominous documents in their receptacle and withdrew to her room. There
she stood in front of a vase of flowers and regarded their green leaves
for an hour without moving. In the vase was a fine specimen of one of
those wondrous tropical plants whose leaves never fall off, one of those
plants which the seasons leave unchanged and which, therefore, is such a
beautiful emblem of constancy. This beautiful plant has a peculiar
property. If one of its compact shining leaves be planted in the earth
it takes root and grows into a shrub whose fragrant wax-like flowers
diffuse an enchanting perfume. Three years before at a jurists' ball,
when Henrietta and Szilard met for the first time, he had given her a
bouquet, among the flowers of which was one of these green-gold leaves,
and when she got home she had planted it in a jar and it had taken root,
spread its shoots abroad and grown larger and larger every year. And
Henrietta had called it Szilard and watched over its growth and cared
for it as if it had been a living human creature. For a long time she
stood before this flowering plant as if she would have spoken to it and
taken counsel of it. At last she turned away and with her hands behind
her head, she walked slowly up and down the room, and as often as she
paused before the vase, she behaved like one whose heart is breaking. But time was hastening on, an hour is so short when one would have it
stay. Alas! nowhere was there any help, any refuge. She was abandoned. She had nothing in the world but this one flowering plant which she
called Szilard. And the moments swiftly galloping after one another
called for a decision. There must be an end to it. Once more she
approached her darling plant and kissed all the leaves of its beautiful
flowers one by one. And now there came a knock at the door. 