



Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





THE ALCHEMIST'S SECRET
BY
ISABEL CECILIA WILLIAMS

P. J. KENEDY & SONS
44 BARCLAY STREET, NEW YORK

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

COPYRIGHT, 1910,
BY
P. J. KENEDY & SONS. -----------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS
                                                        PAGE

THE PASSING OF TONY                                       11
THE TRAMP                                                 27
"HE HATH PUT DOWN THE MIGHTY"                             42
A MEMORABLE CHRISTMAS MORNING                             58
NANCY'S TALE                                              72
PATSY                                                     88
THREE EVENINGS IN A LIFE                                 103
THE ELEVENTH HOUR                                        116
THE STORY OF JULIE BENOIT                                130
PETER                                                    150
GOD'S WAY                                                165

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




THE PASSING OF TONY. "Last mail in, Mis' Bascomb?" "Last mail's in, Tony." "Be there anything for me to-night?" Widow Bascomb knew perfectly well there was not, but she reached for a
small pile of letters in a pigeonhole on her right and glanced over them
rapidly. Her sour visage and rasping voice softened perceptibly as she
smiled on the little old man before her. "Sorry, Tony, there's nothing for you to-night." "Thank you, Mis' Bascomb, p'raps it'll come to-morrow," and Tony turned
away with a sigh and moved towards the door. A group of men were gathered around the stove, smoking and exchanging
the gossip of the town. These greeted him kindly as he passed and he
returned the greetings half absently. Before opening the door, the old
man stopped to give his woolen muffler one more turn around his neck. "Purty cold snap, this," he remarked to the company in general. "Looks
as if we'd have snow 'fore mornin' and a white Christmas after all. Good-night, Mis' Bascomb; good-night boys. A merry Christmas to you
all!" and Tony stepped out into the frosty air of the December evening. He sighed again as he turned up over the hill to the left and started
for home. It had been a long, cold walk down to the village, and it
would be equally long and even colder on the way back, for a sharp wind
was blowing directly in his face. It was a bad night for an old man like
Tony to be abroad and he was almost sorry that he had ventured out. But
there was his promise to Martha; it would never do to break that. Martha
had always been of a more hopeful turn of mind than he, anyway. While
she was still alive she had imparted to him the same spirit of trust and
hopefulness which shone in her steady gray eyes, but since God had taken
Martha and left him all alone in the world of care and trouble, life had
been hard indeed. He had promised Martha never to omit the daily visit to the post-office
to inquire for the letter which, thus far, had failed to arrive. Martha
had been so sure that Sallie would write to them some day; Sallie,
their handsome, wilful daughter, who had passed out of their lives
nearly fifteen years before. He never blamed Sallie for wanting to leave
them; what could a tiny village like this offer to one as clever, as
pretty, as ambitious as Sallie had been? The neighbors had said many
unkind things of Sallie but he heeded them not. They had called her
vain, idle and silly; they said the folks at the big house had spoiled
her and put notions into her head. They told him he did a foolish thing
when he allowed her to go as maid to the lady of the big house over on
the shores of the lake, and to go down to the city with the family when
they moved home in the autumn. To tell the truth, poor Tony had little
voice in the matter. Sallie, as usual, had taken affairs into her own
hands and decided for herself. Nearly fifteen years! It was a long, long time; and never a word from
the truant since the day she had left the village. Martha had waited, at
first impatiently, then anxiously, and finally with a pathetic
hopefulness that was more than half assumed. It was she who had insisted
that Tony must go to the office every day, and during those long years,
every evening, rain or shine, the same little scene was enacted in the
village post-office. Every evening he had the same story of failure to
report. "No letter to-night, mother." "Never mind, father; it'll sure come to-morrow," and Martha would sigh
and clasp her hands in her lap. Presently, by the movement of her lips he would know she was praying for
the absent one. He would lay aside his pipe, fetch his beads, and
together they would say the Rosary, begging the blessed Mother of God to
keep special watch over their child. She was the only one they had left,
four little white stones marking the resting-place of the four little
angels who had been permitted to remain with them for only such a very
short space of time. Martha was sleeping now beside her babies and he was alone in the world;
for who could tell what had become of Sallie? She, too, might be at rest
in God's Acre. Sometimes he felt that she must be, or surely, surely,
some word would have come from her. She must have known how anxiously
they would watch for news of her, and certainly she would not be so
heartless as to keep silence all this long time. Perhaps she had written and the letter failed to reach them. Well,
whatever the trouble was, Tony had long since given up all hope of
hearing from her, but, because of his promise to Martha, he still made
his nightly visit to the post-office in the village. Had it not been for
that promise he would certainly not take that long walk day after day,
in summer heat and winter storms, for hope had long since died in Tony's
heart. At least, so he told himself, but somehow the walk home always
seemed twice as long as the walk down, after hearing those depressing
words "No letter to-night, Tony." Of late, the daily visit to the village had been almost more than the
old man's failing strength had been able to support. How often he wished
he had not been obliged to sell Lassie. She was the last of his horses
to go; the last, in fact, of all his possessions. There was nothing left
to him now but the old house, and that was in such a state of
dilapidation as to be really unfit for habitation. In the old days, his
dogs and his horses were better housed than he was now; in the old days,
when his farm was one of the most prosperous in that section of the
country. It was lonely indeed since Martha went away, but he was glad
she had not lived to see him brought to this pass. He was glad he had
been able to surround her with comforts up to the very end, though to do
so he had been obliged to sell timber-land, horses, cows, everything he
owned, one after another. But Martha never knew; patient, suffering Martha, confined to her room
by illness for many years before God had sent her release from pain. Thank God, Martha never knew; she had trouble enough without worrying
over their poverty. Her room was always bright, always cheerful; her
favorite flowers blossomed in the window, a fire of logs burned cosily
upon the hearth. The neighbors were kind in helping him to care for her,
in bringing her little delicacies to tempt an invalid's appetite; fresh
eggs, chickens, new lettuce, which Martha supposed had come from their
own farm. It would never do to let her know that all their land was gone, all save
that upon which the house stood and Martha's flower garden which
stretched from her windows to the road. How he had worked in that
garden, cultivating the flowers she loved to see growing there. Sometimes he would lift her from the bed and place her in the large
chair by the window, where she could watch him at his work; where she
could watch, too, the road that led from the village. Often, he would
glance up from his spading to meet her brave, cheery smile that
sweetened all his labor; oftener still, it would be to find her eyes
fixed upon that long, dusty line that wound over hill and valley, in and
out through orchards and corn fields, the road that led to the village
and thence to the city beyond. He knew her mind had gone out into the
wide, busy world, of which an occasional echo would reach them, gone out
in a vain effort to guess at the whereabouts of the girl who had passed
down that country road so many years ago never to return. To the very
end, Martha had never ceased hoping, never ceased praying for the return
of the wanderer, or at least for some word of assurance that all was
well with her. By the time Tony reached the dismantled farmhouse the snow was falling
thickly, silently, on all around. "Twill be a bad storm," thought Tony. "God pity any who are abroad this
night." Pushing open the kitchen door he entered quickly, divesting himself of
cap, muffler, and ragged overcoat, and hanging them near the stove to
dry. He lighted the lamp and threw some wood upon the fire which had
burned low. Then, turning, he spied for the first time, a basket upon
the table. A pleased smile overspread his face. So they had not
forgotten, after all! How he and Martha had always watched for that
Christmas basket from Cousin John's folks over at the market town! It
was not so much the value of the gift, for John was not over-plentifully
blessed with the goods of this world and had a large family dependent
upon him. It was more the fact of being remembered kindly, the knowledge
that there was still some one who thought of them occasionally. He commenced unpacking the basket and arranging the contents upon the
table: home-baked bread, pies, cakes; a package of tea, another of
tobacco; oranges, nuts, candy; warm mittens and socks that John's wife
had knit for him. She was a good woman, John's wife, kind-hearted and
thoughtful; she must have guessed how badly he needed socks and mittens
now that Martha was no longer there to make them for him. He started for
the cupboard, a pie in one hand, a loaf of bread in the other, then
stopped in the middle of the room and eyed them meditatively. What was
it Martha used to say? "Never, never let Christmas pass without doing something for some one. No matter how poor one may be, Tony, they're always others poorer still. If it be no more'n a loaf of bread, give something to the poor at
Christmas time in the name of the little Babe that had none but the
shepherds to do a hand's turn for Him." Each year he and Martha had found some one to whom they gave in the
Christ-Child's name, for the sake of the girl who was never absent from
their thoughts by day or by night. Even last year, as poor as he was, he
had met with one more needy still and sent him on his way rejoicing--a
poor lad, out of work, out of money, tramping from city to city in
search of employment. They had taken him in for Sallie's sake, given him
food and shelter, and when the boy left the farm a silver dollar, nearly
the last of Tony's small store, was pressed into his hand. The dollar
had been returned, for at the next town the object of Tony's charity had
found steady work. That was last year. This Christmas he was not doing
a thing for any one; he had forgotten completely, probably because
Martha was not there to remind him. He placed the bread and the pie back upon the table and stood looking at
them long and earnestly. He knew of one who needed them far more than he
did, a poor widow over in "the hollow," whose five small children,
sickly, starved little creatures, were more than half the time crying
with cold and hunger. He opened the package of tobacco, filled his pipe
and sat down in his chair by the stove to smoke and think. How those poor children would enjoy the bread and pies and cakes which
John's wife had sent him! Poor little things, they seldom, if ever,
tasted fare like that. He really did not need them; he managed to get
along pretty well and the neighbors were all good to him; especially
since Martha died. He would really be glad to give those children
something, but he was so tired, so tired, and it was quite a walk over
to the hollow. Then, the storm! How the wind shrieked and tore around the house, and
how steadily the snow beat against the window panes! It was warm and
comfortable there by the fire, but outside----. And he was unusually
tired to-night; that walk to the village had been almost too much for
him. Besides, he must be up in time for first Mass in the morning; he
had never missed first Mass and Holy Communion on Christmas since the
day he and Martha were married. Year after year, they had knelt side by
side at God's altar; for many years Sallie had knelt there with him; now
he was all alone but he meant to continue the custom for Martha's
sake. How the storm did rage, to be sure; but those poor children, those poor
little children! Perhaps somewhere in the wide world his Sallie was in
need of help and comfort this night and those who might give it to her
were too tired or too lazy. He guessed that was the trouble, he was
growing lazy in his old age. Well, he would do this for Sallie; it would
be one more little sacrifice added to the many which he and Martha had
offered for their wandering child, that God might keep guard over her
wherever she might be. Yes, he would do it for Sallie's sake and to
please Martha. From Heaven she was watching him and would know that to
please her and for the sake of their child he was going to brave the
storm once more and carry a little Christmas happiness to those poor
children over in the hollow. The walk over and back again would not hurt
him; he was growing old and lazy, that was all. But first he must light the lamp. Dear, dear, he was growing forgetful
as well as lazy. He had nearly forgotten to light Sallie's lamp. What
would Martha say to that? Every night as soon as dusk had fallen, Martha
had insisted upon placing a lamp in the window of what had once been
Sallie's room. If the child came back unexpectedly, she would see the
light shining from her window and know they were waiting and watching
for her. The room itself was as she had left it years ago, her clothes
still hanging in the closet, her slippers laid ready for the tired feet
to slip into them, the fire on the hearth all prepared against the day
of her home-coming, and by night the lamp in the window shining a
welcome that could be seen afar down the road that led from the village. He must light Sallie's lamp, then off once more into the storm and
darkness to carry a bit of Christmas cheer to the little home in the
hollow. Nearly an hour later, a thoroughly worn-out but very happy old man sat
by the stove in the farmhouse kitchen. He was too tired even to light
his pipe; he simply sat there and tried to rest. It had been a hard
fight against the storm, but how pleased those poor little children
were! Well, he had done it for Sallie, just one more little sacrifice
for Sallie who was somewhere out there in the cold, weary world, far
from the home of her childhood, far from the ones who loved her best. Sallie gone? Sallie far away in the storm and darkness? Why no, of
course not. Sallie was only a little child sleeping quietly in her own
little room. See, the door was ajar and a ray of light from the lamp in
Sallie's room was streaming across the kitchen floor. He must go in and
extinguish the light before it awakened the sleeping child. Why had
Martha left the lamp burning? Surely she must know it would disturb the
child. Well, as soon as he was rested he would go and put it out. How tired, how tired he did feel! He'd worked pretty hard to-day, and
the sun had been hot, so hot. Well, never mind, the hay was all cut now,
a few more days like this and his barn would be filled with the finest
hay in the country. A few more years like this one and he would be the
richest farmer hereabouts. For himself, he did not care, and Martha had
simple tastes like his own. But there was Sallie. She was only a wee tot
now but she would be a woman some day. They must give Sallie all the
advantages they had missed; they must lay by money against the time when
Sallie would be a grown up woman and want things like other girls of her
age. What ailed him, anyway, that a day's work in the hay field should make
him feel like this, so tired, so very tired? He felt a little better now; he would rest a few moments more, then be
off home to supper and to Martha and Sallie. But who was that calling to
him? Why, Martha, to be sure, standing there by the five-barred gate. She had come to meet him with their baby in her arms. That was strange;
it was not Sallie, it was their first-born, the boy with his mother's
eyes who had blessed their home for only a few short months and then
been laid to rest in the churchyard on the hill. The other little tots
were with her, three of them, clinging closely to her skirts. They were
all smiling and holding out their hands to him in invitation. But
Sallie, where was Sallie? Once more Martha called his name. At the sound
of her voice all the wonder, all the worriment, fled from Tony's heart. "Coming, Mother, coming," he called happily, and the smile upon Martha's
face was reflected on his own. Christmas morning dawned bright and clear; the storm had passed in the
night. Something else had passed, too--the soul of an aged farmer. It
was not until the next day they found him, still sitting in the lounging
chair by the stove in which only a small heap of charred ashes remained. They looked upon that serenely smiling face, then from one to another,
and sadly shook their heads. One of their number stepped forward and
with trembling fingers placed in the stiff, cold hand of old Tony, the
letter for which he had watched through long and weary years, the letter
that had come too late. Too late? Nay, not so. Those standing by could not see, as Tony saw, the
woman who lay dying in the great hospital down in the city. They could
not see, as Tony saw, the last rites of the Church administered, the
Sisters of Charity bending near praying, praying for that soul about to
depart upon its last long journey. They could not hear, as Tony heard,
the pale lips speaking their final words:

"You wrote the letter, Sister?" "I wrote the letter, dear. It must have reached them by now." "You told them I was dying? You asked them to forgive?" "I told them all and I'm sure they have forgiven already." "Dear father and mother! God bless them both! God have mercy upon me!" They could not know, but Tony knew. Perhaps that explained the smile on
Tony's face, the smile they could not comprehend. THE TRAMP. "A pretty tough looking character, that! But I suppose you see a great
many just such specimens in this quaint little town of yours." Father Antony's back was turned to the speaker and for several moments
he remained standing at the top of the veranda steps, following with his
eyes the slouching figure that had just passed through the gate and was
tramping slowly along the county road. Then, with a sigh he returned to
his seat and, running his fingers through his hair, remarked half
absently:

"Poor fellow, he looked almost exhausted. I tried to persuade him to
remain here a little longer and rest for a spell. What a life theirs is! Some of them, of course, really enjoy it, but others----. Ah, me! those
poor others. And somehow that tramp who has just left us seems to me to
belong to the latter class rather than to the former. But pardon me,
Father, what was it you were just saying? I was so interested in my
tramp that I failed to catch your words." "I merely remarked," returned the younger priest, smiling, "that you
must see a great many of these nomadic individuals in this quaint little
town of yours. I have been here but a week and that is the sixth
villainous looking rascal who has presented himself and demanded
something to eat." "Yes, a large number of tramps pass through here in the course of a
year, for we are on the direct road between the two largest cities of
the State. Many of them are, as you say, villainous looking, but I do
not think they are half as bad as they look. In fact, in some cases, I
have found them to be pretty good fellows once you had passed the rough
exterior and reached the real man underneath." "You must have had some very interesting experiences with these tramps
of yours; have you not, Father?" asked the younger man curiously. "I
wish you would tell me some of them." Father Anthony shifted his chair so as to command a better view of the
road. He watched in meditative silence until the tramp had become a mere
blot upon the whiteness of the dusty road and had finally disappeared
over the brow of a distant hill. Then he spoke in tones of reminiscence:

"It was on just such a May evening as this, clear and beautiful only
much cooler, that I sat in this very chair and watched the road as I am
doing now. But on that evening I watched anxiously, divided between
hopes and fears, for the figure that was so long in coming; I was
watching for Jim, the tramp. Jim had promised faithfully, but with some
men promises are made only to be broken. I began to fear that Jim was
one of these. Still I prayed fervently and continued to hope, though the
twilight deepened and brought no sign of my vagrant. "My meeting with Jim had come about in this way. For some time I had
been playing a game of hide and seek with a certain backsliding member
of my congregation. The hiding was all on his side, the seeking on mine. Try as I would I could not seem to obtain an interview with him. He was
never at home when I called; so I decided that my only chance of coming
to close quarters with the enemy was to surprise him at his work. That
afternoon I had gone to the quarries and found my man superintending
the gang in charge of the stone-crusher. He certainly was surprised and
not very pleased to see me, and all I could obtain from him after more
than an hour of argument and pleading was a promise that 'he would think
about it.' The 'it' referred to the making of his Easter duty, the time
for which had nearly expired. Bitterly disappointed, and with a feeling
of utter defeat, I was turning away when my steps were arrested by a not
unpleasant voice:

"'Why don't you try your hand on me, Father? I'm a black enough sheep to
keep you busy for a few moments anyway.' "I wheeled around and found myself confronted by a short, thick-set man
of most unattractive appearance, a man whom you would scarce choose as a
companion along a lonely road at night. At a glance I sized up my new
acquaintance: a typical tramp who had taken a job at stoking the engine
to vary the monotony of the road. He was no professional 'hobo,' but
belonged to that class who take to tramping from necessity rather than
from choice--a too great love for the bottle being the necessity. They
find an odd job here and there, hold it until pay day, squander the
month's earnings in the nearest saloon, then on again in search of a job
somewhere else. "I am well acquainted with these men, but there was something about the
rough looking specimen before me, a certain something in his manner, in
his speech, in the twinkle of his eyes, which set him apart from the
rest of his class. A grizzled beard of iron grey concealed the lower
half of his face, and the right temple and cheek were disfigured by a
scar which gave the countenance a decidedly sinister appearance. In
spite of that I felt that the man before me had at one time been
accustomed to a very different life from the one he was leading now. "'Why don't you try your hand on me, Father?' he repeated, and the smile
accompanying the words made the ugly face almost pleasing. "There was not time for a lengthy conversation, the engine requiring
constant attention, but the tramp volunteered the information that he
answered to the name of Jim, and promised to report at the rectory in
the evening and give me a chance to try my hand on him. "In the evening, then, I sat and waited, half fearing that he had
changed his mind and would not come. But just as the first pale stars
began to twinkle in the sky Jim pushed open the gate and I went to meet
him with both hands extended in warmest welcome. He gave me his left
hand, and for the first time I noticed that the right was
gone--amputated at the wrist. Jim saw my glance of shocked pity and
smiled as he said calmly:

"'It was the drink did it, Father--the hand and this scar on my face. I'd been hitting it up pretty lively and didn't realize where I was
walking. The track wasn't wide enough for me and the train. One of us
had to get off, and as the engine was the stronger of the two--well, you
see the result before you.' "'How long have you been tramping, Jim?' I asked. "'More years than I care to think of now, Father. The drink again. In
fact, it's been the drink at every turn; it's ruined my life, made a
complete fool of me. But let's get down to business; only, you'll have
to help me out, it's so long since I went to confession I've almost
forgotten how.' "'Come into the house or the confessional in the church,' I suggested. "'The house or the confessional in the church? No, thank you, Father. My
little friends up yonder, those pretty, sparkling stars, my only
companions on many a lonely night, have been the witnesses of my
degradation. Let them now behold my restoration to the favor of the God
whom I've offended.' "Strange words, those, from a tramp, and I marveled at them. Without
more ado we 'got down to business,' and it was nearly two hours later
when we parted at the gate. In answer to a question of mine, Jim replied
whimsically:

"'Where do I live while I'm working on this job? Well, you see, Father,
I am rather particular with regard to my lodgings, and as there is
nothing around here that quite suits me, I just crawl under the engine
and sleep there.' "'But when it rains, Jim?' "'Well, it just rains, that's all.' "The next morning Jim attended my Mass and received Holy Communion, and
every morning after that when I entered the church to offer up the Holy
Sacrifice the first person I would see would be my one-armed tramp
kneeling in a far corner, his rosary slipping through his fingers. The
rosary had belonged to his mother, and during all his years of tramping
he had guarded it as his most precious treasure. He had worn it in a
little chamois bag suspended from a string around his neck, but had not
used it in many, many years. He came regularly one evening in each week
to make his confession and to have a little chat with me. As the summer
progressed I wondered more and more at this strange new acquaintance of
mine; this rough looking tramp with the manners of a gentleman and the
speech, except for a few lapses in the vernacular of the road, of a man
of considerable education. The oddest thing of all was the feeling I had
that somewhere, at some time, Jim and I had met before. Little tricks of
voice and expression would seem strangely familiar. "The summer gradually faded into autumn, and one evening in late
September when I stood at the gate to say good-night to my tramp, he
remarked sadly:

"'This is good-by as well as good-night, Father. I have given up my
work here and am off early in the morning.' "'Not the road again!' I cried, and the next second would have given
anything to recall the thoughtless words. A pained look crossed Jim's
face, but he answered quietly:

"'No, Father, not the road. Never again shall I return to that life. I
have saved my wages this summer and am going back into the world to
begin life all over again. This time, with God's help, I shall not make
such a muddle of it as I did before.' "The next day he was gone, and many a night as I sat over my study-fire
reading or trying to work up my sermon for Sunday, my thoughts would
stray from the subject in hand and wander out into the world in search
of my friend the tramp. I would listen to the wintry blasts whistling
down my chimney and wonder where Jim was, and wonder still more at his
complete silence. Surely he might let me know if all were well with him. Had he persevered? Or had he, perhaps, lapsed into his former ways, and
was he, even now, tramping the highways and byways? "Winter passed and spring came; still no news of Jim. Another summer,
another fall, another winter. Silence, absolute silence on the part of
my tramp. Then, one evening in May, exactly two years from the day when
I first met him, Jim stood before me once again. I recognized him by the
missing right hand and the scar on the temple. Aside from those two
points and the old merry twinkle in his eye he bore absolutely no
resemblance to my tramp of two years ago. The face was smooth shaven,
the bloat, caused by years of drinking, had all disappeared, and he
looked at least ten years younger than my former friend. His ragged
tramp's garb had been replaced by neat garments such as a fairly
prosperous business man might wear. His whole appearance seemed to
indicate that Jim had done well in the world to which he had returned. Sitting in the garden, he told me all about it. "Yes, he had done well. It had been hard at first, oh! very hard. There
had been a time when, his savings all gone and no employment in sight,
he had faced actual starvation. But the darkest hour comes before dawn,
and that had been Jim's darkest hour. From then on things began to mend. He had obtained a good situation and was happy in it. He had not
written because for long, for so very long, he had no news but bad news
to send. There was nothing but ill-luck and misfortune to report, and he
waited from day to day hoping things would brighten. Then, when the
unexpected stroke of good luck came, he decided to wait yet a little
longer until he could bring me the good news in person. "All the time he was talking I watched his face carefully. That
puzzling, baffling resemblance to some one whom I had known was stronger
than ever since the beard which concealed so much of his face had been
removed. I became more and more convinced that we had met before, but
when and where? I racked my memory, but the name, the personality I
wanted, eluded my grasp. Something of my thoughts must have shown in my
face, for when Jim finished his narrative he threw back his head,
laughing merrily at my very evident perplexity. "'It is really too bad to keep you guessing any longer, Father,' he
said. 'Let me help you to remember when and where we met before. Listen
and I will tell you a little story. "'It is Commencement day at a certain large college in a certain city
which we need not name. The graduating class have met together for the
last time in their own particular class-room. The saintly, white-haired
priest who has watched their progress step by step from the day they
first entered college stands before them. He speaks words to them which
brings tears to those young eyes, accustomed, as a rule, to looking only
on the merry side of life. He speaks words of true affection, of gentle
admonition and fatherly advice. He gives to each youth a tiny silver
medal of our Blessed Mother, and exacts from each one a promise that he
will faithfully carry that little medal until the day of his death.' "As Jim spoke he took from an inner pocket a small medal of our Lady and
laid it on the palm of his hand. I drew forth my rosary, and there,
beside the crucifix, hung a medal the counterpart of Jim's. He smiled as
he continued:

"'I see you remember now, Father, but listen just a little longer for my
story is not finished. From that class-room those lads went forth into
the busy world of men and of affairs. They went their separate ways,
each one to fill that position in life to which he felt himself called,
most of them fired by ambition and confident of success. "'One of those young men left the college that night with his heart as
buoyant and hopeful as any of his companions. Almost from the first,
however, things seemed to go wrong with him. He was an orphan, father
and mother having died a few years before. Perhaps if either parent had
been at hand to warn him of the dangers into which he was drifting, his
life might have been different. Perhaps, even if some one had warned
him, the warning would have passed unheeded. He tried law for a time and
did not like it; tried business and gave that up; drifted from one thing
to another, always drifting lower, lower, until at last he found himself
an outcast and a wanderer. For some years he lived the life of a
vagrant. If at times a longing to return to better ways, a longing for
all that might have been, stirred faintly within him, the feeling was
quickly drowned by recourse to the one thing to which he remained
faithful, the enemy that had brought about his ruin, drink. "'During his wanderings he picked up odd jobs here and there, and one
day he is taken on by the boss of the stone-crusher over there in those
quarries of yours. They were badly in need of some one to stoke the
engine, and even a rough looking tramp was welcome. That same day there
comes to the place a certain priest who is searching for one of the
stray sheep from his own fold. The tramp recognizes the priest at once,
and the sight of that familiar face brings back the old, happy days of
his innocent boyhood. The priest commences to speak; he pleads, he
reasons with the boss of the stone-crusher. In spirit the tramp is once
more back in the college chapel listening to the saintly old man who had
been his guide and confidant in youth, and who had long since passed to
his reward. The vague, discontented longing for better things rises up
in full strength. After all, why not? The look on the priest's face as
he turns away decides him. That look of bitter disappointment, of real
grief, on the face of his old college friend is more than the tramp can
stand. He speaks, the priest turns to him, and--well, the rest of the
story you know for yourself, Father. That is, the rest as far as any
mortal can relate it. The end is not yet, but I trust that end will be
one which will satisfy even you.'" Silence reigned for several moments, the fragrant silence of a warm May
night. And then:

"I am sure it will, I am sure it will," mused Father Anthony, smiling
confidently. "I have no fear as to what the end will be for Jim, my
one-armed tramp." "But the other man, Father, the boss of the stone-crusher? What has
become of him?" "Oh! that little game of hide and seek is still going on, but I have not
lost hope even yet. God's mills grind slowly and we must abide His own
good time, His own good time." "HE HATH PUT DOWN THE MIGHTY." "_Magnificat anima mea Dominum._" The exquisite voice rose and fell
daintily on the incense-laden air. "_Et exultavit spiritus meus in Deo salutari meo,_" responded the chorus
in triumphant harmony. It was a Sunday evening in early June and the hour for Vesper service at
Saint Zita's convent. Reverend Mother mounted the staircase leading to
the chapel, then paused, with her hand upon the door, to listen as the
wonderful soprano again took up the refrain:

"_Quia respexit humilitatem ancillae suae._"

"Poor child, poor child," whispered Reverend Mother, opening the door
and gliding noiselessly to her stall, where she knelt with bowed head
and prayed as she had never prayed before; prayed in fear and trembling
for the future of the girl whose voice had earned for her the title of
"the nightingale of Saint Zita's." Reverend Mother had always dreaded the day when she must part with this
dearly loved child who had been entrusted to her care some ten years
before. A gentleman had come to Saint Zita's bringing with him his
little daughter of six. A man of grave, even stern aspect, there was yet
a look in his eyes which filled the nun's heart with a great pity; it
was the look of one who had suffered deeply and in silence. He was a man
of few words and his errand was quickly explained. He was obliged to be
absent from home the greater part of the time and could not attend to
the education of his little girl as he would like to do. His wife was
not of our faith and was also too busily occupied to look after the
child. He did not mention that her occupation was that of society
butterfly, who sacrificed homelife, husband and child in the pursuit of
pleasure. Would Reverend Mother kindly undertake the charge of his
little Nita's education, spiritual as well as intellectual? Would she be
to the child what father and mother ought to be and could not? Reverend Mother had gladly undertaken the task, and since then Nita had
never been separated from her even for a day. During the vacations, when
other pupils scattered far and wide to their various homes, Nita had
remained at the convent, roaming at will through the deserted
class-room and beautiful grounds. She was the pet and darling of the
entire community. In the long summer afternoons when the nuns carried
their sewing out to the orchard behind the house, or to the pine grove
on the hill, where one could obtain such a lovely view of the river,
Nita would flit about amongst them like a veritable woodland fairy. Her
snatches of song and merry laughter made sylvan echoes ring and brought
smiles to the faces of the simple women who watched her with loving
sympathetic glances. Many a time, especially of late, had Reverend Mother looked at her with
anxious foreboding in her eyes. What would the future hold for this
child of hers, endowed as she was with singular beauty and a wonderful
voice? She was a docile child, sunny and sweet-tempered, and that very
pliancy of nature was what caused the nun many a moment of uneasiness. What would become of her once she had left the shelter of her convent
home and was exposed to the influence of the light-hearted, merry,
soulless mother from whom she had inherited her beauty; the mother whose
only god was pleasure, whose one ambition was to be the best dressed,
the most popular, the most envied woman in her set. The only hope lay in
keeping Nita at the convent as long as possible, or at least until her
character had developed sufficiently to enable her to enter her mother's
world and hold her own against it. Still, Reverend Mother dreaded the
day when she must part with her child, and now that the parting had come
so unexpectedly, so much sooner than she had anticipated, it was doubly
hard to bear. The nun knelt in the chapel that June evening and prayed with all her
heart, not only for the future of the girl whose voice filled the air
with such exquisite melody, but also for help to break to that girl as
gently as possible the sad news awaiting her. Word had just arrived that
her father lay dangerously ill and Nita must hasten to his bedside if
she wished to see him once more in this world. The carriage was waiting
and Nita must go at once. The Benediction over and the lights extinguished, all save the tiny
radiance of the Sanctuary lamp, with a final appealing glance towards
the Tabernacle door, Reverend Mother left the chapel, descended to her
office, where she was accustomed to interview the pupils each in turn,
and summoned Nita to her presence. A little later she stood at the foot of the convent steps and watched
the carriage drive away with a weeping, forlorn little figure huddled in
one corner, while the good lay-sister who accompanied her vainly essayed
words of cheer and consolation. She watched with tear-dimmed eyes as the
carriage rolled rapidly down the avenue and out through the gate, then
entered the house and repaired at once to her refuge in all trials and
afflictions that might beset her way, the convent chapel. There, with
her eyes on the little golden door behind which the dearest and best of
Comforters is always waiting for the sorrowful, the sin-laden, the
weary-hearted, to come to Him, she found consolation and peace. Her
child was in the Lord's hands and surely in those hands she would be
safe. Many times have the June roses blossomed and fallen since the night on
which Reverend Mother stood in the convent doorway and watched the
departure of the carriage which was bearing her child away from her out
into the world of suffering and sin. Once more, the June sunshine is
flooding the land and the air is heavy with the odor of June blossoms. In a small town in the south of France, a young woman, gowned in deepest
mourning, sits by her own casement and gazes gloomily, despairingly, out
into the gathering twilight. On a table at her side is a small pile of
money which she has counted over and over again in the vain hope that
she may have made a mistake and that, perhaps, after all, the amount is
not quite so small as she has made it out to be. That little pile of
money represents her entire worldly wealth, and when it is gone what is
to become of her? Work? She glances at the soft, delicate hands resting
idly in her lap. Their whiteness is dazzling as compared with the black
of her gown, and she smiles rather bitterly. What work could hands like
those perform? They are beautiful certainly, but useless, absolutely
useless, just as she herself is useless. There is not one thing by which
she can earn her daily bread, and earn it she must or starve. To what a
pass has she come; she, who at one time had wealth at her command and
the world at her feet. As she sits there, broken in spirit, broken in health, a middle-aged
woman in appearance, while in years not much beyond her first youth,
she recalls those triumphs of her past. Her success had been marvelous
though short-lived. Her mind wanders back to the days when she was the
pet and idol of musical Europe. The mere announcement that she was to
sing would pack the largest opera house to the very doors. Ah! those
days of triumph, when she had passed from one success to another, when
the mighty ones of the earth were pleased to do her honor, when the
incense of praise and flattery was burned day and night upon the shrine
of her greatness. Her mother was with her then, the beautiful, fairylike
little mother for whom her love had been almost worship. Her voice had
been with her, too, that voice at which two continents had marveled. Both are gone now, the beautiful mother, the wonderful voice; gone, gone
forever, and she is alone in the world, alone and poor and friendless. She recalls the first and only time when she appeared in public in
America, her native land. She did not want to sing that night, for her
mother, who had been slightly ailing for some time, seemed very much
worse. She had decided not to appear at all, but had finally yielded to
the mother's entreaties and driven to the opera house. What an ovation
she had received that night! She could see it all again: the lights, the
flowers, the music, the vast audience simply frantic with delight at her
performance. At the close she had been recalled again and again, and
those enthusiastic plaudits still rang in her ears. How little she had
dreamed as she smiled and bowed her thanks, and how little those who
watched her had dreamed that never again was that wonderful voice to be
heard by mortal ears, that voice which had stirred millions of hearts
and made its owner one of the foremost singers of her day. She had driven home from that scene of triumph to find that her mother's
condition had become alarmingly worse in the few hours of her absence,
and before morning she had stood beside a deathbed the recollection of
which makes her shudder even now. The poor, pretty butterfly, her short
summer over, fought frantically but vainly against the annihilation
which was coming upon her. The memory of her early training at Saint
Zita's, the memory too of that other death-scene she had witnessed when
her father had passed away so calmly, so peacefully, with his eyes upon
the crucifix and the words of God's minister ringing in his ears, came
to the girl and she had begged to be allowed to send for a priest. Her
mother had never professed any belief, but it seemed terrible to Nita to
have her die without even a prayer to help her in that last awful
moment. Entreaties were of no avail. The idea of a priest, of religion,
of even a final prayer, was laughed to scorn. Besides, she was not
dying. She was young yet and was going to have many more years of
sunshine and pleasure before sinking into the oblivion of the cold, dark
grave. No, no, let them not speak of death, that fearsome, awful
spectre. She was going to live. Take it away, take it away, that
dreadful thing standing there beside her, laying its icy hand upon her
forehead. Its touch was turning her to stone. She was cold, and it was
growing so dark she could see nothing. Why did they not bring lights;
why did they not take away the dreadful thing beside her bed? The final struggle was fearful to behold, and even now Nita is haunted
day and night by the scene. Even now, there are times when she springs
from her sleep with a cry of terror, thinking she is again assisting at
the departure of that poor soul who fought so frantically against the
power of death. With her mother, a large part of their income died also, but she still
had sufficient money to supply her wants. Her voice, too, was a fortune
in itself; managers all over the country were eager and anxious to sign
a contract on any terms she chose to dictate. The shock of her mother's
death so unnerved her that she decided to spend a year in rest and
travel before returning to the stage. She had come abroad again, but had
scarcely reached London when she was attacked by a severe throat
trouble. The most eminent physicians were consulted, various treatments
tried, but the disease would not yield. The south of France was
recommended, and hither she had come in a last vain effort to save the
voice which had charmed all Europe. At first she was incredulous. Then,
she hoped against hope that time would prove them wrong and that the
lost voice would return some day even better and richer than it was
before. Now, all her hopes are gone, all her delusions swept away. She
knows she will never sing again, and here in her hand she holds the
cable message which forms the last in this series of dire misfortunes
which have come upon her within the last two years. It is the message
which tells her that her investments have failed and that she is
penniless. She sits by her window in the June twilight, the numbness of despair
taking possession of her. On the table lies all the money she owns in
the world. It is sufficient to cover the few bills she owes, the salary
of the woman who has traveled with her as maid and companion, and pay
her passage back to her native land. But what then? America once
reached, where can she go, to whom can she turn? The distant relatives,
the friends who crowded around her in her days of success, anxiously
seeking a smile, a word, a token of her favor, how will they receive her
if she goes to them a pauper, a dependent upon their charity? There is
no one to whom she can turn, no place to which she can go, and as the
twilight deepens a heavier blackness settles upon the soul of the girl. Presently the sound of music breaks in on the evening stillness, the
sound of an organ responding to the touch of skilled fingers and blended
with it the tones of women's voices. The nuns in a neighboring convent
are chanting the evening office. The sound recalls the chapel at Saint
Zita's, the orchard, the nuns, dear kind Reverend Mother. What peaceful,
happy hours those were? Has she ever known real happiness since she
quitted the quiet convent home of her childhood? Even in the days of her
greatest triumphs, was there not always something she could not attain,
the little bit more which was always wanting? But at Saint Zita's, how
different, oh! how different! Happiness such as the world could not
dream of ruled within its walls. She wonders what they are doing now,
the dear nuns and Reverend Mother. They, too, are probably in the chapel
reciting the office; some of them thinking of her perhaps. What would
they say if they knew how false she has proven to all their teachings,
how careless she has grown in the practice of that religion which is
dearer to them than life itself? A sentence in the last letter she received from Reverend Mother comes
now to her mind. The letter reached her years before and has never been
answered. The words are these:

"Dear child, you are successful and happy now, with the world at your
feet, but if the day ever comes when all these things fall away from you
and you stand in need of a true friend or of any assistance we can
render, remember Saint Zita's is still your home and your old mother's
heart is sick with longing for a sight of her child. Worldly joys must
vanish, worldly hopes decay, but Saint Zita's and Reverend Mother will
be here waiting for you." How she longs for the peace and quiet of the old home and the comforting
touch of Reverend Mother's kind arms about her! What is it that the nuns
are singing! The "Magnificat." She listens in silence for a few moments,
then, a strange smile curving her lips, she recites in unison with the
choir:

"_Deposuit potentes de sede._ Yea, Lord, Thou hast indeed put down the
mighty." It is not until after the voices are stilled, long after the world is
wrapped in slumber, that the girl turns from her open window and gathers
together the small store of money on the table beside her, repeating to
herself the while, slowly, half absently:

"I wonder; I wonder." *       *       *       *       *

Another year has rolled around and again the June roses in the garden
at Saint Zita's fill the summer air with their heavy fragrance. The
convent door opens and Reverend Mother steps out into the portico
accompanied by a caller, one of the "old girls" come back to pay a
fleeting visit to the home of her childhood. The nun has changed but
little with the passing of the years, but those who love her best note
with anxious eyes the slight stoop of the shoulders and feebleness of
gait. The visitor glances idly at a lay-sister who is busily engaged sweeping
the long flight of stone steps leading from the portico to the driveway
below. Her glance passes over the insignificant figure of the
lay-sister, and, looking across to the pine grove on the hill, she
speaks to Reverend Mother. "Do you know, Mother, every time I stand here and look at those trees I
am reminded of Nita, 'the nightingale of Saint Zita's,' as we used to
call her. That grove was ever her favorite resort and even the odor of
pines makes me think of her. I wish I knew what had become of her. I
witnessed her performance the only time she sang here in America, and
truly, it was wonderful. Then she disappeared completely from the face
of the earth, as completely as if the ground had opened and swallowed
her. Rumors came of her travels in England and the south of France and
after that no news of her could be obtained. Occasionally, my dear
Mother," and the visitor smiled knowingly; "occasionally I have fancied
that you knew her whereabouts and could tell us of her." "You are right, dear child, I could tell you, but I may not." "At least, Mother, tell me this: She is well and happy?" "She is well, indeed, and I think I may safely say happier than she has
ever been before." "Thank you, Mother," and the visitor descends the steps and is gone. "Sister Gabrielle," calls Reverend Mother gently. The lay-sister approaches, her broom still in her hand. "You heard our conversation, Sister?" "Yes, my Mother." "I spoke truly, did I not, dearest child?" and the old eyes peer
anxiously into the depths of the younger and smiling eyes raised to meet
her gaze. "You spoke truly, my Mother. Never before have I known what real peace
and real happiness were. Never, did I dream that life on earth could be
as mine is, so happy that it seems to me a little foretaste of the joy
the angels must know in heaven. _Deposuit potentes de sede, et exaltavit
humiles._"




A MEMORABLE CHRISTMAS MORNING. On the outskirts of one of our large mill towns, at the very end of a
narrow street lined on each side by a row of dwelling houses of the
poorer class, stood a tiny cottage. It was a humble, unpretentious abode
of only four rooms, but it was home to the weary girl struggling up the
hillside. The tired eyes brightened and lagging steps quickened
involuntarily as she turned the corner and saw the welcoming light
streaming from the kitchen window. It was very late on the eve of Christmas day and the street was deserted
save for the solitary figure hastening towards that beacon light of
home. Darkness and silence reigned in most of the houses she passed, and
she sighed as she said to herself:

"Poor mother! Still up and still at work. I wish she would not work so
hard; there is no need for it now." Reaching the kitchen window, she stood for a moment to take note of the
little scene within. By the table her mother sat sewing, her head bent
over her work and fingers flying as she plied the needle in and out. As
the girl watched, the mother looked up at the clock on the shelf above
the stove, shook her head sadly, and hastily brushing away the tears
which spring to her eyes, resumed her sewing. "Poor mother!" again sighed the girl. "Worrying about Tim, as usual, I
suppose." Then opening the kitchen door, she stepped into the welcome
warmth and light of home. "Well, little mother," she cried cheerily; "here I am at last, and I
suppose you thought I was never coming. You see, dear, we had to work
very late to-night to finish a large order. Then there was confession
and I was delayed there quite a while. I was almost the last to be heard
and it was considerably after ten by the time I left the church. Everyone in town seemed to be going to confession to-night." "Not everyone," said her mother sadly. "There is _one_ who has not been
in spite of his promise to us and to the Father." The girl glanced quickly at the table on which plates for two were
laid, then at the supper keeping hot upon the stove, and exclaimed
rather bitterly:

"So Tim is away again, as usual, is he? And he promised faithfully to
come home early to-night and go to confession for Christmas. But then,
he promised the same last Easter and every First Friday since, and has
broken his word every time. Mother, how long is it now since Tim has
been to Mass or to confession?" "I do not like to think, child; it's a pretty long time. I can't
understand what has come over him. He used to be such a good boy, such a
help and comfort to me, and now he is slowly breaking my heart. I've had
trials enough, trials enough, as you know, but I never complained. I
never murmured till now. I was always ready to say: 'God's will be
done.' But this, this is different. Long ago, when you and Tim were
children, and the twins upstairs were but a few weeks old, and your
father met with that accident that crippled him for life, I only said:
'God's will be done.' All through the years he lingered in sickness and
suffering and I had to work day and night, day and night to support you
all, I still said only: 'God's will be done.' All through that long,
hard fight to keep starvation from the door, when I saw my little
children crying at times with cold and hunger, and watched my husband
slowly dying and was unable to give him any of those little comforts and
luxuries which the sick require, my only words were: 'His holy will be
done.' But in this, the worst of all the trials that have come to me,
when I see my boy drifting away from us all, turning his back on God and
his religion and wandering away night after night with careless, jovial
companions, intent only on the pursuits of pleasure and folly; God help
me, I simply cannot bow my head and say: 'God's will be done'"; and
tears streamed unheeded from the mother's eyes. The girl stepped quickly to her mother's side and drew the gray head
gently to her shoulder, whispering comfortingly: "There, there, little
mother, don't cry so. You are fretting yourself to death over Tim, and
surely, surely, things will come right in the end. Tim is not a bad boy,
mother dear, only a little wild just now. Remember how good he used to
be, how kind, how helpful, in that hard time you were just speaking
about. Remember how good he was when father died, and how young he was
when he first went to work to help you support us all. Tim's a good boy
at heart, mother, and he's bound to come back before long." "Yes, dearie, that's what the Father says," returned her mother, slowly
drying her eyes and rising to lay the girl's supper upon the table. "He says not to worry but just pray, pray, pray, and Tim will surely
come back before long. But there, dear, sit down and eat your supper;
then we'll fill the children's stockings for I can guess what is in all
those parcels you brought home. Poor little things, it would not be
Christmas for them unless they hung their stockings. Thank God, I've
always managed to find something to put into them if it was only an
orange or an apple and a little candy. Indeed, that's about all it was
when you and Tim were younger, but life is so much easier now that you
are helping me." "And it is going to be easier still, mother dear, and you will be the
happiest little woman in the world one of these days. This wild spell of
Tim's is bound to pass and then he will settle down and be his own old
self again. There, dear," the girl continued, a few moments later; "my
supper is finished and now I'll clear away these dishes and fill the
children's stockings. Just see all the pretty things I've brought for
them. Won't their little eyes dance when they see them! Then, mother
dear, before we go to sleep, you and I will say the rosary for Tim. It
is too late for him to go to confession to-night, but wherever he is,
and God alone knows where he may be, he needs our prayers and he will
have them. As the good Father said, we will pray, pray, pray. If we only
pray hard enough and trust hard enough, things are bound to come right
in the end." The afternoon and evening had been unusually busy ones for Father
Xavier. Hour after hour he had sat in the confessional listening to the
tales of sin and sorrow that were poured into his ears. Hour after hour
he had spent bestowing the priestly absolution on the repentant sinner,
giving fatherly advice and consolation to the sorrowful, sending all
those troubled souls away lighter and happier for his ministrations. Hour after hour he had waited, hoping against hope, for the sound of the
one voice above all others which he most desired to hear. In a town like that which formed Father Xavier's parish, the pastor is
indeed the father of his flock. Every man, woman and child is known to
him personally, and he takes a direct interest in each one's welfare. As
Father Xavier sat that Christmas eve and listened to the confessions of
his people, his heart grew sad and hope gradually died away as he waited
in vain for the voice of one whom he was striving to bring back to God
and to his duty. The crowd of penitents melted away one by one, the few last stragglers
had been heard, and still the priest waited in his confessional. The boy
might possibly come even yet, his boy whom he had loved with a special
affection ever since he was a tiny little chap first learning his
prayers in the baby class of the Sunday-school. Why was it he had not
been able to hold the boy? Why had he not been able to prevent his
wandering away with bad companions, this absolute neglect of all
religious duties on the part of his boy? Why could he not succeed in
bringing him back again even though the boy had wandered far afield? Father Xavier had hoped much from this Christmas eve, for Tim had
promised faithfully to make his confession and to start anew in the path
from which his feet had strayed. Tim had promised it as his Christmas
gift to the Father. Yes, Tim had promised, but Tim had broken his
promise. With a sigh of utter weariness, weariness of body, weariness of mind,
Father Xavier rose and left the confessional. He glanced over the
church; it was empty. He glanced towards the altar and his eyes rested
on the sanctuary lamp which appeared to be burning with unwonted
brightness. The hour was late, much later than he was accustomed to keep the church
open, still he lingered, unwilling to give up a last forlorn hope that
his boy might yet keep his promise. With eyes fixed on the Tabernacle
door, the priest knelt and commenced to recite the rosary, pleading,
pleading for his boy. The joyful mysteries were finished and no one
came; the sorrowful, still no one; finally, the glorious mysteries, and
still the priest was alone. With one last appeal for the welfare of that wandering soul, Father
Xavier rose from his knees and walked to the door of the church to close
it for the night. He passed out on the steps and stood for a moment
listening to a band of roisterers that were coming up the street
disturbing the peaceful quiet of the night with their noisy songs and
laughter. Where was his boy at that moment? He might possibly be with
this very band of half-drunken revellers who were even now passing by
and would soon be swallowed up in the darkness of the street. If not
with this band, he was probably wandering somewhere with another just
like it. Where was his boy at that moment? The priest turned, re-entered
the church, and locking the door, passed up the aisle extinguishing the
lights as he went along. He stood before the altar and once more looked
at the sanctuary lamp. It was certainly burning with unusual brightness
to-night. It set weird, fantastic shadows dancing along the walls and
peopled the dim recesses of the church with goblin shapes. It seemed
beckoning to him, calling to him, drawing him gradually to the steps of
the altar, where he sank upon his knees to pray once more for his
wandering boy. For yet an hour the priest lingered before the Tabernacle. Then, utterly
worn out in mind and body, he passed through the sacristy, locked the
door, and mounted the steps of his own house to seek a few hours of
rest before commencing the arduous duties of Christmas day. The church and rectory were situated on a hill and the priest stood in
his doorway and looked down upon the town below. It was now after
midnight, but many lights were still burning and the faint sound of
distant merry-making reached the priest's ears. Was his boy down there
among the revellers? Beyond the town lay the river, frozen, dark and still; and beyond that
again shone the lights of the neighboring city. Was his boy over there
beyond that dark, silent river? Was he over there in the city in some
one of those dens of iniquity which had lured so many young men to their
ruin? Well, wherever the boy was he must be left now to the care of God and
his angel for Father Xavier had done all he could that night; and the
priest went in and closed the door. At that same moment, in a little cottage at the other end of the town, a
sleepless mother rose from her knees beside the kitchen table and passed
slowly up the stairs to her own room. The children and the eldest girl
were long since asleep, but the mother could not rest for thinking of
her wayward boy. Where was he to-night; where at this very moment? And
he had promised, promised faithfully to turn over a new leaf with this
Christmas eve. Christmas eve was here, nay, it was come and gone for
midnight had sounded and it was now Christmas morning. Still, this night
must be for her as all those other nights when she had lain awake hour
after hour listening in silent anguish for the footstep that did not
come. She had hoped much from that promise of his to Father Xavier and
to her, and her disappointment was proportionately bitter. The mother walked to the window and looked out upon the silent, frosty
night. Low down upon the horizon myriads of stars were twinkling
merrily, but high up in the heavens the moon shone with a brilliant
radiance that totally eclipsed all lesser lights. The night was very
still, very beautiful, but the silence and the beauty failed to bring
peace to the mother's heart. She looked up into the heavens. How
placidly cold the moon looked back at her, the same moon that was
probably shedding its beams upon her boy at that moment and could tell
her where he was if it could but speak. Why, oh why, could those beams
not speak and tell her what they saw; why could they not bring her some
message from the absent one! She had never felt like this before, she
had never felt so restless, so uneasy. It was impossible to think of
sleep; she would pray still longer. Perhaps the boy needed her prayers;
perhaps he was in danger, danger of body, danger of soul, and needed her
help. Her rosary in her fingers, she knelt by the window praying,
praying, while the moonbeams danced and played around the kneeling
figure. Perhaps it was just as well they could not speak and tell her
what they saw out there upon the river. Perhaps they were trying to tell
her and could not; trying to tell her of the three men, one of whom was
scarce more than a boy, struggling out there in the icy water,
struggling for life as the current sought to drag them down beneath the
frozen surface. Their fingers clutched desperately at the ragged edges
of the ice that had broken through with them and cracked and crumbled
away at their touch. Now but two figures were visible to the watching moonbeams; one had been
dragged down into the black waters, down to his death in the freezing
depths below. For a moment a cloud covered the moon's face obscuring its view of
things terrestrial. When it passed and that scene upon the river was
once more visible, only one figure remained still struggling bravely;
still clutching at the slippery, crackling ice; still fighting, not for
life alone, but for his soul's salvation. What thoughts must have passed
through his mind in those dreadful, despairing moments! Thoughts of sins
committed, of graces neglected; thoughts of all that might have been and
of all that was. Who can know of the sorrow and remorse that filled his
heart, of the wild cry for help and pardon that went up from the river
that night? Meanwhile, the moon shone calmly, steadily, on the boy still fighting
for his life, on the mother praying at her chamber window, and on good
Father Xavier sleeping the sleep of the exhausted. Somewhat later, but still before the dawn, he was summoned from that
sleep to answer a sick call from the hospital just across the river, to
which he was chaplain. Three young men coming home from the city shortly
after midnight had attempted to cross the frozen river, though warned of
the danger of doing so. The ice had broken through, two were drowned,
one saved, and the doctors thought he would live though unconscious at
present. No, the names of the young men were not known as yet. The sisters at the
hospital sent for the priest because the boy brought there wore a
scapular and they knew he must be a Catholic. Aside from that nothing
was known about him. Father Xavier's heart stood still. Something told him that his boy had
been one of those three. Two drowned, one saved! Which, oh, which was
the one saved? The hospital reached, it was with rapidly beating heart he followed the
nurse through the ward and stood beside the bed at the farther end. The
night light burned low and the features of the boy upon the bed were
scarcely visible. Stooping low, a fervent "Thank God" broke from the
priest's lips as he recognized in the silent figure, the boy for whom
his heart had been yearning. His boy had been the one that was saved. Yes, saved from death, saved from worse than death, saved to carry out
the resolutions he had made while struggling in the icy river that
Christmas morning. NANCY'S TALE. "Dear, dear! but God's ways are wonderful, there's no denyin' that. Many
a time we poor mortals think if we only had the handlin' of things, the
world would be a pleasanter place for some of us, but I reckon the Lord
knows His own business best. He usually manages to bring things out
right in the end, so He does." Nancy sat before the kitchen stove, rocking to and fro, and gazing
abstractedly before her. Her mood was a reminiscent one and I knew if I
gave her time enough she would launch forth into one of the interesting
narratives of which she possessed a goodly store. To have interrupted
her train of thought by even a whisper would have been fatal; silence
and patience must be my watch-words. Presently she turned to me with the
query:

"'Member Mona, the old apple-woman you met here about a year ago?" Remember the apple-woman? Indeed I did; once having met Mona it was
impossible to forget her. Besides, she was, one might say, one of the
landmarks of the town, the frail, shadowy little woman who sold her
apples and peanuts and candy from her stand on the street-corner. Nancy's words reminded me that I had not seen Mona lately at her usual
place of business. "Well," resumed Nancy, "Mona's gone, gone forever. Poor Mona! It's the
hard life she's had, and I'm after thinkin' she's not sorry that it's
over and she's found peace an' happiness at last. Want to know her
story? Well, I'll tell it to you, for it's me that can, havin' known her
since we was wee scraps of babies playin' on the floor together back
there in the old country. Yes, indeed, we were babies together, we grew
up together, an' we come out here to America on the same ship. Dear,
dear, how long ago that was, an' it don't seem much more than yesterday. "Well, as I was sayin', times was mighty hard in Ireland that year,
specially in the little town where me an' Mona was born an' reared. Crops failed, work was slack; finally, famine an' pestilence took
possession of the land. Ah! child, child, you cannot dream what them
words mean, famine an' pestilence. To see the rich growin' poor, the
poor starvin' an' dyin' on every hand; the little children cryin' with
cold an' hunger, an' the fathers an' mothers with ne'er a scrap of food
to give 'em. That was the state of things in Ireland the year we left
it. "The plague had carried off my father an' mother, my brothers was all
married an' moved away, an' my only sister was at service in London, so
when Mona begged me to come to America with her an' Michael an' the
little ones, I just jumped at the chance. Michael was a good fellow,
sober an' industrious, but there was no work to be had at home and he
had heard such wonders of the land across the sea. There, a man that was
a man had no trouble in findin' work an' making a comfortable livin' for
himself an' family. He wanted to leave Mona with his sister in Dublin,
who offered to care for her an' the children until he'd made a home for
'em in the country he was goin' to. But no, Mona wouldn't hear to that. She'd promised at God's altar to take him for better or worse an' to
cling to him till death. Because the worse had come, she wasn't goin' to
desert him an' let him go out alone to the cold land of the stranger to
fight his battle all by himself. She'd go with him an' stand by him and
help an' comfort him in his struggles. She knew she could help him. She'd been taught by the nuns an' could do all sorts of fine sewin'. In
America, as in Dublin, there must be rich ladies who would pay well for
a bit of fine embroidery or hand-made lace. No, no, Mona wouldn't be
left behind; he must take her an' the little ones, no matter what was
before them. It was settled at last that we was all to go together, an'
so, one bright mornin' we stood on the deck of the ship that was
carryin' us far away from home an' all we loved, far away to the strange
land across the sea. With the tears runnin' down our faces, we waved
farewell to the shores of Ireland, an' Mona, though she didn't know it,
was wavin' farewell to happiness in this world. Poor girl, it's little
she knew from that day on but grief an' trouble an' sufferin'. "Well, child, as I was sayin', it was the fine, bright mornin' that we
left Ireland, but the good weather held for only a few days after. Then,
there blew up such a storm as I never see before an' hope never to see
again. It was fearful, fearful. I couldn't describe it to you if I
tried. We just lay in our berths, every one of us, our backs agin the
wall, our knees braced agin the board in front, an' we holdin' on for
dear life expectin' every moment to be dashed out on to the floor an'
have all our bones broken. We was too frightened to say a word, but we
prayed, oh, my! how we did pray, every mother's son of us. For nigh onto
three days that poor boat struggled on bravely agin the ragin' storm,
but the ship wasn't built that could live in that sea, an' the end was
bound to come sooner or later. Come, it did, at last. An officer stood
on the stairs orderin' us all up onto the deck; the ship had sprung a
leak, the water was pourin' in faster than they could pump it out, an'
we must take to the boats at once. "I never can remember rightly what happened then. It seems now such a
confusin' jumble of men, women and childer, all screamin' an' rushin'
for the stairs, and all the time the wind was a howlin' an' the vessel
was groanin' an' pitchin' so you had to cling to whatever was nearest to
keep on your feet at all. I don't know how we got there, but the next
thing I remember was standin' on the deck an' hangin' on to something
to keep from bein' washed overboard by the great waves that broke over
the ship an' flooded her from stem to stern. Mona stood near me with the
baby on her arm an' holdin' tight to the hand of little Gerald who hid
his face in her skirt an' sobbed in terror. Michael was beside her, one
arm holdin' her close while with the other he hung onto the railin' just
as I was doin'. Pretty soon, the boats was lowered an' everyone made a
rush for 'em. There was a shout of:

"'Stand back, there, stand back! Women an' children first; only the
women an' children.' "The ship's officers an' sailors beat back the men an' commenced puttin'
the women into the boats as fast as they could. One of 'em caught Mona
by the arm an' tried to hurry her away. She struggled with him an'
begged to be left with Michael. The sailor swore at her an' then I heard
Michael's voice, calm an' steady, above the din of the storm:

"'Go at once, asthore,' say he; 'for the sake of the childer, go at
once. Sure, dearie,' says he, 'we're in the Lord's hands anyway! can't
ye trust Him on the water just the same as on the land?' "The sailor lifted Mona an' the baby in his arm (it's the wee bit of a
thing she was always) an' passed her on to another to be lowered into
the boat. Michael caught up little Gerald an' cried out to me: 'Take the
boy with you, Nancy; take him quick, girl.' But before I could lay my
hand on the child I was seized and put into the boat beside Mona. The
poor girl screamed and held out her arms for the little lad, but the
boat was shoved off an' the last thing I can remember, as a mountain of
water rolled up between us an' the ship, was seein' Michael still
clingin' to the rail an' holdin' little Gerald on his arm. Then Mona
fainted agin my shoulder and I had my hands full tendin' her an' the
baby. "It was nearly dusk when we took to the boat, an' pretty soon it was so
dark you could scarce see your hand before you. I'll never forget the
horrors of that night, indeed then I won't, tossin' on top of waves as
big as mountains an' the next minute goin' down, down, down, till I
thought sure we'd strike bottom before ever we come up again. But even
the longest night must wear away, an' when day broke we seen a big
vessel comin' towards us an' in the course of an hour or so we was all
transferred to her decks. She cruised around for a time, hopin' to pick
up some of the other boats, but couldn't find none of 'em. There was no
tellin' how far away from the wreck an' the boats we'd drifted in the
night. The vessel that picked us up was bound for America an' so we
continued our voyage to this country. "I've often heard people complain of the coldness an' hardness of the
world; by 'the world,' always meanin' the folks that live in it, I
suppose. To my way of thinkin' there's a deal more kindness in the world
than there is selfishness an' badness, an' the people on that steamer
proved me right in one case anyway. They made up a purse among 'em an'
give a share to each of us that had been picked out of the sea, as you
might say. So, when we landed, we each had a little money to start in
with. I soon found work in a mill, an' my poor Mona managed to keep
herself an' the baby by doin' fine sewin'. For a long time we kep' house
together, me an' Mona, then I married an' moved away to another town. My
own troubles come on me thick an' fast after that an' what with one
thing an' another, an' movin' here an' there, it was years before I set
eyes on her again. Then we met quite by accident an' I found she was
livin' not far from here with an old woman who peddled shoestrings an'
pencils on the street. Mona herself kep' a stand on a corner where she
sold apples an' peanuts an' such stuff. "That night she come to see me here an' we talked over old times an' all
that had happened since last we met. She'd done well at her sewin', she
said, and brought up the baby in tolerable comfort. Then, just as the
child was growin' into a woman that could be of help to her mother an'
pay her back for her years of workin' an' strugglin', she was took down
with consumption. All the little poor Mona had managed to save went in
carin' for her sick daughter an' buryin' her when she died. By that
time, Mona's health was pretty well broke up, her eyes was not as good
as they used to be, an' she had to give up the sewin'. She fell in with
the old woman who peddled shoestrings, and, by her advice, started in
with her apple-stand. They'd been together ever since an' managed to
earn a livin' between 'em. We talked an' we talked that night, an' when
Mona was goin' she turned to me an' says:

"'Nancy,' says she, 'I can't tell you how thankful I am to have seen
you again. An' I can't tell you how much good you've done me. Nancy,'
says she, 'I've been a wicked woman, a wicked, rebellious woman,' says
she. 'I've said dreadful things in my heart an' felt hard an' bitter at
times against Almighty God for all the trials an' sufferin' He sent me. When I look at you, I'm ashamed of myself. I've lost a husband, so have
you; I lost a daughter, you lost two; my son sleeps at the bottom of the
sea, but your son--.Nancy, Nancy, when I go home to-night, I'll get down
on my knees an' thank God that my boy is sleepin' at the bottom of the
sea instead of wanderin' the earth a shame an' a disgrace to me.' "You see, child, that was before my Danny come back to me to be
reconciled to His God. It was while he was still wanderin' I didn't know
where, an' goin' from one piece of villainy to the next. "Poor Mona, I don't believe she was half as bad as she made herself out
to be, an' certainly from that day to this I've never heard a complaint
or a murmur cross her lips. She's been sick, too, most all the time, an'
there's been many a day when she'd ought to be home in bed but off she'd
go an' stand on her corner an' peddle her apples because the old woman
that lived with her was sicker than she an' they wouldn't have no money,
come rent day, unless Mona went out an' earned it for 'em. Talk about
the heroes that done such wonderful things that folks has to write whole
books about 'em! I tell you what, child, there's many a hero hid away in
the dirty little side-streets and alley-ways of every big city; only
folks don't know about 'em. To my mind, Mona was one of them heroes; so
sweet an' patient, pretty well on in years herself, an' all crippled
with the rheumatism, but goin' out day after day to sell her apples; a
slavin' an' a killin' herself for a woman a little older an' a little
sicker than she was. An' all this because the old woman had been kind to
her in her hour of greatest need. "Well, after findin' her again, I seen Mona every day; she used to come
here in the evenin' an' we'd sit an' talk of them that was gone. She was
with me when my Danny died, an' she thanked God with me for havin'
brought him back to me in the end. Then, one night, Mona didn't come,
but they brought me a message sayin' she was in the hospital, dyin' from
an accident, an' wanted to see me right away. I didn't let the grass
grow under my feet you may be sure, an' before long I stood beside the
bed where she was lyin', her poor, pale face all drawn with sufferin'. I've called her a hero for the life she'd led, an' her end was sure
enough a hero's end. That afternoon a child had started to run across
the street at the corner where Mona's apple-stand was. He didn't see the
horse an' team that come tearin' up the street, an' the driver was too
busy lashin' the horse to see the child. In spite of her rheumatism,
Mona dashed in front of the team, and with a quick shove, sent the child
flyin' out of harm's away. He rolled over an' over on the street, but
beyond a scratch or two wasn't hurt. But Mona fell an' the team passed
over her ankles crushin' both of 'em badly. Her age an' the shock,
together with her injury, made 'em sure she couldn't live long. The
chaplain had been sent for, they told me, an' would come at any moment
now. "She was sleepin' when I reached her, so I sat down beside the bed an'
waited. The priest come an' stood lookin' down at her, an' the kindness
an' pity on his face was wonderful to see. He looked at me an' I fair
jumped out of my chair with the shock his eyes sent through me. "'Glory be to God!' I says, blessin' myself, for I was all a tremble
with the fright of it. 'Sure it's Michael Conners himself come back from
the dead.' "That very minute Mona's eyes opened slowly an' fixed themselves on the
priest's face. A smile that brought the tears to my eyes, it was that
beautiful, crossed her face an' she held out her thin, white hand to
him, whisperin', 'Michael.' Then she closed her eyes again an' was off
unconscious once more. "The priest looked first at her, then at me, an' his face was all
puzzled an' amazed like. "'How do you know that my name is Michael Conners?' says he. "'How do you know it yourself, Father?' says I, for I had my suspicions
by that time. "'Because of this,' says he, showin' me a strangely carved little black
wooden crucifix attached to his beads. 'This was on my neck when I was
saved from the wreck in which my father an' mother perished.' "'Well,' says I, 'you're wrong. 'Tain't Michael, but Gerald, is your
name, an' praise be the Lord but this'll be the happy day for my poor
Mona when she finds out the truth. That crucifix with the name of
Michael Conners on it was given to your father on his marriage day by
the priest that married him. Here's the mate to it that he give your
mother on the same day,' an' I picked up Mona's rosary lyin' on the bed
an' showed him the cross on it. They was as like as two peas, only on
the back of hers was carved the name of Mona Conners. "Well, we had to break the news to her gently, an' it's the happy woman
she was for the next few days in spite of all the pain she suffered. She'd just lie there holdin' Gerald's hand an' gazin' at him an' makin'
him tell over an' over again of how he'd been saved from the wreck. He
was only a wee lad of three at the time, but he could still remember of
his father standin' there on the deck of the sinkin' ship an' holdin'
him in his arms. He could still hear the words his father spoke to him
an' feel the father's hand slippin' the rosary over his head an'
claspin' the little fingers around the cross as it lay on his breast. Michael had passed him to a sailor an' he was lowered into one of the
boats, where a kind-hearted woman took compassion on his loneliness an'
cared for him. They'd been picked up by a sailin' vessel bound for
France, an' the woman who first cared for him, took him with her from
France to America an' finally adopted him. She brought him up, educated
him, an' at last he became a priest of God. "He was with his mother to the very end, an' it was his hand that give
her the last blessin' of the Church an' his voice recited the prayers
that send the departin' soul safe on its journey to the throne of God. It's the happy woman my Mona was in them last few days upon earth, an'
it's the happy woman she is this day, all her troubles over, all her
sufferin's gone, an' she in Paradise for ever an' ever." During Nancy's recital, the shadows of twilight had gathered and
deepened, and now her little kitchen was wrapped in darkness. Still, she
sat for several moments buried in thought which I cared not to
interrupt. Then, with a sigh, she rose to light the lamp and I noticed
that tears filled her eyes though the brave lips were smiling. "Yes, yes," she repeated. "God's ways are wonderful, they are that. Even
if we don't understand things in this world, we're sure to in the next,
for the Lord knows His own business best every time." PATSY. Patsy was wide awake in a second. What was it those men were talking
about; what was it they were planning to do? That name, and "the brown
house on the hill"! By a strong effort, he kept his eyes closed and
breathed regularly and deeply as though still sleeping. He must not let
them suspect that he was listening, but he must catch every word they
said, every word. How he hated them, this band of rascals that had
gotten his David into their clutches and were slowly but surely making
him as bad as they! His David bad? No, no! David was kind and good and
gentle to him always. David was not bad, he would not listen to their
dreadful scheme. He would refuse to help them; surely he would. His
David a thief? It was impossible. But that dreadful plan they were
discussing! "The brown house on the hill"; "to-morrow night"; and David
was promising to go with them. Patsy shivered beneath the bedclothes and bitter tears gathered in his
eyes and trickled down the pale, sunken cheeks. The men were leaving and
David was renewing his promise to accompany the expedition to the brown
house on the hill to-morrow night. In fact, he was to act as guide to
the man appointed to commit the deed, for who, so well as David, could
show them the way to the library in which was the safe that they were
going to rob? They had gone now and Patsy felt that David was standing beside the bed
and looking down at him. He opened his eyes and two more tears escaped,
which he hastily brushed away. Immediately David was on his knees, the
little cripple's hand clasped tenderly in his. "What's the trouble, kid?" he questioned anxiously. "Is it the pain
that's bad to-night?" "'Tain't the pain, Davy, 'tain't the pain at all," sobbed the child. "What is it then, youngster? Come now, tell your own Davy what's
troubling you, there's a good boy." "David, how long is it since mother was taken away from us? It seems so
long. I was thinkin' of mother, Davy, and wishing she was here with us
this night." "You poor kid, poor little crippled kid," muttered David, patting the
small, thin hand. "It's natural, I suppose, for you to pine for your
mother, but ain't Davy been almost like a mother to you, Patsy? He's
tried hard, that he has, to be father and mother and big brother all in
one." And the man smiled somewhat wistfully. "You've been all that and more too, Davy. 'Twasn't on my account I was
wishin' for mother, 'twas on yours. If she was here, she'd know how to
keep you from going with them men to-morrow night. She'd know how to
keep you to home, and I don't know what to say or to do to stop you from
going." David's face darkened slightly and there was a note of sternness in his
voice as he said:

"So you was listening, was you, and heard what we was talkin' about?" "I didn't listen a purpose, David; at least, not at first. I happened to
wake and heard 'em speak of the brown house on the hill. Then I wanted
to hear everything and I listened a purpose after that. Oh, Davy! Davy!" the child cried imploringly, sitting up in the bed and clasping
his hands in petition; "don't do it, Davy; don't be a thief to please
those wicked men; don't go robbing the brown house on the hill." A fearful fit of coughing racked the little form and David held him
gently in his arms until the paroxysm had passed. Then, laying the boy
back upon the pillows, he said quietly:

"You mustn't get excited, Patsy, it's bad for you. We'll not talk no
more to-night. In the morning I'll tell you the story of the house on
the hill and you'll see I'm not tacklin' this job to please anyone but
myself. Go to sleep now, kid, for I'll not say another word to-night,
not another word." When David spoke in that tone of voice Patsy knew there was nothing for
him to do but to obey. Turning his face to the wall, he closed his eyes,
but sleep did not visit him that night. He lay listening for the stroke
of the town clock as it sounded, one after another, the slowly dragging
hours; he lay listening to David's regular breathing and wondered how a
man could sleep so calmly with such a deed in prospect; he lay anxiously
turning over in his mind various schemes by which he could frustrate
the plan in case he failed in persuading David to abandon it altogether. Several times fits of coughing shook him nearly to pieces, and at those
times the pain in his poor little chest was well-nigh unbearable. He
smothered the cough as well as he could beneath the bedclothes for fear
of disturbing David. As for the pain--well, pain and Patsy had been
companions so long now that he had grown quite accustomed to it. The next day was cold and dismal, with a leaden sky threatening snow,
and a bitter wind blowing that searched the very marrow of one's bones. The few neighbors who chanced to glance out of their windows at an early
hour in the afternoon were surprised to see Patsy making his way along
the street, slowly and painfully, with the aid of his crutches. They had
never known him to be abroad on a day like this; indeed, it was many a
day since he had attempted going upon the street at all. Poor little
Patsy, his crutches were once a familiar sight going up and down the
pavements on pleasant days in the summer time, but they had thought
never to see him leave his room again. Did David know? Some one should
stop the child; he was too weak to wander out alone like that. But
then, it was no affair of theirs; David could probably be trusted to
look after the boy. As no one was willing to make it his business to interfere, Patsy went
on his way unmolested. A strange look of determination battled with the
pain on the sickly, childish face as he made his way bravely against the
biting wind that sought to drive him back. He had learned the mystery of
the house on the hill; he knew now why David hated so bitterly that
house and all connected with it; he knew why David was willing and eager
to help the men in the plan they were to carry out that night. David had
told him all about it, and for the first time in his life he had felt
afraid of this dearly loved brother of his. It had been a revelation to
Pasty. Surely, this bitter, unforgiving, revengeful man could not be the
same who had been father, mother and big brother to the little cripple
for whom he had cared so tenderly since their mother had been taken from
them. It had sounded like a fairy tale to Patsy; he could scarcely believe his
own ears. Just to think of it; that brown house on the hill had once
been their mother's home, and the man who lived there, the man whom
David hated with undying hatred, was their mother's brother and their
uncle. On the day she married, she had left her home forever, her
brother vowing that never as long as he lived would he set eyes upon her
face again; to him she would be as though dead. Once, when father lay
dying (Patsy could not remember it, but David had told him of it),
mother had written to their uncle imploring a little help in their
misery. It was not for herself she had asked but for the dying husband
and sickly baby. Her letter had been returned to her with these harsh
words written on the back: "Some mistake here. No woman has the right to
call me brother. My only sister died years ago." David had kept the
letter ever since; he had been old enough at the time to understand. He
had vowed then to have revenge some day and he kept the letter to remind
him of the vow should he ever be in danger of forgetting it. Patsy knew now why his brother so hated the house on the hill, and why
David had been so cross on that day last summer when he, Patsy, had come
home and told of the young lady who had been so kind to him, the lady
who lived in the house on the hill. As a rule, every one was good to
Patsy. Even the children on the street, who quarrelled among themselves,
striking, reviling, pelting one another with stones, had, nothing but
kind words and smiles for Patsy. But that day last summer he had
wandered farther from home than usual and a crowd of rough boys had
stopped and commenced tormenting him, laughing at him, calling him
names, jeering at his deformity, and even pulling his hair and pinching
his ears. The child had tried to push past them, but they closed in on
him and it might have fared ill with Patsy but for the timely arrival on
the scene of the young lady from the house on the hill. She quickly scattered the band of hoodlums and then walked with Patsy
until he was well on his way home and safe from further attack. She had
been kind to him, and made him promise to come and see her. That was how
he knew her name and where she lived. He had wanted to see her again and
had thought of her so often but David would not let him go. Many a night, when the pain kept him from sleeping, he would while away
the long hours by thinking of the gentle, beautiful girl, and he never
said his prayers at night and morning, as mother had taught him, that he
did not add a petition for his "lovely lady." And to think that she was
his own cousin, his uncle's daughter; she lived in the house on the hill
and it was her house that David and those men were planning to rob. For
her sake as well as David's the deed must be prevented; her father must
not be robbed; David must not become a thief. Patsy had determined that
last night when he first heard them mention the scheme. If no one else
would stop them, he would, though he could not imagine how he was going
to do it. He had thought and thought until his head ached so that he
could hardly see, but no plan suggested itself to his mind. He prayed,
too, long and earnestly, for the priest at the Sunday-school told them
God would always answer little boys' prayers if what they asked for was
good for them. And was it not a good thing for which he was pleading? Simply that he might find a way to keep his lady from being robbed and
save David from becoming a thief? At last, the idea he wanted had come to him; he knew just what he must
do to secure his end. There was danger in the plan, to himself, but he
must risk that. It mattered little what happened to him if he could only
save his David, his dear, kind big brother, who would never have thought
of doing wrong had it not been for those wicked men who had led him
astray. Patsy feared those men mightily. He knew their anger would be
terrible should they discover how their plan had been frustrated. They
might even kill him if they found him out, but he hoped they need not
know. He would confess to David alone at supper time that evening; no
matter how angry, David would not hurt his little brother. Of that Patsy
was certain. Anyway, whatever the risk, he must take it to save David
and to save the lady. The early winter twilight was closing in when Patsy reached his home
again and dragged himself up the stairs to the one room which he and
David occupied. He was almost exhausted and his breath came in short,
sharp gasps which cut him like knives. He would have liked to crawl into
his bed, close his eyes and never open them again, he was so tired. But
he must not give in yet; his task was but half accomplished. David must
be told of what he had done, and at that thought a spasm of fear
contracted his heart. Shivering, he drew a chair near the stove and
waited with closed eyes and pain-drawn face for the sound of David's
foot upon the stairs. Twilight passed and darkness filled the little room, still David did not
come. Patsy lighted the lamp upon the table, wondering anxiously why his
brother was so late. He put more coals upon the fire, which was burning
low, and made the tea for David's supper. He set out the loaf of bread,
the cold meat, the cheese, upon the table, then resumed his chair and
his eager listening for footsteps that were so long in coming. It seemed
to Patsy he had waited for hours and hours, and suddenly his heart
stopped beating and his eyes distended in terror as a thought occurred
to him. Suppose David did not come at all! What, what would happen then? But there, that was David's step and all would be well now. The child
looked up eagerly as his brother entered the room, then, nearly cried
aloud in his bitter disappointment. David was not alone. One of the gang
was with him, and this was a contingency for which Patsy had made no
allowance. What was he to do now? How could he tell his brother, how
warn him, in the presence of that dreadful man? For the first time in his life David was so preoccupied that he paid no
heed to the little cripple who had now withdrawn to the darkest corner
of the room and crouched there in abject terror. The two men made a
hasty meal and then sat by the table talking in tones so low that Patsy
heard scarcely a word of what was said. Anyway, he cared nothing for
their plans now; he had spoiled everything for them. But how was he to
tell David, how was he to tell David? By and by, a third man joined them and there was more whispering with
heads close together. At last, the three arose and made preparations for
going out. They moved towards the door and were astonished to find
themselves confronted by a small, crippled figure, that stood swaying on
his crutches, directly in their way. A bright red spot burned on either
cheek, the eyes were brilliant with fever, and the child was panting for
breath. But he said very quietly, his eyes fixed steadily on his
brother's face:

"You mustn't go out to-night, David." The men gasped and looked at one another in amazement. "You mustn't go out to-night, David," the child repeated. "You mustn't
none of you go to the house on the hill to-night." "We mustn't go out, mustn't we," exclaimed one of the men roughly. "Who's to stop us going, I'd like to know? Stand aside, kid, before harm
comes to you." "Who's to stop you? I am. I have stopped you." A laugh of derision greeted this statement. "Yes," Patsy repeated; "I've stopped you. I peached on you; I warned 'em
you was comin'." David's face was terrible to see. "What's that you're saying, Patsy? You what?" "I warned 'em this afternoon. I went to the house on the hill and told
'em you was comin'. You mustn't go, David, you mustn't go. The police'll
be there waitin' for you, 'cos I told 'em you was comin'. I didn't want
you to be a thief, David; I done it for your sake. Oh, David, David!" David's face was livid and his clenched fist was raised to strike, but
Patsy and his crutches lay in a little huddled heap at David's feet. When the child opened his eyes again, the men were gone and he and his
brother were alone. He looked into the face bending above him and gave a
sigh of relief. All the anger was gone, only anxious solicitude rested
there. Patsy tried to speak, but his voice was so weak and low that
David had difficulty in understanding what he said. He leaned over to
catch the faintly whispered words:

"You ain't mad at me now, are you, Davy? I'm so glad. I'd hate to go
away thinkin' you was mad at me. I had to do it, Davy, I had to tell;
there wasn't no other way to keep you from being a thief. I'm sorry to
leave you alone, Davy, but I guess mother wants me in Heaven. You know
the doctor said I'd be going soon anyway. Mother said she'd be waitin'
for you and me and I guess she wants me now. I'm sorry to leave you, but
I'm afeared I must go. It'll be lonesome for you when I'm gone. You'll
have no one to light the lamp and make the tea for you in the evenings. You'll come home here at night and it'll be all dark and lonely with no
Patsy to meet you. But remember, David, I'll be lookin' at you from
Heaven. Mother and I'll be waitin' for you there and I'm thinkin' even
Heaven won't be just right till you've come to us. Promise me you'll
come to us some day; promise you'll never go with them wicked men no
more. Let 'em alone or they'll make you as bad as they be, and then you
won't never see mother and me. Promise you'll let 'em alone, Davy;
promise you'll be good and come to us in Heaven some day." "I promise, kid, I promise," whispered David brokenly. "With God's help
I'll turn over a new leaf and I'll come to you some day." A smile brightened the pale, pinched face, a smile of absolute content
and trustful affection. "God bless you, my Davy, God bless you," murmured the faint voice
haltingly. "Good-by--until we meet--in Heaven." THREE EVENINGS IN A LIFE. I. One by one the city clocks chimed the hour of midnight. One by one Jane
counted the strokes and sighed despairingly as she glanced at the window
in which the light still burned so brightly. The air was bitter cold, a
fine snow was falling, and she had been trudging up and down, up and
down, for ages it seemed to her. Richard was growing so heavy and her
arms ached so she could scarcely hold him. Still, there was nothing for
it but to tramp up and down, up and down the narrow street, the baby in
her arms, until mother should give the welcome signal. When that lamp in
the window opposite was put out and the house in darkness, she would
know that it was safe for her to creep up the stairs and into the bed in
the kitchen which she shared with the baby brother now sleeping in her
arms. Seating herself upon a doorstep she was passing, Jane shifted the baby
to a more comfortable position and leaned her head against the rough
woodwork of the tenement house. How tired, she was, how very tired! Her
head ached, her back ached, she ached all over. Day after day, she
worked in the factory from early morning until nightfall. Night after
night, she walked the street with Richard in her arms, not daring to
enter the house until father was safely sleeping. Of course it did not
happen every night. Just once in a while father would come home sober
and then there was no fear of harm to the baby or herself. Many a night,
too, he did not come home at all, but on those occasions she and mother
scarce dared to close an eye. They knew not at what moment he might
return, possibly in even an uglier mood than usual. Mother was never
afraid for herself. She could usually manage him, although there had
been times when bad cuts and bruises bore testimony to the treatment to
which she had been subjected. For Jane and little Richard, their only
chance lay in keeping out of the way, so Jane would tramp the street,
Richard in her arms, despite aches and pains and weariness. The child on the doorstep anxiously watched the window across the way. Would the light never go out? Father must be unusually bad to-night, and
she was so tired. The day had been a hard one at the factory and every
bone in her body ached. Well, there was one comfort; to-morrow would be
Sunday and she could stay at home all day. To-morrow? To-day, rather,
for midnight had already passed. She would have one long day to rest and
help mother. She felt now as if she could sleep the whole day through. She would like to sleep for a week at least, and even then she would not
be rested quite enough. There were moments of unusual fatigue and
depression in which she could almost wish that she might fall asleep and
sleep forever as the other little ones had done. Three of them there
were, delicate, sickly little creatures, who had struggled for a time
against the ills of human existence and then given up the unequal
conflict. At times, she could almost find it in her heart to envy them
were it not for mother and Richard, especially Richard. There, at last! The light was gone, the window in darkness, and it was
safe for her to return to the tenement across the way. II. The same street, the same tenement house, but grown even uglier and
dingier with the passing of the years. In a small room on the second
floor, Jane sits beside the bed on which her mother tosses in the
delirium of fever. Her heart is slowly breaking as she listens to the
moaning, insistent cry which issues from those parched lips. All through
the days and nights of anxious watching, that cry has been ringing in
her ears, the call for "Richard, Richard, Richard." That her mother is dying she knows full well, and how she longs for one
loving glance, for one word of affection, to carry with her in the
lonely years to come. But no look of recognition comes to the sightless
eyes and no word escapes the lips save that never ceasing cry of
"Richard, Richard, Richard." A white-capped nurse flits softly about,
but Jane pays no heed to her. The doctor enters and hold whispered
consultation with the nurse. Jane does not even glance at him. She is
tired of hearing him say the same old thing time after time: "While
there is life, there is hope." She knows there is no hope, though
everything possible has been done to save the precious life now ebbing
so swiftly. Thank God, they are no longer poor as when she was a child. Her salary is a splendid one and she has been able to have the best
advice, the best care possible, for her dying mother. No, they are no
longer poor, but of what avail is money now? It cannot bring back the
days that are gone, the happy days before Richard went away. 