



Produced by Aaron Cannon and David Widger





PENGUIN ISLAND

by ANATOLE FRANCE




CONTENTS

     BOOK I. THE BEGINNINGS
     BOOK II. THE ANCIENT TIMES
     BOOK III. THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE
     BOOK IV. MODERN TIMES: TRINCO
     BOOK V.    MODERN TIMES: CHATILLON
     BOOK VI. MODERN TIMES
     BOOK VII. MODERN TIMES
     BOOK VIII. FUTURE TIMES





BOOK I. THE BEGINNINGS




I. LIFE OF SAINT MAEL

Mael, a scion of a royal family of Cambria, was sent in his ninth year
to the Abbey of Yvern so that he might there study both sacred and
profane learning. At the age of fourteen he renounced his patrimony and
took a vow to serve the Lord. His time was divided, according to the
rule, between the singing of hymns, the study of grammar, and the
meditation of eternal truths. A celestial perfume soon disclosed the virtues of the monk throughout
the cloister, and when the blessed Gal, the Abbot of Yvern, departed
from this world into the next, young Mael succeeded him in the
government of the monastery. He established therein a school, an
infirmary, a guest-house, a forge, work-shops of all kinds, and sheds
for building ships, and he compelled the monks to till the lands in the
neighbourhood. With his own hands he cultivated the garden of the Abbey,
he worked in metals, he instructed the novices, and his life was gently
gliding along like a stream that reflects the heaven and fertilizes the
fields. At the close of the day this servant of God was accustomed to seat
himself on the cliff, in the place that is to-day still called St.
Mael's chair. At his feet the rocks bristling with green seaweed and
tawny wrack seemed like black dragons as they faced the foam of the
waves with their monstrous breasts. He watched the sun descending into
the ocean like a red Host whose glorious blood gave a purple tone to the
clouds and to the summits of the waves. And the holy man saw in this the
image of the mystery of the Cross, by which the divine blood has clothed
the earth with a royal purple. In the offing a line of dark blue marked
the shores of the island of Gad, where St. Bridget, who had been given
the veil by St. Malo, ruled over a convent of women. Now Bridget, knowing the merits of the venerable Mael, begged from
him some work of his hands as a rich present. Mael cast a hand-bell of
bronze for her and, when it was finished, he blessed it and threw it
into the sea. And the bell went ringing towards the coast of Gad, where
St. Bridget, warned by the sound of the bell upon the waves, received it
piously, and carried it in solemn procession with singing of psalms into
the chapel of the convent. Thus the holy Mael advanced from virtue to virtue. He had already passed
through two-thirds of the way of life, and he hoped peacefully to reach
his terrestrial end in the midst of his spiritual brethren, when he knew
by a certain sign that the Divine wisdom had decided otherwise, and
that the Lord was calling him to less peaceful but not less meritorious
labours. II. THE APOSTOLICAL VOCATION OF SAINT MAEL

One day as he walked in meditation to the furthest point of a tranquil
beach, for which rocks jutting out into the sea formed a rugged dam, he
saw a trough of stone which floated like a boat upon the waters. It was in a vessel similar to this that St. Guirec, the great St.
Columba, and so many holy men from Scotland and from Ireland had gone
forth to evangelize Armorica. More recently still, St. Avoye having come
from England, ascended the river Auray in a mortar made of rose-coloured
granite into which children were afterwards placed in order to make
them strong; St. Vouga passed from Hibernia to Cornwall on a rock whose
fragments, preserved at Penmarch, will cure of fever such pilgrims as
place these splinters on their heads. St. Samson entered the Bay of St.
Michael's Mount in a granite vessel which will one day be called St.
Samson's basin. It is because of these facts that when he saw the stone
trough the holy Mael understood that the Lord intended him for the
apostolate of the pagans who still peopled the coast and the Breton
islands. He handed his ashen staff to the holy Budoc, thus investing him with
the government of the monastery. Then, furnished with bread, a barrel
of fresh water, and the book of the Holy Gospels, he entered the stone
trough which carried him gently to the island of Hoedic. This island is perpetually buffeted by the winds. In it some poor
men fished among the clefts of the rocks and labouriously cultivated
vegetables in gardens full of sand and pebbles that were sheltered from
the wind by walls of barren stone and hedges of tamarisk. A beautiful
fig-tree raised itself in a hollow of the island and thrust forth its
branches far and wide. The inhabitants of the island used to worship it. And the holy Mael said to them: "You worship this tree because it is
beautiful. Therefore you are capable of feeling beauty. Now I come to
reveal to you the hidden beauty." And he taught them the Gospel. And
after having instructed them, he baptized them with salt and water. The islands of Morbihan were more numerous in those times than they are
to-day. For since then many have been swallowed up by the sea. St. Mael
evangelized sixty of them. Then in his granite trough he ascended the
river Auray. And after sailing for three hours he landed before a
Roman house. A thin column of smoke went up from the roof. The holy man
crossed the threshold on which there was a mosaic representing a dog
with its hind legs outstretched and its lips drawn back. He was welcomed
by an old couple, Marcus Combabus and Valeria Moerens, who lived there
on the products of their lands. There was a portico round the interior
court the columns of which were painted red, half their height upwards
from the base. A fountain made of shells stood against the wall and
under the portico there rose an altar with a niche in which the master
of the house had placed some little idols made of baked earth and
whitened with whitewash. Some represented winged children, others Apollo
or Mercury, and several were in the form of a naked woman twisting her
hair. But the holy Mael, observing those figures, discovered among them
the image of a young mother holding a child upon her knees. Immediately pointing to that image he said:

"That is the Virgin, the mother of God. The poet Virgil foretold her in
Sibylline verses before she was born and, in angelical tones he sang Jam
redit et virgo. Throughout heathendom prophetic figures of her have been
made, like that which you, O Marcus, have placed upon this altar. And
without doubt it is she who has protected your modest household. Thus it
is that those who faithfully observe the natural law prepare themselves
for the knowledge of revealed truths." Marcus Combabus and Valeria Moerens, having been instructed by this
speech, were converted to the Christian faith. They received baptism
together with their young freedwoman, Caelia Avitella, who was dearer to
them than the light of their eyes. All their tenants renounced paganism
and were baptized on the same day. Marcus Combabus, Valeria Moerens, and Caelia Avitella led thenceforth
a life full of merit. They died in the Lord and were admitted into the
canon of the saints. For thirty-seven years longer the blessed Mael evangelized the pagans
of the inner lands. He built two hundred and eighteen chapels and
seventy-four abbeys. Now on a certain day in the city of Vannes, when he was preaching the
Gospel, he learned that the monks of Yvern had in his absence declined
from the rule of St. Gal. Immediately, with the zeal of a hen who
gathers her brood, he repaired to his erring children. He was then
towards the end of his ninety-seventh year; his figure was bent, but his
arms were still strong, and his speech was poured forth abundantly like
winter snow in the depths of the valleys. Abbot Budoc restored the ashen staff to St. Mael and informed him of
the unhappy state into which the Abbey had fallen. The monks were in
disagreement as to the date an which the festival of Easter ought to
be celebrated. Some held for the Roman calendar, others for the Greek
calendar, and the horrors of a chronological schism distracted the
monastery. There also prevailed another cause of disorder. The nuns of the island
of Gad, sadly fallen from their former virtue, continually came in boats
to the coast of Yvern. The monks received them in the guesthouse and
from this there arose scandals which filled pious souls with desolation. Having finished his faithful report, Abbot Budoc concluded in these
terms:

"Since the coming of these nuns the innocence and peace of the monks are
at an end." "I readily believe it," answered the blessed Mael. "For woman is a
cleverly constructed snare by which we are taken even before we suspect
the trap. Alas! the delightful attraction of these creatures is exerted
with even greater force from a distance than when they are close at
hand. The less they satisfy desire the more they inspire it. This is the
reason why a poet wrote this verse to one of them:

'When present I avoid thee, but when away I find thee.' "Thus we see, my son, that the blandishments of carnal love have more
power over hermits and monks than over men who live in the world. All
through my life the demon of lust has tempted me in various ways, but
his strongest temptations did not come to me from meeting a woman,
however beautiful and fragrant she was. They came to me from the image
of an absent woman. Even now, though full of days and approaching my
ninety-eighth year, I am often led by the Enemy to sin against chastity,
at least in thought. At night when I am cold in my bed and my frozen
old bones rattle together with a dull sound I hear voices reciting the
second verse of the third Book of the Kings: 'Wherefore his servants
said unto him, Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin:
and let her stand before the king, and let her cherish him, and let her
lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get heat,' and the devil
shows me a girl in the bloom of youth who says to me: 'I am thy Abishag;
I am thy Shunamite. Make, O my lord, room for me in thy couch.' "Believe me," added the old man, "it is only by the special aid of
Heaven that a monk can keep his chastity in act and in intention." Applying himself immediately to restore innocence and peace to the
monastery, he corrected the calendar according to the calculations of
chronology and astronomy and he compelled all the monks to accept his
decision; he sent the women who had declined from St. Bridget's rule
back to their convent; but far from driving them away brutally, he
caused them to be led to their boat with singing of psalms and litanies. "Let us respect in them," he said, "the daughters of Bridget and the
betrothed of the Lord. Let us beware lest we imitate the Pharisees who
affect to despise sinners. The sin of these women and not their persons
should be abased, and they should be made ashamed of what they have done
and not of what they are, for they are all creatures of God." And the holy man exhorted his monks to obey faithfully the rule of their
order. "When it does not yield to the rudder," said he to them, "the ship
yields to the rock." III. THE TEMPTATION OF SAINT MAEL

The blessed Mael had scarcely restored order in the Abbey of Yvern
before he learned that the inhabitants of the island of Hoedic, his
first catechumens and the dearest of all to his heart, had returned to
paganism, and that they were hanging crowns of flowers and fillets of
wool to the branches of the sacred fig-tree. The boatman who brought this sad news expressed a fear that soon those
misguided men might violently destroy the chapel that had been built on
the shore of their island. The holy man resolved forthwith to visit his faithless children, so that
he might lead them back to the faith and prevent them from yielding to
such sacrilege. As he went down to the bay where his stone trough was
moored, he turned his eyes to the sheds, then filled with the noise of
saws and of hammers, which, thirty years before, he had erected on the
fringe of that bay for the purpose of building ships. At that moment, the Devil, who never tires, went out from the sheds and,
under the appearance of a monk called Samsok, he approached the holy man
and tempted him thus:

"Father, the inhabitants of the island of Hoedic commit sins
unceasingly. Every moment that passes removes them farther from God. They are soon going to use violence towards the chapel that you have
raised with your own venerable hands on the shore of their island. Time
is pressing. Do you not think that your stone trough would carry you
more quickly towards them if it were rigged like a boat and furnished
with a rudder, a mast, and a sail, for then you would be driven by the
wind? Your arms are still strong and able to steer a small craft. It would be a good thing, too, to put a sharp stem in front of your
apostolic trough. You are much too clear-sighted not to have thought of
it already." "Truly time is pressing," answered the holy man. "But to do as you say,
Samson, my son, would it not be to make myself like those men of little
faith who do not trust the Lord? Would it not be to despise the gifts of
Him who has sent me this stone vessel without rigging or sail?" This question, the Devil, who is a great theologian, answered by
another. "Father, is it praiseworthy to wait, with our arms folded, until help
comes from on high, and to ask everything from Him who can do all
things, instead of acting by human prudence and helping ourselves? "It certainly is not," answered the holy Mael, "and to neglect to act by
human prudence is tempting God." "Well," urged the Devil, "is it not prudence in this case to rig the
vessel?" "It would be prudence if we could not attain our end in any other way." "Is your vessel then so very speedy?" "It is as speedy as God pleases." "What do you know about it? It goes like Abbot Budoc's mule. It is a
regular old tub. Are you forbidden to make it speedier?" "My son, clearness adorns your words, but they are unduly
over-confident. Remember that this vessel is miraculous." "It is, father. A granite trough that floats on the water like a cork
is a miraculous trough. There is not the slightest doubt about it. What
conclusion do you draw from that?" "I am greatly perplexed. Is it right to perfect so miraculous a machine
by human and natural means?" "Father, if you lost your right foot and God restored it to you, would
not that foot be miraculous?" "Without doubt, my son." "Would you put a shoe on it?" "Assuredly." "Well, then, if you believe that one may cover a miraculous foot with a
natural shoe, you should also believe that we can put natural rigging
on a miraculous boat. That is clear. Alas! Why must the holiest persons
have their moments of weakness and despondency? The most illustrious of
the apostles of Brittany could accomplish works worthy of eternal glory
. . . But his spirit is tardy and his hand is slothful. Farewell then,
father! Travel by short and slow stages and when at last you approach
the coast of Hoedic you will see the smoking ruins of the chapel that
was built and consecrated by your own hands. The pagans will have burned
it and with it the deacon you left there. He will be as thoroughly
roasted as a black pudding." "My trouble is extreme," said the servant of God, drying with his sleeve
the sweat that gathered upon his brow. "But tell me, Samson, my son,
would not rigging this stone trough be a difficult piece of work? And if
we undertook it might we not lose time instead of gaining it?" "Ah! father," exclaimed the Devil, "in one turning of the hour-glass the
thing would be done. We shall find the necessary rigging in this shed
that you have formerly built here on the coast and in those store-houses
abundantly stocked through your care. I will myself regulate all the
ship's fittings. Before being a monk I was a sailor and a carpenter and
I have worked at many other trades as well. Let us to work." Immediately he drew the holy man into an outhouse filled with all things
needful for fitting out a boat. "That for you, father!" And he placed on his shoulders the sail, the mast, the gaff, and the
boom. Then, himself bearing a stem and a rudder with its screw and tiller, and
seizing a carpenter's bag full of tools, he ran to the shore, dragging
the holy man after him by his habit. The latter was bent, sweating, and
breathless, under the burden of canvas and wood. IV. ST. MAEL'S NAVIGATION ON THE OCEAN OF ICE

The Devil, having tucked his clothes up to his arm-pits, dragged the
trough on the sand, and fitted the rigging in less than an hour. As soon as the holy Mael had embarked, the vessel, with all its sails
set, cleft through the waters with such speed that the coast was almost
immediately out of sight. The old man steered to the south so as to
double the Land's End, but an irresistible current carried him to the
south-west. He went along the southern coast of Ireland and turned
sharply towards the north. In the evening the wind freshened. In vain
did Mael attempt to furl the sail. The vessel flew distractedly towards
the fabulous seas. By the light of the moon the immodest sirens of the North came around
him with their hempen-coloured hair, raising their white throats and
their rose-tinted limbs out of the sea; and beating the water into foam
with their emerald tails, they sang in cadence:

     Whither go'st thou, gentle Mael,
     In thy trough distracted? All distended is thy sail
     Like the breast of Juno
     When from it gushed the Milky Way. For a moment their harmonious laughter followed him beneath the stars,
but the vessel fled on, a hundred times more swiftly than the red ship
of a Viking. And the petrels, surprised in their flight, clung with
their feet to the hair of the holy man. Soon a tempest arose full of darkness and groanings, and the trough,
driven by a furious wind, flew like a sea-mew through the mist and the
surge. After a night of three times twenty-four hours the darkness was suddenly
rent and the holy man discovered on the horizon a shore more dazzling
than diamond. The coast rapidly grew larger, and soon by the glacial
light of a torpid and sunken sun, Mael saw, rising above the waves,
the silent streets of a white city, which, vaster than Thebes with its
hundred gates, extended as far as the eye could see the ruins of its
forum built of snow, its palaces of frost, its crystal arches, and its
iridescent obelisks. The ocean was covered with floating ice-bergs around which swam men of
the sea of a wild yet gentle appearance. And Leviathan passed by hurling
a column of water up to the clouds. Moreover, on a block of ice which floated at the same rate as the stone
trough there was seated a white bear holding her little one in her arms,
and Mael heard her murmuring in a low voice this verse of Virgil, Incipe
parve puer. And full of sadness and trouble, the old man wept. The fresh water had frozen and burst the barrel that contained it. And
Mael was sucking pieces of ice to quench his thirst, and his food was
bread dipped in dirty water. His beard and his hair were broken like
glass. His habit was covered with a layer of ice and cut into him at
every movement of his limbs. Huge waves rose up and opened their foaming
jaws at the old man. Twenty times the boat was filled by masses of
sea. And the ocean swallowed up the book of the Holy Gospels which the
apostle guarded with extreme care in a purple cover marked with a golden
cross. Now on the thirtieth day the sea calmed. And lo! with a frightful
clamour of sky and waters a mountain of dazzling whiteness advanced
towards the stone vessel. Mael steered to avoid it, but the tiller broke
in his hands. To lessen the speed of his progress towards the rock he
attempted to reef the sails, but when he tried to knot the reef-points
the wind pulled them away from him and the rope seared his hands. He saw
three demons with wings of black skin having hooks at their ends, who,
hanging from the rigging, were puffing with their breath against the
sails. Understanding from this sight that the Enemy had governed him in all
these things, he guarded himself by making the sign of the Cross. Immediately a furious gust of wind filled with the noise of sobs and
howls struck the stone trough, carried off the mast with all the sails,
and tore away the rudder and the stem. The trough was drifting on the sea, which had now grown calm. The holy
man knelt and gave thanks to the Lord who had delivered him from the
snares of the demon. Then he recognised, sitting on a block of ice, the
mother bear who had spoken during the storm. She pressed her beloved
child to her bosom, and in her hand she held a purple book marked with a
golden cross. Hailing the granite trough, she saluted the holy man with
these words:

"Pax tibi Mael." And she held out the book to him. The holy man recognised his evangelistary, and, full of astonishment, he
sang in the tepid air a hymn to the Creator and His creation. V. THE BAPTISM OF THE PENGUINS

After having drifted for an hour the holy man approached a narrow
strand, shut in by steep mountains. He went along the coast for a whole
day and a night, passing around the reef which formed an insuperable
barrier. He discovered in this way that it was a round island in
the middle of which rose a mountain crowned with clouds. He joyfully
breathed the fresh breath of the moist air. Rain fell, and this rain was
so pleasant that the holy man said to the Lord:

"Lord, this is the island of tears, the island of contrition." The strand was deserted. Worn out with fatigue and hunger, he sat down
on a rock in the hollow of which there lay some yellow eggs, marked with
black spots, and about as large as those of a swan. But he did not touch
them, saying:

"Birds are the living praises of God. I should not like a single one of
these praises to be lacking through me." And he munched the lichens which he tore from the crannies of the rocks. The holy man had gone almost entirely round the island without meeting
any inhabitants, when he came to a vast amphitheatre formed of black and
red rocks whose summits became tinged with blue as they rose towards the
clouds, and they were filled with sonorous cascades. The reflection from the polar ice had hurt the old man's eyes, but
a feeble gleam of light still shone through his swollen eyelids. He
distinguished animated forms which filled the rocks, in stages, like a
crowd of men on the tiers of an amphitheatre. And at the same time, his
ears, deafened by the continual noises of the sea, heard a feeble sound
of voices. Thinking that what he saw were men living under the natural
law, and that the Lord had sent him to teach them the Divine law, he
preached the gospel to them. Mounted on a lofty stone in the midst of the wild circus:

"Inhabitants of this island," said he, "although you be of small
stature, you look less like a band of fishermen and mariners than like
the senate of a judicious republic. By your gravity, your silence, your
tranquil deportment, you form on this wild rock an assembly comparable
to the Conscript Fathers at Rome deliberating in the temple of Victory,
or rather, to the philosophers of Athens disputing on the benches of the
Areopagus. Doubtless you possess neither their science nor their genius,
but perhaps in the sight of God you are their superiors. I believe that
you are simple and good. As I went round your island I saw no image
of murder, no sign of carnage, no enemies' heads or scalps hung from a
lofty pole or nailed to the doors of your villages. You appear to me
to have no arts and not to work in metals. But your hearts are pure
and your hands are innocent, and the truth will easily enter into your
souls." Now what he had taken for men of small stature but of grave bearing were
penguins whom the spring had gathered together, and who were ranged in
couples on the natural steps of the rock, erect in the majesty of their
large white bellies. From moment to moment they moved their winglets
like arms, and uttered peaceful cries. They did not fear men, for they
did not know them, and had never received any harm from them; and there
was in the monk a certain gentleness that reassured the most timid
animals and that pleased these penguins extremely. With a friendly
curiosity they turned towards him their little round eyes lengthened in
front by a white oval spot that gave something odd and human to their
appearance. Touched by their attention, the holy man taught them the Gospel. "Inhabitants of this island, the earthly day that has just risen over
your rocks is the image of the heavenly day that rises in your souls. For I bring you the inner light; I bring you the light and heat of the
soul. Just as the sun melts the ice of your mountains so Jesus Christ
will melt the ice of your hearts." Thus the old man spoke. As everywhere throughout nature voice calls
to voice, as all which breathes in the light of day loves alternate
strains, these penguins answered the old man by the sounds of their
throats. And their voices were soft, for it was the season of their
loves. The holy man, persuaded that they belonged to some idolatrous people and
that in their own language they gave adherence to the Christian faith,
invited them to receive baptism. "I think," said he to them, "that you bathe often, for all the hollows
of the rocks are full of pure water, and as I came to your assembly I
saw several of you plunging into these natural baths. Now purity of body
is the image of spiritual purity." And he taught them the origin, the nature, and the effects of baptism. "Baptism," said he to them, "is Adoption, New Birth, Regeneration,
Illumination." And he explained each of these points to them in succession. Then, having previously blessed the water that fell from the cascades
and recited the exorcisms, he baptized those whom he had just taught,
pouring on each of their heads a drop of pure water and pronouncing the
sacred words. And thus for three days and three nights he baptized the birds. VI. AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE

When the baptism of the penguins was known in Paradise, it caused
neither joy nor sorrow, but an extreme surprise. The Lord himself was
embarrassed. He gathered an assembly of clerics and doctors, and asked
them whether they regarded the baptism as valid. "It is void," said St. Patrick. "Why is it void?" asked St. Gal, who had evangelized the people of
Cornwall and had trained the holy Mael for his apostolical labours. "The sacrament of baptism," answered St. Patrick, "is void when it is
given to birds, just as the sacrament of marriage is void when it is
given to a eunuch." But St. Gal replied:

"What relation do you claim to establish between the baptism of a bird
and the marriage of a eunuch? There is none at all. Marriage is, if I
may say so, a conditional, a contingent sacrament. The priest blesses an
event beforehand; it is evident that if the act is not consummated the
benediction remains without effect. That is obvious. I have known on
earth, in the town of Antrim, a rich man named Sadoc, who, living in
concubinage with a woman, caused her to be the mother of nine children. In his old age, yielding to my reproofs, he consented to marry her, and
I blessed their union. Unfortunately Sadoc's great age prevented him
from consummating the marriage. A short time afterwards he lost all his
property, and Germaine (that was the name of the woman), not feeling
herself able to endure poverty, asked for the annulment of a marriage
which was no reality. The Pope granted her request, for it was just. So much for marriage. But baptism is conferred without restrictions or
reserves of any kind. There is no doubt about it, what the penguins have
received is a sacrament." Called to give his opinion, Pope St. Damascus expressed himself in these
terms:

"In order to know if a baptism is valid and will produce its result,
that is to say, sanctification, it is necessary to consider who gives
it and not who receives it. In truth, the sanctifying virtue of this
sacrament results from the exterior act by which it is conferred,
without the baptized person cooperating in his own sanctification by any
personal act; if it were otherwise it would not be administered to the
newly born. And there is no need, in order to baptize, to fulfil any
special condition; it is not necessary to be in a state of grace; it
is sufficient to have the intention of doing what the Church does, to
pronounce the consecrated words and to observe the prescribed forms. Now
we cannot doubt that the venerable Mael has observed these conditions. Therefore the penguins are baptized." "Do you think so?" asked St. Guenole. "And what then do you believe that
baptism really is? Baptism is the process of regeneration by which man
is born of water and of the spirit, for having entered the water covered
with crimes, he goes out of it a neophyte, a new creature, abounding in
the fruits of righteousness; baptism is the seed of immortality; baptism
is the pledge of the resurrection; baptism is the burying with Christ in
His death and participation in His departure from the sepulchre. That
is not a gift to bestow upon birds. Reverend Fathers, let us consider. Baptism washes away original sin; now the penguins were not conceived in
sin. It removes the penalty of sin; now the penguins have not sinned. It produces grace and the gift of virtues, uniting Christians to Jesus
Christ, as the members to the body, and it is obvious to the senses that
penguins cannot acquire the virtues of confessors, of virgins, and of
widows, or receive grace and be united to--"

St. Damascus did not allow him to finish. "That proves," said he warmly, "that the baptism was useless; it does
not prove that it was not effective." "But by this reasoning," said St. Guenole, "one might baptize in the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, by aspersion or
immersion, not only a bird or a quadruped, but also an inanimate object,
a statue, a table, a chair, etc. That animal would be Christian, that
idol, that table would be Christian! It is absurd!" St. Augustine began to speak. There was a great silence. "I am going," said the ardent bishop of Hippo, "to show you, by an
example, the power of formulas. It deals, it is true, with a diabolical
operation. But if it be established that formulas taught by the Devil
have effect upon unintelligent animals or even on inanimate objects, how
can we longer doubt that the effect of the sacramental formulas extends
to the minds of beasts and even to inert matter? "This is the example. There was during my lifetime in the town of
Madaura, the birthplace of the philosopher Apuleius, a witch who was
able to attract men to her chamber by burning a few of their hairs along
with certain herbs upon her tripod, pronouncing at the same time certain
words. Now one day when she wished by this means to gain the love of a
young man, she was deceived by her maid, and instead of the young man's
hairs, she burned some hairs pulled from a leather bottle, made out of
a goatskin that hung in a tavern. During the night the leather bottle,
full of wine, capered through the town up to the witch's door. This fact
is undoubted. And in sacraments as in enchantments it is the form which
operates. The effect of a divine formula cannot be less in power and
extent than the effect of an infernal formula." Having spoken in this fashion the great St. Augustine sat down amidst
applause. One of the blessed, of an advanced age and having a melancholy
appearance, asked permission to speak. No one knew him. His name was
Probus, and he was not enrolled in the canon of the saints. "I beg the company's pardon," said he, "I have no halo, and I gained
eternal blessedness without any eminent distinction. But after what the
great St. Augustine has just told you I believe it right to impart a
cruel experience, which I had, relative to the conditions necessary for
the validity of a sacrament. The bishop of Hippo is indeed right in what
he said. A sacrament depends on the form; its virtue is in its form;
its vice is in its form. Listen, confessors and pontiffs, to my woeful
story. I was a priest in Rome under the rule of the Emperor Gordianus. Without desiring to recommend myself to you for any special merit, I may
say that I exercised my priesthood with piety and zeal. For forty years
I served the church of St. Modestus-beyond-the-Walls. My habits were
regular. Every Saturday I went to a tavern-keeper called Barjas, who
dwelt with his wine-jars under the Porta Capena, and from him I bought
the wine that I consecrated daily throughout the week. During that long
space of time I never failed for a single morning to consecrate the holy
sacrifice of the mass. However, I had no joy, and it was with a heart
oppressed by sorrow that, on the steps of the altar I used to ask, 'Why
art thou so heavy, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within
me?' The faithful whom I invited to the holy table gave me cause for
affliction, for having, so to speak, the Host that I administered still
upon their tongues, they fell again into sin just as if the sacrament
had been without power or efficacy. At last I reached the end of my
earthly trials, and failing asleep in the Lord, I awoke in this abode
of the elect. I learned then from the mouth of the angel who brought me
here, that Barjas, the tavern-keeper of the Porta Capena, had sold for
wine a decoction of roots and barks in which there was not a single drop
of the juice of the grape. I had been unable to transmute this vile
brew into blood, for it was not wine, and wine alone is changed into the
blood of Jesus Christ. Therefore all my consecrations were invalid, and
unknown to us, my faithful and myself had for forty years been deprived
of the sacrament and were in fact in a state of excommunication. This
revelation threw me into a stupor which overwhelms me even to-day in
this abode of bliss. I go all through Paradise without ever meeting
a single one of those Christians whom formerly I admitted to the holy
table in the basilica of the blessed Modestus. Deprived of the bread of
angels, they easily gave way to the most abominable vices, and they have
all gone to hell. It gives me some satisfaction to think that Barjas,
the tavern-keeper, is damned. There is in these things a logic worthy of
the author of all logic. Nevertheless my unhappy example proves that it
is sometimes inconvenient that form should prevail over essence in the
sacraments, and I humbly ask, Could not, eternal wisdom remedy this?" "No," answered the Lord. "The remedy would be worse than the disease. It would be the ruin of the priesthood if essence prevailed over form in
the laws of salvation." "Alas! Lord," sighed the humble Probus. "Be persuaded by my humble
experience; as long as you reduce your sacraments to formulas your
justice will meet with terrible obstacles." "I know that better than you do," replied the Lord. "I see in a single
glance both the actual problems which are difficult, and the future
problems which will not be less difficult. Thus I can foretell that when
the sun will have turned round the earth two hundred and forty times
more. "Sublime language," exclaimed the angels. "And worthy of the creator of the world," answered the pontiffs. "It is," resumed the Lord, "a manner of speaking in accordance with
my old cosmogony and one which I cannot give up without losing my
immutability. . . . "After the sun, then, will have turned another two hundred and forty
times round the earth, there will not be a single cleric left in Rome
who knows Latin. When they sing their litanies in the churches people
will invoke Orichel, Roguel, and Totichel, and, as you know, these are
devils and not angels. Many robbers desiring to make their communions,
but fearing that before obtaining pardon they would be forced to give up
the things they had robbed to the Church, will make their confessions
to travelling priests, who, ignorant of both Italian and Latin, and only
speaking the patois of their village, will go through cities and towns
selling the remission of sins for a base price, often for a bottle of
wine. Probably we shall not be inconvenienced by those absolutions as
they will want contrition to make them valid, but it may be that their
baptisms will cause us some embarrassment. The priests will become so
ignorant that they will baptize children in nomine patria et filia et
spirita sancta, as Louis de Potter will take a pleasure in relating in
the third volume of his 'Philosophical, Political, and Critical History
of Christianity.' It will be an arduous question to decide on the
validity of such baptisms; for even if in my sacred writings I tolerate
a Greek less elegant than Plato's and a scarcely Ciceronian Latin, I
cannot possibly admit a piece of pure patois as a liturgical formula. And one shudders when one thinks that millions of new-born babes will be
baptized by this method. But let us return to our penguins." "Your divine words, Lord, have already led us back to them," said
St. Gal. "In the signs of religion and the laws of salvation form
necessarily prevails over essence, and the validity of a sacrament
solely depends upon its form. The whole question is whether the penguins
have been baptized with the proper forms. Now there is no doubt about
the answer." The fathers and the doctors agreed, and their perplexity became only the
more cruel. "The Christian state," said St. Cornelius, "is not without serious
inconveniences for a penguin. In it the birds are obliged to work out
their own salvation. How can they succeed? The habits of birds are,
in many points, contrary to the commandments of the Church, and the
penguins have no reason for changing theirs. I mean that they are not
intelligent enough to give up their present habits and assume better." "They cannot," said the Lord; "my decrees prevent them." "Nevertheless," resumed St. Cornelius, "in virtue of their baptism their
actions no longer remain indifferent. Henceforth they will be good or
bad, susceptible of merit or of demerit." "That is precisely the question we have to deal with," said the Lord. "I see only one solution," said St. Augustine. "The penguins will go to
hell." "But they have no soul," observed St. Irenaeus. "It is a pity," sighed Tertullian. "It is indeed," resumed St. Gal. "And I admit that my disciple, the holy
Mael, has, in his blind zeal, created great theological difficulties for
the Holy Spirit and introduced disorder into the economy of mysteries." "He is an old blunderer," cried St. Adjutor of Alsace, shrugging his
shoulders. But the Lord cast a reproachful look on Adjutor. "Allow me to speak," said he; "the holy Mael has not intuitive knowledge
like you, my blessed ones. He does not see me. He is an old man burdened
by infirmities; he is half deaf and three parts blind. You are
too severe on him. However, I recognise that the situation is an
embarrassing one." "Luckily it is but a passing disorder," said St. Irenaeus. "The penguins
are baptized, but their eggs are not, and the evil will stop with the
present generation." "Do not speak thus, Irenaeus my son," said the Lord. "There are
exceptions to the laws that men of science lay down on the earth because
they are imperfect and have not an exact application to nature. But
the laws that I establish are perfect and suffer no exception. We must
decide the fate of the baptized penguins without violating any divine
law, and in a manner conformable to the decalogue as well as to the
commandments of my Church." "Lord," said St. Gregory Nazianzen, "give them an immortal soul." "Alas! Lord, what would they do with it," sighed Lactantius. "They
have not tuneful voices to sing your praises. They would not be able to
celebrate your mysteries." "Without doubt," said St. Augustine, "they would not observe the divine
law." "They could not," said the Lord. "They could not," continued St. Augustine. "And if, Lord, in your
wisdom, you pour an immortal soul into them, they will burn eternally
in hell in virtue of your adorable decrees. Thus will the transcendent
order, that this old Welshman has disturbed, be re-established." "You propose a correct solution to me, son of Monica," said the Lord,
"and one that accords with my wisdom. But it does not satisfy my mercy. And, although in my essence I am immutable, the longer I endure, the
more I incline to mildness. This change of character is evident to
anyone who reads my two Testaments." As the discussion continued without much light being thrown upon the
matter and as the blessed showed a disposition to keep repeating the
same thing, it was decided to consult St. Catherine of Alexandria. This
is what was usually done in such cases. St. Catherine while on earth had
confounded fifty very learned doctors. She knew Plato's philosophy in
addition to the Holy Scriptures, and she also possessed a knowledge of
rhetoric. VII. AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE (Continuation and End)

St. Catherine entered the assembly, her head encircled by a crown of
emeralds, sapphires, and pearls, and she was clad in a robe of cloth
of gold. She carried at her side a blazing wheel, the image of the one
whose fragments had struck her persecutors. The Lord having invited her to speak, she expressed herself in these
terms:

"Lord, in order to solve the problem you deign to submit to me I
shall not study the habits of animals in general nor those of birds in
particular. I shall only remark to the doctors, confessors, and pontiffs
gathered in this assembly that the separation between man and animal is
not complete since there are monsters who proceed from both. Such are
chimeras--half nymphs and half serpents; such are the three Gorgons and
the Capripeds; such are the Scyllas and the Sirens who sing in the
sea. These have a woman's breast and a fish's tail. Such also are the
Centaurs, men down to the waist and the remainder horses. They are a
noble race of monsters. One of them, as you know, was able, guided
by the light of reason alone, to direct his steps towards eternal
blessedness, and you sometimes see his heroic bosom prancing on the
clouds. Chiron, the Centaur, deserved for his works on the earth
to share the abode of the blessed; he it was who gave Achilles his
education; and that young hero, when he left the Centaur's hands, lived
for two years, dressed as a young girl, among the daughters of King
Lycomedes. He shared their games and their bed without allowing any
suspicion to arise that he was not a young virgin like them. Chiron,
who taught him such good morals, is, with the Emperor Trajan, the only
righteous man who obtained celestial glory by following the law of
nature. And yet he was but half human. "I think I have proved by this example that, to reach eternal
blessedness, it is enough to possess some parts of humanity, always on
the condition that they are noble. And what Chiron, the Centaur,
could obtain without having been regenerated by baptism, would not the
penguins deserve too, if they became half penguins and half men? That
is why, Lord, I entreat you to give old Mael's penguins a human head
and breast so that they can praise you worthily. And grant them also an
immortal soul--but one of small size." Thus Catherine spoke, and the fathers, doctors, confessors, and pontiffs
heard her with a murmur of approbation. But St. Anthony, the Hermit, arose and stretching two red and knotty
arms towards the Most High:

"Do not so, O Lord God," he cried, "in the name of your holy Paraclete,
do not so!" He spoke with such vehemence that his long white beard shook on his chin
like the empty nose-bag of a hungry horse. "Lord, do not so. Birds with human heads exist already. St. Catherine
has told us nothing new." "The imagination groups and compares; it never creates," replied St.
Catherine drily. "They exist already," continued St. Antony, who would listen to nothing. "They are called harpies, and they are the most obscene animals in
creation. One day as I was having supper in the desert with the Abbot
St. Paul, I placed the table outside my cabin under an old sycamore
tree. The harpies came and sat in its branches; they deafened us with
their shrill cries and cast their excrement over all our food. The
clamour of the monsters prevented me from listening to the teaching of
the Abbot St. Paul, and we ate birds' dung with our bread and lettuces. Lord, it is impossible to believe that harpies could give thee worthy
praise. "Truly in my temptations I have seen many hybrid beings, not only
women-serpents and women-fishes, but beings still more confusedly formed
such as men whose bodies were made out of a pot, a bell, a clock, a
cupboard full of food and crockery, or even out of a house with doors
and windows through which people engaged in their domestic tasks could
be seen. Eternity would not suffice were I to describe all the monsters
that assailed me in my solitude, from whales rigged like ships to a
shower of red insects which changed the water of my fountain into blood. But none were as disgusting as the harpies whose offal polluted the
leaves of my sycamore." "Harpies," observed Lactantius, "are female Monsters with birds'
bodies. They have a woman's head and breast. Their forwardness, their
shamelessness, and their obscenity proceed from their female nature as
the poet Virgil demonstrated in his 'Aeneid.' They share the curse of
Eve." "Let us not speak of the curse of Eve," said the Lord. "The second Eve
has redeemed the first." Paul Orosius, the author of a universal history that Bossuet was to
imitate in later years, arose and prayed to the Lord:

"Lord, hear my prayer and Anthony's. Do not make any more monsters like
the Centaurs, Sirens, and Fauns, whom the Greeks, those collectors of
fables, loved. You will derive no satisfaction from them. Those species
of monsters have pagan inclinations and their double nature does not
dispose them to purity of morals." The bland Lactantius replied in these terms:

"He who has just spoken is assuredly the best historian in Paradise, for
Herodotus, Thucydides, Polybius, Livy, Velleius Paterculus, Cornelius
Nepos, Suetonius, Manetho, Diodorus Siculus, Dion Cassius, and
Lampridius are deprived of the sight of God, and Tacitus suffers in hell
the torments that are reserved for blasphemers. But Paul Orosius does
not know heaven as well as he knows the earth, for he does not seem to
bear in mind that the angels, who proceed from man and bird, are purity
itself." "We are wandering," said the Eternal. "What have we to do with all those
centaurs, harpies, and angels? We have to deal with penguins." "You have spoken to the point, Lord," said the chief of the fifty
doctors, who, during their mortal life had been confounded by the Virgin
of Alexandria, "and I dare express the opinion that, in order to put an
end to the scandal by which heaven is now stirred, old Mael's penguins
should, as St. Catherine who confounded us has proposed, be given half
of a human body with an eternal soul proportioned to that half." At this speech there arose in the assembly a great noise of private
conversations and disputes of the doctors. The Greek fathers argued with
the Latins concerning the substance, nature, and dimensions of the soul
that should be given to the penguins. "Confessors and pontiffs," exclaimed the Lord, "do not imitate the
conclaves and synods of the earth. And do not bring into the Church
Triumphant those violences that trouble the Church Militant. For it is
but too true that in all the councils held under the inspiration of my
spirit, in Europe, in Asia, and in Africa, fathers have torn the
beards and scratched the eyes of other fathers. Nevertheless they were
infallible, for I was with them." Order being restored, old Hermas arose and slowly uttered these words:

"I will praise you, Lord, for that you caused my mother, Saphira, to be
born amidst your people, in the days when the dew of heaven refreshed
the earth which was in travail with its Saviour. And will praise you,
Lord, for having granted to me to see with my mortal eyes the Apostles
of your divine Son. And I will speak in this illustrious assembly
because you have willed that truth should proceed out of the mouths of
the humble, and I will say: 'Change these penguins to men. It is the
only determination conformable to your justice and your mercy.'" Several doctors asked permission to speak, others began to do so. No one
listened, and all the confessors were tumultuously shaking their palms
and their crowns. The Lord, by a gesture of his right hand, appeased the quarrels of his
elect. "Let us not deliberate any longer," said he. "The opinion broached by
gentle old Hermas is the only one conformable to my eternal designs. These birds will be changed into men. I foresee in this several
disadvantages. Many of those men will commit sins they would not have
committed as penguins. Truly their fate through this change will be
far less enviable than if they had been without this baptism and this
incorporation into the family of Abraham. But my foreknowledge must not
encroach upon their free will. "In order not to impair human liberty, I will be ignorant of what I
know, I will thicken upon my eyes the veils I have pierced, and in my
blind clearsightedness I will let myself be surprised by what I have
foreseen." And immediately calling the archangel Raphael:

"Go and find the holy Mael," said he to him; "inform him of his mistake
and tell him, armed with my Name, to change these penguins into men." VIII. METAMORPHOSIS OF THE PENGUINS

The archangel, having gone down into the Island of the Penguins, found
the holy man asleep in the hollow of a rock surrounded by his new
disciples. He laid his hand on his shoulder and, having waked him, said
in a gentle voice:

"Mael, fear not!" The holy man, dazzled by a vivid light, inebriated by a delicious
odour, recognised the angel of the Lord, and prostrated himself with his
forehead on the ground. The angel continued:

"Mael, know thy error, believing that thou wert baptizing children of
Adam thou hast baptized birds; and it is, through thee that penguins
have entered into the Church of God." At these words the old man remained stupefied. And the angel resumed:

"Arise, Mael, arm thyself with the mighty Name of the Lord, and say to
these birds, 'Be ye men!'" And the holy Mael, having wept and prayed, armed himself with the mighty
Name of the Lord and said to the birds:

"Be ye men!" Immediately the penguins were transformed. Their foreheads enlarged and
their heads grew round like the dome of St. Maria Rotunda in Rome. Their
oval eyes opened more widely on the universe; a fleshy nose clothed the
two clefts of their nostrils; their beaks were changed into mouths, and
from their mouths went forth speech; their necks grew short and thick;
their wings became arms and their claws legs; a restless soul dwelt
within the breast of each of them. However, there remained with them some traces of their first nature. They were inclined to look sideways; they balanced themselves on their
short thighs; their bodies were covered with fine down. And Mael gave thanks to the Lord, because he had incorporated these
penguins into the family of Abraham. But he grieved at the thought that he would soon leave the island to
come back no more, and that perhaps when he was far away the faith
of the penguins would perish for want of care like a young and tender
plant. And he formed the idea of transporting their island to the coasts of
Armorica. "I know not the designs of eternal Wisdom," said he to himself. "But if
God wills that this island be transported, who could prevent it?" And the holy man made a very fine cord about forty feet long out of the
flax of his stole. He fastened one end of the cord round a point of rock
that jutted up through the sand of the shore and, holding the other end
of the cord in his hand, he entered the stone trough. The trough glided over the sea and towed Penguin Island behind it; after
nine days' sailing it approached the Breton coast, bringing the island
with it. BOOK II. THE ANCIENT TIMES




I. THE FIRST CLOTHES

One day St. Mael was sitting by the seashore on a warm stone that he
found. He thought it had been warmed by the sun and he gave thanks
to God for it, not knowing that the Devil had been resting on it. The
apostle was waiting for the monks of Yvern who had been commissioned to
bring a freight of skins and fabrics to clothe the inhabitants of the
island of Alca. Soon he saw a monk called Magis coming ashore and carrying a chest upon
his back. This monk enjoyed a great reputation for holiness. When he had drawn near to the old man he laid the chest on the ground
and wiping his forehead with the back of his sleeve, he said:

"Well, father, you wish then to clothe these penguins?" "Nothing is more needful, my son," said the old man. "Since they have
been incorporated into the family of Abraham these penguins share the
curse of Eve, and they know that they are naked, a thing of which they
were ignorant before. And it is high time to clothe them, for they are
losing the down that remained on them after their metamorphosis." "It is true," said Magis as he cast his eyes over the coast where
the penguins were to be seen looking for shrimps, gathering mussels,
singing, or sleeping, "they are naked. But do you not think, father,
that it would be better to leave them naked? Why clothe them? When they
wear clothes and are under the moral law they will assume an immense
pride, a vile hypocrisy, and an excessive cruelty." "Is it possible, my son," sighed the old man, "that you understand so
badly the effects of the moral law to which even the heathen submit?" "The moral law," answered Magis, "forces men who are beasts to live
otherwise than beasts, a thine that doubtless puts a constraint upon
them, but that also flatters and reassures them; and as they are proud,
cowardly, and covetous of pleasure, they willingly submit to restraints
that tickle their vanity and on which they found both their present
security and the hope of their future happiness. That is the principle
of all morality. . . . But let us not mislead ourselves. My companions
are unloading their cargo of stuffs and skins on the island. Think,
father, while there is still time I To clothe the penguins is a very
serious business. At present when a penguin desires a penguin he knows
precisely what he desires and his lust is limited by an exact knowledge
of its object. At this moment two or three couples of penguins are
making love on the beach. See with what simplicity! No one pays
any attention and the actors themselves do not seem to be greatly
preoccupied. But when the female penguins are clothed, the male penguin
will not form so exact a notion of what it is that attracts him to them. His indeterminate desires will fly out into all sorts of dreams and
illusions; in short, father, he will know love and its mad torments. And all the time the female penguins will cast down their eyes and bite
their lips, and take on airs as if they kept a treasure under their
clothes! . . . what a pity! "The evil will be endurable as long as these people remain rude and
poor; but only wait for a thousand years and you will see, father, with
what powerful weapons you have endowed the daughters of Alca. If you
will allow me, I can give you some idea of it beforehand. I have some
old clothes in this chest. Let us take at hazard one of these female
penguins to whom the male penguins give such little thought, and let us
dress her as well as we can. "Here is one coming towards us. She is neither more beautiful nor
uglier than the others; she is young. No one looks at her. She strolls
indolently along the shore, scratching her back and with her finger
at her nose as she walks. You cannot help seeing, father, that she has
narrow shoulders, clumsy breasts, a stout figure, and short legs. Her
reddish knees pucker at every step she takes, and there is, at each of
her joints, what looks like a little monkey's head. Her broad and sinewy
feet cling to the rock with their four crooked toes, while the great
toes stick up like the heads of two cunning serpents. She begins to
walk, all her muscles are engaged in the task, and, when we see them
working, we think of her as a machine intended for walking rather than
as a machine intended for making love, although visibly she is both,
and contains within herself several other pieces of machinery, besides. Well, venerable apostle, you will see what I am going to make of her." With these words the monk, Magis, reached the female penguin in three
bounds, lifted her up, carried her in his arms with her hair trailing
behind her, and threw her, overcome with fright, at the feet of the holy
Mael. And whilst she wept and begged him to do her no harm, he took a pair of
sandals out of his chest and commanded her to put them on. "Her feet," observed the old man, "will appear smaller when squeezed in
by the woollen cords. The soles, being two fingers high, will give
an elegant length to her legs and the weight they bear will seem
magnified." As the penguin tied on her sandals she threw a curious look towards
the open coffer, and seeing that it was full of jewels and finery, she
smiled through her tears. The monk twisted her hair on the back of her head and covered it with
a chaplet of flowers. He encircled her wrist with golden bracelets
and making her stand upright, he passed a large linen band beneath her
breasts, alleging that her bosom would thereby derive a new dignity and
that her sides would be compressed to the greater glory of her hips. He fixed this band with pins, taking them one by one out of his mouth. "You can tighten it still more," said the penguin. When he had, with much care and study, enclosed the soft parts of her
bust in this way, he covered her whole body with a rose-coloured tunic
which gently followed the lines of her figure. "Does it hang well?" asked the penguin. And bending forward with her head on one side and her chin on her
shoulder, she kept looking attentively at the appearance of her toilet. Magis asked her if she did not think the dress a little long, but she
answered with assurance that it was not--she would hold it up. Immediately, taking the back of her skirt in her left hand, she drew
it obliquely across her hips, taking care to disclose a glimpse of her
heels. Then she went away, walking with short steps and swinging her
hips. She did not turn her head, but as she passed near a stream she glanced
out of the corner of her eye at her own reflection. A male penguin, who met her by chance, stopped in surprise, and
retracing his steps began to follow her. As she went along the shore,
others coming back from fishing, went up to her, and after looking at
her, walked behind her. Those who were lying on the sand got up and
joined the rest. Unceasingly, as she advanced, fresh penguins, descending from the paths
of the mountain, coming out of clefts of the rocks, and emerging from
the water, added to the size of her retinue. And all of them, men of ripe age with vigorous shoulders and hairy
breasts, agile youths, old men shaking the multitudinous wrinkles of
their rosy, and white-haired skins, or dragging their legs thinner and
drier than the juniper staff that served them as a third leg, hurried
on, panting and emitting an acrid odour and hoarse gasps. Yet she went
on peacefully and seemed to see nothing. "Father," cried Magis, "notice how each one advances with his nose
pointed towards the centre of gravity of that young damsel now that the
centre is covered by a garment. The sphere inspires the meditations
of geometers by the number of its properties. When it proceeds from a
physical and living nature it acquires new qualities, and in order that
the interest of that figure might be fully revealed to the penguins it
was necessary that, ceasing to see it distinctly with their eyes, they
should be led to represent it to themselves in their minds. I myself
feel at this moment irresistibly attracted towards that penguin. Whether
it be because her skirt gives more importance to her hips, and that in
its simple magnificence it invests them with a synthetic and general
character and allows only the pure idea, the divine principle, of them
to be seen, whether this be the cause I cannot say, but I feel that if
I embraced her I would hold in my hands the heaven of human pleasure. It
is certain that modesty communicates an invincible attraction to women. My uneasiness is so great that it would be vain for me to try to conceal
it." He spoke, and, gathering up his habit, he rushed among the crowd of
penguins, pushing, jostling, trampling, and crushing, until he reached
the daughter of Alca, whom he seized and suddenly carried in his arms
into a cave that had been hollowed out by the sea. Then the penguins felt as if the sun had gone out. And the holy Mael
knew that the Devil had taken the features of the monk, Magis, in order
that he might give clothes to the daughter of Alca. He was troubled in
spirit, and his soul was sad. As with slow steps he went towards his
hermitage he saw the little penguins of six and seven years of age
tightening their waists with belts made of sea-weed and walking along
the shore to see if anybody would follow them. II. THE FIRST CLOTHES (Continuation and End)

The holy Mael felt a profound sadness that the first clothes put upon
a daughter of Alca should have betrayed the penguin modesty instead of
helping it. He persisted, none the less, in his design of giving clothes
to the inhabitants of the miraculous island. Assembling them on the
shore, he distributed to them the garments that the monks of Yvern
had brought. The male penguins received short tunics and breeches, the
female penguins long robes. But these robes were far from creating the
effect that the former one had produced. They were not so beautiful,
their shape was uncouth and without art, and no attention was paid to
them since every woman bad one. As they prepared the meals and worked
in the fields they soon had nothing but slovenly bodices and soiled
petticoats. The male penguins loaded their unfortunate consorts with work until they
looked like beasts of burden. They knew nothing of the troubles of the
heart and the disorders of passion. Their habits were innocent. Incest,
though frequent, was a sign of rustic simplicity and if drunkenness led
a youth to commit some such crime he thought nothing more about it the
day afterwards. III. SETTING BOUNDS TO THE FIELDS AND THE ORIGIN OF PROPERTY

The island did not preserve the rugged appearance that it had formerly,
when, in the midst of floating icebergs it sheltered a population of
birds within its rocky amphitheatre. Its snow-clad peak had sunk
down into a hill from the summit of which one could see the coasts of
Armorica eternally covered with mist, and the ocean strewn with sullen
reefs like monsters half raised out of its depths. Its coasts were now very extensive and clearly defined and its shape
reminded one of a mulberry leaf. It was suddenly covered with coarse
grass, pleasing to the flocks, and with willows, ancient figtrees, and
mighty oaks. This fact is attested by the Venerable Bede and several
other authors worthy of credence. To the north the shore formed a deep bay that in after years became one
of the most famous ports in the universe. To the east, along a rocky
coast beaten by a foaming sea, there stretched a deserted and fragrant
heath. It was the Beach of Shadows, and the inhabitants of the island
never ventured on it for fear of the serpents that lodged in the hollows
of the rocks and lest they might encounter the souls of the dead who
resembled livid flames. To the south, orchards and woods bounded the
languid Bay of Divers. On this fortunate shore old Mael built a wooden
church and a monastery. To the west, two streams, the Clange and the
Surelle, watered the fertile valleys of Dalles and Dombes. Now one autumn morning, as the blessed Mael was walking in the valley of
Clange in company with a monk of Yvern called Bulloch, he saw bands of
fierce-looking men loaded with stones passing along the roads. At the
same time he heard in all directions cries and complaints mounting up
from the valley towards the tranquil sky. And he said to Bulloch:

"I notice with sadness, my son, that since they became men the
inhabitants of this island act with less wisdom than formerly. When they
were birds they only quarrelled during the season of their love affairs. But now they dispute all the time; they pick quarrels with each other
in summer as well as in winter. How greatly have they fallen from that
peaceful majesty which made the assembly of the penguins look like the
Senate of a wise republic! "Look towards Surelle, Bulloch, my son. In yonder pleasant valley a
dozen men penguins are busy knocking each other down with the spades and
picks that they might employ better in tilling the ground. The women,
still more cruel than the men, are tearing their opponents' faces with
their nails. Alas! Bulloch, my son, why are they murdering each other in
this way?" "From a spirit of fellowship, father, and through forethought for
the future," answered Bulloch. "For man is essentially provident and
sociable. Such is his character and it is impossible to imagine it apart
from a certain appropriation of things. Those penguins whom you see are
dividing the ground among themselves." "Could they not divide it with less violence?" asked the aged man. "As
they fight they exchange invectives and threats. I do not distinguish
their words, but they are angry ones, judging from the tone." "They are accusing one another of theft and encroachment," answered
Bulloch. "That is the general sense of their speech." At that moment the holy Mael clasped his hands and sighed deeply. "Do you see, my son," he exclaimed, "that madman who with his teeth is
biting the nose of the adversary he has overthrown and that other one
who is pounding a woman's head with a huge stone?" "I see them," said Bulloch. "They are creating law; they are founding
property; they are establishing the principles of civilization, the
basis of society, and the foundations of the State." "How is that?" asked old Mael. "By setting bounds to their fields. That is the origin of all
government. Your penguins, O Master, are performing the most august
of functions. Throughout the ages their work will be consecrated by
lawyers, and magistrates will confirm it." Whilst the monk, Bulloch, was pronouncing these words a big penguin with
a fair skin and red hair went down into the valley carrying a trunk of a
tree upon his shoulder. He went up to a little penguin who was watering
his vegetables in the heat of the sun, and shouted to him:

"Your field is mine!" And having delivered himself of this stout utterance he brought down
his club on the head of the little penguin, who fell dead upon the field
that his own hands had tilled. At this sight the holy Mael shuddered through his whole body and poured
forth a flood of tears. And in a voice stifled by horror and fear he addressed this prayer to
heaven:

"O Lord, my God, O thou who didst receive young Abel's sacrifices, thou
who didst curse Cain, avenge, O Lord, this innocent penguin sacrificed
upon his own field and make the murderer feel the weight of thy arm. Is there a more odious crime, is there a graver offence against thy
justice, O Lord, than this murder and this robbery?" "Take care, father," said Bulloch gently, "that what you call murder and
robbery may not really be war and conquest, those sacred foundations
of empires, those sources of all human virtues and all human greatness. Reflect, above all, that in blaming the big penguin you are attacking
property in its origin and in its source. I shall have no trouble
in showing you how. To till the land is one thing, to possess it is
another, and these two things must not be confused; as regards ownership
the right of the first occupier is uncertain and badly founded. The
right of conquest, on the other hand, rests on more solid foundations. It is the only right that receives respect since it is the only one that
makes itself respected. The sole and proud origin of property is force. It is born and preserved by force. In that it is august and yields
only to a greater force. This is why it is correct to say that he
who possesses is noble. And that big red man, when he knocked down a
labourer to get possession of his field, founded at that moment a very
noble house upon this earth. I congratulate him upon it." Having thus spoken, Bulloch approached the big penguin, who was leaning
upon his club as he stood in the blood-stained furrow:

"Lord Greatauk, dreaded Prince," said he, bowing to the ground, "I
come to pay you the homage due to the founder of legitimate power and
hereditary wealth. The skull of the vile Penguin you have overthrown
will, buried in your field, attest for ever the sacred rights of your
posterity over this soil that you have ennobled. Blessed be your suns
and your sons' sons! They shall be Greatauks, Dukes of Skull, and they
shall rule over this island of Alca." Then raising his voice and turning towards the holy Mael:

"Bless Greatauk, father, for all power comes from God." Mael remained silent and motionless, with his eyes raised towards
heaven; he felt a painful uncertainty in judging the monk Bulloch's
doctrine. It was, however, the doctrine destined to prevail in epochs of
advanced civilization. Bulloch can be considered as the creator of civil
law in Penguinia. IV. THE FIRST ASSEMBLY OF THE ESTATES OF PENGUINIA

"Bulloch, my son," said old Mael, "we ought to make a census of the
Penguins and inscribe each of their names in a book." "It is a most urgent matter," answered Bulloch, "there can be no good
government without it." Forthwith, the apostle, with the help of twelve monks, proceeded to make
a census of the people. And old Mael then said:

"Now that we keep a register of all the inhabitants, we ought, Bulloch,
my son, to levy a just tax so as to provide for public expenses and
the maintenance of the Abbey. Each ought to contribute according to his
means. For this reason, my son, call together the Elders of Alca, and in
agreement with them we shall establish the tax." The Elders, being called together, assembled to the number of thirty
under the great sycamore in the courtyard of the wooden monastery. They were the first Estates of Penguinia. Three-fourths of them were
substantial peasants of Surelle and Clange. Greatauk, as the noblest of
the Penguins, sat upon the highest stone. The venerable Mael took his place in the midst of his monks and uttered
these words:

"Children, the Lord when he pleases grants riches to men and he
takes them away from them. Now I have called you together to levy
contributions from the people so as to provide for public expenses and
the maintenance of the monks. I consider that these contributions
ought to be in proportion to the wealth of each. Therefore he who has a
hundred oxen will give ten; he who has ten will give one." When the holy man had spoken, Morio, a labourer at Anis-on-the-Clange,
one of the richest of the Penguins, rose up and said:

"O Father Mael, I think it right that each should contribute to the
public expenses and to the support of the Church, on my part I am ready
to give up all that I possess in the interest of my brother Penguins,
and if it were necessary I would even cheerfully part with my shirt. All
the elders of the people are ready, like me, to sacrifice their goods,
and no one can doubt their absolute devotion to their country and their
creed. We have, then, only to consider the public interest and to do
what it requires. Now, Father, what it requires, what it demands, is not
to ask much from those who possess much, for then the rich would be less
rich and the poor still poorer. The poor live on the wealth of the rich
and that is the reason why that wealth is sacred. Do not touch it, to do
so would be an uncalled for evil. You will get no great profit by taking
from the rich, for they are very few in number; on the contrary you will
strip yourself of all your resources and plunge the country into misery. Whereas if you ask a little from each inhabitant without regard to his
wealth, you will collect enough for the public necessities and you will
have no need to enquire into each citizen's resources, a thing that
would be regarded by all as a most vexatious measure. By taxing all
equally and easily you will spare the poor, for you Will leave them
the wealth of the rich. And how could you possibly proportion taxes to
wealth? Yesterday I had two hundred oxen, to-day I have sixty, to-morrow
I shall have a hundred. Clunic has three cows, but they are thin; Nicclu
has only two, but they are fat. Which is the richer, Clunic or Nicclu? The signs of opulence are deceitful. What is certain is that everyone
eats and drinks. Tax people according to what they consume. That would
be wisdom and it would be justice." Thus spoke Morio amid the applause of the Elders. "I ask that this speech be graven on bronze," cried the monk, Bulloch. "It is spoken for the future; in fifteen hundred years the best of the
Penguins will not speak otherwise." The Elders were still applauding when Greatauk, his hand on the pommel
of his sword, made this brief declaration:

"Being noble, I shall not contribute; for to contribute is ignoble. It
is for the rabble to pay." After this warning the Elders separated in silence. As in Rome, a new census was taken every five years; and by this means
it was observed that the population increased rapidly. Although children
died in marvellous abundance and plagues and famines came with perfect
regularity to devastate entire villages, new Penguins, in continually
greater numbers, contributed by their private misery to the public
prosperity. V. THE MARRIAGE OF KRAKEN AND ORBEROSIA

During these times there lived in the island of Alca a Penguin whose arm
was strong and whose mind was subtle. He was called Kraken, and had his
dwelling on the Beach of Shadows whither the inhabitants never ventured
for fear of serpents that lodged in the hollows of the rocks and
lest they might encounter the souls of Penguins that had died without
baptism. These, in appearance like livid flames, and uttering doleful
groans, wandered night and day along the deserted beach. For it was
generally believed, though without proof, that among the Penguins that
had been changed into men at the blessed Mael's prayer, several had
not received baptism and returned after their death to lament amid the
tempests. Kraken dwelt on this savage coast in an inaccessible cavern. The only way to it was through a natural tunnel a hundred feet long, the
entrance of which was concealed by a thick wood. One evening as Kraken
was walking through this deserted plain he happened to meet a young and
charming woman Penguin. She was the one that the monk Magis had clothed
with his own hands and thus was the first to have worn the garments
of chastity. In remembrance of the day when the astonished crowd of
Penguins had seen her moving gloriously in her robe tinted like the
dawn, this maiden had received the name of Orberosia. *

     * "Orb, poetically, a globe when speaking of the heavenly
     bodies. By extension any species of globular body." --Littre

At the sight of Kraken she uttered a cry of alarm and darted forward to
escape from him. But the hero seized her by the garments that floated
behind, her, and addressed her in these words:

"Damsel, tell me thy name, thy family and thy country." But Orberosia kept looking at Kraken with alarm. "Is it you, I see, sir," she asked him, trembling, "or is it not rather
your troubled spirit?" She spoke in this way because the inhabitants of Alca, having no news of
Kraken since he went to live on the Beach of Shadows, believed that he
had died and descended among the demons of night. "Cease to fear, daughter of Alca," answered Kraken. "He who speaks to
thee is not a wandering spirit, but a man full of strength and might. I
shall soon possess great riches." And young Orberosia asked:

"How dost thou think of acquiring great riches, O Kraken, since thou art
a child of Penguins?" "By my intelligence," answered Kraken. "I know," said Orberosia, "that in the time that thou dwelt among us
thou wert renowned for thy skill in hunting and fishing. No one equalled
thee in taking fishes in a net or in piercing with thy arrows the
swift-flying birds." "It was but a vulgar and laborious industry, O maiden. I have found a
means of gaining much wealth for myself without fatigue. But tell me who
thou art?" "I am called Orberosia," answered the young girl. "Why art thou so far away from thy dwelling and in the night?" "Kraken, it was not without the will of Heaven." "What meanest thou, Orberosia?" "That Heaven, O Kraken, placed me in thy path, for what reason I know
not." Kraken beheld her for a long time in silence. Then he said with gentleness:

"Orberosia, come into my house; it is that of the bravest and most
ingenious of the sons of the Penguins. If thou art willing to follow me,
I will make thee my companion." Then casting down her eyes, she murmured:

"I will follow thee, master." It is thus that the fair Orberosia became the consort of the hero
Kraken. This marriage was not celebrated with songs and torches because
Kraken did not consent to show himself to the people of the Penguins;
but hidden in his cave he planned great designs. VI. THE DRAGON OF ALCA

"We afterwards went to visit the cabinet of natural history. . . . The
care-taker showed us a sort of packet bound in straw that he told us
contained the skeleton of a dragon; a proof, added he, that the dragon
is not a fabulous animal." --Memoirs of Jacques Casanova, Paris, 1843. Vol. IV., pp. 404, 405

In the meantime the inhabitants of Alca practised the labours of peace. Those of the northern coast went in boats to fish or to search for
shell-fish. The labourers of Dombes cultivated oats, rye, and wheat. The rich Penguins of the valley of Dalles reared domestic animals,
while those of the Bay of Divers cultivated their orchards. Merchants of
Port-Alca carried on a trade in salt fish with Armorica and the gold
of the two Britains, which began to be introduced into the island,
facilitated exchange. The Penguin people were enjoying the fruit of
their labours in perfect tranquillity when suddenly a sinister rumour
ran from village to village. It was said everywhere that frightful
dragon had ravaged two farms in the Bay of Divers. A few days before, the maiden Orberosia had disappeared. Her absence had
at first caused no uneasiness because on several occasions she had been
carried off by violent men who were consumed with love. And thoughtful
people were not astonished at this, reflecting that the maiden was the
most beautiful of the Penguins. It was even remarked that she sometimes
went to meet her ravishers, for none of us can escape his destiny. But
this time, as she did not return, it was feared that the dragon had
devoured her. The more so as the inhabitants of the valley of Dalles
soon knew that the dragon was not a fable told by the women around the
fountains. For one night the monster devoured out of the village of Anis
six hens, a sheep, and a young orphan child called little Elo. The next
morning nothing was to be found either of the animals or of the child. Immediately the Elders of the village assembled in the public place and
seated themselves on the stone bench to take counsel concerning what it
was expedient to do in these terrible circumstances. Having called all those Penguins who had seen the dragon during the
disastrous night, they asked them:

"Have you not noticed his form and his behaviour?" And each answered in his turn:

"He has the claws of a lion, the wings of an eagle, and the tail of a
serpent." "His back bristles with thorny crests." "His whole body is covered with yellow scales." "His look fascinates and confounds. He vomits flames." "He poisons the air with his breath." "He has the head of a dragon, the claws of a lion, and the tail of a
fish." And a woman of Anis, who was regarded as intelligent and of sound
judgment and from whom the dragon had taken three hens, deposed as
follows:

"He is formed like a man. The proof is that I thought he was my husband,
and I said to him, 'Come to bed, you old fool.'" Others said:

"He is formed like a cloud." "He looks like a mountain." And a little child came and said:

"I saw the dragon taking off his head in the barn so that he might give
a kiss to my sister Minnie." And the Elders also asked the inhabitants:

"How big is the dragon?" And it was answered:

"As big as an ox." "Like the big merchant ships of the Bretons." "He is the height of a man." "He is higher than the fig-tree under which you are sitting." "He is as large as a dog." Questioned finally on his colour, the inhabitants said:

"Red." "Green." "Blue." "Yellow." "His head is bright green, his wings are brilliant orange tinged with
pink, his limbs are silver grey, his hind-quarters and his tail are
striped with brown and pink bands, his belly bright yellow spotted with
black." "His colour? He has no colour." "He is the colour of a dragon." After hearing this evidence the Elders remained uncertain as to what
should be done. Some advised to watch for him, to surprise him and
overthrow him by a multitude of arrows. Others, thinking it vain to
oppose so powerful a monster by force, counselled that he should be
appeased by offerings. "Pay him tribute," said one of them who passed for a wise man. "We can
render him propitious to us by giving him agreeable presents, fruits,
wine, lambs, a young virgin." Others held for poisoning the fountains where he was accustomed to drink
or for smoking him out of his cavern. But none of these counsels prevailed. The dispute was lengthy and the
Elders dispersed without coming to any resolution. VII. THE DRAGON OF ALCA (Continuation)

During all the month dedicated by the Romans to their false god Mars or
Mavors, the dragon ravaged the farms of Dalles and Dombes. He carried
off fifty sheep, twelve pigs, and three young boys. Every family was in
mourning and the island was full of lamentations. In order to remove the
scourge, the Elders of the unfortunate villages watered by the Clange
and the Surelle resolved to assemble and together go and ask the help of
the blessed Mael. On the fifth day of the month whose name among the Latins signifies
opening, because it opens the year, they went in procession to the
wooden monastery that had been built on the southern coast of the
island. When they were introduced into the cloister they filled it with
their sobs and groans. Moved by their lamentations, old Mael left the
room in which he devoted himself to the study of astronomy and the
meditation of the Scriptures, and went down to them, leaning on his
pastoral staff. At his approach, the Elders, prostrating themselves,
held out to him green branches of trees and some of them burnt aromatic
herbs. And the holy man, seating himself beside the cloistral fountain under an
ancient fig-tree, uttered these words:

"O my sons, offspring of the Penguins, why do you weep and groan? Why do
you hold out those suppliant boughs towards me? Why do you raise towards
heaven the smoke of those herbs? What calamity do you expect that I can
avert from your heads? Why do you beseech me? I am ready to give my life
for you. Only tell your father what it is you hope from him." To these questions the chief of the Elders answered:

"O Mael, father of the sons of Alca, I will speak for all. A horrible
dragon is laying waste our lands, depopulating our cattle-sheds, and
carrying off the flower of our youth. He has devoured the child Elo and
seven young boys; he has mangled the maiden Orberosia, the fairest of
the Penguins with his teeth. There is not a village in which he does not
emit his poisoned breath and which he has not filled with desolation. A prey to this terrible scourge, we come, O Mael, to pray thee, as the
wisest, to advise us concerning the safety of the inhabitants of this
island lest the ancient race of Penguins be extinguished." "O chief of the Elders of Alca," replied Mael, "thy words fill me with
profound grief, and I groan at the thought that this island is the prey
of a terrible dragon. But such an occurrence is not unique, for we find
in books several tales of very fierce dragons. The monsters are oftenest
found in caverns, by the brinks of waters, and, in preference, among
pagan peoples. Perhaps there are some among you who, although they have
received holy baptism and been incorporated into the family of Abraham,
have yet worshipped idols, like the ancient Romans, or hung up images,
votive tablets, fillets of wool, and garlands of flowers on the branches
of some sacred tree. Or perhaps some of the women Penguins have danced
round a magic stone and drunk water from the fountains where the nymphs
dwell. If it be so, believe, O Penguins, that the Lord has sent this
dragon to punish all for the crimes of some, and to lead you, O children
of the Penguins, to exterminate blasphemy, superstition, and impiety
from amongst you. For this reason I advise, as a remedy against the
great evil from which you suffer, that you carefully search your
dwellings for idolatry, and extirpate it from them. I think it would be
also efficacious to pray and do penance." Thus spoke the holy Mael. And the Elders of the Penguin people kissed
his feet and returned to their villages with renewed hope. VIII. THE DRAGON OF ALCA (Continuation)

Following the counsel of the holy Mael the inhabitants of Alca
endeavoured to uproot the superstitions that had sprung up amongst them. They took care to prevent the girls from dancing with incantations
round the fairy tree. Young mothers were sternly forbidden to rub their
children against the stones that stood upright in the fields so as
to make them strong. An old man of Dombes who foretold the future by
shaking grains of barley on a sieve, was thrown into a well. However, each night the monster still raided the poultry-yards and the
cattle-sheds. The frightened peasants barricaded themselves in their
houses. A woman with child who saw the shadow of a dragon on the road
through a window in the moonlight, was so terrified that she was brought
to bed before her time. In those days of trial, the holy Mael meditated unceasingly on the
nature of dragons and the means of combating them. After six months of
study and prayer he thought he had found what he sought. One evening as
he was walking by the sea with a young monk called Samuel, he to him in
these terms:

"I have studied at length the history and habits of dragons, not to
satisfy a vain curiosity, but to discover examples to follow in the
present circumstances. For such, Samuel, my son, is the use of history. "It is an invariable fact that dragons are extremely vigilant. They
never sleep, and for this reason we often find them employed in guarding
treasures. A dragon guarded at Colchis the golden fleece that Jason
conquered from him. A dragon watched over the golden apples in the
garden of the Hesperides. He was killed by Hercules and transformed into
a star by Juno. This fact is related in some books, and if it be true,
it was done by magic, for the gods of the pagans are in reality demons. A dragon prevented barbarous and ignorant men from drinking at the
fountain of Castalia. We must also remember the dragon of Andromeda,
which was slain by Perseus. But let us turn from these pagan fables, in
which error is always mixed with truth. We meet dragons in the histories
of the glorious archangel Michael, of St. George, St. Philip, St. James
the Great, St. Patrick, St. Martha, and St. Margaret. And it is in such
writings, since they are worthy of full credence, that we ought to look
for comfort and counsel. "The story of the dragon of Silena affords us particularly precious
examples. You must know, my son, that on the banks of a vast pool close
to that town there dwelt a dragon who sometimes approached the walls
and poisoned with his breath all who dwelt in the suburbs. And that
they might not be devoured by the monster, the inhabitants of Silena
delivered up to him one of their number expressed his thought every
morning. The victim was chosen by lot, and after a hundred others, the
lot fell upon the king's daughter. "Now St. George, who was a military tribune, as he passed through the
town of Silena, learned that the king's daughter had just been given to
the fierce beast. He immediately mounted his horse, and, armed with
his lance, rushed to encounter the dragon, whom he reached just as the
monster was about to devour the royal virgin. And when St. George had
overthrown the dragon, the king's daughter fastened her girdle round the
beast's neck and he followed her like a dog led on a leash. "That is an example for us of the power of virgins over dragons. The
history of St. Martha furnishes us with a still more certain proof. Do
you know the story, Samuel, my son?" "Yes, father," answered Samuel. And the blessed Mael went on:

"There was in a forest on the banks of the Rhone, between Arles and
Avignon, a dragon half quadruped and half fish, larger than an ox, with
sharp teeth like horns and huge-wings at his shoulders. He sank the
boats and devoured their passengers. Now St. Martha, at the entreaty of
the people, approached this dragon, whom she found devouring a man. She
put her girdle round his neck and led him easily into the town. "These two examples lead me to think that we should have recourse to the
power of some virgin so as to conquer the dragon who scatters terror and
death through the island of Alca. "For this reason, Samuel thy son, gird up thy loins and go, I pray thee,
with two of thy companions, into all the villages of this island, and
proclaim everywhere that a virgin alone shall be able to deliver the
island from the monster that devastates it. "Thou shalt sing psalms and canticles and thou shalt say:

"'O sons of the Penguins, if there be among you a pure virgin, let her
arise and go, armed with the sign of the cross, to combat the dragon!'" Thus the old man spake, and Samuel promised to obey him. The next day he
girded up his loins and set out with two of his companions to proclaim
to the inhabitants of Alca that a virgin alone would be able to deliver
the Penguins from the rage of the dragon. IX. THE DRAGON OF ALCA (Continuation)

Orberosia loved her husband, but she did not love him alone. At the
hour when Venus lightens in the pale sky, whilst Kraken scattered terror
through the villages, she used to visit in his moving hut, a young
shepherd of Dalles called Marcel, whose pleasing form was invested with
inexhaustible vigour. The fair Orberosia shared the shepherd's aromatic
couch with delight, but far from making herself known to him, she took
the name of Bridget, and said that she was the daughter of a gardener in
the Bay of Divers. When regretfully she left his arms she walked across
the smoking fields towards the Coast of Shadows, and if she happened to
meet some belated peasant she immediately spread out her garments like
great wings and cried:

"Passer by, lower your eyes, that you may not have to say, 'Alas! alas! woe is me, for I have seen the angel of the Lord.'" The villagers tremblingly knelt with their faces to the round. And
several of them used to say that angels, whom it would be death to see,
passed along the roads of the island in the night time. Kraken did not know of the loves of Orberosia and Marcel, for he was a
hero, and heroes never discover the secrets of their wives. But though
he did not know of these loves, he reaped the benefit of them. Every
night he found his companion more good-humoured and more beautiful,
exhaling pleasure and perfuming the nuptial bed with a delicious odour
of fennel and vervain. She loved Kraken with a love that never became
importunate or anxious, because she did not rest its whole weight on him
alone. This lucky infidelity of Orberosia was destined soon to save the hero
from a great peril and to assure his fortune and his glory for ever. For it happened that she saw passing in the twilight a neatherd from
Belmont, who was goading on his oxen, and she fell more deeply in
love with him than she had ever been with the shepherd Marcel. He was
hunch-backed; his shoulders were higher than his ears; his body was
supported by legs of different lengths; his rolling eyes flashed, from
beneath his matted hair. From his throat issued a hoarse voice and
strident laughter; he smelt of the cow-shed. However, to her he was
beautiful. "A plant," as Gnatho says, "has been loved by one, a stream
by another, a beast by a third." Now, one day, as she was sighing within the neatherd's arms in a village
barn, suddenly the blasts of a trumpet, with sounds and footsteps, fell
upon her ears; she looked through the window and saw the inhabitants
collected in the marketplace round a young monk, who, standing upon a
rock, uttered these words in a distinct voice:

"Inhabitants of Belmont, Abbot Mael, our venerable father, informs you
through my mouth that neither by strength nor skill in arms shall you
prevail against the dragon; but the beast shall be overcome by a virgin. If, then, there be among you a perfectly pure virgin, let her arise and
go towards the monster; and when she meets him let her tie her girdle
round his neck and she shall lead him as easily as if he were a little
dog." And the young monk, replacing his hood upon his head, departed to carry
the proclamation of the blessed Mael to other villages. Orberosia sat in the amorous straw, resting her head in her hand and
supporting her elbow upon her knee, meditating on what she had just
heard. Although, so far as Kraken was concerned, she feared the power of
a virgin much less than the strength of armed men, she did not feel
reassured by the proclamation of the blessed Mael. A vague but sure
instinct ruled her mind and warned her that Kraken could not henceforth
be a dragon with safety. She said to the neatherd:

"My own heart, what do you think about the dragon?" The rustic shook his head. "It is certain that dragons laid waste the earth in ancient times and
some have been seen as large as mountains. But they come no longer, and
I believe that what has been taken for a dragon is not one at all, but
pirates or merchants who have carried off the fair Orberosia and
the best of the children of Alca in their ships. But if one of those
brigands attempts to rob me of my oxen, I will either by force or craft
find a way to prevent him from doing me any harm." This remark of the neatherd increased Orberosia's apprehensions and
added to her solicitude for the husband whom she loved. X. THE DRAGON OF ALCA (Continuation)

The days passed by and no maiden arose in the island to combat the
monster. And in the wooden monastery old Mael, seated on a bench in the
shade of an old fig-tree, accompanied by a pious monk called Regimental,
kept asking himself anxiously and sadly how it was that there was not in
Alca a single virgin fit to overthrow the monster. He sighed and brother Regimental sighed too. At that moment old Mael
called young Samuel, who happened to pass through the garden, and said
to him:

"I have meditated anew, my son, on the means of destroying the dragon
who devours the flower of our youth, our flocks, and our harvests. In
this respect the story of the dragons of St. Riok and of St. Pol de Leon
seems to me particularly instructive. The dragon of St. Riok was six
fathoms long; his head was derived from the cock and the basilisk, his
body from the ox and the serpent; he ravaged the banks of the Elorn in
the time of King Bristocus. St. Riok, then aged two years, led him by
a leash to the sea, in which the monster drowned himself of his own
accord. St. Pol's dragon was sixty feet long and not less terrible. The
blessed apostle of Leon bound him with his stole and allowed a young
noble of great purity of life to lead him. These examples prove that
in the eyes of God a chaste young man is as agreeable as a chaste girl. Heaven makes no distinction between them. For this reason, my son, if
you believe what I say, we will both go to the Coast of Shadows; when we
reach the dragon's cavern we will call the monster in a loud voice, and
when he comes forth I will tie my stole round his neck and you will lead
him to the sea, where he will not fail to drown himself." At the old man's words Samuel cast down his head and did not answer. "You seem to hesitate, my son," said Mael. Brother Regimental, contrary to his custom, spoke without being
addressed. "There is at least cause for some hesitation," said he. "St. Riok was
only two years old when he overcame the dragon. Who says that nine or
ten years later he could have done as much? Remember, father, that the
dragon who is devastating our island has devoured little Elo and four
or five other young boys. Brother Samuel is not go presumptuous as to
believe that at nineteen years of age he is more innocent than they were
at twelve and fourteen. "Alas!" added the monk, with a groan, "who can boast of being chaste in
this world, where everything gives the example and model of love, where
all things in nature, animals, and plants, show us the caresses of love
and advise us to share them? Animals are eager to unite in their own
fashion, but the various marriages of quadrupeds, birds, fishes, and
reptiles are far from equalling in lust the nuptials of the trees. The
greatest extremes of lewdness that the pagans have imagined in their
fables are outstripped by the simple flowers of the field, and, if
you knew the irregularities of lilies and roses you would take those
chalices of impurity, those vases of scandal, away from your altars." "Do not speak in this way, Brother Regimental," answered old Mael. "Since they are subject to the law of nature, animals and plants are
always innocent. They have no souls to save, whilst man--"

"You are right," replied Brother Regimental, "it is quite a different
thing. But do not send young Samuel to the dragon--the dragon might
devour him. For the last five years Samuel is not in a state to show his
innocence to monsters. In the year of the comet, the Devil in order to
seduce him, put in his path a milkmaid, who was lifting up her petticoat
to cross a ford. Samuel was tempted, but he overcame the temptation. The Devil, who never tires, sent him the image of that young girl in
a dream. The shade did what the reality was unable to accomplish, and
Samuel yielded. When he awoke be moistened his couch with his tears, but
alas! repentance did not give him back his innocence." As he listened to this story Samuel asked himself how his secret could
be known, for he was ignorant that the Devil had borrowed the appearance
of Brother Regimental, so as to trouble the hearts of the monks of Alca. And old Mael remained deep in thought and kept asking himself in grief:

"Who will deliver us from the dragon's tooth? Who will preserve us from
his breath? Who will save us from his look?" However, the inhabitants of Alca began to take courage. The labourers of
Dombes and the neatherds of Belmont swore that they themselves would
be of more avail than a girl against the ferocious beast, and they
exclaimed as they stroked the muscles on their arms, "Let the dragon
come!" Many men and women had seen him. They did not agree about his
form and his figure, but all now united in saying that he was not as
big as they had thought, and that his height was not much greater than
a man's. The defence was organised; towards nightfall watches were
stationed at the entrances of the villages ready to give the alarm; and
during the night companies armed with pitchforks and scythes protected
the paddocks in which the animals were shut up. Indeed, once in the
village of Anis some plucky labourers surprised him as he was scaling
Morio's wall, and, as they had flails, scythes, and pitchforks, they
fell upon him and pressed him hard. One of them, a very quick and
courageous man, thought to have run him through with his pitchfork; but
he slipped in a pool and so let him escape. The others would certainly
have caught him had they not waited to pick up the rabbits and fowls
that he dropped in his flight. Those labourers declared to the Elders of the village that the monster's
form and proportions appeased to them human enough except for his head
and his tail, which were, in truth, terrifying. XI. THE DRAGON OF ALCA (Continuation)

On that day Kraken came back to his cavern sooner than usual. He took
from his head his sealskin helmet with its two bull's horns and its
visor trimmed with terrible hooks. He threw on the table his gloves that
ended in horrible claws--they were the beaks of sea-birds. He unhooked
his belt from which hung a long green tail twisted into many folds. Then
he ordered his page, Elo, to help him off with his boots and, as the
child did not succeed in doing this very quickly, he gave him a kick
that sent him to the other end of the grotto. Without looking at the fair Orberosia, who was spinning, he seated
himself in front of the fireplace, on which a sheep was roasting, and he
muttered:

"Ignoble Penguins. . . . There is no worse trade than a dragon's." "What does my master say?" asked the fair Orberosia. "They fear me no longer," continued Kraken. "Formerly everyone fled at
my approach. I carried away hens and rabbits in my bag; I drove sheep
and pigs, cows, and oxen before me. To-day these clod-hoppers keep a
good guard; they sit up at night. Just now I was pursued in the
village of Anis by doughty labourers armed with flails and scythes and
pitchforks. I had to drop the hens and rabbits, put my tail under my
arm, and run as fast as I could. Now I ask you, is it seemly for a
dragon of Cappadocia to run away like a robber with his tail under his
arm? Further, incommoded as I was by crests, horns, hooks, claws, and
scales, I barely escaped a brute who ran half an inch of his pitchfork
into my left thigh." As he said this he carefully ran his hand over the insulted part, and,
after giving himself up for a few moments to bitter meditation:

"What idiots those Penguins are! I am tired of blowing flames in the
faces of such imbeciles. Orberosia, do you hear me?" Having thus spoken the hero raised his terrible helmet in his hands and
gazed at it for a long time in gloomy silence. Then he pronounced these
rapid words:

"I have made this helmet with my own hands in the shape of a fish's
head, covering it with the skin of a seal. To make it more terrible I
have put on it the horns of a bull and I have given it a boar's jaws;
I have hung from it a horse's tail dyed vermilion. When in the gloomy
twilight I threw it over my shoulders no inhabitant of this island had
courage to withstand its sight. Women and children, young men and old
men fled distracted at its approach, and I carried terror among the
whole race of Penguins. By what advice does that insolent people lose
its earlier fears and dare to-day to behold these horrible jaws and to
attack this terrible crest?" And throwing his helmet on the rocky soil:

"Perish, deceitful helmet!" cried Kraken. "I swear by all the demons of
Armor that I will never bear you upon my head again." And having uttered this oath he stamped upon his helmet, his gloves, his
boots, and upon his tail with its twisted folds. "Kraken," said the fair Orberosia, "will you allow your servant to
employ artifice to save your reputation and your goods? Do not despise a
woman's help. You need it, for all men are imbeciles." "Woman," asked Kraken, "what are your plans?" And the fair Orberosia informed her husband that the monks were going
through the villages teaching the inhabitants the best way of combating
the dragon; that, according to their instructions, the beast would be
overcome by a virgin, and that if a maid placed her girdle around the
dragon's neck she could lead him as easily as if he were a little dog. "How do you know that the monks teach this?" asked Kraken. "My friend," answered Orberosia, "do not interrupt a serious subject
by frivolous questions. . . . 'If, then,' added the monks, 'there be in
Alca a pure virgin, let her arise!' Now, Kraken, I have determined to
answer their call. I will go and find the holy Mael and I will say to
him: 'I am the virgin destined by Heaven to overthrow the dragon.'" At these words Kraken exclaimed: "How can you be that pure virgin? And
why do you want to overthrow me, Orberosia? Have you lost your reason? Be sure that I will not allow myself to be conquered by you!" "Can you not try and understand me before you get angry?" sighed the
fair Orberosia with deep though gentle contempt. And she explained the cunning designs that she had formed. As he listened, the hero remained pensive. And when she ceased speaking:

"Orberosia, your cunning, is deep," said he, "And if your plans are
carried out according to your intentions I shall derive great advantages
from them. But how can you be the virgin destined by heaven?" 