



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger





THE STORY OF A BAD BOY


by Thomas Bailey Aldrich




Chapter One--In Which I Introduce Myself


This is the story of a bad boy. Well, not such a very bad, but a pretty
bad boy; and I ought to know, for I am, or rather I was, that boy
myself. Lest the title should mislead the reader, I hasten to assure him here
that I have no dark confessions to make. I call my story the story of
a bad boy, partly to distinguish myself from those faultless young
gentlemen who generally figure in narratives of this kind, and partly
because I really was not a cherub. I may truthfully say I was an
amiable, impulsive lad, blessed with fine digestive powers, and no
hypocrite. I didn't want to be an angel and with the angels stand; I
didn't think the missionary tracts presented to me by the Rev. Wibird
Hawkins were half so nice as Robinson Crusoe; and I didn't send my
little pocket-money to the natives of the Feejee Islands, but spent
it royally in peppermint-drops and taffy candy. In short, I was a real
human boy, such as you may meet anywhere in New England, and no more
like the impossible boy in a storybook than a sound orange is like one
that has been sucked dry. But let us begin at the beginning. Whenever a new scholar came to our school, I used to confront him at
recess with the following words: "My name's Tom Bailey; what's your
name?" If the name struck me favorably, I shook hands with the new
pupil cordially; but if it didn't, I would turn on my heel, for I was
particular on this point. Such names as Higgins, Wiggins, and Spriggins
were deadly affronts to my ear; while Langdon, Wallace, Blake, and the
like, were passwords to my confidence and esteem. Ah me! some of those dear fellows are rather elderly boys by this
time--lawyers, merchants, sea-captains, soldiers, authors, what not? Phil
Adams (a special good name that Adams) is consul at Shanghai, where I
picture him to myself with his head closely shaved--he never had too much
hair--and a long pigtail banging down behind. He is married, I hear;
and I hope he and she that was Miss Wang Wang are very happy together,
sitting cross-legged over their diminutive cups of tea in a skyblue
tower hung with bells. It is so I think of him; to me he is henceforth
a jewelled mandarin, talking nothing but broken China. Whitcomb is a
judge, sedate and wise, with spectacles balanced on the bridge of that
remarkable nose which, in former days, was so plentifully sprinkled with
freckles that the boys christened him Pepper Whitcomb. Just to think
of little Pepper Whitcomb being a judge! What would he do to me now, I
wonder, if I were to sing out "Pepper!" some day in court? Fred Langdon
is in California, in the native-wine business--he used to make the best
licorice-water I ever tasted! Binny Wallace sleeps in the Old South
Burying-Ground; and Jack Harris, too, is dead--Harris, who commanded us
boys, of old, in the famous snow-ball battles of Slatter's Hill. Was it
yesterday I saw him at the head of his regiment on its way to join the
shattered Army of the Potomac? Not yesterday, but six years ago. It was
at the battle of the Seven Pines. Gallant Jack Harris, that never drew
rein until he had dashed into the Rebel battery! So they found him--lying
across the enemy's guns. How we have parted, and wandered, and married, and died! I wonder what
has become of all the boys who went to the Temple Grammar School at
Rivermouth when I was a youngster? "All, all are gone, the old familiar
faces!" It is with no ungentle hand I summon them back, for a moment, from that
Past which has closed upon them and upon me. How pleasantly they live
again in my memory! Happy, magical Past, in whose fairy atmosphere even
Conway, mine ancient foe, stands forth transfigured, with a sort of
dreamy glory encircling his bright red hair! With the old school formula I commence these sketches of my boyhood. My
name is Tom Bailey; what is yours, gentle reader? I take for granted
it is neither Wiggins nor Spriggins, and that we shall get on famously
together, and be capital friends forever. Chapter Two--In Which I Entertain Peculiar Views


I was born at Rivermouth, but, before I had a chance to become very well
acquainted with that pretty New England town, my parents removed to New
Orleans, where my father invested his money so securely in the banking
business that he was never able to get any of it out again. But of this
hereafter. I was only eighteen months old at the time of the removal, and it didn't
make much difference to me where I was, because I was so small; but
several years later, when my father proposed to take me North to be
educated, I had my own peculiar views on the subject. I instantly kicked
over the little Negro boy who happened to be standing by me at the
moment, and, stamping my foot violently on the floor of the piazza,
declared that I would not be taken away to live among a lot of Yankees! You see I was what is called "a Northern man with Southern principles." I had no recollection of New England: my earliest memories were
connected with the South, with Aunt Chloe, my old Negro nurse, and
with the great ill-kept garden in the centre of which stood our house--a
whitewashed stone house it was, with wide verandas--shut out from the
street by lines of orange, fig, and magnolia trees. I knew I was born
at the North, but hoped nobody would find it out. I looked upon the
misfortune as something so shrouded by time and distance that maybe
nobody remembered it. I never told my schoolmates I was a Yankee,
because they talked about the Yankees in such a scornful way it made
me feel that it was quite a disgrace not to be born in Louisiana, or at
least in one of the Border States. And this impression was strengthened
by Aunt Chloe, who said, "dar wasn't no gentl'men in the Norf no way,"
and on one occasion terrified me beyond measure by declaring that,
"if any of dem mean whites tried to git her away from marster, she was
jes'gwine to knock 'em on de head wid a gourd!" The way this poor creature's eyes flashed, and the tragic air with which
she struck at an imaginary "mean white," are among the most vivid things
in my memory of those days. To be frank, my idea of the North was about as accurate as that
entertained by the well-educated Englishmen of the present day
concerning America. I supposed the inhabitants were divided into two
classes--Indians and white people; that the Indians occasionally dashed
down on New York, and scalped any woman or child (giving the preference
to children) whom they caught lingering in the outskirts after
nightfall; that the white men were either hunters or schoolmasters, and
that it was winter pretty much all the year round. The prevailing style
of architecture I took to be log-cabins. With this delightful picture of Northern civilization in my eye, the
reader will easily understand my terror at the bare thought of being
transported to Rivermouth to school, and possibly will forgive me for
kicking over little black Sam, and otherwise misconducting myself, when
my father announced his determination to me. As for kicking little Sam--I
always did that, more or less gently, when anything went wrong with me. My father was greatly perplexed and troubled by this unusually violent
outbreak, and especially by the real consternation which he saw written
in every line of my countenance. As little black Sam picked himself up,
my father took my hand in his and led me thoughtfully to the library. I can see him now as he leaned back in the bamboo chair and questioned
me. He appeared strangely agitated on learning the nature of my
objections to going North, and proceeded at once to knock down all my
pine log houses, and scatter all the Indian tribes with which I had
populated the greater portion of the Eastern and Middle States. "Who on earth, Tom, has filled your brain with such silly stories?" asked my father, wiping the tears from his eyes. "Aunt Chloe, sir; she told me." "And you really thought your grandfather wore a blanket embroidered with
beads, and ornamented his leggins with the scalps of his enemies?" "Well, sir, I didn't think that exactly." "Didn't think that exactly? Tom, you will be the death of me." He hid his face in his handkerchief, and, when he looked up, he seemed
to have been suffering acutely. I was deeply moved myself, though I did
not clearly understand what I had said or done to cause him to feel so
badly. Perhaps I had hurt his feelings by thinking it even possible that
Grandfather Nutter was an Indian warrior. My father devoted that evening and several subsequent evenings to giving
me a clear and succinct account of New England; its early struggles, its
progress, and its present condition--faint and confused glimmerings
of all which I had obtained at school, where history had never been a
favorite pursuit of mine. I was no longer unwilling to go North; on the contrary, the proposed
journey to a new world full of wonders kept me awake nights. I promised
myself all sorts of fun and adventures, though I was not entirely at
rest in my mind touching the savages, and secretly resolved to go on
board the ship--the journey was to be made by sea--with a certain little
brass pistol in my trousers-pocket, in case of any difficulty with the
tribes when we landed at Boston. I couldn't get the Indian out of my head. Only a short time previously
the Cherokees--or was it the Camanches?--had been removed from their
hunting-grounds in Arkansas; and in the wilds of the Southwest the red
men were still a source of terror to the border settlers. "Trouble
with the Indians" was the staple news from Florida published in the New
Orleans papers. We were constantly hearing of travellers being attacked
and murdered in the interior of that State. If these things were done in
Florida, why not in Massachusetts? Yet long before the sailing day arrived I was eager to be off. My
impatience was increased by the fact that my father had purchased for me
a fine little Mustang pony, and shipped it to Rivermouth a fortnight
previous to the date set for our own departure--for both my parents were
to accompany me. The pony (which nearly kicked me out of bed one night
in a dream), and my father's promise that he and my mother would come to
Rivermouth every other summer, completely resigned me to the situation. The pony's name was Gitana, which is the Spanish for gypsy; so I always
called her--she was a lady pony--Gypsy. At length the time came to leave the vine-covered mansion among the
orange-trees, to say goodby to little black Sam (I am convinced he was
heartily glad to get rid of me), and to part with simple Aunt Chloe,
who, in the confusion of her grief, kissed an eyelash into my eye, and
then buried her face in the bright bandana turban which she had mounted
that morning in honor of our departure. I fancy them standing by the open garden gate; the tears are rolling
down Aunt Chloe's cheeks; Sam's six front teeth are glistening like
pearls; I wave my hand to him manfully then I call out "goodby" in a
muffled voice to Aunt Chloe; they and the old home fade away. I am never
to see them again! Chapter Three--On Board the Typhoon


I do not remember much about the voyage to Boston, for after the first
few hours at sea I was dreadfully unwell. The name of our ship was the "A No. 1, fast-sailing packet Typhoon." I learned afterwards that she sailed fast only in the newspaper
advertisements. My father owned one quarter of the Typhoon, and that is
why we happened to go in her. I tried to guess which quarter of the ship
he owned, and finally concluded it must be the hind quarter--the cabin,
in which we had the cosiest of state-rooms, with one round window in the
roof, and two shelves or boxes nailed up against the wall to sleep in. There was a good deal of confusion on deck while we were getting under
way. The captain shouted orders (to which nobody seemed to pay any
attention) through a battered tin trumpet, and grew so red in the face
that he reminded me of a scooped-out pumpkin with a lighted candle
inside. He swore right and left at the sailors without the slightest
regard for their feelings. They didn't mind it a bit, however, but went
on singing--

     "Heave ho! With the rum below,
     And hurrah for the Spanish Main O!" I will not be positive about "the Spanish Main," but it was hurrah for
something O. I considered them very jolly fellows, and so indeed they
were. One weather-beaten tar in particular struck my fancy--a thick-set,
jovial man, about fifty years of age, with twinkling blue eyes and a
fringe of gray hair circling his head like a crown. As he took off his
tarpaulin I observed that the top of his head was quite smooth and flat,
as if somebody had sat down on him when he was very young. There was something noticeably hearty in this man's bronzed face, a
heartiness that seemed to extend to his loosely knotted neckerchief. But
what completely won my good-will was a picture of enviable loveliness
painted on his left arm. It was the head of a woman with the body of a
fish. Her flowing hair was of livid green, and she held a pink comb in
one hand. I never saw anything so beautiful. I determined to know that
man. I think I would have given my brass pistol to have had such a
picture painted on my arm. While I stood admiring this work of art, a fat wheezy steamtug, with
the word AJAX in staring black letters on the paddlebox, came puffing up
alongside the Typhoon. It was ridiculously small and conceited, compared
with our stately ship. I speculated as to what it was going to do. In a
few minutes we were lashed to the little monster, which gave a snort and
a shriek, and commenced backing us out from the levee (wharf) with the
greatest ease. I once saw an ant running away with a piece of cheese eight or ten times
larger than itself. I could not help thinking of it, when I found the
chubby, smoky-nosed tug-boat towing the Typhoon out into the Mississippi
River. In the middle of the stream we swung round, the current caught us, and
away we flew like a great winged bird. Only it didn't seem as if we were
moving. The shore, with the countless steamboats, the tangled rigging of
the ships, and the long lines of warehouses, appeared to be gliding away
from us. It was grand sport to stand on the quarter-deck and watch all this. Before long there was nothing to be seen on other side but stretches of
low swampy land, covered with stunted cypress trees, from which drooped
delicate streamers of Spanish moss--a fine place for alligators and Congo
snakes. Here and there we passed a yellow sand-bar, and here and there a
snag lifted its nose out of the water like a shark. "This is your last chance to see the city, To see the city, Tom," said
my father, as we swept round a bend of the river. I turned and looked. New Orleans was just a colorless mass of something
in the distance, and the dome of the St. Charles Hotel, upon which
the sun shimmered for a moment, was no bigger than the top of old Aunt
Chloe's thimble. What do I remember next? The gray sky and the fretful blue waters of the
Gulf. The steam-tug had long since let slip her hawsers and gone panting
away with a derisive scream, as much as to say, "I've done my duty, now
look out for yourself, old Typhoon!" The ship seemed quite proud of being left to take care of itself, and,
with its huge white sails bulged out, strutted off like a vain turkey. I had been standing by my father near the wheel-house all this while,
observing things with that nicety of perception which belongs only
to children; but now the dew began falling, and we went below to have
supper. The fresh fruit and milk, and the slices of cold chicken, looked very
nice; yet somehow I had no appetite There was a general smell of tar
about everything. Then the ship gave sudden lurches that made it a
matter of uncertainty whether one was going to put his fork to his mouth
or into his eye. The tumblers and wineglasses, stuck in a rack over the
table, kept clinking and clinking; and the cabin lamp, suspended by four
gilt chains from the ceiling, swayed to and fro crazily. Now the floor
seemed to rise, and now it seemed to sink under one's feet like a
feather-bed. There were not more than a dozen passengers on board, including
ourselves; and all of these, excepting a bald-headed old gentleman--a
retired sea-captain--disappeared into their staterooms at an early hour
of the evening. After supper was cleared away, my father and the elderly gentleman,
whose name was Captain Truck, played at checkers; and I amused myself
for a while by watching the trouble they had in keeping the men in the
proper places. Just at the most exciting point of the game, the ship
would careen, and down would go the white checkers pell-mell among the
black. Then my father laughed, but Captain Truck would grow very angry,
and vow that he would have won the game in a move or two more, if
the confounded old chicken-coop--that's what he called the ship--hadn't
lurched. "I--I think I will go to bed now, please," I said, laying my band on my
father's knee, and feeling exceedingly queer. It was high time, for the Typhoon was plunging about in the most
alarming fashion. I was speedily tucked away in the upper berth, where
I felt a trifle more easy at first. My clothes were placed on a narrow
shelf at my feet, and it was a great comfort to me to know that my
pistol was so handy, for I made no doubt we should fall in with
Pirates before many hours. This is the last thing I remember with any
distinctness. At midnight, as I was afterwards told, we were struck by
a gale which never left us until we came in sight of the Massachusetts
coast. For days and days I had no sensible idea of what was going on around me. That we were being hurled somewhere upside-down, and that I didn't like
it, was about all I knew. I have, indeed, a vague impression that my
father used to climb up to the berth and call me his "Ancient Mariner,"
bidding me cheer up. But the Ancient Mariner was far from cheering up,
if I recollect rightly; and I don't believe that venerable navigator
would have cared much if it had been announced to him, through a
speaking-trumpet, that "a low, black, suspicious craft, with raking
masts, was rapidly bearing down upon us!" In fact, one morning, I thought that such was the case, for bang! went
the big cannon I had noticed in the bow of the ship when we came on
board, and which had suggested to me the idea of Pirates. Bang! went
the gun again in a few seconds. I made a feeble effort to get at my
trousers-pocket! But the Typhoon was only saluting Cape Cod--the
first land sighted by vessels approaching the coast from a southerly
direction. The vessel had ceased to roll, and my sea-sickness passed away as
rapidly as it came. I was all right now, "only a little shaky in my
timbers and a little blue about the gills," as Captain Truck remarked to
my mother, who, like myself, had been confined to the state-room during
the passage. At Cape Cod the wind parted company with us without saying as much
as "Excuse me"; so we were nearly two days in making the run which in
favorable weather is usually accomplished in seven hours. That's what
the pilot said. I was able to go about the ship now, and I lost no time in cultivating
the acquaintance of the sailor with the green-haired lady on his arm. I found him in the forecastle--a sort of cellar in the front part of the
vessel. He was an agreeable sailor, as I had expected, and we became the
best of friends in five minutes. He had been all over the world two or three times, and knew no end of
stories. According to his own account, he must have been shipwrecked
at least twice a year ever since his birth. He had served under Decatur
when that gallant officer peppered the Algerines and made them promise
not to sell their prisoners of war into slavery; he had worked a gun
at the bombardment of Vera Cruz in the Mexican War, and he had been on
Alexander Selkirk's Island more than once. There were very few things he
hadn't done in a seafaring way. "I suppose, sir," I remarked, "that your name isn't Typhoon?" "Why, Lord love ye, lad, my name's Benjamin Watson, of Nantucket. But
I'm a true blue Typhooner," he added, which increased my respect for
him; I don't know why, and I didn't know then whether Typhoon was the
name of a vegetable or a profession. Not wishing to be outdone in frankness, I disclosed to him that my name
was Tom Bailey, upon which he said he was very glad to hear it. When we got more intimate, I discovered that Sailor Ben, as he wished
me to call him, was a perfect walking picturebook. He had two anchors, a
star, and a frigate in full sail on his right arm; a pair of lovely blue
hands clasped on his breast, and I've no doubt that other parts of his
body were illustrated in the same agreeable manner. I imagine he was
fond of drawings, and took this means of gratifying his artistic taste. It was certainly very ingenious and convenient. A portfolio might
be misplaced, or dropped overboard; but Sailor Ben had his pictures
wherever he went, just as that eminent person in the poem,

"With rings on her fingers and bells on her toes"--was accompanied by
music on all occasions. The two bands on his breast, he informed me, were a tribute to the
memory of a dead messmate from whom he had parted years ago--and surely a
more touching tribute was never engraved on a tombstone. This caused me
to think of my parting with old Aunt Chloe, and I told him I should take
it as a great favor indeed if he would paint a pink hand and a black
hand on my chest. He said the colors were pricked into the skin with
needles, and that the operation was somewhat painful. I assured him, in
an off-hand manner, that I didn't mind pain, and begged him to set to
work at once. The simple-hearted fellow, who was probably not a little vain of his
skill, took me into the forecastle, and was on the point of complying
with my request, when my father happened to own the gangway--a
circumstance that rather interfered with the decorative art. I didn't have another opportunity of conferring alone with Sailor Ben,
for the next morning, bright and early, we came in sight of the cupola
of the Boston State House. Chapter Four--Rivermouth


It was a beautiful May morning when the Typhoon hauled up at Long Wharf. Whether the Indians were not early risers, or whether they were away
just then on a war-path, I couldn't determine; but they did not appear
in any great force--in fact, did not appear at all. In the remarkable geography which I never hurt myself with studying
at New Orleans, was a picture representing the landing of the Pilgrim
Fathers at Plymouth. The Pilgrim Fathers, in rather odd hats and coats,
are seen approaching the savages; the savages, in no coats or hats
to speak of, are evidently undecided whether to shake hands with the
Pilgrim Fathers or to make one grand rush and scalp the entire party. Now this scene had so stamped itself on my mind, that, in spite of
all my father had said, I was prepared for some such greeting from
the aborigines. Nevertheless, I was not sorry to have my expectations
unfulfilled. By the way, speaking of the Pilgrim Fathers, I often used
to wonder why there was no mention made of the Pilgrim Mothers. While our trunks were being hoisted from the hold of the ship, I mounted
on the roof of the cabin, and took a critical view of Boston. As we came
up the harbor, I had noticed that the houses were huddled together on an
immense bill, at the top of which was a large building, the State House,
towering proudly above the rest, like an amiable mother-hen surrounded
by her brood of many-colored chickens. A closer inspection did not
impress me very favorably. The city was not nearly so imposing as New
Orleans, which stretches out for miles and miles, in the shape of a
crescent, along the banks of the majestic river. I soon grew tired of looking at the masses of houses, rising above one
another in irregular tiers, and was glad my father did not propose
to remain long in Boston. As I leaned over the rail in this mood, a
measly-looking little boy with no shoes said that if I would come down
on the wharf he'd lick me for two cents--not an exorbitant price. But I
didn't go down. I climbed into the rigging, and stared at him. This, as
I was rejoiced to observe, so exasperated him that he stood on his head
on a pile of boards, in order to pacify himself. The first train for Rivermouth left at noon. After a late breakfast
on board the Typhoon, our trunks were piled upon a baggage-wagon, and
ourselves stowed away in a coach, which must have turned at least one
hundred corners before it set us down at the railway station. In less time than it takes to tell it, we were shooting across the
country at a fearful rate--now clattering over a bridge, now screaming
through a tunnel; here we cut a flourishing village in two, like a
knife, and here we dived into the shadow of a pine forest. Sometimes
we glided along the edge of the ocean, and could see the sails of ships
twinkling like bits of silver against the horizon; sometimes we dashed
across rocky pasture-lands where stupid-eyed cattle were loafing. It was
fun to scare lazy-looking cows that lay round in groups under the newly
budded trees near the railroad track. We did not pause at any of the little brown stations on the route (they
looked just like overgrown black-walnut clocks), though at every one of
them a man popped out as if he were worked by machinery, and waved a red
flag, and appeared as though he would like to have us stop. But we were
an express train, and made no stoppages, excepting once or twice to give
the engine a drink. It is strange how the memory clings to some things. It is over twenty years since I took that first ride to Rivermouth,
and yet, oddly enough, I remember as if it were yesterday, that, as we
passed slowly through the village of Hampton, we saw two boys fighting
behind a red barn. There was also a shaggy yellow dog, who looked as
if he had commenced to unravel, barking himself all up into a knot with
excitement. We had only a hurried glimpse of the battle--long enough,
however, to see that the combatants were equally matched and very much
in earnest. I am ashamed to say how many times since I have speculated
as to which boy got licked. Maybe both the small rascals are dead now
(not in consequence of the set-to, let us hope), or maybe they are
married, and have pugnacious urchins of their own; yet to this day I
sometimes find myself wondering how that fight turned out. We had been riding perhaps two hours and a half, when we shot by a tall
factory with a chimney resembling a church steeple; then the locomotive
gave a scream, the engineer rang his bell, and we plunged into the
twilight of a long wooden building, open at both ends. Here we stopped,
and the conductor, thrusting his head in at the car door, cried out,
"Passengers for Rivermouth!" At last we had reached our journey's end. On the platform my father
shook hands with a straight, brisk old gentleman whose face was very
serene and rosy. He had on a white hat and a long swallow-tailed coat,
the collar of which came clear up above his cars. He didn't look unlike
a Pilgrim Father. This, of course, was Grandfather Nutter, at whose
house I was born. My mother kissed him a great many times; and I was
glad to see him myself, though I naturally did not feel very intimate
with a person whom I had not seen since I was eighteen months old. While we were getting into the double-seated wagon which Grandfather
Nutter had provided, I took the opportunity of asking after the health
of the pony. The pony had arrived all right ten days before, and was in
the stable at home, quite anxious to see me. As we drove through the quiet old town, I thought Rivermouth the
prettiest place in the world; and I think so still. The streets are long
and wide, shaded by gigantic American elms, whose drooping branches,
interlacing here and there, span the avenues with arches graceful
enough to be the handiwork of fairies. Many of the houses have small
flower-gardens in front, gay in the season with china-asters, and are
substantially built, with massive chimney-stacks and protruding eaves. A beautiful river goes rippling by the town, and, after turning and
twisting among a lot of tiny islands, empties itself into the sea. The harbor is so fine that the largest ships can sail directly up to
the wharves and drop anchor. Only they don't. Years ago it was a famous
seaport. Princely fortunes were made in the West India trade; and in
1812, when we were at war with Great Britain, any number of privateers
were fitted out at Rivermouth to prey upon the merchant vessels of the
enemy. Certain people grew suddenly and mysteriously rich. A great many
of "the first families" of today do not care to trace their pedigree
back to the time when their grandsires owned shares in the Matilda Jane,
twenty-four guns. Well, well! Few ships come to Rivermouth now. Commerce drifted into other ports. The
phantom fleet sailed off one day, and never came back again. The crazy
old warehouses are empty; and barnacles and eel-grass cling to the piles
of the crumbling wharves, where the sunshine lies lovingly, bringing
out the faint spicy odor that haunts the place--the ghost of the old dead
West India trade! During our ride from the station, I was struck, of
course, only by the general neatness of the houses and the beauty of
the elm-trees lining the streets. I describe Rivermouth now as I came to
know it afterwards. Rivermouth is a very ancient town. In my day there existed a tradition
among the boys that it was here Christopher Columbus made his first
landing on this continent. I remember having the exact spot pointed out
to me by Pepper Whitcomb! One thing is certain, Captain John Smith, who
afterwards, according to the legend, married Pocahontas--whereby he got
Powhatan for a father-in-law-explored the river in 1614, and was much
charmed by the beauty of Rivermouth, which at that time was covered with
wild strawberry-vines. Rivermouth figures prominently in all the colonial histories. Every
other house in the place has its tradition more or less grim and
entertaining. If ghosts could flourish anywhere, there are certain
streets in Rivermouth that would be full of them. I don't know of a town
with so many old houses. Let us linger, for a moment, in front of the
one which the Oldest Inhabitant is always sure to point out to the
curious stranger. It is a square wooden edifice, with gambrel roof and deep-set
window-frames. Over the windows and doors there used to be heavy
carvings--oak-leaves and acorns, and angels' heads with wings spreading
from the ears, oddly jumbled together; but these ornaments and other
outward signs of grandeur have long since disappeared. A peculiar
interest attaches itself to this house, not because of its age, for
it has not been standing quite a century; nor on account of its
architecture, which is not striking--but because of the illustrious men
who at various periods have occupied its spacious chambers. In 1770 it was an aristocratic hotel. At the left side of the entrance
stood a high post, from which swung the sign of the Earl of Halifax. The
landlord was a stanch loyalist--that is to say, he believed in the king,
and when the overtaxed colonies determined to throw off the British
yoke, the adherents to the Crown held private meetings in one of the
back rooms of the tavern. This irritated the rebels, as they were
called; and one night they made an attack on the Earl of Halifax, tore
down the signboard, broke in the window-sashes, and gave the landlord
hardly time to make himself invisible over a fence in the rear. For several months the shattered tavern remained deserted. At last the
exiled innkeeper, on promising to do better, was allowed to return; a
new sign, bearing the name of William Pitt, the friend of America, swung
proudly from the door-post, and the patriots were appeased. Here it was
that the mail-coach from Boston twice a week, for many a year, set
down its load of travelers and gossip. For some of the details in this
sketch, I am indebted to a recently published chronicle of those times. It is 1782. The French fleet is lying in the harbor of Rivermouth, and
eight of the principal officers, in white uniforms trimmed with gold
lace, have taken up their quarters at the sign of the William Pitt. Who
is this young and handsome officer now entering the door of the tavern? It is no less a personage than the Marquis Lafayette, who has come all
the way from Providence to visit the French gentlemen boarding there. What a gallant-looking cavalier he is, with his quick eyes and coal
black hair! Forty years later he visited the spot again; his locks were
gray and his step was feeble, but his heart held its young love for
Liberty. Who is this finely dressed traveler alighting from his coach-and-four,
attended by servants in livery? Do you know that sounding name, written
in big valorous letters on the Declaration of Independence--written as
if by the hand of a giant? Can you not see it now? JOHN HANCOCK. This is
he. Three young men, with their valet, are standing on the doorstep of the
William Pitt, bowing politely, and inquiring in the most courteous terms
in the world if they can be accommodated. It is the time of the French
Revolution, and these are three sons of the Duke of Orleans--Louis
Philippe and his two brothers. Louis Philippe never forgot his visit
to Rivermouth. Years afterwards, when he was seated on the throne of
France, he asked an American lady, who chanced to be at his court, if
the pleasant old mansion were still standing. But a greater and a better man than the king of the French has honored
this roof. Here, in 1789, came George Washington, the President of
the United States, to pay his final complimentary visit to the State
dignitaries. The wainscoted chamber where he slept, and the dining-hall
where he entertained his guests, have a certain dignity and sanctity
which even the present Irish tenants cannot wholly destroy. During the period of my reign at Rivermouth, an ancient lady, Dame
Jocelyn by name, lived in one of the upper rooms of this notable
building. She was a dashing young belle at the time of Washington's
first visit to the town, and must have been exceedingly coquettish and
pretty, judging from a certain portrait on ivory still in the possession
of the family. According to Dame Jocelyn, George Washington flirted with
her just a little bit--in what a stately and highly finished manner can
be imagined. There was a mirror with a deep filigreed frame hanging over the
mantel-piece in this room. The glass was cracked and the quicksilver
rubbed off or discolored in many places. When it reflected your face
you had the singular pleasure of not recognizing yourself. It gave your
features the appearance of having been run through a mince-meat machine. But what rendered the looking-glass a thing of enchantment to me was a
faded green feather, tipped with scarlet, which drooped from the top
of the tarnished gilt mouldings. This feather Washington took from the
plume of his three-cornered hat, and presented with his own hand to the
worshipful Mistress Jocelyn the day he left Rivermouth forever. I wish
I could describe the mincing genteel air, and the ill-concealed
self-complacency, with which the dear old lady related the incident. Many a Saturday afternoon have I climbed up the rickety staircase to
that dingy room, which always had a flavor of snuff about it, to sit
on a stiff-backed chair and listen for hours together to Dame Jocelyn's
stories of the olden time. How she would prattle! She was bedridden--poor
creature!--and had not been out of the chamber for fourteen years. Meanwhile the world had shot ahead of Dame Jocelyn. The changes that had
taken place under her very nose were unknown to this faded, crooning old
gentlewoman, whom the eighteenth century had neglected to take away with
the rest of its odd traps. She had no patience with newfangled notions. The old ways and the old times were good enough for her. She had never
seen a steam engine, though she had heard "the dratted thing" screech in
the distance. In her day, when gentlefolk traveled, they went in
their own coaches. She didn't see how respectable people could bring
themselves down to "riding in a car with rag-tag and bobtail and
Lord-knows-who." Poor old aristocrat The landlord charged her no rent
for the room, and the neighbors took turns in supplying her with meals. Towards the close of her life--she lived to be ninety-nine--she grew very
fretful and capricious about her food. If she didn't chance to fancy
what was sent her, she had no hesitation in sending it back to the giver
with "Miss Jocelyn's respectful compliments." But I have been gossiping too long--and yet not too long if I have
impressed upon the reader an idea of what a rusty, delightful old town
it was to which I had come to spend the next three or four years of my
boyhood. A drive of twenty minutes from the station brought us to the door-step
of Grandfather Nutter's house. What kind of house it was, and what sort
of people lived in it, shall be told in another chapter. Chapter Five--The Nutter House and the Nutter Family


The Nutter House--all the more prominent dwellings in Rivermouth are
named after somebody; for instance, there is the Walford House, the
Venner House, the Trefethen House, etc., though it by no means follows
that they are inhabited by the people whose names they bear--the Nutter
House, to resume, has been in our family nearly a hundred years, and
is an honor to the builder (an ancestor of ours, I believe), supposing
durability to be a merit. If our ancestor was a carpenter, he knew his
trade. I wish I knew mine as well. Such timber and such workmanship
don't often come together in houses built nowadays. Imagine a low-studded structure, with a wide hall running through the
middle. At your right band, as you enter, stands a tall black mahogany
clock, looking like an Egyptian mummy set up on end. On each side of
the hall are doors (whose knobs, it must be confessed, do not turn very
easily), opening into large rooms wainscoted and rich in wood-carvings
about the mantel-pieces and cornices. The walls are covered with
pictured paper, representing landscapes and sea-views. In the parlor,
for example, this enlivening figure is repeated all over the room. A
group of English peasants, wearing Italian hats, are dancing on a lawn
that abruptly resolves itself into a sea-beach, upon which stands a
flabby fisherman (nationality unknown), quietly hauling in what appears
to be a small whale, and totally regardless of the dreadful naval combat
going on just beyond the end of his fishing-rod. On the other side of
the ships is the main-land again, with the same peasants dancing. Our ancestors were very worthy people, but their wall-papers were
abominable. There are neither grates nor stoves in these quaint chambers, but
splendid open chimney-places, with room enough for the corpulent
back-log to turn over comfortably on the polished andirons. A wide
staircase leads from the hall to the second story, which is arranged
much like the first. Over this is the garret. I needn't tell a
New England boy what--a museum of curiosities is the garret of a
well-regulated New England house of fifty or sixty years' standing. Here meet together, as if by some preconcerted arrangement, all the
broken-down chairs of the household, all the spavined tables, all
the seedy hats, all the intoxicated-looking boots, all the split
walking-sticks that have retired from business, "weary with the march of
life." The pots, the pans, the trunks, the bottles--who may hope to
make an inventory of the numberless odds and ends collected in this
bewildering lumber-room? But what a place it is to sit of an afternoon
with the rain pattering on the roof! What a place in which to read
Gulliver's Travels, or the famous adventures of Rinaldo Rinaldini! My grandfather's house stood a little back from the main street, in
the shadow of two handsome elms, whose overgrown boughs would dash
themselves against the gables whenever the wind blew hard. In the rear
was a pleasant garden, covering perhaps a quarter of an acre, full of
plum-trees and gooseberry bushes. These trees were old settlers, and are
all dead now, excepting one, which bears a purple plum as big as an egg. This tree, as I remark, is still standing, and a more beautiful tree
to tumble out of never grew anywhere. In the northwestern corner of the
garden were the stables and carriage-house opening upon a narrow lane. You may imagine that I made an early visit to that locality to inspect
Gypsy. Indeed, I paid her a visit every half-hour during the first day
of my arrival. At the twenty-fourth visit she trod on my foot rather
heavily, as a reminder, probably, that I was wearing out my welcome. She
was a knowing little pony, that Gypsy, and I shall have much to say of
her in the course of these pages. Gypsy's quarters were all that could be wished, but nothing among my new
surroundings gave me more satisfaction than the cosey sleeping apartment
that had been prepared for myself. It was the hall room over the front
door. I had never had a chamber all to myself before, and this one, about
twice the size of our state-room on board the Typhoon, was a marvel of
neatness and comfort. Pretty chintz curtains hung at the window, and a
patch quilt of more colors than were in Joseph's coat covered the little
truckle-bed. The pattern of the wall-paper left nothing to be desired in
that line. On a gray background were small bunches of leaves, unlike
any that ever grew in this world; and on every other bunch perched a
yellow-bird, pitted with crimson spots, as if it had just recovered from
a severe attack of the small-pox. That no such bird ever existed did
not detract from my admiration of each one. There were two hundred and
sixty-eight of these birds in all, not counting those split in two where
the paper was badly joined. I counted them once when I was laid up with
a fine black eye, and falling asleep immediately dreamed that the whole
flock suddenly took wing and flew out of the window. From that time I
was never able to regard them as merely inanimate objects. A wash-stand in the corner, a chest of carved mahogany drawers, a
looking-glass in a filigreed frame, and a high-backed chair studded with
brass nails like a coffin, constituted the furniture. Over the head of
the bed were two oak shelves, holding perhaps a dozen books--among which
were Theodore, or The Peruvians; Robinson Crusoe; an odd volume of
Tristram Shandy; Baxter's Saints' Rest, and a fine English edition of
the Arabian Nights, with six hundred wood-cuts by Harvey. Shall I ever forget the hour when I first overhauled these books? I do
not allude especially to Baxter's Saints' Rest, which is far from being
a lively work for the young, but to the Arabian Nights, and particularly
Robinson Crusoe. The thrill that ran into my fingers' ends then has not
run out yet. Many a time did I steal up to this nest of a room,
and, taking the dog's-eared volume from its shelf, glide off into an
enchanted realm, where there were no lessons to get and no boys to
smash my kite. In a lidless trunk in the garret I subsequently unearthed
another motley collection of novels and romances, embracing the
adventures of Baron Trenck, Jack Sheppard, Don Quixote, Gil Blas, and
Charlotte Temple--all of which I fed upon like a bookworm. I never come across a copy of any of those works without feeling a
certain tenderness for the yellow-haired little rascal who used to lean
above the magic pages hour after hour, religiously believing every word
he read, and no more doubting the reality of Sindbad the Sailor, or the
Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, than he did the existence of his
own grandfather. Against the wall at the foot of the bed hung a single-barrel
shot-gun--placed there by Grandfather Nutter, who knew what a boy
loved, if ever a grandfather did. As the trigger of the gun had been
accidentally twisted off, it was not, perhaps, the most dangerous weapon
that could be placed in the hands of youth. In this maimed condition
its "bump of destructiveness" was much less than that of my small brass
pocket-pistol, which I at once proceeded to suspend from one of the
nails supporting the fowling-piece, for my vagaries concerning the red
man had been entirely dispelled. Having introduced the reader to the Nutter House, a presentation to the
Nutter family naturally follows. The family consisted of my
grandfather; his sister, Miss Abigail Nutter; and Kitty Collins, the
maid-of-all-work. Grandfather Nutter was a hale, cheery old gentleman, as straight and as
bald as an arrow. He had been a sailor in early life; that is to say, at
the age of ten years he fled from the multiplication-table, and ran away
to sea. A single voyage satisfied him. There never was but one of our
family who didn't run away to sea, and this one died at his birth. My
grandfather had also been a soldier--a captain of militia in 1812. If I
owe the British nation anything, I owe thanks to that particular British
soldier who put a musket-ball into the fleshy part of Captain Nutter's
leg, causing that noble warrior a slight permanent limp, but offsetting
the injury by furnishing him with the material for a story which the old
gentleman was never weary of telling and I never weary of listening to. The story, in brief, was as follows. At the breaking out of the war, an English frigate lay for several days
off the coast near Rivermouth. A strong fort defended the harbor, and a
regiment of minute-men, scattered at various points along-shore, stood
ready to repel the boats, should the enemy try to effect a landing. Captain Nutter had charge of a slight earthwork just outside the mouth
of the river. Late one thick night the sound of oars was heard; the
sentinel tried to fire off his gun at half-cock, and couldn't, when
Captain Nutter sprung upon the parapet in the pitch darkness, and
shouted, "Boat ahoyl" A musket-shot immediately embedded itself in the
calf of his leg. The Captain tumbled into the fort and the boat, which
had probably come in search of water, pulled back to the frigate. This was my grandfather's only exploit during the war. That his prompt
and bold conduct was instrumental in teaching the enemy the hopelessness
of attempting to conquer such a people was among the firm beliefs of my
boyhood. At the time I came to Rivermouth my grandfather had retired from active
pursuits, and was living at ease on his money, invested principally
in shipping. He had been a widower many years; a maiden sister, the
aforesaid Miss Abigail, managing his household. Miss Abigail also
managed her brother, and her brother's servant, and the visitor at her
brother's gate--not in a tyrannical spirit, but from a philanthropic
desire to be useful to everybody. In person she was tall and angular;
she had a gray complexion, gray eyes, gray eyebrows, and generally wore
a gray dress. Her strongest weak point was a belief in the efficacy of
"hot-drops" as a cure for all known diseases. If there were ever two people who seemed to dislike each other, Miss
Abigail and Kitty Collins were those people. If ever two people really
loved each other, Miss Abigail and Kitty Collins were those people also. They were always either skirmishing or having a cup of tea lovingly
together. Miss Abigail was very fond of me, and so was Kitty; and in the course of
their disagreements each let me into the private history of the other. According to Kitty, it was not originally my grandfather's intention
to have Miss Abigail at the head of his domestic establishment. She had
swooped down on him (Kitty's own words), with a band-box in one hand and
a faded blue cotton umbrella, still in existence, in the other. Clad
in this singular garb--I do not remember that Kitty alluded to--any
additional peculiarity of dress--Miss Abigail had made her appearance at
the door of the Nutter House on the morning of my grandmother's funeral. The small amount of baggage which the lady brought with her would have
led the superficial observer to infer that Miss Abigail's visit was
limited to a few days. I run ahead of my story in saying she remained
seventeen years! How much longer she would have remained can never be
definitely known now, as she died at the expiration of that period. Whether or not my grandfather was quite pleased by this unlooked-for
addition to his family is a problem. He was very kind always to Miss
Abigail, and seldom opposed her; though I think she must have tried his
patience sometimes, especially when she interfered with Kitty. Kitty Collins, or Mrs. Catherine, as she preferred to be called,
was descended in a direct line from an extensive family of kings who
formerly ruled over Ireland. In consequence of various calamities,
among which the failure of the potato-crop may be mentioned, Miss
Kitty Collins, in company with several hundred of her countrymen and
countrywomen--also descended from kings--came over to America in an
emigrant ship, in the year eighteen hundred and something. I don't know what freak of fortune caused the royal exile to turn up
at Rivermouth; but turn up she did, a few months after arriving in this
country, and was hired by my grandmother to do "general housework" for
the sum of four shillings and six-pence a week. Kitty had been living about seven years in my grandfather's family when
she unburdened her heart of a secret which had been weighing upon it all
that time. It may be said of people, as it is said of nations, "Happy
are they that have no history." Kitty had a history, and a pathetic one,
I think. On board the emigrant ship that brought her to America, she became
acquainted with a sailor, who, being touched by Kitty's forlorn
condition, was very good to her. Long before the end of the voyage,
which had been tedious and perilous, she was heartbroken at the thought
of separating from her kindly protector; but they were not to part just
yet, for the sailor returned Kitty's affection, and the two were married
on their arrival at port. Kitty's husband--she would never mention his
name, but kept it locked in her bosom like some precious relic--had a
considerable sum of money when the crew were paid off; and the young
couple--for Kitty was young then--lived very happily in a lodging-house on
South Street, near the docks. This was in New York. The days flew by like hours, and the stocking in which the little bride
kept the funds shrunk and shrunk, until at last there were only three
or four dollars left in the toe of it. Then Kitty was troubled; for
she knew her sailor would have to go to sea again unless he could
get employment on shore. This he endeavored to do, but not with much
success. One morning as usual he kissed her good day, and set out in
search of work. "Kissed me goodby, and called me his little Irish lass," sobbed Kitty,
telling the story, "kissed me goodby, and, Heaven help me, I niver set
oi on him nor on the likes of him again!" He never came back. Day after day dragged on, night after night, and
then the weary weeks. What had become of him? Had he been murdered? Had
he fallen into the docks? Had he--deserted her? No! She could not believe
that; he was too brave and tender and true. She couldn't believe that. He was dead, dead, or he'd come back to her. Meanwhile the landlord of the lodging-house turned Kitty into the
streets, now that "her man" was gone, and the payment of the rent
doubtful. She got a place as a servant. The family she lived with
shortly moved to Boston, and she accompanied them; then they went
abroad, but Kitty would not leave America. Somehow she drifted to
Rivermouth, and for seven long years never gave speech to her sorrow,
until the kindness of strangers, who had become friends to her, unsealed
the heroic lips. Kitty's story, you may be sure, made my grandparents treat her more
kindly than ever. In time she grew to be regarded less as a servant than
as a friend in the home circle, sharing its joys and sorrows--a faithful
nurse, a willing slave, a happy spirit in spite of all. I fancy I hear
her singing over her work in the kitchen, pausing from time to time to
make some witty reply to Miss Abigail--for Kitty, like all her race, had
a vein of unconscious humor. Her bright honest face comes to me out from
the past, the light and life of the Nutter House when I was a boy at
Rivermouth. Chapter Six--Lights and Shadows


The first shadow that fell upon me in my new home was caused by the
return of my parents to New Orleans. Their visit was cut short by
business which required my father's presence in Natchez, where he was
establishing a branch of the bankinghouse. When they had gone, a sense
of loneliness such as I had never dreamed of filled my young breast. I crept away to the stable, and, throwing my arms about Gypsy's neck,
sobbed aloud. She too had come from the sunny South, and was now a
stranger in a strange land. The little mare seemed to realize our situation, and gave me all the
sympathy I could ask, repeatedly rubbing her soft nose over my face and
lapping up my salt tears with evident relish. When night came, I felt still more lonesome. My grandfather sat in
his arm-chair the greater part of the evening, reading the Rivermouth
Bamacle, the local newspaper. There was no gas in those days, and the
Captain read by the aid of a small block-tin lamp, which he held in one
hand. I observed that he had a habit of dropping off into a doze every
three or four minutes, and I forgot my homesickness at intervals in
watching him. Two or three times, to my vast amusement, he scorched the
edges of the newspaper with the wick of the lamp; and at about half
past eight o'clock I had the satisfactions--I am sorry to confess it was a
satisfaction--of seeing the Rivermouth Barnacle in flames. My grandfather leisurely extinguished the fire with his hands, and Miss
Abigail, who sat near a low table, knitting by the light of an astral
lamp, did not even look up. She was quite used to this catastrophe. There was little or no conversation during the evening. In fact, I do
not remember that anyone spoke at all, excepting once, when the Captain
remarked, in a meditative manner, that my parents "must have reached New
York by this time"; at which supposition I nearly strangled myself in
attempting to intercept a sob. The monotonous "click click" of Miss Abigail's needles made me nervous
after a while, and finally drove me out of the sitting-room into the
kitchen, where Kitty caused me to laugh by saying Miss Abigail thought
that what I needed was "a good dose of hot-drops," a remedy she was
forever ready to administer in all emergencies. If a boy broke his
leg, or lost his mother, I believe Miss Abigail would have given him
hot-drops. Kitty laid herself out to be entertaining. She told me several funny
Irish stories, and described some of the odd people living in the town;
but, in the midst of her comicalities, the tears would involuntarily
ooze out of my eyes, though I was not a lad much addicted to weeping. Then Kitty would put her arms around me, and tell me not to mind it--that
it wasn't as if I had been left alone in a foreign land with no one to
care for me, like a poor girl whom she had once known. I brightened up
before long, and told Kitty all about the Typhoon and the old seaman,
whose name I tried in vain to recall, and was obliged to fall back on
plain Sailor Ben. I was glad when ten o'clock came, the bedtime for young folks, and old
folks too, at the Nutter House. Alone in the hallchamber I had my cry
out, once for all, moistening the pillow to such an extent that I was
obliged to turn it over to find a dry spot to go to sleep on. My grandfather wisely concluded to put me to school at once. If I had
been permitted to go mooning about the house and stables, I should have
kept my discontent alive for months. The next morning, accordingly, he
took me by the hand, and we set forth for the academy, which was located
at the farther end of the town. The Temple School was a two-story brick building, standing in the centre
of a great square piece of land, surrounded by a high picket fence. There were three or four sickly trees, but no grass, in this enclosure,
which had been worn smooth and hard by the tread of multitudinous feet. I noticed here and there small holes scooped in the ground, indicating
that it was the season for marbles. A better playground for baseball
couldn't have been devised. On reaching the schoolhouse door, the Captain inquired for Mr. Grimshaw. The boy who answered our knock ushered us into a side-room, and in a
few minutes--during which my eye took in forty-two caps hung on forty-two
wooden pegs--Mr. Grimshaw made his appearance. He was a slender man, with
white, fragile hands, and eyes that glanced half a dozen different ways
at once--a habit probably acquired from watching the boys. After a brief consultation, my grandfather patted me on the head and
left me in charge of this gentleman, who seated himself in front of
me and proceeded to sound the depth, or, more properly speaking, the
shallowness, of my attainments. I suspect my historical information
rather startled him. I recollect I gave him to understand that Richard
III was the last king of England. This ordeal over, Mr. Grimshaw rose and bade me follow him. A door
opened, and I stood in the blaze of forty-two pairs of upturned eyes. I was a cool hand for my age, but I lacked the boldness to face this
battery without wincing. In a sort of dazed way I stumbled after Mr.
Grimshaw down a narrow aisle between two rows of desks, and shyly took
the seat pointed out to me. The faint buzz that had floated over the school-room at our entrance
died away, and the interrupted lessons were resumed. By degrees I
recovered my coolness, and ventured to look around me. The owners of the forty-two caps were seated at small green desks like
the one assigned to me. The desks were arranged in six rows, with spaces
between just wide enough to prevent the boys' whispering. A blackboard
set into the wall extended clear across the end of the room; on a raised
platform near the door stood the master's table; and directly in front
of this was a recitation-bench capable of seating fifteen or twenty
pupils. A pair of globes, tattooed with dragons and winged horses,
occupied a shelf between two windows, which were so high from the floor
that nothing but a giraffe could have looked out of them. Having possessed myself of these details, I scrutinized my new
acquaintances with unconcealed curiosity, instinctively selecting my
friends and picking out my enemies--and in only two cases did I mistake
my man. A sallow boy with bright red hair, sitting in the fourth row, shook
his fist at me furtively several times during the morning. I had a
presentiment I should have trouble with that boy some day--a presentiment
subsequently realized. On my left was a chubby little fellow with a great many freckles (this
was Pepper Whitcomb), who made some mysterious motions to me. I didn't
understand them, but, as they were clearly of a pacific nature, I winked
my eye at him. This appeared to be satisfactory, for he then went on
with his studies. At recess he gave me the core of his apple, though
there were several applicants for it. Presently a boy in a loose olive-green jacket with two rows of brass
buttons held up a folded paper behind his slate, intimating that it was
intended for me. The paper was passed skillfully from desk to desk until
it reached my hands. On opening the scrap, I found that it contained
a small piece of molasses candy in an extremely humid state. This was
certainly kind. I nodded my acknowledgments and hastily slipped the
delicacy into my mouth. In a second I felt my tongue grow red-hot with
cayenne pepper. My face must have assumed a comical expression, for the boy in the
olive-green jacket gave an hysterical laugh, for which he was instantly
punished by Mr. Grimshaw. I swallowed the fiery candy, though it brought
the water to my eyes, and managed to look so unconcerned that I was
the only pupil in the form who escaped questioning as to the cause of
Marden's misdemeanor. C. Marden was his name. Nothing else occurred that morning to interrupt the exercises, excepting
that a boy in the reading class threw us all into convulsions by calling
Absalom A-bol'-som "Abolsom, O my son Abolsom!" I laughed as loud as
anyone, but I am not so sure that I shouldn't have pronounced it Abolsom
myself. At recess several of the scholars came to my desk and shook hands with
me, Mr. Grimshaw having previously introduced me to Phil Adams, charging
him to see that I got into no trouble. My new acquaintances suggested
that we should go to the playground. We were no sooner out-of-doors than
the boy with the red hair thrust his way through the crowd and placed
himself at my side. "I say, youngster, if you're comin' to this school you've got to toe the
mark." I didn't see any mark to toe, and didn't understand what he meant; but I
replied politely, that, if it was the custom of the school, I should be
happy to toe the mark, if he would point it out to me. "I don't want any of your sarse," said the boy, scowling. "Look here, Conway!" cried a clear voice from the other side of the
playground. "You let young Bailey alone. He's a stranger here, and might
be afraid of you, and thrash you. Why do you always throw yourself in
the way of getting thrashed?" I turned to the speaker, who by this time had reached the spot where we
stood. Conway slunk off, favoring me with a parting scowl of defiance. I gave my hand to the boy who had befriended me--his name was Jack
Harris--and thanked him for his good-will. "I tell you what it is, Bailey," he said, returning my pressure
good-naturedly, "you'll have to fight Conway before the quarter ends,
or you'll have no rest. That fellow is always hankering after a licking,
and of course you'll give him one by and by; but what's the use of
hurrying up an unpleasant job? Let's have some baseball. By the way,
Bailey, you were a good kid not to let on to Grimshaw about the candy. Charley Marden would have caught it twice as heavy. He's sorry he played
the joke on you, and told me to tell you so. Hallo, Blake! Where are the
bats?" This was addressed to a handsome, frank-looking lad of about my own age,
who was engaged just then in cutting his initials on the bark of a tree
near the schoolhouse. Blake shut up his penknife and went off to get the
bats. During the game which ensued I made the acquaintance of Charley Marden,
Binny Wallace, Pepper Whitcomb, Harry Blake, and Fred Langdon. These
boys, none of them more than a year or two older than I (Binny Wallace
was younger), were ever after my chosen comrades. Phil Adams and Jack
Harris were considerably our seniors, and, though they always treated
us "kids" very kindly, they generally went with another set. Of course,
before long I knew all the Temple boys more or less intimately, but the
five I have named were my constant companions. My first day at the Temple Grammar School was on the whole satisfactory. I had made several warm friends and only two permanent enemies--Conway
and his echo, Seth Rodgers; for these two always went together like a
deranged stomach and a headache. Before the end of the week I had my studies well in hand. I was a
little ashamed at finding myself at the foot of the various classes, and
secretly determined to deserve promotion. The school was an admirable
one. I might make this part of my story more entertaining by picturing
Mr. Grimshaw as a tyrant with a red nose and a large stick; but
unfortunately for the purposes of sensational narrative, Mr. Grimshaw
was a quiet, kindhearted gentleman. Though a rigid disciplinarian, he
had a keen sense of justice, was a good reader of character, and the
boys respected him. There were two other teachers--a French tutor and a
writing-master, who visited the school twice a week. On Wednesdays and
Saturdays we were dismissed at noon, and these half-holidays were the
brightest epochs of my existence. Daily contact with boys who had not been brought up as gently as I
worked an immediate, and, in some respects, a beneficial change in my
character. I had the nonsense taken out of me, as the saying is--some
of the nonsense, at least. I became more manly and self-reliant. I
discovered that the world was not created exclusively on my account. In New Orleans I labored under the delusion that it was. Having neither
brother nor sister to give up to at home, and being, moreover, the
largest pupil at school there, my will had seldom been opposed. At
Rivermouth matters were different, and I was not long in adapting myself
to the altered circumstances. Of course I got many severe rubs, often
unconsciously given; but I had the sense to see that I was all the
better for them. My social relations with my new schoolfellows were the pleasantest
possible. There was always some exciting excursion on foot--a ramble
through the pine woods, a visit to the Devil's Pulpit, a high cliff
in the neighborhood--or a surreptitious low on the river, involving
an exploration of a group of diminutive islands, upon one of which we
pitched a tent and played we were the Spanish sailors who got wrecked
there years ago. But the endless pine forest that skirted the town was
our favorite haunt. There was a great green pond hidden somewhere in its
depths, inhabited by a monstrous colony of turtles. Harry Blake, who
had an eccentric passion for carving his name on everything, never let
a captured turtle slip through his fingers without leaving his mark
engraved on its shell. He must have lettered about two thousand from
first to last. We used to call them Harry Blake's sheep. These turtles were of a discontented and migratory turn of mind, and we
frequently encountered two or three of them on the cross-roads several
miles from their ancestral mud. Unspeakable was our delight whenever we
discovered one soberly walking off with Harry Blake's initials! I've
no doubt there are, at this moment, fat ancient turtles wandering about
that gummy woodland with H.B. neatly cut on their venerable backs. It soon became a custom among my playmates to make our barn their
rendezvous. Gypsy proved a strong attraction. Captain Nutter bought me a
little two-wheeled cart, which she drew quite nicely, after kicking out
the dasher and breaking the shafts once or twice. With our lunch-baskets
and fishing-tackle stowed away under the seat, we used to start off
early in the afternoon for the sea-shore, where there were countless
marvels in the shape of shells, mosses, and kelp. Gypsy enjoyed the
sport as keenly as any of us, even going so far, one day, as to trot
down the beach into the sea where we were bathing. As she took the cart
with her, our provisions were not much improved. I shall never forget
how squash-pie tastes after being soused in the Atlantic Ocean. Soda-crackers dipped in salt water are palatable, but not squash-pie. There was a good deal of wet weather during those first six weeks at
Rivermouth, and we set ourselves at work to find some indoor amusement
for our half-holidays. It was all very well for Amadis de Gaul and Don
Quixote not to mind the rain; they had iron overcoats, and were not,
from all we can learn, subject to croup and the guidance of their
grandfathers. Our case was different. "Now, boys, what shall we do?" I asked, addressing a thoughtful conclave
of seven, assembled in our barn one dismal rainy afternoon. "Let's have a theatre," suggested Binny Wallace. The very thing! But where? The loft of the stable was ready to burst
with hay provided for Gypsy, but the long room over the carriage-house
was unoccupied. The place of all places! My managerial eye saw at a
glance its capabilities for a theatre. I had been to the play a great
many times in New Orleans, and was wise in matters pertaining to the
drama. So here, in due time, was set up some extraordinary scenery of my
own painting. The curtain, I recollect, though it worked smoothly enough
on other occasions, invariably hitched during the performances; and it
often required the united energies of the Prince of Denmark, the King,
and the Grave-digger, with an occasional band from "the fair Ophelia"
(Pepper Whitcomb in a low-necked dress), to hoist that bit of green
cambric. The theatre, however, was a success, as far as it went. I retired from
the business with no fewer than fifteen hundred pins, after deducting
the headless, the pointless, and the crooked pins with which our
doorkeeper frequently got "stuck." From first to last we took in a
great deal of this counterfeit money. The price of admission to the
"Rivermouth Theatre" was twenty pins. I played all the principal parts
myself--not that I was a finer actor than the other boys, but because I
owned the establishment. At the tenth representation, my dramatic career was brought to a close
by an unfortunate circumstance. We were playing the drama of "William
Tell, the Hero of Switzerland." Of course I was William Tell, in spite
of Fred Langdon, who wanted to act that character himself. I wouldn't
let him, so he withdrew from the company, taking the only bow and arrow
we had. I made a cross-bow out of a piece of whalebone, and did very
well without him. We had reached that exciting scene where Gessler, the
Austrian tyrant, commands Tell to shoot the apple from his son's head. Pepper Whitcomb, who played all the juvenile and women parts, was my
son. To guard against mischance, a piece of pasteboard was fastened by a
handkerchief over the upper portion of Whitcomb's face, while the arrow
to be used was sewed up in a strip of flannel. I was a capital marksman,
and the big apple, only two yards distant, turned its russet cheek
fairly towards me. I can see poor little Pepper now, as he stood without flinching,
waiting for me to perform my great feat. I raised the crossbow amid the
breathless silence of the crowded audience consisting of seven boys and
three girls, exclusive of Kitty Collins, who insisted on paying her way
in with a clothes-pin. I raised the cross-bow, I repeat. Twang! went the
whipcord; but, alas! instead of hitting the apple, the arrow flew right
into Pepper Whitcomb's mouth, which happened to be open at the time, and
destroyed my aim. I shall never be able to banish that awful moment from my memory. Pepper's roar, expressive of astonishment, indignation, and pain, is
still ringing in my cars. I looked upon him as a corpse, and, glancing
not far into the dreary future, pictured myself led forth to execution
in the presence of the very same spectators then assembled. Luckily poor Pepper was not seriously hurt; but Grandfather Nutter,
appearing in the midst of the confusion (attracted by the howls of young
Tell), issued an injunction against all theatricals thereafter, and the
place was closed; not, however, without a farewell speech from me, in
which I said that this would have been the proudest moment of my life
if I hadn't hit Pepper Whitcomb in the mouth. Whereupon the audience
(assisted, I am glad to state, by Pepper) cried "Hear! Hear!" I then
attributed the accident to Pepper himself, whose mouth, being open at
the instant I fired, acted upon the arrow much after the fashion of a
whirlpool, and drew in the fatal shaft. I was about to explain how a
comparatively small maelstrom could suck in the largest ship, when the
curtain fell of its own accord, amid the shouts of the audience. This was my last appearance on any stage. It was some time, though,
before I heard the end of the William Tell business. Malicious little
boys who had not been allowed to buy tickets to my theatre used to cry
out after me in the street,

     "'Who killed Cock Robin?' 'I,' said the sparrer,
     'With my bow and arrer,
     I killed Cock Robin!'" The sarcasm of this verse was more than I could stand. And it made
Pepper Whitcomb pretty mad to be called Cock Robin, I can tell you! So the days glided on, with fewer clouds and more sunshine than fall to
the lot of most boys. Conway was certainly a cloud. Within school-bounds
he seldom ventured to be aggressive; but whenever we met about town he
never failed to brush against me, or pull my cap over my eyes, or
drive me distracted by inquiring after my family in New Orleans, always
alluding to them as highly respectable colored people. Jack Harris was right when he said Conway would give me no rest until I
fought him. I felt it was ordained ages before our birth that we should
meet on this planet and fight. With the view of not running counter to
destiny, I quietly prepared myself for the impending conflict. The scene
of my dramatic triumphs was turned into a gymnasium for this purpose,
though I did not openly avow the fact to the boys. By persistently
standing on my head, raising heavy weights, and going hand over hand up
a ladder, I developed my muscle until my little body was as tough as a
hickory knot and as supple as tripe. I also took occasional lessons in
the noble art of self-defence, under the tuition of Phil Adams. I brooded over the matter until the idea of fighting Conway became a
part of me. I fought him in imagination during school-hours; I dreamed
of fighting with him at night, when he would suddenly expand into a
giant twelve feet high, and then as suddenly shrink into a pygmy so
small that I couldn't hit him. In this latter shape he would get into
my hair, or pop into my waistcoat-pocket, treating me with as little
ceremony as the Liliputians showed Captain Lemuel Gulliver--all of which
was not pleasant, to be sure. On the whole, Conway was a cloud. And then I had a cloud at home. It was not Grandfather Nutter, nor Miss
Abigail, nor Kitty Collins, though they all helped to compose it. It
was a vague, funereal, impalpable something which no amount of gymnastic
training would enable me to knock over. It was Sunday. If ever I have
a boy to bring up in the way he should go, I intend to make Sunday a
cheerful day to him. Sunday was not a cheerful day at the Nutter House. You shall judge for yourself. It is Sunday morning. I should premise by saying that the deep gloom
which has settled over everything set in like a heavy fog early on
Saturday evening. At seven o'clock my grandfather comes smilelessly downstairs. He is
dressed in black, and looks as if he had lost all his friends during
the night. Miss Abigail, also in black, looks as if she were prepared to
bury them, and not indisposed to enjoy the ceremony. Even Kitty Collins
has caught the contagious gloom, as I perceive when she brings in the
coffee-urn--a solemn and sculpturesque urn at any time, but monumental
now--and sets it down in front of Miss Abigail. Miss Abigail gazes at
the urn as if it held the ashes of her ancestors, instead of a generous
quantity of fine old Java coffee. The meal progresses in silence. Our parlor is by no means thrown open every day. It is open this June
morning, and is pervaded by a strong smell of centretable. The furniture
of the room, and the little China ornaments on the mantel-piece, have a
constrained, unfamiliar look. My grandfather sits in a mahogany chair,
reading a large Bible covered with green baize. Miss Abigail occupies
one end of the sofa, and has her hands crossed stiffly in her lap. I
sit in the corner, crushed. Robinson Crusoe and Gil Blas are in close
confinement. Baron Trenck, who managed to escape from the fortress of
Clatz, can't for the life of him get out of our sitting-room closet. Even
the Rivermouth Barnacle is suppressed until Monday. Genial converse,
harmless books, smiles, lightsome hearts, all are banished. If I want to
read anything, I can read Baxter's Saints' Rest. I would die first. So
I sit there kicking my heels, thinking about New Orleans, and watching
a morbid blue-bottle fly that attempts to commit suicide by butting his
head against the window-pane. Listen!--no, yes--it is--it is the robins
singing in the garden--the grateful, joyous robins singing away like mad,
just as if it wasn't Sunday. Their audacity tickles me. My grandfather looks up, and inquires in a sepulchral voice if I am
ready for Sabbath school. It is time to go. I like the Sabbath school;
there are bright young faces there, at all events. When I get out into
the sunshine alone, I draw a long breath; I would turn a somersault up
against Neighbor Penhallow's newly painted fence if I hadn't my best
trousers on, so glad am I to escape from the oppressive atmosphere of
the Nutter House. Sabbath school over, I go to meeting, joining my grandfather, who
doesn't appear to be any relation to me this day, and Miss Abigail, in
the porch. Our minister holds out very little hope to any of us of being
saved. Convinced that I am a lost creature, in common with the human
family, I return home behind my guardians at a snail's pace. We have a
dead cold dinner. I saw it laid out yesterday. There is a long interval between this repast and the second service,
and a still longer interval between the beginning and the end of that
service; for the Rev. Wibird Hawkins's sermons are none of the shortest,
whatever else they may be. After meeting, my grandfather and I take a walk. We visit appropriately
enough--a neighboring graveyard. I am by this time in a condition of
mind to become a willing inmate of the place. The usual evening
prayer-meeting is postponed for some reason. At half past eight I go to
bed. This is the way Sunday was observed in the Nutter House, and pretty
generally throughout the town, twenty years ago. (1) People who were
prosperous and natural and happy on Saturday became the most rueful of
human beings in the brief space of twelve hours. I don't think there was
any hypocrisy in this. It was merely the old Puritan austerity cropping
out once a week. Many of these people were pure Christians every day in
the seven--excepting the seventh. Then they were decorous and solemn to
the verge of moroseness. I should not like to be misunderstood on this
point. Sunday is a blessed day, and therefore it should not be made a
gloomy one. It is the Lord's day, and I do believe that cheerful hearts
and faces are not unpleasant in His sight. "O day of rest! How beautiful, how fair,
     How welcome to the weary and the old! Day of the Lord! and truce to earthly cares! Day of the Lord, as all our days should be! Ah, why will man by his austerities
     Shut out the blessed sunshine and the light,
     And make of thee a dungeon of despair!" (1) About 1850. Chapter Seven--One Memorable Night


Two months had elapsed since my arrival at Rivermouth, when the approach
of an important celebration produced the greatest excitement among the
juvenile population of the town. There was very little hard study done in the Temple Grammar School the
week preceding the Fourth of July. For my part, my heart and brain were
so full of fire-crackers, Roman candles, rockets, pin-wheels, squibs,
and gunpowder in various seductive forms, that I wonder I didn't explode
under Mr. Grimshaw's very nose. I couldn't do a sum to save me; I
couldn't tell, for love or money, whether Tallahassee was the capital
of Tennessee or of Florida; the present and the pluperfect tenses
were inextricably mixed in my memory, and I didn't know a verb from an
adjective when I met one. This was not alone my condition, but that of
every boy in the school. Mr. Grimshaw considerately made allowances for our temporary
distraction, and sought to fix our interest on the lessons by connecting
them directly or indirectly with the coming Event. The class in
arithmetic, for instance, was requested to state how many boxes of
fire-crackers, each box measuring sixteen inches square, could be stored
in a room of such and such dimensions. He gave us the Declaration of
Independence for a parsing exercise, and in geography confined his
questions almost exclusively to localities rendered famous in the
Revolutionary War. "What did the people of Boston do with the tea on board the English
vessels?" asked our wily instructor. "Threw it into the river!" shrieked the smaller boys, with an
impetuosity that made Mr. Grimshaw smile in spite of himself. One
luckless urchin said, "Chucked it," for which happy expression he was
kept in at recess. Notwithstanding these clever stratagems, there was not much solid work
done by anybody. The trail of the serpent (an inexpensive but dangerous
fire-toy) was over us all. We went round deformed by quantities of
Chinese crackers artlessly concealed in our trousers-pockets; and if a
boy whipped out his handkerchief without proper precaution, he was sure
to let off two or three torpedoes. Even Mr. Grimshaw was made a sort of accessory to the universal
demoralization. In calling the school to order, he always rapped on
the table with a heavy ruler. Under the green baize table-cloth, on the
exact spot where he usually struck, certain boy, whose name I withhold,
placed a fat torpedo. The result was a loud explosion, which caused Mr.
Grimshaw to look queer. Charley Marden was at the water-pail, at the
time, and directed general attention to himself by strangling for
several seconds and then squirting a slender thread of water over the
blackboard. Mr. Grimshaw fixed his eyes reproachfully on Charley, but said nothing. The real culprit (it wasn't Charley Marden, but the boy whose name I
withhold) instantly regretted his badness, and after school confessed
the whole thing to Mr. Grimshaw, who heaped coals of fire upon the
nameless boy's head giving him five cents for the Fourth of July. If
Mr. Grimshaw had caned this unknown youth, the punishment would not have
been half so severe. On the last day of June the Captain received a letter from my father,
enclosing five dollars "for my son Tom," which enabled that young
gentleman to make regal preparations for the celebration of our national
independence. A portion of this money, two dollars, I hastened to invest
in fireworks; the balance I put by for contingencies. In placing the
fund in my possession, the Captain imposed one condition that dampened
my ardor considerably--I was to buy no gunpowder. I might have all the
snapping-crackers and torpedoes I wanted; but gunpowder was out of the
question. I thought this rather hard, for all my young friends were provided with
pistols of various sizes. Pepper Whitcomb had a horse-pistol nearly as
large as himself, and Jack Harris, though he, to be sure, was a big
boy, was going to have a real oldfashioned flintlock musket. However, I
didn't mean to let this drawback destroy my happiness. I had one charge
of powder stowed away in the little brass pistol which I brought from
New Orleans, and was bound to make a noise in the world once, if I never
did again. It was a custom observed from time immemorial for the towns-boys to have
a bonfire on the Square on the midnight before the Fourth. I didn't ask
the Captain's leave to attend this ceremony, for I had a general idea
that he wouldn't give it. If the Captain, I reasoned, doesn't forbid me,
I break no orders by going. Now this was a specious line of argument,
and the mishaps that befell me in consequence of adopting it were richly
deserved. On the evening of the 3d I retired to bed very early, in order to disarm
suspicion. I didn't sleep a wink, waiting for eleven o'clock to come
round; and I thought it never would come round, as I lay counting from
time to time the slow strokes of the ponderous bell in the steeple of
the Old North Church. At length the laggard hour arrived. While the
clock was striking I jumped out of bed and began dressing. My grandfather and Miss Abigail were heavy sleepers, and I might have
stolen downstairs and out at the front door undetected; but such a
commonplace proceeding did not suit my adventurous disposition. I
fastened one end of a rope (it was a few yards cut from Kitty Collins's
clothes-line) to the bedpost nearest the window, and cautiously climbed
out on the wide pediment over the hall door. I had neglected to knot the
rope; the result was, that, the moment I swung clear of the pediment, I
descended like a flash of lightning, and warmed both my hands smartly. The rope, moreover, was four or five feet too short; so I got a fall
that would have proved serious had I not tumbled into the middle of one
of the big rose-bushes growing on either side of the steps. I scrambled out of that without delay, and was congratulating myself on
my good luck, when I saw by the light of the setting moon the form of a
man leaning over the garden gate. It was one of the town watch, who had
probably been observing my operations with curiosity. Seeing no chance
of escape, I put a bold face on the matter and walked directly up to
him. "What on airth air you a doin'?" asked the man, grasping the collar of
my jacket. "I live here, sir, if you please," I replied, "and am going to the
bonfire. I didn't want to wake up the old folks, that's all." The man cocked his eye at me in the most amiable manner, and released
his hold. "Boys is boys," he muttered. He didn't attempt to stop me as I slipped
through the gate. Once beyond his clutches, I took to my heels and soon reached the
Square, where I found forty or fifty fellows assembled, engaged in
building a pyramid of tar-barrels. The palms of my hands still tingled
so that I couldn't join in the sport. I stood in the doorway of the
Nautilus Bank, watching the workers, among whom I recognized lots of my
schoolmates. They looked like a legion of imps, coming and going in the
twilight, busy in raising some infernal edifice. What a Babel of
voices it was, everybody directing everybody else, and everybody doing
everything wrong! When all was prepared, someone applied a match to the sombre pile. A
fiery tongue thrust itself out here and there, then suddenly the whole
fabric burst into flames, blazing and crackling beautifully. This was a
signal for the boys to join hands and dance around the burning barrels,
which they did shouting like mad creatures. When the fire had burnt
down a little, fresh staves were brought and heaped on the pyre. In the
excitement of the moment I forgot my tingling palms, and found myself in
the thick of the carousal. Before we were half ready, our combustible material was expended, and a
disheartening kind of darkness settled down upon us. The boys collected
together here and there in knots, consulting as to what should be done. It yet lacked four or five hours of daybreak, and none of us were in the
humor to return to bed. I approached one of the groups standing near the
town pump, and discovered in the uncertain light of the dying brands the
figures of Jack Harris, Phil Adams, Harry Blake, and Pepper Whitcomb,
their faces streaked with perspiration and tar, and, their whole
appearance suggestive of New Zealand chiefs. "Hullo! Here's Tom Bailey!" shouted Pepper Whitcomb. "He'll join in!" Of course he would. The sting had gone out of my hands, and I was ripe
for anything--none the less ripe for not knowing what was on the tapis. After whispering together for a moment the boys motioned me to follow
them. We glided out from the crowd and silently wended our way through a
neighboring alley, at the head of which stood a tumble-down old barn,
owned by one Ezra Wingate. In former days this was the stable of the
mail-coach that ran between Rivermouth and Boston. When the railroad
superseded that primitive mode of travel, the lumbering vehicle was
rolled in the barn, and there it stayed. The stage-driver, after
prophesying the immediate downfall of the nation, died of grief and
apoplexy, and the old coach followed in his wake as fast as could
by quietly dropping to pieces. The barn had the reputation of being
haunted, and I think we all kept very close together when we found
ourselves standing in the black shadow cast by the tall gable. Here,
in a low voice, Jack Harris laid bare his plan, which was to burn the
ancient stage-coach. "The old trundle-cart isn't worth twenty-five cents," said Jack Harris,
"and Ezra Wingate ought to thank us for getting the rubbish out of the
way. But if any fellow here doesn't want to have a hand in it, let him
cut and run, and keep a quiet tongue in his head ever after." With this he pulled out the staples that held the lock, and the big barn
door swung slowly open. The interior of the stable was pitch-dark, of
course. As we made a movement to enter, a sudden scrambling, and the
sound of heavy bodies leaping in all directions, caused us to start back
in terror. "Rats!" cried Phil Adams. "Bats!" exclaimed Harry Blake. "Cats!" suggested Jack Harris. "Who's afraid?" Well, the truth is, we were all afraid; and if the pole of the stage had
not been lying close to the threshold, I don't believe anything on earth
would have induced us to cross it. We seized hold of the pole-straps
and succeeded with great trouble in dragging the coach out. The two fore
wheels had rusted to the axle-tree, and refused to revolve. It was the
merest skeleton of a coach. The cushions had long since been removed,
and the leather hangings, where they had not crumbled away, dangled in
shreds from the worm-eaten frame. A load of ghosts and a span of phantom
horses to drag them would have made the ghastly thing complete. Luckily for our undertaking, the stable stood at the top of a very steep
hill. With three boys to push behind, and two in front to steer, we
started the old coach on its last trip with little or no difficulty. Our speed increased every moment, and, the fore wheels becoming unlocked
as we arrived at the foot of the declivity, we charged upon the crowd
like a regiment of cavalry, scattering the people right and left. Before
reaching the bonfire, to which someone had added several bushels of
shavings, Jack Harris and Phil Adams, who were steering, dropped on the
ground, and allowed the vehicle to pass over them, which it did without
injuring them; but the boys who were clinging for dear life to the
trunk-rack behind fell over the prostrate steersman, and there we all
lay in a heap, two or three of us quite picturesque with the nose-bleed. The coach, with an intuitive perception of what was expected of it,
plunged into the centre of the kindling shavings, and stopped. The
flames sprung up and clung to the rotten woodwork, which burned like
tinder. At this moment a figure was seen leaping wildly from the inside
of the blazing coach. The figure made three bounds towards us, and
tripped over Harry Blake. It was Pepper Whitcomb, with his hair somewhat
singed, and his eyebrows completely scorched off! Pepper had slyly ensconced himself on the back seat before we started,
intending to have a neat little ride down hill, and a laugh at us
afterwards. But the laugh, as it happened, was on our side, or would
have been, if half a dozen watchmen had not suddenly pounced down upon
us, as we lay scrambling on the ground, weak with mirth over Pepper's
misfortune. We were collared and marched off before we well knew what
had happened. The abrupt transition from the noise and light of the Square to the
silent, gloomy brick room in the rear of the Meat Market seemed like the
work of enchantment. We stared at each other, aghast. "Well," remarked Jack Harris, with a sickly smile, "this is a go!" "No go, I should say," whimpered Harry Blake, glancing at the bare brick
walls and the heavy ironplated door. "Never say die," muttered Phil Adams, dolefully. The bridewell was a small low-studded chamber built up against the
rear end of the Meat Market, and approached from the Square by a narrow
passage-way. A portion of the rooms partitioned off into eight cells,
numbered, each capable of holding two persons. The cells were full at
the time, as we presently discovered by seeing several hideous faces
leering out at us through the gratings of the doors. A smoky oil-lamp in a lantern suspended from the ceiling threw a
flickering light over the apartment, which contained no furniture
excepting a couple of stout wooden benches. It was a dismal place by
night, and only little less dismal by day, tall houses surrounding "the
lock-up" prevented the faintest ray of sunshine from penetrating the
ventilator over the door--long narrow window opening inward and propped
up by a piece of lath. As we seated ourselves in a row on one of the benches, I imagine that
our aspect was anything but cheerful. Adams and Harris looked very
anxious, and Harry Blake, whose nose had just stopped bleeding, was
mournfully carving his name, by sheer force of habit, on the prison
bench. I don't think I ever saw a more "wrecked" expression on any
human countenance than Pepper Whitcomb's presented. His look of natural
astonishment at finding himself incarcerated in a jail was considerably
heightened by his lack of eyebrows. As for me, it was only by thinking how the late Baron Trenck would
have conducted himself under similar circumstances that I was able to
restrain my tears. None of us were inclined to conversation. A deep silence, broken now
and then by a startling snore from the cells, reigned throughout the
chamber. By and by Pepper Whitcomb glanced nervously towards Phil Adams
and said, "Phil, do you think they will--hang us?" "Hang your grandmother!" returned Adams, impatiently. "What I'm afraid
of is that they'll keep us locked up until the Fourth is over." "You ain't smart ef they do!" cried a voice from one of the cells. It
was a deep bass voice that sent a chill through me. "Who are you?" said Jack Harris, addressing the cells in general; for
the echoing qualities of the room made it difficult to locate the voice. "That don't matter," replied the speaker, putting his face close up to
the gratings of No. 3, "but ef I was a youngster like you, free an' easy
outside there, this spot wouldn't hold me long." "That's so!" chimed several of the prison-birds, wagging their heads
behind the iron lattices. "Hush!" whispered Jack Harris, rising from his seat and walking on
tip-toe to the door of cell No. 3. "What would you do?" "Do? Why, I'd pile them 'ere benches up agin that 'ere door, an' crawl
out of that 'erc winder in no time. That's my adwice." "And werry good adwice it is, Jim," said the occupant of No. 5,
approvingly. Jack Harris seemed to be of the same opinion, for he hastily placed the
benches one on the top of another under the ventilator, and, climbing up
on the highest bench, peeped out into the passage-way. "If any gent happens to have a ninepence about him," said the man in
cell No. 3, "there's a sufferin' family here as could make use of it. Smallest favors gratefully received, an' no questions axed." This appeal touched a new silver quarter of a dollar in my
trousers-pocket; I fished out the coin from a mass of fireworks, and
gave it to the prisoner. He appeared to be so good-natured a fellow that
I ventured to ask what he had done to get into jail. "Intirely innocent. I was clapped in here by a rascally nevew as wishes
to enjoy my wealth afore I'm dead.' "Your name, Sir?' I inquired, with a view of reporting the outrage to my
grandfather and having the injured person re instated in society. "Git out, you insolent young reptyle!" shouted the man, in a passion. I retreated precipitately, amid a roar of laughter from the other cells. "Can't you keep still?" exclaimed Harris, withdrawing his head from the
window. A portly watchman usually sat on a stool outside the door day and night;
but on this particular occasion, his services being required elsewhere,
the bridewell had been left to guard itself. "All clear," whispered Jack Harris, as he vanished through the
aperture and dropped softly on the ground outside. We all followed him
expeditiously--Pepper Whitcomb and myself getting stuck in the window for
a moment in our frantic efforts not to be last. "Now, boys, everybody for himself!" Chapter Eight--The Adventures of a Fourth


The sun cast a broad column of quivering gold across the river at the
foot of our street, just as I reached the doorstep of the Nutter House. Kitty Collins, with her dress tucked about her so that she looked as if
she had on a pair of calico trousers, was washing off the sidewalk. "Arrah you bad boy!" cried Kitty, leaning on the mop handle. "The Capen
has jist been askin' for you. He's gone up town, now. It's a nate thing
you done with my clothes-line, and, it's me you may thank for gettin' it
out of the way before the Capen come down." The kind creature had hauled in the rope, and my escapade had not been
discovered by the family; but I knew very well that the burning of the
stage-coach, and the arrest of the boys concerned in the mischief, were
sure to reach my grandfathers ears sooner or later. "Well, Thomas," said the old gentleman, an hour or so afterwards,
beaming upon me benevolently across the breakfast table, "you didn't
wait to be called this morning." "No, sir," I replied, growing very warm, "I took a little run up town to
see what was going on." I didn't say anything about the little run I took home again! "They had
quite a time on the Square last night," remarked Captain Nutter, looking
up from the Rivermouth Barnacle, which was always placed beside his
coffee-cup at breakfast. I felt that my hair was preparing to stand on end. "Quite a time," continued my grandfather. "Some boys broke into Ezra
Wingate's barn and carried off the old stagecoach. The young rascals! I
do believe they'd burn up the whole town if they had their way." With this he resumed the paper. After a long silence he exclaimed,
"Hullo!" upon which I nearly fell off the chair. "'Miscreants unknown,'" read my grandfather, following the paragraph
with his forefinger; "'escaped from the bridewell, leaving no clew to
their identity, except the letter H, cut on one of the benches.' 'Five
dollars reward offered for the apprehension of the perpetrators.' Sho! I
hope Wingate will catch them." I don't see how I continued to live, for on hearing this the breath went
entirely out of my body. I beat a retreat from the room as soon as I
could, and flew to the stable with a misty intention of mounting Gypsy
and escaping from the place. I was pondering what steps to take, when
Jack Harris and Charley Marden entered the yard. "I say," said Harris, as blithe as a lark, "has old Wingate been here?" "Been here?" I cried, "I should hope not!" "The whole thing's out, you know," said Harris, pulling Gypsy's forelock
over her eyes and blowing playfully into her nostrils. "You don't mean it!" I gasped. "Yes, I do, and we are to pay Wingate three dollars apiece. He'll make
rather a good spec out of it." "But how did he discover that we were the--the miscreants?" I asked,
quoting mechanically from the Rivermouth Bamacle. "Why, he saw us take the old ark, confound him! He's been trying to sell
it any time these ten years. Now he has sold it to us. When he found
that we had slipped out of the Meat Market, he went right off and wrote
the advertisement offering five dollars reward; though he knew well
enough who had taken the coach, for he came round to my father's
house before the paper was printed to talk the matter over. Wasn't the
governor mad, though! But it's all settled, I tell you. We're to pay
Wingate fifteen dollars for the old go-cart, which he wanted to sell
the other day for seventy-five cents, and couldn't. It's a downright
swindle. But the funny part of it is to come." "O, there's a funny part to it, is there?" I remarked bitterly. "Yes. The moment Bill Conway saw the advertisement, he knew it was
Harry Blake who cut that letter H on the bench; so off he rushes up to
Wingate--kind of him, wasn't it?--and claims the reward. 'Too late, young
man,' says old Wingate, 'the culprits has been discovered.' You see
Sly-boots hadn't any intention of paying that five dollars." Jack Harris's statement lifted a weight from my bosom. The article in
the Rivermouth Barnacle had placed the affair before me in a new light. I had thoughtlessly committed a grave offence. Though the property in
question was valueless, we were clearly wrong in destroying it. At the
same time Mr. Wingate had tacitly sanctioned the act by not preventing
it when he might easily have done so. He had allowed his property to be
destroyed in order that he might realize a large profit. Without waiting to hear more, I went straight to Captain Nutter, and,
laying my remaining three dollars on his knee, confessed my share in the
previous night's transaction. The Captain heard me through in profound silence, pocketed the
bank-notes, and walked off without speaking a word. He had punished me
in his own whimsical fashion at the breakfast table, for, at the very
moment he was harrowing up my soul by reading the extracts from the
Rivermouth Barnacle, he not only knew all about the bonfire, but had
paid Ezra Wingate his three dollars. Such was the duplicity of that aged
impostor. I think Captain Nutter was justified in retaining my pocketmoney, as
additional punishment, though the possession of it later in the day
would have got me out of a difficult position, as the reader will see
further on. I returned with a light heart and a large piece of punk to
my friends in the stable-yard, where we celebrated the termination
of our trouble by setting off two packs of fire-crackers in an empty
wine-cask. They made a prodigious racket, but failed somehow to fully
express my feelings. The little brass pistol in my bedroom suddenly
occurred to me. It had been loaded I don't know how many months, long
before I left New Orleans, and now was the time, if ever, to fire it
off. Muskets, blunderbusses, and pistols were banging away lively all
over town, and the smell of gunpowder, floating on the air, set me wild
to add something respectable to the universal din. When the pistol was produced, Jack Harris examined the rusty cap and
prophesied that it would not explode. "Never mind," said I, "let's try it." I had fired the pistol once, secretly, in New Orleans, and, remembering
the noise it gave birth to on that occasion, I shut both eyes tight as
I pulled the trigger. The hammer clicked on the cap with a dull, dead
sound. Then Harris tried it; then Charley Marden; then I took it again,
and after three or four trials was on the point of giving it up as a
bad job, when the obstinate thing went off with a tremendous explosion,
nearly jerking my arm from the socket. The smoke cleared away, and
there I stood with the stock of the pistol clutched convulsively in my
hand--the barrel, lock, trigger, and ramrod having vanished into thin
air. "Are you hurt?" cried the boys, in one breath. "N--no," I replied, dubiously, for the concussion had bewildered me a
little. When I realized the nature of the calamity, my grief was excessive. I
can't imagine what led me to do so ridiculous a thing, but I gravely
buried the remains of my beloved pistol in our back garden, and erected
over the mound a slate tablet to the effect that "Mr. Barker formerly of
new Orleans, was killed accidentally on the Fourth of July, 18-- in the
2nd year of his Age." Binny Wallace, arriving on the spot just after
the disaster, and Charley Marden (who enjoyed the obsequies immensely),
acted with me as chief mourners. I, for my part, was a very sincere one. As I turned away in a disconsolate mood from the garden, Charley Marden
remarked that he shouldn't be surprised if the pistol-butt took root and
grew into a mahogany-tree or something. He said he once planted an old
musket-stock, and shortly afterwards a lot of shoots sprung up! Jack
Harris laughed; but neither I nor Binny Wallace saw Charley's wicked
joke. We were now joined by Pepper Whitcomb, Fred Langdon, and several other
desperate characters, on their way to the Square, which was always a
busy place when public festivities were going on. Feeling that I was
still in disgrace with the Captain, I thought it politic to ask his
consent before accompanying the boys. He gave it with some hesitation, advising me to be careful not to get
in front of the firearms. Once he put his fingers mechanically into his
vest-pocket and half drew forth some dollar bills, then slowly thrust
them back again as his sense of justice overcame his genial disposition. I guess it cut the old gentleman to the heart to be obliged to keep
me out of my pocket-money. I know it did me. However, as I was passing
through the hall, Miss Abigail, with a very severe cast of countenance,
slipped a brand-new quarter into my hand. We had silver currency in
those days, thank Heaven! Great were the bustle and confusion on the Square. By the way, I don't
know why they called this large open space a square, unless because it
was an oval--an oval formed by the confluence of half a dozen streets,
now thronged by crowds of smartly dressed towns-people and country
folks; for Rivermouth on the Fourth was the centre of attraction to the
inhabitants of the neighboring villages. On one side of the Square were twenty or thirty booths arranged in
a semi-circle, gay with little flags and seductive with lemonade,
ginger-beer, and seedcakes. Here and there were tables at which could be
purchased the smaller sort of fireworks, such as pin-wheels, serpents,
double-headers, and punk warranted not to go out. Many of the adjacent
houses made a pretty display of bunting, and across each of the streets
opening on the Square was an arch of spruce and evergreen, blossoming
all over with patriotic mottoes and paper roses. It was a noisy, merry, bewildering scene as we came upon the ground. The
incessant rattle of small arms, the booming of the twelve-pounder firing
on the Mill Dam, and the silvery clangor of the church-bells ringing
simultaneously--not to mention an ambitious brass-band that was blowing
itself to pieces on a balcony--were enough to drive one distracted. We
amused ourselves for an hour or two, darting in and out among the crowd
and setting off our crackers. At one o'clock the Hon. Hezekiah Elkins
mounted a platform in the middle of the Square and delivered an oration,
to which his "feller-citizens" didn't pay much attention, having all
they could do to dodge the squibs that were set loose upon them by
mischievous boys stationed on the surrounding housetops. Our little party which had picked up recruits here and there, not being
swayed by eloquence, withdrew to a booth on the outskirts of the crowd,
where we regaled ourselves with root beer at two cents a glass. I
recollect being much struck by the placard surmounting this tent:

ROOT BEER

SOLD HERE

It seemed to me the perfection of pith and poetry. What could be more
terse? Not a word to spare, and yet everything fully expressed. Rhyme
and rhythm faultless. It was a delightful poet who made those verses. As
for the beer itself--that, I think, must have been made from the root
of all evil! A single glass of it insured an uninterrupted pain for
twenty-four hours. The influence of my liberality working on Charley Marden--for it was I
who paid for the beer--he presently invited us all to take an ice-cream
with him at Pettingil's saloon. Pettingil was the Delmonico of
Rivermouth. He furnished ices and confectionery for aristocratic balls
and parties, and didn't disdain to officiate as leader of the orchestra
at the same; for Pettingil played on the violin, as Pepper Whitcomb
described it, "like Old Scratch." Pettingil's confectionery store was on the corner of Willow and High
Streets. The saloon, separated from the shop by a flight of three steps
leading to a door hung with faded red drapery, had about it an air of
mystery and seclusion quite delightful. Four windows, also draped, faced
the side-street, affording an unobstructed view of Marm Hatch's back
yard, where a number of inexplicable garments on a clothes-line were
always to be seen careering in the wind. There was a lull just then in the ice-cream business, it being
dinner-time, and we found the saloon unoccupied. When we had seated
ourselves around the largest marble-topped table, Charley Marden in a
manly voice ordered twelve sixpenny icecreams, "strawberry and verneller
mixed." It was a magnificent sight, those twelve chilly glasses entering the
room on a waiter, the red and white custard rising from each glass like
a church-steeple, and the spoon-handle shooting up from the apex like
a spire. I doubt if a person of the nicest palate could have
distinguished, with his eyes shut, which was the vanilla and which the
strawberry; but if I could at this moment obtain a cream tasting as that
did, I would give five dollars for a very small quantity. We fell to with a will, and so evenly balanced were our capabilities
that we finished our creams together, the spoons clinking in the glasses
like one spoon. "Let's have some more!" cried Charley Marden, with the air of Aladdin
ordering up a fresh hogshead of pearls and rubies. "Tom Bailey, tell
Pettingil to send in another round." Could I credit my ears? I looked at him to see if he were in earnest. He meant it. In a moment more I was leaning over the counter giving
directions for a second supply. Thinking it would make no difference to
such a gorgeous young sybarite as Marden, I took the liberty of ordering
ninepenny creams this time. On returning to the saloon, what was my horror at finding it empty! There were the twelve cloudy glasses, standing in a circle on the sticky
marble slab, and not a boy to be seen. A pair of hands letting go their
hold on the window-sill outside explained matters. I had been made a
victim. I couldn't stay and face Pettingil, whose peppery temper was well known
among the boys. I hadn't a cent in the world to appease him. What should
I do? I heard the clink of approaching glasses--the ninepenny creams. I rushed to the nearest window. It was only five feet to the ground. I
threw myself out as if I had been an old hat. Landing on my feet, I fled breathlessly down High Street, through
Willow, and was turning into Brierwood Place when the sound of several
voices, calling to me in distress, stopped my progress. "Look out, you fool! The mine! The mine!" yelled the warning voices. Several men and boys were standing at the head of the street, making
insane gestures to me to avoid something. But I saw no mine, only in the
middle of the road in front of me was a common flour-barrel, which, as
I gazed at it, suddenly rose into the air with a terrific explosion. I felt myself thrown violently off my feet. I remember nothing else,
excepting that, as I went up, I caught a momentary glimpse of Ezra
Wingate leering through is shop window like an avenging spirit. The mine that had wrought me woe was not properly a mine at all, but
merely a few ounces of powder placed under an empty keg or barrel and
fired with a slow-match. Boys who didn't happen to have pistols or
cannon generally burnt their powder in this fashion. For an account of what followed I am indebted to hearsay, for I was
insensible when the people picked me up and carried me home on a shutter
borrowed from the proprietor of Pettingil's saloon. I was supposed to
be killed, but happily (happily for me at least) I was merely stunned. I lay in a semi-unconscious state until eight o'clock that night, when
I attempted to speak. Miss Abigail, who watched by the bedside, put
her ear down to my lips and was saluted with these remarkable words:
"Strawberry and verneller mixed!" "Mercy on us! What is the boy saying?" cried Miss Abigail. "ROOTBEERSOLDHERE!" This inscription is copied from a triangular-shaped
     piece of slate, still preserved in the garret of the Nutter
     House, together with the pistol butt itself, which was
     subsequently dug up for a postmortem examination. Chapter Nine--I Become an R. M. C.


In the course of ten days I recovered sufficiently from my injuries to
attend school, where, for a little while, I was looked upon as a hero,
on account of having been blown up. What don't we make a hero of? The
distraction which prevailed in the classes the week preceding the Fourth
had subsided, and nothing remained to indicate the recent festivities,
excepting a noticeable want of eyebrows on the part of Pepper Whitcomb
and myself. In August we had two weeks' vacation. It was about this time that I
became a member of the Rivermouth Centipedes, a secret society composed
of twelve of the Temple Grammar School boys. This was an honor to which
I had long aspired, but, being a new boy, I was not admitted to the
fraternity until my character had fully developed itself. It was a very select society, the object of which I never fathomed,
though I was an active member of the body during the remainder of my
residence at Rivermouth, and at one time held the onerous position of F.
C., First Centipede. Each of the elect wore a copper cent (some occult
association being established between a cent apiece and a centipedes
suspended by a string round his neck). The medals were worn next the
skin, and it was while bathing one day at Grave Point, with Jack Harris
and Fred Langdon, that I had my curiosity roused to the highest pitch
by a sight of these singular emblems. As soon as I ascertained the
existence of a boys' club, of course I was ready to die to join it. And
eventually I was allowed to join. 