



Produced by Anne Storer, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: This e-book was produced from a reprint of the
edition first published in 1894 in London by Bliss, Sands, and Foster. Inconsistent spellings and hyphenations have been standardized. There
is one instance each of Cruachmore and Croachmore, so they have been
left as printed.] _The Daughters of Danaus_

_Mona Caird_

1894


       *       *       *       *       *

CONTENTS


_The Daughters of Danaus_                                       1

Appendix: "Does Marriage Hinder a Woman's Self-development?" by Mona Caird                                                 535

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DAUGHTERS OF DANAUS

CHAPTER I. It was only just light enough to discern the five human forms in the
dimness of the garret; the rays of the moon having to find their way
through the deep window-embrasures of the keep. Less illumination would
have sufficed to disclose the ancient character of the garret, with its
low ceiling, and the graduated mouldings of the cornice, giving the
effect of a shallow dome. The house stood obviously very high, for one
could see from the windows for miles over a bleak country, coldly lit by
the rays of the moon, which was almost at the full. Into the half light
stole presently the sound of some lively instrument: a reel tune played,
as it were, beneath one's breath, but with all the revel and rollicking
emphasis of that intoxicating primitive music. And then in correspondingly
low relief, but with no less emphasis, the occupants of this singular
ball-room began to dance. One might have fancied them some midnight
company of the dead, risen from their graves for this secret revelry,
so strange was the appearance of the moving figures, with the moonlight
catching, as they passed, the faces or the hands. They danced excellently
well, as to the manner born, tripping in and out among the shadows, with
occasional stamping, in time to the music, and now and again that wild
Celtic shout or cry that sets the nerves athrill. In spite of the whole
scene's being enacted in a low key, it seemed only to gain in intensity
from that circumstance, and in fantastic effect. Among the dancers was one who danced with peculiar spirit and brilliancy,
and her little cry had a ring and a wildness that never failed to set the
others going with new inspiration. She was a slight, dark-haired girl, with a pale, rather mysterious face,
and large eyes. Not a word was spoken, and the reel went on for nearly
ten minutes. At length the girl with the dark hair gave a final shout,
and broke away from the circle. With her desertion the dance flagged, and presently came to an end. The
first breaking of the silence gave a slight shock, in spite of the
subdued tones of the speaker. "It is no use trying to dance a reel without Hadria," said a tall youth,
evidently her brother, if one might judge from his almost southern
colouring and melancholy eyes. In build and feature he resembled the
elder sister, Algitha, who had all the characteristics of a fine
northern race. "Old Maggie said the other day, that Hadria's dancing of the reel was no
'right canny,'" Algitha observed, in the same low tone that all the
occupants of the garret instinctively adopted. "Ah!" cried Fred, "old Maggie has always looked upon Hadria as half
bewitched since that night when she found her here 'a wee bit bairn,' as
she says, at this very window, in her nightshirt, standing on tiptoe to
see the moonlight." "It frightened the poor old thing out of her wits, of course," said
Algitha, who was leaning with crossed arms, in a corner of the deep-set
window. The fine outlines of face and form were shewn in the strange
light, as in a boldly-executed sketch, without detail. Pride and
determination were the dominant qualities so indicated. Her sister
stood opposite, the moonshine making the smooth pallor of her face
more striking, and emphasizing its mysterious quality. The whole group of young faces, crowded together by the window, and lit
up by the unsympathetic light, had something characteristic and unusual
in its aspect, that might have excited curiosity. "Tell us the story of the garret, Hadria," said Austin, the youngest
brother, a handsome boy of twelve, with curling brown hair and blue
eyes. "Hadria has told it hundreds of times, and you know it as well as she
does." "But I want to hear it again--about the attack upon the keep, and the
shouting of the men, while the lady was up here starving to death." But Algitha shook her head. "We don't come up here to tell stories, we must get to business." "Will you have the candle, or can you see?" asked Fred, the second
brother, a couple of years younger than Hadria, whom he addressed. His
features were irregular; his short nose and twinkling grey eyes
suggesting a joyous and whimsical temperament. "I think I had better have the candle; my notes are very illegible." Fred drew forth a candle-end from his pocket, stuck it into a
quaint-looking stand of antique steel, much eaten with rust, and set the
candle-end alight. Algitha went into the next room and brought in a couple of chairs. Fred
followed her example till there were enough for the party. They all took
their places, and Hadria, who had been provided with a seat facing them,
and with a rickety wooden table that trembled responsively to her
slightest movement, laid down her notes and surveyed her audience. The
faces stood out strangely, in the lights and shadows of the garret. "Ladies and gentlemen," she began; "on the last occasion on which the
Preposterous Society held its meeting, we had the pleasure of listening
to an able lecture on 'Character' by our respected member Demogorgon"
(the speaker bowed to Ernest, and the audience applauded). "My address
to-night on 'Fate' is designed to contribute further ideas to this
fascinating subject, and to pursue the enquiry more curiously." The audience murmured approval. "We were left at loggerheads, at the end of the last debate. I doubted
Demogorgon's conclusion, while admiring his eloquence. To-night, I will
put before you the view exactly contrary to his. I do not assert that I
hold this contrary view, but I state it as well as I am able, because I
think that it has not been given due consideration." "This will be warm," Fred was heard to murmur with a chuckle, to an
adjacent sister. The speaker looked at her notes. "I will read," she said, "a passage from Emerson, which states very
strikingly the doctrine that I am going to oppose." Hadria held her paper aslant towards the candle-end, which threw a murky
yellow light upon the background of the garret, contrasting oddly with
the thin, clear moonbeams. "'But the soul contains the event that shall befall it, for the event is
only the actualization of its thoughts; and what we pray to ourselves
for is always granted. The event is the print of your form. It fits you
like your skin. What each does is proper to him. Events are the children
of his mind and body.'" Algitha leant forward. The members of the Preposterous Society settled
into attitudes of attention. Hadria said that this was a question that could not fail to be of
peculiar interest to them all, who had their lives before them, to make
or mar. It was an extremely difficult question, for it admitted of no
experiment. One could never go back in life and try another plan. One
could never make sure, by such a test, how much circumstance and how
much innate ideas had to do with one's disposition. Emerson insisted
that man makes his circumstance, and history seemed to support that
theory. How untoward had been, in appearance, the surroundings of those
who had made all the great movements and done all the great deeds of the
world. Let one consider the poverty, persecution, the incessant
discouragement, and often the tragic end of our greatest benefactors. Christ was but one of the host of the crucified. In spite of the theory
which the lecturer had undertaken to champion, she believed that it was
generally those people who had difficult lives who did the beneficent
deeds, and generally those people who were encouraged and comfortable
who went to sleep, or actively dragged down what the thinkers and actors
had piled up. In great things and in small, such was the order of life. "Hear, hear," cried Ernest, "my particular thunder!" "Wait a minute," said the lecturer. "I am going to annihilate you with
your particular thunder." She paused for a moment, and her eyes rested
on the strange white landscape beyond the little group of faces upturned
towards her. "Roughly, we may say that people are divided into two orders: first, the
organizers, the able, those who build, who create cohesion, symmetry,
reason, economy; and, secondly, the destroyers, those who come wandering
idly by, and unfasten, undo, relax, disintegrate all that has been
effected by the force and vigilance of their betters. This distinction
is carried into even the most trivial things of life. Yet without that
organization and coherence, the existence of the destroyers themselves
would become a chaos and a misery." The oak table over which Hadria bent forward towards her audience,
appeared to be applauding this sentiment vigorously. It rocked to and
fro on the uneven floor with great clamour. "Thus," the speaker went on, "these relaxed and derivative people are
living on the strength of the strong. He who is strong must carry with
him, as a perpetual burden, a mass of such pensioners, who are scared
and shocked at his rude individuality; and if he should trip or stumble,
if he should lose his way in the untrodden paths, in seeking new truth
and a broader foundation for the lives of men, then a chorus of censure
goes up from millions of little throats." "Hear, hear!" cried Algitha and Fred, and the table rocked
enthusiastically. "But when the good things are gained for which the upholders have
striven and perhaps given their lives, then there are no more greedy
absorbers of the bounty than these same innumerable little throats." The table led the chorus of assent. "And now," said the lecturer slowly, "consider this in relation to the
point at issue. Emerson asserts that circumstance can always be conquered. But is not circumstance, to a large extent, created by these destroyers,
as I have called them? Has not the strongest soul to count with these,
who weave the web of adverse conditions, whose dead weight has to be
carried, whose work of destruction has to be incessantly repaired? Who
can dare to say 'I am master of my fate,' when he does not know how large
may be the share of the general burden that will fall to him to drag
through life, how great may be the number of these parasites who are
living on the moral capital of their generation? Surely circumstance
consists largely in the inertia, the impenetrability of the destroyers." Ernest shewed signs of restiveness. He shuffled on his chair, made
muttered exclamations. "Presently," said the lecturer reassuringly. "Or put it in another way," she went on. "A man may make a
thing--circumstance included--but he is not a sort of moral spider; he
can't spin it out of his own inside. _He wants something to make it of._
The formative force comes from within, but he must have material, just
as much as a sculptor must have his marble before he can shape his
statue. There is a subtle relation between character and conditions, and
it is this _relation_ that determines Fate. Fate is as the statue of
the sculptor." "That's where Hadria mainly differs from you," said Fred, "you make the
thing absolute; Hadria makes it a matter of relation." "Exactly," assented the lecturer, catching the remark. "Difficulties
need not be really obstructive to the best development of a character or
a power, nor a smooth path always favourable. Obstacles may be of a kind
to stimulate one person and to annihilate another. It is _not_ a
question of relative strength between character and circumstance, as
people are so fond of asserting. That is mere gibberish. It means nothing. The two things cannot be compared, for they are not of the same nature. They can't be reduced to a common denominator." Austin appreciated this illustration, being head of his class for
arithmetic. "We shall never be able to take a reasonable view of this question till
we get rid of that ridiculous phrase, '_If the soul is strong enough, it
can overcome circumstance._' In a room filled with carbonic acid instead
of ordinary air, a giant would succumb as quickly as a dwarf, and his
strength would avail him nothing. Indeed, if there is a difference, it
is in favour of the dwarf." Ernest frowned. This was all high treason against his favourite author. He had given his sister a copy of Emerson's works last Christmas, in the
hope that her views might be enlightened, and _this_ was the disgraceful
use she made of it! "Finally," said Hadria, smiling defiantly at her brother, "let us put
the question shortly thus: Given (say) great artistic power, given also
a conscience and a strong will, is there any combination of circumstances
which might prevent the artistic power (assuming it to be of the highest
order and strength) from developing and displaying itself, so as to meet
with general recognition?" "No," asserted Ernest, and there was a hesitating chorus on his side. "There seem to me to be a thousand chances against it," Hadria
continued. "Artistic power, to begin with, is a sort of weakness in
relation to the everyday world, and so, in some respects, is a nice
conscience. I think Emerson is shockingly unjust. His beaming optimism
is a worship of success disguised under lofty terms. There is nothing
to prove that thousands have not been swamped by maladjustment of
character to circumstance, and I would even go so far as to suggest that
perhaps the very greatest of all are those whom the world has never
known, because the present conditions are inharmonious with the very
noblest and the very highest qualities." No sooner was the last word uttered than the garret became the scene of
the stormiest debate that had ever been recorded in the annals of the
Preposterous Society, an institution that had lately celebrated its
fifth anniversary. Hadria, fired by opposition, declared that the
success of great people was due not simply to their greatness, but to
some smaller and commoner quality which brought them in touch with the
majority, and so gave their greatness a chance. At this, there was such a howl of indignation that Algitha remonstrated. "We shall be heard, if you don't take care," she warned. "My dear Algitha, there are a dozen empty rooms between us and the
inhabited part of the house, not to mention the fact that we are a
storey above everyone except the ghosts, so I think you may compose
yourself." However, the excited voices were hushed a little as the discussion
continued. One of the chief charms of the institution, in the eyes of
the members of the Society, was its secrecy. The family, though united
by ties of warm affection to their parents, did not look for
encouragement from them in this direction. Mr. Fullerton was too
exclusively scientific in his bent of thought, to sympathize with the
kind of speculation in which his children delighted, while their mother
looked with mingled pride and alarm at these outbreaks of individuality
on the part of her daughters, for whom she craved the honours of the
social world. In this out-of-the-way district, society smiled upon
conformity, and glared vindictively at the faintest sign of spontaneous
thinking. Cleverness of execution, as in music, tennis, drawing, was
forgiven, even commended; but originality, though of the mildest sort,
created the same agonizing disturbance in the select circle, as the
sight of a crucifix is wont to produce upon the father of Evil. Yet by
some freak of fortune, the whole family at Dunaghee had shewn obstinate
symptoms of individuality from their childhood, and, what was more
distressing, the worst cases occurred in the girls. In the debate just recorded, that took place on Algitha's twenty-second
birthday, Ernest had been Hadria's principal opponent, but the others
had also taken the field against her. "You have the easier cause to champion," she said, when there was a
momentary lull, "for all your evidences can be pointed to and counted;
whereas mine, poor things--pale hypotheses, nameless peradventures--lie
in forgotten churchyards--unthought of, unthanked, untrumpeted, and all
their tragedy is lost in the everlasting silence." "You will never make people believe in what _might_ have been," said
Algitha. "I don't expect to." Hadria was standing by the window looking out over
the glimmering fields and the shrouded white hills. "Life is as white and
as unsympathetic as this," she said dreamily. "We just dance our reel in
our garret, and then it is all over; and whether we do the steps as our
fancy would have them, or a little otherwise, because of the uneven floor,
or tired feet, or for lack of chance to learn the steps--heavens and earth,
what does it matter?" "Hadria!" exclaimed an astonished chorus. The sentiment was so entirely unlike any that the ardent President of
the Society had ever been known to express before, that brothers and
sisters crowded up to enquire into the cause of the unusual mood. "Oh, it is only the moonlight that has got into my head," she said,
flinging back the cloudy black hair from her brow. Algitha's firm, clear voice vibrated through the room. "But I think it matters very much whether one's task is done well or
ill," she said, "and nobody has taught me to wish to make solid use of
my life so much as you have, Hadria. What possesses you to-night?" "I tell you, the moonlight." "And something else." "Well, it struck me, as I stood there with my head full of what we have
been discussing, that the conditions of a girl's life of our own class
are pleasant enough, but they are stifling, absolutely _stifling_;
and not all the Emersons in the world will convince me to the contrary. Emerson never was a girl!" There was a laugh. "No; but he was a great man," said Ernest. "Then he must have had something of the girl in him!" cried Hadria. "I didn't mean that, but perhaps it is true." "If he had been a girl, he would have known that conditions _do_ count
hideously in one's life. I think that there are more 'destroyers' to be
carried about and pampered in this department of existence than in any
other (material conditions being equal)." "Do you mean that a girl would have more difficulty in bringing her
power to maturity and getting it recognized than a man would have?" asked Fred. "Yes; the odds are too heavy." "A second-rate talent perhaps," Ernest admitted, "but not a really big
one." "I should exactly reverse that statement," said Hadria. "The greater the
power and the finer its quality, the greater the inharmony between the
nature and the conditions; therefore the more powerful the leverage
against it. A small comfortable talent might hold its own, where a
larger one would succumb. That is where I think you make your big
mistake, in forgetting that the greatness of the power may serve to
make the greatness of the obstacles." "So much the better for me then," said Algitha, with a touch of satire;
"for I have no idea of being beaten." She folded her arms in a serene
attitude of determination. "Surely it only wants a little force of will to enable you to occupy
your life in the manner you think best," said Ernest. "That is often impossible for a girl, because prejudice and custom are
against her." "But she ought to despise prejudice and custom," cried the brother,
nobly. "So she often would; but then she has to tear through so many living
ties that restrain her freedom." Algitha drew herself up. "If one is unjustly restrained," she said, "it
is perfectly right to brave the infliction of the sort of pain that
people feel only because they unfairly object to one's liberty of
action." "But what a frightful piece of circumstance _that_ is to encounter,"
cried Hadria, "to have to buy the mere right to one's liberty by cutting
through prejudices that are twined in with the very heart-strings of
those one loves! Ah! _that_ particular obstacle has held many a
woman helpless and suffering, like some wretched insect pinned alive to
a board throughout a miserable lifetime! What would Emerson say to these
cases? That 'Nature magically suits the man to his fortunes by making
these the fruit of his character'? Pooh! I think Nature more often makes
a man's fortunes a veritable shirt of Nessus which burns and clings, and
finally kills him with anguish!" CHAPTER II. Once more the old stronghold of Dunaghee, inured for centuries to the
changes of the elements, received the day's greeting. The hues of dawn
tinged the broad hill pastures, or "airds," as they were called, round
about the Tower of the Winds. No one was abroad yet in the silent lands,
except perhaps a shepherd, tending his flock. The little farmstead of
Craw Gill, that lay at a distance of about a couple of miles down the
valley, on the side of a ravine, was apparently dead asleep. Cruachmore,
the nearest upland farm, could scarcely be seen from the stronghold. The
old tower had been added to, perhaps two hundred years ago; a
rectangular block projecting from the corner of the original building,
and then a second erection at right angles to the first, so as to form
three sides of an irregular courtyard. This arrangement afforded some
shelter from the winds which seldom ceased to blow in these high
regions. The spot had borne the same reputation for centuries, as the
name of the old tower implied. The Tower of the Winds stood desolately, in the midst of a wide-eyed
agricultural country, and was approached only by a sort of farm track
that ran up hill and down dale, in a most erratic course, to the distant
main road. The country was not mountainous, though it lay in a northern district of
Scotland; it was bleak and solitary, with vast bare fields of grass or
corn; and below in the valley, a river that rushed sweeping over its
rough bed, silent where it ran deep, but chattering busily in the
shallows. Here was verdure to one's heart's content; the whole country
being a singular mixture of bleakness on the heights, and woodland
richness in the valleys; bitterly cold in the winter months, when the
light deserted the uplands ridiculously early in the afternoon, leaving
long mysterious hours that held the great silent stretches of field and
hill-side in shadow; a circumstance, which had, perhaps, not been
without its influence in the forming of Hadria's character. She, more
than the others, seemed to have absorbed the spirit of the northern
twilights. It was her custom to wander alone over the broad spaces of
the hills, watching the sun set behind them, the homeward flight of the
birds, the approach of darkness and the rising of the stars. Every
instinct that was born in her with her Celtic blood--which lurked still
in the family to the confounding of its fortunes--was fostered by the
mystery and wildness of her surroundings. Dawn and sunset had peculiar attractions for her. Although the Preposterous Society had not separated until unusually late
on the previous night, the President was up and abroad on this exquisite
morning, summoned by some "message of range and of sweep----" to the
flushing stretches of pasture and the windy hill-side. In spite of the view that Hadria had expounded in her capacity of
lecturer, she had an inner sense that somehow, after all, the will _can_
perform astonishing feats in Fate's despite. Her intellect, rather than
her heart, had opposed the philosophy of Emerson. Her sentiment recoiled
from admitting the possibility of such tragedy as her expressed belief
implied. This morning, the wonder and the grandeur of the dawn supplied
arguments to faith. If the best in human nature were always to be hunted
down and extinguished, if the efforts to rise in the scale of being, to
bring gifts instead of merely absorbing benefits, were only by a rare
combination of chances to escape the doom of annihilation, where was one
to turn to for hope, or for a motive for effort? How could one reconcile
the marvellous beauty of the universe, the miracles of colour, form,
and, above all, of music, with such a chaotic moral condition, and such
unlovely laws in favour of dulness, cowardice, callousness, cruelty? One
aspired to be an upholder and not a destroyer, but if it were a useless
pain and a bootless venture----? Hadria tried to find some proof of the happier philosophy that would
satisfy her intellect, but it refused to be comforted. Yet as she
wandered in the rosy light over the awakening fields, her heart sang
within her. The world was exquisite, life was a rapture! She could take existence in her hands and form and fashion it at her
will, obviously, easily; her strength yearned for the task. Yet all the time, the importunate intellect kept insisting that feeling
was deceptive, that health and youth and the freshness of the morning
spoke in her, and not reason or experience. Feeling was left untouched
nevertheless. It was impossible to stifle the voices that prophesied
golden things. Life was all before her; she was full of vigour and
longing and good will; the world stretched forth as a fair territory,
with magical pathways leading up to dizzy mountain tops. With visions
such as these, the members of the Preposterous Society had fired their
imaginations, and gained impetus for their various efforts and their
various ambitions. Hadria had been among the most hopeful of the party, and had pointed to
the loftier visions, and the more impersonal aims. Circumstance must
give way, compromise was wrong; we had but a short time in this world,
and mere details and prejudices must not be allowed to interfere with
one's right to live to the utmost of one's scope. But it was easier to
state a law than to obey it; easier to inspire others with faith than to
hold fast to it oneself. The time for taking matters in one's own hands had scarcely come. A girl
was so helpless, so tied by custom. One could engage, so far, only in
guerilla warfare with the enemy, who lurked everywhere in ambush, ready
to harass the wayfarers with incessant petty attack. But life _must_
have something more to offer than this--life with its myriad interests,
dramas, mysteries, arts, poetries, delights! By the river, where it had worn for itself a narrow ravine, with steep
rocky sides or "clints," as they were called, several short tunnels or
passages had been cut in places where the rock projected as far as the
bank of the river, which was followed in its windings by a narrow
footway, leading to the farmstead of Craw Gill. In one part, a series of such tunnels, with intervals of open pathway,
occurred in picturesque fashion, causing a singular effect of light and
shade. As Hadria stood admiring the glow of the now fully-risen sun, upon the
wall of rock that rose beyond the opening of the tunnel which she had
just passed through, she heard footsteps advancing along the riverside
path, and guessed that Algitha and Ernest had come to fetch her, or to
join in any absurd project that she might have in view. Although Algitha
was two-and-twenty, and Hadria only a year younger, they were still
guilty at times of wild escapades, with the connivance of their
brothers. Walks or rides at sunrise were ordinary occurrences in the
family, and in summer, bathing in the river was a favourite amusement. "I thought I recognised your footsteps," said Hadria, as the two figures
appeared at the mouth of the tunnel, the low rays of the sun lighting
them up, for a moment, as they turned the sharp bend of the narrow path,
before entering the shadow. A quantity of brown dead leaves were strewn upon the floor of the
rock-passage, blown in by the wind from the pathway at each end, or
perhaps through the opening in the middle of the tunnel that looked out
upon the rushing river. A willow-tree had found footing in the crevice of the rock just outside,
and its branches, thinly decked with pale yellow leaves, dipped into the
water just in front of the opening. When the wind blew off the river it
would sweep the leaves of the willow into the tunnel. "Let's make a bonfire," suggested Ernest. They collected the withered harvest of the winds upon the cavern floor,
in a big brown heap, and then Ernest struck a match and set light to it. Algitha, in a large black cloak, stood over it with a hazel stick--like
a wand--stirring and heaping on the fuel, as the mass began to smoulder
and to send forth a thick white smoke that gradually filled the cavern,
curling up into the rocky roof and swirling round and out by the
square-cut mouth, to be caught there by the slight wind and illumined
by the sun, which poured down upon the soft coils of the smoke, in so
strange a fashion, as to call forth a cry of wonder from the onlookers. Standing in the interval of open pathway between the two rock-passages,
and looking back at the fire lit cavern, with its black shadows and
flickering flame-colours, Hadria was bewildered by what appeared to her
a veritable magic vision, beautiful beyond anything that she had ever
met in dream. She stood still to watch, with a real momentary doubt as
to whether she were awake. The figures, stooping over the burning heap, moved occasionally across
the darkness, looking like a witch and her familiar spirit, who were
conjuring, by uncanny arts, a vision of life, on the strange, white,
clean-cut patch of smoke that was defined by the sunlit entrance to the
tunnel. The witch stirred, and her familiar added fuel, while behind
them the smoke, rising and curdling, formed the mysterious background
of light: opaque, and yet in a state of incessant movement, as of some
white raging fire, thinner and more deadly than any ordinary earthly
element, that seemed to sicken and flicker in the blast of a furnace,
and then rushed upwards, and coiled and rolled across the tunnel's
mouth. Presently, as a puff of wind swept away part of the smoke, a
miraculous tinge of rosy colour appeared, changing, as one caught it,
into gold, and presently to a milky blue, then liquid green, and a
thousand intermediate tints corresponding to the altering density of
the smoke--and then! Hadria caught her breath--the blue and the red
and the gold melted and moved and formed, under the incantation, into
a marvellous vision of distant lands, purple mountains, fair white
cities, and wide kingdoms, so many, so great, that the imagination
staggered at the vastness revealed, and offered, as it seemed, to him
who could grasp and perceive it. Among those blue deeps and faint
innumerable mountain-tops, caught through a soft mist that continually
moved and lifted, thinned and thickened, with changing tints, all the
secrets, all the hopes, all the powers and splendours, of life lay
hidden; and the beauty of the vision was as the essence of poetry and
of music--of all that is lovely in the world of art, and in the world of
the emotions. The question that had been debated so hotly and so often,
as to the relation of the good and the beautiful, art and ethics, seemed
to be answered by this bewildering revelation of sunlit smoke, playing
across the face of a purple-tinted rock, and a few feet of grass-edged
pathway. "Come and see what visions you have conjured up, O witch!" cried Hadria. Algitha gave a startled exclamation, as the smoke thinned and revealed
that bewildering glimpse of distant lands, half seen, as through the
atmosphere of a dream. An exquisite city, with slender towers and
temples, flashed, for a moment, through the mist curtain. "If life is like that," she said at length, drawing a long breath,
"nothing on this earth ought to persuade us to forego it; no one has the
right to hold one back from its possession." "No one," said Hadria; "but everyone will try!" "Let them try," returned Algitha defiantly. CHAPTER III. Ernest and his two sisters walked homeward along the banks of the river,
and thence up by a winding path to the top of the cliffs. It was mild
weather, and they decided to pause in the little temple of classic
design, which some ancient owner of the Drumgarran estate, touched with
a desire for the exquisiteness of Greek outline, had built on a
promontory of the rocks, among rounded masses of wild foliage; a spot
that commanded one of the most beautiful reaches of the river. The scene
had something of classic perfection and serenity. "I admit," said Ernest in response to some remark of one of his sisters,
"I admit that I should not like to stay here during all the best years
of my life, without prospect of widening my experience; only as a matter
of fact, the world is somewhat different from anything that you imagine,
and by no means would you find it all beer and skittles. Your smoke and
sun-vision is not to be trusted." "But think of the pride and joy of being able to speak in that tone of
experience!" exclaimed Hadria mockingly. "One has to pay for experience," said Ernest, shaking his head and
ignoring her taunt. "I think one has to pay more heavily for _in_experience," she said. "Not if one never comes in contact with the world. Girls are protected
from the realities of life so long as they remain at home, and that is
worth something after all." Algitha snorted. "I don't know what you are pleased to call realities,
my dear Ernest, but I can assure you there are plenty of unpleasant
facts, in this protected life of ours." "Nobody can expect to escape unpleasant facts," said Ernest. "Then for heaven's sake, let us purchase with them something worth
having!" Hadria cried. "Hear, hear!" assented Algitha. "Unpleasant facts being a foregone conclusion," Hadria added, "the point
to aim at obviously is _interesting_ facts--and plenty of them." Ernest flicked a pebble off the parapet of the balustrade of the little
temple, and watched it fall, with a silent splash, into the river. "I never met girls before, who wanted to come out of their cotton-wool,"
he observed. "I thought girls loved cotton-wool. They always seem to." "Girls _seem_ an astonishing number of things that they are not,"
said Hadria, "especially to men. A poor benighted man might as well try
to get on to confidential terms with the Sphinx, as to learn the real
thoughts and wishes of a girl." "You two are exceptional, you see," said Ernest. "Oh, _everybody's_ exceptional, if you only knew it!" exclaimed his
sister. "Girls;" she went on to assert, "are stuffed with certain
stereotyped sentiments from their infancy, and when that painful process
is completed, intelligent philosophers come and smile upon the victims,
and point to them as proofs of the intentions of Nature regarding our
sex, admirable examples of the unvarying instincts of the feminine
creature. In fact," Hadria added with a laugh, "it's as if the trainer
of that troop of performing poodles that we saw, the other day, at
Ballochcoil, were to assure the spectators that the amiable animals were
inspired, from birth, by a heaven-implanted yearning to jump through
hoops, and walk about on their hind legs----"

"But there _are_ such things as natural instincts," said Ernest. "There _are_ such things as acquired tricks," returned Hadria. A loud shout, accompanied by the barking of several dogs, announced the
approach of the two younger boys. Boys and dogs had been taking their
morning bath in the river. "You have broken in upon a most interesting discourse," said Ernest. "Hadria was really coming out." This led to a general uproar. When peace was restored, the conversation went on in desultory fashion. Ernest and Hadria fell apart into a more serious talk. These two had
always been "chums," from the time when they used to play at building
houses of bricks on the nursery floor. There was deep and true affection
between them. The day broke into splendour, and the warm rays, rounding the edge of
the eastward rock, poured straight into the little temple. Below and
around on the cliff-sides, the rich foliage of holly and dwarf oak, ivy,
and rowan with its burning berries, was transformed into a mass of warm
colour and shining surfaces. "What always bewilders me," Hadria said, bending over the balustrade
among the ivy, "is the enormous gulf between what _might be_ and what
_is_ in human life. Look at the world--life's most sumptuous stage--and
look at life! The one, splendid, exquisite, varied, generous, rich
beyond description; the other, poor, thin, dull, monotonous, niggard,
distressful--is that necessary?" "But all lives are not like that," objected Fred. "I speak only from my own narrow experience," said Hadria. "Oh, she is thinking, as usual, of that unfortunate Mrs. Gordon!" cried
Ernest. "Of her, and the rest of the average, typical sort of people that I
know," Hadria admitted. "I wish to heaven I had a wider knowledge to
speak from." "If one is to believe what one hears and reads," said Algitha, "life
must be full of sorrow indeed." "But putting aside the big sorrows," said her sister, "the ordinary
every day existence that would be called prosperous, seems to me to be
dull and stupid to a tragic extent." "The Gordons of Drumgarran once more! I confess I can't see anything
particularly tragic there," observed Fred, whose memory recalled troops
of stalwart young persons in flannels, engaged for hours, in sending a
ball from one side of a net to the other. "It is more than tragic; it is disgusting!" cried Hadria with a shiver. Algitha drew herself together. She turned to her eldest brother. "Look here, Ernest; you said just now that girls were shielded from the
realities of life. Yet Mrs. Gordon was handed over by her protectors,
when she was little more than a school-girl, without knowledge, without
any sort of resource or power of facing destiny, to--well, to the
hateful realities of the life that she has led now for over twenty
years. There is nothing to win general sympathy in this case, for Mr.
Gordon is good and kind; but oh, think of the existence that a
'protected,' carefully brought-up girl may be launched into, before she
knows what she is pledged to, or what her ideas of life may be! If
_that_ is what you call protection, for heaven's sake let us remain
defenceless." Fred and Ernest accused their elder sister of having been converted by
Hadria. Algitha, honest and courageous in big things and in small, at
once acknowledged the source of her ideas. Not so long ago, Algitha had
differed from the daughters of the neighbouring houses, rather in force
of character than in sentiment. She had followed the usual aims with unusual success, giving unalloyed
satisfaction to her proud mother. Algitha had taken it as a matter of
course that she would some day marry, and have a house of her own to
reign in. A home, not a husband, was the important matter, and Algitha
had trusted to her attractions to make a good marriage; that is, to
obtain extensive regions for her activities. She craved a roomy stage
for her drama, and obviously there was only one method of obtaining it,
and even that method was but dubious. But Hadria had undermined this
matter of fact, take-things-as-you-find-them view, and set her sister's
pride on the track. That master-passion once aroused in the new
direction, Algitha was ready to defend her dignity as a woman, and as a
human being, to the death. Hadria felt as a magician might feel, who has
conjured up spirits henceforth beyond his control; for obviously, her
sister's whole life would be altered by this change of sentiment, and,
alas, her mother's hopes must be disappointed. The laird of Clarenoc--a
fine property, of which Algitha might have been mistress--had received
polite discouragement, much to his surprise and that of the
neighbourhood. Even Ernest, who was by no means worldly, questioned the
wisdom of his sister's decision; for the laird of Clarenoc was a good
fellow, and after all, let them talk as they liked, what was to become
of a girl unless she married? This morning's conversation therefore
touched closely on burning topics. "Mrs. Gordon's people meant it for the best, I suppose," Ernest
observed, "when they married her to a good man with a fine property." "That is just the ghastly part of it!" cried Hadria; "from ferocious
enemies a girl might defend herself, but what is she to do against the
united efforts of devoted friends?" "I don't suppose Mrs. Gordon is aware that she is so ill-used!" "Another gruesome circumstance!" cried Hadria, with a half laugh; "for
that only proves that her life has dulled her self-respect, and
destroyed her pride." "But, my dear, every woman is in the same predicament, if predicament it
be!" "What a consolation!" Hadria exclaimed, "_all_ the foxes have lost
their tails!" "It may be illogical, but people generally are immensely comforted by
that circumstance." The conversation waxed warmer and more personal. Fred took a
conservative view of the question. He thought that there were instincts
implanted by Nature, which inspired Mrs. Gordon with a yearning for
exactly the sort of existence that fate had assigned to her. Algitha,
who had been the recipient of that lady's tragic confidences, broke into
a shout of laughter. "Well, Harold Wilkins says----"

This name was also greeted with a yell of derision. "I don't see why you girls always scoff so at Harold Wilkins," said
Fred, slightly aggrieved, "he is generally thought a lot of by girls. All Mrs. Gordon's sisters adore him." "He needs no further worshippers," said Hadria. Fred was asked to repeat the words of Harold Wilkins, but to soften them
down if too severe. "He laughs at your pet ideas," said Fred ruthlessly. "Break it gently, Fred, gently." "He thinks that a true woman esteems it her highest privilege to--well,
to be like Mrs. Gordon." "Wise and learned youth!" cried Hadria, resting her chin on her hand,
and peering up into the blue sky, above the temple. "_Fool!_" exclaimed Algitha. "He says," continued Fred, determined not to spare those who were so
overbearing in their scorn, "he says that girls who have ideas like
yours will never get any fellow to marry them." Laughter loud and long greeted this announcement. "Laughter," observed Fred, when he could make himself heard, "is among
the simplest forms of argument. Does this merry outburst imply that you
don't care a button whether you are able to get some one to marry you or
not?" "It does," said Algitha. "Well, so I said to Wilkins, as a matter of fact, with my nose in the air,
on your behalf, and Wilkins replied, 'Oh, it's all very well while girls
are young and good-looking to be so high and mighty, but some day, when
they are left out in the cold, and all their friends married, they may
sing a different tune.' Feeling there was something in this remark,"
Fred continued, "I raised my nose two inches higher, and adopted the
argument that _I_ also resort to _in extremis_. I laughed. 'Well, my dear fellow,' Wilkins observed calmly, 'I mean no offence, but
what on earth is a girl to do with herself if she _doesn't_ marry?'" "What did you reply?" asked Ernest with curiosity. "Oh, I said that was an unimportant detail, and changed the subject." Algitha was still scornful, but Hadria looked meditative. "Harold Wilkins has a practical mind," she observed. "After all, he is
right, when you come to consider it." "_Hadria!_" remonstrated her sister, in dismay. "We may as well be candid," said Hadria. "There _is_ uncommonly little
that a girl can do (or rather that people will let her do) unless she
marries, and that is why she so often does marry as a mere matter of
business. But I wish Harold Wilkins would remember that fact, instead of
insisting that it is our inherent and particular nature that urges us,
one and all, to the career of Mrs. Gordon." Algitha was obviously growing more and more ruffled. Fred tried in vain
to soothe her feelings. He joked, but she refused to see the point. She
would not admit that Harold Wilkins had facts on his side. "If one simply made up one's mind to walk through all the hampering
circumstances, who or what could stop one?" she asked. "Algitha has evidently got some desperate plan in her head for making
mincemeat of circumstances," cried Fred, little guessing that he had
stated the exact truth. "Do you remember that Mrs. Gordon herself waged a losing battle in early
days, incredible as it may appear?" asked Hadria. Algitha nodded slowly, her eyes fixed on the ground. "She did not originally set out with the idea of being a sort of amiable
cow. She once aspired to be quite human; she really did, poor thing!" "Then why didn't she do it?" asked Algitha contemptuously. "Instead of _doing_ a thing, she had to be perpetually struggling for
the chance to do it, which she never achieved, and so she was submerged. That seems to be the fatality in a woman's life." "Well, there is one thing I am very sure of," announced Algitha, leaning
majestically against a column of the temple, and looking like a
beautiful Greek maiden, in her simple gown, "I do not intend to be a
cow. I do not mean to fight a losing battle. I will not wait at home
meekly, till some fool holds out his sceptre to me." All eyes turned to her, in astonishment. "But what are you going to do?" asked a chorus of voices. Hadria's was
not among them, for she knew what was coming. The debate of last night,
and this morning's discussion, had evidently brought to a climax a
project that Algitha had long had in her mind, but had hesitated to
carry out, on account of the distress that it would cause to her mother. Algitha's eyes glittered, and her colour rose. "I am not going to be hawked about the county till I am disposed of. It
does not console me in the least, that _all_ the foxes are without
tails," she went on, taking short cuts to her meaning, in her
excitement. "I am going to London with Mrs. Trevelyan, to help her in
her work." "By _Jove_!" exclaimed Fred. Ernest whistled. Austin stared, with
open mouth. Having recovered from the first shock of surprise, the family plied
their sister with questions. She said that she had long been thinking of
accepting the post offered her by Mrs. Trevelyan last year, and now she
was resolved. The work was really wise, useful work among the poor,
which Algitha felt she could do well. At home, there was nothing that
she did that the housekeeper could not do better. She felt herself
fretting and growing irritable, for mere want of some active employment. This was utterly absurd, in an overworked world. Hadria had her music
and her study, at any rate, but Algitha had nothing that seemed worth
doing; she did not care to paint indifferently on china; she was a mere
encumbrance--a destroyer, as Hadria put it--while there was so much, so
very much, that waited to be done. The younger sister made no comment. "Next time I meet Harold Wilkins," said Fred, drawing a long breath, "I
will tell him that if a girl does not marry, she can devote herself to
the poor." "Or that she can remain to be the family consolation, eh, Hadria? By
Jove, what a row there will be!" The notion of Hadria in the capacity of the family consolation, created
a shout of laughter. It had always been her function to upset foregone
conclusions, overturn orthodox views, and generally disturb the
conformity of the family attitude. Now the sedate and established
qualities would be expected of her. Hadria must be the stay and hope
of the house! Fred continued to chuckle, at intervals, over the idea. "It _does_ seem to indicate rather a broken-down family!" said Ernest. "I wish one of you boys would undertake the position instead of laughing
at _me_," exclaimed Hadria in mock resentment. "I wish _you_ would go to
eternal tennis-parties, and pay calls, and bills, and write notes, and
do little useless necessary things, more or less all day. I wish _you_
had before you the choice between that existence and the career of Mrs.
Gordon, with the sole chance of escape from either fate, in ruthlessly
trampling upon the bleeding hearts of two beloved parents!" "Thank you kindly," said Fred, "but we infinitely prefer to laugh at you." "Man's eternal reply to woman, admirably paraphrased!" commented Hadria. Everyone was anxious to know when Algitha intended to go to London. Nobody doubted for a moment that she would hold to her purpose; as Fred
said, she was so "beastly obstinate." Algitha had not fixed any time. It would depend on her mother. She
wished to make things as little painful as possible. That it was her
duty to spare her pain altogether by remaining at home, Algitha refused
to admit. She and Hadria had thought out the question from all sides. The work she was going to do was useful, but she did not justify herself
on that ground. She claimed the right to her life and her liberty, apart
from what she intended to do with either. She owed it to her own
conscience alone to make good use of her liberty. "I don't want to pose
as a philanthropist," she added, "though I honestly do desire to be of
service. I want to spread my wings. And why should I not? Nobody turns
pale when Ernest wants to spread _his_. How do I know what life is like,
or how best to use it, if I remain satisfied with my present ignorance? How can I even appreciate what I possess, if I have nothing to compare
it with? Of course, the truly nice and womanly thing to do, is to remain
at home, waiting to be married. I have elected to be _un_womanly." "I wonder how all this will turn out," said Ernest, "whether you won't
regret it some day when it is too late." "Don't people _always_ regret what they do--some day?" asked Hadria. "Perhaps so, especially if they do it sooner than other people." "When are you going to make the announcement at head quarters?" asked
Fred. There was a pause. The colour had left Algitha's cheeks. She answered at
length with an effort--

"I shall speak to mother to-day." CHAPTER IV. Mrs. Fullerton had gone to the study, to consult with her husband on
some matter of domestic importance. It was a long, low-pitched room,
situated in the part of the house that stood at right angles to the
central block, with long, narrow windows looking on to a rough orchard. A few old portraits, very yellow and somewhat grotesque, hung on the
walls; a wood fire burnt on the hob-grate, and beside it stood a vast
arm chair, considerably worn, with depressions shewing where its owner
had been leaning his head, day after day, when he smoked his pipe, or
took his after-dinner nap. The bookshelves were stocked with scientific
works, and some volumes on philosophy of a materialistic character. With
the exception of Robert Burns, not one poet was represented. The owner of the house sat before a big writing-table, which was covered
with papers. His face was that of a hard thinker; the head was fine in
form, the forehead broad and high; the features regular, almost severe. The severity was softened by a genial expression. Mrs. Fullerton, though
also obviously above the average of humanity, shewed signs of incomplete
development. The shape of the head and brow promised many faculties that
the expression of the face did not encourage one to expect. She was
finely built; and carried herself with dignity. When her daughters
accompanied her on a round of calls in the neighbourhood, they expressed
a certain quality in her appearance, in rough and ready terms: "Other
married women always look such fools beside mother!" And they did. Mrs. Fullerton wore her fine black hair brushed neatly over her
forehead; her eyes were large, and keen in expression. The mouth shewed
determination. It was easy to see that this lady had unbounded belief in
her husband's wisdom, except in social matters, for which he cared
nothing. On that point she had to keep her ambitions to herself. In
questions of philosophy, she had imbibed his tenets unmodified, and
though she went regularly every Sunday to the close little Scottish
church at Ballochcoil, she had no more respect than her husband had,
for the doctrines that were preached there. "No doubt it is all superstition and nonsense," she used to say, "but in
this country, one can't afford to fly in the face of prejudice. It would
seriously tell against the girls." "Well, have your own way," Mr. Fullerton would reply, "but I can't see
the use of always bothering about what people will think. What more do
the girls want than a good home and plenty of lawn-tennis? They'll get
husbands fast enough, without your asphyxiating yourself every Sunday
in their interests." In her youth, Mrs. Fullerton had shewn signs of qualities which had
since been submerged. Her husband had influenced her development
profoundly, to the apparent stifling of every native tendency. A few
volumes of poetry, and other works of imagination, bore testimony to
the lost sides of her nature. Mr. Fullerton thought imagination "all nonsense," and his wife had no
doubt he was right, though there was something to be said for one or two
of the poets. The buried impulses had broken out, like a half-smothered
flame, in her children, especially in her younger daughter. Singularly
enough, the mother regarded these qualities, partly inherited from
herself, as erratic and annoying. The memory of her own youth taught her
no sympathy. It was a benumbed sort of life that she led, in her picturesque old
home, whose charm she perceived but dimly with the remnants of her lost
aptitudes. "Picturesque!" Mr. Fullerton used to cry with a snort; "why not say
'unhealthy' and be done with it?" From these native elements of character, modified in so singular a
fashion in the mother's life, the children of this pair had drawn
certain of their peculiarities. The inborn strength and authenticity
of the parents had transmuted itself, in the younger generation, to a
spirit of free enquiry, and an audacity of thought which boded ill for
Mrs. Fullerton's ambitions. The talent in her daughters, from which she
had hoped so much, seemed likely to prove a most dangerous obstacle to
their success. Why was it that clever people were never sensible? The gong sounded for luncheon. Austin put his head in at the door of the
study, to ask if his father would shew him a drop of ditch-water through
the microscope, in the afternoon. "If you will provide the ditch-water, I will provide the microscope,"
promised Mr. Fullerton genially. Luncheon, usually a merry meal at Dunaghee, passed off silently. There
was a sense of oppression in the air. Algitha and her sister made
spasmodic remarks, and there were long pauses. The conversation was
chiefly sustained by the parents and the ever-talkative Fred. The latter had some anecdotes to tell of the ravages made by wasps. "If Buchanan would only adopt my plan of destroying them," said Mr.
Fullerton, "we should soon get rid of the pest." "It's some chemical, isn't it?" asked Mrs. Fullerton. "Oh, no; that's no use at all! Wasps positively enjoy chemicals. What
you do is this----." And then followed a long and minute explanation of
his plan, which had the merit of extreme originality. Mr. Fullerton had his own particular way of doing everything, a piece
of presumption which was naturally resented, with proper spirit, by his
neighbours. He found it an expensive luxury. In the management of the
estate, he had outraged the feelings of every landlord and land-agent
within a radius of many miles, but he gained the affection of his
tenants, and this he seemed to value more than the approval of his
fellow-proprietors. In theory, he stuck out for his privileges; in
practice, he was the friend and brother of the poorest on the estate. In
his mode of farming he was as eccentric as in his method of management. He had taken Croachmore into his own hands, and this devoted farm had
become the subject of a series of drastic scientific experiments, to the
great grief and indignation of his bailiff. Mrs. Fullerton believed implicitly in the value of these experiments,
and so long as her husband tried science only on the farm she had no
misgivings; but, alas, he had lately taken shares in some company, that
was to revolutionize agriculture through an ingenious contrivance for
collecting nitrogen from the atmosphere. Mr. Fullerton was confident
that the new method was to be a gigantic success. But on this point,
his wife uneasily shook her head. She had even tried to persuade Mr.
Fullerton to rid himself of his liability. It was so great, she argued,
and why should one be made anxious? But her husband assured her that she
didn't understand anything about it; women ought not to meddle in
business matters; it was a stupendous discovery, sure to make the
fortunes of the original shareholders. "When once the prejudice against a new thing has been got over," said
the man of science, "you will see----the thing will go like wild-fire." Many years afterwards, these words were remembered by Mrs. Fullerton,
and she bitterly regretted that she had not urged the matter more
strenuously. "Well, Algitha," said her father, wondering at her silence, "how are the
roses getting on? And I hope you have not forgotten the sweet-brier that
you promised to grow for me." "Oh, no, father, the sweet-brier has been ordered," returned Algitha,
without her usual brightness of manner. "Have you a headache?" enquired Mrs. Fullerton. "I hope you have not all
been sitting up talking in Hadria's room, as you are too fond of doing. You have the whole day in which to express your ideas, and I think you
might let the remainder wait over till morning." "We _were_ rather late last night," Algitha confessed. "Pressure of ideas overpowering," added Fred. "When _I_ was young, ideas would never have been tolerated in young
people for a moment," said Mrs. Fullerton, "it would have been considered
a mark of ill-breeding. You may think yourselves lucky to be born at this
end of the century, instead of the other." "Indeed we do!" exclaimed Ernest. "It's getting jolly interesting!" "In some respects, no doubt we have advanced," observed his mother, "but
I confess I don't understand all your modern notions. Everybody seems to
be getting discontented. The poor want to be rich, and the rich want to
be millionaires; men want to do their master's work, and women want to
do men's; everything is topsy-turvy!" "The question is: What constitutes being right side up?" said Ernest. "One can't exactly say what is topsy-turvy till one knows _that_." "When I was young we thought we _did_ know," said Mrs. Fullerton,
"but no doubt we are old-fashioned." When luncheon was over, Mr. Fullerton went to the garden with his
family, according to a time-honoured custom. His love of flowers
sometimes made Hadria wonder whether her father also had been born with
certain instincts, which the accidents of life had stifled or failed to
develop. Terrible was the tyranny of circumstance! What had Emerson been
dreaming of? Mr. Fullerton, with a rose-bud in his button-hole, went off with the
boys for a farming walk. Mrs. Fullerton returned to the house, and the
sisters were left pacing together in the sheltered old garden, between
two rows of gorgeous autumn flowers. Hadria felt sick with dread of the coming interview. Algitha was buoyed up, for the moment, by a strong conviction that she
was in the right. "It can't be fair even for parents to order one's whole life according
to their pleasure," she said. "Other girls submit, I know----"

"And so the world is full of abortive, ambiguous beings, fit for
nothing. The average woman always seem to me to be _muffled_----or
morbid." "That's what _I_ should become if I pottered about here much longer,"
said Algitha--"morbid; and if there is one thing on the face of the
earth that I loathe, it is morbidness." Both sisters were instinctively trying to buttress up Algitha's courage,
by strengthening her position with additional arguments. "Is it fair," Hadria asked, "to summon children into the world, and then
run up bills against them for future payment? Why should one not see the
bearings of the matter?" "In theory one can see them clearly enough; but it is poor comfort when
it comes to practice." "Oh, seeing the bearings of things is _always_ poor comfort!" exclaimed
the younger sister, with sudden vehemence. "Upon my word, I think it is
better, after all, to absorb indiscriminately whatever idiotcy may
happen to be around one, and go with the crowd." "Nonsense!" cried Algitha, who had no sympathy with these passionate
discouragements that alternated, in Hadria, with equally passionate
exaltations. "When you have gone, I will ask Mrs. Gordon to teach me the spirit of
acquiescence, and one of those distracting games--besique or halma, or
some of the other infernal pastimes that heaven decrees for recalcitrant
spirits in need of crushing discipline." "I think I see you!" Algitha exclaimed with a dispirited laugh. "It will be a trial," Hadria admitted; "but it is said that suffering
strengthens the character. You may look forward before long, to claiming
as sister a creature of iron purpose." "I wonder, I wonder," cried Algitha, bending her fine head; "we owe
everything to her." "I know we do. It's of no use disguising the unpleasant side of the
matter. A mother disappointed in her children must be a desperately
unhappy woman. She has nothing left; for has she not resigned everything
for them? But is sacrifice for ever to follow on sacrifice? Is life to
go rolling after life, like the cheeses that the idiot in the fable sent
running downhill, the one to fetch the other back?" "Yes, for ever," said Algitha, "until a few dare to break through the
tradition, and then everyone will wonder at its folly. If only I could
talk the matter over, in a friendly spirit, with mother, but she won't
let me. Ah! if it were not that one is born with feelings and energies
and ambitions of one's own, parents might treat one as a showman treats
his marionettes, and we should all be charmed to lie prone on our backs,
or to dance as may be convenient to our creators. But, as it is, the
life of a marionette--however affectionate the wire-pullers--does become
monotonous after a time." "As to that," said the younger sister, with a little raising of the
brows, as if half shrinking from what she meant to say, "I think most
parents regard their children with such favourable eyes, not so much
because they are _they_ as because they are _theirs_." The sisters paced the length of the garden without speaking. Then Hadria
came to a standstill at the sun-dial, at the crossing of the paths, and
began absently to trace the figures of the hours, with the stalk of a
rose. "After all," she said, "parents are presumably not actuated by
humanitarian motives in bringing one into this wild world. They don't
even profess to have felt an unselfish desire to see one enjoying
oneself at their expense (though, as a matter of fact, what enjoyment
one has generally _is_ at their expense). People are always
enthusiastically congratulated on the arrival of a new child, though it
be the fourteenth, and the income two hundred a year! This seems to
point to a pronounced taste for new children, regardless of the
consequences!" "Oh, of course," said Algitha, "it's one of the canons! Women, above
all, are expected to jubilate at all costs. And I think most of them do,
more or less sincerely." "Very well then," cried Hadria, "it is universally admitted that
children are summoned into the world to gratify parental instincts. Yet
the parents throw all the onus of existence, after all, upon the children,
and make _them_ pay for it, and apologise for it, and justify it by
a thousand sacrifices and an ever-flowing gratitude." "I am quite ready to give gratitude and sacrifice too," said Algitha,
"but I don't feel that I ought to sacrifice _everything_ to an idea
that seems to me wrong. Surely a human being has a right to his own life. If he has not that, what, in heaven's name, _has_ he?" "Anything but that!" cried Hadria. *       *       *       *       *

While the momentous interview was going on, Hadria walked restlessly up
and down the garden, feverishly waiting. The borders were brilliant with
vast sunflowers, white lilies, and blazing "red-hot pokers" tangled
together in splendid profusion, a very type of richness and glory of
life. Such was the sort of existence that Hadria claimed from Fate. Her
eyes turned to the bare, forlorn hills that even the August sunshine
could not conjure into sumptuousness, and there she saw the threatened
reality. When at last Algitha's fine figure appeared at the further end of the
path, Hadria hastened forward and took her sister's arm. "It was worse than I had feared," Algitha said, with a quiver in her
voice. "I _know_ I am right, and yet it seems almost more than I am
equal for. When I told mother, she turned deadly white, and I thought,
for a moment, that she was going to faint. Let's sit down on this
seat." "Oh, it was horrible, Hadria! Mother must have been cherishing hopes
about us, in a way that I don't think she quite knew herself. After that
first moment of wretchedness, she flew into a passion of rage--that
dreadful, tearing anger that people only feel when something of
themselves is being wrenched away from them. She said that her children
were all bad and unnatural; that she had spent her whole life in their
interests; that if it had not been for her, we should all of us have
grown up without education or accomplishments, or looks, or anything
else; that she watched over us incessantly when we were little children,
denying herself, spending her youth in devotion to us, when she might
have gone into the world, and had some brightness and pleasure. If we
imagined that she had never felt the dulness of her life, and never
longed to go about and see people and things, we were much mistaken. But
she had renounced everything she cared for, from her girlhood--she was
scarcely older than I when her sacrifices began--and now her children
gave no consideration to her; they were ready to scatter themselves
hither and thither without a thought of her, or her wishes. They even
talked scoffingly of the kind of life that she had led for _them_--for
_them_, she repeated bitterly." Hadria's face had clouded. "Truly parents must have a bad time of it!" she exclaimed, "but does it
really console them that their children should have a bad time of it
too?" Algitha was trembling and very pale. "Mother says I shall ruin my life by this fad. What real good am I going
to do? She says it is absurd the way we talk of things we know nothing
about." "But she won't let us know about things; one must talk about
_some_thing!" cried Hadria with a dispirited laugh. "She says she has experience of life, and we are ignorant of it. I
reminded her that our ignorance was not exactly our fault." "Ah! precisely. Parents throw their children's ignorance in their teeth,
having taken precious good care to prevent their knowing anything. I can't
understand parents; they must have been young themselves once. Yet they
seem to have forgotten all about it. They keep us hoodwinked and infantile,
and then launch us headlong into life, with all its problems to meet, and
all momentous decisions made for us, past hope of undoing." Hadria rose
restlessly in her excitement. "Surely no creature was ever dealt with so
insanely as the well-brought-up girl! Surely no well-wisher so sincere as
the average parent ever ill-treated his charge so preposterously." Again there was a long silence, filled with painful thought. "One begins
to understand a little, why women do things that one despises, and why
the proudest of them so often submit to absolute indignity. You remember
when Mrs. Arbuthnot and----"

"Ah, don't!" cried Algitha, flushing. "_Nothing_ ought to induce a
woman to endure that." "H'm----I suspect the world that we know nothing about, Algitha, has
ways and means of applying the pressure such as you and I scarcely dream
of." Hadria spoke with half-closed eyes that seemed to see deep and far. "I have read and heard things that have almost taken my breath away! I
feel as if I could _kill_ every man who acquiesces in the present
order of things. It is an insult to every woman alive!" In Hadria's room that night, Algitha finally decided to delay her going
for another six months, hoping by that time that her mother would have
grown used to the idea, and less opposed to it. Mr. Fullerton dismissed
it, as obviously absurd. But this high-handed treatment roused all the
determination that Algitha had inherited from her father. The six months
had to be extended, in order to procure funds. Algitha had a small
income of her own, left her by her godmother, Miss Fortescue. She put
aside this, for her purpose. Further delay, through Mrs. Trevelyan,
brought the season round again to autumn, before Algitha was able to
make her final preparations for departure. "Do try and reconcile them to the idea," she said to her sister, as they
stood on the platform of Ballochcoil station, very white and
wretched-looking. "It breaks my heart to see father look so fixed and angry, and mother so
miserable. I am not going away for ever. Dear me, a day's journey will
bring me back, at any time." "I'll do my best," said Hadria, "here's your train; what a clumsy
instrument of fate it does look!" There was not much time for farewells. In a few minutes the train was
steaming out of the station. A solitary figure stood on the platform,
watching the monster curving and diminishing along the line, with its
white smoke soaring merrily into the air, in great rolling masses, that
melted, as if by some incantation, from thick, snow-like whiteness to
rapid annihilation. CHAPTER V.


As Hadria drove over the winding upland road back to her home, her
thoughts followed her sister into her new existence, and then turned
wistfully backwards to the days that had been marked off into the past
by Algitha's departure. How bright and eager and hopeful they had all
been, how full of enthusiasm and generous ambitions! Even as they talked
of battle, they stretched forth their hands for the crown of victory. At the last meeting of the Preposterous Society, Ernest had repeated a
poem of his favourite Emerson, called _Days_, and the poem, which
was familiar to Hadria, sounded in her memory, as the pony trotted merrily
along the well-known homeward way. "Daughters of Time, the hypocritic Days,
           Muffled and dumb, like barefoot Dervishes,
           And marching single in an endless file,
           Bring diadems and faggots in their hands. To each they offer gifts after his will,
           Bread, kingdoms, stars, and sky that holds them all. I, in my pleached garden, watched the pomp,
           Forgot my morning wishes, hastily
           Took a few herbs and apples, and the Day
           Turned and departed silent. I, too late,
           Under her solemn fillet saw the scorn." In spite of Hadria's memorable lecture of a year ago, it was still the
orthodox creed of the Society, that Circumstance is the handmaid of the
Will; that one can demand of one's days "bread, kingdoms, stars, or
sky," and that the Days will obediently produce the objects desired. If
one has but the spirit that can soar high enough to really be resolved
upon stars, or the ambition sufficiently vaulting to be determined on
kingdoms, then--so ran the dogma--stars and kingdoms would be
forthcoming, though obstacles were never so determined. No member except
Hadria had ever dreamt of insinuating that one might have a very
pronounced taste for stars and kingdoms--nay, a taste so dominant that
life would be worthless unless they were achieved--yet might be forced,
by the might of events, to forego them. Hadria's own heresy had been of
the head rather than of the heart. But to-day, feeling began to share
the scepticism of the intellect. What if one's stars and kingdoms lay on the further side of a crime or a
cruelty? What then was left but to gather up one's herbs and apples, and bear, as
best one might, the scorn of the unjust Days? Hadria cast about in her mind for a method of utilizing to the best
advantage possible, the means at her disposal: to force circumstance to
yield a harvest to her will. To be the family consolation meant no light
task, for Mrs. Fullerton was exacting by nature: she had given much, and
she expected much in return. Her logic was somewhat faulty, but that
could not be gracefully pointed out to her by her daughter. Having
allowed her own abilities to decay, Mrs. Fullerton had developed an
extraordinary power of interfering with the employment of the abilities
of others. Hadria had rather underrated than exaggerated this
difficulty. Her mother would keep her for hours, discussing a trivial
point of domestic business, giving elaborate directions about it, only
to do it herself in the end. She spent her whole life in trifles of this
kind, or over social matters. Everything was done cumbrously, with an
incredible amount of toil and consideration, and without any noticeable
results. Hadria, fighting against a multitude of harassing little
difficulties, struggled to turn the long winter months to some use. But
Mrs. Fullerton broke the good serviceable time into jagged fragments. "I really can't see," said the mother, when the daughter proposed to set
apart certain hours for household duties, and to have other portions of
the day to herself, "I really can't see why a girl's little occupations
should be treated with so much consideration. However, I have no wish
for grudging assistance." Hadria's temper was far indeed from perfect, and painful scenes often
occurred. But as a rule, she would afterwards be seized with a fit of
remorse, knowing that her mother was suffering bitterly from her keen
disappointment about Algitha. The failure of a life-long hope must try
the endurance of the bravest. Mrs. Fullerton, seeing that Hadria was
more patient, quickly took advantage of the favourable moment, with a
rapid instinct that had often done her good service in the management
of a niggard destiny. The valuable mood must not be allowed to die
fruitless. The elder girl's defection thus became, to the mother, a sort
of investment, bearing interest of docility in the younger. Because the
heartless Algitha had left home, it seemed to Mrs. Fullerton that the
very least that Hadria could do, was to carry out her mother's lightest
wish. And so the weeks went by, in dreary, troublous fashion, cut into a
hundred little barren segments. The mind had no space, or stretch, or
solitude. It was incessantly harassed, and its impetus was perpetually
checked. But Hadria hoped on. This could not last for ever. Some day,
doubtless, if she sank not in spirit, the stars and the kingdoms would
come. Meanwhile, the position of affairs was decidedly ridiculous. She was
here as the family consolation, and nobody seemed to be consoled! Her
efforts had been sincere and even enthusiastic, but the boys only
laughed at her, in this role, and nobody was apparently in the least
gratified (except those imps of boys!). For a long time, Mrs. Fullerton seemed to be oblivious of her daughter's
efforts, but one day, when they had been talking about Algitha, the
mother said: "Your father and I now look to you, Hadria. I do think that
you are beginning to feel a little what your duty is. If _you_ also
were to turn deserter in our old age, I think it would kill us." Hadria felt a thrill of horror. The network of Fate seemed to be fast
closing round her. The temporary was to become fixed. She must act all
her days according to the conviction of others, or her parents would die
of grief! When she went to the hills that afternoon, she felt as if she must walk
on and on into the dreamy distance, away from all these toils and
claims, away into the unknown world and never return. But, alas! the
night descended and return she must. These wild impulses could never be
followed. The day had been peculiarly harassing and cut up; some neighbours had
been to afternoon tea and tennis, and the sight of their faces and the
sound of their talk had caused, in Hadria, an unutterable depression. The light, conventional phrases rang in her ears still, the expression
of the faces haunted her, and into her heart crept a chill that benumbed
every wish and hope and faith that she had ever cherished. She sat up late into the night. Since freedom and solitude could not be
had by day, the nights were often her sole opportunity. At such times
she would work out her musical ideas, which in the dead silence of the
house were brought forth plentifully. These, from her point of view,
were the fruitful hours of the twenty-four. Thoughts would throng the
darkness like swarms of living things. Hadria's mood found expression to-night in a singular and most
melancholy composition. She called it _Futility_. It was unlike anything that she had ever done before, and she felt that
it shewed an access of musical power. She dreamt an absurd dream: That she was herself one of those girls with
the high pattering accents, playing tennis without ceasing and with
apparent cheerfulness; talking just as they had talked, and about just
the same things; and all the time, a vast circle of shadowy forms stood
watching, beckoning, and exhorting and warning, and turning away, at
last, in sorrowful contempt, because she preferred to spend her youth
eternally in futilities. And then they all slowly drifted by with sad
eyes fixed on her, and she was still left playing, playing. And it
seemed as if whole weeks passed in that way, and she grew mortally
tired, but some power prevented her from resting. The evil spell held
her enthralled. Always cheerful, always polite and agreeable, she
continued her task, finding herself growing accustomed to it at last,
and duly resigned to the necessity, wearisome though it was. Then all
hope that the game would ever cease went away, and she played on,
mechanically, but always with that same polite cheerfulness, as of
afternoon calls. She would not for the world admit that she was tired. But she was so tired that existence became a torture to her, and her
heart seemed about to break with the intolerable strain--when she woke
up with a start, and found herself lying in a constrained attitude,
half-choked by the bed-clothes. She did not see the comic side of the dream till next morning, when she
told it at breakfast for the benefit of the family. As Hadria was an ardent tennis-player, it struck her brethren as a
particularly inappropriate form of nightmare. Hadria, at this time, went frequently with her father on his farming
walks, as he liked to have one or more of the family with him. She
enjoyed these walks, for Mr. Fullerton would talk about philosophy and
science, often of the most abstruse and entrancing kind. His children
were devoted to him. During these expeditions, they always vied with one
another to ferret out the most absurd story to tell him, he being held
as conqueror who made their father laugh most heartily. Sometimes they
all went in a body, armed with wild stories; and occasionally, across
the open fields, a row of eccentric-looking figures might be seen,
struggling in the grip of hilarious paroxysms; Mr. Fullerton doubled up
in the middle of a turnip-field, perhaps, with his family in contortions
round him. The air of the hills seemed to run to their heads, like wine. Roulades of laughter, hearty guffaws, might have been heard for
surprising distances, much to the astonishment of the sober labourers
bending over their toil. Ernest had to go back to college; Fred and Austin to school. The house
seemed very quiet and sad after the boys left, and Hadria missed her
sister more and more, as time went on. Algitha wrote most happily. "With all its drawbacks, this existence of hard work (yet not too hard)
suits me exactly. It uses up my energies; yet, in spite of the really
busy life I lead, I literally have more leisure than I used to have at
home, where all through the day, there was some little detail to be
attended to, some call to make, some convention to offer incense to,
some prejudice to respect. Here, once my day's work is over, it _is_
over, and I have good solid hours of leisure. I feel that I have earned
those hours when they come; also that I have earned a right to my keep,
as Wilfrid Burton, the socialist, puts it somewhat crudely. When I go to
bed at night, I can say: 'Because of me, this day, heavy hearts have
been made a little lighter.' I hear all sorts of opinions, and see all
sorts of people. I never was so happy in my life." It was Hadria's habit still to take solitary rambles over the country. A passionate lover of Nature, she found endless pleasure in its
ever-changing aspects. Yet of late, a new feeling had begun to mutter
angrily within her: a resentment against these familiar sights and
sounds, because they were the boundaries of her horizon. She hated the
line of the round breezy hills where the row of fir-trees stood against
the sky, because that was the edge of her world, and she wanted to see
what was beyond. She must and would see what was beyond, some day. Her
hope was always vague; for if she dared to wonder how the curtain of
life was to be lifted, she had to face the fact that there was no
reasonable prospect of such a lifting. Still, the utter horror of living
on always, in this fashion, seemed to prove it impossible. On one dim afternoon, when the sun was descending, Hadria's solitary
figure was noticed by a white-haired lady, presumably a tourist, who had
stopped to ask a question of some farm labourers, working in a field. She ceased to listen to the information, on the subject of Dunaghee,
that was given to her in a broad Scottish dialect. The whole scene,
which an instant before had impressed her as one of beauty and peace,
suddenly focussed itself round the dark figure, and grew sinister in its
aspect. At that moment, nothing would have persuaded the onlooker that
the hastening figure was not hastening towards misfortune. A woman of impulse, she set off in purposeless pursuit. Hadria's pace
was very rapid; she was trying to outrun thought. It was impossible to
live without hope, yet hope, in this forlorn land, was growing faint
and tired. Her pursuer was a remarkable-looking woman, no longer young, with her
prematurely white hair drawn up from her brow with a proud sweep that
suited well her sharply defined features and her air of defiance. She
was carelessly dressed after the prevailing fashion, and gave the
impression of not having her life successfully in hand, but rather of
being driven by it, as by a blustering wind, against her inclination. The impression which had seized her, a moment ago, deepened as she went. Something in the scene and the hastening figure roused a sense of dread. With her, an impression was like a spark to gunpowder. Her imagination
blazed up. Life, in its most tragic aspect, seemed before her in the
lonely scene, with the lonely figure, moving, as if in pursuit of a lost
hope, towards the setting sun. If Hadria had not paused on the brow of the hill, it is unlikely that
she would have been overtaken, but that pause decided the matter. The
stranger seemed suddenly to hesitate, wondering, apparently, what she
had done this eccentric thing for. Hadria, feeling a presence behind her, turned nervously round and gave
a slight start. It was so rare to meet anybody on these lonely hills, that the
apparition of a striking-looking woman with white hair, dark eyes, and
a strange exalted sort of expression, gave a shock of surprise. As the lady had stopped short, Hadria supposed that she had lost her
way, and wished to make some enquiries. "Can I direct you, or give you any assistance?" she asked, after a
second's pause. "Oh, thank you, you are very kind. I have come over from Ballochcoil to
explore the country. I have been trying to find out the history of the
old houses of the district. Could you tell me, by the way, anything
about that house with the square tower at the end; I have been loitering
round it half the afternoon. And I would have given anything to know its
history, and what it is like inside." "Well, I can help you there, for that old house is my home. If you have
time to come with me now, I will show you all over it," said Hadria,
impulsively. "That is too tempting an offer. And yet I really don't like to intrude
in this way. I am a perfect stranger to you and--your parents I
suppose?" "They will be delighted," Hadria assured her new acquaintance, somewhat
imprudently. "Well, I can't resist the temptation," said the latter, and they walked
on together. Hadria related what she knew about the history of the house. Very scanty
records had survived. It had obviously been one of the old Scottish
strongholds, built in the lawless days when the country was plunged in
feuds and chieftains lived on plunder. A few traditions lingered about
it: among them that of a chief who had carried off, by force, the
daughter of his bitterest enemy, in revenge for some deed of treachery. He had tortured her with insolent courtship, and then starved her to
death in a garret in the tower, while her father and his followers
assaulted its thick walls in vain. "The tradition is, that on stormy nights one can still hear the sound of
the attack, the shouts of the men and the father's imprecations." "A horrible story!" "When people say the world has not progressed, I always think of that
story, and remember that such crimes were common in those days," Hadria
remarked. "I doubt if we are really less ferocious to-day," the other said; "our
ferocity is directed against the weakest, now as then, but there are
happily not so many weak, so we get the credit of being juster, without
expense. As a matter of fact, our opportunities are less, and so we make
a virtue of necessity--with a vengeance!" Hadria looked at her companion with startled interest. "Will you tell me
to whom I have the pleasure of speaking?" the lady asked. "My name is Fullerton--Hadria Fullerton." "Thank you. And here is my card, at least I think it is. Oh, no, that is
a friend's card! How very tiresome! I am reduced to pronouncing my own
name--Miss Du Prel, Valeria Du Prel; you may know it." Hadria came to a sudden standstill. She might know it! she might indeed. Valeria Du Prel had long been to her a name to swear by. "Miss Du Prel! Is that--are you--may I ask, are you the writer of those
wonderful books?" Miss Du Prel gave a gratified smile. "I am glad they please you." "Ah! if you could guess how I have longed to know you. I simply can't
believe it." "And so my work has really given you pleasure?" "Pleasure! It has given me hope, it has given me courage, it has given
me faith in all that is worth living for. It was an epoch in my life
when I first read your _Parthenia_." Miss Du Prel seemed so genuinely pleased by this enthusiasm that Hadria
was surprised. "I have plenty of compliments, but very seldom a word that makes me
feel that I have spoken to the heart. I feel as if I had called in the
darkness and had no response, or like one who has cried from the
house-tops to a city of the dead." "And I so often thought of writing to you, but did not like to intrude,"
cried Hadria. "Ah! if you only _had_ written to me!" Miss Du Prel exclaimed. Hadria gazed incredulously at the familiar scene, as they approached the
back of the house, with its round tower and its confusion of picturesque,
lichen-covered roofs. An irregular circle of stately trees stood as
sentinels round the stronghold. After all, something did happen, once in a while, in this remote corner
of the universe, whose name, Hadria used to think, had been erased from
the book of Destiny. She was perhaps vaguely disappointed to find that
the author of _Parthenia_ wore ordinary human serge, and a cape cut
after the fashion of any other person's cape. Still, she had no idea
what supersensuous material she could reasonably have demanded of her
heroine (unless it were the mythic "bombazine" that Ernest used to talk
about, in his ignorant efforts to describe female apparel), or what
transcendental form of cape would have satisfied her imagination. "You have a lovely home," said Valeria Du Prel, "you must be very happy
here." "Would you be happy here?" "Well, of course that would depend. I am, I fear, too roving by nature
to care to stay long in one place. Still I envy girls their home-life in
the country; it is so healthy and free." Hadria, without answering, led her companion round the flank of the
tower, and up to the front door. It was situated in the angle of the
wings, a sheltered nook, hospitably careful of the guest, whom the winds
of the uplands were disposed to treat but roughly. Hadria and her companion entered a little panelled hall, whence a flight
of broad stairs with stout wooden balusters, of quaint design, led to
the first floor. The visitor was charmed with the quiet old rooms, especially with
Hadria's bedroom in the tower, whose windows were so deep-set that they
had to be approached through a little tunnel cut out of the thickness of
the wall. The windows looked on to the orchard at the back, and in
front over the hills. Miss Du Prel was taken to see the scene of the
tragedy, and the meeting-room of the Preposterous Society. "You must see the drawing-room," said Hadria. She opened a door as she spoke, and ushered her visitor into a large,
finely-proportioned room with three tall windows of stately form,
divided into oblong panes, against which vagrant sprays of ivy were
gently tapping. This room was also panelled with painted wood; its character was quiet
and stately and reposeful. Yet one felt that many human lives had been
lived in it. It was full of the sentiment of the past, from the old
prints and portraits on the walls, to the delicate outlines of the
wooden mantel-piece, with its finely wrought urns and garlands. Before this mantel-piece, with the firelight flickering in her face, sat
Mrs. Fullerton, working at a large piece of embroidery. For the first time, Hadria hesitated. "Mother," she said, "this is Miss
Du Prel. We met out on the hills this afternoon, and I have brought her
home to see the house, which she admires very much." Mrs. Fullerton had looked up in astonishment, at this incursion into her
very sanctuary, of a stranger met at haphazard on the hills. Hadria
wheeled up an easy-chair for the visitor. "I fear Miss Du Prel will not find much to see in the old house," said
Mrs. Fullerton, whose manner had grown rigid, partly because she was
shy, partly because she was annoyed with Hadria for her impulsive
conduct, and largely because she disliked the idea of a literary
acquaintance for her daughter, who was quite extraordinary enough as it
was. "We have been all over the house," said Hadria hastily, with an anxious
glance at Miss Du Prel, whom she half expected to rise and walk out of
the room. It must surely be the first time in her life that her presence
had not been received as an honour! "It is all very old and shabby," said Mrs. Fullerton. "I hope you will
take some tea; if you have walked far to-day, you must be cold and in
need of something to eat." "Oh no, no, thank you," returned the visitor; "I ought to be getting
back to Ballochcoil to-night." "To Ballochcoil!" exclaimed mother and daughter in simultaneous dismay. "But it is nearly seven miles off, and the sun is down. You can't get
back to-night on foot." "Dear me, can I not? I suppose I forgot all about getting back, in the
interest of the scenery." "What an extraordinary person!" thought Mrs. Fullerton. Miss Du Prel glanced helplessly at Hadria; rising then and looking out
of the window at the dusk, which had come on so rapidly. "Dear me, how
dark it has grown! Still I think I can walk it, or perhaps I can get a
fly at some inn on the way." "Can we offer you a carriage?" asked Mrs. Fullerton. "Oh no, thank you; that is quite unnecessary. I have already intruded
far too long; I shall wend my way back, or what might perhaps be better,
I could get a lodging at the farmhouse down the road. I am told that
they put travellers up sometimes." Miss Du Prel hurried off, evidently chilled by Mrs. Fullerton's freezing
courtesy. Hadria, disregarding her mother's glance of admonition,
accompanied the visitor to the farm of Craw Gill, having first given
directions to old Maggie to put together a few things that Miss Du Prel
would require for the night. Hadria's popularity at the farm, secured
her new friend a welcome. Mrs. McEwen was a fine example of the best
type of Scottish character; warm of heart, honest of purpose, and full
of a certain unconscious poetry, and a dignity that lingers still in
districts where the railway whistle is not too often heard. Miss Du Prel
seemed to nestle up to the good woman, as a child to its mother after
some scaring adventure. Mrs. McEwen was recommending a hot water-bottle
and gruel in case of a chill, when Hadria wended her way homeward to
brave her mother's wrath. CHAPTER VI. "I cannot make you realize that you are an ignorant girl who knows
nothing of the world, and that it is necessary you should accept my
experience, and condescend to be guided by my wishes. You put me in a
most unpleasant position this afternoon, forcing me to receive a person
whom I have never been introduced to, or heard of----"

"Valeria Du Prel has been heard of throughout the English-speaking
world," said Hadria rhetorically. "So much the worse," retorted Mrs. Fullerton. "No nicely brought up
woman is ever heard of outside her own circle." Hadria recalled a similar sentiment among the ancient Greeks, and
thought how hard an old idea dies. "She might have been some awful person, some unprincipled adventuress,
and that I believe is what she is. What was she prowling about the back
of our house for, I should like to know?" "I suspect she wanted to steal chickens or something," Hadria was goaded
into suggesting, and the interview ended painfully. When Hadria went to Craw Gill, next morning, to enquire for Miss Du
Prel, Mrs. McEwen said that the visitor had breakfasted in bed. The
farmer's wife also informed Miss Fullerton that the lady had decided to
stay on at Craw Gill, for some time. She had been looking out for a
retreat of the kind. "She seems a nice-like body," said Mrs. McEwen, "and I see no objection
to the arrangement." Hadria's heart beat faster. Could it be possible that Valeria du Prel
was to be a near neighbour? It seemed too good to be true! When Miss Du Prel came down in her walking garments, she greeted Hadria
with a certain absence of mind, which smote chill upon the girl's
eagerness. "I wanted to know if you were comfortable, if I could do anything for
you." Miss Du Prel woke up. "Oh no, thank you; you are very kind. I am most comfortable--at
least--it is very strange, but I have lost my keys and my umbrella and
my handbag--I can't think what I can have done with them. Oh, and my
purse is gone too!" Whereupon Mrs. McEwen in dismay, Mr. McEwen (who then appeared), the
maid, and Hadria, hunted high and low for the missing properties, which
were brought to light, one by one, in places where their owner had
already "thoroughly searched," and about which she had long since
abandoned hope. She received them with mingled joy and amazement, and having responded
to Mrs. McEwen's questions as to what she would like for dinner, she
proposed to Hadria that they should take a walk together. Hadria beamed. Miss Du Prel seemed both amused and gratified by her
companion's worship, and the talk ran on, in a light and pleasant vein,
differing from the talk of the ordinary mortal, Hadria considered, as
champagne differs from ditch-water. In recording it for Algitha's benefit that evening, Hadria found that
she could not reproduce the exhilarating quality, or describe the
influence of Miss Du Prel's personality. It was as if, literally, a
private and particular atmosphere had encompassed her. She was "alive
all round," as her disciple asserted. Her love of Nature was intense. Hadria had never before realized that
she had been without full sympathy in this direction. She awoke to a
strange retrospective sense of solitude, feeling a new pity for the
eager little child of years ago, who had wandered up to the garret, late
at night, to watch the moonlight spread its white shroud over the hills. With every moment spent in the society of Valeria Du Prel, new and
clearer light seemed to Hadria, to be thrown upon all the problems of
existence; not by any means only through what Miss Du Prel directly
said, but by what she implied, by what she took for granted, by what she
omitted to say. "It seems like a home-coming from long exile," Hadria wrote to her
sister. "I have been looking through a sort of mist, or as one looks at
one's surroundings before quite waking. Now everything stands out sharp
and cut, as objects do in the clear air of the South. Ah me, the South! Miss Du Prel has spent much of her life there, and my inborn smouldering
passion for it, is set flaming by her descriptions! You remember that
brief little fortnight that we spent with mother and father in Italy? I
seem now to be again under the spell of the languorous airs, the
cloudless blue, the white palaces, the grey olive groves, and the art,
the art! Oh, Algitha, I must go to the South soon, soon, or I shall die
of home sickness! Miss Du Prel says that this is only one side of me
breaking out: that I am northern at heart. I think it is true, but
meanwhile the thought of the South possesses me. I confess I think
mother had some cause to be alarmed when she saw Miss Du Prel, if she
wants to keep us in a chastened mood, at home. It seems as if all of me
were in high carnival. Life is raised to a higher power. I feel nearly
omnipotent. Epics and operas are child's play to me! It is true I have
produced comparatively few; but, oh, those that are to come! I feel fit
for anything, from pitch-and-toss to manslaughter. I think of the two, I
rather lean to the manslaughter. Oh, I don't mean it in the facetious
sense! that would be a terrible downfall from my present altitudes. To
such devices the usual wretched girl, who has never drawn rebellious
breath, or listened to the discourses of Valeria Du Prel, has to turn
for a living, or to keep _ennui_ at bay. But _I_, no, the inimical
sex may possess their souls in peace, as far as I am concerned. They might
retort that they never _had_ felt nervous, but a letter has the same
advantage as the pulpit: the adversary can never get up and contradict. "That ridiculous adversary, Harold Wilkins, is staying again at
Drumgarren, and I hear from Mrs. Gordon that he thinks it very strange
that I should see so much of so extraordinary a person as Miss Du Prel! Opinions differ of course; _I_ think it very strange that the Gordons
should see so much of so ordinary a person as Mr. Wilkins. Everybody
makes much of him here, and, alas! all the girls run after him, and even
fall in love with him; why, I can't conceive. For if driven by dire
compulsion of fate, to bend one's thoughts upon _some_ prosaic example
of that prosaic sex, why not choose one of the many far more attractive
candidates available--the Gordons, the McKenzies, and so forth? When I
go to tennis parties with mother--they are still playing upon the
asphalte courts--and see the little dramas that go on, the jealousies
and excitements, and general much-ado-about-nothing, I can scarcely
believe that Miss Du Prel really belongs to the same planet as ours. But
I don't feel so contemptuous as I did; it is so pitiful. Out of my great
wealth I can afford to be more generous. "And when I see those wretched girls fluttering round Mr. Wilkins, I no
longer turn up my 'aughty nose' (as old Mrs. Brooks used to say). I only
think to myself, 'Heavens and earth! what an aching, empty life those
young women must lead, if they are actually reduced for interest and
amusement to the utterances of Mr. Wilkins!' They would have the pull of
one though, if the utterances of Mr. Wilkins were the only utterances to
be heard! Perish the thought of such beggary!" The talks with Valeria Du Prel grew more intimate, and more deeply
interesting to Hadria, every day. Miss Du Prel used often to look at her companion in amazement. "Where
_did_ you come from?" she exclaimed on one occasion. "One would suppose
you had lived several lives; you seem to _know_ things in such a subtle,
intimate fashion!" She used to ponder over the problem, wondering what Professor Fortescue
would say to it. There appeared to be more here than mere heredity could
account for. But science had never solved this problem; originality
seemed always to enter upon its career, uncaused and unaccountable. It
was ever a miraculous phenomenon. The Professor had always said so. Still the heritage was rich enough, in this case. Heredity might have
some discoverable part in the apparent marvel. Each member of the
Fullerton family had unusual ability of some kind. Their knowledge of
science, and their familiarity with the problems of philosophy, had
often astonished Miss Du Prel. Hadria's accounts of the Preposterous
Society made her laugh and exclaim at the same moment. She gave an
envious sigh at the picture of the eager little group, with their warmth
of affection for one another, and their vivid interests. Miss Du Prel,
with all her sadness, was youthful in spirit. Hadria found her far
younger than many girls of her own age. This set her thinking. She
observed how rigid most people become in a few years, and how the
personality grows wooden, in the daily repetition of the same actions
and the same ideas. This stiffening process had been attributed to the
malice of Time; but now Hadria began to believe that narrow and
ungenerous thought lay at the root of the calamity. The entire life of
the little world in which she had grown up, on all its sides, in all its
ideals and sentiments, stood before her, as if some great painter had
made a picture of it. She had never before been able to stand so
completely apart from the surroundings of her childhood. And she was
able to do so now, not because Miss Du Prel discoursed about it, but
because Hadria's point of view had shifted sympathetically to the point
of view of her companion, through the instinctive desire to see how
these familiar things would look to alien eyes. That which had seemed
merely prosaic and dreary, became characteristic; the very things which
she had taken most for granted were exactly those which turned out to be
the significant and idiomatic facts. These had made permanent inroads into the mind and character. It was
with these that Hadria would have to reckon all her days, under whatever
conditions she might hereafter be placed. Daily surroundings were not
merely pleasant or unpleasant facts, otherwise of no importance; they
were the very material and substance of character; the push and impetus,
or the let and hindrance; the guardians or the assassins of the soul. CHAPTER VII. Miss Du Prel had promised to allow Hadria to drive her to Darachanarvan,
a little town on the banks of the river, about seven miles across
country. Hadria was in high spirits, as they trundled along the white roads with
the wind in their faces, the hills and the blue sky spread out before
them, the pleasant sound of the wheels and the trotting of the pony
setting their thoughts to rhythm. The trees were all shedding their last yellow leaves, and the air was
full of those faded memories of better days, whirling in wild companies
across the road, rushing upward on the breast of some vagabond gust,
drifting, spinning, shuddering along the roadside, to lie there at last,
quiet, among a host of brothers, with little passing tremors, as if
(said Valeria) they were silently sobbing because of their banishment
from their kingdom of the air. Miss Du Prel, though she enjoyed the beauty of the day and the scenery,
seemed sad of mood. "This weather recalls so many autumns," she said. "It reminds me too vividly of wonderful days, whose like I shall never
see again, and friends, many of whom are dead, and many lost sight of in
this inexorable coming and going of people and things, this inexorable
change that goes on for ever. I feel as if I should go mad at times,
because it will not stop, either in myself or others." "Ah, that is a dreadful thought!" "It comes to me so insistently, perhaps, because of my roving life," she
said. She paused for a moment, and then she fell into one of her exalted
moods, when she seemed to lose consciousness of the ordinary conditions
around her, or rather to pierce deeper into their significance and
beauty. Her speech would, at such times, become rhythmic and
picturesque; she evidently saw vivid images before her, in which her
ideas embodied themselves. "Most people who live always in one place see the changes creeping on so
gradually that they scarcely feel them, but with me this universal flux
displays itself pitilessly, I cannot escape. Go where I will, there is
something to measure the changes by. A shoal of yellow leaves whispers
to me of seasons long ago, and the old past days, with their own
intimate character that nothing ever repeats, flash before me again with
the vividness of yesterday; and a flight of birds--ah! 