



Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net









Chronicles of Carlingford




THE DOCTOR'S FAMILY

BY

MRS OLIPHANT


NEW EDITION
_WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS_
EDINBURGH AND LONDON




CHRONICLES OF CARLINGFORD. THE DOCTOR'S FAMILY. CHAPTER I. Young Dr Rider lived in the new quarter of Carlingford: had he aimed at
a reputation in society, he could not possibly have done a more foolish
thing; but such was not his leading motive. The young man, being but
young, aimed at a practice. He was not particular in the mean time as to
the streets in which his patients dwelt. A new house, gazing with all
its windows over a brick-field, was as interesting to the young surgeon
as if it had been one of those exclusive houses in Grange Lane, where
the aristocracy of Carlingford lived retired within their garden walls. His own establishment, though sufficiently comfortable, was of a kind
utterly to shock the feelings of the refined community: a corner house,
with a surgery round the corner, throwing the gleam of its red lamp over
all that chaotic district of half-formed streets and full-developed
brick-fields, with its night-bell prominent, and young Rider's name on a
staring brass plate, with mysterious initials after it. M.R.C.S. the
unhappy young man had been seduced to put after his name upon that brass
plate, though he was really Dr Rider, a physician, if not an experienced
one. Friends had advised him that in such districts people were afraid
of physicians, associating only with dread adumbrations of a guinea a
visit that miscomprehended name; so, with a pang, the young surgeon had
put his degree in his pocket, and put up with the inferior distinction. Of course, Dr Marjoribanks had all the patronage of Grange Lane. The
great people were infatuated about that snuffy old Scotchman--a man
behind his day, who had rusted and grown old among the soft diseases
of Carlingford, where sharp practice was so seldom necessary; and no
opening appeared for young Rider except in the new district, in the smug
corner house, with the surgery and the red lamp, and M.R.C.S. on a brass
plate on his door. If you can imagine that the young man bowed his spirit to this without a
struggle, you do the poor young fellow injustice. He had been hard
enough put to it at divers periods of his life. Ambition had not been
possible for him either in one shape or another. Some people said he had
a vulgar mind when he subsided into that house; other people declared
him a shabby fellow when he found out, after the hardest night's thought
he ever went through in his life, that he durst not ask Bessie Christian
to marry him. You don't suppose that he did not know in his secret
heart, and feel tingling through every vein, those words which nobody
ever said to his face? But he could not help it. He could only make an
indignant gulp of his resentment and shame, which were shame and
resentment at himself for wanting the courage to dare everything, as
well as at other people for finding him out, and go on with his work
as he best could. He was not a hero nor a martyr; men made of that
stuff have large compensations. He was an ordinary individual, with no
sublimity in him, and no compensation to speak of for his sufferings--no
consciousness of lofty right-doing, or of a course of action superior to
the world. Perhaps you would prefer to go up-stairs and see for yourself what was
the skeleton in Edward Rider's cupboard, rather than have it described
to you. His drag came to the door an hour ago, and he went off with Care
sitting behind him, and a certain angry pang aching in his heart, which
perhaps Bessie Christian's wedding-veil, seen far off in church yesterday,
might have something to do with. His looks were rather black as he
twitched the reins out of his little groom's hands, and went off at a
startling pace, which was almost the only consolation the young fellow
had. Now that he is certainly gone, and the coast clear, we may go
up-stairs. It is true he all but kicked the curate down for taking a
similar liberty, but we who are less visible may venture while he is
away. This skeleton is not in a cupboard. It is in an up-stairs room,
comfortable enough, but heated, close, unwholesome--a place from which,
even when the window is open, the fresh air seems shut out. There is no
fresh air nor current of life in this stifling place. There is a fire,
though it is not cold--a sofa near the fire--a sickening heavy smell of
abiding tobacco--not light whiffs of smoke, such as accompany a man's
labours, but a dead pall of idle heavy vapour; and in the midst of all a
man stretched lazily on the sofa, with his pipe laid on the table beside
him, and a book in his soft, boneless, nerveless hands. A large man,
interpenetrated with smoke and idleness and a certain dreary sodden
dissipation, heated yet unexcited, reading a novel he has read
half-a-dozen times before. He turns his bemused eyes to the door when
his invisible visitors enter. He fancies he hears some one coming, but
will not take the trouble to rise and see who is there--so, instead of
that exertion, he takes up his pipe, knocks the ashes out of it upon his
book, fills it with coarse tobacco, and stretches his long arm over the
shoulder of the sofa for a light. His feet are in slippers, his person
clothed in a greasy old coat, his linen soiled and untidy. That is the
skeleton in young Rider's house. The servants, you may be sure, knew all about this unwelcome visitor. They went with bottles and jugs secretly to bring him what he wanted;
they went to the circulating library for him; they let him in when he
had been out in the twilight all shabby and slovenly. They would not be
human if they did not talk about him. They say he is very good-natured,
poor gentleman--always has a pleasant word--is nobody's enemy but his
own; and to see how "the doctor do look at him, and he his own brother
as was brought up with him," is dreadful, to be sure. All this young Rider takes silently, never saying a word about it to any
human creature. He seems to know by intuition what all these people say
of him, as he drives about furiously in his drag from patient to patient;
and wherever he goes, as plain, nay, far more distinctly than the
actual prospect before him, he sees that sofa, that dusty slow-burning
fire--that pipe, with the little heap of ashes knocked out of it upon
the table--that wasted ruined life chafing him to desperation with its
dismal content. It is very true that it would have been sadly imprudent
of the young man to go to the little house in Grove Street a year ago,
and tell Bessie Christian he was very fond of her, and that somehow for
her love he would manage to provide for those old people whom that
cheerful little woman toiled to maintain. It was a thing not to be done
in any way you could contemplate it; and with a heartache the poor young
doctor had turned his horse's head away from Grove Street, and left
Bessie to toil on in her poverty. Bessie had escaped all that nowadays;
but who could have forewarned the poor doctor that his elder brother,
once the hope of the family--that clever Fred, whom all the others had
been postponed to--he who with his evil reputation had driven poor
Edward out of his first practice, and sent him to begin life a second
time at Carlingford--was to drop listlessly in again, and lay a harder
burden than a harmless old father-in-law upon the young man's hands--a
burden which no grateful Bessie shared and sweetened? No wonder black
Care sat at the young doctor's back as he drove at that dangerous pace
through the new, encumbered streets. He might have broken his neck over
those heaps of brick and mortar, and it is doubtful whether he would
have greatly cared. When Dr Rider went home that night, the first sight he saw when he
pulled up at his own door was his brother's large indolent shabby figure
prowling up the street. In the temper he was then in, this was not
likely to soothe him. It was not a much-frequented street, but the young
doctor knew instinctively that his visitor had been away in the heart of
the town at the booksellers' shops buying cheap novels, and ordering
them magnificently to be sent to Dr Rider's; and could guess the curious
questions and large answers which had followed. He sprang to the ground
with a painful suppressed indignation, intensified by many mingled
feelings, and waited the arrival of the maudlin wanderer. Ah me! one
might have had some consolation in the burden freely undertaken for
love's sake, and by love's self shared and lightened: but this load of
disgrace and ruin which nobody could take part of--which it was misery
so much as to think that anybody knew of--the doctor's fraternal
sentiments, blunted by absence and injury, were not strong enough to
bear that weight. "So, Fred, you have been out," said Dr Rider, moodily, as he stood aside
on his own threshold to let his brother pass in--not with the courtesy
of a host, but the precaution of a jailer, to see him safe before he
himself entered and closed the door. "Yes, you can't expect a man to sit in the house for ever," said the
prodigal, stumbling in to his brother's favourite sitting-room, where
everything was tidy and comfortable for the brief leisure of the
hard-working man. The man who did no work threw himself heavily into
the doctor's easy-chair, and rolled his bemused eyes round upon his
brother's household gods. Those book-shelves with a bust at either
corner, those red curtains drawn across the window, those prints on the
walls--all once so pleasant to the doctor's eyes--took a certain air of
squalor and wretchedness to-night which sickened him to look at. The
lamp flared wildly with an untrimmed wick, or at least Dr Rider thought
so; and threw a hideous profile of the intruder upon the wall behind
him. The hearth was cold, with that chill, of sentiment rather than
reality, naturally belonging to a summer night. Instead of a familiar
place where rest and tranquillity awaited him, that room, the only
vision of home which the poor young fellow possessed, hardened into four
walls, and so many chairs and tables, in the doctor's troubled eyes. But it bore a different aspect in the eyes of his maudlin brother. Looking round with those bewildered orbs, all this appeared luxury to
the wanderer. Mentally he appraised the prints over the mantelshelf, and
reckoned how much of _his_ luxuries might be purchased out of them. That
was all so much money wasted by the Croesus before him. What a mint of
money the fellow must be making; and grudged a little comfort to his
brother, his elder brother, the cleverest of the family! The dull
exasperation of selfishness woke in the mind of the self-ruined man! "You're snug enough here," he exclaimed, "though you shut me in up-stairs
to burrow out of sight. By Jove! as if I were not good enough to face
your Carlingford patients. I've had a better practice in my day than
ever you'll see, my fine fellow, with your beggarly M.R.C.S. And you'd
have me shut myself up in my garret into the bargain! You're ashamed of
me, forsooth! You can go spending money on that rubbish there, and can't
pay a tailor's bill for your elder brother; and as for introducing me in
this wretched hole of a place, and letting me pick up a little money for
myself--I, a man with twice the experience in the profession that you
have----"

"Fred, stop that," cried the doctor--"I've had about enough. Look
here--I can't deny you shelter and what you call necessaries, because
you're my brother; but I won't submit to be ruined a second time by any
man. If I am ever to do any good in this world--and whether I do any
good or not," he added fiercely, "I'll not have my good name tarnished
and my work interfered with _again_. I don't care two straws for my
life. It's hard enough--as hard as a treadmill, and never a drop of
consolation in the cup; though I might have had that if I had been
anything but a fool. But look here, I do care for my practice--I won't
have you put your confounded spoke in my wheel again. Keep on in your
own way; smoke and drink and dream if you will; but I'll stand no
interference with my work--and that I tell you once for all." This speech was uttered with great vehemence, the speaker walking up and
down the room all the while. The bitterness of ingratitude and malice
had entered into the young man's soul. All the wrongs which the clever
elder brother, to whose claims everybody else was subordinated, had done
to his family, rose upon the recollection of the younger; all the still
bitterer sting of that injury which had been personal to himself; all
the burden and peril of this present undesired visit, the discontent,
the threats, the evident power of doing evil, woke the temper and spirit
of the young doctor. It was not Fred's fault that his brother had made
that mistake in life which he repented so bitterly. Bessie Christian's
bridal veil, and white ribbons; her joyful face untouched with any
pensive reminiscences; and the dead dulness of that house, into which
foot of woman never entered, were not of Fred's doing; but passion is
not reasonable. The doctor gave Fred credit unconsciously for the whole. He walked up and down the room with a whole world of passionate mortified
feeling--vexation, almost despair, throbbing within him. He seemed to
have made a vast sacrifice for the sake of this brother who scorned him
to his face. "You're hot," said the disreputable figure in Dr Rider's easy-chair,
"much hotter than there's any occasion for. Do I envy you your beggarly
patients, do you suppose? But, Ned, you never were cut out for the
profession--a good shopkeeping business would have been a deal better
for you. Hang it! you haven't the notions of a gentleman. You think
bread and water is all you're bound to furnish your brother when he is
under a cloud. As for society, I never see a soul--not even yourself,
though you're no great company. Look here--I am not unreasonable; order
in some supper--there's a good fellow--and let's have a comfortable
evening together. You're not the man you used to be, Ned. You used to be
a fellow of spirit; somebody's jilted you, or something--I don't want
to pry into your secrets; but let's have a little comfort for once in a
way, and you shall have the whole business about the old colony, and how
I came to leave it--the truth, and nothing but the truth." It was some time before the victim yielded; at last, half to escape the
painful ferment of his own thoughts, and half with a natural yearning
for some sympathy and companionship, however uncongenial, he fell out of
his heat and passion into a more complacent mood. He sat down, watching
with a gulp of hardly-restrained disgust that lolling figure in the
chair, every gesture of which was the more distasteful for being so
familiar, and recalling a hundred preliminary scenes all tending towards
this total wreck and shame. Then his mind softened with fraternal
instincts--strange interlacement of loathing and affection. He was
tired, hungry, chilled to his heart. The spell of material comfort,
even in such company, came upon the young man. They supped together,
not much to the advantage of Dr Rider's head, stomach, or temper, on the
following morning. The elder told his story of inevitable failure, and
strange unexplainable fatality. The younger dropped forth expressions of
disappointment and trouble which partly eased his own mind. Thus they
spent together the unlovely evening; and perhaps a few such nights would
have done as much harm to the young doctor's practice as had he introduced
his disreputable brother without more ado into the particular little
world of Carlingford. CHAPTER II. Next morning Dr Rider rose mightily vexed with himself, as was to be
supposed. He was half an hour late for breakfast: he had a headache, his
hand shook, and his temper was "awful." Before he was dressed, ominous
knocks came to the door; and all feverish and troubled as he was, you
may imagine that the prospect of the day's work before him did not improve
his feelings, and that self-reproach, direst of tormentors, did not mend
the matter. Two ladies were waiting for him, he was told when he went
down-stairs--not to say sundry notes and messages in the ordinary way
of business--two ladies who had brought two boxes with them, and asked
leave to put them in the hall till they could see Dr Rider. The sight
of this luggage in his little hall startled the doctor. Patients do not
generally carry such things about with them. What did it mean? What
could two ladies want with him? The young man felt his face burn with
painful anticipations, a little shame, and much impatience. Probably the
sister who adored Fred, and never could learn to believe that he was not
unfortunate and a victim. This would be a climax to the occupation of
his house. As the poor doctor gloomily approached the door of the room in which he
had spent last evening, he heard a little rustle and commotion not quite
consistent with his expectations--a hum of voices and soft stir such as
youthful womankind only makes. Then a voice entirely strange to him
uttered an exclamation. Involuntarily he started and changed his aspect. He did not know the voice, but it was young, sweet, peculiar. The cloud
lightened a little upon the doctor's face. Notwithstanding Bessie
Christian, he was still young enough to feel a little flutter of curiosity
when he heard such a voice sounding out of his room. Hark! what did she
say? It was a profoundly prosaic speech. "What an intolerable smell of smoke! I shouldn't wonder a bit--indeed,
I rather think he must be, or he wouldn't live in a place like this--if
he were exactly such another as Fred." "Poor Fred!" said a plaintive voice, "if we only can learn where he is. Hush, there is a footstep! Ah, it is not my poor fellow's footstep! Nettie, hark!" "No, indeed! twenty thousand times sharper, and more like a man," said
the other, in hurried breathless accents. "Hark! here he is." The entire bewilderment, the amaze, apprehension, confusion with which
Dr Rider entered the room from which this scrap of conversation reached
him, is indescribable. A dreadful sense that something was about to
happen seized the young man's mind with an indescribable curiosity. He
paused an instant to recover himself, and then went boldly and silently
into the room which had become mysterious through its new inmates. They
both turned round upon him as he entered. Two young women: one who had
been sitting at the table, looking faded, plaintive, and anxious, rose
up suddenly, and, clasping her hands, as if in entreaty, fixed two
bright but sunken eyes upon his face. The other, a younger, lighter
figure, all action and haste, interposed between him and her companion. She put up one hand in warning to the petitioner behind her, and one to
call the attention of the bewildered stranger before. Evidently the one
thing which alarmed this young lady was that somebody would speak before
her, and the conduct of the _situation_ be taken out of her hands. She
was little, very slight, very pretty, but her prettiness was peculiar. The young doctor, accustomed to the fair Saxon version of beauty given by
Bessie Christian, did not at the first glance believe that the wonderful
little person before him possessed any; for she was not only slender,
but _thin_, dark, eager, impetuous, with blazing black eyes and
red lips, and nothing else notable about her. So he thought, gazing
fascinated, yet not altogether attracted--scarcely sure that he was not
repelled--unable, however, to withdraw his eyes from that hurried,
eager little figure. Nothing in the least like her had ever yet appeared
before Dr Rider's eyes. "We want to inquire about your brother," said the little stranger; "we
know this was to be his address, and we want to know whether he is living
here. His letters were to be sent to your care; but my sister has not
heard from him now for a year." "Never mind that!--never mind telling that, Nettie," cried the other
behind her. "Oh, sir! only tell me where my poor Fred is?" "So she began to fear he was ill," resumed the younger of the two,
undauntedly; "though Susan will do nothing but praise him, he has
behaved to her very shamefully. Do you happen to know, sir, where he
is?" "Did you say Fred--my brother Fred?" cried the poor young doctor in
utter dismay; "and may I ask who it is that expresses so much interest
in him?" There was a momentary pause; the two women exchanged looks. "I told you
so," cried the eager little spokeswoman. "He never has let his friends
know; he was afraid of that. I told you how it was. This," she continued,
with a little tragic air, stretching out her arm to her sister, and
facing the doctor--"this is Mrs Frederick Rider, or rather Mrs Rider,
I should say, as he is the eldest of the family! Now will you please
to tell us where he is?" The doctor made no immediate answer. He gazed past the speaker to the
faded woman behind, and exclaimed, with a kind of groan, "Fred's wife!" "Yes, Fred's wife," cried the poor creature, rushing forward to him;
"and oh! where is he? I've come thousands of miles to hear. Is he ill? has anything happened to him? Where is Fred?" "Susan, you are not able to manage this; leave it to me," said her
sister, drawing her back peremptorily. "Dr Rider, please to answer us. We know you well enough, though you don't seem ever to have heard of us. It was you that my brother-in-law gave up his business to before he
came out to the colony. Oh, we know all about it! To keep him separate
from his wife cannot do you any benefit, Dr Edward. Yes, I know your
name, and all about it; and I don't mean indeed to suffer my sister to
be injured and kept from her husband. I have come all this way with her
to take care of her. I mean to stay with her to take care of her. I have
not parted with my money, though she gave all hers away; and I mean to
see her have her rights." "Oh, Nettie, Nettie, how you talk!" cried the unfortunate wife. "You
keep him from answering me. All this time I cannot hear--where is Fred?" "Be seated, please," said the doctor, with dreadful civility, "and
compose yourselves. Fred is well enough; as well as he ever is. I don't
know," added poor Rider, with irrestrainable bitterness, "whether he is
quite presentable to ladies; but I presume, madam, if you're his wife,
you're acquainted with his habits. Excuse me for being quite unprepared
for such a visit. I have not much leisure for anything out of my
profession. I can scarcely spare these minutes, that is the truth; but if
you will favour me with a few particulars, I will have the news conveyed
to my brother. I--I beg your pardon. When a man finds he has new
relations he never dreamed of, it naturally embarrasses him at the
moment. May I ask if you ladies have come from Australia alone?" "Oh, not alone; the children are at the hotel. Nettie said it was no use
coming unless we all came," said his new sister-in-law, with a half-sob. "The children!" Dr Rider's gasp of dismay was silent, and made no sound. He stood staring blankly at those wonderful invaders of his bachelor
house, marvelling what was to be done with them in the first place. Was
he to bring Fred down all slovenly and half-awakened? was he to leave
them in possession of his private sanctuary? The precious morning
moments were passing while he pondered, and his little groom fidgeted
outside with a message for the doctor. While he stood irresolute, the
indefatigable Nettie once more darted forward. "Give me Fred's address, please," said this managing woman. "I'll see
him, and prepare him for meeting Susan. He can say what he pleases to
me; _I_ don't mind it in the very least; but Susan of course must be
taken care of. Now, look here, Dr Edward; Susan is your sister-in-law,
and I am her sister. We don't want to occupy your time. I can manage
everything; but it is quite necessary in the first place that you should
confide in me." "Confide!" cried the bewildered man. "Fred is not under my authority. He is here in my house much against my will. He is in bed, and not fit
to be awakened; and I am obliged to tell you simply, ladies," said the
unfortunate doctor, "that my house has no accommodation for a family. If
you will go back to the hotel where you left the children"--and here the
speaker gave another gasp of horror--"I'll have him roused and sent to
you. It is the only thing I can do." "Susan can go," said the prompt Nettie; "I'll stay here until Fred is
ready, and take him to see them. It is necessary he should be prepared,
you know. Don't talk nonsense, Susan--I shall stay here, and Dr Rider,
of course, will call a cab for you." "But Nettie, Nettie dear, it isn't proper. I can't leave you all by
yourself in a strange house," remonstrated her sister. "Don't talk such stuff; I am perfectly well able to take care of myself;
I am not a London young lady," said the courageous Nettie. "It is
perfectly unnecessary to say another word to me--I know my duty--I shall
stay here." With which speech she seated herself resolutely in that same easy-chair
which Fred had lolled in last night, took off her bonnet, for hats were
not in these days, and shed off from her face, with two tiny hands,
exquisite in shape if a little brown in colour, the great braids of
dark-brown silky hair which encumbered her little head. The gesture
mollified Dr Rider in the most unaccountable way in spite of himself. The intolerable idea of leaving these two in his house became less
intolerable, he could not tell how. And the little groom outside fairly
knocked at the door in that softening moment with a message which could
be delayed no longer. The doctor put his head out to receive the call,
and looked in again perplexed and uncertain. Nettie had quite established
herself in the easy-chair. She sat there looking with her bright eyes
into the vacant air before her, in a pretty attitude of determination
and readiness, beating her little foot on the carpet. Something whimsical,
odd, and embarrassing about her position made it all the more piquant
to the troubled eyes which, in spite of all their worldly wisdom, were
still the eyes of a young man. He could not tell in the world what to
say to her. To order that creature out of his house was simply impossible;
to remain there was equally so; to leave them in possession of the
field--what could the unfortunate young doctor do? One thing was certain,
the impatient patient could no longer be neglected; and after a few
minutes longer of bewildered uncertainty, Dr Rider went off in the
wildest confusion of mind, leaving his brother's unknown family
triumphant in his invaded house. To describe the feelings with which the unfortunate doctor went fasting
about his day's work--the manner in which that scene returned to him
after every visit he made--the continual succession in which wrath,
dismay, alarm, bitter disgust with the falsehood of the brother who, no
further gone than last night, had pretended to confide in him, but never
breathed a syllable of this biggest unconcealable secret, swept through
the mind of the victim; all culminating, however, in the softening of
that moment, in the tiny figure, indomitable elf or fairy, shedding back
with dainty fingers those soft abundant locks--would be impossible. The
young man got through his work somehow, in a maze of confusion and
excitement--angry excitement, indignant confusion, determination to
yield nothing further, but to defend himself and his house once for all
from the inroads of what he angrily pronounced in his own mind "another
man's family"--yet, withal, of curiosity and interest which gave zest
greater than usual to the idea of going home. When he was able at last
to turn his horse's head towards his own dwelling, it was with feelings
very different from the usual unexpecting blank of sullen displeasure. What he should find there, was a curious, exciting, alarming question;
perhaps an entire nursery with Nettie in charge; perhaps a recusant
husband with Nettie mounting guard over him; perhaps a thrilling scene
of family explanation and reconciliation. The day had been a specially
long and hard one. He had been obliged to snatch a hurried lunch at one
of his patients' houses, and to postpone his hard-earned dinner to the
most fashionable of hours. It was indeed quite evening, almost twilight,
when he made his way home at last. As he neared the scene of action,
the tired man condoled with himself over the untimely excitement that
awaited him. He said to himself with pathetic self-pity that it was hard
indeed for a man who had earned a little repose to go in upon all the
troubles of another man's family. He had denied himself--he had not
undertaken upon his own shoulders that pleasing burden; and now what
was he to be saddled with?--the burden without the consolation--the
responsibility without the companionship. All this Dr Rider represented
to himself very pathetically as he wended his homeward way. Yet it is
astonishing, notwithstanding, with what alacrity he hastened upon that
path, and how much the curiosity, the excitement, the dramatic stir and
commotion made in his monotonous life by this entirely new unexpected
incident, occupied his mind. With expectations highly roused, he drew
up once more before his own house. It was surprising to him to see
how exactly it looked like itself. The blinds half-drawn down in the
genteelest calm as they always were--no faces peeping at the windows--no
marks of an arrival on the pavement, or in the composed countenance of
Mary, who stood holding the door open for him. He went in with a little
thrill of curiosity; the house was very quiet--dead-quiet in comparison
with the commotion of his thoughts; so was the sitting-room where he had
left Nettie resolutely planted in the easy-chair; there was nobody there
now; the boxes were out of the hall, not a sound was to be heard in the
house. He turned rather blankly upon Mary, who was going away quite
composedly, as if there was nothing which she wanted to tell or he to
hear. "Where is my brother and the ladies?" said the amazed doctor. "They all went off to the 'otel, sir, as soon as Mr Rider came
down-stairs," said Mary, complacently. "I assured Miss as it was the
best thing she could do, sir, for that I was 'most sure you'd never have
the children here,--as to be sure there wasn't no room neither," said
the doctor's factotum. "As soon as Mr Frederick came down, she called a
cab, did Miss, and took 'em both away." "Oh! so they're gone, are they?" said the doctor. "Hours and hours ago," answered Mary; "dinner'll be up in two minutes. But I wouldn't say much for the potatoes, sir. When a gentleman's
irreg'lar, it's hard laws on the poor servants--nothink will keep, going
on for two hours, and not take no harm; but all's quiet and comfortable
in your room." And with this assurance, which she evidently thought a very grateful
one, Mary went off to get the doctor's dinner. He walked to the end of
the room, and then back again, with solemnity--then threw himself into
that easy-chair. "Blessed riddance!" said the doctor; but somehow he
looked glum, wonderfully glum. There was no accounting for those blank
looks of his; he who had been condoling with himself over the exciting
scene he expected, so uncomfortable a conclusion to a long day's labour,
how was it he did not look relieved when that scene was spared him? To
tell the truth, when one has been expecting something to happen, of
whatever description, and has been preparing one's courage, one's
temper, one's fortitude, in anticipatory rehearsals--when one has placed
one's self in the attitude of a martyr, and prepared to meet with fiery
trials--it is mortifying, to say the least, when one finds all the
necessities of the case disappear, and the mildest calm replace that
tragical anticipation: the quiet falls blank upon the excited fancy. Of
course Dr Rider was relieved; but it was with something mightily like
disappointment that he leant back in his chair and knitted his brows at
the opposite wall. Not for the world would he have acknowledged himself
to be disappointed; but the calm was wonderfully monotonous after all
those expectations. He was never so bored and sick of a night by
himself. He tried to read, but reading did not occupy his mind. He grew
furious over his charred chops and sodden potatoes. As for the tea Mary
brought, he would have gladly pitched it at her by way of diversifying
that blank evening with an incident. The contrast between what he had
looked for and what he had, was wonderful. How delicious this stillness
should have been, this consciousness of having his house to himself, and
nobody to interrupt his brief repose! But somehow it appears that human
nature takes best with not having its wishes granted. It is indescribable
how Dr Rider yawned--how dull he found his newspaper--how few books
worth reading there were in the house--how slow the minutes ran on. If somebody had chosen to be ill that night, of all nights the best
for such a purpose, the doctor would not have objected to such an
interruption. Failing that, he went to bed early, dreadfully tired of
his own society. Such were the wonderful results of that invasion so
much dreaded, and that retreat so much hoped for. Perhaps his own
society had never in his life been so distasteful to him before. CHAPTER III. Next day Dr Rider audibly congratulated himself at breakfast upon having
once more his house to himself--audibly, as if it were really necessary
to give utterance to the thought before he could quite feel its force. A week before, if Fred had departed, however summarily, there can be no
doubt that his brother's feelings of relief and comfort would have been
unfeigned; now, however, he began to think the matter over, and to
justify to himself his extraordinary sense of disappointment. As he
poured out his own coffee with a sober face, his eye rested upon that
easy-chair which had been brought into such prominence in the history
of the last two days. He kept looking at it as he sipped that gloomy
coffee. Fred had faded from the great chair; his big image threw no
shadow upon it. There sat a little fairy queen, tiny as Titania, but
dark as an elf of the East, putting up those two shapely tiny hands,
brown and beautiful, to push aside the flood of hair, which certainly
would have veiled her little figure all over, the doctor thought, had it
been let down. Wonderful little sprite! She, no doubt, had dragged her
plaintive sister over the seas--she it was that had forced her way into
Edward Rider's house; taken her position in it, ousted the doctor; and
she doubtless it was who swept the husband and wife out of it again,
leaving no trace behind. Waking up from a little trance of musing upon
this too interesting subject, Dr Rider suddenly raised himself into an
erect position, body and mind, with an involuntary movement, as if to
shake off the yoke of the enchantress. He reminded himself instinctively
of his brother's falsehood and ingratitude. After throwing himself a
most distasteful burden on Edward's charity for five long dreary months,
the bugbear of the doctor's dreams, and heavy ever-recurring climax of
his uncomfortable thoughts, here had Fred departed without a word of
explanation or thanks, or even without saying good-bye. The doctor
thought himself quite justified in being angry. He began to feel that
the suspicious uneasiness which possessed him was equally natural and
inevitable. Such a thankless, heartless departure was enough to put any
man out. To imagine that Fred could be capable of it, naturally went to
his brother's heart. That day there was still no word of the party who had disappeared so
mysteriously out of the doctor's house. Dr Rider went to his hard day's
work vaguely expectant, feeling sure he must hear of them somehow, and
more interested in hearing of them than was to be expected from his
former low ebb of fraternal affection. When he returned and found still
no letter, no message, the blank disappointment of the former night
closed still more blankly upon him. When one is all by one's self, and
has nothing at best but an easy-chair to go home to, and goes home
expecting a letter, or a message, or a visitor who has not arrived, and
has no chance of arriving, the revulsion of feeling is not agreeable. It did not improve the doctor's temper in the first place. The chill
loneliness of that trim room, with its drawn curtains and tidy pretence
of being comfortable, exasperated him beyond bearing. He felt shut up
in it, and yet would not leave it. Somebody certainly might come even
to-night. Fred himself perhaps, if he could escape from the rigid
guardianship he was under; or was that miraculous Australian Nettie a
little witch, who had spirited the whole party in a nutshell over the
seas? Never was man delivered from a burden with a worse grace than was
Dr Rider; and the matter had not mended in these twenty-four hours. Next morning, however, this fever of fraternal suspense was assuaged. A three-cornered note, addressed in an odd feminine hand, very thin,
small, and rapid, came among Dr Rider's letters. He signalled it out by
instinct, and opened it with an impatience wonderful to behold. "SIR,--We are all at the Blue Boar until we can get lodgings, which I
hope to be to-day. I am utterly ashamed of Fred for not having let you
know, and indeed of myself for trusting to him. I should not wonder but
we may have been under a mistake about him and you. If you could call
about one, I should most likely be in to see you, and perhaps you could
give me your advice about the lodgings. Neither of _them_ have the
least judgment in such matters. I am sorry to trouble you; but being a
stranger, perhaps you will excuse me. I understand you are only at home
in the evening, and that is just the time I can't come out, as I have
the whole of them to look to, which is the reason I ask you to call on
me. Begging you will pardon me, I remain,
                                                   "NETTIE UNDERWOOD." "She remains Nettie Underwood," said the doctor, unawares. He laughed to
himself at that conclusion. Then an odd gleam came across his face. It
was probably the first time he had laughed in a natural fashion for some
months back, and the unusual exertion made his cheeks tingle. His temper
was improved that morning. He went off to his patients almost in a good
humour. When he passed the great house where Bessie Christian now reigned,
he recalled her image with a positive effort. Astonishing what an effect
of distance had floated over the apparition of that bride. Was it a year
since he saw her and gnashed his teeth at the thought of his own folly,
or was it only last Sunday? The doctor could not tell. He put Nettie's
note in his pocket-book, and was at the hotel door punctually at one
o'clock. It was in the principal street of Carlingford, George Street,
where all the best shops, and indeed some of the best houses, were. From the corner window of the hotel you could see down into the bowery
seclusion of Grange Lane, and Mr Wodehouse's famous apple-trees holding
tempting clusters over the high wall. The prospect was very different
from that which extended before Dr Rider's window. Instinctively he
marvelled within himself whether, if Dr Marjoribanks were to die--people
cannot live for ever even in Carlingford--whether it might not be a
disadvantage to a man to live so far out of the world. No doubt it
was a temptation of the Evil One. Happily the young man did not take
sufficient time to answer himself, but walked forward briskly through
the mazy old passages of the old inn, to a room from which sundry noises
issued. Dr Rider walked in with the natural confidence of a man who
has an appointment. The room was in undisturbed possession of three
children--three children making noise enough for six--all very small, very
precocious, with staring round eyes and the most complete independence of
speech and manners. The doctor confronted the little rabble thunderstruck;
they were his brother's children, unrecognisable little savages as they
were. One little fellow, in a linen pinafore, was mounted on the arm of a
sofa, spurring vigorously; another was pursuing his sister about the
room, trying to catch her feet with the tongs, and filling the air
with repeated loud snaps of disappointment. They intermitted their
occupations to stare at him. "Look here--here's a man," said the youngest,
meditatively, beholding his dismayed uncle with a philosophic eye. "Can't some one go and tell Nettie?" said the little girl, gazing also
with calm equanimity. "If he wants Nettie he'll have to wait," said the
elder boy. A pause followed; the unhappy doctor stood transfixed by the
steady stare of their three pair of eyes. Suddenly the little girl burst
out of the room, and ran screaming along the passage. "Mamma, mamma,
here's a man come," cried the wonderful colonial child. A few minutes
afterwards their mother appeared, languid and faded as before. Perhaps
she had been even prettier than Nettie in her bright days, if any days
had ever been bright for Fred Rider's wife. She was fairer, larger,
smoother than her sister; but these advantages had lapsed in a general
fade, which transformed her colour into washy pinkness, made her figure
stoop, and her footsteps drag. She came remonstrating all the way in
feeble accents. It was not for her, certainly, that the doctor had taken
the trouble to come to the Blue Boar. "Please to sit down," said Mrs Fred, and stood leaning on the table,
looking at her brother-in-law with a calm curiosity, not unlike that
of her children. "Nettie and my husband have gone out together; but now
that we are all so happy and united," she continued, with a sort of
feeble spitefulness, "I am sure it is quite a pity to trouble you. You
could not take us in, you know. You said that very plain, Mr Edward." "It was perfectly true, madam," said the doctor. "I have not ventured on
the step my brother has taken, and have naturally no accommodation for a
family. But I am not here for my own pleasure. Your sister, I presume it
is, wrote to me. I was requested to call here to-day." "Oh, yes; Nettie is very self-willed--very; though, of course, we could
not get on without her. She attacked Fred like a wild-cat for not writing
you: but I daresay, if the truth were known, you did not expect to hear
from my husband," said the wife, recovering her voice, and fixing a
vindictive gaze upon her visitor, who felt himself betrayed. "I came by Miss Underwood's instructions and at her request," said the
unfortunate man. "We need not enter into any question between Fred and
myself." "Ah, yes, that is very safe and wise for you," laughed Fred's wife. The doctor was deeply exasperated, as was only natural: he eyed the
feeble helpless creature for a moment angrily, provoked to answer her;
but his gaze became one of wonder and dismay ere he withdrew it. Surely
of all incomprehensible entities, the most amazing is a fool--a creature
insensate, unreasoning, whom neither argument nor fact can make any
impression upon. Appalled and impressed, the doctor's gaze left that
pretty faded face to turn upon the children. Dreadful imps! If Fred had
only taken to evil ways after he became possessed of such a family, his
brother could have forgiven him. While these thoughts passed through Dr
Rider's mind, however, deliverance approached. He heard Nettie's voice
in the passage, long before she reached the door. Not that it was loud
like the voices of this dreadful household; but the tone was sufficiently
peculiar to be recognised anywhere. With a most penetrating clearness,
it came through the long passages, words inaudible, only the sound of a
voice, rapid, breathless, decided--with the distant sound of Fred's long,
shambling, uncertain footsteps coming in as the strange accompaniment. Then they entered the room--the one tiny, bright, dauntless, an intrepid,
undiscourageable little soul; the other with his heavy large limbs, his
bemused face, his air of hopeless failure, idleness, content. Edward
Rider gazed involuntarily from one to another of this two. He saw the
sprite place herself between the husband and wife, a vain little Quixote,
balancing these extremes of helplessness and ruin. He could not help
looking at her with a certain unconscious admiration and amazement, as
he might have looked at a forlorn hope. Thousands of miles away from her
friends, wherever and whatever they might be, with Fred and his wife and
children on her hands, a household of incapables--what was that little
creature to do? "Good morning, Dr Edward," said Nettie. "I thought I should have been
back sooner; but Fred is so slow, I cannot manage to get him along at
all. We have found some lodgings a little way out of Carlingford, near
that chapel, you know, or church, or something, that stands a little
off the road: where it's open, and there's morning service, and such a
handsome young clergyman. Who is he? We went into the chapel, and it's
so fine, you would not believe it. Well, just a hundred yards from there
is the house. Four rooms, exactly what I wanted, with a garden for the
children to play in--quite quiet, and fresh and pleasant. Tell me who
the people are--their name is Smith. If they're respectable, I'll go
back and take it. I can afford the rent." "Near St Roque's? They belong to the church there. I daresay they are
all right," said the doctor, "but it is a long way off, and inconvenient,
and----"

"That is just why I want it," said Nettie. "We never were used to
conveniences, and none of us want to be much in the town, so far as I
know. It is the very thing. Why has not lunch come up?--what do these
people mean, Susan, by not attending to their orders? Ring the bell,
Freddy--ring loud; and after lunch, as your drag is at the door, Dr
Edward, you'll drive me down to this place again, that I may secure
it, won't you? I want to have a talk with you besides.--Lunch, please,
immediately. I ordered it to be ready at one--now it is half-past. We
can't have our time wasted this way.--Dr Edward, please, you'll stay." The doctor gazed with ever-increasing amazement at the little speaker. Nobody else had spoken a word. Fred had nodded to him sullenly. Fred's
wife had sunk back on the sofa--everybody seemed to recognise Nettie
as supreme. He hesitated, it must be confessed, to put his grievances
so entirely aside as to sit down in perfect amity with Fred and his
household; but to refuse to drive Nettie to St Roque's was impossible. The blood rushed to the doctor's face at the thought. What the world
of Carlingford would say to see his well-known vehicle proceeding
down Grange Lane, through Dr Marjoribanks's territories, under such
circumstances, was a question he did not choose to consider; neither did
he enter too minutely into the special moment at which his next patient
might be expecting him. The young man was under the spell, and did not
struggle against it. He yielded to the invitation, which was a command. He drew near the table at which Nettie, without hesitation, took the
presiding place. A dull amount of conversation, often interrupted by
that lively little woman, rose in the uncongenial party. Nettie cut up
the meat for those staring imps of children--did them all up in snowy
napkins--kept them silent and in order. She regulated what Susan was to
have, and which things were best for Fred. She appealed to Dr Edward
perpetually, taking him into her confidence in a way which could not
fail to be flattering to that young man, and actually reduced to
the calmness of an ordinary friendly party this circle so full of
smouldering elements of commotion. Through all she was so dainty, so
pretty, her rapid fingers so shapely, her eager talk so sweet-toned,
that it was beyond the power of mortal man to remain uninterested. It
was a development of womankind unknown to Dr Rider. Bessie Christian had
exhausted the race for him until now; but Nettie was a thousand times
more piquant than Bessie Christian. He gazed and wondered, and moralised
secretly in his own mind, what was to become of the girl?--what could
she do? "You have left some of your things at my house, Fred," said the doctor,
making an attempt to approach his sullen brother, who evidently expected
no overtures of friendship. "Yes. Mrs Rider, you see, arrived unexpectedly," said Fred, with
confusion--"in fact, I knew nothing about it, or--or I should have told
you--Nettie----"

"Nettie thought it best to come off at once, without writing," explained
Fred's wife. "What was the use of writing?" cried that little person. "You had
written to Fred for six months without ever getting an answer. You made
everybody unhappy round you with your fears and troubles about him. I
knew perfectly he was quite well and enjoying himself; but, of course,
Susan would not be convinced. So what was there for it but bringing her
away? What else could I do, Dr Edward? And to leave the children would
have been preposterous. In the first place, I should have been miserable
about them; and so, as soon as she found Fred was all right, would
Susan: and something would certainly have happened--scarlet fever or
something--and at the end of all I should have had to go out again to
fetch them. So the shortest way was to bring them at once. Don't you
think so? And to see us all here so comfortable, I am sure is enough to
repay any one for the trouble. Fred, don't drink any more beer." Nettie put out her tiny hand as she spoke to arrest the bottle. Fred
stared at her with a dull red flush on his face; but he gave in, in the
most inexplicable way; it seemed a matter of course to yield to Nettie. The doctor's amazement began to be mingled with amusement. To see how she
managed them all was worth the sacrifice of a little time--unconsciously
he became more fraternal in his thoughts. He spoke to foolish faded Mrs
Fred with a total forgiveness and forgetfulness of her spiteful speech. He hoped she would like Carlingford; he said something to the children. But it was not easy to talk in presence of that amazing family party,
the existence of which he had not dreamed of a few days ago. To see
his brother at the head of such a group had, in spite of himself, a
wonderful effect upon Dr Rider. Their children, of course, must be
supported somehow. Who was to do it? Was their father, grown incapable
and useless in the middle of his days, to be forced into the current of
life again? Was it a vague faith in Providence which had brought the
helpless household here; or was it a more distinct, if not so elevated,
confidence in Nettie? The doctor's heart sank once more within him as he
looked round the table. Three helpless by nature--two equally helpless
who ought in nature to have been the support of the whole--nothing but
one bright ready little spirit between them all and destitution; and
what could Nettie do to stave that wolf from the door? Once more Dr
Rider's countenance fell. If the household broke down in its attempt at
independence, who had they to turn to but himself?--such a prospect was
not comfortable. When a man works himself to death for his own family,
he takes the pleasure with the pain; but when another's family threatens
to fall upon his hands, the prospect is naturally appalling--and
even if Fred could do anything, what was Fred's life, undermined by
evil habit, to depend upon? Silence once more fell over the little
company--silence from all but Nettie and the children, who referred to
her naturally instead of to their mother. Fred was sullen, and his wife
took her cue from him. Edward was uneasy and dismayed. Family parties
suddenly assembled without due warning are seldom greatly successful;
and even Nettie could not make immediate reconciliation and fraternal
kindness out of this. CHAPTER IV. "Take me down this long pretty road. There must be delicious houses
inside the walls. Look here; drive slowly, and let us have a peep in at
this open door," said Nettie. "How sweet and cosy! and who is that
pretty young lady coming out? I saw her in the chapel this morning. Oh,"
added Nettie, with a little sharpness, "she knows _you_--tell me who she
is." "That is Miss Lucy Wodehouse--one of our Carlingford beauties," said Dr
Rider. "Do you know her very well?" asked the inquisitive Nettie. "How she
stares--why does she stare, do you suppose? Is there anything absurd
about my dress? Look here--don't they wear bonnets just like this in
England?" "So far as I am able to judge," said the doctor, looking at the tiny
head overladen with hair, from which the bonnet had fallen half off. "I suppose she is surprised to see me here. Drive on faster, Dr Edward,
I want to talk to you. I see Fred has been telling us a parcel of
stories. It would be cruel to tell Susan, you know, for she believes in
him; but you may quite trust me. Is your brother good for anything, Dr
Edward, do you suppose?" "Not very much now, I fear," said the doctor. "Not very much _now_. I suppose he never was good for much," said the
indignant Nettie; "but he was said to be very clever when he first came
out to the colony. I can't tell why Susan married him. She is very
self-willed, though you would fancy her so submissive. She is one of
those people, you know, who fall ill when they are crossed, and threaten
to die, so that one daren't cross her. Now, then, what is to be done
with them? He will not go back to the colony, and I don't care to do it
myself. Must I keep them here?" "Miss Underwood----" began the perplexed doctor. "It would save trouble to call me Nettie--everybody does," said his
strange companion; "besides, you are my brother in a kind of a way, and
the only person I can consult with; for, of course, it would not do to
tell one's difficulties to strangers. Fred may not be very much to depend
upon, you know, but still he is Fred." "Yes," said the doctor, with a little self-reproach, "still he is Fred;
but pardon me, the name suggests long aggravations. You can't tell how
often I have had to put up with affronts and injuries because it was
Fred. I shouldn't like to grieve you----"

"Never mind about grieving me;--_I_ am not in love with him;--let me
hear all about it!" said Nettie. Dr Rider paused a little; seeing the abyss upon the brink of which this
brave little girl was standing, he had not the heart to aggravate her
by telling the failures of the past. Better to soften the inevitable
discovery if possible. But his hesitation was quite apparent to Nettie. With considerable impatience she turned round upon him. "If you think I don't know what I am doing, but have gone into this
business like a fool, you are quite mistaken, Dr Edward," she said, a
little sharply. "I see how it is as well as anybody can do. I knew how
it was when I left the colony. Don't be alarmed about me. Do you think
I am to be turned against my own flesh and blood by finding out their
follies; or to grumble at the place God put me in?--Nothing of the sort! I know the kind of situation perfectly--but one _may_ make the best of
it, you know: and for that reason tell me everything, please." "But, Miss Underwood, consider," cried the doctor, in consternation. "You are taking responsibilities upon yourself which nobody could lay
upon you; you! young--tender" (the doctor paused for a word, afraid to
be too complimentary)--"delicate! Why, the whole burden of this family
will come upon you. There is not one able to help himself in the whole
bundle! I am shocked!--I am alarmed!--I don't know what to say to
you----"

"Don't say anything, please," said Nettie. "I know what I am about. Do
you call this a street or a lane, or what do you call it? Oh, such nice
houses! shouldn't I like to be able to afford to have one of them, and
nurses, and governesses, and everything proper for the children! I should
like to dress them so nicely, and give them such a good education. I
don't know anything particular to speak of, myself--I shall never be
able to teach them when they grow older. If Fred, now, was only to be
trusted, and would go and work like a man and make something for the
children, I daresay I could keep up the house;--but if he won't do
anything, you know, it will take us every farthing just to live. Look
here, Dr Edward: I have two hundred a-year;--Susan had the same, you
know, but Fred got all the money when they were married, and muddled it
away. Now, how much can one do in Carlingford with three children upon
two hundred a-year?" "Fred will be the meanest blackguard in existence," cried the doctor,
"if he takes his living from you." "He took his living from _you_, it appears," said Nettie, coolly, "and
did not thank you much. We must make the best of him. We can't help
ourselves. Now, there is the pretty church, and there is our little
house. Come in with me and answer for me, Dr Edward. You can say I
am your sister-in-law, you know, and then, perhaps, we can get into
possession at once; for," said Nettie, suddenly turning round upon the
doctor with her brilliant eyes shining out quaintly under the little
brow all puckered into curves of foresight, "it is so sadly expensive
living where we are now." To look at the creature thus flashing those shining eyes, not without a
smile lurking in their depths, upon him--to see the triumphant, undaunted,
undoubting youthfulness which never dreamt of failure--to note that
pretty anxiety, the look which might have become a bride in her first
troubles "playing at housekeeping," and think how desperate was the
position she had assumed, how dreary the burden she had taken upon
her--was almost too much for the doctor's self-control. He did not know
whether to admire the little heroine as half-divine, or to turn from
her as half-crazy. Probably, had the strange little spirit possessed a
different frame, the latter was the sentiment which would have influenced
the unimaginative mind of Edward Rider. But there was no resisting that
little brown Titania, with her little head overladen with its beautiful
hair, her red, delicate mouth closing firm and sweet above that little
decided chin, her eyes which seemed to concentrate the light. She seemed
only a featherweight when the bewildered doctor helped her to alight--an
undoubted sprite and creature of romance. But to hear her arranging about
all the domestic necessities within, and disclosing her future plans
for the children, and all the order of that life of which she took the
charge so unhesitatingly, bewildered the mistress of the house as much
as it did the wondering doctor. The two together stood gazing at her as
she moved about the room, pouring forth floods of eager talk. Her words
were almost as rapid as her step,--her foot, light as it was, almost as
decided and firm as her resolutions. She was a wonder to behold as she
pushed about the furniture, and considered how it could be brightened
up and made more comfortable. Gazing at her with his silent lips apart,
Dr Rider sighed at the word. Comfortable! Was she to give her mind to
making Fred and his children comfortable--such a creature as this? Involuntarily it occurred to Edward that, under such ministrations,
sundry changes might come over the aspect of that prim apartment in
which he had seen her first; the room with the bookcase and the red
curtains, and the prints over the mantelpiece--a very tidy, comfortable
room before any bewitching imp came to haunt it, and whisper suspicions
of its imperfection--the doctor's own retirement, where he had chewed
the cud of sweet and bitter fancies often enough, without much thought
of his surroundings. But Nettie now had taken possession of the prosaic
place, and, all unconscious of that spiritual occupation, was as busy
and as excited about Mrs Smith's lodgings at St Roque's Cottage as if it
were an ideal home she was preparing, and the life to be lived in it was
the brightest and most hopeful in the world. When Dr Rider reached home that night, and took his lonely meal in his
lonely room, certain bitter thoughts of unequal fortune occupied the
young man's mind. Let a fellow be but useless, thankless, and heartless
enough, and people spring up on all sides to do his work for him, said
the doctor to himself, with a bitterness as natural as it was untrue. The more worthless a fellow is, the more all the women connected with
him cling to him and make excuses for him, said Edward Rider in his
indignant heart. Mother and sister in the past--wife and Nettie now--to
think how Fred had secured for himself such perpetual ministrations,
by neglecting all the duties of life! No wonder an indignant pang
transfixed the lonely bosom of the virtuous doctor, solitary and
unconsoled as he was. _His_ laborious days knew no such solace. And as
he fretted and pondered, no visions of Bessie Christian perplexed his
thoughts. He had forgotten that young woman. All his mind was fully
occupied chafing at the sacrifice of Nettie. He was not sorry, he was
angry, to think of her odd position, and the duties she had taken upon
herself. What had she to do with those wretched children, and that
faded spiteful mother? Edward Rider was supremely disgusted. He said to
himself, with the highest moral indignation, that such a girl ought not
to be permitted to tie herself to such a fate. CHAPTER V.


St Roque's Cottage was considered rather a triumph of local architecture. A Carlingford artist had built it "after" the Church, which was one of
Gilbert Scott's churches, and perfect in its way, so that its Gothic
qualities were unquestionable. The only thing wanting was size, which
was certainly an unfortunate defect, and made this adaptation of
ecclesiastical architecture to domestic purposes a very doubtful
experiment. However, in bright sunshine, when the abundance of light
neutralised the want of window, all was well, and there was still
abundance of sunshine in Carlingford in October, three months after the
entrance of Fred Rider and his family into Mrs Smith's little rooms. It
was a bright autumn day, still mild, though with a crispness in the air,
the late season showing more in the destitution of the flower-borders
than in any more sensible sign. It was a pretty spot enough for a
roadside. St Roque's stood on the edge of a little common, over which,
at the other margin, you could see some white cottages, natural to
the soil, in a little hamlet-cluster, dropped along the edge of the
grey-green unequal grass; while between the church and the cottage ran
the merest shadow of a brook, just enough to give place and nutriment
to three willow-trees which had been the feature of the scene before St
Roque's was, and which now greatly helped the composition of the little
landscape, and harmonised the new building with the old soil. St Roque's
Cottage, by special intervention of Mr Wentworth, the perpetual curate,
had dropped no intervening wall between its garden and those trees; but,
not without many fears, had contented itself with a wooden paling on the
side nearest the willows. Consequently, the slope of grass at that side,
which Mrs Smith was too prudent to plant with anything that could be
abstracted, was a pretty slope with the irregular willow shadows swept
over it, thin, but still presenting a pale obstruction to the flood of
sunshine on this special afternoon. There a little group was collected,
in full enjoyment of the warmth and the light. Mrs Rider, still faded,
but no longer travel-worn, sat farther up in the garden, on the green
bench, which had been softened with cushions for her use, leisurely
working at some piece of needlework, in lonely possession of the
chrysanthemums and Michaelmas daisies round her; while on the grass,
dropped over with yellow flecks of willow-leaves, lightly loosened by
every passing touch of wind, sat Nettie, all brown and bright, working
with the most rapid fingers at a child's frock, and "minding" with a
corner of her eye the possessor of the same, the tiny Freddy, an imp of
mischief uncontrollable by other hand or look than hers. A little lower
down, poking into the invisible brook through the paling, was the eldest
boy, silent from sheer delight in the unexpected pleasure of coating
himself with mud without remark from Nettie. This unprecedented escape
arose from the fact that Nettie had a visitor, a lady who had bent down
beside her in a half-kneeling attitude, and was contemplating her with
a mingled amaze and pity which intensified the prevailing expression
of kindness in the mildest face in the world. It was Miss Wodehouse, in
her soft dove-coloured dress and large soft checked shawl. Her mild eyes
were fixed upon that brilliant brown creature, all buoyant and sparkling
with youth. These wonderful young people perplexed Miss Wodehouse; here
was another incomprehensible specimen--most incomprehensible perhaps of
all that had ever crossed her mild elderly horizon with bewildering
unintelligible light. "My dear," said Miss Wodehouse, "things used to be very different
when I was young. When we were girls we thought about our own
pleasures--and--and vanities of all kinds," said the good woman, with a
little sigh; "and, indeed, I can't think it is natural still to see you
devoting yourself like this to your sister's family. It is wonderful;
but dear, dear me! it isn't natural, Nettie, such self-devotion." "I do wish you wouldn't speak!" said Nettie, with a sudden
start--"self-devotion! stuff! I am only doing what must be done. Freddy
can't go on wearing one frock for ever, can he--does it stand to reason? Would you have me sit idle and see the child's petticoats drop to pieces? I am a colonial girl--I don't know what people do in England. Where I
was brought up we were used to be busy about whatever lay nearest to our
hand." "It isn't Freddy's frock," said Miss Wodehouse, with a little solemnity. "You know very well what I mean. And suppose you were to marry--what
would happen supposing you were to marry, Nettie?" "It is quite time enough to think of that when there is any likelihood
of it happening," said Nettie, with a little toss of her head. "It is
only idle people who have time to think of falling in love and such
nonsense. When one is very busy it never comes into one's head. Why,
you have never married, Miss Wodehouse; and when I know that I have
everything I possibly could desire, why should I?" Miss Wodehouse bent her troubled sweet old face over the handle of her
parasol, and did not say anything for a few minutes. "It is all very
well as long as you are young," she said, with a wistful look; "and
somehow you young creatures are so much handier than we used to be. Our
little Lucy, you know, that I can remember quite a baby--I am twice as
old as she is," cried Miss Wodehouse, "and she is twice as much use in
the world as I. Well, it is all very strange. But, dear, you know,
_this_ isn't natural all the same." "It is dreadful to say so--it is dreadful to think so!" cried Nettie. "I know what you mean--not Freddy's frock, to be sure, but only one's
whole life and heart. Should one desert the only people belonging to one
in the world because one happens to have a little income and they have
none? If one's friends are not very sensible, is that a reason why one
should go and leave them? Is it right to make one's escape directly
whenever one feels one is wanted? or what do you mean, Miss Wodehouse?" said the vehement girl. "That is what it comes to, you know. Do you
imagine I had any choice about coming over to England when Susan was
breaking her heart about her husband? could one let one's sister die,
do you suppose? And now that they are all together, what choice have I? They can't do much for each other--there is actually nobody but me to
take care of them all. You may say it is not natural, or it is not
right, or anything you please, but what else can one do? That is the
practical question," said Nettie, triumphantly. "If you will answer
that, then I shall know what to say to you." Miss Wodehouse gazed at her with a certain mild exasperation, shook her
head, wrung her hands, but could find nothing to answer. "I thought so," said Nettie, with a little outburst of jubilee; "that
is how it always happens to abstract people. Put the practical question
before them, and they have not a word to say to you. Freddy, cut the
grass with the scissors, don't cut my trimmings; they are for your own
frock, you little savage. If I were to say it was my duty and all that
sort of stuff, you would understand me, Miss Wodehouse; but one only
says it is one's duty when one has something disagreeable to do; and I
am not doing anything disagreeable," added the little heroine, flashing
those eyes which had confused Edward Rider--those brilliant, resolute,
obstinate eyes, always with the smile of youth, incredulous of evil,
lurking in them, upon her bewildered adviser. "I am living as I like to
live." There was a pause--at least there was a pause in the argument, but not
in Nettie's talk, which ran on in an eager stream, addressed to Freddy,
Johnnie, things in general. Miss Wodehouse pondered over the handle
of her parasol. She had absolutely nothing to say; but, thoroughly
unconvinced and exasperated at Nettie's logic, could not yet retire from
the field. "It is all very well to talk just now," said the gentle woman at last,
retiring upon that potent feminine argument; "but, Nettie, think! If you
were to marry----"

Miss Wodehouse paused, appalled by the image she herself had conjured
up. "Marrying is really a dreadful business, anyhow," she added, with a
sigh; "so few people, you know, can, when they might. There is poor Mr
Wentworth, who brought me here first; unless he gets preferment, poor
fellow----. And there is Dr Rider. Things are very much changed from
what they used to be in my young days." "Is Dr Rider in the same dilemma? I suppose, of course, you mean Dr
Edward," cried Nettie, with a little flash of mischievous curiosity. "Why? He has nobody but himself. I should like to know why he can't
marry--that is, if anybody would have him--when he pleases. Tell me; you
know he is my brother-in-law." Miss Wodehouse had been thinking of Bessie Christian. She paused, partly
for Dr Rider's sake, partly because it was quite contrary to decorum,
to suppose that Bessie, now Mrs Brown, might possibly a year ago
have married somebody else. She faltered a little in her answer. "A
professional man never marries till he has a position," said Miss
Wodehouse, abstractedly. Nettie lifted upon her, eyes that danced with
mischief and glee. "A profession is as bad as a family, then," said the little Australian. "I shall remember that next time you speak to me on this subject. I am
glad to think Dr Edward, with all his prudence, is disabled too." When Nettie had made this unguarded speech, she blushed; and suddenly,
in a threatening and defiant manner, raised her eyes again to Miss
Wodehouse's face. Why? Miss Wodehouse did not understand the look, nor
put any significance into the words. She rose up from the grass, and
said it was time for her to go. She went away, pondering in her own mind
those singular new experiences of hers. She had never been called upon
to do anything particular all her gentle life. Another fashion of woman
might have found a call to action in the management of her father's
house, or the education of her motherless young sister. But Miss
Wodehouse had contented herself with loving Lucy--had suffered her to
grow up very much as she would, without interference--had never taken
a decided part in her life. When anything had to be done, to tell the
truth, she was very inexpert--unready--deeply embarrassed with the unusual
necessity. Nettie's case, so wonderfully different from anything she
could have conceived, lay on her mind and oppressed her as she went home
to Grange Lane. As for Nettie herself, she took her work and her children indoors after
a while, and tried on the new frock, and scolded and rehabilitated the
muddy hero of the brook. Then, with those light fairy motions of hers,
she spread the homely table for tea, called in Susan, sought Fred in his
room up-stairs with a stinging word which penetrated even his callous
mind, and made him for the moment ashamed of himself. Nettie bit her red
lip till it grew white and bloodless as she turned from Fred's door. It
was not hard to work for the children--to support and domineer over
Susan; but it was hard for such an alert uncompromising little soul to
tolerate that useless hulk--that heavy encumbrance of a man, for whom
hope and life were dead. She bit her lip as she discharged her sharp
stinging arrow at him through the half-opened door, and then went
down singing, to take her place at the table which her own hands had
spread--which her own purse supplied with bread. Nobody there showed the
least consciousness of that latter fact; nobody fancied it was anything
but natural to rely upon Nettie. The strange household demeaned itself
exactly as if things were going on in the most regular and ordinary
course. No wonder that spectators outside looked on with a wonder that
could scarcely find expression, and half exasperated, half admiring,
watched the astonishing life of the colonial girl. Nobody watched it with half the amount of exasperation which concentrated
in the bosom of Dr Rider. He gazed and noted and observed everything
with a secret rage, indignation, and incredulity impossible to describe. He could not believe it even when it went on before his very eyes. Doctor though he was, and scientific, to a certain extent, Edward Rider
would have believed in witchcraft--in some philtre or potion acting upon
her mind, rather than in Nettie's voluntary folly. Was it folly? was it
heroism? was it simple necessity, as she herself called it? Nobody
could answer that question. The matter was as incomprehensible to Miss
Wodehouse as to Dr Rider, but not of such engrossing interest. Bessie
Christian, after all, grew tame in the Saxon composure of her beauty
before this brown, sparkling, self-willed, imperious creature. To see
her among her self-imposed domestic duties filled the doctor with a
smouldering wrath against all surrounding her, which any momentary spark
might set aflame. CHAPTER VI. Affairs went on in Carlingford with the usual commonplace pertinacity of
human affairs. Notable events happened but seldom in anybody's life, and
matters rolled back into their ordinary routine, or found a new routine
for themselves after the ordinary course of humanity. After the
extraordinary advent of Nettie and her strange household--after the
setting-out of that wonderful little establishment, with all the amazed
expectation it excited--it was strange to see how everything settled
down, and how calmly the framework of common life took in that exceptional
and half-miraculous picture. Lookers-on prophesied that it never could
last--that in the very nature of things some sudden crisis or collapse
must ensue, and the vain experiment prove a failure; but quiet nature
and steady time prevailed over these moralists and their prophecies. The
winter went on calmly day by day, and Nettie and her dependants became
legitimate portions of Carlingford society. People ceased to wonder
by degrees. Gradually the eyes of Carlingford grew accustomed to that
dainty tiny figure sweeping along, by mere impulse of cheerful will
and ceaseless activity, the three open-eyed staring children, the faded
mother. Sometimes, indeed, Nettie, too clear of the necessity of her
own exertions, and too simply bent upon her business, to feel any
sentimental shame of her relations, was seen quickening the sluggish
steps of Fred himself, who shuffled along by her side in a certain
flush of self-disgust, never perceptible upon him under any other
circumstances. Even Fred was duly moved by her vicinity. When he saw
other people look at them, his bemused intellect was still alive enough
to comprehend that people were aware of his dismal dependence upon that
fairy creature, whom it was a shame to think of as the support not only
of his deserted children, but of his own base comforts and idleness. But
the spur, though it pricked, did not goad him into any action. When he
got home, he took refuge in his room up-stairs, in the hazy atmosphere
drugged with the heavy fumes of his pipe, and stretched his slovenly
limbs on his sofa, and buried his confused faculties in his old novel. So he lived day by day, circumscribed in the most dangerous of his
indulgences by Nettie's unhesitating strictures and rules, which nobody
dared break, but unlimited in his indolence, his novel, and his pipe. That stifling fire, that close room, the ashes of the pipe on the table,
the listless shabby figure on the sofa, were the most dismal part of the
interior at St Roque's Cottage, so far as it appeared to the external
eye. But it is doubtful whether Mrs Fred, spiteful and useless, with
her poor health, her selfish love, her utter unreason, dawdling over
trifling matters which she never completed; or the three children,
entirely unrespectful of father and mother, growing up amid that wonderful
subversion of the ordinary rules of nature, with some loyalty to Nettie,
but no reverence in them, were not as appalling companions to live with. Nettie, however, did not consider the matter as a spectator might. She
did not enter into it at all as a matter to be criticised; they simply
belonged to her as they were. She knew their faults without loving them
less, or feeling it possible that faults could make any difference to
those bonds of nature. Fred, indeed, did afflict her lively impatient
spirit;--she had tried to quicken him into life at first--she gave him
up with a certain frank scorn now, and accepted her position. Thus he
was to be all his life long this big cumberer of the ground. Nettie,
valorous and simple, made up her mind to it. He was Fred--that was all
that could be said on the subject; and, being Fred, belonged to her, and
had to be cared for like the rest. It all grew into a matter of routine as that winter glided along;
outside and in, everybody came to take it for granted. Miss Wodehouse,
who, with a yearning admiration of a creature so totally unlike herself,
came often to visit Nettie, ceased to expostulate, almost ceased to
wonder. Mr Wentworth no longer opened his fine eyes in amazement when
that household was named. Mrs Smith, their landlady, calmly brought her
bills to Nettie, and forgot that it was not the most natural thing in
the world that she should be paid by Miss Underwood. The only persistent
sceptic was the doctor. Edward Rider could not, would not, believe it. He who had so chafed under Fred's society, felt it beyond the bounds
of human possibility that Nettie could endure him. He watched with an
eagerness which he found it difficult to account for, to see the first
symptoms of disgust which must ere long mark the failure of this bold
but foolish venture. It occupied his mind a great deal more than was
good for his own comfort; perhaps more than was best for his patients. Though he had few people to visit in that quarter of the town, his
drag was seen to pass St Roque's Cottage most days in the week; and
when urgent messages came for Dr Rider in the evening, his little
groom always wended his way out through the special district of Dr
Marjoribanks to find his master, if the doctor was not at home. Not that
all this devotion assisted him much either in increase of friendship
with his relations, or in verification of his auguries. The disgust of
the young doctor, when he saw his brother's slovenly figure in his own
chair, was nothing to his disgust now, when he saw that same form, so
out of accordance with the neat little sitting-room which Nettie's
presence made dainty and refined in its homeliness, lounging in Nettie's
way. He could not bring himself to speak with ordinary patience to
Fred; and Fred, obtuse as he was, perceived his brother's disgust and
contempt, and resented it sullenly; and betrayed his resentment to the
foolish wife, who sulked and said spiteful things to Edward. It was not
a pleasant family group. As for Nettie, she was much too fully occupied
to give her society or conversation to Dr Rider. She came and went
while he was there, busy about a thousand things, always alert, decided,
uncompromising--not disinclined to snub either Fred or Susan when
opportunity offered, totally unconscious even of that delicacy with
which a high fantastical heroine of romance would have found it
necessary to treat her dependants. It was this unconsciousness, above
all, that irritated the doctor. If she had shown any feeling, he said
to himself--if she had even been grandly aware of sacrificing herself
and doing her duty--there would have been some consolation in it. But
Nettie obstinately refused to be said to do her duty. She was doing
her own will with an imperious distinctness and energy--having her own
way--displaying no special virtue, but a determined wilfulness. Dr
Rider was half disgusted with Nettie, to see how little disgust she
showed of her companions. He was disappointed in her: he concluded to
himself that she did not show that fine perception which he was disposed
to expect from so dainty a little sprite. Yet, notwithstanding all these
disappointed expectations, it is astonishing how he haunted that room
where the society was so unattractive, and bore Mrs Fred's spiteful
speeches, and suffered his eyes and his temper to be vexed beyond
endurance by the dismal sight of his brother. The children, too, worried
their unfortunate uncle beyond description. He did not dislike children:
as a general rule, mothers in the other end of Carlingford, indeed,
declared the doctor to be wonderfully tender and indulgent to his
little patients: but those creatures, with their round staring eyes,
the calm remarks they made upon their father's slovenly indolence and
their mother's imbecility--their precocious sharp-sightedness and
insubordination, moved Dr Rider with a sharp prevailing inclination,
intensifying by times almost into action, to whip them all round, and
banish the intolerable brats out of sight. Such was his unpaternal way
of contemplating the rising hopes of his house. How Nettie could bear it
all, was an unceasing marvel to the doctor. Yet, in spite of these
disagreeables, he went to St Roque's all the same. One of these winter evenings the doctor wended his way to St Roque's
Cottage in a worse frame of mind than usual. It was a clear frosty
night, very pleasant to be out in, though sharp and chill; such a night
as brightens young eyes, and exhilarates young hearts, when all is well
with them. Young Rider could hear his own footsteps echoing along the
hard frost-bound road, and could not but wonder in himself, as he drew
near the group of buildings which broke the solitude of the way, whether
Nettie too might hear it, and _perhaps_ recognise the familiar step. The
shadow of St Roque's fell cold over him as he passed. Just from that
spot the light in the parlour window of the cottage became perceptible
to the wayfarer. A shadow crossed the blind as he came in sight--Nettie
unquestionably. It occurred to Dr Rider to remember with very sharp
distinctness at that moment, how Nettie's little shadow had dropped
across the sunshine that first morning when he saw her in his own room. He quickened his step unawares--perhaps to-night Nettie might be more
accessible than usual, less shut in and surrounded by her family. He
pictured to himself, as he went past the willows, which rustled faintly
with their long bare branches in the night air, that perhaps, as he was
later than usual, Fred might have retired to his den up-stairs; and
Susan might have gone to bear Fred company--who knows? and the children
might be in bed, the dreadful little imps. And for once a half-hour's
talk with the strange little head of the house might comfort the young
doctor's fatigued mind and troubled heart. For he was sadly fatigued and worn out. What with incessant occupation
and distracted thoughts, this year had been a very exhausting one for
the doctor. He had fagged on through the whole summer and autumn without
any relaxation. He had chafed over Fred's presence for half of the
year, and had been occupied for the other half with matters still more
absorbing and exciting. Even now his mind was in a perpetual ferment,
and no comforting spirit spoke quietness to his soul--no stout heart
strengthened his--no lively intelligence animated his own to worthy
doings. He was very cross and fretful, and knew himself to be so that
particular evening--worried and in want of rest. What a chance, if
perhaps he found Nettie, whose very provocations were somehow more
interesting than other people's most agreeable and tranquillising
efforts, all alone and at leisure! He went on with some palpitations of
hope. As soon as he had entered the cottage, however, he found out the
delusion he was under. The children were the first fact that presented
itself to his senses; an uproar that pervaded the house, a novel tumult
waking all the echoes; glimpses of flying figures pursuing each other
with brushes and mops, and other impromptu weapons; one astride upon
the banisters of the stairs, sliding down from top to bottom; another
clinging now and then, in the pauses of the conflict, to the top of
one of the doors, by which it swung back and forward. Terrible infants! there they all were in a complete saturnalia, the door of the parlour
half open all the time, and no sound of Nettie's restraining voice. Only poor Mrs Smith standing helpless in successions of fright and
exasperation, sometimes alarmed for life and limb, sometimes ready to
give the little wretches over to all the penalties of poetic justice. The poor woman brightened a little when she perceived the sympathetic
horror on the doctor's face. "How's this?" exclaimed young Rider, with a sigh of dismay. Alas! however it was, no quiet imaginary conference, no soothing glimpse of
Nettie, was practicable to-night. He grew sulky and ferocious under
the thought. He seized the imp that hung on the door, and set it down
summarily with a certain moral violence, unable to refrain from an
admonitory shake, which startled its sudden scream into a quavering echo
of alarm. "Do you want to break your neck, sir?" cried the wrathful
uncle. Dr Rider, however, had to spring aside almost before the words
were uttered to escape the encounter of a hearth-brush levelled at him
by his sweet little niece. "How is this, Mrs Smith?" cried the startled
visitor, with indignation, raising his voice sufficiently to be quite
audible through the half-open door. "Bless you, sir, Miss is gone out to tea--don't say nothing--I don't
begrudge the poor young lady a bit of a holiday," whispered the frightened
landlady under her breath; "but I can't never give in to it again. Their
mamma never takes a bit of notice exceptin' when they're found fault
with. Lord! to think how blind some folks is when it's their own. But
the poor dear young lady, she's gone out for a little pleasure--only to
Miss Wodehouse's, doctor," added Mrs Smith, looking up with a sudden
start to catch the stormy expression on the doctor's face. He made no reply to the troubled landlady. He pushed the children aside,
and made a stride into the parlour. To be sure, if Nettie was not here,
what a charming opportunity to make himself disagreeable, and give the
other two a piece of his mind! Edward Rider was anything but perfect. He
decided on that expedient with an angry satisfaction. Since he could not
have Nettie, he would at least have this relief to his feelings, which
was next best. The room was full of smoke, which came in heavy puffs from Fred's pipe. He himself lay stretched on the little sofa; Nettie's sofa--Nettie's
room--the place sacred in the doctor's heart to that bright little
figure, the one redeeming presence in this dismal household. Mrs Fred
sat dawdling opposite her husband over some wretched fancy-work. Eyes
less prejudiced than those of Edward Rider might have imagined this a
scene of coarse but not unpleasant domestic comfort. To him it was a
disgusting picture of self-indulgence and selfish miserable enjoyment,
almost vice. The very tobacco which polluted the atmosphere of her room
was bought with Nettie's money. Pah! the doctor came in with a silent
pale concentration of fury and disgust, scarcely able to compel himself
to utter ordinary words of civility. His presence disturbed the pair in
their stolen pleasure. Fred involuntarily put aside his pipe, and Mrs
Fred made a little movement to remove from the table the glass from
which her husband had been drinking; but both recollected themselves
after a moment. The wife set down the glass with a little spiteful toss
of her head; the husband, with that heated sullen flush upon his face,
relighted his half-extinguished pipe, and put up again on the sofa
the slovenly-slippered feet which at Edward's first appearance he had
withdrawn from it. A sullen "How d'ye do?" was all the salutation that
passed between them. _They_ felt themselves found out; the visitor felt
with rage and indignation that he had found them out. Defiant shame and
resentment, spiteful passion and folly, on one side, encountered the
gaze of a spectator outside whose opinion could not be mistaken, a known
critic and possible spy. Little comfort could come from this strange
reunion. They sat in uneasy silence for a few minutes, mutually ready
to fly at each other. Mrs Fred, in her double capacity as a woman and a
fool, was naturally the first to speak. "Nettie's gone out to tea," said that good wife. "I daresay, Mr Edward,
we should not have had the pleasure of seeing you here had you known
that only Fred and I were at home. It is very seldom we have an evening
to ourselves. It was too great a pleasure, I suppose, not to be
disturbed." "Susan, hold your confounded tongue," said the ungrateful Fred. "I am sorry to disturb Mrs Rider," said Edward, with deadly civility. "I was not aware, indeed, of the domestic enjoyment I was likely to
interrupt. But if you don't want your boys to break their necks, some
one ought certainly to interfere outside there." "That is exactly what I expected," said Mrs Fred. "My poor children
can't have a little amusement, poor things, but somebody must interfere
with it; and my poor Fred--perhaps you have some fault to find with him,
Mr Edward? Oh, I can see it in your looks! so please take your advantage,
now that there's nobody to be afraid of. I can tell you have ever so
many pleasant things just on your lips to say." "I wish you'd mind your own business, Susan," said her husband, who was
not a fool. "Look after these imps there, and let me and Edward alone. Nettie's gone out, you understand. She's a wonderful creature, to be
sure, but it's a blessed relief to get rid of her for a little. A man
can't breathe under her sharp eyes," said Fred, half apologetic, half
defiant, as he breathed out a puff of smoke. Edward Rider stared at his brother, speechless with rage and indignation. He could have rushed upon that listless figure, and startled the life half
out of the nerveless slovenly frame. The state of mingled resentment,
disappointment, and disgust he was in, made every particular of this
aggravating scene tell more emphatically. To see that heavy vapour
obscuring those walls which breathed of Nettie--to think of this one
little centre of her life, which always hitherto had borne in some
degree the impress of her womanly image, so polluted and vulgarised,
overpowered the young man's patience. Yet perhaps he of all men in the
world had least right to interfere. "How is it possible," burst forth the doctor all at once, "that you can
live upon that creature, Fred? If you have the heart of a mouse in that
big body of yours--if you are not altogether lost and degraded, how can
you do it? And, by Jove, when all is done, to go and fill the only room
she has--the only place you have left her--with this disgusting smoke
and noise as soon as her back is turned! Good heaven! it sickens one to
think of it. A fellow like you, as strong as any hodman, to let such a
creature sacrifice herself to keep him in bread; and the only bit of a
little place she can sit down in when she comes home--It's too much, you
know--it's more than she ought to bear." "And who are you, to meddle with us and our arrangements?" cried Mrs
Fred. "My husband is in his own house. You would not take us into your
house, Mr Edward----"

"Hold your confounded tongue, I tell you," said Fred, slowly gathering
himself off the sofa. "You're a pretty fellow to speak, you are--that
wouldn't lend a fellow a shilling to keep him from ruin. You had better
remember where you are--in--in--as Susan says--my own house." What outbreak of contempt might have come from the doctor's lips was
fortunately lost at that moment, since a louder outcry than usual from
outside, the screams of the children, and the wailings of the landlady,
at length roused the mother to the length of going to the door. When
she was gone the two brothers eyed each other threateningly. Fred, not
without a certain intolerable sensation of shame, rose to knock his pipe
upon the mantel-shelf among Nettie's pretty girlish ornaments. Somehow
these aggravations of insult to her image drove Edward Rider desperate. He laid his hand on Fred's shoulder and shook him violently. "Wake up! can't you wake up and see what you're about?" cried the
doctor; "can't you show a little respect for her, at least? Look here,
Fred Rider. I knew you could do anything shabby or mean, if it suited
you. I knew you would consent to hang a burden on anybody that would
take such a weight upon them; but, by Jove, I did not think you had the
heart to insult her, after all. A man can't stand by and see that. Clear
off your pipe and your brandy before she comes, or, as sure as I am made
of flesh and blood, and not cast-iron----"

The doctor's threats were interrupted by the entrance of a woeful
procession. Into the presence of the two brothers, eyeing each other
with such lowering faces, Mrs Smith and her husband entered, carrying
between them, with solemn looks, the unconscious Freddy, while his
mother followed screaming, and his little brother and sister staring
open-mouthed. It was some relief to the doctor's feelings, in the
excitement of the moment, to rush to the window and throw it open,
admitting a gust of chill December air, penetrating enough to search to
the bones of the fireside loiterer. Fred was father enough to turn with
anxiety to the child. But his trembling nervous fingers and bemused eyes
could make nothing of the "case" thus so suddenly brought before him. He
turned fiercely and vacantly upon his wife and demanded why everything
was suffered to go to ruin when Nettie was away. Mrs Fred, screaming and
terrified, began to recriminate. The pallid figure of the child on the
table gave a certain air of squalid tragedy to the scene, to the sordid
miseries of which the night air, coming in with a rush, chilling the
group in their indoor dresses, and flickering the flame of the candles,
added one other point of dismal accumulation. The child had dropped from
his swing on the door, and was stunned with the fall. Both father
and mother thought him dead in the excitement of the moment; but the
accustomed and cooler eyes of the doctor perceived the true state of
affairs. Edward Rider forgot his disgust and rage as he devoted himself
to the little patient--not that he loved the child more, but that the
habits of his profession were strong upon him. When he had succeeded
in restoring the little fellow to consciousness, the doctor threw a
professional glance of inquiry round him to see who could be trusted. Then, with a contemptuous shrug of his shoulders and impatient
exclamation, turned back to the table. Fred, shivering and helpless,
stood by the fire, uttering confused directions, and rubbing miserably
his own flabby hands; his wife, crying, scolding, and incapable, stood
at the end of the table, offering no assistance, but wondering when
ever Nettie would come back. Dr Rider took the patient in his arms, and,
beckoning Mrs Smith to go before him, carried the child up-stairs. There
the good mistress of the cottage listened to all his directions, and
promised devoutly to obey him--to keep the room quiet, if she could--to
tell everything he had said to Miss Nettie. He did not enter the
desecrated parlour again when he came down-stairs. What was the use? He was glad to go out and escape the chance of a fraternal struggle. He went out into the cold night air all thrilling with excitement
and agitation. It was not wonderful that a scene so strange should
rouse many impatient thoughts in the young man's mind; but the most
intolerable of these had the most trifling origin. That Fred should have
smoked his pipe in Nettie's sitting-room, when she was out of the way,
was not, after all, considering Fred's character, a very wonderful
circumstance, but it exasperated his brother to a greater extent than
much more important matters. That aggravation entirely overpowered
Edward Rider's self-control. It seemed the culmination of all the wrong
and silent insolent injury inflicted upon Nettie. He saw the stain of
those ashes on the little mantel-shelf, the rolling cloud of smoke in
the room, and indignation burned yet higher and higher in his breast. When the current of his thoughts was suddenly checked and stimulated by
the sound of voices on the road. Voices, one of which was Nettie's, one
the lofty clerical accents of the Rev. Frank Wentworth. The two were
walking arm-in-arm in very confidential colloquy, as the startled and
jealous doctor imagined. What were these two figures doing together upon
the road? why did Nettie lean on the arm of that handsome young clerical
coxcomb? It did not occur to Dr Rider that the night was extremely dark,
and that Nettie had been at Miss Wodehouse's, where the curate of St
Roque's was a perpetual visitor. With a mortified and jealous pang,
totally unreasonable and totally irresistible, Edward Rider, only a moment
before so fantastically extreme in Nettie's defence--in the defence of
Nettie's very "image" from all vulgar contact and desecration--strode
past Nettie now without word or sign of recognition. She did not see
him, as he observed with a throbbing heart; she was talking to young Mr
Wentworth with all the haste and eagerness which Dr Rider had found so
captivating. She never suspected who it was that brushed past her with
breathless, exasperated impatience in the darkness. They went on past
him, talking, laughing lightly, under the veil of night, quite indifferent
as to who heard them, though the doctor did not think of that. He,
unreasonably affronted, galled, and mortified, turned his back upon that
house, which at this present disappointed moment did not contain one
single thing or person which he could dwell on with pleasure; and, a
hundred times more discontented, fatigued, and worn out--full of disgust
with things in general, and himself and his own fate in particular--than
he had been when he set out from the other end of Carlingford, went
sulkily, and at a terrific pace, past the long garden-walls of Grange
Lane, and all Dr Marjoribanks's genteel patients. When he had reached
home, he found a message waiting him from an urgent invalid whose "case"
kept the unhappy doctor up and busy for half the night. Such was the
manner in which Edward Rider got through the evening--the one wonderful
exceptional evening when Nettie went out to tea. CHAPTER VII. With the dawn of the morning, however, and the few hours' hurried
rest which Edward Rider was able to snatch after his labours, other
sentiments arose in his mind. It was quite necessary to see how the
unlucky child was at St Roque's Cottage, and perhaps what Nettie thought
of all that had occurred during her absence. The doctor bethought himself,
too, that there might be very natural explanations of the curate's
escort. How else, to be sure, could she have got home on a dark winter
night through that lonely road? Perhaps, if he himself had been less
impatient and ill-tempered, it might have fallen to his lot to supersede
Mr Wentworth. On the whole, Dr Rider decided that it was necessary to
make one of his earliest calls this morning at St Roque's. It was a foggy frosty day, brightened with a red sun, which threw wintry
ruddy rays across the mist. Dr Rider drew up somewhat nervously at the
little Gothic porch. He was taken up-stairs to the bedroom where little
Freddy lay moaning and feverish. A distant hum came from the other
children in the parlour, the door of which, however, was fast closed
this morning; and Nettie herself sat by the child's bedside--Nettie, all
alert and vigorous, in the little room, which, homely as its aspect was,
displayed even to the doctor's uninitiated glance a fastidious nicety of
arrangement which made it harmonious with that little figure. Nettie was
singing childish songs to solace the little invalid's retirement--the
"fox that jumped up on a moonlight night," the "frog that would a-wooing
go"--classic ditties of which the nursery never tires. The doctor, who
was not aware that music was one of Nettie's accomplishments, stopped on
the stairs to listen. And indeed she had not a great deal of voice, and
still less science, Nettie's life having been too entirely occupied to
leave much room for such studies. Yet somehow her song touched the
doctor's heart. He forgave her entirely that walk with the curate. He
went in softly, less impatient than usual with her crazy Quixotism. A
child--a sick child especially--was a bearable adjunct to the picture. A
woman could be forgiven for such necessary ministrations--actually, to
tell the truth, could be forgiven most follies she might happen to do,
when one could have her to one's self, without the intervention of such
dreary accessories as Susan and Fred. "Thank you very much for your care of this child last night, Dr Edward,"
said the prompt Nettie, laying down the large piece of very plain
needlework in her hand. "I always said, though you don't make a fuss
about the children, that you were quite to be relied on if anything
should happen. He is feverish, but he is not ill; and so long as I tell
him stories and keep beside him, Freddy is the best child in the world." "More people than Freddy might be willing to be ill under such
conditions," said the doctor, complimentary, but rueful. He felt his
patient's pulse, and prescribed for him with a softened voice. He
lingered and looked round the room, which was very bare, yet somehow
was not like any of the rooms in _his_ house. How was it?--there were no
ornaments about, excepting that tiny little figure with the little head
overladen with such a wealth of beautiful hair. The doctor sighed. In
this little sacred spot, where she was so clearly at her post--or at
least at a post which no other was at hand to take--he could not even
resent Nettie's self-sacrifice. He gave in to her here, with a sigh. "Since you think he is not ill to speak of, will you drive me and the
other children into Carlingford, Dr Edward?" said the courageous Nettie. "It will be a pleasure for them, you know, and I shall be able to do my
business without losing so much time; besides, I want to talk to you; I
can see you will in your eyes. Go down, please, and talk to Mr Smith,
who has got a headache or something, and wants to see you. You need not
trouble yourself seeing Susan, who is cross, of course. I don't wonder
at her being cross; it must be very shocking, you know, to feel one's
self of no use, whatever happens. Thank you; I shall be ready in a
minute, as soon as you have done talking to Mr Smith." The doctor went down obediently, and in an unusual flutter of pleasure,
to see the master of the cottage--totally indifferent to the ailments
of the virtuous Smith, and thinking only of Nettie and that drive to
Carlingford, where, indeed, he should not have gone, had he considered
the merely abstract matters of business and duty, which led him entirely
in a different direction. He was somewhat rudely recalled to himself
when he went down-stairs. Smith had no headache, but only wanted
to speak to the doctor about his lodgers, whose "ways" were sadly
discomposing to himself and his wife. "You saw how it was yourself last night, sir," said the troubled
landlady. "Them hangings--you know the smoke goes through and through
them. After leaving all the windows open this frosty morning, and a
draught enough to give you your death, the place smells like I don't
know what. If it wasn't for Miss I wouldn't put up with it for a day;
and the gentleman's own room, doctor; if you was just to go in and see
it--just put your head in and say good morning--you'd believe me." "I know all about it," said the doctor; "but Miss Underwood, Mrs
Smith--?" "There's where it is, sir," said the landlady. "I can't find it in my
heart to say a word to Miss. To see how she do manage them all, to be
sure! but for all that, doctor, it stands to reason as one can't spoil
one's lodgings for a family as may be gone to-morrow--not except it's
considered in the rent. It's more natural-like to speak to a gentleman
like you as knows the world, than to a young lady as one hasn't a word
to say against--the handiest, liveliest, managingest! Ah, doctor, she'd
make a deal different a wife from her sister, that young lady would! though it isn't my part to say nothink, considering all things, and that
you're relations, like; but Smith and me are both o' one mind about it,
Dr Rider--unless it's considered in the rent, or the gentleman drops
smoking, or----"

"I hear Miss Underwood coming down-stairs," cried young Rider. "Next
time I come we'll arrange it all. But not a word to _her_, remember--not
a syllable; and go up-stairs and look after that poor child, there's a
good soul--she trusts you while she is gone, and so do I. There, there! another time. I'll take the responsibility of satisfying you, Mrs Smith,"
said the doctor, in a prodigious hurry, ready to promise anything in
this incautious moment, and bolting out of their little dark back-room,
which the local architect's mullions had converted into a kind of
condemned cell. Nettie stood at the door, all ready for her expedition
to Carlingford, with her two children, open-eyed and calmly inquisitive,
but no longer noisy. Mrs Fred was standing sulky at the parlour door. The doctor took off his hat to her as he helped Nettie into the front
seat of the drag, but took care not to approach nearer. The children
were packed in behind, under charge of the little groom, and, with an
exhilarating sensation of lawlessness in the present pleasure, Dr Rider
turned his back upon his duty and the patient who expected him a mile on
the other side of St Roque's, and drove, not too rapidly, into
Carlingford. "Mrs Smith was talking to you of us," said Nettie, flashing her
penetrating eyes upon the confused doctor. "I know she was--I could see
it in her face this morning, and in yours when you came out of her room. Dreadful little dungeon, is it not? I wonder what the man meant, to
build such a place. Do they want to turn us out, Dr Edward, or do they
want more rent? I am not surprised, I am sure, after last night. Was it
not odious of Fred to go and smoke in the parlour, the only place we can
have tidy? But it is no use speaking to him, you know; nor to Susan
either, for that matter. Married people do stand up for each other so
when you say a word, however they may fight between themselves. But is
it more rent they want, Dr Edward? for I can't afford more rent." "It is an abominable shame--you oughtn't to afford anything. It is too
dreadful to think of!" cried the angry doctor, involuntarily touching
his horse with his whip in the energy of the moment, though he was
indeed in no hurry to reach Carlingford. "Hush," said Nettie, lifting her tiny hand as though to put it to his
incautious mouth, which, indeed, the doctor would not have objected to. "We shall quarrel on that subject if you say anything more, so it is
better to stop at once. Nobody has a right to interfere with me; this
is my business, and no one else has anything to do with it." "You mistake," cried the doctor, startled out of all his prudences; "it
ought to be my business quite as much as it is yours." Nettie looked at him with a certain careless scorn of the inferior
creature--"Ah, yes, I daresay; but then you are only a man," said
Nettie; and the girl elevated that pretty drooping head, and flashed a
whole torrent of brilliant reflections over the sombre figure beside
her. He felt himself glow under the sudden radiance of the look. To
fancy this wilful imperious creature a meek self-sacrificing heroine,
was equally absurd and impossible. Was there any virtue at all in that
dauntless enterprise of hers? or was it simple determination to have her
own way? "But not to quarrel," said Nettie; "for indeed you are the only person
in the world I can say a word to about the way things are going on," she
added with a certain momentary softening of voice and twinkling of her
eyelid, as if some moisture had gathered there. "I think Fred is in a
bad way. I think he is muddling his brains with that dreadful life he
leads. To think of a man that could do hundreds of things living like
that! A woman, you know, can only do a thing or two here and there. If
it were not wicked to say so, one would think almost that Providence
forgot sometimes, and put the wrong spirit into a body that did not
belong to it. Don't you think so? When I look at Fred I declare sometimes
I could take hold of him and give him a good shake, and ask him what he
means; and then it all seems so useless the very idea of expecting him
to feel anything. I want to know what you said to him last night." "Not much--not half so much as I meant to have said. To see him
polluting your room!" cried the doctor, with a flush growing on
his face, and breaking off abruptly, not quite able to conclude the
sentence. Nettie gave him a shy upward glance, and grew suddenly crimson
too. "Did you mind?" said Nettie, with a momentary timidity, against the
unexpected charm of which the unhappy doctor fell defenceless; then
holding out her tiny hand to him with shy frankness, "Thank you for
caring so much for me," said the dauntless little girl, resolute not to
perceive anything which could not be fully spoken out. "Caring _so_ much! I must speak to you; we can't go on like this,
Nettie," cried the doctor, holding fast the little unfaltering hand. "Oh, here is the place I am going to. Please don't; people might not
understand,--though we _are_ brother and sister in a kind of a way,"
said the little Australian. "Please, Dr Edward, we must get out here." For a moment Edward Rider hesitated with a wild intention of urging his
horse forward and carrying her off anywhere, out of Carlingford, out of
duty and practice and responsibility, and all those galling restraints
of life which the noonday light and everyday sounds about brought in
with so entire a discord to break up this momentary hallucination. For
half a minute only the doctor lingered on the borders of that fairyland
where time and duty are not, but only one ineffable moment always
passing, never past. Then with a long sigh, the breath of which dispersed
a whole gleaming world of visionary delights, he got down doggedly on
the commonplace pavement. Ah, what a descent it was! the moment his foot
touched these vulgar flags, he was once more the hard-worked doctor at
everybody's command, with a fretful patient waiting for him a mile
beyond St Roque's; and all these dazzling moments, which had rapt the
unfortunate young fellow into another world, were so much time lost to
the prose figure that had to help Nettie down and let her go, and betake
himself soberly about his own business. Perhaps Nettie felt it a little
disenchanting too, when she was dropped upon the bare street, and went
into the common shop, and saw the doctor's drag flash off in the red
frosty sunshine with a darting movement of exasperation and impatience
on the part of its aggravated driver. For once in her life Nettie felt
disposed to be impatient with the children, who, unceremoniously ejected
from their perch behind, were not in the most obedient frame of mind. The two young people possibly agreed in their mutual sentiment of disgust
with other people's society just at that moment. However, there was no
help for it. Dr Rider galloped his horse to his patient's door, and took
it out of that unlucky individual, who was fortunately strong enough to
be able to bear sharp practice. Nettie, when she had made her little
purchases, walked home smartly to sing "The fox jumped up on a moonlight
night" to little Freddy in his bedroom. This kind of interlude, however,
as all young men and maidens ought to be aware, answers much better in
the evening, when a natural interval of dreams interposes between it and
the common work of existence. Nettie decided, thinking on it, that this
would never do. She made up her mind not to have any more drives with
the doctor. There was no telling what such proceedings might lead to. They were distinctly incompatible with the more serious business of her
life. CHAPTER VIII. Such a parting, however, is sadly apt to lead to future meetings. Notwithstanding his smouldering quarrel with Fred, which was always
ready to burst out afresh, Dr Rider would not give up coming to St
Roque's. He came to some clandestine arrangement with Mrs Smith, of
which nobody ever was aware, and which he himself was rather ashamed of
than otherwise; and he attended Freddy with the most dutiful exactness
till the child was quite restored. But all this time Nettie put on a
coat of armour, and looked so thoroughly unlike herself in her unusual
reserve and propriety, that the doctor was heartily discouraged, and
could go no further. Besides, it would not be positively correct to
assert that--though he would gladly have carried her off in the drag
anywhere, to the end of the world, in the enchantment of the moment--he
was just as ready to propose setting up a new household, with Fred and
his family hanging on to it as natural dependants. That was a step the
doctor was not prepared for. Some people are compelled to take the prose
concerns of life into full consideration even when they are in love, and
Edward Rider was one of these unfortunate individuals. The boldness
which puts everything to the touch to gain or lose was not in this young
man. He had been put to hard encounters enough in his day, and had
learned to trust little to chance or good fortune. He did not possess
the boldness which disarms an adverse fate, nor that confidence in his
own powers which smooths down wounded pride, and accounts even for
failure. 