



Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Woodie4 and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced
from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.) THE HARBOR




  THE HARBOR

  BY

  ERNEST POOLE

  [Illustration: Publishers mark]

  NEW YORK GROSSET & DUNLAP PUBLISHERS

  Published by Arrangement with The Macmillan Company. COPYRIGHT, 1915,

  BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  Set up and electrotyped. Published February, 1915 Reprinted February,
  1915 Twice. March, 1915 Three Times. April, 1915 Twice May, 1915. Twice
  June, 1915. Twice July, 1915. August, 1915. September, October,
  November, December, 1915. January, 1916. March, 1916


  _TO M. A._




THE HARBOR




BOOK I

CHAPTER I


"You chump," I thought contemptuously. I was seven years old at the
time, and the gentleman to whom I referred was Henry Ward Beecher. What
it was that aroused my contempt for the man will be more fully
understood if I tell first of the grudge that I bore him. I was sitting in my mother's pew in the old church in Brooklyn. I was
altogether too small for the pew, it was much too wide for the bend at
my knees; and my legs, which were very short and fat, stuck straight out
before me. I was not allowed to move, I was most uncomfortable, and for
this Sabbath torture I laid all the blame on the preacher. For my mother
had once told me that I was brought to church so small in order that
when I grew up I could say I had heard the great man preach before he
died. Hence the deep grudge that I bore him. Sitting here this morning,
it seemed to me for hours and hours, I had been meditating upon my hard
lot. From time to time, as was my habit when thinking or feeling deeply,
one hand would unconsciously go to my head and slowly stroke my bang. My
hair was short and had no curls, its only glory was this bang, which was
deliciously soft to my hand and shone like a mirror from much reflective
stroking. Presently my mother would notice and with a smile she would
put down my hand, but a few moments later up it would come and would
continue its stroking. For I felt both abused and puzzled. What was
there in the talk of the large white-haired old man in the pulpit to
make my mother's eyes so queer, to make her sit so stiff and still? What
good would it do me when I grew up to say that I had heard him? "I don't believe I will ever say it," I reasoned doggedly to myself. "And even if I do, I don't believe any other man will care whether I say
it to him or not." I felt sure my father wouldn't. He never even came to
church. At the thought of my strange silent father, my mind leaped to his
warehouse, his dock, the ships and the harbor. Like him, they were all
so strange. And my hands grew a little cold and moist as I thought of
the terribly risky thing I had planned to do all by myself that very
afternoon. I thought about it for a long time with my eyes tight shut. Then the voice of the minister brought me back, I found myself sitting
here in church and went on with this less shivery thinking. "I wouldn't care myself," I decided. "If I were a man and another man
met me on the street and said, 'Look here. When I was a boy I heard
Henry Ward Beecher before he died,' I guess I would just say to him,
'You mind your business and I'll mind mine.'" This phrase I had heard
from the corner grocer, and I liked the sound of it. I repeated it now
with an added zest. Again I opened my eyes and again I found myself here in church. Still
here. I heaved a weary sigh. "If you were dead already," I thought as I looked up at the preacher,
"my mother wouldn't bring me here." I found this an exceedingly cheering
thought. I had once overheard our cook Anny describe how her old father
had dropped dead. I eyed the old minister hopefully. But what was this he was saying! Something about "the harbor of life." The harbor! In an instant I was listening hard, for this was something I
knew about. "Safe into the harbor," I heard him say. "Home to the harbor at last to
rest." And then, while he passed on to something else, something I
_didn't_ know about, I settled disgustedly back in the pew. "You chump," I thought contemptuously. To hear him talk you would have
thought the harbor was a place to feel quite safe in, a place to snuggle
down in, a nice little place to come home to at night. "I guess he has
never seen it much," I snorted. For I had. From our narrow brownstone house on the Heights, ever since I
could remember (and let me tell you that seems a long time when you are
seven years old), I had looked down from our back windows upon a harbor
that to me was strange and terrible. I was glad that our house was up so high. Its front was on a sedate old
street, and within it everything felt safe. My mother was here, and Sue,
my little sister, and old Belle, our nurse, our nursery, my games, my
animals, my fairy books, the small red table where I ate my supper, and
the warm fur rug by my bed, where I knelt for "Now I lay me." But from the porch at the back of our house you went three steps down to
a long narrow garden--at least the garden seemed long to me--and if you
walked to the end of the garden and peered through the ivy-covered bars
of the fence, as I had done when I was so little that I could barely
walk alone, you had the first mighty thrill of your life. For you found
that through a hole in the ivy you could see a shivery distance straight
down through the air to a street below. You found that the two iron
posts, one at either end of the fence, were warm when you touched them,
had holes in the top, had smoke coming out--were chimneys! And slowly it
dawned upon your mind that this garden of yours was nothing at all but
the roof of a gray old building--which your nurse told you vaguely had
been a "warehouse" long ago when the waters of the harbor had come 'way
in to the street below. The old "wharves" had been down there, she said. What was a "wharf?" It was a "dock," she told me. And she said that a
family of "dockers" lived in the building under our garden. They were
all that was left in it now but "old junk." Who was Old Junk, a man or a
woman? And what in the world were Dockers? Pursuing my adventurous ways, I found at one place in the garden, hidden
by flowers near a side wall, a large heavy lid which was painted brown
and felt like tin. But how much heavier than tin. Tug as I might, I
could not budge it. Then I found it had an iron hook and was hooked down
tight to the garden. Yes, it was true, our whole garden was a roof! I
put my ear down to the lid and listened scowling, both eyes shut. I
heard nothing then, but I came back and tried it many times, until once
I jumped up and ran like mad. For faintly from somewhere deep down under
the flower beds I had heard a baby crying! What was this baby, a Junk or
a Docker? And who were these people who lived under flowers? To me they
sounded suspiciously like the goblins in my goblin book. Once when I was
sick in bed, Sue came shrieking into the house and said that a giant had
heaved up that great lid from below. Up had come his shaggy head, his
dirty face, his rolling eyes, and he had laughed and laughed at the
flowers. He was a drunken man, our old nurse Belle had told her, but Sue
was sure he was a giant. "You are wrong," I said with dignity. "He is either a Junk or a Docker." The lid was spiked down after that, and our visitor never appeared
again. But I saw him vividly in my mind's eye--his shaggy wild head
rising up among our flowers. Vaguely I felt that he came from the
harbor. As the exciting weeks of my life went on I discovered three good holes
in that ivy-covered fence of ours. These all became my secret holes, and
through them I watched the street below, a bleak bare chasm of a street
which when the trucks came by echoed till it thundered. Across the
street rose the high gray front of my father's warehouse. It was part
of a solid line of similar gray brick buildings, and it was like my
father, it was grim and silent, you could not see inside. Over its five
tiers of windows black iron shutters were fastened tight. From time to
time a pair of these shutters would fly open, disclosing a dark cave
behind, out of which men brought barrels and crates and let them down by
ropes into the trucks on the street below. How they spun round and round
as they came! But most of the trucks drove rumbling into a tunnel which
led through the warehouse out to my father's dock, out to the ships and
the harbor. And from that mysterious region long lines of men came
through the tunnel at noontime, some nearly naked, some only in shirts,
men with the hairiest faces. They sat on the street with their backs to
the warehouse wall, eating their dinners out of pails, and from other
pails they took long drinks of a curious stuff all white on top. Some of
them were always crossing the street and disappearing from my view into
a little store directly underneath me. Belle spoke of this store as a
"vile saloon" and of these men as "dockers." So I knew what Dockers were
at last! In place of the one who lived under our garden and had burst up
among the flowers, I saw now that there were hundreds and thousands of
men like him down there on the docks. And all belonged to the harbor. Their work I learned was to load the ships whose masts and spars peeped
up at me over the warehouse roofs. From my nursery window above I could
see them better. Sometimes they had large white sails and then they
moved off somewhere. I could see them go, these tall ships, with their
sails making low, mysterious sounds, flappings, spankings and deep
boomings. The men on them sang the weirdest songs as they pulled all
together at the ropes. Some of these songs brought a lump in your
throat. Where were they going? "To heathen lands," Belle told me. What
did she mean? I was just going to ask her. But then I stopped--I did not
dare! From up the river, under the sweeping arch of that Great Bridge
which seemed high as the clouds, came more tall ships, and low
"steamers" belching smoke and "tugs" and "barges" and "ferry boats." The
names of all these I learned from Belle and Anny the cook and my mother. And all were going "to heathen lands." What in the world did Belle mean
by that? Once I thought I had it. I saw that some of these smaller boats were
just going across the river and stopping at the land over there, a land
so crowded with buildings you could barely see into it at all. "Is that
a heathen land?" I asked her. "Yes!" said Belle. And she laughed. She
was Scotch and very religious. But later I heard her call it "New York"
and say she was going there herself to buy herself some corsets. And so
I was even more puzzled than ever. For some deep instinct told me you
could buy no corsets in "heathen land"--least of all Belle's corsets. She often spoke of "the ocean," too, another place where the tall ships
went. But what was the ocean? "It's like a lake, but mightier," Belle
had said. But what was a lake? It was all so vague and confusing. Always
it came back to this, that I had no more seen the "ocean" than I had
seen a "heathen land," and so I did not know them. But I knew the harbor by day and by night, on bright sunny days and in
fogs and rains, in storms of wind, in whirling snow, and under the
restful stars at night that twinkled down from so far above, while the
shadowy region below twinkled back with stars of its own, restless,
many-colored stars, yellow, green and red and blue, moving, dancing,
flaring, dying. And all these stars had voices, too. By night in my bed
I could hear them--hoots and shrieks from ferries and tugs, hoarse
coughs from engines along the docks, the whine of wheels, the clang of
bells, deep blasts and bellows from steamers. And closer still, from
that "vile saloon" directly under the garden, I could hear wild shouts
and songs and roars of laughter that came, I learned, not only from
dockers, but from "stokers" and "drunken sailors," men who lived right
inside the ships and would soon be starting for heathen lands! "I wonder how I'd feel," I would think, "if I were out in the garden
now--out in the dark all by myself--right above that vile saloon!" This would always scare me so that I would bury my head in the covers
and shake. But I often did this, for I liked to be scared. It was a game
I had all by myself with the harbor. *       *       *       *       *

And yet this old man in the pulpit called it a place where you went to
rest! Twenty-five years have gone since then, and all that I can remember now
of anything Henry Ward Beecher said was this--that once, just once, I
heard him speak of something that I knew about, and that when he did he
was wrong. And though all the years since then have been for me one long story of a
harbor, restless, heaving, changing, always changing--it has never
changed for me in this--it has never seemed a haven where ships come to
dock, but always a place from which ships start out--into the storms and
the fogs of the seas, over the "ocean" to "heathen lands." For so I saw
it when I was a child, the threshold of adventures. CHAPTER II


As I walked home from church with my mother that day the streets seemed
as quiet and safe as her eyes. How suddenly tempting it seemed to me,
this quiet and this safety, compared to the place where I was going. For
I had decided to run away from my home and my mother that afternoon,
down to the harbor to see the world. What would become of me 'way down
there? What would she do if I never came back? A lump rose in my throat
at the thought of her tears. It was terrible. "All the same I am going to do it," I kept thinking doggedly. And yet
suddenly, as we reached our front steps, how near I came to telling her. But no, she would only spoil it all. She wanted me always up in the
garden, she wanted me never to have any thrills. My mother knew me so well. She had seen that when she read stories of
fairies, witches and goblins out of my books to Sue and me, while Sue,
though two years younger, would sit there like a little dark imp, her
black eyes snapping over the fights, I would creep softly out of the
room, ashamed and shaken, and would wait in the hall outside till the
happy ending was in plain view. So my mother had gradually toned down
all the fights and the killings, the witches and the monsters, and much
to my disappointment had wholly shut out the gory pirates who were for
me the most frightfully fascinating of all. Sometimes I felt vaguely
that for this she had her own reason, too--that my mother hated
everything that had to do with the ocean, especially my father's dock
that made him so gloomy and silent. But of this I could never be quite
sure. I would often watch her intently, with a sudden sharp anxiety,
for I loved my mother with all my soul and I could not bear to see her
unhappy. "Never on any account," I heard her say to Belle, "are the children to
go down the street toward the docks." "Yes, ma'am," said Belle. "I'll see to it." At once I wanted to go there. The street in front of our house sloped
abruptly down at the next corner two blocks through poorer and smaller
houses to a cobblestone space below, over which trucks clattered,
plainly on their way to the docks. So I could go down and around by that
way. How tempting it all looked down there. Above the roofs of the
houses, the elevated railroad made a sharp bend on its way to the
Bridge, trains roared by, high over all the Great Bridge swept across
the sky. And below all this and more thrilling than all, I caught
glimpses of strange, ragged boys. "Micks," Belle sometimes called them,
and sometimes, "Finian Mickies." Up here I had no playmates. From now on, our garden lost its charms. Up the narrow courtway which
ran along the side of the house I would slip stealthily to the front
gate and often get a good look down the street before Belle sharply
called me back. The longest looks, I found, were always on Sunday
afternoons, when Belle would sit back there in the garden, close to the
bed of red tulips which encircled a small fountain made of two white
angels. Belle, who was bony, tall and grim, would sit by the little
angels reading her shabby Bible. Her face was wrinkled and almost brown,
her eyes now kind, now gloomy. She had a song she would sing now and
then. "For beneath the Union Jack we will drive the Finians back"--is
all I can remember. She told me of witches in the Scotch hills. At her
touch horrible monsters rose in the most surprising places. In the
bathtub, for example, when I stayed in the bath too long she would jerk
out the stopper, and as from the hole there came a loud gurgle--"It's
the Were-shark," Belle would mutter. And I would leap out trembling. This old "Were-shark" had his home in the very middle of the ocean. In
one gulp he could swallow a boy of my size, and this he did three times
each day. The boys were brought to him by the "Condor," a perfectly
hideous bird as large as a cow and as fierce as a tiger. If ever I dared
go down that street and disobey my mother, the Condor would "swoop" down
over the roofs, snatch me up in his long yellow beak with the blood of
the last boy on it, and with thunder and lightning would carry me off
far over the clouds and drop me into the Were-shark's mouth. Then Belle would sit down to her Bible. Sunday after Sunday passed, and still in fascinated dread I would steal
quietly out to the gate and watch this street forbidden. Pointing to it
one day, Belle had declared in awful tones, "Broad is the way that
leadeth to destruction." But it was not broad. In that at least she was
all wrong. It was in fact so narrow that a Condor as big as a cow might
easily bump himself when he "swooped." Besides, there were good strong
lamp-posts where a little boy could cling and scream, and almost always
somewhere in sight was a policeman so fat and heavy that even two
Condors could hardly lift him from the ground. This policeman would come
running. My mother had said I must never be scared by policemen, because
they were really good kind men. In fact, she said, it was foolish to be
scared by anything ever. She never knew of Belle's methods with me. *       *       *       *       *

So at last I had decided to risk it, and now the fearful day had come. I
could barely eat my dinner. My courage was fast ebbing away. In the
dining-room the sunlight was for a time wiped out by clouds, and I grew
suddenly happy. It might rain and then I could not go. But it did not
rain nor did anything I hoped for happen to prevent my plan. Belle sat
down by the angels and was soon so deep in her Bible that it was plain I
could easily slip up the path. Sue never looked up from her sand-pile
to say, "Stop Billy! He's running away from home!" With a gulp I passed
my mother's window. She did not happen to look out. Now I had reached
the very gate. "I can't go! I can't open the gate!" But the old gate
opened with one push. "I can't go! There is no policeman!" But yes,
there he was on my side of the street slowly walking toward me. My heart
thumped, I could hardly breathe. In a moment with a frantic rush I had
reached the nearest lamp-post and was clinging breathless. I could not
scream, I shut my eyes in sickening fear and waited for the rushing of
enormous wings. But there came no Condor swooping. Another rush--another post--another and another! "What's the matter with you, little feller?" I looked up at the big safe policeman and laughed. "I'm playing a game," I almost shouted, and ran without touching another
post two blocks to the cobblestone space below. I ran blindly around it
several times, I bumped into a man who said, "Heigh there! Look out!" After that I strutted proudly, then turned and ran back with all my
might up the street, and into our house and up to my room. And there on
my bed to my great surprise I found myself sobbing and sobbing. It was a
long time before I could stop. I had had my first adventure. *       *       *       *       *

I made many Sunday trips after that, and on no one of them was I caught. For delighted and proud at what I had done I kept asking Belle to talk
of the Condor, gloomily she piled on the terrors, and seeing the awed
look in my eyes (awe at my own courage in defying such a bird), she felt
so sure of my safety that often she would barely look up from her Bible
the whole afternoon. Even on workdays over her sewing she would forget. And so I went "to destruction." At first I stayed but a little while and never left the cobblestone
space, only peering up into the steep little streets that led to the
fearsome homes of the "Micks." But then I made the acquaintance of Sam. It happened through a small toy boat which I had taken down there with
the purpose of starting it off for "heathen lands." As I headed across
the railroad tracks that led to the docks, suddenly Sam and his gang
appeared from around a freight car. I stood stock-still. They were
certainly "Micks"--ragged and dirty, with holes in their shoes and soot
on their faces. Sam was smoking a cigarette. "Heigh, fellers," he said, "look at Willy's boat." I clutched my boat tighter and turned to run. But the next moment Sam
had me by the arm. "Look here, young feller," he growled. "You've got the wrong man to do
business with this time." "I don't want to do any business," I gasped. "Smash him, Sam--smash in his nut for him," piped the smallest Micky
cheerfully. And this Sam promptly proceeded to do. It was a wild and
painful time. But though Sam was two years older, he was barely any
larger than I, and when he and his gang had gone off with my boat, as I
stood there breathing hard, I was filled with a grim satisfaction. For
once when he tried to wrench the boat from me I had hit him with it
right on the face, and I had had a glimpse of a thick red mark across
his cheek. I tasted something new in my mouth and spit it out. It was
blood. I did this several times, slowly and impressively, till it made a
good big spot on the railroad tie at my feet. Then I walked with dignity
back across the tracks and up "the way of destruction" home. I walked
slowly, planning as I went. At the gate I climbed up on it and swung. Then with a sudden loud cry I fell off and ran back into the garden
crying, "I fell off the gate! I fell on my face!" So my cut and swollen
lip was explained, and my trips were not discovered. I felt myself growing older fast. For I knew that I could both fight and
tell lies, besides defying the Condor. In the next years, for weeks at a time my life was centered on Sam and
his gang. How we became friends, how often we met, by just what means I
evaded my nurse, all these details are vague to me now. I am not even
sure I was never caught. But it seems to me that I was not. For as I
grew to be eight years old, Belle turned her attention more and more to
that impish little sister of mine who was always up to some mischief or
other. There was the corner grocer, too, with whom I pretended to be
staunch friends. "I'm going to see the grocer," I would say, when I
heard Sam's cautious whistle in front of the house--and so presently I
would join the gang. I followed Sam with a doglike devotion, giving up
my weekly twenty-five cents instead of saving it for Christmas, and in
return receiving from him all the world-old wisdom stored in that
bullet-shaped head of his which sat so tight on his round little
shoulders. And though I did not realize it then, in my tense crowded childhood,
through Sam and his companions I learned something else that was to
stand me in good stead years later on. I learned how to make friends
with "the slums." I discovered that by making friends with "Micks" and
"Dockers" and the like, you find they are no fearful goblins, giants
bursting savagely up among the flowers of your life, but people as human
as yourself, or rather, much more human, because they live so close to
the harbor, close to the deep rough tides of life. Into these tides I was now drawn down--and it did me some good and a
great deal of harm. For I was too little those days for the harbor. Sam had the most wonderful life in the world. He could go wherever he
liked and at any hour day or night. Once, he said, when a "feller" was
drowned, he had stayed out on the docks all night. His mother always let
him alone. An enormous woman with heavy eyes, I was in awe of her from
the first. The place that she kept with Sam's father was called "The
Sailor's Harbor." It stood on a corner down by the docks, a long, low
wooden building painted white, with twelve tight-shuttered, mysterious
windows along the second story, and below them a "Ladies' Entrance." In
front was a small blackboard with words in white which Sam could read. "Ten Cent Dinners" stood at the top. Below came, "Coffee and rolls." Next, "Ham and eggs." Then "Bacon and eggs." And then, "To-day"--with a
space underneath where Sam's fat father wrote down every morning still
more delicious eatables. You got whiffs of these things and they made
your mouth water, they made your stomach fairly turn against your
nursery supper. But most of our time we spent on the docks. All were roofed, and
exploring the long dock sheds and climbing down into the dark holds of
the square-rigged ships called "clippers," we found logs of curious
mottled wood, huge baskets of sugar, odorous spices, indigo, camphor,
tea, coffee, jute and endless other things. Sam knew their names and the
names of the wonder-places they came from--Manila, Calcutta, Bombay,
Ceylon. He knew besides such words as "hawser," "bulkhead" and
"ebb-tide." And Sam knew how to swear. He swore with a fascinating ease
such words as made me shiver and stare. And then he would look at me and
chuckle. "You think I'll go to hell for this, don't you," he asked me once. And
my face grew hot with embarrassment, for I thought that he assuredly
would. I asked him what were heathen lands, and he said they were countries
where heathen lived. And what were heathen? Cannibals. And what were
they? "Fellers that eat fellers," he said. "Alive?" I inquired. He turned to the gang:

"Listen to the kid! He wants to know if they eat 'em alive!" Sam spat
disgustedly. "Naw," he said. "First they roast 'em like any meat. They
roast 'em," he added reflectively, "until their skin gets brown and
bubbles out and busts." One afternoon a carriage brought three travelers for one of the ships, a
man, his wife and a little girl with shining yellow pig-tails. "To be
et," Sam whispered as we stood close beside them. And then, pointing to
some of the half-naked brown men that made the crew of the ship near
by--"cannibals," he muttered. For a long time I stared at these eaters,
especially at their lean brown stomachs. "We're safe enough," Sam told me. "They ain't allowed to come ashore." I
found this very comforting. But what a frightful fate lay in store for the little girl with
pig-tails. As I watched her I felt worse and worse. Why couldn't
somebody warn her in time? At last I decided to do it myself. Procuring
a scrap of paper I retired behind a pile of crates and wrote in my
large, clumsy hand, "You look out--you are going to be et." Watching my
chance, I slipped this into her satchel and hoped that she would read it
soon. Then I promptly forgot all about her and ran off into a warehouse
where the gang had gone to slide. These warehouses had cavernous rooms, so dark you could not see to the
ends, and there from between the wooden columns the things from the
ships loomed out of the dark like so many ghosts. There were strange
sweet smells. And from a hole in the ceiling there was a twisting chute
of steel down which you could slide with terrific speed. We used to
slide by the hour. Outside were freight cars in long lines, some motionless, some suddenly
lurching forward or back, with a grinding and screeching of wheels and a
puffing and coughing from engines ahead. Sam taught me how to climb on
the cars and how to swing off while they were going. He had learned from
watching the brakemen that dangerous backward left-hand swing that lands
you stock-still in your tracks. It is a splendid feeling. Only once
Sam's left hand caught, I heard a low cry, and after I jumped I found
him standing there with a white face. His left hand hung straight down
from the wrist and blood was dripping from it. "Shut up, you damn fool!" he said fiercely. "I wasn't saying nothing," I gasped. "Yes, you was--you was startin' to cry! Holy Christ!" He sat down
suddenly, then rolled over and lay still. Some one ran for his mother,
and after a time he was carried away. I did not see him again for some
weeks. We did things that were bad for a boy of my size, and I saw things that
I shouldn't have seen--a docker crushed upon one of the docks and
brought out on a stretcher dead, a stoker as drunk as though he were
dead being wheeled on a wheelbarrow to a ship by the man called a
"crimp," who sold this drunken body for an advance on its future pay. Sam told me in detail of these things. There came a strike, and once in
the darkness of a cold November twilight I saw some dockers rush on a
"scab," I heard the dull sickening thumps as they beat him. And one day Sam took me to the door of his father's saloon and pointed
out a man in there who had an admiring circle around him. "He's going to jump from the Bridge on a bet," Sam whispered. I saw the
man go. For what seemed to me hours I watched the Great Bridge up there
in the sky, with its crawling processions of trolleys and wagons, its
whole moving armies of little black men. Suddenly one of these tiny
specks shot out and down, I saw it fall below the roofs, I felt Sam's
hand like ice in mine. And this was not good for a boy of ten. But the sight that ended it all for me was not a man, but a woman. It
happened one chilly March afternoon when I fell from a dock into water
covered with grease and foam, came up spluttering and terrified, was
quickly hauled to the dock by a man and then hustled by Sam and the gang
to his home, to have my clothes dried and so not get caught by my
mother. Scolded by Sam's mother and given something fiery hot to drink,
stripped naked and wrapped in an old flannel nightgown and told to sit
by the stove in the kitchen--I was then left alone with Sam. And then
Sam with a curious light in his eyes took me to a door which he opened
just a crack. Through the crack he showed me a small back room full of
round iron tables. And at one of these a man, stoker or sailor I don't
know which, his face flushed red under dirt and hair, held in his lap a
big fat girl half dressed, giggling and queer, quite drunk. And then
while Sam whispered on and on about the shuttered rooms upstairs, I felt
a rush of such sickening fear and loathing that I wanted to scream--but
I turned too faint. I remember awakening on the floor, Sam's mother furiously slapping Sam,
then dressing me quickly, gripping me tight by both my arms and saying,

"You tell a word of this to your pa and we'll come up and kill you!" That night at home I did not sleep. I lay in my bed and shivered and
burned. My first long exciting adventure was over. Ended were all the
thrills, the wild fun. It was a spree I had had with the harbor, from
the time I was seven until I was ten. It had taken me at seven, a plump
sturdy little boy, and at ten it had left me wiry, thin, with quick,
nervous movements and often dark shadows under my eyes. And it left a
deep scar on my early life. For over all the adventures and over my
whole childhood loomed this last thing I had seen, hideous, disgusting. For years after that, when I saw or even thought of the harbor, I felt
the taste of foul, greasy water in my mouth and in my soul. So ended the first lesson. CHAPTER III


The next morning as I started for school, suddenly in the hallway I
thought of what my mother had told me--always when I was frightened to
shut my eyes and speak to Jesus and he would be sure to make everything
right. I had not spoken to Jesus of late except to say "Holy Christ!" like Sam. But now, so sickened by Sam and his docks, my head throbbing
from the sleepless night, on the impulse I kneeled quickly with my face
on a chair right there in the hall. But I found I was too ashamed to
begin. "If he would only ask me," I thought. Why didn't he ask me, "What's the
matter, little son?" or say, "Now, you must tell me and then you'll feel
better"--as my mother always did. But Jesus did not help me out. I could
not even feel him near me. "I will never tell anyone," I thought. And I
felt myself horribly alone. Help came from a quite different source. "There he is! Look!" I heard Sue's eager whisper. Jumping quickly to my feet, I saw in the
library doorway Sue's dark little figure and her mocking, dancing eyes
as she pointed me out to our father, her chum, whose face wore a smile
of amusement. In a moment I had rushed out of doors and was running
angrily to school, furious at myself for praying, furious at Sue for
spying and at my father for that smile. My terror was forgotten. No more
telling Jesus things! I retreated deep inside of myself and worked out
of my troubles as best I could. From that day the harbor became for me a big grim place to be let
alone--like my father. A place immeasurably stronger than I--like my
father--and like him harsh and indifferent, not caring whether when I
fell into it I was pulled up to safety or drawn far down into grease and
slime. It made no difference. I was nothing to it one way or the other. And I was nothing to my father. Of course this was by no means true. As I look back now I know that
often he must have tried to be kind, that in the jar and worry of his
own absorbing troubled life he must have often turned to me and tried to
make himself my friend. But children pass hard judgments. And if my
father was friendly at times it did no good. For he was a man--big and
strong--and I was a small boy craving his love. Why couldn't he really love me? Why couldn't he ask me how I felt or
pull my ear and say "Hello, Puss?" He was always saying these things to
Sue, and caring about her very hard and trying to understand her,
although she was nothing but a girl, two years younger and smaller than
I and far less interesting. And yet with her he was kind and tender,
curious and smiling, he watched her with wholly different eyes. My
father was a short, powerful man, and though he was nearly fifty years
old his hair was black and thick and coarse. At night he would rub his
unshaven cheek on Sue's small cheek and tickle her. She would chuckle
and wriggle as though it were fun. I used to watch this hungrily, and
once I awkwardly drew close and offered my cheek to be tickled. My
father at once grew as awkward as I, and he gave me a rub so rough it
stung. And this wasn't fair--I had hoped for a cuddle. Besides, he was
always praising Sue when I knew she didn't deserve it. He called her
brave. Once when he took us duck shooting together a squall came up and
he rowed hard, and Sue sat with her eyes on his, smiling and quite
unafraid. At home that night I heard him tell my mother how wonderfully
brave she had been, and of how I, on the other hand, had gripped the
boat and turned white with fear, while little Sue just sat and smiled. "We'll see how brave she is," I thought, and the next day I hit her in
Sam's best style, fairly "knocked her nut off," in fact, with one quick
blow. "There," I said to myself while she screamed. "I guess that shows
how brave you are. I didn't scream when Sam hit me." He said she was quicker than I at her lessons. And this rankled the
deeper because it was true. But I would never admit it. "Of course she's quick, when he's always helping her. Why doesn't he
ever come and help me?" I would burst into tears of vexation. My father
was unfair! More than that, it was he and his dock and his warehouse, in the years
that followed my thrills with Sam, that stripped all these thrills away. A great ship with her spreading, booming white sails might move up the
river from heathen lands as wonderful and strange as you please. But the
moment she reached my father's dock she became a dirty, spotted thing,
just a common every-day part of his business. He himself was nothing but business. His business was with ships and the
sea, and yet he had never once in his life taken a long sea voyage. "Why
doesn't he? Why does he like only tiresome things?" I argued secretly to
myself. "Why does he always come ashore?" He always did. In my memories
of ships sailing I see him always there on deck talking to the captain,
scowling, wrinkling his eyes over the smoke of his cigar, but always
coming down the gang-plank at the end, unconcernedly turning his back on
all the excitement and going back to his warehouse. He could get excited about ships, but only in the queerest way that had
something to do with his business. Late one night from my bed I heard
his voice downstairs, cutting and snarling through other voices. I got
out of bed and stole downstairs and along the half-lit hall to the
library door, and there from behind the curtain I watched what was going
on inside. The library was full of men, grave, courteous-looking
gentlemen, some of them angry, some merely amused. My father was leaning
over his table talking of ships, of mysterious things that he said must
be done with battleships and tariffs. "And mark me, gentlemen," he cried. "If we don't do these things in time
American sails will be swept from the seas!" Listening, I got a picture of an immense broom reaching out of the
clouds and sweeping American ships off the ocean. But I could make
nothing of this at the time. I only watched his face and eyes and his
fist that came down with a crash on the table. And I was afraid of my
father. When ships lay at his dock the captains often came up to dinner. But
even these marvelous creatures lost in my father's presence all that Sam
had given them in my eyes. They did not like my mother, they ate in
uneasy silence, or spoke gruffly of their dull affairs. Once or twice I
heard talk of mutinies, of sailors shot down or put in irons, but all in
a matter-of-fact sort of way. Mere grunts came from my father. Steadily
drearier grew the ocean, flatter all the heathen lands. One stout, red-faced captain, jovial even in spite of my mother, would
annoy me frightfully by joking about my going to sea. He was always
asking me when I meant to run away and be "a bloody pirate." He took it
for granted I liked the sea, was thrilled by the sea, when the truth of
it was that I hated the sea! It was business now, only business! My father's warehouse, too, lost its mystery as I grew older. For
exploring into its darkness I found that of course it did have walls
like any common building. The things in it, too, lost their wonder. It
was as though my father had packed all the rich and romantic Far East
into common barrels and crates and then nailed down the covers. And he
himself became for me as common as his warehouse. For in his case, too,
I could see the walls. "I know you now," I thought to myself. He could sit through supper
night after night and not utter a word in his gloom. But the mystery in
him was gone. Business, nothing but business. A man and a place to be
let alone. *       *       *       *       *

But it was my mother more than anyone else who drew me away from the
harbor. All through those early years she was the one who never changed,
the strong sure friend I could always come back to. My mother was as
safe as our house. She was a small, slender woman grown bodily stronger year by year by the
sheer force of her spirit. I remember her smoothly parted hair, brown
but showing gray at forty, the strong, lined face and the kindly eyes
which I saw so often lighted by that loving smile of hers for me. If my
father didn't care for me, I was always sure she did. I could feel her
always watching, trying to understand what I was thinking and feeling. As when I was very small she toned down the stories she read, so she did
in everything else for me, even in her religion. Though she was a strong
church woman, I heard little from her of the terrors of hell. But I
heard much of heaven and more still of a heaven on earth. "Thy will be
done on earth as it is in heaven." I can never forget how she spoke
those words as I knelt and repeated them after her--not so much in the
tone of a prayer to a higher being as in one of quiet resolve to
herself. To do her share, through church and hospital and charity work
and the bringing up of her children, her share in the establishment of a
heaven upon the earth, this was her religion. And this heaven on earth of my mother's was made up of all that was
"fine" in humanity past and present. "Fine, fine!" she would say of some
kind deed, of some new plan for bettering life, or of some book she was
reading, some music she had heard, or of a photograph of some great
painting over in Europe. All her life she had wanted to go abroad. My mother was one of those first American women who went to college, and
one of that army sent out from college as school teachers all over the
land. She had taught school in frontier hamlets far out West, homesick
she had looked back on the old college town in New England, and those
ten years of her life out West had been bare and hard, an exile. At last
she had secured a position in an expensive girls' school in New York,
and from there a few years later she had married my father. I think they
had been happy at first, I think that his work with the ships had seemed
to her a gateway leading out to Europe, to all the very "finest" things. But later, as he set his whole mind upon his warehouse worries, upon his
fight for Yankee ships, a navy, subsidies, tariffs, and shut out all
thought of travel, culture, friends, all but the bare, ugly business of
life--my mother had rebelled against this, had come to hate his harbor,
and had determinedly set herself to help me get what she had missed. I don't mean that she babied me. She was too good a teacher for that. I
mean she steered me through hard work away from what she saw in the
harbor up toward what she felt was fine. She began when I was very
little giving me daily lessons at home in the brief time she had to
spare from her house and charity work. She made me study and she studied
me. My mother, sooner or later, seemed to find out all I did or felt. Often I would hold stubbornly back. While I was going with Sam to the
docks I never once gave her a hint of my rovings. It was not until two
years after that drunken woman disaster that I suddenly told my mother
about it. I remember then she did not chide. Instead she caught the
chance to draw out of me all I had learned from the harbor. I talked to
her long that night, but she said little in reply. I can vividly
remember, though, how she came to me a few days later and placed a "book
for young men" in my hands. "You are only twelve," she said. "It's a pity. But after what you have
seen, my son, it is better that you know." She did this twenty years ago. It was far in advance of what most
parents did then or are doing even now for their children. And it threw
a flood of light into the darkest place in my mind, swept away endless
forebodings, secret broodings over what until then had seemed to me the
ugliest, the dirtiest, the most frightening thing I had found in life. "When you meet anything ugly or bad," she told me, "I don't want you to
turn away at once, I want you to face it and see what it is. Understand
it and then leave it, and then it won't follow you in the dark." "Keep clean," she said. And understanding me as she did, I think she
added to herself, "And I must keep you quiet." She once told me she
hoped that when I grew up I might become a professor in one of those
college towns she loved, where I might work all my life in peace. Although she never said anything to me against the harbor, I knew that
my mother put all the ugliest things in life down there. And the things
that were fine were all up here. "I always like the front door of a house," she used to say, "to be wide
and low with only a step or two leading up. I like it to look
hospitable, as though always waiting for friends to come in." Our front door was like that, and the neighborhood it waited for was one
of the quietest, the cleanest and the finest, according to her view, of
any in the country. The narrow little street had wide, leisurely
sidewalks and old-fashioned houses on either side, a few of red brick,
but more of brown stone with spotless white-sashed windows which were
tall and narrow and rounded at the top. There were no trees, but there
were many smooth, orderly vines. Almost all the houses had wide,
inviting doorways like ours, but the people they invited in were only
those who lived quietly here, shutting out New York and all the toots
and rumblings of the ships and warehouses and docks below, of which they
themselves were the owners. These people in their leisurely way talked of literature and music, of
sculpture and painting and travel abroad, as their fathers and even
grandfathers had done--in times when the rest of the country, like one
colossal harbor, changing, heaving, seething, had had time for only the
crudest things, for railroads, mining camps, belching mills, vast herds
of cattle and droves of sheep, for the frontier towns my mother had
loathed, for a Civil War, for a Tweed Ring, for the Knights of Labor, a
Haymarket riot, for the astounding growth of cities, slums, corporations
and trusts, in this deep turbulent onward rush, this peopling of a
continent. And because my father, crude and self-made and come out of the West, was
of this present country, he was an intruder politely avoided by these
people of the past. The men would come sometimes at night, but they came
only on business. They went straight through to the library, whence I
could hear my father's voice, loud, impatient, angry, talking of what
must be done soon, or Germany and England would drive the American flag
from the ocean and make us beggars on the seas, humbly asking the ships
of our rivals to give us a share in the trade of the world. To such
disturbing meetings these grave and courteous gentlemen came less and
less as the years went by. And so that hospitable front door of ours waited long for neighbors. CHAPTER IV


But if my father was an intruder, a disturber of the peace of these
contented gentlemen, my mother was more and more liked by their wives. As time wore on they came to our house in the afternoons, upon hospital
and church affairs. And first in the church and then in a private school
near by I grew to be friends with their children. Across the street from us at the corner there stood a huge, square
brownstone house with a garden and a wide yard around it. Two boys and a
little girl lived here, and about them our small circle centered. Here
we played hockey in winter, part of the yard being flooded for our use;
and in Spring and Autumn, ball, tag, I spy, prisoner's base and other
games. They were all well enough as far as they went, but all were so
very young and tame compared to my former adventures with Sam. Adventures, that was the difference. These were only games. I felt poor beside these boys, in this ample yard by their grandfather's
house. I often saw his great carriage roll out of the stable behind the
yard. "Coach," they called it. It had rich silver trimmings and a red
thing called a "crest," and a footman and coachman in top boots. Inside
the house was a butler who was still more imposing, and a lofty room
with spacious windows called the picture gallery. But by far the most
awesome of all was the white-headed grandfather of these boys, who had
been to Europe twenty-eight times and could read and speak "every
language on earth," as I was told in whispers while we peeped in through
his library door. There he sat with all his books, a man so rich he
never even went to his office, a man who had owned not only warehouses
but hundreds of ships and had sent them to every land in the world! While, as for me, my grandfather was not even alive. I felt poor and
small, and I did not like it. Besides, these unadventurous boys all put me down as "a queer kid." I
was middling good at most of their games and would get sudden spurts
when I would become almost a leader. But at other times, often right in
the middle of a game, I would suddenly forget where I was and would
think of Sam, of the cannibals that I had seen, of the man who had
jumped from the Great Bridge, or of that drunken woman. They would catch
me at it and call me queer. And I would grow hot and feel ashamed. On the other hand, poor and queer as I felt at times, at others I would
swell with my wisdom and importance. For what did they know, these
respectable boys, about the docks and the gangs of "Micks" deep down
there below us all as we played about in our nice little gardens. When
they called me queer, sometimes I would retort with dark hints, all
games would stop, they would gather close, and then I would tell these
intense eager boys the things I had learned from the harbor. And I had
the more pleasure in the telling from the feeling of relief that now I
was safe away from it all. "That's the real thing, that is," I would declare impressively. But how
good it felt to me to be free of such reality. *       *       *       *       *

At such times we made "the Chips" stay over on their side of the yard. "The Chips" were three small admiring girls. One was my young sister
Sue, who was then about nine years old, long-legged, skinny and quick as
a flash, her black hair always flying. The second, a plump freckled
girl, was the younger sister of the boys who lived here. And the third
was a quiet little thing who lived around the corner. We called them
"Chips" to annoy them. We got the term from the stout coachman in the
barn who used it with a fine sweeping contempt that included all his
lady friends. We ourselves had the most profound contempt for these
girls who kept poking into our games. At times we would stop everything
and take the utmost pains to explain to them that they were nothing
whatever but girls. And this would make Sue furious. She would screw up
her snapping black eyes and viciously stick out her tongue and stamp her
foot and say "darn!" to show she could swear like a regular kid. And
still they hung around us. But as time wore on we grew more indulgent, we included them more and
more. And this was largely due to me. For I took a vague curious
interest in the one who lived around the corner. Her name was Eleanore Dillon and her age was eight, and she had
attractions that slowly grew. To begin with, as I became gradually
aware, she was much the prettiest of the three. She had light curly hair
tied up in red ribbons, always _fresh_ red ribbons. Everything about her
was always fresh and clean. She had the most serious blue eyes, which at
times would grow intent on what a tall chap of twelve like myself
condescended to tell her, and at other times wondrously confiding. Eleanore first attracted me by making me a hero. It was a warm May
afternoon and she was sitting on the grass with her doll and her two
companions. Sue had stolen some matches and was using them as
Jackstraws. Suddenly I heard a scream, then I saw Sue racing like mad
toward the garden hose, and I saw that the white skirt of Eleanore's
dress had caught fire. As yet there was only a little flame. She was
sitting still motionless on the grass, hugging her doll, with scared
round eyes. I got to her first and with my cap I beat out the flame. I
was suddenly panting, my hands were cold. But a few moments later, when
Sue and two of the boys came tugging the hose, it as suddenly flashed
upon me that I had done a heroic thing. "Get out!" I shouted scornfully, as they started to play the hose on
her. "Can't you see the whole fire is out?" And then while the plump freckled girl came screeching out of the
kitchen with half the servants behind her, and presently these servants
all called me "a little heero"--the one whom I had rescued looked up at
me very gratefully and said,

"Thank you, Boy, for not letting them squirt water on my dolly's clean
dress." "Aw, what do I care for a doll?" I retorted ungraciously. But I liked her from that day. She was not at all like Sue. She was
quiet and knew her place. She knew that she was only a girl, how
thoroughly well she knew it. And yet, although so feminine, so
deliberate and sedate, she had "a pile of ginger" deep down inside of
her. In our games, whenever allowed to play, with a dogged resolution
she would come pegging along in the rear, she was a sticker, she never
gave up. In winter when they flooded the yard she was the poorest skater
of all, but patiently plodding along on the ice, each time she fell down
she would pick herself up with such determination that at last with a
jerk at her arm I said,

"Here, Chip, come on and I'll teach you." She came on. I can still feel her soft determined clutch on my elbow. When I said, "That's enough," she said, "Thank you, Boy," and went
quietly on alone. After that I taught her many times. One afternoon when there was a thaw,
I said,

"Gee, but this ice is rotten." And then Eleanore asked me placidly,

"Do you like my pretty new shoes?" "What's that got to do with it?" I demanded indignantly. "Nothing, I guess," she said meekly. This girl was full of mysteries. One great point in her favor was that
she had a mother "at death's door." This appealed to me tremendously. It was so unusual. "How's your mother?" I would ask her often, just for the pleasure of
hearing her answer softly,

"She's at death's door, thank you." She soon learned to skate much better, and I remember quite vividly
still the January afternoon when as the darkness deepened a silvery moon
appeared overhead. I had not skated with her for a week, but now we'd
been skating for nearly an hour. One by one the others went home, and
the plump girl turned at the kitchen door to call back to Eleanore
tauntingly,

"You'll catch it, going home so late!" "Never mind," said a gentle voice at my side, and round and round we
skated. The moon grew steadily brighter. Still that soft steady clutch
on my arm. "Now you'd better go home," I said gruffly at last. "What time is it?" she asked me. I looked at my watch. "Gee! It's nearly seven o'clock!" "What a pretty watch that is," she said in a pleased, quiet voice, but I
was not to be diverted. "Go on home, I tell you. Sit down and I'll take off your skates." She
sighed regretfully but obeyed. "What'll they do to you?" I asked her when we stopped in front of her
house. "They'll try to punish me," she answered. I looked down at her
anxiously. "Hard?" I inquired. She smiled at me. "What time is it now?" she asked. "Ten minutes after seven." "Then they won't punish me," she said. "My father always comes home at
seven." And she went placidly into the house. "A mighty smart Chip," I said to myself. I had told her a little about the docks, and one day she asked me to
take her there. I promptly refused, but patiently from time to time she
repeated her request. She wanted me to take her "just for a little
walk" down there, or she would run if I preferred. She wanted to come
out after supper into her garden, which was only the third from ours,
and then she would sing and I would whistle. Then I would come around by
the street and she would meet me at her front gate. I don't know how she
ever persuaded me, but she did, and the plan worked splendidly. At the
gate without a word I took her hand and ran down the street. Soon we
were flying. Down to the open space we came, and around across the
railroad tracks. In and out among grimy freight cars we sped. I would
not stop. "Christ!" I thought in terror. "Suppose Sam and the gang come around
this way!" I had not seen them now for years. What might not they do to
her? But she made me stop by my father's dock. She was gasping and her face
was red, but with her hand like a little vise on mine she stood there
staring at the ship. "Where are the heathen?" she asked at last, in a queer choking voice. "There." I pointed to a small brown man with a white skull-cap on his
head. "There's one. See him? Now come home!" "Wait a minute, please," she begged very softly. A moment longer she
stared at him. "All right, now we'll go," she said. When I got her safe inside my gate I was in a cold sweat. This
adventure, to my surprise, had been one of the most thrilling of all. And who'd have thought _her_ an adventurer? Her mother died that summer while we were up in the mountains, and when
we came back we found the house empty. Her father had taken her out
West. I remember being distinctly relieved when I heard that she had gone
away. For now there was something uncanny about her. It was one thing to
have a mother "at death's door." That had been quite exciting. But to
have one dead! There was something too awful about it. I would not have
known what to say to the girl. And, besides, the thought suddenly
entered my mind--suppose my own mother were to die! *       *       *       *       *

We had been splendid chums, my mother and I, that long delightful summer
up in the White Mountains. The mountains, we had decided together, were
our favorite place to live in. "I will lift up mine eyes unto the
hills," was the part of the Bible which she liked best. She loved these
hills for their quiet, I loved them for the exciting adventures I had
with Sue and "Stouty," the son of the farmer with whom we stayed. But
these adventures were of a kind that my mother warmly approved of for
me. They were not like those on the harbor. An adventure to climb with Stouty and Sue up through the resinous
branches of an enormous pine on the mountainside to the hawk's nest in
the bare top branches, snatch the eggs and smash them, while Stouty with
a big thick stick would beat off the mother hawk. An adventure to
clamber half the day up a bouldery path through firs and birches,
looking into black caves, peeping over steep cliffs, and at last
reaching the wind-swept summit to look off through miles of emptiness. An adventure, coming home from a picnic as evening was falling, to sit
snug in that creaking capacious wagon which belonged to Stouty's father,
and to watch the lights and shadows that darted in and out of the pines
as the lantern swung beneath our wheels. But even up here in the mountains the harbor reached with its cold
embrace. For at night it was an adventure hurriedly to undress and bury
myself in the covers in time to hear the first low rumble of "the night
freight" that went by some five miles distant. It made me think of the
trains on the docks, whose voices I had heard at night, and of the
things I had done with Sam. I would hear the mountain engine come
panting impatiently up the grade. As it reached the top I would rise
from my bed and soar off into space, in one swift rushing flight through
the darkness I would be there in the nick of time, I would swing on to a
freight car in the way Sam had shown me, climb to the top and crouching
there I would watch the dark roadway open ahead through the silent
forest. Lower would sink the voice of the engine until it became a faint
confused mutter. And the rest was dreamland. This was one of those secret games I never told my mother about--until,
to my own surprise, in one of those long talks at night when she seemed
drawing me to her right out through my eyes, I blurted this out. My
mother wanted to know all about it. Did my hands get cold? Yes, colder
and colder, as listening here in bed I heard the first muttering of the
train and knew that in a few moments more I would take that five-mile
flight, right through the window and over the trees to the distant
track, to be there just ahead of the on-puffing engine. My voice
quivered excitedly as I spoke. "I see--I see," she said soothingly. "And when you are riding on top of
a car--aren't you ever frightened?" "No--because all the time I know that I am back there at home in my bed. I can see myself back there behind me." "Do you fall asleep in bed--or are you still on the top of the car the
last thing you can remember?" "Most always on the top of the car." "And when you sleep--do you always dream?" "Yes--that's the finest part of it." "Do you ever dream of Sam?" "Yes." "And all those things you did on the harbor?" "Yes--all." For some moments she sat by my bedside quietly stroking one of my hands. "Billy." "Yes, mother." I was growing impatient, I wished she would go, for now
it was nearly time for the train. "Have you ever played other games like that? I mean where you leave
yourself and look back--and see your own body behind you." "Yes--in bed in Brooklyn when I was quite little." "Where did you go from your bed?" "I went to the end of the garden. I heard drunken sailors and dockers
shouting in that vile saloon below." This was not true. What I had
really done was to lie in bed and whisper, "_Suppose_ I were out
there"--which is very different. I was too young then to have learned
the real trick. But now I was so proud of it that I honestly thought I
had always known how. "It was a game I had with the harbor," I said. "With the harbor." I felt her hand slowly tighten on mine. Then all at
once as we heard the first low grumble of the freight train coming, my
mother's hold grew tighter and tighter. "Open your eyes." I opened them
quickly, for her voice was sharp and stern. She held me until the sound
was gone. "Do you hear it any longer?" she asked quietly at last. "No," I whispered. My breath still came fast. "Neither do I." There was another silence. "Let's go and sit by the
window," she said. And there she talked to me of the stars. How great they were and how
very quiet. She said that the greatest men in the world were almost
always quiet like that. They never let their hands get cold. Often after that in the evenings just before I went to bed we had these
talks about the stars. And not only in the mountains. On sparkling
frosty winter nights we watched them over the harbor. And the things she
said about them were so utterly absorbing that I would never think to
look down, would barely hear the toots and the puffings and grinding of
wheels from that infernal region below. For always when she spoke of
the stars my mother spoke of great men too, the men who had done the
"finest" things--a few in the clash and jar of life like Washington and
Lincoln, but most of them more quietly, by preaching, writing, painting,
composing, sermons, books, pictures and music so "fine" that all the
best people on earth had known about them and loved them. As I grew older she read to me more and more about these men. And
sometimes I would feel deeply content as though I had found what I
wanted. But more often I would feel myself swell up big inside of me,
restless, worrying, groping for something. I didn't know what I wanted
then, but I do know now as I look back, and I think there are thousands
of children like me, the kind who are called "queer kids" by their
playmates, who are all groping for much the same thing. "Where is the Golden Age to-day?" they are asking. "We hear of all this
from our mothers. We hear of brave knights and warriors, of God and
Christ as they walked around on earth like regular people, of saints and
preachers, writers and painters. But where are the great men living now? Not in our house nor on our street, nor in school nor in our church on
the corner. There is nothing there that thrills us. Why isn't there? What is the matter? We are no longer babies, we are becoming big boys
and girls. What will we do when we are grown up? Has everything fine
already been done? Is there no chance for us to be great and to do
them?" It was to questionings like these that my mother had led me up from the
harbor. CHAPTER V


And to such questionings I believe that for many children of my kind
there is often some familiar place--a schoolroom or a commonplace
street, or a dreary farm in winter, a grimy row of factories or the ugly
mouth of a mine--that mutely answers,

"No. There are no more great men for you, nor any fine things left to be
done. There is nothing else left in the world but me. And you'd better
stop trying to find it." In my case this message came from the harbor, that one part of the
modern world which looked up at me steadily day after day. Vaguely
struggle as I would to build up fine things in the present from all that
my mother brought out of the past, the harbor would not let me. For what
I clothed it soon stripped naked, what I built it soon tore down. "When you were little," it seemed to say, "for you I was filled with
thrilling idols--cannibals and condors, Sam, strange wonder-ships and
sailors adventuring to heathen lands. But then I dragged these idols
down and made you see me as I am. And as I showed myself to you, so I'll
show up all other wonderful places or men that your mother would have
you believe in." It did this, as I remember it, in the easiest most trivial ways, like
some huge beast that flicks off a fly and then lumbers unconcernedly on. My mother by years of patient work had built up my religion, filling it
with the grand figures of God and Christ and his followers down to the
present time, ending with Henry Ward Beecher. When this man died I felt
awe at her silent grief. All at once the idea popped into my head that I
too might become a great preacher. And still greater, I soon learned, I
might become a preacher who went far off to heathen lands, braving
cannibals and death and giving to thousands of heathen eternal happiness
and life. Our church was sending out such a man. I heard him described
as a hero of God, and I thought of pictures I had seen of saints and
martyrs with soft haloes around their heads. But this hero of God came down to the harbor. He was to sail for China
from my father's dock. He wore, I remember, a brown derby hat and a
little top coat. He was thin, with stooping shoulders, he was flustered
in the excitement of leaving, nervously laughing as he shook hands with
admiring women and talking fast in his high jerky voice. Two big dockers
trundled his trunks. I saw them grin at the little man and spit tobacco
juice his way. My father came by, shot one contemptuous glance, and then
went on board to his business. I looked back at the hero. Off fell the
halo from his head. "No," I said gloomily to myself, "I never want to be like you." And
drearily I looked around. What heaps and heaps of business here. What an
immense gray harbor. I found no more thrills in church after that. And as with religion, so with love. In reading of men of the Golden Age
I came upon stories of high romance that made me strangely happy. But I
saw no love of this kind in our house. I saw my mother and father living
sharply separate lives, and I saw few kisses between them. I saw my
father absorbed in his business, with little time for my mother. And I
blamed this on the harbor. Long ago the same grim place had taught me
something else about this many-sided passion between men and women, and
one day it rose suddenly up in my mind:

I must have been about fifteen when my little friend Eleanore Dillon
came back. Soon she and Sue were intimate chums, they went to school
together. My mother invited her up to the mountains, and there I was
with her a good deal. She was now nearly twelve years old, and the life
in the West with her father had left her sturdy as you please. And yet
somehow she still seemed to me the same feminine little creature, and as
she told me stories of the life out West, where her father, who was an
engineer, had built bridges, planned out harbors and new cities, I would
wonder vaguely about her. What a fresh, clean little person to be
talking of such places. She was talking to me in this way one drowsy August afternoon. We had
been fishing down on the river, and now on our way home up the long hot
slope of the meadow we had stopped to cool ourselves in the shadow of a
haystack. It was fragrant there. Presently, from the top of the stack
close over our heads, a bird poured forth a ravishing song. And Eleanore
with a deep "Oh-h" of delight threw both her hands behind her head, sank
back in the hay and lay there close beside me. Her eyes were shut and
she was smiling to herself. Then as the song of the bird bubbled on, I
felt suddenly a little shock, a new disturbing feeling. Breathlessly I
watched her face. The song stopped and Eleanore opened her eyes, met
mine, and closed them quickly. I saw a slight tightening of her
features. I grew anxious at once and awkward. I wanted to get away. But as I made a first uneasy movement, a bit of bright color caught my
eye. It was one of her red garters which had slipped down from beneath
her skirt. And all at once out of my memory rose a picture of years ago,
a picture from the harbor, of that fat drunken girl I had seen. She too
had worn red garters--in fact, little else! With disgusting vividness up
she came! And I jumped trembling to my feet. "I'm going home," I said roughly, and left my small companion. I kept away from her after that. And even the following winter, when
she came over often to our house to spend the night with Sue, I did my
best to avoid her. I avoided all Sue's friends. I did not keep girls
quite out of my thoughts, I had spells now and then when I would read
about them in novels, papers and magazines, anything I could lay hands
on. I would read hungrily, at times almost wistfully. But all the
stories that I read, however romantic, could never quite overbalance for
me that giggling woman I had seen. "This is what love can be these days, foul as two pigs in a sty," said
the harbor. The same thing happened again with war and the great idea of giving
one's life for one's country. By countless eager questionings I had forced my mother to include among
our heroes men like Napoleon, Nelson and Grant, and after I gave up
hopes of the church these men for a time became greatest of all. You
needed no mother to help you here. It was the easiest thing in the world
to picture yourself leading charges or standing high up on a hill like
Grant, quietly smoking a black cigar and sending your orderlies on the
mad gallop out to all corners of the field. My hill grew very real to
me. It had three wind-swept trees on top and I stood just in front of
them. When the war with Spain broke out I was still in my 'teens, still rather
thin and by no means tall, but I made up my mind to try to enlist. Even
now I can shut my eyes and see again that long night on the docks when I
watched two regiments embark on ships which were to sail at dawn. With
the uniforms, the crash of bands, the flags, the cheers, the women
laughing and crying, the harbor seemed all on my side that night. "This is certainly what I want!" I thought. But my father forbade my going. He was not only stern, he was savage. For once he came out of himself and talked. And his talk was not only
against this war but against all wars. The Civil War was the worst of
all. This was the more a surprise to me because I knew that he himself
had been with the Boys of Sixty One, I had often boasted about it. But
now I learned he had not fought at all, he had been a mere commissary
clerk moving rations and blankets on freight trains! "The business side of war," he said. "And when you've seen that side of
it you know how rotten a big war is! Men in the North made millions by
sending such rotten meat to the front that we had to live on the people
down South, we had to go into their farms and plantations and plunder
defenseless women and children of all they had to eat! That's war! And
war is filthy stinking camps where men die of fever and scurvy like
flies--and war is field hospitals so rotten in their management that you
see the wounded in long lines--packed together like bloody
sardines--bleeding to death for the lack of care! When they're dead you
dig big trenches and you pile 'em in like dogs! In time of war remember
peace--and then you'll be ashamed you're there!" For a moment I was struck dumb with surprise. What was this strange fire
deep down within my father's soul that could give out such a flash? Confusedly I wondered. A sudden idea crossed my mind. "But if that's how you feel," I retorted, "why are you always talking
about the battleships we need? You want a big navy----"

"Yes," he snapped, "to keep this country _out_ of war! If you live long
enough you'll see what I mean--remember then what I'm telling you! This
country needs a navy so big she can trade wherever she likes and make
other nations leave her alone! But she doesn't want war! Sixty One was
enough! Some day when you get a man's eyes in your head you'll see what
that did to this harbor!" I had it now, the cause of all his curious wrath! War had hurt his
harbor! How or why I did not care. Could this harbor of his stand
nothing heroic? Patriotism, religion, love--must they all be shoved
aside to make way for his dull business? *       *       *       *       *

About a year later I was torn for months between two careers. Should I
become a great musician or a famous writer? The idea of writing came to
me first, I got it from "Pendennis," and for a time it took hold so hard
I thought I was nicely settled for life. But then my mother read aloud
"The Lives of Great Musicians," and within a few weeks the piano lessons
which for years I had thought so dull became an absorbing passion. My
mother bought me a photograph of one of the Beethoven portraits, and
around it over my desk I tacked up pictures of famous pianists that I
cut from magazines. I went to concerts in New York. Better still, my
teacher secured me admittance to some orchestra rehearsals, where like a
real professional, all mere amateurs shut out, I could sit in the dark
and listen, and shut my eyes and hold my head between my hands. I was
composing! After a month or two of this feverish life I remember the
pride with which I wrote "Opus 38" over my last composition. My rapidity
was astounding! But one day my teacher, a kind tactful German, told me that Beethoven,
when he was composing, had not always shut himself up in a room and
scowled with both hands to his head, as in the portrait of him I had,
but had rather gone out into the world. "The Master found his music," he said, "by listening to the life close
around him." "He did?" I became uneasy at once, for again I felt myself being pushed
toward that eternal harbor. "If I were you," my relentless monitor went on, "and desired to become
in music the great voice of my country"--I looked at him quickly but saw
no smile--"I should watch the great ships down there below, I should
listen to them with an artist's ears. They are here from all over the
world, these ships, they are manned by men of all nations. I should
listen to the songs of these men. I have heard," he added reflectively,
"that some of their songs are centuries old. Beethoven gathered only the
folk songs of his country. But you in your city of all nations might
gather the folk songs of all the seas." I turned quickly. I had been walking the room. "I have heard the sailors sing," I said, "ever since I was a little kid
out there in the garden." I scowled in the effort to search my soul, my
artist's soul. "Yes," I added triumphantly, "and sometimes it brought a
lump in my throat!" "Ah! Now you are a musician!" "I will see what I can do," I said. So again I tackled the harbor. By day it was quite impossible, all toots
and blares, the most frightful discords--but at night its vulgar
loudness was toned down sufficiently so that a fellow with artist's ears
could really stand listening to its life, especially if I did not go too
close but listened from my window. Here with uglier sounds subdued I
could catch low voices, snatches of song and now and then a chorus. "The
folk songs of the Seven Seas!" How that phrase took hold of me! I went for information to an old dock watchman who had been a sailor. "Songs? Why sure!" he answered. "It must be the chanties ye mean." "Chanties?" "That's it. I've been told the word's French." "Oh! Chanter!" "No--chanty. An' the man that sings the verses, he's called the
chantyman. He sings while the crew heaves on the ropes an' they all come
in on the chorus. If he's a real good chantyman he makes up new verses
every time, a kind of a yarn he spins while he sings." Soon after this, toward the end of a warm, windy April night, I awoke
and heard them singing. I jumped up and went to my window. From the dock
next to my father's, over the line of warehouse roofs, I could see the
immense white sails already slowly rising into the starlit night. Quickly I threw on some clothes and hurried down to the docks. The
waterfront was empty, swept clean of all that I disliked. Only overhead
a few billowy clouds, the soft rush of the wind, a slight flush in the
east, it was almost dawn. Here and there gleamed a light, red, green or
yellow, with a phantom tug or barge around it, moving over the black of
the water. Not silence but something richer was here--the confused
mysterious murmuring, the creaking and the breathing of the sleeping
port. And out of this those voices singing. I drew nearer slowly. Hungrily I tried to take in the details of color
and sound. And I felt suddenly such a deep delight as I had never
dreamed of. To look around and listen and gather it into me and
remember. This was great, no doubt about it--it fitted into all that was
fine! "This is really what I want to do--I'd like to learn to do it well--I'd
like to do it all my life!" Slower, more fearfully, I drew near. Would anything happen to spoil it
all? There she lay, the long white ship, laden deep, settled low in the
water. I could see the lines of little dark men heaving together at the
ropes. Each time they hove they sang the refrain, which, no doubt, was
centuries old, a song of the winds, the big bullies of the ocean,
calling to each other as in some wild storm at sea they buffeted the
tiny men who clung to the masts and spars of ships:

    "Blow the man down, bullies,
    Blow him right down! Hey! Hey! Blow the man down! Give us the time to blow the man down!" But what were the verses? I could hear the plaintive tenor voice of the
chantyman who sang them--now low and almost mournful, now passionate,
thrilling up into the night, as though yearning for all that was hid in
the heavens. Could a man like that feel things like that? But what were
the words he was singing, this yarn he was spinning in his song? I came around by the foot of the slip and walked rapidly up the dockshed
toward one of its wide hatchways. The singing had stopped, but as I drew
close a rough voice broke the silence:

"Sing it again, Paddy!" I looked out. Close by on the deck, in the hard blue glare of an
arc-light, were some twenty men, dirty, greasy, ragged, sweating, all
gripping the ropes and waiting for Paddy, who rolled his quid in his
mouth, spat twice, and then began:

    "As I went awalking down Paradise Street
    A pretty young maiden I chanced for to meet." A heave on the ropes and a deafening roar:

    "Blow the man down, bullies,
    Blow him right down! Hey! Hey! Blow the man down!" Again the solo voice, plaintiff and tender:

    "By her build I took her for Dutch. She was square in the stuns'l and bluff in the bow." The rest was a detailed account of the night spent with the maiden. Roar
on roar rose the boisterous chorus: "Blow the man down, bullies, blow
him right down!" The big patched, dirty sails went jerking and flapping
up toward the stars, which from here were so faint they could barely be
seen. And the ship moved out on the harbor. "There go the folk songs of the seas," I thought disgustedly, looking
out on the water now showing itself grease-mottled in the first raw
light of day. I tried other songs with my artist's ears and found them all much like
the first, the music like the very stars, the words like the grease and
scum on the water. I was about giving up my search when I met my old
friend, the watchman. "Well, did ye find the chanties?" he asked. "Yes," I said. "They can't be printed." His old eyes twinkled merrily:

"Of course they can't. An' _most_ songs an' stories can't. But I'll give
ye a nice little song ye can print. It's the oldest chanty of 'em all. I'll try to remember an' write it down." Here is the song he gave me:

ROLLING HOME

    To Australia's fair-haired maidens
    We will bid our last good-bye. We are going home to England,
    We may never more see you. Rolling home, rolling home,
          Rolling home across the sea,
          Rolling home to merry England,
          Rolling home dear land to thee. We will leave you our best wishes
    As we leave your rocky shores,
    We are going home to England,
    We may never see you more. Rolling home....

    Up aloft amidst her rigging
    Spreading out her snow white sails,
    Like a bird with outstretched pinions,
    On we speed before the gale. Rolling home....

    And the wild waves, as we leave them,
    Seem to murmur as they roll;
    There are hands and hearts to greet thee
    In that land to which you go. 