



Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








AMARYLLIS AT THE FAIR



THE READERS' LIBRARY

Uniform with this Volume


BELLOC, H.

  AVRIL. Essays on the Poetry of the French Renaissance


BIRRELL, AUGUSTINE

  ORBITER DICTA


BOURNE, GEORGE

  MEMOIRS OF A SURREY LABOURER


BROOKS, STOPFORD A. STUDIES IN POETRY. Essays on Blake, Scott, Shelley, Keats, etc. EVERETT, W.

  ITALIAN POETS SINCE DANTE


GALSWORTHY, JOHN

  A COMMENTARY


HUDSON, W. H.

  GREEN MANSIONS. A Romance of the Tropical Forest

  THE PURPLE LAND. Descriptive Romance


JEFFERIES, RICHARD

  AMARYLLIS AT THE FAIR

  BEVIS. The Story of a Boy

  AFTER LONDON


MCCABE, JOSEPH

  ST. AUGUSTINE AND HIS AGE


NEVINSON, H. W.

  ESSAYS IN FREEDOM


STEPHEN, SIR LESLIE

  ENGLISH LITERATURE AND SOCIETY

  IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

  STUDIES OF A BIOGRAPHER. First Series. Two Volumes

  STUDIES OF A BIOGRAPHER. Second Series. Two Volumes


WITTE, DR. CARL

  ESSAYS ON DANTE


ROOSEVELT, THEODORE

  THE STRENUOUS LIFE. Essays and Addresses


ECKENSTEIN, LINA

  COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN NURSERY RHYMES: Essays in a Branch of Folklore


CUNNINGHAME GRAHAM, R. B. PROGRESS, and other Sketches


Additional Volumes will be announced from time to time





AMARYLLIS AT THE FAIR

BY

RICHARD JEFFERIES

AUTHOR OF "THE GAMEKEEPER AT HOME," "AFTER LONDON," "WOOD MAGIC; A
FABLE," "BEVIS," ETC. "Our day is but a finger: bring large cups." ALCAEUS. [Illustration]

          LONDON
          DUCKWORTH AND CO.
          3, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, W.C.


          Reissued 1904
          Reprinted in Readers Library 1911
          _All rights reserved_


                 =Dedicated=

                     TO

          CHARLES PRESTWICH SCOTT. [Illustration]




INTRODUCTION. [1]


"THE book is not a novel" is a phrase often in the mouth of critics, who
on second thoughts might, perhaps, add with less emphasis, "It does not
conform to the common type of novel." Fortified, however, with that
sense of rectitude that dictates conformity to our neighbours and a safe
acquiescence in the mysterious movements of public taste, the critics
have exclaimed with touching unanimity--"What a pity Jefferies tried to
write novels! Why didn't he stick to essays in natural history!" What a pity Jefferies should have given us "Amaryllis at the Fair," and
"After London"!--this opinion has been propagated with such fervency
that it seems almost a pity to disturb it by inquiring into the nature
of these his achievements. Certainly the critics, and their critical
echoes, are united. "He wrote some later novels of indifferent merit,"
says a critic in "Chambers' Encyclopaedia." "Has anyone ever been able to
write with free and genuine appreciation of even the later novels?" asks or echoes a lady, Miss Grace Toplis, writing on Jefferies. "In
brief, he was an essayist and not a novelist at all," says Mr. Henry
Salt. "It is therefore certain that his importance for posterity will
dwindle, if it has not already dwindled, to that given by a bundle of
descriptive selections. But these will occupy a foremost place on their
particular shelf, the shelf at the head of which stands Gilbert White
and Gray," says Mr. George Saintsbury. "He was a reporter of genius, and
he never got beyond reporting. Mr. Besant has the vitalising imagination
which Jefferies lacked," says Mr. Henley in his review of Walter
Besant's "Eulogy of Richard Jefferies"; and again, "They are not novels
as he (Walter Besant) admits, they are a series of pictures. . . . That
is the way he takes Jefferies at Jefferies' worst." Yes, it is very
touching this unanimity, and it is therefore a pleasure for this critic
to say that in his judgment "Amaryllis at the Fair" is one of the very
few later-day novels of English country life that are worth putting on
one's shelf, and that to make room for it he would turn out certain
highly-praised novels by Hardy which do not ring quite true, novels
which the critics and the public, again with touching unanimity, have
voted to be of high rank. But what is a novel? the reader may ask. A
novel, says the learned Charles Annandale, is "a fictitious prose
narrative, involving some plot of greater or less intricacy, and
professing to give a picture of real life, generally exhibiting the
passions and sentiments, in a state of great activity, and especially
the passion of love." Well, "Amaryllis at the Fair" is a fictitious
prose narrative professing to give a picture of real life, and involving
a plot of little intricacy. Certainly it exhibits the passions and
sentiments in a state of great activity. But Mr. Henry Salt, whose
little book on Jefferies is the best yet published, further remarks:
"Jefferies was quite unable to give any vivid dramatic life to his
stories . . . his instinct was that of the naturalist who observes and
moralizes rather than that of the novelist who penetrates and
interprets; and consequently his rustic characters, though strongly and
clearly drawn, do not live, as, for example, those of Thomas Hardy
live. . . . Men and animals are alike mere figures in his landscapes." *       *       *       *       *

So far the critics. Jefferies being justly held to be "no ordinary
novelist," it is inferred by most that something is wrong with
"Amaryllis the Fair," and the book has been passed over in silence. But
we do not judge every novel by the same test. We do not judge "Tristram
Shandy," for example, by its intricate plot, or by its "vivid drama," we
judge it simply as an artistic revelation of human life and by its
humorous insight into human character. And judged by the same simple
test "Amaryllis at the Fair," we contend, is a living picture of life, a
creative work of imagination of a high order. Iden, the unsuccessful
farmer who "built for all time, and not for the circumstances of the
hour," is a masterly piece of character drawing. But Iden is a personal
portrait, the reader may object, Well, what about Uncle Toby? From what
void did he spring? Iden, to our mind, is almost as masterly a
conception, as broadly human a figure as Uncle Toby. And Mrs. Iden,
where will you find this type of nervous, irritable wife, full of
spiteful disillusioned love for her dilatory husband better painted than
by Jefferies? But Mrs. Iden is a type, not an individual, the reader may
say. Excellent reader! and what about the Widow Wadman? She is no less
and no more of an individual than is Mrs. Iden. It was a great feat of
Sterne to create so cunningly the atmosphere of the Shandy household,
but Jefferies has accomplished an artistic feat also in drawing the
relations of the Idens, father, mother, and daughter. How true, how
unerringly true to human nature is this picture of the Iden household;
how delicately felt and rendered to a hair is his picture of the
father's sluggish, masculine will, pricked ineffectually by the waspish
tongue of feminine criticism. Further, we not only have the family's
idiosyncrasies, their habits, mental atmosphere, and domestic story
brought before us in a hundred pages, easily and instinctively by the
hand of the artist, but we have the whole book steeped in the breath of
English spring, the restless ache of spring that thrills through the
nerves, and stirs the sluggish winter blood; we have the spring feeling
breaking from the March heavens and the March earth in copse, meadow,
and ploughland, as it has scarcely been rendered before by English
novelist. The description of Amaryllis running out into the March wind
to call her father from his potato planting to see the daffodil; the
picture of Iden pretending to sleep in his chair that he may watch the
mice; the description of the girl Amaryllis watching the crowd of plain,
ugly men of the countryside flocking along the road to the fair; the
description of Amadis the invalid, in the old farm kitchen among the
stalwart country folk--all these pictures and a dozen others in the book
are painted with a masterly hand. Pictures! the critical reader may
complain. Yes, pictures of living men and women. What does it matter
whether a revelation of human life is conveyed to us by pictures or by
action so long as it is conveyed? Mr. Saintsbury classes Jefferies with
Gray, presumably because both writers have written of the English
landscape. With Gray! Jefferies in his work as a naturalist and observer
of wild life may be classed merely for convenience with Gilbert White. But this classification only applies to one half of Jefferies' books. By
his "Wild Life in a Southern County" he stands beside Gilbert White; by
his "Story of My Heart" he stands by himself, a little apart from the
poets, and by "Amaryllis at the Fair" he stands among the half-dozen
country writers of the century whose work is racy of the English soil
and of rural English human nature. We will name three of these writers,
Barnes, Cobbett, Waugh, and our attentive readers can name the other
three. To come back to "Amaryllis at the Fair," why is it so masterly, or,
further, wherein is it so masterly, the curious reader may inquire? "Is
it not full of digressions? Granted that the first half of the 'novel'
is beautiful in style, does not Jefferies suddenly break his method,
introduce his own personality, intersperse abrupt disquisitions on food,
illness, and Fleet Street? Is not that description of Iden's dinner a
little--well, a little unusual? In short, is not the book a disquisition
on life from the standpoint of Jefferies' personal experiences? And if
this is so, how can the book be so fine an achievement?" Oh, candid
reader, with the voice of authority sounding in your ears (and have we
not Mr. Henley and Mr. Saintsbury bound in critical amity against us), a
book may break the formal rules, and yet it may yield to us just that
salt of life which we may seek for vainly in the works of more faultless
writers. The strength of "Amaryllis at the Fair" is that its beauty
springs naturally from the prosaic earthly facts of life it narrates,
and that, in the natural atmosphere breathed by its people, the prose
and the poetry of their life are one. In the respect of the artistic
naturalness of its homely picture, the book is very superior to, say
"The Mayor of Casterbridge," where we are conscious that the author has
been at work arranging and rearranging his charming studies and
impressions of the old-world people of Casterbridge into the pattern of
an exciting plot. Now it is precisely in the artificed dramatic story of
"The Mayor of Casterbridge"--and we cite this novel as characteristic,
both in its strength and weakness, of its distinguished author,--that we
are brought to feel that we have not been shown the characters of
Casterbridge going their way in life naturally, but that they have been
moved about, kaleidoscopically, to suit the exigencies of the plot, and
that the more this is so the less significance for us have their
thoughts and actions. Watching the quick whirling changes of Farfrae and
Lucetta, Henchard and Newson in the matrimonial mazes of the story, and
listening to the chorus of the rustics in the wings, we perceive indeed
whence comes that atmosphere of stage crisis and stage effect which
suddenly introduces a disillusioning sense of unreality, and mars the
artistic unity of this charming picture, so truthful in other respects
to English rural life. Plot is Mr. Hardy's weakness, and perfect indeed
and convincing would have been his pictures, if he could have thrown his
plots and his rustic choruses to the four winds. May we not be thankful,
therefore, that Jefferies was no hand at elaborating a plot, and that in
"Amaryllis at the Fair," the scenes, the descriptions, the conversations
are spontaneous as life, and that Jefferies' commentary on them is like
Fielding's commentary, a medium by which he lives with his characters. The author's imagination, memory, and instinctive perception are,
indeed, all working together; and so his picture of human life in
"Amaryllis" brings with it as convincing and as fresh a breath of life
as we find in Cobbett's, Waugh's and Barnes' country writings. When a
writer arrives at being perfectly natural in his atmosphere, his style
and his subject seem to become one. He moves easily and surely. Out of
the splintered mass of ideas and emotions, out of the sensations, the
observations and revelations of his youth, and the atmosphere familiar
to him through long feeling, he builds up a subtle and cunning picture
for us, a complete illusion of life more true than the reality. For what
prosaic people call the reality is merely the co-ordination in their own
minds of perhaps a thousandth part of aspects of the life around them;
and only this thousandth part they have noticed. But the creative mind
builds up a living picture out of the thousands of aspects most of us
are congenitally blind to. This is what Jefferies has done in "Amaryllis
at the Fair." The book is rich in the contradictory forces of life, in
its quick twists and turns: we feel in it there is nature working alike
in the leaves of grass outside the Idens' house, in the blustering winds
round the walls, and in the minds of the characters indoors; and the
style has the freshness of the April wind. Everything is growing,
changing, breathing in the book. But the accomplished critics do not
notice these trivial strengths. It is enough for them that Jefferies was
not a novelist! Indeed, Mr. Saintsbury apparently thinks that Jefferies
made a mistake in drawing his philosophy from an open-air study of
nature, for he writes: "Unfortunately for Jefferies his philosophic
background was not like Wordsworth's clear and cheerful, but wholly
vague and partly gloomy." It was neither vague nor gloomy, we may
remark, parenthetically, but we may admit that Jefferies saw too deeply
into nature's workings, and had too sensuous a joy in life to interpret
all Nature's doings, a la Wordsworth, and lend them a portentously moral
significance. The one charge that may with truth be brought against "Amaryllis at the
Fair" is that its digressions damage the artistic illusion of the whole. The book shows the carelessness, the haste, the roughness of a sketch, a
sketch, moreover, which Jefferies was not destined to carry to the end
he had planned, but we repeat, let us be thankful that its artistic
weaknesses are those of a sketch direct from nature, rather than those
of an ambitious studio picture. And these digressions are an integral
part of the book's character, just as the face of a man has its own
blemishes: they are one with the spirit of the whole, and so, if they
break somewhat the illusion of the scenes, they do not damage its
spiritual unity. It is this spiritual unity on which we must insist,
because "Amaryllis" is indeed Jefferies' last and complete testament on
human life. He wrote it, or rather dictated it to his wife, as he lay in
pain, slowly dying, and he has put into it the frankness of a dying man. How real, how solid, how deliciously sweet seemed those simple earthly
joys, those human appetites of healthy, vigorous men to him! how intense
is his passion and spiritual hunger for the beauty of earth! Like a
flame shooting up from the log it is consuming, so this passion for the
green earth, for the earth in wind and rain and sunshine, consumes the
wasted, consumptive body of the dying man. The reality, the solidity of
the homely farmhouse life he describes spring from the intensity with
which he clings to all he loves, the cold March wind buffeting the face,
the mating cries of the birds in the hot spring sunshine. Life is so
terribly strong, so deliciously real, so full of man's unsatisfied
hungry ache for happiness; and sweet is the craving, bitter the
knowledge of the unfulfilment. So, inspiring and vivifying the whole, in
every line of "Amaryllis" is Jefferies' philosophy of life. Jefferies
"did not understand human nature," say the accomplished critics. Did he
not? "Amaryllis at the Fair" is one of the truest criticisms of human
life, oh reader, you are likely to meet with. The mixedness of things,
the old, old human muddle, the meanness and stupidity and
shortsightedness of humanity, the good salty taste of life in the
healthy mouth, the spirituality of love, the strong earthy roots of
appetite, man's lust of life, with circumstances awry, and the sharp
wind blowing alike on the just and the unjust--all is there on the
printed page of "Amaryllis at the Fair." The song of the wind and the
roar of London unite and mingle therein for those who do not bring the
exacting eye of superiority to this most human book. EDWARD GARNETT. [Illustration]

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Reprinted in part from "The Academy" of April 4th, 1903. [Illustration]

AMARYLLIS AT THE FAIR

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




AMARYLLIS AT THE FAIR. CHAPTER I.


AMARYLLIS found the first daffodil flowering by the damask rose, and
immediately ran to call her father to come and see it. There are no damask roses now, like there used to be in summer at Coombe
Oaks. I have never seen one since I last gathered one from that very
bush. There are many grand roses, but no fragrance--the fragrance is
gone out of life. Instinctively as I pass gardens in summer I look under
the shade of the trees for the old roses, but they are not to be found. The dreary nurseries of evergreens and laurels--cemeteries they should
be called, cemeteries in appearance and cemeteries of taste--are
innocent of such roses. They show you an acre of what they call roses
growing out of dirty straw, spindly things with a knob on the top,
which even dew can hardly sweeten. "No call for damask roses--wouldn't
pay to grow they. Single they was, I thinks. No good. These be cut every
morning and fetched by the flower-girls for gents' button-holes and
ladies' jackets. You won't get no damask roses; they be died out." I think in despite of the nurseryman, or cemetery-keeper, that with
patience I could get a damask rose even now by inquiring about from
farmhouse to farmhouse. In time some old farmer, with a good old taste
for old roses and pinks, would send me one; I have half a mind to try. But, alas! it is no use, I have nowhere to put it; I rent a house which
is built in first-rate modern style, though small, of course, and there
is a "garden" to it, but no place to put a damask rose. No place,
because it is not "home," and I cannot plant except round "home." The
plot or "patch" the landlord calls "the garden"--it is about as wide as
the border round a patch, old style--is quite vacant, bare, and contains
nothing but mould. It is nothing to me, and I cannot plant it. Not only are there no damask roses, but there is no place for them
now-a-days, no "home," only villas and rented houses. Anything rented in
a town can never be "home." Farms that were practically taken on a hundred and twenty, or fifty, or
perhaps two hundred years' leases were "homes." Consequently they had
damask roses, bees, and birds about them. There had been daffodils in that spot at least a century, opening every
March to the dry winds that shrivel up the brown dead leaves of winter,
and carry them out from the bushes under the trees, sending them across
the meadow--fleeing like a routed army before the bayonets of the East. Every spring for a century at least the daffodils had bloomed there. Amaryllis did not stay to think of the century, but ran round the corner
of the house, and came face to face with the east wind, which took her
with such force as to momentarily stay her progress. Her skirts were
blown out horizontally, her ankles were exposed, and the front line of
her shape (beginning to bud like spring) was sketched against the red
brick wall. She laughed, but the strong gale filled her throat as if a
hand had been thrust down it; the wind got its edge like a knife under
her eyelids, between them and the eyeballs, and seemed as if it would
scoop them out; her eyes were wet with involuntary tears; her lips dried
up and parched in a moment. The wind went through her thick stockings as
if the wool was nothing. She lifted her hand to defend her eyes, and the
skin of her arm became "goosey" directly. Had she worn hat or bonnet it
would have flown. Stooping forwards, she pushed step by step, and
gradually reached the shelter of the high garden wall; there she could
stand upright, and breathe again. Her lips, which had been whitened by the keen blast, as if a storm of
ice particles had been driven against them, now resumed their scarlet,
but her ears were full of dust and reddened, and her curly dark hair was
dry and rough and without gloss. Each separate hair separated itself
from the next, and would not lie smooth--the natural unctuous essence
which usually caused them to adhere was dried up. The wind had blown thus round that corner every March for a century, and
in no degree abated its bitter force because a beautiful human child,
full of the happiness of a flower, came carelessly into its power. Nothing ever shows the least consideration for human creatures. The moss on the ridge of the wall under which she stood to breathe
looked shrivelled and thin, the green tint dried out of it. A sparrow
with a straw tried hard to reach the eaves of the house to put it in his
nest, but the depending straw was caught by the breeze as a sail, and
carried him past. Under the wall was a large patch recently dug, beside the patch a grass
path, and on the path a wheelbarrow. A man was busy putting in potatoes;
he wore the raggedest coat ever seen on a respectable back. As the wind
lifted the tails it was apparent that the lining was loose and only hung
by threads, the cuffs were worn through, there was a hole beneath each
arm, and on each shoulder the nap of the cloth was gone; the colour,
which had once been grey, was now a mixture of several soils and
numerous kinds of grit. The hat he had on was no better; it might have
been made of some hard pasteboard, it was so bare. Every now and then
the wind brought a few handfuls of dust over the wall from the road, and
dropped it on his stooping back. The way in which he was planting potatoes was wonderful, every potato
was placed at exactly the right distance apart, and a hole made for it
in the general trench; before it was set it was looked at and turned
over, and the thumb rubbed against it to be sure that it was sound, and
when finally put in, a little mould was delicately adjusted round to
keep it in its right position till the whole row was buried. He carried
the potatoes in his coat pocket--those, that is, for the row--and took
them out one by one; had he been planting his own children he could not
have been more careful. The science, the skill, and the experience
brought to this potato-planting you would hardly credit; for all this
care was founded upon observation, and arose from very large abilities
on the part of the planter, though directed to so humble a purpose at
that moment. So soon as Amaryllis had recovered breath, she ran down the grass path
and stood by the wheelbarrow, but although her shadow fell across the
potato row, he would not see her. "Pa," she said, not very loud. "Pa," growing bolder. "Do come--there's a
daffodil out, the very, very first." "Oh," a sound like a growl--"oh," from the depth of a vast chest
heaving out a doubtful note. "It is such a beautiful colour!" "Where is your mother?" looking at her askance and still stooping. "Indoors--at least--I think--no----"

"Haven't you got no sewing? Can't you help her? What good be you on?" "But this is such a lovely daffodil, and the very first--now do come!" "Flowers bean't no use on; such trumpery as that; what do'ee want
a-messing about arter thaay? You'll never be no good on; you ain't never
got a apron on." "But--just a minute now." "Go on in, and be some use on." Amaryllis' lip fell; she turned and walked slowly away along the path,
her head drooping forward. Did ever anyone have a beautiful idea or feeling without being repulsed? She had not reached the end of the path, however, when the father began
to change his attitude; he stood up, dropped his "dibbler," scraped his
foot on his spade, and, grumbling to himself, went after her. She did
not see or hear him till he overtook her. "Please, I'll go and do the sewing," she said. "Where be this yer flower?" gruffly. "I'll show you," taking his ragged arm, and brightening up immediately. "Only think, to open in all this wind, and so cold--isn't it beautiful? It's much more beautiful than the flowers that come in the summer." "Trumpery rubbish--mean to dig 'em all up--would if I had time,"
muttered the father. "Have 'em carted out and drowed away--do for ashes
to drow on the fields. Never no good on to nobody, thaay thengs. You
can't eat 'em, can you, like you can potatoes?" "But it's lovely. Here it is," and Amaryllis stepped on the patch
tenderly, and lifted up the drooping face of the flower. "Ah, yes," said Iden, putting his left hand to his chin, a habit of his
when thinking, and suddenly quite altering his pronunciation from that
of the country folk and labourers amongst whom he dwelt to the correct
accent of education. "Ah, yes; the daffodil was your great-uncle's
favourite flower." "Richard?" asked Amaryllis. "Richard," repeated Iden. And Amaryllis, noting how handsome her
father's intellectual face looked, wandered in her mind from the flower
as he talked, and marvelled how he could be so rough sometimes, and why
he talked like the labourers, and wore a ragged coat--he who was so full
of wisdom in his other moods, and spoke, and thought, and indeed acted
as a perfect gentleman. "Richard's favourite flower," he went on. "He brought the daffodils down
from Luckett's; every one in the garden came from there. He was always
reading poetry, and writing, and sketching, and yet he was such a
capital man of business; no one could understand that. He built the
mill, and saved heaps of money; he bought back the old place at
Luckett's, which belonged to us before Queen Elizabeth's days; indeed,
he very nearly made up the fortunes Nicholas and the rest of them got
rid of. He was, indeed, a man. And now it is all going again--faster
than he made it. He used to take you on his knee and say you would walk
well, because you had a good ankle." Amaryllis blushed and smoothed her dress with her hands, as if that
would lengthen the skirt and hide the ankles which Richard, the
great-uncle, had admired when she was a child, being a man, but which
her feminine acquaintances told her were heavy. "Here, put on your hat and scarf; how foolish of you to go out in this
wind without them!" said Mrs. Iden, coming out. She thrust them into
Amaryllis' unwilling hands, and retired indoors again immediately. "He was the only one of all the family," continued her father, "who
could make money; all the rest could do nothing but spend it. For ten
generations he was the only money-maker and saver, and yet he was as
free and liberal as possible. Very curious, wasn't it?--only one in ten
generations--difficult to understand why none of the others--why----" He
paused, thinking. Amaryllis, too, was silent, thinking--thinking how easily her papa could
make money, great heaps of money. She was sure he could if he tried,
instead of planting potatoes. "If only another Richard would rise up like him!" said Iden. This was a very unreasonable wish, for, having had one genius in the
family, and that, too, in the memory of man, they could not expect
another. Even vast empires rarely produce more than one great man in all
the course of their history. There was but one Caesar in the thousand
years of Rome; Greece never had one as a nation, unless we except
Themistocles, or unless we accept Alexander, who was a Macedonian;
Persia had a Cyrus; there was a Tamerlane somewhere, but few people know
anything of the empire he overshadows with his name; France has had two
mighty warriors, Charlemagne and Napoleon--unfortunate France! As for
ourselves, fortunate islanders! we have never had a great man so
immensely great as to overtop the whole, like Charlemagne in his day. Fortunate for us, indeed, that it has been so. But the best example to
the point is the case of the immense empire of Russia, which has had one
Peter the Great, and one only. Great-uncle Richard was the Peter the
Great of his family, whose work had been slowly undone by his
successors. "I wonder whether any of us will ever turn out like Richard," continued
Iden. "No one could deny him long; he had a way of persuading and
convincing people, and always got his own will in the end. Wonderful
man!" he pondered, returning towards his work. Suddenly the side door opened, and Mrs. Iden just peered out, and cried,
"Put your hat and scarf on directly." Amaryllis put the hat on, and wound the scarf very loosely about her
neck. She accompanied her father to the potato patch, hoping that he
would go on talking, but he was quickly absorbed in the potatoes. She
watched him stooping till his back was an arch; in fact, he had stooped
so much that now he could not stand upright, though still in the prime
of life; if he stood up and stretched himself, still his back was bowed
at the shoulders. He worked so hard--ever since she could remember she
had seen him working like this; he was up in the morning while it was
yet dark tending the cattle; sometimes he was up all night with them,
wind or weather made no difference. Other people stopped indoors if it
rained much, but it made no difference to her father, nor did the deep
snow or the sharp frosts. Always at work, and he could talk so cleverly,
too, and knew everything, and yet they were so short of money. How could
this be? What a fallacy it is that hard work is the making of money; I could show
you plenty of men who have worked the whole of their lives as hard as
ever could possibly be, and who are still as far off independence as
when they began. In fact, that is the rule; the winning of independence
is rarely the result of work, else nine out of ten would be well-to-do. [Illustration]




CHAPTER II. PRESENTLY Amaryllis wandered indoors, and was met in the hall by her
mother. "What has he been talking to you about?" she said, angrily. "Don't
listen to him. He will never do any good. Just look at his coat; it's a
disgrace, a positive disgrace. Telling you about the old people? What's
the use of talking of people who have been dead all this time? Why
doesn't he do something himself? Don't listen to his rubbish--wasting
his time there with potatoes, it is enough to make one wild! Why doesn't
he go in to market and buy and sell cattle, and turn over money in that
way? Not he! he'd rather muddle with a few paltry potatoes, as if it
mattered an atom how they were stuck in the ground." Not liking to hear her father abused, Amaryllis went upstairs, and when
she was alone lifted her skirt and looked at the ankles which
great-uncle Richard had admired. Other girls had told her they were
thick, and she was ashamed of them. Instead of the slender things which seem as if a sudden strain would
snap them, and are nothing but mere bone, she had a pair of well-shaped
ankles, justly proportioned to what would soon be a fine form; strong,
but neither thick, nor coarse, nor heavy, ankles that would carry her
many a mile without weariness, that ended good legs with plenty of flesh
on them. The stupidity of calling such coarse or heavy! They were really
ideal ankles, such as a sculptor would carve. Yet these ill-instructed
girls called them coarse! It was not their fault, it was the lack of
instruction; as they did not know what was physically perfect, of course
they could not recognize it. Let every girl who has such ankles be proud of them, for they will prove
a blessing to her for the whole of her life. Amaryllis could not get her hair smooth, though she brushed it for some
time; it would not lie close, so much had the east wind dried it. She
opened a drawer, and took out a little bottle of macassar, and held it
in her hand, balancing probabilities. Would her father see it if she
used it, or might he, perhaps, fail to notice? She dared not leave the
bottle on the dressing-table, for if he had chanced to pass through the
room he would certainly have thrown it out of window, so bitter was his
antagonism to all oils and perfumes, scents, pomades, and other
resources of the hairdresser, which he held defiled the hair and ruined
it, to the deception of woman and the disgust of man. Not one drop of
scent did Amaryllis dare to sprinkle on her handkerchief, not one drop
of oil did she dare put on her beautiful hair unless surreptitiously,
and then she could not go near him, for he was certain to detect it and
scorch her with withering satire. Yet, however satirized, feminine faith in perfumes and oils and so forth
is like a perennial spring, and never fails. Such splendid hair as Amaryllis possessed needed no dressing--nothing
could possibly improve it, and the chances therefore were that whatever
she used would injure--yet in her heart she yearned to rub it with oil. But the more she considered the more probable it seemed that her father
would detect her; she had better wait till he went out for the afternoon
somewhere, an event that seldom occurred, for Iden was one of those who
preferred working at home to rambling abroad. He was, indeed, too
attached to his home work. So she returned the bottle to the drawer, and
hid it under some stockings. Immediately afterwards it was dinner-time. At all meals the rule was
that there must be no talking, but at dinner the law was so strict that
even to ask for anything, as a piece of bread, or to say so much as
"Give me the salt, please," was a deadly sin. There must be absolute
silence while the master ate. The least infringement was visited with a
severe glance from his keen and brilliant blue eyes--there are no eyes
so stern as blue eyes when angry--or else he uttered a deep sigh like a
grunt, and sat rigidly upright for a moment. For he usually stooped,
and to sit upright showed annoyance. No laws of the Medes and Persians
were ever obeyed as was this law of silence in that house. Anything that disturbed the absolute calm of the dinner hour was worse
than sacrilege; anything that threatened to disturb it was watched
intently by that repressive eye. No one must come in or go out of the
room; if anyone knocked at the door (there are no bells in old country
houses) there was a frown immediately, it necessitated someone answering
it, and then Mrs. Iden or Amaryllis had to leave the table, to go out
and open and shut the sitting-room door as they went, and again as they
returned. Amaryllis dreaded a knock at the door, it was so awful to have
to stir once they had sat down to dinner, and the servant was certain
not to know what reply to give. Sometimes it happened--and this was very
terrible--that the master himself had to go, some one wanted him about
some hay or a horse and cart, and no one could tell what to do but the
master. A dinner broken up in this way was a very serious matter indeed. That day they had a leg of mutton--a special occasion--a joint to be
looked on reverently. Mr. Iden had walked into the town to choose it
himself some days previously, and brought it home on foot in a flag
basket. The butcher would have sent it, and if not, there were men on
the farm who could have fetched it, but it was much too important to be
left to a second person. No one could do it right but Mr. Iden himself. There was a good deal of reason in this personal care of the meat, for
it is a certain fact that unless you do look after such things yourself,
and that persistently, too, you never get it first-rate. For this cause
people in grand villas scarcely ever have anything worth eating on their
tables. Their household expenses reach thousands yearly, and yet they
rarely have anything eatable, and their dinner-tables can never show
meat, vegetables, or fruit equal to Mr. Iden's. The meat was dark brown,
as mutton should be, for if it is the least bit white it is sure to be
poor; the grain was short, and ate like bread and butter, firm, and yet
almost crumbling to the touch; it was full of juicy red gravy, and cut
pleasantly, the knife went through it nicely; you can tell good meat
directly you touch it with the knife. It was cooked to a turn, and had
been done at a wood fire on a hearth; no oven taste, no taint of coal
gas or carbon; the pure flame of wood had browned it. Such emanations as
there may be from burning logs are odorous of the woodland, of the
sunshine, of the fields and fresh air; the wood simply gives out as it
burns the sweetness it has imbibed through its leaves from the
atmosphere which floats above grass and flowers. Essences of this order,
if they do penetrate the fibres of the meat, add to its flavour a
delicate aroma. Grass-fed meat, cooked at a wood fire, for me. Wonderful it is that wealthy people can endure to have their meat
cooked over coal or in a shut-up iron box, where it kills itself with
its own steam, which ought to escape. But then wealthy villa people do
do odd things. _Les Miserables_ who have to write like myself must put
up with anything and be thankful for permission to exist; but people
with mighty incomes from tea, or crockery-ware, or mud, or bricks and
mortar--why on earth these happy and favoured mortals do not live like
the gods passes understanding. Parisian people use charcoal: perhaps Paris will convert some of you who
will not listen to a farmer. Mr. Iden had himself grown the potatoes that were placed before him. They were white, floury, without a drop of water in the whole dish of
them. They were equal to the finest bread--far, far superior to the
bread with which the immense city of London permits itself to be
poisoned. (It is not much better, for it destroys the digestion.) This,
too, with wheat at thirty shillings the quarter, a price which is in
itself one of the most wonderful things of the age. The finest bread
ought to be cheap. "They be forty-folds," said Mr. Iden, helping himself to half a dozen. "Look at the gravy go up into um like tea up a knob of sugar." The gravy was drawn up among the dry, floury particles of the potatoes
as if they had formed capillary tubes. "Forty-folds," he repeated; "they comes forty to one. It be an amazing
theng how thengs do that; forty grows for one. Thaay be an old-fashioned
potato; you won't find many of thaay, not true forty-folds. Mine comes
true, 'cause I saves um every year a' purpose. Better take more than
that (to Amaryllis)--you haven't got but two" (to Mrs. Iden). What he ate other people at his table must eat, and the largest quantity
possible. No one else must speak, hardly to say "Yes" or "No," but the
master could talk, talk, talk without end. The only talking that might
be done by others was in praise of the edibles on the table by Iden so
carefully provided. You might admire the potatoes or the mutton, but you
must not talk on any other subject. Nor was it safe even to do that,
because if you said, "What capital potatoes!" you were immediately
helped to another plateful, and had to finish them, want them or not. If
you praised the mutton several thick slices were placed on your plate,
and woe to you if you left a particle. It was no use to try and cover
over what you could not manage with knife and fork; it was sure to be
seen. "What bean't you going to yet (eat) up that there juicy bit, you?" Amaryllis and Mrs. Iden, warned by previous experience, discreetly
refrained from admiring either mutton or potatoes. [Illustration]




CHAPTER III. "FORTY-FOLDS," went on the master, "be the best keeping potatoes. Thur
be so many new sorts now, but they bean't no good; they be very good for
gentlefolk as doan't know no better, and poor folk as can't help
theirselves. They won't grow everywhere neither; there bean't but one
patch in our garden as ull grow 'um well. It's that's big middle patch. Summat different in the soil thur. There's a lot, bless you! to be
learned before you can grow a potato, for all it looks such a simple
thing. Farty-folds----"

"Farty-folds!" said Mrs. Iden, imitating his provincial pronunciation
with extreme disgust in her tone. "Aw, yes, too," said Iden. "Varty-volds be ould potatoes, and thur
bean't none as can beat um." The more she showed her irritation at his speech or ways, the more he
accentuated both language and manner. "Talking with your mouth full," said Mrs. Iden. It was true, Iden did
talk with his mouth full, very full indeed, for he fed heartily. The
remark annoyed him; he grunted and spluttered and choked a
little--floury things are choky. He got it down by taking a long draught
at his quart of strong ale. Splendid ale it was, too, the stuff to
induce you to make faces at Goliath. He soon began to talk again. "Th' ould shepherd fetched me these swede greens; I axed un three days
ago; I know'd we was going to have this yer mutton. You got to settle
these yer things aforehand." "Axed," muttered Mrs. Iden. "Th' pigeons have been at um, they be 'mazing fond of um, so be the
larks. These be the best as thur was. They be the best things in the
world for the blood. Swede greens be the top of all physic. If you can
get fresh swede tops you don't want a doctor within twenty miles. Their's nothing in all the chemists' shops in England equal to swede
greens"--helping himself to a large quantity of salt. "What a lot of salt you _do_ eat!" muttered Mrs. Iden. "Onely you must have the real swedes--not thuck stuff they sells in
towns; greens they was once p'rhaps, but they be tough as leather, and
haven't got a drop of sap in um. Swedes is onely to be got about March." "Pooh! you can get them at Christmas in London," said Mrs. Iden. "Aw, can 'ee? Call they swede tops? They bean't no good; you might as
well eat dried leaves. I tell you these are the young fresh green shoots
of spring"--suddenly changing his pronunciation as he became interested
in his subject and forgot the shafts of irritation shot at him by his
wife. "They are full of sap--fresh sap--the juice which the plant
extracts from the earth as the active power of the sun's rays increases. It is this sap which is so good for the blood. Without it the vegetable
is no more than a woody fibre. Why the sap should be so powerful I
cannot tell you; no one knows, any more than they know _how_ the plant
prepares it. This is one of those things which defy analysis--the
laboratory is at fault, and can do nothing with it." ("More salt!" muttered Mrs. Iden. "How can you eat such a quantity of salt?") "There
is something beyond what the laboratory can lay hands on; something that
cannot be weighed, or seen, or estimated, neither by quantity, quality,
or by any means. They analyse champagne, for instance; they find so many
parts water, so much sugar, so much this, and so much that; but out of
the hundred parts there remain ten--I think it is ten--at all events so
many parts still to be accounted for. They escape, they are set down as
volatile--the laboratory has not even a distinct name for this
component; the laboratory knows nothing at all about it, cannot even
name it. But this unknown constituent is the real champagne. So it is
with the sap. In spring the sap possesses a certain virtue; at other
times of the year the leaf is still green, but useless to us." "I shall have some vinegar," said Mrs. Iden, defiantly, stretching out
her hand to the cruet. Mr. Iden made a wry face, as if the mere mention of vinegar had set his
teeth on edge. He looked the other way and ate as fast as he could, to
close his eyes to the spectacle of any one spoiling the sappy swede
greens with nauseous vinegar. To his system of edible philosophy vinegar
was utterly antagonistic--destructive of the sap-principle, altogether
wrong, and, in fact, wicked, as destroying good and precious food. Amaryllis would not have dared to have taken the vinegar herself, but as
her mother passed the cruet to her, she, too, fell away, and mixed
vinegar with the green vegetables. All women like vinegar. When the bottle was restored to the cruet-stand Mr. Iden deigned to look
round again at the table. "Ha! you'll cut your thumb!" he shouted to Amaryllis, who was cutting a
piece of bread. She put the loaf down with a consciousness of guilt. "Haven't I told you how to cut bread twenty times? Cutting towards your
thumb like that! Hold your left hand lower down, so that if the knife
slips it will go over. Here, like this. Give it to me." He cut a slice to show her, and then tossed the slice across the table
so accurately that it fell exactly into its proper place by her plate. He had a habit of tossing things in that way. "Why ever couldn't you pass it on the tray?" said Mrs. Iden. "Flinging
in that manner! I hate to see it." Amaryllis, as in duty bound, in appearance took the lesson in
bread-cutting to heart, as she had done twenty times before. But she
knew she should still cut a loaf in the same dangerous style when out of
his sight. She could not do it in the safe way--it was so much easier in
the other; and if she did cut her hand she did not greatly care. "Now perhaps you'll remember," said the master, getting up with his
plate in his hand. "Whatever _are_ you going to do now?" asked Mrs. Iden, who knew
perfectly well. "Going to warm the plate." He went out into the kitchen, sat down by the
fire, and carefully warmed his plate for a second helping. "I should think you couldn't want any more," said Mrs. Iden when he came
back. "You had enough the first time for three." But Iden, who had the appetite of a giant, and had never ruined his
digestion with vinegar or sauces, piled another series of thick slices
on his plate, now hot to liquefy the gravy, and added to the meat a just
proportion of vegetables. In proportion and a just mixture the secret of
eating successfully consisted, according to him. First he ate a piece of the dark brown mutton, this was immediately
followed by a portion of floury potato, next by a portion of swede
tops, and then, lest a too savoury taste should remain in the mouth, he
took a fragment of bread, as it were to sweeten and cleanse his teeth. Finally came a draught of strong ale, and after a brief moment the same
ingredients were mixed in the same order as before. His dinner was thus
eaten in a certain order, and with a kind of rhythm, duly exciting each
particular flavour like a rhyme in its proper position, and duly putting
it out with its correct successor. Always the savour of meat and gravy
and vegetables had to be toned down by the ultimate bread, a vast piece
of which he kept beside him. He was a great bread eater--it was always
bread after everything, and if there were two courses then bread between
to prepare the palate, and to prevent the sweets from quarrelling with
the acids. Organization was the chief characteristic of his mind--his
very dinner was organized and well planned, and any break or disturbance
was not so much an annoyance in itself as destructive of a clever
design, like a stick thrust through the web of a geometrical spider. This order of mouthfuls had been explained over and over again to the
family, and if they felt that he was in a more than usually terrible
mood, and if they felt his gaze upon them, the family to some extent
submitted. Neither Mrs. Iden nor Amaryllis, however, could ever educate
their palates into this fixed sequence of feeding; and, if Iden was not
in a very awful and Jovelike mood, they wandered about irregularly in
their eating. When the dinner was over (and, indeed, before it began)
they had a way of visiting the larder, and "picking" little fragments of
pies, or cold fowl, even a cold potato, the smallest mug--a quarter of a
pint of the Goliath ale between them, or, if it was to be had, a sip of
port wine. These women were very irrational in their feeding; they
actually put vinegar on cold cabbage; they gloated over a fragment of
pickled salmon about eleven o'clock in the morning. They had a herring
sometimes for tea--the smell of it cooking sent the master into fits of
indignation, he abominated it so, but they were so hardened and lost to
righteousness they always repeated the offence next time the itinerant
fish-dealer called. You could not drum them into good solid,
straightforward eating. They generally had a smuggled bit of pastry to eat in the kitchen after
dinner, for Mr. Iden considered that no one could need a second course
after first-rate mutton and forty-folds. A morsel of cheese if you
liked--nothing more. In summer the great garden abounded with fruit; he
would have nothing but rhubarb, rhubarb, rhubarb, day after day, or else
black-currant pudding. He held that black currants were the most
wholesome fruit that grew; if he fancied his hands were not quite clean
he would rub them with black-currant leaves to give them a pleasant
aromatic odour (as ladies use scented soap). He rubbed them with
walnut-leaves for the same purpose. Of salad in its season he was a great eater, cucumber especially, and
lettuce and celery; but a mixed salad (oil and a flash, as it were, of
Worcester sauce) was a horror to him. A principle ran through all his
eating--an idea, a plan and design. I assure you it is a very important matter this eating, a man's fortune
depends on his dinner. I should have been as rich as Croesus if I
could only have eaten what I liked all my time; I am sure I should, now
I come to look back. The soundest and most wholesome food in the world was set on Mr. Iden's
table; you may differ from his system, but you would have enjoyed the
dark brown mutton, the floury potatoes, the fresh vegetables and fruit
and salad, and the Goliath ale. When he had at last finished his meal he took his knife and carefully
scraped his crumbs together, drawing the edge along the cloth, first one
way and then the other, till he had a little heap; for, eating so much
bread, he made many crumbs. Having got them together, he proceeded to
shovel them into his mouth with the end of his knife, so that not one
was wasted. Sometimes he sprinkled a little moist sugar over them with
his finger and thumb. He then cut himself a slice of bread and cheese,
and sat down with it in his arm-chair by the fire, spreading his large
red-and-yellow silk handkerchief on his knee to catch the fragments in
lieu of a plate. "Why can't you eat your cheese at the table, like other people?" said
Mrs. Iden, shuffling her feet with contemptuous annoyance. A deep grunt
in the throat was the answer she received; at the same time he turned
his arm-chair more towards the fire, as much as to say, "Other people
are nothing to me." [Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV. THIS arm-chair, of old-fashioned make, had lost an arm--the screw
remained sticking up, but the woodwork on that side was gone. It had
been accidentally broken some ten years since; yet, although he used the
chair every day, the arm had never been mended. Awkward as it was, he
let it alone. "Hum! where's _The Standard_, then?" he said presently, as he nibbled
his cheese and sipped the ale which he had placed on the hob. "Here it is, Pa," said Amaryllis, hastening with the paper. "Thought you despised the papers?" said Mrs. Iden. "Thought there was
nothing but lies and rubbish in them, according to you?" "No more thur bean't." "You always take good care to read them, though." "Hum!" Another deep grunt, and another slight turn of the chair. He
could not answer this charge of inconsistency, for it was a fact that
he affected to despise the newspaper and yet read it with avidity, and
would almost as soon have missed his ale as his news. However, to settle with his conscience, he had a manner of holding the
paper half aslant a good way from him, and every now and then as he read
uttered a dissentient or disgusted grunt. The master's taking up his paper was a signal for all other persons to
leave the room, and not to return till he had finished his news and his
nap. Mrs. Iden and Amaryllis, as they went out, each took as many of the
dishes as they could carry, for it was uncertain when they could come in
again to clear the table. The cloth must not be moved, the door opened,
or the slightest sound heard till the siesta was over. "Can't clear the dinner things till four o'clock," said Mrs. Iden as she
went, "and then you want your tea--senseless!" Amaryllis shut the door,
and the master was left to himself. By-and-by, his cheese being finished, he dropped his newspaper, and
arranged himself for slumber. His left elbow he carefully fitted to the
remnant of the broken woodwork of the chair. The silk handkerchief, red
and yellow, he gathered into a loose pad in his left hand for his cheek
and temple to rest on. His face was thus supported by his hand and arm,
while the side of his head touched and rested against the wainscot of
the wall. Just where his head touched it the wainscot had been worn away by the
daily pressure, leaving a round spot. The wood was there exposed--a
round spot, an inch or two in diameter, being completely bare of
varnish. So many nods--the attrition of thirty years and more of
nodding--had gradually ground away the coat with which the painter had
originally covered the wood. It even looked a little hollow--a little
depressed--as if his head had scooped out a shallow crater; but this was
probably an illusion, the eye being deceived by the difference in colour
between the wood and the varnish around it. This human mark reminded one of the grooves worn by the knees of
generations of worshippers in the sacred steps of the temple which they
ascended on all-fours. It was, indeed, a mark of devotion, as Mrs. Iden
and others, not very keen observers, would have said, to the god of
Sleep; in truth, it was a singular instance of continued devotion at the
throne of the god of Thought. It was to think that Mr. Iden in the commencement assumed this posture
of slumber, and commanded silence. But thought which has been cultivated
for a third of a century is apt to tone down to something very near
somnolence. That panel of wainscot was, in fact, as worthy of preservation as those
on which the early artists delineated the Madonna and Infant, and for
which high prices are now paid. It was intensely--superlatively--human. Worn in slow time by a human head within which a great mind was working
under the most unhappy conditions, it had the deep value attaching to
inanimate things which have witnessed intolerable suffering. I am not a Roman Catholic, but I must confess that if I could be assured
any particular piece of wood had really formed a part of the Cross I
should think it the most valuable thing in the world, to which
Koh-i-noors would be mud. I am a pagan, and think the heart and soul above crowns. That panel was in effect a cross on which a heart had been tortured for
the third of a century, that is, for the space of time allotted to a
generation. That mark upon the panel had still a further meaning, it represented the
unhappiness, the misfortunes, the Nemesis of two hundred years. This
family of Idens had endured already two hundred years of unhappiness and
discordance for no original fault of theirs, simply because they had
once been fortunate of old time, and therefore they had to work out that
hour of sunshine to the utmost depths of shadow. The panel of the wainscot upon which that mark had been worn was in
effect a cross upon which a human heart had been tortured--and thought
can, indeed, torture--for a third of a century. For Iden had learned to
know himself, and despaired. Not long after he had settled himself and closed his eyes the handle of
the door was very softly turned, and Amaryllis stole in for her book,
which she had forgotten. She succeeded in getting it on tiptoe without a
sound, but in shutting the door the lock clicked, and she heard him
kick the fender angrily with his iron-shod heel. After that there was utter silence, except the ticking of the American
clock--a loud and distinct tick in the still (and in that sense vacant)
room. Presently a shadow somewhat darkened the window, a noiseless shadow;
Mrs. Iden had come quietly round the house, and stood in the March wind,
watching the sleeping man. She had a shawl about her shoulders--she put
out her clenched hand from under its folds, and shook her fist at him,
muttering to herself, "Never _do_ anything; nothing but sleep, sleep,
sleep: talk, talk, talk; never _do_ anything. That's what I hate." The noiseless shadow disappeared; the common American clock continued
its loud tick, tick. Slight sounds, faint rustlings, began to be audible among the cinders in
the fender. The dry cinders were pushed about by something passing
between them. After a while a brown mouse peered out at the end of the
fender under Iden's chair, looked round a moment, and went back to the
grate. In a minute he came again, and ventured somewhat farther across
the width of the white hearthstone to the verge of the carpet. This
advance was made step by step, but on reaching the carpet the mouse
rushed home to cover in one run--like children at "touch wood," going
out from a place of safety very cautiously, returning swiftly. The next
time another mouse followed, and a third appeared at the other end of
the fender. By degrees they got under the table, and helped themselves
to the crumbs; one mounted a chair and reached the cloth, but soon
descended, afraid to stay there. Five or six mice were now busy at their
dinner. The sleeping man was as still and quiet as if carved. A mouse came to the foot, clad in a great rusty-hued iron-shod boot--the
foot that rested on the fender, for he had crossed his knees. His ragged
and dingy trouser, full of March dust, and earth-stained by labour, was
drawn up somewhat higher than the boot. It took the mouse several trials
to reach the trouser, but he succeeded, and audaciously mounted to
Iden's knee. Another quickly followed, and there the pair of them
feasted on the crumbs of bread and cheese caught in the folds of his
trousers. One great brown hand was in his pocket, close to them--a mighty hand,
beside which they were pigmies indeed in the land of the giants. What
would have been the value of their lives between a finger and thumb that
could crack a ripe and strong-shelled walnut? The size--the mass--the weight of his hand alone was as a hill
overshadowing them; his broad frame like the Alps; his head high above
as a vast rock that overhung the valley. His thumb-nail--widened by labour with spade and axe--his thumb-nail
would have covered either of the tiny creatures as his shield covered
Ajax. Yet the little things fed in perfect confidence. He was so still, so
_very_ still--quiescent--they feared him no more than they did the wall;
they could not hear his breathing. Had they been gifted with human intelligence that very fact would have
excited their suspicions. Why so very, _very_ still? Strong men, wearied
by work, do not sleep quietly; they breathe heavily. Even in firm sleep
we move a little now and then, a limb trembles, a muscle quivers, or
stretches itself. But Iden was so still it was evident he was really wide awake and
restraining his breath, and exercising conscious command over his
muscles, that this scene might proceed undisturbed. Now the strangeness of the thing was in this way: Iden set traps for
mice in the cellar and the larder, and slew them there without mercy. He
picked up the trap, swung it round, opening the door at the same
instant, and the wretched captive was dashed to death upon the stone
flags of the floor. So he hated them and persecuted them in one place,
and fed them in another. A long psychological discussion might be held on this apparent
inconsistency, but I shall leave analysis to those who like it, and go
on recording facts. I will only make one remark. That nothing is
consistent that is human. If it was not inconsistent it would have no
association with a living person. From the merest thin slit, as it were, between his eyelids, Iden watched
the mice feed and run about his knees till, having eaten every crumb,
they descended his leg to the floor. [Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.


HE was not asleep--he was thinking. Sometimes, of course, it happened
that slumber was induced by the position in which he placed himself;
slumber, however, was not his intent. He liked to rest after his midday
meal and think. There was no real loss of time in it--he had been at
work since half-past five. His especial and striking characteristic was a very large, high, and
noble forehead--the forehead attributed to Shakespeare and seen in his
busts. Shakespeare's intellect is beyond inquiry, yet he was not
altogether a man of action. He was, indeed, an actor upon the stage;
once he stole the red deer (delightful to think of that! ), but he did
not sail to the then new discovered lands of America, nor did he fight
the Spaniards. So much intellect is, perhaps, antagonistic to action, or
rather it is averse to those arts by which a soldier climbs to the
position of commander. If Shakespeare by the chance of birth, or other
accident, had had the order of England's forces, we should have seen
generalship such as the world had not known since Caesar. His intellect was too big to climb backstairs till opportunity came. We
have great thoughts instead of battles. Iden's forehead might have been sculptured for Shakespeare's. There was
too much thought in it for the circumstances of his life. It is possible
to think till you cannot act. After the mice descended Iden did sleep for a few minutes. When he awoke
he looked at the clock in a guilty way, and then opening the oven of the
grate, took out a baked apple. He had one there ready for him almost
always--always, that is, when they were not ripe on the trees. A baked apple, he said, was the most wholesome thing in the world; it
corrected the stomach, prevented acidity, improved digestion, and gave
tone to all the food that had been eaten previously. If people would
only eat baked apples they would not need to be for ever going to the
chemists' shops for drugs and salines to put them right. The women were
always at the chemists' shops--you could never pass the chemists' shops
in the town without seeing two or three women buying something. The apple was the apple of fruit, the natural medicine of man--and the
best flavoured. It was compounded of the sweetest extracts and essences
of air and light, put together of sunshine and wind and shower in such a
way that no laboratory could imitate: and so on in a strain and with a
simplicity of language that reminded you of Bacon and his philosophy of
the Elizabethan age. Iden in a way certainly had a tinge of the Baconian culture, naturally,
and not from any study of that author, whose books he had never seen. The great Bacon was, in fact, a man of orchard and garden, and gathered
his ideas from the fields. Just look at an apple on the tree, said Iden. Look at a Blenheim orange,
the inimitable mixture of colour, the gold and bronze, and ruddy tints,
not bright colours--undertones of bright colours--smoothed together and
polished, and made the more delightful by occasional roughness in the
rind. Or look at the brilliant King Pippin. Now he was getting older he
found, however, that the finest of them all was the russet. For eating,
at its proper season, it was good, but for cooking it was simply the
Imperial Caesar and Sultan of apples; whether for baking, or pies, or
sauce, there was none to equal it. Apple-sauce made of the real true
russet was a sauce for Jove's own table. It was necessary that it should
be the real russet. Indeed in apple trees you had to be as careful of
breeding and pedigree as the owners of racing stables were about their
horses. Ripe apples could not be got all the year round in any variety; besides
which, in winter and cold weather the crudity of the stomach needed to
be assisted with a little warmth; therefore bake them. People did not eat nearly enough fruit now-a-days; they had too much
butcher's meat, and not enough fruit--that is, home-grown fruit,
straight from orchard or garden, not the half-sour stuff sold in the
shops, picked before it was ready. The Americans were much wiser (he knew a good deal about America--he had
been there in his early days, before thought superseded action)--the
Americans had kept up many of the fine old English customs of two or
three hundred years since, and among these was the eating of fruit. They
were accused of being so modern, so very, very modern, but, in fact, the
country Americans, with whom he had lived (and who had taught him how to
chop) maintained much of the genuine antique life of old England. They had first-rate apples, yet it was curious that the same trees
produced an apple having a slightly different flavour to what it had in
this country. You could always distinguish an American apple by its
peculiar piquancy--a sub-acid piquancy, a wild strawberry piquancy, a
sort of woodland, forest, backwoods delicacy of its own. And so on, and
so on--"talk, talk, talk," as Mrs. Iden said. After his baked apple he took another guilty look at the clock, it was
close on four, and went into the passage to get his hat. In farmhouses
these places are called passages; in the smallest of villas, wretched
little villas not fit to be called houses, they are always "halls." In the passage Mrs. Iden was waiting for him, and began to thump his
broad though bowed back with all her might. "Sleep, sleep, sleep!" she cried, giving him a thump at each word. "You've slept two hours. (Thump.) You sleep till you stupefy yourself
(thump), and then you go and dig. What's the use of digging? (Thump.) Why don't you make some money? (Thump.) Talk and sleep! (Thump.) I hate
it. (Thump.) You've rubbed the paint off the wainscot with your sleep,
sleep, sleep (thump)--there's one of your hairs sticking to the paint
where your head goes. (Thump.) Anything more hateful--sleep (thump),
talk (thump), sleep (thump). Go on!" She had thumped him down the passage, and across the covered-in court to
the door opening on the garden. There he paused to put on his hat--an
aged, battered hat--some sort of nondescript bowler, broken, grey,
weather-stained, very battered and very aged--a pitiful hat to put above
that broad, Shakespearian forehead. While he fitted it on he was thumped
severely: when he opened the door he paused, and involuntarily looked up
at the sky to see about the weather--a habit all country people
have--and so got more thumping, ending as he started out with a
tremendous push. He did not seem to resent the knocks, nor did the push
accelerate his pace; he took it very much as he took the March wind. Mrs. Iden slammed the door, and went in to clear the dinner things, and
make ready for tea. Amaryllis helped her. "He'll want his tea in half an hour," said Mrs. Iden. "What's the use of
his going out to work for half an hour?" Amaryllis was silent. She was very fond of her father; he never did
anything wrong in her eyes, and she could have pointed out that when he
sat down to dinner at one he had already worked as many hours as Mrs.
Iden's model City gentleman in a whole day. His dinner at one was, in
effect, equivalent to their dinner at seven or eight, over which they
frequently lingered an hour or two. He would still go on labouring,
almost another half day. But she held her peace, for, on the other hand,
she could not contradict and argue with her mother, whom she knew had
had a wearisome life and perpetual disappointments. Mrs. Iden grumbled on to herself, working herself into a more fiery
passion, till at last she put down the tea-pot, and rushed into the
garden. There as she came round the first thing she saw was the
daffodil, the beautiful daffodil Amaryllis had discovered. Beside
herself with indignation--what was the use of flowers or potatoes?--Mrs. Iden stepped on the border and trampled the flower under foot till it
was shapeless. After this she rushed indoors again and upstairs to her
bedroom, where she locked herself in, and fumbled about in the old black
oak chest of drawers till she found a faded lavender glove. That glove had been worn at the old "Ship" at Brighton years and years
ago in the honeymoon trip: in those days bridal parties went down by
coach. Faded with years, it had also faded from the tears that had
fallen upon it. She turned it over in her hands, and her tears spotted
it once more. Amaryllis went on with the tea-making; for her mother to rush away in
that manner was nothing new. She toasted her father a piece of toast--he
affected to despise toast, but he always ate it if it was there, and
looked about for it if it was not, though he never said anything. The
clock struck five, and out she went to tell him tea was ready. Coming
round the house she found her daffodil crushed to pieces. "Oh!" The blood rushed to her forehead; then her beautiful lips pouted
and quivered; tears filled her eyes, and her breast panted. She knew
immediately who had done it; she ran to her bedroom to cry and to hide
her grief and indignation. [Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI. LADY-DAY Fair came round by and by, and Amaryllis, about eleven o'clock
in the morning, went down the garden to the end of the orchard, where
she could overlook the highway without being seen, and watch the folk go
past. Just there the road began to descend into a hollow, while the
garden continued level, so that Amaryllis, leaning her arm on the top of
the wall, was much higher up than those who went along. The wall dropped
quite fourteen feet down to the road, a rare red brick wall--thick and
closely-built, the bricks close together with thin seams of mortar, so
that the fibres of the whole mass were worked and compressed and bound
firm, like the fibres of a piece of iron. The deep red bricks had a
colour--a certain richness of stability--and at the top this good piece
of workmanship was protected from the weather by a kind of cap, and
ornamented with a projecting ridge. Within the wall Amaryllis could
stand on a slight bank, and easily look over it. Without there was a
sheer red precipice of fourteen feet down to the dusty sward and
nettles beside the road. Some bare branches of a plum tree trained against the wall rose thin and
tapering above it in a bunch, a sign of bad gardening, for they ought to
have been pruned, and the tree, indeed, had an appearance of neglect. One heavy bough had broken away from the nails and list, and drooped to
the ground, and the shoots of last year, not having been trimmed, thrust
themselves forward presumptuously. Behind the bunch of thin and tapering branches rising above the wall
Amaryllis was partly hidden, but she relied a great deal more for
concealment upon a fact Iden had taught her, that people very seldom
look up; and consequently if you are only a little higher they will not
see you. This she proved that morning, for not one of all who passed
glanced up from the road. The shepherd kept his eye fixed on his sheep,
and the drover on his bullocks; the boys were in a hurry to get to the
fair and spend their pennies; the wenches had on a bit of blue ribbon or
a new bonnet, and were perpetually looking at the traps that overtook
them to see if the men admired their finery. No one looked up from the
road they were pursuing. The photographer fixes the head of the sitter by a sort of stand at the
back, which holds it steady in one position while the camera takes the
picture. In life most people have their heads fixed in the claws of
some miserable pettiness, which interests them so greatly that they
tramp on steadily forward, staring ahead, and there's not the slightest
fear of their seeing anything outside the rut they are travelling. Amaryllis did not care anything about the fair or the people either,
knowing very well what sort they would be; but I suspect, if it had been
possible to have got at the cause which brought her there, it would have
been traced to the unconscious influence of sex, a perfectly innocent
prompting, quite unrecognised by the person who feels it, and who would
indignantly deny it if rallied on the subject, but which leads girls of
her age to seize opportunities of observing the men, even if of an
uninteresting order. Still they are men, those curious beings, that
unknown race, and little bits of knowledge about them may, perhaps, be
picked up by a diligent observer. The men who drifted along the road towards the Fair were no "mashers, by
Jove!" Some of them, though young, were clad antiquely enough in
breeches and gaiters--not sportsmen's breeches and gaiters, but
old-fashioned "granfer" things; the most of them were stout and sturdy,
in drab and brown suits of good cloth, cut awry. Hundreds of them on
foot, in traps, gigs, fourwheels, and on horseback, went under
Amaryllis: but, though they were all Christians, there was not one
"worth a Jewess' eye." She scorned them all. This member of the unknown race was too thickly made, short set, and
squat; this one too fair--quite white and moist-sugar looking; this one
had a straight leg. Another went by with a great thick and long black beard--what a horrid
thing, now, when kissing!--and as he walked he wiped it with his sleeve,
for he had just washed down the dust with a glass of ale. His neck, too,
was red and thick; hideous, yet he was a "stout knave," and a man all
over, as far as body makes a man. But women are, like Shakespeare, better judges. "Care I for the thews
and sinews of a man?" They look for something more than bulk. A good many of these fellows were more or less lame, for it is
astonishing if you watch people go by and keep account of them what a
number have game legs, both young and old. A young buck on a capital horse was at the first glance more
interesting--paler, rakish, a cigar in his mouth, an air of viciousness
and dash combined, fairly well dressed, pale whiskers and beard; in
short, he knew as much of the billiard-table as he did of sheep and
corn. When nearer Amaryllis disliked him more than all the rest put
together; she shrank back a little from the wall lest he should chance
to look up; she would have feared to have been alone with such a
character, and yet she could not have said why. She would not have
feared to walk side by side with the great black beard--hideous as he
was--nor with any of the rest, not even with the roughest of the
labourers who tramped along. This gentleman alone alarmed her. There were two wenches, out for their Fair Day holiday, coming by at the
same time; they had on their best dresses and hats, and looked fresh and
nice. They turned round to watch him coming, and half waited for him;
when he came up he checked his horse, and began to "cheek" them. Nothing
loth, the village girls "cheeked" him, and so they passed on. One or two very long men appeared, unusually clumsy, even in walking
they did not know exactly what to do with their legs. Amaryllis had no
objection to their being tall--indeed, to be tall is often a passport to
a "Jewess' eye"--but they were so clumsy. Of the scores who went by in traps and vehicles she could not see much
but their clothes and their faces, and both the clothes and the faces
were very much alike. Rough, good cloth, ill-fitting (the shoulders were
too broad for the tailor, who wanted to force Bond Street measurements
on the British farmer's back); reddish, speckled faces, and yellowish
hair and whiskers; big speckled hands, and that was all. Scores of men,
precisely similar, were driven down the road. If those broad speckled
hands had been shown to Jacob's ewes he need not have peeled rods to
make them bring forth speckled lambs. Against the stile a long way up the road there was a group of five or
six men, who were there when she first peered over the wall, and made
no further progress to the Fair. They were waiting till some
acquaintance came by and offered a lift; lazy dogs, they could not walk. They had already been there long enough to have walked to the Fair and
back, still they preferred to fold their hands and cross their legs, and
stay on. So many people being anxious to get to the town, most of those
who drove had picked up friends long before they got here. The worst walker of all was a constable, whose huge boots seemed to take
possession of the width of the road, for he turned them out at right
angles, working his legs sideways to do it, an extraordinary exhibition
of stupidity and ugliness, for which the authorities who drilled him in
that way were responsible, and not the poor fellow. Among the lowing cattle and the baaing sheep there drifted by a variety
of human animals, tramps and vagrants, not nearly of so much value as
the wool and beef. It is curious that these "characters"--as they are so kindly
called--have a way of associating themselves with things that promise
vast enjoyment to others. The number of unhappy, shirtless wretches who
thread their path in and out the coaches at the Derby is wonderful. While the champagne fizzes above on the roof, and the footman between
the shafts sits on an upturned hamper and helps himself out of another
to pie with truffles, the hungry, lean kine of human life wander round
about sniffing and smelling, like Adam and Eve after the fall at the
edge of Paradise. There are such incredible swarms of vagrants at the Derby that you might
think the race was got up entirely for their sakes. There would be
thousands at Sandown, but the gate is locked with a half-crown bolt, and
they cannot get a stare at the fashionables on the lawn. For all that,
the true tramp, male or female, is so inveterate an attendant at races
and all kinds of accessible entertainments and public events that the
features of the fashionable are better known to him than to hundreds of
well-to-do people unable to enter society. So they paddled along to the fair, slip-slop, in the dust, among the
cattle and sheep, hands in pockets, head hanging down, most of them
followed at a short distance by a Thing. This Thing is upright, and therefore, according to the old definition,
ought to come within the genus Homo. It wears garments rudely resembling
those of a woman, and there it ends. Perhaps it was a woman once;
perhaps it never was, for many of them have never had a chance to enter
the ranks of their own sex. Amaryllis was too young, and, as a consequence, too full of her own
strength and youth and joy in life to think for long or seriously about
these curious Things drifting by like cattle and sheep. Yet her brow
contracted, and she drew herself together as they passed--a sort of
shiver, to think that there should be such degradation in the world. Twice when they came along her side of the road she dropped pennies in
front of them, which they picked up in a listless way, just glancing
over the ear in the direction the money fell, and went on without so
much as recognizing where it came from. If sheep were treated as unfortunate human beings are, they would take a
bitter revenge; though they are the mildest of creatures, they would
soon turn round in a venomous manner. If they did not receive sufficient
to eat and drink, and were not well sheltered, they would take a bitter
revenge: _they would die_. Loss of L s. d.! But human beings have not even got the courage or energy to do that;
they put up with anything, and drag on--miserables that they are. I said they were not equal in value to the sheep--why, they're not worth
anything when they're dead. You cannot even sell the skins of the
Things! Slip-slop in the dust they drive along to the fair, where there will be
an immense amount of eating and a far larger amount of drinking all
round them, in every house they pass, and up to midnight. They will see
valuable animals, and men with well-lined pockets. What on earth can a
tramp find to please him among all this? It is not for him; yet he goes
to see it. [Illustration]




CHAPTER VII. THE crowd began to pass more thickly, when Amaryllis saw a man coming up
the road in the opposite direction to that in which the multitude was
moving. They were going to the fair; he had his back to it, and a party
in a trap rallied him smartly for his folly. "What! bean't you a-going to fair? Why, Measter Duck, what's up? Looking
for a thunderstorm?" --which young ducks are supposed to enjoy. "Ha! ha! ha!" Measter Duck, with a broad grin on his face, nevertheless plodded up the
hill, and passed beneath Amaryllis. She knew him very well, for he lived in the hamlet, but she would not
have taken any notice of him had he not been so elaborately dressed. His
high silk hat shone glossy; his black broadcloth coat was new and
carefully brushed; he was in black all over, in contrast with the mass
of people who had gone by that morning. A blue necktie, bright and
clean, spotless linen, gloves rolled up in a ball in one hand, whiskers
brushed, boots shining, teeth clean, Johnny was off to the fair! The coat fitted him to a nicety; it had, in fact, no chance to do
otherwise, for his great back and shoulders stretched it tight, and
would have done so had it been made like a sack. Of all the big men who
had gone by that day Jack Duck was the biggest; his back was immense,
and straight, too, for he walked upright for a farmer, nor was his bulk
altogether without effect, for he was not over-burdened with abdomen, so
that it showed to the best advantage. He was a little over the average
height, but not tall; he had grown laterally. He could lift two sacks of wheat from the ground. You just try to lift
_one_. His sleeves were too long, so that only the great knuckles of his
speckled hands were visible. Red whiskers, red hair, blue eyes, speckled
face, straight lips, thick, like the edge of an earthenware pitcher, and
of much the same coarse red hue, always a ready grin, a round, hard
head, which you might have hit safely with a mallet; and there is the
picture. For some reason, very big men do not look well in glossy black coats and
silk hats; they seem to want wideawakes, bowlers, caps, anything rather
than a Paris hat, and some loose-cut jacket of a free-and-easy colour,
suitable for the field, or cricket, or boating. They do not belong to
the town and narrow doorways; Nature grew them for hills and fields. Compared with the Continental folk, most Englishmen are big, and
therefore, as their "best" suits do not fit in with their character as
written in limbs and shoulders, the Continent thinks us clumsy. The
truth is, it is the Continent that is little. "Isn't he ugly?" thought Amaryllis, looking down on poor John Duck. "Isn't he ugly?" Now the top of the wall was crusted with moss, which
has a way of growing into bricks and mortar, and attaching particles of
brick to its roots. As she watched the people she unconsciously trifled
with a little piece of moss--her hand happened at the moment to project
over the wall, and as John Duck went under she dropped the bit of moss
straight on his glossy hat. Tap! the fragment of brick adhering to the
moss struck the hollow hat smartly like a drum. She drew back quickly, laughing and blushing, and angry with herself all
at the same time, for she had done it without a thought. Jack pulled off his hat, saw nothing, and put it on again, suspecting
that some one in a passing gig had "chucked" something at him. In a minute Amaryllis peeped over the wall, and, seeing his broad back a
long way up the road, resumed her stand. "How ever could I do such a stupid thing?" she thought. "But isn't he
ugly? Aren't they _all_ ugly? All of them--horridly ugly." The entire unknown race of Man was hideous. So coarse in feature--their
noses were thick, half an inch thick, or enormously long and knobbed at
the end like a walking-stick, or curved like a reaping-hook, or slewed
to one side, or flat as if they had been smashed, or short and stumpy
and incomplete, or spotted with red blotches, or turned up in the
vulgarest manner--nobody had a good nose. Their eyes were goggles, round and staring--like liquid marbles--they
had no eyelashes, and their eyebrows were either white and invisible, or
shaggy, as if thistles grew along their foreheads. Their cheeks were speckled and freckled and red and brick-dust and
leather-coloured, and enclosed with scrubby whiskers, like a garden
hedge. Upon the whole, those who shaved and were smooth looked worse than those
who did not, for they thus exposed the angularities of their chins and
jaws. They wore such horrid hats on the top of these roughly-sketched
faces--sketched, as it were, with a bit of burnt stick. Some of them had
their hats on the backs of their heads, and some wore them aslant, and
some jammed over their brows. They went along smoking and puffing, and talking and guffawing in the
vulgarest way, _en route_ to swill and smoke and puff and guffaw
somewhere else. Whoever could tell what they were talking about? these creatures. They had no form or grace like a woman--no lovely sloped shoulders, no
beautiful bosom, no sweeping curve of robe down to the feet. No softness
of cheek, or silky hair, or complexion, or taper fingers, or arched
eyebrows; no sort of style whatever. They were mere wooden figures; and,
in short, sublimely ugly. There was a good deal of truth in Amaryllis' reflections; it was a pity
a woman was not taken into confidence when the men were made. Suppose the women were like the men, and we had to make love to such a
set of bristly, grisly wretches!--pah! shouldn't we think them ugly! The
patience of the women, putting up with us so long! As for the muscles on which we pride ourselves so much, in a woman's
eyes (though she prefers a strong man) they simply increase our
extraordinary ugliness. But if we look pale, and slim, and so forth, then they despise us, and
there is no doubt that altogether the men were made wrong. "And Jack's the very ugliest of the lot," thought Amaryllis. "He just
_is_ ugly." Pounding up the slope, big John Duck came by-and-by to the gateway, and
entering without ceremony, as is the custom in the country, found Mr.
Iden near the back door talking to a farmer who had seated himself on a
stool. He was a middle-aged man, stout and florid, rough as a chunk of wood,
but dressed in his best brown for the fair. Tears were rolling down his
vast round cheeks as he expatiated on his grievances to Mr. Iden:--

"Now, just you see how I be helped up with this here 'ooman," he
concluded as Duck arrived. Mr. Iden, not a little glad of an opportunity
to escape a repetition of the narrative, to which he had patiently
listened, took Jack by the arm, and led him indoors. As they went the
man on the stool extended his arm towards them hopelessly:--"Just you
see how I be helped up with this here 'ooman!" A good many have been "helped up" with a woman before now. Mrs. Iden met Jack with a gracious smile--she always did--yet there
could not have been imagined a man less likely to have pleased her. A quick, nervous temperament, an eye sharp to detect failings or
foolishness, an admirer of briskness and vivacity, why did she welcome
John Duck, that incarnation of stolidity and slowness, that enormous
mountain of a man? Because extremes meet? No, since she was always
complaining of Iden's dull, motionless life; so it was not the contrast
to her own disposition that charmed her. John Duck was Another Man--not Mr. Iden. The best of matrons like to see Another Man enter their houses; there's
no viciousness in it, it is simply nature, which requires variety. The
best of husbands likes to have another woman--or two, or three--on a
visit; there's nothing wrong, it is innocent enough, and but gives a
spice to the monotony of existence. Besides, John Duck, that mountain of slowness and stolidity, was not
perhaps a fool, notwithstanding his outward clumsiness. A little
attention is appreciated even by a matron of middle age. "Will you get us some ale?" said Iden; and Mrs. Iden brought a full jug
with her own hands--a rare thing, for she hated the Goliath barrel as
Iden enjoyed it. "Going to the fair, Mr. Duck?" "Yes, m'm," said John, deep in his chest and gruff, about as a horse
might be expected to speak if he had a voice. "You going, m'm? I just
come up to ask if you'd ride in my dog-trap?" John had a first-rate turn-out. Mrs. Iden, beaming with smiles, replied that she was not going to the
fair. "Should be glad to take you, you know," said John, dipping into the ale. "Shall you be going presently?" --to Mr. Iden. "Perhaps you'd have a
seat?" "Hum!" said Iden, fiddling with his chin, a trick he had when undecided. "I don't zactly know; fine day, you see; want to see that hedge grubbed;
want to fill up the gaps; want to go over to the wood meads; thought
about----"

"There, take and go!" said Mrs. Iden. "Sit there thinking--take and go." "I can't say zactly, John; don't seem to have anything to go vor." "What do other people go for?" said Mrs. Iden, contemptuously. "Why
can't you do like other people? Get on your clean shirt, and go. Jack
can wait--he can talk to Amaryllis while you dress." "Perhaps Miss would like to go," suggested John, very quietly, and as if
it was no consequence to him; the very thing he had called for, to see
if he could get Amaryllis to drive in with him. He knew that Mrs. Iden
never went anywhere, and that Mr. Iden could not make up his mind in a
minute--he would require three or four days at least--so that it was
quite safe to ask them first. "Of course she would," said Mrs. Iden. "She is going--to dine with her
grandfather; it will save her a long walk. You had better go and ask
her; she's down at Plum Corner, watching the people." "So I wull," said Jack, looking out of the great bow window at the
mention of Plum Corner--he could just see the flutter of Amaryllis'
dress in the distance between the trees. That part of the garden was
called Plum Corner because of a famous plum tree--the one that had not
been pruned and was sprawling about the wall. Mr. Iden had planted that plum tree specially for Mrs. Iden, because she
was so fond of a ripe luscious plum. But of late years he had not pruned
it. "Vine ale!" said John, finishing his mug. "Extra vine ale!" "It be, bean't it?" said Mr. Iden. It really was humming stuff, but John well knew how proud Iden was of
it, and how much he liked to hear it praised. The inhabitants of the City of London conceitedly imagine that no one
can be sharp-witted outside the sound of Bow Bells--country people are
stupid. My opinion is that clumsy Jack Duck, who took about half an hour
to write his name, was equal to most of them. [Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII. THE ale being ended, Iden walked with him through the orchard. "Famous wall that," said John, presently, nodding towards the great red
brick wall which adorned that side of the place. "Knowed how to build
walls in those days." "No such wall as that anywhere about here," said Iden, as proud of his
wall as his ale. "No such bricks to be got. Folk don't know how to put
up a wall now--you read in the papers how the houses valls down in
Lunnon." "Sort of cracks and comes in like--jest squashes up," said John. "Now, that's a real bit of brickwork," said Iden. "That'll last--ah,
last----"

"No end to it," said John, who had admired the wall forty times before,
thinking to himself as he saw Amaryllis leaning over the corner,
"Blessed if I don't think as 'twas she as dropped summat on my hat." This strengthened his hopes; he had a tolerably clear idea that Mr. and
Mrs. Iden were not averse to his suit; but he was doubtful about
Amaryllis herself. Amaryllis had not the slightest idea Duck had so much as looked at
her--he called often, but seemed absorbed in the ale and gossip. Fancy
her scorn if she had guessed! John Duck was considered one of the most eligible young men thereabouts,
for though by no means born in the purple of farming, it was believed he
was certain to be very "warm" indeed when his father died. Old Duck, the
son of a common labourer, occupied two or three of the finest farms in
the neighbourhood. He made his money in a waggon--a curious place, you
will say; why so? Have you ever seen the dingy, dark china-closets they
call offices in the City? Have you ever ascended the dirty, unscrubbed,
disgraceful staircase that leads to a famous barrister's "chambers"? These are far less desirable, surely, than a seat in a waggon in a
beautiful meadow or cornfield. Old Duck, being too ponderous to walk,
was driven about in a waggon, sitting at the rear with his huge, short
legs dangling down; and, the waggon being halted in a commanding
position, he overlooked his men at work. One day he was put in a cart instead, and the carter walking home beside
the horse, and noting what a pull it was for him up the hills, and
drawling along half asleep, quite forgot his master, and dreamed he had
a load of stones. By-and-by, he pulled out the bar, and shot Old Duck
out. "A shot me out," grumbled the old man, "as if I'd a been a load of
flints." Riding about in this rude chariot the old fellow had amassed
considerable wealth--his reputation for money was very great indeed--and
his son John would, of course, come in for it. John felt sure of Mr. and Mrs. Iden, but about Amaryllis he did not
know. The idea that she had dropped "summat" on his hat raised his
spirits immensely. Now Amaryllis was not yet beautiful--she was too young; I do not think
any girl is really beautiful so young--she was highly individualized,
and had a distinct character, as it were, in her face and figure. You
saw at a glance that there was something about her very different from
other girls, something very marked, but it was not beauty yet. Whether John thought her handsome, or saw that she would be, or what, I
do not know; or whether he looked "forrard," as he would have said. "Heigh for a lass with a tocher!" John had never read Burns, and would not have known that tocher meant
dowry; nor had he seen the advice of Tennyson--

          "Doesn't thee marry for money,
           But go where money lies." but his native intelligence needed no assistance from the poets,
coronetted or otherwise. It was patent to everyone that her father, Iden, was as poor as the
raggedest coat in Christendom could make him; but it was equally well
known and a matter of public faith, that her grandfather, the great
miller and baker, Lord Lardy-Cake, as the boys called him derisively,
had literally bushels upon bushels of money. He was a famous stickler
for ancient usages, and it was understood that there were twenty
thousand spade guineas in an iron box under his bed. Any cottager in the
whole country side could have told you so, and would have smiled at your
ignorance; the thing was as well known as that St. Paul's is in the
City. Besides which there was another consideration, old Granfer Iden was a
great favourite at Court--Court meaning the mansion of the Hon. Raleigh
Pamment, the largest landowner that side of the county. Granfer Iden
entered the Deer Park (which was private) with a special key whenever he
pleased, he strolled about the gardens, looked in at the conservatory,
chatted familiarly with the royal family of Pamment when they were at
home, and when they were away took any friend he chose through the
galleries and saloons. "Must be summat at the bottom on't," said John Duck to himself many a
time and oft. "They stuck-up proud folk wouldn't have he there if there
wasn't summat at the bottom on't." A favourite at Court could dispense,
no doubt, many valuable privileges. Amaryllis heard their talk as they came nearer, and turned round and
faced them. She wore a black dress, but no hat; instead she had
carelessly thrown a scarlet shawl over her head, mantilla fashion, and
held it with one hand. Her dark ringlets fringed her forehead, blown
free and wild; the fresh air had brought a bright colour into her
cheeks. As is often the case with girls whose figure is just beginning
to show itself, her dress seemed somewhat shortened in front--lifted up
from her ankles, which gave the effect of buoyancy to her form, she
seemed about to walk though standing still. There was a defiant light in
her deep brown eyes, that sort of "I don't care" disposition which our
grandmothers used to say would take us to the gallows. Defiance,
wilfulness, rebellion, was expressed in the very way she stood on the
bank, a little higher than they were, and able to look over their heads. "Marning," said John, rocking his head to one side as a salute. "Marning," repeated Amaryllis, mocking his broad pronunciation. As John could not get any further Iden helped him. "Jack's going to the fair," he said, "and thought you would like to ride
with him. Run in and dress." "I shan't ride," said Amaryllis, "I shall walk." "Longish way," said John. "Mor'n two mile." "I shall walk," said Amaryllis, decidedly. "Lot of cattle about," said John. "Better ride," said Iden. "No," said Amaryllis, and turned her back on them to look over the wall
again. She was a despot already. There was nothing left for them but to walk
away. "However," said Iden, always trying to round things off and make square
edges smooth, "very likely you'll overtake her and pick her up." "Her wull go across the fields," said John. "Shan't see her." As he walked down the road home for his dog-trap he looked up at the
corner of the wall, but she was not looking over then. Mrs. Iden had
fetched her in, as it was time to dress. "I don't want to go," said Amaryllis, "I hate fairs--they are so silly." "But you must go," said Mrs. Iden. "Your grandfather sent a message last
night; you know it's his dinner-day." "He's such a horrid old fellow," said Amaryllis, "I can't bear him." "How dare you speak of your grandfather like that? you are getting very
rude and disrespectful." There was no depending on Mrs. Iden. At one time she would go on and
abuse Granfer Iden for an hour at a time, calling him every name she
could think of, and accusing him of every folly under the sun. At
another time she would solemnly inform Amaryllis that they had not a
farthing of money, and how necessary it was that they should be
attentive and civil to him. Amaryllis very slowly put her hat on and the first jacket to hand. "What! aren't you going to change your dress?" "No, that I'm not." "Change it directly." "What, to go in and see that musty old----"

"Change it directly; I _will_ be obeyed." Amaryllis composedly did as she was bid. One day Mrs. Iden humoured her every whim and let her do just as she
pleased; the next she insisted on minute obedience. "Make haste, you'll be late; now, then, put your things on--come." So Amaryllis, much against her will, was bustled out of the house and
started off. As John had foreseen, she soon quitted the road to follow
the path across the fields, which was shorter. An hour or so later Iden came in from work as usual, a few minutes
before dinner, and having drawn his quart of ale, sat down to sip it in
the bow window till the dishes were brought. "You're not gone, then?" said Mrs. Iden, irritatingly. "Gone--wur?" said Iden, rather gruffly for him. "To fair, of course--like other people." "Hum," growled Iden. "You know your father expects all the family to come in to dinner on
fair day; I can't think how you can neglect him, when you know we
haven't got a shilling--why don't you go in and speak to him?" "You can go if you like." "I go!" cried Mrs. Iden. "I go!" in shrill accents of contempt. "I don't
care a button for all the lardy-cake lot! Let him keep his money. I'm as
good as he is any day. My family go about, and do some business----"

"_Your_ family," muttered Iden. "The Flammas!" "Yes, _my_ family--as good as yours, I should think! What's your family
then, that you should be so grand? You're descended from a lardy-cake!" "You be descended from a quart pot," said Iden. This was an allusion to Mrs. Iden's grandfather, who had kept a small
wayside public. There was no disgrace in it, for he was a very
respectable man, and laid the foundation of his family's fortune, but it
drove Mrs. Iden into frenzy. "You talk about a quart pot--_you_," she shrieked. "Why, your family
have drunk up thousands of pounds--you know they have. Where's the
Manor? they swilled it away. Where's Upper Court? they got it down their
throats. They built a house to drink in and nothing else. You know they
did. You told me yourself. The most disgraceful set of drunkards that
ever lived!" "Your family don't drink, then, I suppose?" said Iden. "Your lot's been drinking two hundred years--why, you're always talking
about it." "Your family be as nervous as cats--see their hands shake in the
morning." "They go to business in the City and do something; they don't mess about
planting rubbishing potatoes." Mrs. Iden was London born. "A pretty mess they've made of their business, as shaky as their hands. Fidgetty, miserable, nervous set they be." "They're not stocks and stones like yours, anyhow, as stolid, and slow,
and stupid; why, you do nothing but sleep, sleep, sleep, and talk, talk,
talk. You've been talking with the lazy lot over at the stile, and
you've been talking with that old fool at the back door, and talking
with Jack Duck--and that's your second mug! You're descended from a
nasty, greasy lardy-cake! There!" Iden snatched a piece of bread from the table and thrust it in one
pocket, flung open the oven-door, and put a baked apple in the other
pocket, and so marched out to eat what he could in quiet under a tree in
the fields. In the oratory of abuse there is no resource so successful as raking up
the weaknesses of the opponent's family, especially when the parties are
married, for having gossiped with each other for so long in the most
confidential manner, they know every foible. How Robert drank, and Tom
bet, and Sam swore, and Bill knocked his wife about, and Joseph did as
Potiphar's spouse asked him, and why your uncle had to take refuge in
Spain; and so on to an indefinite extent, like the multiplication table. [Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX. THIS discordance between her father and mother hurt Amaryllis'
affectionate heart exceedingly. It seemed to be always breaking out all
the year round. Of a summer's eve, when the day's work among the hot hay was done, Iden
would often go out and sit under the russet apple till the dew had
filled the grass like a green sea. When the tide of the dew had risen he
would take off his heavy boots and stockings, and so walk about in the
cool shadows of eve, paddling in the wet grass. He liked the refreshing
coolness and the touch of the sward. It was not for washing, because he
was scrupulously clean under the ragged old coat; it was because he
liked the grass. There was nothing very terrible in it; men, and women,
too, take off their shoes and stockings, and wade about on the sands at
the sea, and no one thinks that it is anything but natural, reasonable,
and pleasant. But, then, you see, _everybody_ does it at the seaside,
and Iden alone waded in the dew, and that was his crime--that he alone
did it. The storm and rage of Mrs. Iden whenever she knew he was paddling in the
grass was awful. She would come shuffling out--she had a way of rubbing
her shoes along the ground when irritated with her hands under her
apron, which she twisted about--and pelt him with scorn. "There, put your boots on--do, and hide your nasty feet!" (Iden had a
particularly white skin, and feet as white as a lady's.) "Disgusting! Nobody ever does it but you, and you ought to be ashamed of yourself! Anything more disgusting I never heard of. Nobody else but you would
ever think of such a thing; makes me feel queer to see you." Shuffling about, and muttering to herself, "Nobody else"--that was the
sin and guilt of it--by-and-by Mrs. Iden would circle round to where he
had left his boots, and, suddenly seizing them, would fling them in the
ditch. And I verily believe, in the depth of her indignation, if she had not
been afraid to touch firearms, she would have brought out the gun, and
had a shot at him. After a time Iden left his old post at the russet apple, and went up the
meadow to the horse-chestnut trees that he himself had planted, and
there, in peace and quietness and soft cool shadow, waded about in the
dew, without any one to grumble at him. How crookedly things are managed in this world! It is the modern fashion to laugh at the East, and despise the Turks and
all their ways, making Grand Viziers of barbers, and setting waiters in
high places, with the utmost contempt for anything reasonable--all so
incongruous and chance-ruled. In truth, all things in our very midst go
on in the Turkish manner; crooked men are set in straight places, and
straight people in crooked places, just the same as if we had all been
dropped promiscuously out of a bag and shook down together on the earth
to work out our lives, quite irrespective of our abilities and natures. Such an utter jumble! Here was Iden, with his great brain and wonderful power of observation,
who ought to have been a famous traveller in unexplored Africa or
Thibet, bringing home rarities and wonders; or, with his singular
capacity for construction, a leading engineer, boring Mont Cenis Tunnels
and making Panama Canals; or, with his Baconian intellect, forming a new
school of philosophy--here was Iden, tending cows, and sitting, as the
old story goes, undecidedly on a stile--sitting astride--eternally
sitting, and unable to make up his mind to get off on one side or the
other. Here was Mrs. Iden, who had had a beautiful shape and expressive eyes,
full in her youth of life and fire, who ought to have led the gayest
life in London and Paris alternately, riding in a carriage, and flinging
money about in the most extravagant, joyous, and good-natured
manner--here was Mrs. Iden making butter in a dull farmhouse, and
wearing shoes out at the toes. So our lives go on, rumble-jumble, like a carrier's cart over ruts and
stones, thumping anyhow instead of running smoothly on new-mown sward
like a cricket-ball. It all happens in the Turkish manner. Another time there would come a letter from one of the Flammas in
London. Could they spare a little bag of lavender?--they grew such
lovely sweet lavender at Coombe Oaks. Then you might see Mr. and Mrs.
Iden cooing and billing, soft as turtle-doves, and fraternising in the
garden over the lavender hedge. Here was another side, you see, to the
story. Mrs. Iden was very fond of lavender, the scent, and the plant in every
form. She kept little bags of it in all her drawers, and everything at
Coombe Oaks upstairs in the bedrooms had a faint, delicious lavender
perfume. There is nothing else that smells so sweet and clean and dry. You cannot imagine a damp sheet smelling of lavender. Iden himself liked lavender, and used to rub it between his finger and
thumb in the garden, as he did, too, with the black-currant leaves and
walnut-leaves, if he fancied anything he had touched might have left an
unpleasant odour adhering to his skin. He said it cleaned his hands as
much as washing them. Iden liked Mrs. Iden to like lavender because his mother had been so
fond of it, and all the sixteen carved oak-presses which had been so
familiar to him in boyhood were full of a thick atmosphere of the
plant. Long since, while yet the honeymoon bouquet remained in the wine of
life, Iden had set a hedge of lavender to please his wife. It was so
carefully chosen, and set, and watched, that it grew to be the finest
lavender in all the country. People used to come for it from round
about, quite certain of a favourable reception, for there was nothing so
sure to bring peace at Coombe Oaks as a mention of lavender. But the letter from the Flammas was the great event--from London, all
that way, asking for some Coombe Oaks lavender! Then there was billing
and cooing, and fraternising, and sunshine in the garden over the hedge
of lavender. If only it could have lasted! Somehow, as people grow older
there seems so much grating of the wheels. In time, long time, people's original feelings get strangely confused
and overlaid. The churchwardens of the eighteenth century plastered the
fresco paintings of the fourteenth in their churches--covered them over
with yellowish mortar. The mould grows up, and hides the capital of the
fallen column; the acanthus is hidden in earth. At the foot of the oak,
where it is oldest, the bark becomes dense and thick, impenetrable, and
without sensitiveness; you may cut off an inch thick without reaching
the sap. A sort of scale or caking in long, long time grows over
original feelings. There was no one in the world so affectionate and loving as Mrs.
Iden--no one who loved a father so dearly; just as Amaryllis loved _her_
father. But after they had lived at Coombe Oaks thirty years or so, and the
thick dull bark had grown, after the scales or caking had come upon the
heart, after the capital of the column had fallen, after the painting
had been blurred, it came about that old Flamma, Mrs. Iden's father,
died in London. After thirty years of absolute quiet at Coombe Oaks, husband and wife
went up to London to the funeral, which took place at one of those
fearful London cemeteries that strike a chill at one's very soul. Of all
the horrible things in the world there is nothing so calmly ghastly as a
London cemetery. In the evening, after the funeral, Mr. and Mrs. Iden went to the
theatre. "How frivolous! How unfeeling!" No, nothing of the sort; how truly sad
and human, for to be human is to be sad. That men and women should be so
warped and twisted by the pressure of the years out of semblance to
themselves; that circumstances should so wall in their lives with
insurmountable cliffs of granite facts, compelling them to tread the
sunless gorge; that the coldness of death alone could open the door to
pleasure. They sat at the theatre with grey hearts. With the music and the song,
the dancing, the colours and gay dresses, it was sadder there than in
the silent rooms at the house where the dead had been. 