



Produced by Mike Lough





PHANTASTES

A FAERIE ROMANCE FOR MEN AND WOMEN


By George Macdonald


A new Edition, with thirty-three new Illustrations by Arthur Hughes;
edited by Greville MacDonald


     "In good sooth, my masters, this is no door. Yet is it a little window, that looketh upon a great world." LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  THE MEETING OF SIR GALAHAD AND SIX PERCIVALE
  SUDDENLY THERE STOOD ON THE THRESHOLD A TINY WOMAN-FORM
  THE BRANCHES AND LEAVES ON THE CURTAINS OF MY BED WERE IN MOTION
  I SAW A COUNTRY MAIDEN COMING TOWARDS ME
  TAILPIECE TO CHAPTER III
  HEADPIECE TO CHAPTER IV
  TWO LARGE SOFT ARMS WERE THROWN AROUND ME FROM BEHIND
  I GAZED AFTER HER IN A KIND OF DESPAIR
  I FOUND MYSELF IN A LITTLE CAVE
  THE ASH SHUDDERED AND GROANED
  TAILPIECE TO CHAPTER VI
  I COULD HARDLY BELIEVE THAT THERE WAS A FAIRY LAND
  I DID NOT BELIEVE IN FAIRY LAND
  A RUNNER WITH GHOSTLY FEET
  THE MAIDEN CAME ALONG, SINGING AND DANCING,HAPPY AS A CHILD
  THE GOBLINS PERFORMED THE MOST ANTIC HOMAGE
  THE FAIRY PALACE IN THE MOONLIGHT
  TOO DAZZLING FOR EARTHLY EYES
  IN THE WOODS AND ALONG THE RIVER BANKS DO THE MAIDENS GO LOOKING
       FOR CHILDREN
  SHE LAY WITH CLOSED EYES, WHENCE TWO TEARS WERE FAST WELLING
  HEADPIECE TO CHAPTER XIV
  I SPRANG TO HER, AND LAID MY HAND ON THE HARP
  A WHITE FIGURE GLEAMED PAST ME, WRINGING HER HANDS
  THEY ALL RUSHED UPON ME, AND HELD ME TIGHT
  A WINTRY SEA, BARE, AND WASTE, AND GRAY
  SHOW ME THE CHILD THOU CALLEST MINE
  THE TIME PASSED AWAY IN WORK AND SONG
  HEADPIECE TO CHAPTER XXI
  WE REACHED THE PALACE OF THE KING
  I SAW, LEANING AGAINST THE TREE, A BEAUTIFUL WOMAN
  FASTENED TO THE SADDLE, WAS THE BODY OF A GREAT DRAGON
  I WAS DEAD, AND RIGHT CONTENT
  A VALLEY LAY BENEATH ME




PREFACE

For offering this new edition of my father's Phantastes, my reasons
are three. The first is to rescue the work from an edition illustrated
without the author's sanction, and so unsuitably that all lovers of the
book must have experienced some real grief in turning its pages. With
the copyright I secured also the whole of that edition and turned it
into pulp. My second reason is to pay a small tribute to my father by way of
personal gratitude for this, his first prose work, which was published
nearly fifty years ago. Though unknown to many lovers of his greater
writings, none of these has exceeded it in imaginative insight and power
of expression. To me it rings with the dominant chord of his life's
purpose and work. My third reason is that wider knowledge and love of the book should
be made possible. To this end I have been most happy in the help of my
father's old friend, who has illustrated the book. I know of no other
living artist who is capable of portraying the spirit of Phantastes;
and every reader of this edition will, I believe, feel that the
illustrations are a part of the romance, and will gain through them
some perception of the brotherhood between George MacDonald and Arthur
Hughes. GREVILLE MACDONALD. September 1905. PHANTASTES A FAERIE ROMANCE


    "Phantastes from 'their fount all shapes deriving,
    In new habiliments can quickly dight." FLETCHER'S Purple Island


     "Es lassen sich Erzahlungen ohne Zusammenhang, jedoch mit
     Association, wie Traume dengkeennohgneedizhusamdimenhang;
     jedoeh mit und voll schoner Worte sind, aber auch ohne allen
     Sinn und Zusammenhang, hochstens einzelne Strophen
     verstandlich, wie Bruchstucke aus den verjschledenartigsten
     Dingen, Diese svahre Poesie kann Wlrkung, wie Musik haben. Darum ist die Natur so rein poetisch wle die Stube eines
     Zauberers, eines Physikers, eine Kinderstube elne Polterund
     Vorrathskammer

     "Ein Mahrchen ist wie ein Traumbild ohne Zusammenhang. Ein
     Ensemble wunderbarer Dinge und Begebenheiten, z. B. eine
     dMusNkalische Pbantasie, die harmonischen Folgen einer
     Aeolsharfe, die Natur slebst....


     "In einem echten Mahrchen muss ailes wunderbar,
     geheimnissvoll undzusammenhangendsein; alles belebt, jeder
     auf eineandereArt Die ganze Natur muss wunderlich mit der
     ganzen Geisterwelt gemiseht sein; hier tritt die Zeit der
     Anarehie, der Gesetzlosigkeit Frelheit, der Naturstand der
     Natur, die Zeit von der Welt ein entgegengesetztes und eben
     daruel'ndiehr Weld der Wahrheit durehaus Chaos der
     vollendeten Sehopfung ahnlich ist."--NOVALIS. CHAPTER I

                       "A spirit  . . . . . . . . . The undulating and silent well,
    And rippling rivulet, and evening gloom,
    Now deepening the dark shades, for speech assuming,
    Held commune with him; as if he and it
    Were all that was." SHELLEY'S Alastor. I awoke one morning with the usual perplexity of mind which accompanies
the return of consciousness. As I lay and looked through the eastern
window of my room, a faint streak of peach-colour, dividing a cloud that
just rose above the low swell of the horizon, announced the approach of
the sun. As my thoughts, which a deep and apparently dreamless sleep had
dissolved, began again to assume crystalline forms, the strange events
of the foregoing night presented themselves anew to my wondering
consciousness. The day before had been my one-and-twentieth birthday. Among other ceremonies investing me with my legal rights, the keys of an
old secretary, in which my father had kept his private papers, had been
delivered up to me. As soon as I was left alone, I ordered lights in the
chamber where the secretary stood, the first lights that had been there
for many a year; for, since my father's death, the room had been left
undisturbed. But, as if the darkness had been too long an inmate to
be easily expelled, and had dyed with blackness the walls to which,
bat-like, it had clung, these tapers served but ill to light up the
gloomy hangings, and seemed to throw yet darker shadows into the hollows
of the deep-wrought cornice. All the further portions of the room lay
shrouded in a mystery whose deepest folds were gathered around the dark
oak cabinet which I now approached with a strange mingling of reverence
and curiosity. Perhaps, like a geologist, I was about to turn up to
the light some of the buried strata of the human world, with its fossil
remains charred by passion and petrified by tears. Perhaps I was to
learn how my father, whose personal history was unknown to me, had woven
his web of story; how he had found the world, and how the world had left
him. Perhaps I was to find only the records of lands and moneys, how
gotten and how secured; coming down from strange men, and through
troublous times, to me, who knew little or nothing of them all. To solve
my speculations, and to dispel the awe which was fast gathering around
me as if the dead were drawing near, I approached the secretary; and
having found the key that fitted the upper portion, I opened it with
some difficulty, drew near it a heavy high-backed chair, and sat down
before a multitude of little drawers and slides and pigeon-holes. But
the door of a little cupboard in the centre especially attracted my
interest, as if there lay the secret of this long-hidden world. Its key
I found. One of the rusty hinges cracked and broke as I opened the door: it
revealed a number of small pigeon-holes. These, however, being but
shallow compared with the depth of those around the little cupboard, the
outer ones reaching to the back of the desk, I concluded that there
must be some accessible space behind; and found, indeed, that they were
formed in a separate framework, which admitted of the whole being pulled
out in one piece. Behind, I found a sort of flexible portcullis of small
bars of wood laid close together horizontally. After long search, and
trying many ways to move it, I discovered at last a scarcely projecting
point of steel on one side. I pressed this repeatedly and hard with
the point of an old tool that was lying near, till at length it
yielded inwards; and the little slide, flying up suddenly, disclosed a
chamber--empty, except that in one corner lay a little heap of withered
rose-leaves, whose long-lived scent had long since departed; and, in
another, a small packet of papers, tied with a bit of ribbon, whose
colour had gone with the rose-scent. Almost fearing to touch them, they
witnessed so mutely to the law of oblivion, I leaned back in my chair,
and regarded them for a moment; when suddenly there stood on the
threshold of the little chamber, as though she had just emerged from its
depth, a tiny woman-form, as perfect in shape as if she had been a small
Greek statuette roused to life and motion. Her dress was of a kind that
could never grow old-fashioned, because it was simply natural: a robe
plaited in a band around the neck, and confined by a belt about the
waist, descended to her feet. It was only afterwards, however, that I
took notice of her dress, although my surprise was by no means of so
overpowering a degree as such an apparition might naturally be expected
to excite. Seeing, however, as I suppose, some astonishment in my
countenance, she came forward within a yard of me, and said, in a voice
that strangely recalled a sensation of twilight, and reedy river banks,
and a low wind, even in this deathly room:--

"Anodos, you never saw such a little creature before, did you?" "No," said I; "and indeed I hardly believe I do now." "Ah! that is always the way with you men; you believe nothing the first
time; and it is foolish enough to let mere repetition convince you of
what you consider in itself unbelievable. I am not going to argue with
you, however, but to grant you a wish." Here I could not help interrupting her with the foolish speech,
of which, however, I had no cause to repent--

"How can such a very little creature as you grant or refuse anything?" "Is that all the philosophy you have gained in one-and-twenty years?" said she. "Form is much, but size is nothing. It is a mere matter of
relation. I suppose your six-foot lordship does not feel altogether
insignificant, though to others you do look small beside your old Uncle
Ralph, who rises above you a great half-foot at least. But size is of so
little consequence with old me, that I may as well accommodate myself to
your foolish prejudices." So saying, she leapt from the desk upon the floor, where she stood a
tall, gracious lady, with pale face and large blue eyes. Her dark hair
flowed behind, wavy but uncurled, down to her waist, and against it her
form stood clear in its robe of white. "Now," said she, "you will believe me." Overcome with the presence of a beauty which I could now perceive, and
drawn towards her by an attraction irresistible as incomprehensible, I
suppose I stretched out my arms towards her, for she drew back a step or
two, and said--

"Foolish boy, if you could touch me, I should hurt you. Besides, I was
two hundred and thirty-seven years old, last Midsummer eve; and a man
must not fall in love with his grandmother, you know." "But you are not my grandmother," said I. "How do you know that?" she retorted. "I dare say you know something of
your great-grandfathers a good deal further back than that; but you know
very little about your great-grandmothers on either side. Now, to the
point. Your little sister was reading a fairy-tale to you last night." "She was." "When she had finished, she said, as she closed the book, 'Is there a
fairy-country, brother?' You replied with a sigh, 'I suppose there is,
if one could find the way into it.'" "I did; but I meant something quite different from what you seem to
think." "Never mind what I seem to think. You shall find the way into Fairy Land
to-morrow. Now look in my eyes." Eagerly I did so. They filled me with an unknown longing. I remembered
somehow that my mother died when I was a baby. I looked deeper and
deeper, till they spread around me like seas, and I sank in their
waters. I forgot all the rest, till I found myself at the window, whose
gloomy curtains were withdrawn, and where I stood gazing on a whole
heaven of stars, small and sparkling in the moonlight. Below lay a sea,
still as death and hoary in the moon, sweeping into bays and around
capes and islands, away, away, I knew not whither. Alas! it was no
sea, but a low bog burnished by the moon. "Surely there is such a sea
somewhere!" said I to myself. A low sweet voice beside me replied--

"In Fairy Land, Anodos." I turned, but saw no one. I closed the secretary, and went to my own
room, and to bed. All this I recalled as I lay with half-closed eyes. I was soon to find
the truth of the lady's promise, that this day I should discover the
road into Fairy Land. CHAPTER II

     "'Where is the stream?' cried he, with tears. 'Seest thou
     its not in blue waves above us?' He looked up, and lo! the
     blue stream was flowing gently over their heads." --NOVALIS, Heinrich von Ofterdingen. While these strange events were passing through my mind, I suddenly, as
one awakes to the consciousness that the sea has been moaning by him for
hours, or that the storm has been howling about his window all night,
became aware of the sound of running water near me; and, looking out of
bed, I saw that a large green marble basin, in which I was wont to wash,
and which stood on a low pedestal of the same material in a corner of
my room, was overflowing like a spring; and that a stream of clear water
was running over the carpet, all the length of the room, finding its
outlet I knew not where. And, stranger still, where this carpet, which
I had myself designed to imitate a field of grass and daisies, bordered
the course of the little stream, the grass-blades and daisies seemed to
wave in a tiny breeze that followed the water's flow; while under the
rivulet they bent and swayed with every motion of the changeful current,
as if they were about to dissolve with it, and, forsaking their fixed
form, become fluent as the waters. My dressing-table was an old-fashioned piece of furniture of black
oak, with drawers all down the front. These were elaborately carved
in foliage, of which ivy formed the chief part. The nearer end of this
table remained just as it had been, but on the further end a singular
change had commenced. I happened to fix my eye on a little cluster of
ivy-leaves. The first of these was evidently the work of the carver; the
next looked curious; the third was unmistakable ivy; and just beyond it
a tendril of clematis had twined itself about the gilt handle of one of
the drawers. Hearing next a slight motion above me, I looked up, and saw
that the branches and leaves designed upon the curtains of my bed were
slightly in motion. Not knowing what change might follow next, I thought
it high time to get up; and, springing from the bed, my bare feet
alighted upon a cool green sward; and although I dressed in all haste,
I found myself completing my toilet under the boughs of a great
tree, whose top waved in the golden stream of the sunrise with many
interchanging lights, and with shadows of leaf and branch gliding over
leaf and branch, as the cool morning wind swung it to and fro, like a
sinking sea-wave. After washing as well as I could in the clear stream, I rose and looked
around me. The tree under which I seemed to have lain all night was one
of the advanced guard of a dense forest, towards which the rivulet ran. Faint traces of a footpath, much overgrown with grass and moss, and with
here and there a pimpernel even, were discernible along the right bank. "This," thought I, "must surely be the path into Fairy Land, which
the lady of last night promised I should so soon find." I crossed the
rivulet, and accompanied it, keeping the footpath on its right bank,
until it led me, as I expected, into the wood. Here I left it, without
any good reason: and with a vague feeling that I ought to have followed
its course, I took a more southerly direction. CHAPTER III

            "Man doth usurp all space,
             Stares thee, in rock, bush, river, in
                    the face. Never thine eyes behold a tree;
             'Tis no sea thou seest in the sea,
             'Tis but a disguised humanity. To avoid thy fellow, vain thy plan;
             All that interests a man, is man." HENRY SUTTON. The trees, which were far apart where I entered, giving free passage
to the level rays of the sun, closed rapidly as I advanced, so that ere
long their crowded stems barred the sunlight out, forming as it were a
thick grating between me and the East. I seemed to be advancing towards
a second midnight. In the midst of the intervening twilight, however,
before I entered what appeared to be the darkest portion of the forest,
I saw a country maiden coming towards me from its very depths. She did
not seem to observe me, for she was apparently intent upon a bunch of
wild flowers which she carried in her hand. I could hardly see her face;
for, though she came direct towards me, she never looked up. But when we
met, instead of passing, she turned and walked alongside of me for a few
yards, still keeping her face downwards, and busied with her flowers. She spoke rapidly, however, all the time, in a low tone, as if talking
to herself, but evidently addressing the purport of her words to me. She seemed afraid of being observed by some lurking foe. "Trust the
Oak," said she; "trust the Oak, and the Elm, and the great Beech. Take
care of the Birch, for though she is honest, she is too young not to be
changeable. But shun the Ash and the Alder; for the Ash is an ogre,--you
will know him by his thick fingers; and the Alder will smother you with
her web of hair, if you let her near you at night." All this was uttered
without pause or alteration of tone. Then she turned suddenly and left
me, walking still with the same unchanging gait. I could not conjecture
what she meant, but satisfied myself with thinking that it would be time
enough to find out her meaning when there was need to make use of her
warning, and that the occasion would reveal the admonition. I concluded
from the flowers that she carried, that the forest could not be
everywhere so dense as it appeared from where I was now walking; and I
was right in this conclusion. For soon I came to a more open part, and
by-and-by crossed a wide grassy glade, on which were several circles of
brighter green. But even here I was struck with the utter stillness. No
bird sang. No insect hummed. Not a living creature crossed my way. Yet
somehow the whole environment seemed only asleep, and to wear even in
sleep an air of expectation. The trees seemed all to have an expression
of conscious mystery, as if they said to themselves, "we could, an' if
we would." They had all a meaning look about them. Then I remembered
that night is the fairies' day, and the moon their sun; and I
thought--Everything sleeps and dreams now: when the night comes, it will
be different. At the same time I, being a man and a child of the day,
felt some anxiety as to how I should fare among the elves and other
children of the night who wake when mortals dream, and find their common
life in those wondrous hours that flow noiselessly over the moveless
death-like forms of men and women and children, lying strewn and parted
beneath the weight of the heavy waves of night, which flow on and beat
them down, and hold them drowned and senseless, until the ebbtide comes,
and the waves sink away, back into the ocean of the dark. But I took
courage and went on. Soon, however, I became again anxious, though from
another cause. I had eaten nothing that day, and for an hour past had
been feeling the want of food. So I grew afraid lest I should find
nothing to meet my human necessities in this strange place; but once
more I comforted myself with hope and went on. Before noon, I fancied I saw a thin blue smoke rising amongst the stems
of larger trees in front of me; and soon I came to an open spot of
ground in which stood a little cottage, so built that the stems of four
great trees formed its corners, while their branches met and intertwined
over its roof, heaping a great cloud of leaves over it, up towards the
heavens. I wondered at finding a human dwelling in this neighbourhood;
and yet it did not look altogether human, though sufficiently so to
encourage me to expect to find some sort of food. Seeing no door, I went
round to the other side, and there I found one, wide open. A woman sat
beside it, preparing some vegetables for dinner. This was homely and
comforting. As I came near, she looked up, and seeing me, showed no
surprise, but bent her head again over her work, and said in a low tone:

"Did you see my daughter?" "I believe I did," said I. "Can you give me something to eat, for I am
very hungry?" "With pleasure," she replied, in the same tone; "but do
not say anything more, till you come into the house, for the Ash is
watching us." Having said this, she rose and led the way into the cottage; which, I
now saw, was built of the stems of small trees set closely together, and
was furnished with rough chairs and tables, from which even the bark had
not been removed. As soon as she had shut the door and set a chair--

"You have fairy blood in you," said she, looking hard at me. "How do you know that?" "You could not have got so far into this wood if it were not so; and I
am trying to find out some trace of it in your countenance. I think I
see it." "What do you see?" "Oh, never mind: I may be mistaken in that." "But how then do you come to live here?" "Because I too have fairy blood in me." Here I, in my turn, looked hard at her, and thought I could perceive,
notwithstanding the coarseness of her features, and especially the
heaviness of her eyebrows, a something unusual--I could hardly call it
grace, and yet it was an expression that strangely contrasted with
the form of her features. I noticed too that her hands were delicately
formed, though brown with work and exposure. "I should be ill," she continued, "if I did not live on the borders of
the fairies' country, and now and then eat of their food. And I see by
your eyes that you are not quite free of the same need; though, from
your education and the activity of your mind, you have felt it less than
I. You may be further removed too from the fairy race." I remembered what the lady had said about my grandmothers. Here she placed some bread and some milk before me, with a kindly
apology for the homeliness of the fare, with which, however, I was in no
humour to quarrel. I now thought it time to try to get some explanation
of the strange words both of her daughter and herself. "What did you mean by speaking so about the Ash?" She rose and looked out of the little window. My eyes followed her; but
as the window was too small to allow anything to be seen from where I
was sitting, I rose and looked over her shoulder. I had just time to
see, across the open space, on the edge of the denser forest, a single
large ash-tree, whose foliage showed bluish, amidst the truer green of
the other trees around it; when she pushed me back with an expression
of impatience and terror, and then almost shut out the light from the
window by setting up a large old book in it. "In general," said she, recovering her composure, "there is no danger in
the daytime, for then he is sound asleep; but there is something unusual
going on in the woods; there must be some solemnity among the fairies
to-night, for all the trees are restless, and although they cannot come
awake, they see and hear in their sleep." "But what danger is to be dreaded from him?" Instead of answering the question, she went again to the window and
looked out, saying she feared the fairies would be interrupted by foul
weather, for a storm was brewing in the west. "And the sooner it grows dark, the sooner the Ash will be awake," added
she. I asked her how she knew that there was any unusual excitement in the
woods. She replied--

"Besides the look of the trees, the dog there is unhappy; and the eyes
and ears of the white rabbit are redder than usual, and he frisks about
as if he expected some fun. If the cat were at home, she would have
her back up; for the young fairies pull the sparks out of her tail with
bramble thorns, and she knows when they are coming. So do I, in another
way." At this instant, a grey cat rushed in like a demon, and
disappeared in a hole in the wall. "There, I told you!" said the woman. "But what of the ash-tree?" said I, returning once more to the
subject. Here, however, the young woman, whom I had met in the morning,
entered. A smile passed between the mother and daughter; and then the
latter began to help her mother in little household duties. "I should like to stay here till the evening," I said; "and then go on
my journey, if you will allow me." "You are welcome to do as you please; only it might be better to stay
all night, than risk the dangers of the wood then. Where are you going?" "Nay, that I do not know," I replied, "but I wish to see all that is to
be seen, and therefore I should like to start just at sundown." "You are
a bold youth, if you have any idea of what you are daring; but a rash
one, if you know nothing about it; and, excuse me, you do not seem very
well informed about the country and its manners. However, no one comes
here but for some reason, either known to himself or to those who have
charge of him; so you shall do just as you wish." Accordingly I sat down, and feeling rather tired, and disinclined for
further talk, I asked leave to look at the old book which still screened
the window. The woman brought it to me directly, but not before taking
another look towards the forest, and then drawing a white blind over
the window. I sat down opposite to it by the table, on which I laid the
great old volume, and read. It contained many wondrous tales of Fairy
Land, and olden times, and the Knights of King Arthur's table. I read
on and on, till the shades of the afternoon began to deepen; for in
the midst of the forest it gloomed earlier than in the open country. At
length I came to this passage--

"Here it chanced, that upon their quest, Sir Galahad and Sir Percivale
rencountered in the depths of a great forest. Now, Sir Galahad was dight
all in harness of silver, clear and shining; the which is a delight
to look upon, but full hasty to tarnish, and withouten the labour of a
ready squire, uneath to be kept fair and clean. And yet withouten squire
or page, Sir Galahad's armour shone like the moon. And he rode a great
white mare, whose bases and other housings were black, but all besprent
with fair lilys of silver sheen. Whereas Sir Percivale bestrode a red
horse, with a tawny mane and tail; whose trappings were all to-smirched
with mud and mire; and his armour was wondrous rosty to behold, ne could
he by any art furbish it again; so that as the sun in his going down
shone twixt the bare trunks of the trees, full upon the knights twain,
the one did seem all shining with light, and the other all to glow with
ruddy fire. Now it came about in this wise. For Sir Percivale, after his
escape from the demon lady, whenas the cross on the handle of his sword
smote him to the heart, and he rove himself through the thigh, and
escaped away, he came to a great wood; and, in nowise cured of his
fault, yet bemoaning the same, the damosel of the alder tree encountered
him, right fair to see; and with her fair words and false countenance
she comforted him and beguiled him, until he followed her where she led
him to a---"

Here a low hurried cry from my hostess caused me to look up from the
book, and I read no more. "Look there!" she said; "look at his fingers!" Just as I had been reading in the book, the setting sun was shining
through a cleft in the clouds piled up in the west; and a shadow as of a
large distorted hand, with thick knobs and humps on the fingers, so that
it was much wider across the fingers than across the undivided part
of the hand, passed slowly over the little blind, and then as slowly
returned in the opposite direction. "He is almost awake, mother; and greedier than usual to-night." "Hush, child; you need not make him more angry with us than he is; for
you do not know how soon something may happen to oblige us to be in the
forest after nightfall." "But you are in the forest," said I; "how is it that you are safe here?" "He dares not come nearer than he is now," she replied; "for any of
those four oaks, at the corners of our cottage, would tear him to
pieces; they are our friends. But he stands there and makes awful faces
at us sometimes, and stretches out his long arms and fingers, and tries
to kill us with fright; for, indeed, that is his favourite way of doing. Pray, keep out of his way to-night." "Shall I be able to see these things?" said I. "That I cannot tell yet, not knowing how much of the fairy nature there
is in you. But we shall soon see whether you can discern the fairies in
my little garden, and that will be some guide to us." "Are the trees fairies too, as well as the flowers?" I asked. "They are of the same race," she replied; "though those you call fairies
in your country are chiefly the young children of the flower fairies. They are very fond of having fun with the thick people, as they call
you; for, like most children, they like fun better than anything else." "Why do you have flowers so near you then? Do they not annoy you?" "Oh, no, they are very amusing, with their mimicries of grown people,
and mock solemnities. Sometimes they will act a whole play through
before my eyes, with perfect composure and assurance, for they are not
afraid of me. Only, as soon as they have done, they burst into peals
of tiny laughter, as if it was such a joke to have been serious over
anything. These I speak of, however, are the fairies of the garden. They are more staid and educated than those of the fields and woods. Of course they have near relations amongst the wild flowers, but they
patronise them, and treat them as country cousins, who know nothing
of life, and very little of manners. Now and then, however, they are
compelled to envy the grace and simplicity of the natural flowers." "Do they live IN the flowers?" I said. "I cannot tell," she replied. "There is something in it I do not
understand. Sometimes they disappear altogether, even from me, though
I know they are near. They seem to die always with the flowers they
resemble, and by whose names they are called; but whether they return to
life with the fresh flowers, or, whether it be new flowers, new fairies,
I cannot tell. They have as many sorts of dispositions as men and women,
while their moods are yet more variable; twenty different expressions
will cross their little faces in half a minute. I often amuse myself
with watching them, but I have never been able to make personal
acquaintance with any of them. If I speak to one, he or she looks up in
my face, as if I were not worth heeding, gives a little laugh, and runs
away." Here the woman started, as if suddenly recollecting herself, and
said in a low voice to her daughter, "Make haste--go and watch him, and
see in what direction he goes." I may as well mention here, that the conclusion I arrived at from the
observations I was afterwards able to make, was, that the flowers die
because the fairies go away; not that the fairies disappear because
the flowers die. The flowers seem a sort of houses for them, or outer
bodies, which they can put on or off when they please. Just as you could
form some idea of the nature of a man from the kind of house he built,
if he followed his own taste, so you could, without seeing the fairies,
tell what any one of them is like, by looking at the flower till you
feel that you understand it. For just what the flower says to you, would
the face and form of the fairy say; only so much more plainly as a face
and human figure can express more than a flower. For the house or the
clothes, though like the inhabitant or the wearer, cannot be wrought
into an equal power of utterance. Yet you would see a strange
resemblance, almost oneness, between the flower and the fairy, which you
could not describe, but which described itself to you. Whether all the
flowers have fairies, I cannot determine, any more than I can be sure
whether all men and women have souls. The woman and I continued the conversation for a few minutes longer. I
was much interested by the information she gave me, and astonished
at the language in which she was able to convey it. It seemed that
intercourse with the fairies was no bad education in itself. But now the
daughter returned with the news, that the Ash had just gone away in a
south-westerly direction; and, as my course seemed to lie eastward, she
hoped I should be in no danger of meeting him if I departed at once. I looked out of the little window, and there stood the ash-tree, to my
eyes the same as before; but I believed that they knew better than I
did, and prepared to go. I pulled out my purse, but to my dismay there
was nothing in it. The woman with a smile begged me not to trouble
myself, for money was not of the slightest use there; and as I might
meet with people in my journeys whom I could not recognise to be
fairies, it was well I had no money to offer, for nothing offended them
so much. "They would think," she added, "that you were making game of them; and
that is their peculiar privilege with regard to us." So we went together
into the little garden which sloped down towards a lower part of the
wood. Here, to my great pleasure, all was life and bustle. There was still
light enough from the day to see a little; and the pale half-moon,
halfway to the zenith, was reviving every moment. The whole garden
was like a carnival, with tiny, gaily decorated forms, in groups,
assemblies, processions, pairs or trios, moving stately on, running
about wildly, or sauntering hither or thither. From the cups or bells of
tall flowers, as from balconies, some looked down on the masses below,
now bursting with laughter, now grave as owls; but even in their deepest
solemnity, seeming only to be waiting for the arrival of the next laugh. Some were launched on a little marshy stream at the bottom, in boats
chosen from the heaps of last year's leaves that lay about, curled and
withered. These soon sank with them; whereupon they swam ashore and got
others. Those who took fresh rose-leaves for their boats floated the
longest; but for these they had to fight; for the fairy of the rose-tree
complained bitterly that they were stealing her clothes, and defended
her property bravely. "You can't wear half you've got," said some. "Never you mind; I don't choose you to have them: they are my property." "All for the good of the community!" said one, and ran off with a great
hollow leaf. But the rose-fairy sprang after him (what a beauty she was! only too like a drawing-room young lady), knocked him heels-over-head as
he ran, and recovered her great red leaf. But in the meantime twenty had
hurried off in different directions with others just as good; and the
little creature sat down and cried, and then, in a pet, sent a perfect
pink snowstorm of petals from her tree, leaping from branch to branch,
and stamping and shaking and pulling. At last, after another good cry,
she chose the biggest she could find, and ran away laughing, to launch
her boat amongst the rest. But my attention was first and chiefly attracted by a group of fairies
near the cottage, who were talking together around what seemed a
last dying primrose. They talked singing, and their talk made a song,
something like this:



    "Sister Snowdrop died
        Before we were born." "She came like a bride
        In a snowy morn." "What's a bride?" "What is snow? "Never tried." "Do not know." "Who told you about her?" "Little Primrose there
    Cannot do without her." "Oh, so sweetly fair!" "Never fear,
        She will come,
    Primrose dear." "Is she dumb?" "She'll come by-and-by." "You will never see her." "She went home to dies,
        "Till the new year." "Snowdrop!" "'Tis no good
        To invite her." "Primrose is very rude,
        "I will bite her." "Oh, you naughty Pocket! "Look, she drops her head." "She deserved it, Rocket,
        "And she was nearly dead." "To your hammock--off with you!" "And swing alone." "No one will laugh with you." "No, not one." "Now let us moan." "And cover her o'er." "Primrose is gone." "All but the flower." "Here is a leaf." "Lay her upon it." "Follow in grief." "Pocket has done it." "Deeper, poor creature! Winter may come." "He cannot reach her--
        That is a hum." "She is buried, the beauty!" "Now she is done." "That was the duty." "Now for the fun." And with a wild laugh they sprang away, most of them towards the
cottage. During the latter part of the song-talk, they had formed
themselves into a funeral procession, two of them bearing poor Primrose,
whose death Pocket had hastened by biting her stalk, upon one of her
own great leaves. They bore her solemnly along some distance, and
then buried her under a tree. Although I say HER I saw nothing but
the withered primrose-flower on its long stalk. Pocket, who had been
expelled from the company by common consent, went sulkily away towards
her hammock, for she was the fairy of the calceolaria, and looked rather
wicked. When she reached its stem, she stopped and looked round. I could
not help speaking to her, for I stood near her. I said, "Pocket, how
could you be so naughty?" "I am never naughty," she said, half-crossly, half-defiantly; "only if
you come near my hammock, I will bite you, and then you will go away." "Why did you bite poor Primrose?" "Because she said we should never see Snowdrop; as if we were not good
enough to look at her, and she was, the proud thing!--served her right!" "Oh, Pocket, Pocket," said I; but by this time the party which had
gone towards the house, rushed out again, shouting and screaming with
laughter. Half of them were on the cat's back, and half held on by her
fur and tail, or ran beside her; till, more coming to their help, the
furious cat was held fast; and they proceeded to pick the sparks out
of her with thorns and pins, which they handled like harpoons. Indeed,
there were more instruments at work about her than there could have
been sparks in her. One little fellow who held on hard by the tip of
the tail, with his feet planted on the ground at an angle of forty-five
degrees, helping to keep her fast, administered a continuous flow of
admonitions to Pussy. "Now, Pussy, be patient. You know quite well it is all for your good. You cannot be comfortable with all those sparks in you; and, indeed, I
am charitably disposed to believe" (here he became very pompous) "that
they are the cause of all your bad temper; so we must have them all out,
every one; else we shall be reduced to the painful necessity of cutting
your claws, and pulling out your eye-teeth. Quiet! Pussy, quiet!" But with a perfect hurricane of feline curses, the poor animal broke
loose, and dashed across the garden and through the hedge, faster than
even the fairies could follow. "Never mind, never mind, we shall find
her again; and by that time she will have laid in a fresh stock of
sparks. Hooray!" And off they set, after some new mischief. But I will not linger to enlarge on the amusing display of these
frolicsome creatures. Their manners and habits are now so well known to
the world, having been so often described by eyewitnesses, that it would
be only indulging self-conceit, to add my account in full to the rest. I cannot help wishing, however, that my readers could see them for
themselves. Especially do I desire that they should see the fairy of the
daisy; a little, chubby, round-eyed child, with such innocent trust in
his look! Even the most mischievous of the fairies would not tease him,
although he did not belong to their set at all, but was quite a little
country bumpkin. He wandered about alone, and looked at everything, with
his hands in his little pockets, and a white night-cap on, the darling! He was not so beautiful as many other wild flowers I saw afterwards, but
so dear and loving in his looks and little confident ways. CHAPTER IV

        "When bale is att hyest, boote is nyest." Ballad of Sir Aldingar. By this time, my hostess was quite anxious that I should be gone. So,
with warm thanks for their hospitality, I took my leave, and went my way
through the little garden towards the forest. Some of the garden flowers
had wandered into the wood, and were growing here and there along
the path, but the trees soon became too thick and shadowy for them. I
particularly noticed some tall lilies, which grew on both sides of
the way, with large dazzlingly white flowers, set off by the universal
green. It was now dark enough for me to see that every flower was
shining with a light of its own. Indeed it was by this light that I
saw them, an internal, peculiar light, proceeding from each, and not
reflected from a common source of light as in the daytime. This light
sufficed only for the plant itself, and was not strong enough to cast
any but the faintest shadows around it, or to illuminate any of the
neighbouring objects with other than the faintest tinge of its own
individual hue. From the lilies above mentioned, from the campanulas,
from the foxgloves, and every bell-shaped flower, curious little figures
shot up their heads, peeped at me, and drew back. They seemed to inhabit
them, as snails their shells but I was sure some of them were intruders,
and belonged to the gnomes or goblin-fairies, who inhabit the ground
and earthy creeping plants. From the cups of Arum lilies, creatures with
great heads and grotesque faces shot up like Jack-in-the-box, and made
grimaces at me; or rose slowly and slily over the edge of the cup,
and spouted water at me, slipping suddenly back, like those little
soldier-crabs that inhabit the shells of sea-snails. Passing a row of
tall thistles, I saw them crowded with little faces, which peeped every
one from behind its flower, and drew back as quickly; and I heard them
saying to each other, evidently intending me to hear, but the speaker
always hiding behind his tuft, when I looked in his direction, "Look at
him! Look at him! He has begun a story without a beginning, and it will
never have any end. He! he! he! Look at him!" But as I went further into the wood, these sights and sounds became
fewer, giving way to others of a different character. A little forest
of wild hyacinths was alive with exquisite creatures, who stood nearly
motionless, with drooping necks, holding each by the stem of her flower,
and swaying gently with it, whenever a low breath of wind swung the
crowded floral belfry. In like manner, though differing of course
in form and meaning, stood a group of harebells, like little angels
waiting, ready, till they were wanted to go on some yet unknown message. In darker nooks, by the mossy roots of the trees, or in little tufts
of grass, each dwelling in a globe of its own green light, weaving a
network of grass and its shadows, glowed the glowworms. They were just like the glowworms of our own land, for they are fairies
everywhere; worms in the day, and glowworms at night, when their own can
appear, and they can be themselves to others as well as themselves. But they had their enemies here. For I saw great strong-armed beetles,
hurrying about with most unwieldy haste, awkward as elephant-calves,
looking apparently for glowworms; for the moment a beetle espied one,
through what to it was a forest of grass, or an underwood of moss, it
pounced upon it, and bore it away, in spite of its feeble resistance. Wondering what their object could be, I watched one of the beetles,
and then I discovered a thing I could not account for. But it is no use
trying to account for things in Fairy Land; and one who travels there
soon learns to forget the very idea of doing so, and takes everything as
it comes; like a child, who, being in a chronic condition of wonder, is
surprised at nothing. What I saw was this. Everywhere, here and there
over the ground, lay little, dark-looking lumps of something more like
earth than anything else, and about the size of a chestnut. The beetles
hunted in couples for these; and having found one, one of them stayed
to watch it, while the other hurried to find a glowworm. By signals, I
presume, between them, the latter soon found his companion again: they
then took the glowworm and held its luminous tail to the dark earthly
pellet; when lo, it shot up into the air like a sky-rocket, seldom,
however, reaching the height of the highest tree. Just like a rocket
too, it burst in the air, and fell in a shower of the most gorgeously
coloured sparks of every variety of hue; golden and red, and purple and
green, and blue and rosy fires crossed and inter-crossed each other,
beneath the shadowy heads, and between the columnar stems of the forest
trees. They never used the same glowworm twice, I observed; but let him
go, apparently uninjured by the use they had made of him. In other parts, the whole of the immediately surrounding foliage was
illuminated by the interwoven dances in the air of splendidly coloured
fire-flies, which sped hither and thither, turned, twisted, crossed, and
recrossed, entwining every complexity of intervolved motion. Here and
there, whole mighty trees glowed with an emitted phosphorescent light. You could trace the very course of the great roots in the earth by the
faint light that came through; and every twig, and every vein on every
leaf was a streak of pale fire. All this time, as I went through the wood, I was haunted with the
feeling that other shapes, more like my own size and mien, were moving
about at a little distance on all sides of me. But as yet I could
discern none of them, although the moon was high enough to send a great
many of her rays down between the trees, and these rays were unusually
bright, and sight-giving, notwithstanding she was only a half-moon. I
constantly imagined, however, that forms were visible in all directions
except that to which my gaze was turned; and that they only became
invisible, or resolved themselves into other woodland shapes, the moment
my looks were directed towards them. However this may have been, except
for this feeling of presence, the woods seemed utterly bare of anything
like human companionship, although my glance often fell on some object
which I fancied to be a human form; for I soon found that I was quite
deceived; as, the moment I fixed my regard on it, it showed plainly that
it was a bush, or a tree, or a rock. Soon a vague sense of discomfort possessed me. With variations of
relief, this gradually increased; as if some evil thing were wandering
about in my neighbourhood, sometimes nearer and sometimes further off,
but still approaching. The feeling continued and deepened, until all my
pleasure in the shows of various kinds that everywhere betokened the
presence of the merry fairies vanished by degrees, and left me full
of anxiety and fear, which I was unable to associate with any definite
object whatever. At length the thought crossed my mind with horror: "Can
it be possible that the Ash is looking for me? or that, in his nightly
wanderings, his path is gradually verging towards mine?" I comforted
myself, however, by remembering that he had started quite in another
direction; one that would lead him, if he kept it, far apart from me;
especially as, for the last two or three hours, I had been diligently
journeying eastward. I kept on my way, therefore, striving by direct
effort of the will against the encroaching fear; and to this end
occupying my mind, as much as I could, with other thoughts. I was so far
successful that, although I was conscious, if I yielded for a moment, I
should be almost overwhelmed with horror, I was yet able to walk right
on for an hour or more. What I feared I could not tell. Indeed, I was
left in a state of the vaguest uncertainty as regarded the nature of my
enemy, and knew not the mode or object of his attacks; for, somehow or
other, none of my questions had succeeded in drawing a definite answer
from the dame in the cottage. How then to defend myself I knew not; nor
even by what sign I might with certainty recognise the presence of my
foe; for as yet this vague though powerful fear was all the indication
of danger I had. To add to my distress, the clouds in the west had risen
nearly to the top of the skies, and they and the moon were travelling
slowly towards each other. Indeed, some of their advanced guard had
already met her, and she had begun to wade through a filmy vapour that
gradually deepened. At length she was for a moment almost entirely obscured. When she shone
out again, with a brilliancy increased by the contrast, I saw plainly
on the path before me--from around which at this spot the trees receded,
leaving a small space of green sward--the shadow of a large hand, with
knotty joints and protuberances here and there. Especially I remarked,
even in the midst of my fear, the bulbous points of the fingers. I
looked hurriedly all around, but could see nothing from which such
a shadow should fall. Now, however, that I had a direction, however
undetermined, in which to project my apprehension, the very sense of
danger and need of action overcame that stifling which is the worst
property of fear. I reflected in a moment, that if this were indeed a
shadow, it was useless to look for the object that cast it in any other
direction than between the shadow and the moon. I looked, and peered,
and intensified my vision, all to no purpose. I could see nothing of
that kind, not even an ash-tree in the neighbourhood. Still the shadow
remained; not steady, but moving to and fro, and once I saw the fingers
close, and grind themselves close, like the claws of a wild animal, as
if in uncontrollable longing for some anticipated prey. There seemed
but one mode left of discovering the substance of this shadow. I went
forward boldly, though with an inward shudder which I would not heed, to
the spot where the shadow lay, threw myself on the ground, laid my head
within the form of the hand, and turned my eyes towards the moon Good
heavens! what did I see? I wonder that ever I arose, and that the very
shadow of the hand did not hold me where I lay until fear had frozen my
brain. I saw the strangest figure; vague, shadowy, almost transparent,
in the central parts, and gradually deepening in substance towards the
outside, until it ended in extremities capable of casting such a shadow
as fell from the hand, through the awful fingers of which I now saw the
moon. The hand was uplifted in the attitude of a paw about to strike
its prey. But the face, which throbbed with fluctuating and pulsatory
visibility--not from changes in the light it reflected, but from changes
in its own conditions of reflecting power, the alterations being from
within, not from without--it was horrible. I do not know how to describe
it. It caused a new sensation. Just as one cannot translate a horrible
odour, or a ghastly pain, or a fearful sound, into words, so I cannot
describe this new form of awful hideousness. I can only try to describe
something that is not it, but seems somewhat parallel to it; or at least
is suggested by it. It reminded me of what I had heard of vampires; for
the face resembled that of a corpse more than anything else I can
think of; especially when I can conceive such a face in motion, but
not suggesting any life as the source of the motion. The features were
rather handsome than otherwise, except the mouth, which had scarcely a
curve in it. The lips were of equal thickness; but the thickness was
not at all remarkable, even although they looked slightly swollen. They
seemed fixedly open, but were not wide apart. Of course I did not REMARK
these lineaments at the time: I was too horrified for that. I noted them
afterwards, when the form returned on my inward sight with a vividness
too intense to admit of my doubting the accuracy of the reflex. But the
most awful of the features were the eyes. These were alive, yet not with
life. They seemed lighted up with an infinite greed. A gnawing voracity, which
devoured the devourer, seemed to be the indwelling and propelling power
of the whole ghostly apparition. I lay for a few moments simply imbruted
with terror; when another cloud, obscuring the moon, delivered me from
the immediately paralysing effects of the presence to the vision of the
object of horror, while it added the force of imagination to the power
of fear within me; inasmuch as, knowing far worse cause for apprehension
than before, I remained equally ignorant from what I had to defend
myself, or how to take any precautions: he might be upon me in the
darkness any moment. I sprang to my feet, and sped I knew not whither,
only away from the spectre. I thought no longer of the path, and often
narrowly escaped dashing myself against a tree, in my headlong flight of
fear. Great drops of rain began to patter on the leaves. Thunder began to
mutter, then growl in the distance. I ran on. The rain fell heavier. At
length the thick leaves could hold it up no longer; and, like a second
firmament, they poured their torrents on the earth. I was soon drenched,
but that was nothing. I came to a small swollen stream that rushed
through the woods. I had a vague hope that if I crossed this stream, I
should be in safety from my pursuer; but I soon found that my hope was
as false as it was vague. I dashed across the stream, ascended a rising
ground, and reached a more open space, where stood only great trees. Through them I directed my way, holding eastward as nearly as I could
guess, but not at all certain that I was not moving in an opposite
direction. My mind was just reviving a little from its extreme terror,
when, suddenly, a flash of lightning, or rather a cataract of successive
flashes, behind me, seemed to throw on the ground in front of me, but
far more faintly than before, from the extent of the source of the
light, the shadow of the same horrible hand. I sprang forward, stung
to yet wilder speed; but had not run many steps before my foot slipped,
and, vainly attempting to recover myself, I fell at the foot of one
of the large trees. Half-stunned, I yet raised myself, and almost
involuntarily looked back. All I saw was the hand within three feet
of my face. But, at the same moment, I felt two large soft arms thrown
round me from behind; and a voice like a woman's said: "Do not fear the
goblin; he dares not hurt you now." With that, the hand was suddenly
withdrawn as from a fire, and disappeared in the darkness and the rain. Overcome with the mingling of terror and joy, I lay for some time almost
insensible. The first thing I remember is the sound of a voice above me,
full and low, and strangely reminding me of the sound of a gentle wind
amidst the leaves of a great tree. It murmured over and over again:
"I may love him, I may love him; for he is a man, and I am only a
beech-tree." I found I was seated on the ground, leaning against a human
form, and supported still by the arms around me, which I knew to be
those of a woman who must be rather above the human size, and largely
proportioned. I turned my head, but without moving otherwise, for I
feared lest the arms should untwine themselves; and clear, somewhat
mournful eyes met mine. At least that is how they impressed me; but I
could see very little of colour or outline as we sat in the dark and
rainy shadow of the tree. The face seemed very lovely, and solemn from
its stillness; with the aspect of one who is quite content, but waiting
for something. I saw my conjecture from her arms was correct: she was
above the human scale throughout, but not greatly. "Why do you call yourself a beech-tree?" I said. "Because I am one," she replied, in the same low, musical, murmuring
voice. "You are a woman," I returned. "Do you think so? Am I very like a woman then?" "You are a very beautiful woman. Is it possible you should not know it?" "I am very glad you think so. I fancy I feel like a woman sometimes. I
do so to-night--and always when the rain drips from my hair. For there
is an old prophecy in our woods that one day we shall all be men and
women like you. Do you know anything about it in your region? Shall I
be very happy when I am a woman? I fear not, for it is always in nights
like these that I feel like one. But I long to be a woman for all that." I had let her talk on, for her voice was like a solution of all musical
sounds. I now told her that I could hardly say whether women were happy
or not. I knew one who had not been happy; and for my part, I had often
longed for Fairy Land, as she now longed for the world of men. But then
neither of us had lived long, and perhaps people grew happier as they
grew older. Only I doubted it. I could not help sighing. She felt the sigh, for her arms were still
round me. She asked me how old I was. "Twenty-one," said I. "Why, you baby!" said she, and kissed me with the sweetest kiss of winds
and odours. There was a cool faithfulness in the kiss that revived my
heart wonderfully. I felt that I feared the dreadful Ash no more. "What did the horrible Ash want with me?" I said. "I am not quite sure, but I think he wants to bury you at the foot of
his tree. But he shall not touch you, my child." "Are all the ash-trees as dreadful as he?" "Oh, no. They are all disagreeable selfish creatures--(what horrid men
they will make, if it be true!) --but this one has a hole in his heart
that nobody knows of but one or two; and he is always trying to fill it
up, but he cannot. That must be what he wanted you for. I wonder if he
will ever be a man. If he is, I hope they will kill him." "How kind of you to save me from him!" "I will take care that he shall not come near you again. But there are
some in the wood more like me, from whom, alas! I cannot protect you. Only if you see any of them very beautiful, try to walk round them." "What then?" "I cannot tell you more. But now I must tie some of my hair about you,
and then the Ash will not touch you. Here, cut some off. You men have
strange cutting things about you." She shook her long hair loose over me, never moving her arms. "I cannot cut your beautiful hair. It would be a shame." "Not cut my hair! It will have grown long enough before any is wanted
again in this wild forest. Perhaps it may never be of any use again--not
till I am a woman." And she sighed. As gently as I could, I cut with a knife a long tress of flowing, dark
hair, she hanging her beautiful head over me. When I had finished, she
shuddered and breathed deep, as one does when an acute pain, steadfastly
endured without sign of suffering, is at length relaxed. She then took
the hair and tied it round me, singing a strange, sweet song, which I
could not understand, but which left in me a feeling like this--

            "I saw thee ne'er before;
             I see thee never more;
             But love, and help, and pain, beautiful one,
             Have made thee mine, till all my years are done." I cannot put more of it into words. She closed her arms about me again,
and went on singing. The rain in the leaves, and a light wind that had
arisen, kept her song company. I was wrapt in a trance of still delight. It told me the secret of the woods, and the flowers, and the birds. At
one time I felt as if I was wandering in childhood through sunny spring
forests, over carpets of primroses, anemones, and little white starry
things--I had almost said creatures, and finding new wonderful flowers
at every turn. At another, I lay half dreaming in the hot summer noon,
with a book of old tales beside me, beneath a great beech; or, in
autumn, grew sad because I trod on the leaves that had sheltered me,
and received their last blessing in the sweet odours of decay; or, in
a winter evening, frozen still, looked up, as I went home to a warm
fireside, through the netted boughs and twigs to the cold, snowy moon,
with her opal zone around her. At last I had fallen asleep; for I
know nothing more that passed till I found myself lying under a superb
beech-tree, in the clear light of the morning, just before sunrise. Around me was a girdle of fresh beech-leaves. Alas! I brought nothing
with me out of Fairy Land, but memories--memories. The great boughs of
the beech hung drooping around me. At my head rose its smooth stem, with
its great sweeps of curving surface that swelled like undeveloped limbs. The leaves and branches above kept on the song which had sung me asleep;
only now, to my mind, it sounded like a farewell and a speedwell. I sat
a long time, unwilling to go; but my unfinished story urged me on. I
must act and wander. With the sun well risen, I rose, and put my arms as
far as they would reach around the beech-tree, and kissed it, and said
good-bye. A trembling went through the leaves; a few of the last drops
of the night's rain fell from off them at my feet; and as I walked
slowly away, I seemed to hear in a whisper once more the words: "I may
love him, I may love him; for he is a man, and I am only a beech-tree." CHAPTER V

        "And she was smooth and full, as if one gush
         Of life had washed her, or as if a sleep
         Lay on her eyelid, easier to sweep
         Than bee from daisy." BEDDOIS' Pygmalion. "Sche was as whyt as lylye yn May,
         Or snow that sneweth yn wynterys day." Romance of Sir Launfal. I walked on, in the fresh morning air, as if new-born. The only thing
that damped my pleasure was a cloud of something between sorrow and
delight that crossed my mind with the frequently returning thought of my
last night's hostess. "But then," thought I, "if she is sorry, I could
not help it; and she has all the pleasures she ever had. Such a day as
this is surely a joy to her, as much at least as to me. And her life
will perhaps be the richer, for holding now within it the memory of what
came, but could not stay. And if ever she is a woman, who knows but
we may meet somewhere? there is plenty of room for meeting in the
universe." Comforting myself thus, yet with a vague compunction, as if
I ought not to have left her, I went on. There was little to distinguish
the woods to-day from those of my own land; except that all the wild
things, rabbits, birds, squirrels, mice, and the numberless other
inhabitants, were very tame; that is, they did not run away from me, but
gazed at me as I passed, frequently coming nearer, as if to examine
me more closely. Whether this came from utter ignorance, or from
familiarity with the human appearance of beings who never hurt them, I
could not tell. As I stood once, looking up to the splendid flower of
a parasite, which hung from the branch of a tree over my head, a large
white rabbit cantered slowly up, put one of its little feet on one of
mine, and looked up at me with its red eyes, just as I had been
looking up at the flower above me. I stooped and stroked it; but when
I attempted to lift it, it banged the ground with its hind feet and
scampered off at a great rate, turning, however, to look at me several
times before I lost sight of it. Now and then, too, a dim human figure
would appear and disappear, at some distance, amongst the trees, moving
like a sleep-walker. But no one ever came near me. This day I found plenty of food in the forest--strange nuts and fruits
I had never seen before. I hesitated to eat them; but argued that, if
I could live on the air of Fairy Land, I could live on its food also. I
found my reasoning correct, and the result was better than I had hoped;
for it not only satisfied my hunger, but operated in such a way upon my
senses that I was brought into far more complete relationship with the
things around me. The human forms appeared much more dense and defined;
more tangibly visible, if I may say so. I seemed to know better which
direction to choose when any doubt arose. I began to feel in some degree
what the birds meant in their songs, though I could not express it in
words, any more than you can some landscapes. At times, to my surprise,
I found myself listening attentively, and as if it were no unusual
thing with me, to a conversation between two squirrels or monkeys. The subjects were not very interesting, except as associated with the
individual life and necessities of the little creatures: where the best
nuts were to be found in the neighbourhood, and who could crack them
best, or who had most laid up for the winter, and such like; only they
never said where the store was. There was no great difference in kind
between their talk and our ordinary human conversation. Some of the
creatures I never heard speak at all, and believe they never do so,
except under the impulse of some great excitement. The mice talked; but
the hedgehogs seemed very phlegmatic; and though I met a couple of moles
above ground several times, they never said a word to each other in my
hearing. There were no wild beasts in the forest; at least, I did not
see one larger than a wild cat. There were plenty of snakes, however,
and I do not think they were all harmless; but none ever bit me. Soon after mid-day I arrived at a bare rocky hill, of no great size, but
very steep; and having no trees--scarcely even a bush--upon it, entirely
exposed to the heat of the sun. Over this my way seemed to lie, and
I immediately began the ascent. On reaching the top, hot and weary, I
looked around me, and saw that the forest still stretched as far as the
sight could reach on every side of me. I observed that the trees, in the
direction in which I was about to descend, did not come so near the
foot of the hill as on the other side, and was especially regretting the
unexpected postponement of shelter, because this side of the hill seemed
more difficult to descend than the other had been to climb, when my eye
caught the appearance of a natural path, winding down through broken
rocks and along the course of a tiny stream, which I hoped would lead
me more easily to the foot. I tried it, and found the descent not at all
laborious; nevertheless, when I reached the bottom, I was very tired and
exhausted with the heat. But just where the path seemed to end, rose
a great rock, quite overgrown with shrubs and creeping plants, some of
them in full and splendid blossom: these almost concealed an opening in
the rock, into which the path appeared to lead. I entered, thirsting for
the shade which it promised. What was my delight to find a rocky
cell, all the angles rounded away with rich moss, and every ledge and
projection crowded with lovely ferns, the variety of whose forms, and
groupings, and shades wrought in me like a poem; for such a harmony
could not exist, except they all consented to some one end! A little
well of the clearest water filled a mossy hollow in one corner. I drank,
and felt as if I knew what the elixir of life must be; then threw myself
on a mossy mound that lay like a couch along the inner end. Here I lay
in a delicious reverie for some time; during which all lovely forms, and
colours, and sounds seemed to use my brain as a common hall, where they
could come and go, unbidden and unexcused. I had never imagined that
such capacity for simple happiness lay in me, as was now awakened by
this assembly of forms and spiritual sensations, which yet were far too
vague to admit of being translated into any shape common to my own and
another mind. I had lain for an hour, I should suppose, though it may
have been far longer, when, the harmonious tumult in my mind having
somewhat relaxed, I became aware that my eyes were fixed on a strange,
time-worn bas-relief on the rock opposite to me. This, after some
pondering, I concluded to represent Pygmalion, as he awaited the
quickening of his statue. The sculptor sat more rigid than the figure to
which his eyes were turned. That seemed about to step from its pedestal
and embrace the man, who waited rather than expected. "A lovely story," I said to myself. "This cave, now, with the bushes cut
away from the entrance to let the light in, might be such a place as he
would choose, withdrawn from the notice of men, to set up his block of
marble, and mould into a visible body the thought already clothed with
form in the unseen hall of the sculptor's brain. And, indeed, if I
mistake not," I said, starting up, as a sudden ray of light arrived
at that moment through a crevice in the roof, and lighted up a small
portion of the rock, bare of vegetation, "this very rock is marble,
white enough and delicate enough for any statue, even if destined to
become an ideal woman in the arms of the sculptor." I took my knife and removed the moss from a part of the block on which
I had been lying; when, to my surprise, I found it more like alabaster
than ordinary marble, and soft to the edge of the knife. In fact, it
was alabaster. By an inexplicable, though by no means unusual kind of
impulse, I went on removing the moss from the surface of the stone;
and soon saw that it was polished, or at least smooth, throughout. I
continued my labour; and after clearing a space of about a couple of
square feet, I observed what caused me to prosecute the work with more
interest and care than before. For the ray of sunlight had now reached
the spot I had cleared, and under its lustre the alabaster revealed
its usual slight transparency when polished, except where my knife had
scratched the surface; and I observed that the transparency seemed to
have a definite limit, and to end upon an opaque body like the more
solid, white marble. I was careful to scratch no more. And first, a
vague anticipation gave way to a startling sense of possibility; then,
as I proceeded, one revelation after another produced the entrancing
conviction, that under the crust of alabaster lay a dimly visible form
in marble, but whether of man or woman I could not yet tell. I worked on
as rapidly as the necessary care would permit; and when I had uncovered
the whole mass, and rising from my knees, had retreated a little way,
so that the effect of the whole might fall on me, I saw before me
with sufficient plainness--though at the same time with considerable
indistinctness, arising from the limited amount of light the place
admitted, as well as from the nature of the object itself--a block of
pure alabaster enclosing the form, apparently in marble, of a reposing
woman. She lay on one side, with her hand under her cheek, and her face
towards me; but her hair had fallen partly over her face, so that I
could not see the expression of the whole. What I did see appeared to
me perfectly lovely; more near the face that had been born with me in
my soul, than anything I had seen before in nature or art. The actual
outlines of the rest of the form were so indistinct, that the more than
semi-opacity of the alabaster seemed insufficient to account for
the fact; and I conjectured that a light robe added its obscurity. Numberless histories passed through my mind of change of substance from
enchantment and other causes, and of imprisonments such as this before
me. I thought of the Prince of the Enchanted City, half marble and half
a man; of Ariel; of Niobe; of the Sleeping Beauty in the Wood; of the
bleeding trees; and many other histories. Even my adventure of the
preceding evening with the lady of the beech-tree contributed to arouse
the wild hope, that by some means life might be given to this form also,
and that, breaking from her alabaster tomb, she might glorify my eyes
with her presence. "For," I argued, "who can tell but this cave may be
the home of Marble, and this, essential Marble--that spirit of marble
which, present throughout, makes it capable of being moulded into any
form? Then if she should awake! But how to awake her? A kiss awoke
the Sleeping Beauty! a kiss cannot reach her through the incrusting
alabaster." I kneeled, however, and kissed the pale coffin; but she
slept on. I bethought me of Orpheus, and the following stones--that
trees should follow his music seemed nothing surprising now. Might not a
song awake this form, that the glory of motion might for a time displace
the loveliness of rest? Sweet sounds can go where kisses may not enter. I sat and thought. Now, although always delighting in music, I had never
been gifted with the power of song, until I entered the fairy forest. I
had a voice, and I had a true sense of sound; but when I tried to sing,
the one would not content the other, and so I remained silent. This
morning, however, I had found myself, ere I was aware, rejoicing in a
song; but whether it was before or after I had eaten of the fruits
of the forest, I could not satisfy myself. I concluded it was after,
however; and that the increased impulse to sing I now felt, was in part
owing to having drunk of the little well, which shone like a brilliant
eye in a corner of the cave. It saw down on the ground by the "antenatal
tomb," leaned upon it with my face towards the head of the figure
within, and sang--the words and tones coming together, and inseparably
connected, as if word and tone formed one thing; or, as if each word
could be uttered only in that tone, and was incapable of distinction
from it, except in idea, by an acute analysis. I sang something like
this: but the words are only a dull representation of a state whose
very elevation precluded the possibility of remembrance; and in which I
presume the words really employed were as far above these, as that state
transcended this wherein I recall it:

            "Marble woman, vainly sleeping
             In the very death of dreams! Wilt thou--slumber from thee sweeping,
             All but what with vision teems--
             Hear my voice come through the golden
             Mist of memory and hope;
             And with shadowy smile embolden
             Me with primal Death to cope? "Thee the sculptors all pursuing,
             Have embodied but their own;
             Round their visions, form enduring,
             Marble vestments thou hast thrown;
             But thyself, in silence winding,
             Thou hast kept eternally;
             Thee they found not, many finding--
             I have found thee: wake for me." As I sang, I looked earnestly at the face so vaguely revealed before me. I fancied, yet believed it to be but fancy, that through the dim veil
of the alabaster, I saw a motion of the head as if caused by a sinking
sigh. I gazed more earnestly, and concluded that it was but fancy. Neverthless I could not help singing again--

            "Rest is now filled full of beauty,
             And can give thee up, I ween;
             Come thou forth, for other duty
             Motion pineth for her queen. "Or, if needing years to wake thee
             From thy slumbrous solitudes,
             Come, sleep-walking, and betake thee
             To the friendly, sleeping woods. Sweeter dreams are in the forest,
             Round thee storms would never rave;
             And when need of rest is sorest,
             Glide thou then into thy cave. "Or, if still thou choosest rather
             Marble, be its spell on me;
             Let thy slumber round me gather,
             Let another dream with thee!" Again I paused, and gazed through the stony shroud, as if, by very force
of penetrative sight, I would clear every lineament of the lovely face. And now I thought the hand that had lain under the cheek, had slipped
a little downward. But then I could not be sure that I had at first
observed its position accurately. So I sang again; for the longing had
grown into a passionate need of seeing her alive--

            "Or art thou Death, O woman? for since I
                Have set me singing by thy side,
             Life hath forsook the upper sky,
                And all the outer world hath died. "Yea, I am dead; for thou hast drawn
                My life all downward unto thee. Dead moon of love! let twilight dawn:
                Awake! and let the darkness flee. "Cold lady of the lovely stone! Awake! or I shall perish here;
             And thou be never more alone,
                My form and I for ages near. "But words are vain; reject them all--
                They utter but a feeble part:
             Hear thou the depths from which they call,
                The voiceless longing of my heart." There arose a slightly crashing sound. Like a sudden apparition that
comes and is gone, a white form, veiled in a light robe of whiteness,
burst upwards from the stone, stood, glided forth, and gleamed away
towards the woods. For I followed to the mouth of the cave, as soon
as the amazement and concentration of delight permitted the nerves of
motion again to act; and saw the white form amidst the trees, as it
crossed a little glade on the edge of the forest where the sunlight fell
full, seeming to gather with intenser radiance on the one object that
floated rather than flitted through its lake of beams. I gazed after her
in a kind of despair; found, freed, lost! It seemed useless to follow,
yet follow I must. I marked the direction she took; and without once
looking round to the forsaken cave, I hastened towards the forest. CHAPTER VI

     "Ah, let a man beware, when his wishes, fulfilled, rain down
     upon him, and his happiness is unbounded." "Thy red lips, like worms,
         Travel over my cheek." --MOTHERWELL. But as I crossed the space between the foot of the hill and the forest,
a vision of another kind delayed my steps. Through an opening to
the westward flowed, like a stream, the rays of the setting sun, and
overflowed with a ruddy splendour the open space where I was. And riding
as it were down this stream towards me, came a horseman in what appeared
red armour. From frontlet to tail, the horse likewise shone red in the
sunset. I felt as if I must have seen the knight before; but as he drew
near, I could recall no feature of his countenance. Ere he came up
to me, however, I remembered the legend of Sir Percival in the rusty
armour, which I had left unfinished in the old book in the cottage: it
was of Sir Percival that he reminded me. And no wonder; for when he came
close up to me, I saw that, from crest to heel, the whole surface of his
armour was covered with a light rust. The golden spurs shone, but the
iron greaves glowed in the sunlight. The MORNING STAR, which hung from
his wrist, glittered and glowed with its silver and bronze. His whole
appearance was terrible; but his face did not answer to this appearance. It was sad, even to gloominess; and something of shame seemed to cover
it. Yet it was noble and high, though thus beclouded; and the form
looked lofty, although the head drooped, and the whole frame was bowed
as with an inward grief. The horse seemed to share in his master's
dejection, and walked spiritless and slow. I noticed, too, that the
white plume on his helmet was discoloured and drooping. "He has fallen
in a joust with spears," I said to myself; "yet it becomes not a noble
knight to be conquered in spirit because his body hath fallen." He
appeared not to observe me, for he was riding past without looking up,
and started into a warlike attitude the moment the first sound of my
voice reached him. Then a flush, as of shame, covered all of his face
that the lifted beaver disclosed. He returned my greeting with distant
courtesy, and passed on. But suddenly, he reined up, sat a moment still,
and then turning his horse, rode back to where I stood looking after
him. "I am ashamed," he said, "to appear a knight, and in such a guise; but
it behoves me to tell you to take warning from me, lest the same evil,
in his kind, overtake the singer that has befallen the knight. Hast thou
ever read the story of Sir Percival and the"--(here he shuddered, that
his armour rang)--"Maiden of the Alder-tree?" "In part, I have," said I; "for yesterday, at the entrance of this
forest, I found in a cottage the volume wherein it is recorded." "Then
take heed," he rejoined; "for, see my armour--I put it off; and as it
befell to him, so has it befallen to me. I that was proud am humble now. Yet is she terribly beautiful--beware. Never," he added, raising his
head, "shall this armour be furbished, but by the blows of knightly
encounter, until the last speck has disappeared from every spot where
the battle-axe and sword of evil-doers, or noble foes, might fall; when
I shall again lift my head, and say to my squire, 'Do thy duty once
more, and make this armour shine.'" Before I could inquire further, he had struck spurs into his horse and
galloped away, shrouded from my voice in the noise of his armour. For I
called after him, anxious to know more about this fearful enchantress;
but in vain--he heard me not. "Yet," I said to myself, "I have now
been often warned; surely I shall be well on my guard; and I am fully
resolved I shall not be ensnared by any beauty, however beautiful. Doubtless, some one man may escape, and I shall be he." So I went on
into the wood, still hoping to find, in some one of its mysterious
recesses, my lost lady of the marble. The sunny afternoon died into
the loveliest twilight. Great bats began to flit about with their own
noiseless flight, seemingly purposeless, because its objects are unseen. The monotonous music of the owl issued from all unexpected quarters in
the half-darkness around me. The glow-worm was alight here and there,
burning out into the great universe. The night-hawk heightened all the
harmony and stillness with his oft-recurring, discordant jar. Numberless unknown sounds came out of the unknown dusk; but all were of
twilight-kind, oppressing the heart as with a condensed atmosphere of
dreamy undefined love and longing. The odours of night arose, and bathed
me in that luxurious mournfulness peculiar to them, as if the plants
whence they floated had been watered with bygone tears. Earth drew me
towards her bosom; I felt as if I could fall down and kiss her. I forgot
I was in Fairy Land, and seemed to be walking in a perfect night of
our own old nursing earth. Great stems rose about me, uplifting a thick
multitudinous roof above me of branches, and twigs, and leaves--the bird
and insect world uplifted over mine, with its own landscapes, its own
thickets, and paths, and glades, and dwellings; its own bird-ways and
insect-delights. Great boughs crossed my path; great roots based the
tree-columns, and mightily clasped the earth, strong to lift and strong
to uphold. It seemed an old, old forest, perfect in forest ways and
pleasures. And when, in the midst of this ecstacy, I remembered that
under some close canopy of leaves, by some giant stem, or in some mossy
cave, or beside some leafy well, sat the lady of the marble, whom my
songs had called forth into the outer world, waiting (might it not
be?) to meet and thank her deliverer in a twilight which would veil her
confusion, the whole night became one dream-realm of joy, the central
form of which was everywhere present, although unbeheld. Then,
remembering how my songs seemed to have called her from the marble,
piercing through the pearly shroud of alabaster--"Why," thought I,
"should not my voice reach her now, through the ebon night that
inwraps her." My voice burst into song so spontaneously that it seemed
involuntarily. "Not a sound
             But, echoing in me,
             Vibrates all around
             With a blind delight,
             Till it breaks on Thee,
             Queen of Night! Every tree,
             O'ershadowing with gloom,
             Seems to cover thee
             Secret, dark, love-still'd,
             In a holy room
             Silence-filled. "Let no moon
             Creep up the heaven to-night;
             I in darksome noon
             Walking hopefully,
             Seek my shrouded light--
             Grope for thee! "Darker grow
             The borders of the dark! Through the branches glow,
             From the roof above,
             Star and diamond-sparks
             Light for love." Scarcely had the last sounds floated away from the hearing of my own
ears, when I heard instead a low delicious laugh near me. It was not the
laugh of one who would not be heard, but the laugh of one who has just
received something long and patiently desired--a laugh that ends in
a low musical moan. I started, and, turning sideways, saw a dim white
figure seated beside an intertwining thicket of smaller trees and
underwood. "It is my white lady!" I said, and flung myself on the ground beside
her; striving, through the gathering darkness, to get a glimpse of the
form which had broken its marble prison at my call. "It is your white lady!" said the sweetest voice, in reply, sending a
thrill of speechless delight through a heart which all the love-charms
of the preceding day and evening had been tempering for this culminating
hour. Yet, if I would have confessed it, there was something either in
the sound of the voice, although it seemed sweetness itself, or else in
this yielding which awaited no gradation of gentle approaches, that did
not vibrate harmoniously with the beat of my inward music. And likewise,
when, taking her hand in mine, I drew closer to her, looking for the
beauty of her face, which, indeed, I found too plenteously, a cold
shiver ran through me; but "it is the marble," I said to myself, and
heeded it not. She withdrew her hand from mine, and after that would scarce allow me to
touch her. It seemed strange, after the fulness of her first greeting,
that she could not trust me to come close to her. Though her words
were those of a lover, she kept herself withdrawn as if a mile of space
interposed between us. "Why did you run away from me when you woke in the cave?" I said. "Did I?" she returned. "That was very unkind of me; but I did not know
better." "I wish I could see you. The night is very dark." "So it is. Come to my grotto. There is light there." "Have you another cave, then?" "Come and see." But she did not move until I rose first, and then she was on her feet
before I could offer my hand to help her. She came close to my side, and
conducted me through the wood. But once or twice, when, involuntarily
almost, I was about to put my arm around her as we walked on through the
warm gloom, she sprang away several paces, always keeping her face full
towards me, and then stood looking at me, slightly stooping, in the
attitude of one who fears some half-seen enemy. It was too dark to
discern the expression of her face. Then she would return and walk close
beside me again, as if nothing had happened. I thought this strange;
but, besides that I had almost, as I said before, given up the attempt
to account for appearances in Fairy Land, I judged that it would be very
unfair to expect from one who had slept so long and had been so suddenly
awakened, a behaviour correspondent to what I might unreflectingly look
for. I knew not what she might have been dreaming about. Besides, it was
possible that, while her words were free, her sense of touch might be
exquisitely delicate. At length, after walking a long way in the woods, we arrived at another
thicket, through the intertexture of which was glimmering a pale rosy
light. "Push aside the branches," she said, "and make room for us to
enter." I did as she told me. "Go in," she said; "I will follow you." I did as she desired, and found myself in a little cave, not very unlike
the marble cave. It was festooned and draperied with all kinds of
green that cling to shady rocks. In the furthest corner, half-hidden in
leaves, through which it glowed, mingling lovely shadows between them,
burned a bright rosy flame on a little earthen lamp. The lady glided
round by the wall from behind me, still keeping her face towards me, and
seated herself in the furthest corner, with her back to the lamp, which
she hid completely from my view. I then saw indeed a form of perfect
loveliness before me. Almost it seemed as if the light of the rose-lamp
shone through her (for it could not be reflected from her); such a
delicate shade of pink seemed to shadow what in itself must be a marbly
whiteness of hue. I discovered afterwards, however, that there was one
thing in it I did not like; which was, that the white part of the eye
was tinged with the same slight roseate hue as the rest of the form. It
is strange that I cannot recall her features; but they, as well as her
somewhat girlish figure, left on me simply and only the impression of
intense loveliness. I lay down at her feet, and gazed up into her face
as I lay. She began, and told me a strange tale, which, likewise, I
cannot recollect; but which, at every turn and every pause, somehow or
other fixed my eyes and thoughts upon her extreme beauty; seeming always
to culminate in something that had a relation, revealed or hidden, but
always operative, with her own loveliness. I lay entranced. It was a
tale which brings back a feeling as of snows and tempests; torrents
and water-sprites; lovers parted for long, and meeting at last; with a
gorgeous summer night to close up the whole. I listened till she and I
were blended with the tale; till she and I were the whole history. And
we had met at last in this same cave of greenery, while the summer night
hung round us heavy with love, and the odours that crept through the
silence from the sleeping woods were the only signs of an outer world
that invaded our solitude. What followed I cannot clearly remember. The
succeeding horror almost obliterated it. I woke as a grey dawn stole
into the cave. The damsel had disappeared; but in the shrubbery, at the
mouth of the cave, stood a strange horrible object. It looked like an
open coffin set up on one end; only that the part for the head and
neck was defined from the shoulder-part. In fact, it was a rough
representation of the human frame, only hollow, as if made of decaying
bark torn from a tree. It had arms, which were only slightly seamed, down from the
shoulder-blade by the elbow, as if the bark had healed again from the
cut of a knife. But the arms moved, and the hand and the fingers were
tearing asunder a long silky tress of hair. The thing turned round--it
had for a face and front those of my enchantress, but now of a pale
greenish hue in the light of the morning, and with dead lustreless eyes. In the horror of the moment, another fear invaded me. I put my hand to
my waist, and found indeed that my girdle of beech-leaves was gone. Hair again in her hands, she was tearing it fiercely. Once more, as she
turned, she laughed a low laugh, but now full of scorn and derision; and
then she said, as if to a companion with whom she had been talking while
I slept, "There he is; you can take him now." I lay still, petrified
with dismay and fear; for I now saw another figure beside her, which,
although vague and indistinct, I yet recognised but too well. It was the
Ash-tree. My beauty was the Maid of the Alder! and she was giving
me, spoiled of my only availing defence, into the hands of my awful foe. The Ash bent his Gorgon-head, and entered the cave. I could not stir. He drew near me. His ghoul-eyes and his ghastly face fascinated me. He came stooping, with the hideous hand outstretched, like a beast of
prey. I had given myself up to a death of unfathomable horror, when,
suddenly, and just as he was on the point of seizing me, the dull,
heavy blow of an axe echoed through the wood, followed by others in
quick repetition. The Ash shuddered and groaned, withdrew the
outstretched hand, retreated backwards to the mouth of the cave, then
turned and disappeared amongst the trees. The other walking Death
looked at me once, with a careless dislike on her beautifully moulded
features; then, heedless any more to conceal her hollow deformity,
turned her frightful back and likewise vanished amid the green
obscurity without. I lay and wept. The Maid of the Alder-tree had
befooled me--nearly slain me--in spite of all the warnings I had
received from those who knew my danger. CHAPTER VII

         "Fight on, my men, Sir Andrew sayes,
          A little Ime hurt, but yett not slaine;
          He but lye downe and bleede awhile,
          And then Ile rise and fight againe." Ballad of Sir Andrew Barton. But I could not remain where I was any longer, though the daylight was
hateful to me, and the thought of the great, innocent, bold sunrise
unendurable. Here there was no well to cool my face, smarting with the
bitterness of my own tears. Nor would I have washed in the well of
that grotto, had it flowed clear as the rivers of Paradise. I rose, and
feebly left the sepulchral cave. I took my way I knew not whither, but
still towards the sunrise. The birds were singing; but not for me. All
the creatures spoke a language of their own, with which I had nothing to
do, and to which I cared not to find the key any more. I walked listlessly along. What distressed me most--more even than my
own folly--was the perplexing question, How can beauty and ugliness
dwell so near? Even with her altered complexion and her face of dislike;
disenchanted of the belief that clung around her; known for a
living, walking sepulchre, faithless, deluding, traitorous; I felt
notwithstanding all this, that she was beautiful. Upon this I pondered
with undiminished perplexity, though not without some gain. Then I began
to make surmises as to the mode of my deliverance; and concluded that
some hero, wandering in search of adventure, had heard how the forest
was infested; and, knowing it was useless to attack the evil thing in
person, had assailed with his battle-axe the body in which he dwelt, and
on which he was dependent for his power of mischief in the wood. "Very
likely," I thought, "the repentant-knight, who warned me of the evil
which has befallen me, was busy retrieving his lost honour, while I was
sinking into the same sorrow with himself; and, hearing of the dangerous
and mysterious being, arrived at his tree in time to save me from being
dragged to its roots, and buried like carrion, to nourish him for
yet deeper insatiableness." I found afterwards that my conjecture was
correct. I wondered how he had fared when his blows recalled the Ash
himself, and that too I learned afterwards. I walked on the whole day, with intervals of rest, but without food; for
I could not have eaten, had any been offered me; till, in the afternoon,
I seemed to approach the outskirts of the forest, and at length arrived
at a farm-house. An unspeakable joy arose in my heart at beholding an
abode of human beings once more, and I hastened up to the door, and
knocked. A kind-looking, matronly woman, still handsome, made her
appearance; who, as soon as she saw me, said kindly, "Ah, my poor boy,
you have come from the wood! Were you in it last night?" I should have ill endured, the day before, to be called BOY; but now the
motherly kindness of the word went to my heart; and, like a boy indeed,
I burst into tears. She soothed me right gently; and, leading me into
a room, made me lie down on a settle, while she went to find me some
refreshment. She soon returned with food, but I could not eat. She
almost compelled me to swallow some wine, when I revived sufficiently to
be able to answer some of her questions. I told her the whole story. "It is just as I feared," she said; "but you are now for the night
beyond the reach of any of these dreadful creatures. It is no wonder
they could delude a child like you. But I must beg you, when my husband
comes in, not to say a word about these things; for he thinks me even
half crazy for believing anything of the sort. But I must believe my
senses, as he cannot believe beyond his, which give him no intimations
of this kind. I think he could spend the whole of Midsummer-eve in
the wood and come back with the report that he saw nothing worse than
himself. Indeed, good man, he would hardly find anything better than
himself, if he had seven more senses given him." "But tell me how it is that she could be so beautiful without any heart
at all--without any place even for a heart to live in." "I cannot quite tell," she said; "but I am sure she would not look so
beautiful if she did not take means to make herself look more beautiful
than she is. And then, you know, you began by being in love with
her before you saw her beauty, mistaking her for the lady of the
marble--another kind altogether, I should think. But the chief thing
that makes her beautiful is this: that, although she loves no man, she
loves the love of any man; and when she finds one in her power, her
desire to bewitch him and gain his love (not for the sake of his love
either, but that she may be conscious anew of her own beauty,
through the admiration he manifests), makes her very lovely--with a
self-destructive beauty, though; for it is that which is constantly
wearing her away within, till, at last, the decay will reach her face,
and her whole front, when all the lovely mask of nothing will fall to
pieces, and she be vanished for ever. So a wise man, whom she met in
the wood some years ago, and who, I think, for all his wisdom, fared no
better than you, told me, when, like you, he spent the next night here,
and recounted to me his adventures." I thanked her very warmly for her solution, though it was but partial;
wondering much that in her, as in woman I met on my first entering the
forest, there should be such superiority to her apparent condition. Here
she left me to take some rest; though, indeed, I was too much agitated
to rest in any other way than by simply ceasing to move. In half an hour, I heard a heavy step approach and enter the house. A
jolly voice, whose slight huskiness appeared to proceed from overmuch
laughter, called out "Betsy, the pigs' trough is quite empty, and that
is a pity. Let them swill, lass! They're of no use but to get fat. Ha! ha! ha! Gluttony is not forbidden in their commandments. Ha! ha! ha!" The very voice, kind and jovial, seemed to disrobe the room of the
strange look which all new places wear--to disenchant it out of the
realm of the ideal into that of the actual. It began to look as if I
had known every corner of it for twenty years; and when, soon after, the
dame came and fetched me to partake of their early supper, the grasp of
his great hand, and the harvest-moon of his benevolent face, which was
needed to light up the rotundity of the globe beneath it, produced such
a reaction in me, that, for a moment, I could hardly believe that there
was a Fairy Land; and that all I had passed through since I left home,
had not been the wandering dream of a diseased imagination, operating on
a too mobile frame, not merely causing me indeed to travel, but peopling
for me with vague phantoms the regions through which my actual steps
had led me. But the next moment my eye fell upon a little girl who was
sitting in the chimney-corner, with a little book open on her knee, from
which she had apparently just looked up to fix great inquiring eyes upon
me. I believed in Fairy Land again. She went on with her reading, as
soon as she saw that I observed her looking at me. I went near, and
peeping over her shoulder, saw that she was reading "The History of
Graciosa and Percinet." "Very improving book, sir," remarked the old farmer, with a
good-humoured laugh. "We are in the very hottest corner of Fairy Land
here. Ha! ha! Stormy night, last night, sir." "Was it, indeed?" I rejoined. "It was not so with me. A lovelier night I
never saw." "Indeed! Where were you last night?" "I spent it in the forest. I had lost my way." "Ah! then, perhaps, you will be able to convince my good woman, that
there is nothing very remarkable about the forest; for, to tell the
truth, it bears but a bad name in these parts. I dare say you saw
nothing worse than yourself there?" "I hope I did," was my inward reply; but, for an audible one, I
contented myself with saying, "Why, I certainly did see some appearances
I could hardly account for; but that is nothing to be wondered at in an
unknown wild forest, and with the uncertain light of the moon alone to
go by." "Very true! you speak like a sensible man, sir. We have but few sensible
folks round about us. Now, you would hardly credit it, but my wife
believes every fairy-tale that ever was written. I cannot account for
it. She is a most sensible woman in everything else." "But should not that make you treat her belief with something of
respect, though you cannot share in it yourself?" "Yes, that is all very well in theory; but when you come to live
every day in the midst of absurdity, it is far less easy to behave
respectfully to it. Why, my wife actually believes the story of the
'White Cat.' You know it, I dare say." "I read all these tales when a child, and know that one especially
well." "But, father," interposed the little girl in the chimney-corner, "you
know quite well that mother is descended from that very princess who was
changed by the wicked fairy into a white cat. Mother has told me so a
many times, and you ought to believe everything she says." "I can easily believe that," rejoined the farmer, with another fit of
laughter; "for, the other night, a mouse came gnawing and scratching
beneath the floor, and would not let us go to sleep. Your mother sprang
out of bed, and going as near it as she could, mewed so infernally like
a great cat, that the noise ceased instantly. I believe the poor mouse
died of the fright, for we have never heard it again. Ha! ha! ha!" The son, an ill-looking youth, who had entered during the conversation,
joined in his father's laugh; but his laugh was very different from the
old man's: it was polluted with a sneer. I watched him, and saw that,
as soon as it was over, he looked scared, as if he dreaded some evil
consequences to follow his presumption. The woman stood near, waiting
till we should seat ourselves at the table, and listening to it all
with an amused air, which had something in it of the look with which one
listens to the sententious remarks of a pompous child. We sat down to
supper, and I ate heartily. My bygone distresses began already to look
far off. "In what direction are you going?" asked the old man. "Eastward," I replied; nor could I have given a more definite answer. "Does the forest extend much further in that direction?" "Oh! for miles and miles; I do not know how far. For although I have
lived on the borders of it all my life, I have been too busy to make
journeys of discovery into it. Nor do I see what I could discover. It
is only trees and trees, till one is sick of them. By the way, if you
follow the eastward track from here, you will pass close to what the
children say is the very house of the ogre that Hop-o'-my-Thumb visited,
and ate his little daughters with the crowns of gold." "Oh, father! ate his little daughters! No; he only changed their gold
crowns for nightcaps; and the great long-toothed ogre killed them in
mistake; but I do not think even he ate them, for you know they were his
own little ogresses." "Well, well, child; you know all about it a great deal better than I do. However, the house has, of course, in such a foolish neighbourhood as
this, a bad enough name; and I must confess there is a woman living
in it, with teeth long enough, and white enough too, for the lineal
descendant of the greatest ogre that ever was made. I think you had
better not go near her." In such talk as this the night wore on. When supper was finished, which
lasted some time, my hostess conducted me to my chamber. "If you had not had enough of it already," she said, "I would have put
you in another room, which looks towards the forest; and where you
would most likely have seen something more of its inhabitants. For they
frequently pass the window, and even enter the room sometimes. Strange
creatures spend whole nights in it, at certain seasons of the year. I am
used to it, and do not mind it. No more does my little girl, who sleeps
in it always. But this room looks southward towards the open country,
and they never show themselves here; at least I never saw any." I was somewhat sorry not to gather any experience that I might have, of
the inhabitants of Fairy Land; but the effect of the farmer's company,
and of my own later adventures, was such, that I chose rather an
undisturbed night in my more human quarters; which, with their clean
white curtains and white linen, were very inviting to my weariness. In the morning I awoke refreshed, after a profound and dreamless sleep. The sun was high, when I looked out of the window, shining over a wide,
undulating, cultivated country. Various garden-vegetables were growing
beneath my window. Everything was radiant with clear sunlight. The
dew-drops were sparkling their busiest; the cows in a near-by field were
eating as if they had not been at it all day yesterday; the maids were
singing at their work as they passed to and fro between the out-houses:
I did not believe in Fairy Land. I went down, and found the family
already at breakfast. But before I entered the room where they sat, the
little girl came to me, and looked up in my face, as though she wanted
to say something to me. I stooped towards her; she put her arms round my
neck, and her mouth to my ear, and whispered--

"A white lady has been flitting about the house all night." "No whispering behind doors!" cried the farmer; and we entered together. "Well, how have you slept? No bogies, eh?" "Not one, thank you; I slept uncommonly well." "I am glad to hear it. Come and breakfast." After breakfast, the farmer and his son went out; and I was left alone
with the mother and daughter. "When I looked out of the window this morning," I said, "I felt almost
certain that Fairy Land was all a delusion of my brain; but whenever I
come near you or your little daughter, I feel differently. Yet I could
persuade myself, after my last adventures, to go back, and have nothing
more to do with such strange beings." "How will you go back?" said the woman. "Nay, that I do not know." "Because I have heard, that, for those who enter Fairy Land, there is no
way of going back. They must go on, and go through it. How, I do not in
the least know." "That is quite the impression on my own mind. Something compels me to go
on, as if my only path was onward, but I feel less inclined this morning
to continue my adventures." "Will you come and see my little child's room? She sleeps in the one I
told you of, looking towards the forest." "Willingly," I said. So we went together, the little girl running before to open the door for
us. It was a large room, full of old-fashioned furniture, that seemed to
have once belonged to some great house. The window was built with a low arch, and filled with lozenge-shaped
panes. The wall was very thick, and built of solid stone. I could see
that part of the house had been erected against the remains of some old
castle or abbey, or other great building; the fallen stones of which
had probably served to complete it. But as soon as I looked out of the
window, a gush of wonderment and longing flowed over my soul like the
tide of a great sea. Fairy Land lay before me, and drew me towards it
with an irresistible attraction. The trees bathed their great heads in
the waves of the morning, while their roots were planted deep in gloom;
save where on the borders the sunshine broke against their stems, or
swept in long streams through their avenues, washing with brighter hue
all the leaves over which it flowed; revealing the rich brown of the
decayed leaves and fallen pine-cones, and the delicate greens of the
long grasses and tiny forests of moss that covered the channel over
which it passed in motionless rivers of light. I turned hurriedly to bid
my hostess farewell without further delay. She smiled at my haste, but
with an anxious look. "You had better not go near the house of the ogre, I think. My son will
show you into another path, which will join the first beyond it." Not wishing to be headstrong or too confident any more, I agreed;
and having taken leave of my kind entertainers, went into the wood,
accompanied by the youth. He scarcely spoke as we went along; but he led
me through the trees till we struck upon a path. He told me to follow
it, and, with a muttered "good morning" left me. CHAPTER VIII

     "I am a part of the part, which at first was the whole." GOETHE.--Mephistopheles in Faust. My spirits rose as I went deeper; into the forest; but I could not
regain my former elasticity of mind. I found cheerfulness to be like
life itself--not to be created by any argument. Afterwards I learned,
that the best way to manage some kinds of pain fill thoughts, is to dare
them to do their worst; to let them lie and gnaw at your heart till they
are tired; and you find you still have a residue of life they cannot
kill. So, better and worse, I went on, till I came to a little clearing
in the forest. In the middle of this clearing stood a long, low hut,
built with one end against a single tall cypress, which rose like a
spire to the building. A vague misgiving crossed my mind when I saw it;
but I must needs go closer, and look through a little half-open door,
near the opposite end from the cypress. Window I saw none. On peeping
in, and looking towards the further end, I saw a lamp burning, with
a dim, reddish flame, and the head of a woman, bent downwards, as if
reading by its light. I could see nothing more for a few moments. At
length, as my eyes got used to the dimness of the place, I saw that the
part of the rude building near me was used for household purposes;
for several rough utensils lay here and there, and a bed stood in the
corner. An irresistible attraction caused me to enter. The woman never raised
her face, the upper part of which alone I could see distinctly; but, as
soon as I stepped within the threshold, she began to read aloud, in a
low and not altogether unpleasing voice, from an ancient little volume
which she held open with one hand on the table upon which stood the
lamp. What she read was something like this:

"So, then, as darkness had no beginning, neither will it ever have
an end. So, then, is it eternal. The negation of aught else, is its
affirmation. Where the light cannot come, there abideth the darkness. The light doth but hollow a mine out of the infinite extension of the
darkness. And ever upon the steps of the light treadeth the darkness;
yea, springeth in fountains and wells amidst it, from the secret
channels of its mighty sea. Truly, man is but a passing flame, moving
unquietly amid the surrounding rest of night; without which he yet could
not be, and whereof he is in part compounded." As I drew nearer, and she read on, she moved a little to turn a leaf
of the dark old volume, and I saw that her face was sallow and slightly
forbidding. Her forehead was high, and her black eyes repressedly quiet. But she took no notice of me. This end of the cottage, if cottage it
could be called, was destitute of furniture, except the table with the
lamp, and the chair on which the woman sat. In one corner was a door,
apparently of a cupboard in the wall, but which might lead to a room
beyond. Still the irresistible desire which had made me enter the
building urged me: I must open that door, and see what was beyond it. I approached, and laid my hand on the rude latch. Then the woman spoke,
but without lifting her head or looking at me: "You had better not open
that door." This was uttered quite quietly; and she went on with her
reading, partly in silence, partly aloud; but both modes seemed equally
intended for herself alone. The prohibition, however, only increased my
desire to see; and as she took no further notice, I gently opened the
door to its full width, and looked in. At first, I saw nothing worthy
of attention. It seemed a common closet, with shelves on each hand, on
which stood various little necessaries for the humble uses of a cottage. In one corner stood one or two brooms, in another a hatchet and other
common tools; showing that it was in use every hour of the day for
household purposes. But, as I looked, I saw that there were no shelves
at the back, and that an empty space went in further; its termination
appearing to be a faintly glimmering wall or curtain, somewhat less,
however, than the width and height of the doorway where I stood. But,
as I continued looking, for a few seconds, towards this faintly luminous
limit, my eyes came into true relation with their object. All at once,
with such a shiver as when one is suddenly conscious of the presence of
another in a room where he has, for hours, considered himself alone, I
saw that the seemingly luminous extremity was a sky, as of night, beheld
through the long perspective of a narrow, dark passage, through what, or
built of what, I could not tell. As I gazed, I clearly discerned two or
three stars glimmering faintly in the distant blue. But, suddenly, and
as if it had been running fast from a far distance for this very point,
and had turned the corner without abating its swiftness, a dark figure
sped into and along the passage from the blue opening at the remote end. I started back and shuddered, but kept looking, for I could not help it. On and on it came, with a speedy approach but delayed arrival; till, at
last, through the many gradations of approach, it seemed to come within
the sphere of myself, rushed up to me, and passed me into the cottage. All I could tell of its appearance was, that it seemed to be a dark
human figure. Its motion was entirely noiseless, and might be called a
gliding, were it not that it appeared that of a runner, but with ghostly
feet. I had moved back yet a little to let him pass me, and looked round
after him instantly. I could not see him. "Where is he?" I said, in some alarm, to the woman, who still sat
reading. "There, on the floor, behind you," she said, pointing with her arm
half-outstretched, but not lifting her eyes. I turned and looked, but
saw nothing. Then with a feeling that there was yet something behind me,
I looked round over my shoulder; and there, on the ground, lay a black
shadow, the size of a man. It was so dark, that I could see it in the
dim light of the lamp, which shone full upon it, apparently without
thinning at all the intensity of its hue. "I told you," said the woman, "you had better not look into that
closet." "What is it?" I said, with a growing sense of horror. 