



Produced by Charles Keller





MISS BILLY'S DECISION

By Eleanor H. Porter

Author of "Miss Billy," etc. TO My Cousin Helen


                                        CONTENTS
          CHAPTER
          I.      CALDERWELL DOES SOME TALKING
          II. AUNT HANNAH GETS A LETTER
          III. BILLY AND BERTRAM
          IV. FOR MARY JANE
          V.      MARIE SPEAKS HER MIND
          VI. AT THE SIGN OF THE PINK
          VII. OLD FRIENDS AND NEW
          VIII. M. J. OPENS THE GAME
          IX. A RUG, A PICTURE, AND A GIRL AFRAID
          X. A JOB FOR PETE--AND FOR BERTRAM
          XI. A CLOCK AND AUNT HANNAH
          XII. SISTER KATE
          XIII. CYRIL AND A WEDDING
          XIV. M. J. MAKES ANOTHER MOVE
          XV. "MR. BILLY" AND "MISS MARY JANE"
          XVI. A GIRL AND A BIT OF LOWESTOFT
          XVII. ONLY A LOVE SONG, BUT--
          XVIII. SUGARPLUMS
          XIX. ALICE GREGGORY
          XX. ARKWRIGHT TELLS A STORY
          XXI. A MATTER OF STRAIGHT BUSINESS
          XXII. PLANS AND PLOTTINGS
          XXIII. THE CAUSE AND BERTRAM
          XXIV. THE ARTIST AND HIS ART
          XXV. THE OPERETTA
          XXVI. ARKWRIGHT TELLS ANOTHER STORY
          XXVII. THE THING THAT WAS THE TRUTH
          XXVIII. BILLY TAKES HER TURN
          XXIX. KATE WRITES A LETTER
          XXX. "I'VE HINDERED HIM"
          XXXI. FLIGHT
          XXXII. PETE TO THE RESCUE
          XXXIII. BERTRAM TAKES THE REINS





MISS BILLY'S DECISION




CHAPTER I. CALDERWELL DOES SOME TALKING


Calderwell had met Mr. M. J. Arkwright in London through a common
friend; since then they had tramped half over Europe together in a
comradeship that was as delightful as it was unusual. As Calderwell put
it in a letter to his sister, Belle:

"We smoke the same cigar and drink the same tea (he's just as much of
an old woman on that subject as I am! ), and we agree beautifully on
all necessary points of living, from tipping to late sleeping in the
morning; while as for politics and religion--we disagree in those just
enough to lend spice to an otherwise tame existence." Farther along in this same letter Calderwell touched upon his new friend
again. "I admit, however, I would like to know his name. To find out what that
mysterious 'M. J.' stands for has got to be pretty nearly an obsession
with me. I am about ready to pick his pocket or rifle his trunk in
search of some lurking 'Martin' or 'John' that will set me at peace. As
it is, I confess that I have ogled his incoming mail and his outgoing
baggage shamelessly, only to be slapped in the face always and
everlastingly by that bland 'M. J.' I've got my revenge, now, though. To
myself I call him 'Mary Jane'--and his broad-shouldered, brown-bearded
six feet of muscular manhood would so like to be called 'Mary Jane'! By the way, Belle, if you ever hear of murder and sudden death in my
direction, better set the sleuths on the trail of Arkwright. Six to one
you'll find I called him 'Mary Jane' to his face!" Calderwell was thinking of that letter now, as he sat at a small table
in a Paris cafe. Opposite him was the six feet of muscular manhood,
broad shoulders, pointed brown beard, and all--and he had just addressed
it, inadvertently, as "Mary Jane." During the brief, sickening moment of silence after the name had left
his lips, Calderwell was conscious of a whimsical realization of the
lights, music, and laughter all about him. "Well, I chose as safe a place as I could!" he was thinking. Then
Arkwright spoke. "How long since you've been in correspondence with members of my
family?" "Eh?" Arkwright laughed grimly. "Perhaps you thought of it yourself, then--I'll admit you're capable of
it," he nodded, reaching for a cigar. "But it so happens you hit upon my
family's favorite name for me." "_Mary Jane!_ You mean they actually _call_ you that?" "Yes," bowed the big fellow, calmly, as he struck a light. "Appropriate!--don't you think?" Calderwell did not answer. He thought he could not. "Well, silence gives consent, they say," laughed the other. "Anyhow, you
must have had _some_ reason for calling me that." "Arkwright, what _does_ 'M. J.' stand for?" demanded Calderwell. "Oh, is that it?" smiled the man opposite. "Well, I'll own those
initials have been something of a puzzle to people. One man declares
they're 'Merely Jokes'; but another, not so friendly, says they stand
for 'Mostly Jealousy' of more fortunate chaps who have real names for
a handle. My small brothers and sisters, discovering, with the usual
perspicacity of one's family on such matters, that I never signed, or
called myself anything but 'M. J.,' dubbed me 'Mary Jane.' And there you
have it." "Mary Jane! You!" Arkwright smiled oddly. "Oh, well, what's the difference? Would you deprive them of their
innocent amusement? And they do so love that 'Mary Jane'! Besides,
what's in a name, anyway?" he went on, eyeing the glowing tip of the
cigar between his fingers. "'A rose by any other name--'--you've
heard that, probably. Names don't always signify, my dear fellow. For
instance, I know a 'Billy'--but he's a girl." Calderwell gave a sudden start. "You don't mean Billy--Neilson?" The other turned sharply. "Do _you_ know Billy Neilson?" Calderwell gave his friend a glance from scornful eyes. "Do I know Billy Neilson?" he cried. "Does a fellow usually know the
girl he's proposed to regularly once in three months? Oh, I know I'm
telling tales out of school, of course," he went on, in response to the
look that had come into the brown eyes opposite. "But what's the use? Everybody knows it--that knows us. Billy herself got so she took it as
a matter of course--and refused as a matter of course, too; just as she
would refuse a serving of apple pie at dinner, if she hadn't wanted it." "Apple pie!" scouted Arkwright. Calderwell shrugged his shoulders. "My dear fellow, you don't seem to realize it, but for the last six
months you have been assisting at the obsequies of a dead romance." "Indeed! And is it--buried, yet?" "Oh, no," sighed Calderwell, cheerfully. "I shall go back one of these
days, I'll warrant, and begin the same old game again; though I will
acknowledge that the last refusal was so very decided that it's been a
year, almost, since I received it. I think I was really convinced, for
a while, that--that she didn't want that apple pie," he finished with
a whimsical lightness that did not quite coincide with the stern lines
that had come to his mouth. For a moment there was silence, then Calderwell spoke again. "Where did you know--Miss Billy?" "Oh, I don't know her at all. I know of her--through Aunt Hannah." Calderwell sat suddenly erect. "Aunt Hannah! Is she your aunt, too? Jove! This _is_ a little old world,
after all; isn't it?" "She isn't my aunt. She's my mother's third cousin. None of us have seen
her for years, but she writes to mother occasionally; and, of course,
for some time now, her letters have been running over full of Billy. She
lives with her, I believe; doesn't she?" "She does," rejoined Calderwell, with an unexpected chuckle. "I wonder
if you know how she happened to live with her, at first." "Why, no, I reckon not. What do you mean?" Calderwell chuckled again. "Well, I'll tell you. You, being a 'Mary Jane,' ought to appreciate it. You see, Billy was named for one William Henshaw, her father's chum,
who promptly forgot all about her. At eighteen, Billy, being left quite
alone in the world, wrote to 'Uncle William' and asked to come and live
with him." "Well?" "But it wasn't well. William was a forty-year-old widower who lived with
two younger brothers, an old butler, and a Chinese cook in one of those
funny old Beacon Street houses in Boston. 'The Strata,' Bertram called
it. Bright boy--Bertram!" "The Strata!" "Yes. I wish you could see that house, Arkwright. It's a regular layer
cake. Cyril--he's the second brother; must be thirty-four or five
now--lives on the top floor in a rugless, curtainless, music-mad
existence--just a plain crank. Below him comes William. William collects
things--everything from tenpenny nails to teapots, I should say, and
they're all there in his rooms. Farther down somewhere comes Bertram. He's _the_ Bertram Henshaw, you understand; the artist." "Not the 'Face-of-a-Girl' Henshaw?" "The same; only of course four years ago he wasn't quite so well known
as he is now. Well, to resume and go on. It was into this house, this
masculine paradise ruled over by Pete and Dong Ling in the kitchen, that
Billy's naive request for a home came." "Great Scott!" breathed Arkwright, appreciatively. "Yes. Well, the letter was signed 'Billy.' They took her for a boy,
naturally, and after something of a struggle they agreed to let 'him'
come. For his particular delectation they fixed up a room next to
Bertram with guns and fishing rods, and such ladylike specialties; and
William went to the station to meet the boy." "With never a suspicion?" "With never a suspicion." "Gorry!" "Well, 'he' came, and 'she' conquered. I guess things were lively for
a while, though. Oh, there was a kitten, too, I believe, 'Spunk,' who
added to the gayety of nations." "But what did the Henshaws do?" "Well, I wasn't there, of course; but Bertram says they spun around like
tops gone mad for a time, but finally quieted down enough to summon a
married sister for immediate propriety, and to establish Aunt Hannah for
permanency the next day." "So that's how it happened! Well, by George!" cried Arkwright. "Yes," nodded the other. "So you see there are untold possibilities just
in a name. Remember that. Just suppose _you_, as Mary Jane, should beg a
home in a feminine household--say in Miss Billy's, for instance!" "I'd like to," retorted Arkwright, with sudden warmth. Calderwell stared a little. The other laughed shamefacedly. "Oh, it's only that I happen to have a devouring curiosity to meet
that special young lady. I sing her songs (you know she's written some
dandies! ), I've heard a lot about her, and I've seen her picture." (He did not add that he had also purloined that same picture from his
mother's bureau--the picture being a gift from Aunt Hannah.) "So you
see I would, indeed, like to occupy a corner in the fair Miss Billy's
household. I could write to Aunt Hannah and beg a home with her, you
know; eh?" "Of course! Why don't you--'Mary Jane'?" laughed Calderwell. "Billy'd
take you all right. She's had a little Miss Hawthorn, a music teacher,
there for months. She's always doing stunts of that sort. Belle writes
me that she's had a dozen forlornites there all this last summer, two
or three at a time-tired widows, lonesome old maids, and crippled
kids--just to give them a royal good time. So you see she'd take you,
without a doubt. Jove! what a pair you'd make: Miss Billy and Mr. Mary
Jane! You'd drive the suffragettes into conniption fits--just by the
sound of you!" Arkwright laughed quietly; then he frowned. "But how about it?" he asked. "I thought she was keeping house with Aunt
Hannah. Didn't she stay at all with the Henshaws?" "Oh, yes, a few months. I never knew just why she did leave, but I
fancied, from something Billy herself said once, that she discovered she
was creating rather too much of an upheaval in the Strata. So she took
herself off. She went to school, and travelled considerably. She was
over here when I met her first. After that she was with us all one
summer on the yacht. A couple of years ago, or so, she went back to
Boston, bought a house and settled down with Aunt Hannah." "And she's not married--or even engaged?" "Wasn't the last I heard. I haven't seen her since December, and I've
heard from her only indirectly. She corresponds with my sister, and so
do I--intermittently. I heard a month ago from Belle, and _she_ had a
letter from Billy in August. But I heard nothing of any engagement." "How about the Henshaws? I should think there might be a chance there
for a romance--a charming girl, and three unattached men." Calderwell gave a slow shake of the head. "I don't think so. William is--let me see--nearly forty-five, I guess,
by this time; and he isn't a marrying man. He buried his heart with his
wife and baby years ago. Cyril, according to Bertram, 'hates women
and all other confusion,' so that ought to let him out. As for Bertram
himself--Bertram is 'only Bertram.' He's always been that. Bertram loves
girls--to paint; but I can't imagine him making serious love to any one. It would always be the tilt of a chin or the turn of a cheek that he was
admiring--to paint. No, there's no chance for a romance there, I'll
warrant." "But there's--yourself." Calderwell's eyebrows rose the fraction of an inch. "Oh, of course. I presume January or February will find me back there,"
he admitted with a sigh and a shrug. Then, a little bitterly, he added:
"No, Arkwright. I shall keep away if I can. I _know_ there's no chance
for me--now." "Then you'll leave me a clear field?" bantered the other. "Of course--'Mary Jane,'" retorted Calderwell, with equal lightness. "Thank you." "Oh, you needn't," laughed Calderwell. "My giving you the right of way
doesn't insure you a thoroughfare for yourself--there are others, you
know. Billy Neilson has had sighing swains about I her, I imagine, since
she could walk and talk. She is a wonderfully fascinating little bit of
femininity, and she has a heart of pure gold. All is, I envy the man who
wins it--for the man who wins that, wins her." There was no answer. Arkwright sat with his eyes on the moving throng
outside the window near them. Perhaps he had not heard. At all events,
when he spoke some time later, it was of a matter far removed from Miss
Billy Neilson, or the way to her heart. Nor was the young lady mentioned
between them again that day. Long hours later, just before parting for the night, Arkwright said:

"Calderwell, I'm sorry, but I believe, after all, I can't take that trip
to the lakes with you. I--I'm going home next week." "Home! Hang it, Arkwright! I'd counted on you. Isn't this rather
sudden?" "Yes, and no. I'll own I've been drifting about with you contentedly
enough for the last six months to make you think mountain-climbing and
boat-paddling were the end and aim of my existence. But they aren't, you
know, really." "Nonsense! At heart you're as much of a vagabond as I am; and you know
it." "Perhaps. But unfortunately I don't happen to carry your pocketbook." "You may, if you like. I'll hand it over any time," grinned Calderwell. "Thanks. You know well enough what I mean," shrugged the other. There was a moment's silence; then Calderwell queried:

"Arkwright, how old are you?" "Twenty-four." "Good! Then you're merely travelling to supplement your education, see?" "Oh, yes, I see. But something besides my education has got to be
supplemented now, I reckon." "What are you going to do?" There was an almost imperceptible hesitation; then, a little shortly,
came the answer:

"Hit the trail for Grand Opera, and bring up, probably--in vaudeville." Calderwell smiled appreciatively. "You _can_ sing like the devil," he admitted. "Thanks," returned his friend, with uplifted eyebrows. "Do you mind
calling it 'an angel'--just for this occasion?" "Oh, the matinee-girls will do that fast enough. But, I say,
Arkwright, what are you going to do with those initials then?" "Let 'em alone." "Oh, no, you won't. And you won't be 'Mary Jane,' either. Imagine a Mary
Jane in Grand Opera! I know what you'll be. You'll be 'Senor Martini
Johnini Arkwrightino'! By the way, you didn't say what that 'M. J.' really did stand for," hinted Calderwell, shamelessly. "'Merely Jokes'--in your estimation, evidently," shrugged the other. "But my going isn't a joke, Calderwell. I'm really going. And I'm going
to work." "But--how shall you manage?" "Time will tell." Calderwell frowned and stirred restlessly in his chair. "But, honestly, now, to--to follow that trail of yours will take
money. And--er--" a faint red stole to his forehead--"don't they
have--er--patrons for these young and budding geniuses? Why can't I have
a hand in this trail, too--or maybe you'd call it a foot, eh? I'd be no
end glad to, Arkwright." "Thanks, old man." The red was duplicated this time above the brown
silky beard. "That was mighty kind of you, and I appreciate it; but it
won't be necessary. A generous, but perhaps misguided bachelor uncle
left me a few thousands a year or so ago; and I'm going to put them all
down my throat--or rather, _into_ it--before I give up." "Where you going to study? New York?" Again there was an almost imperceptible hesitation before the answer
came. "I'm not quite prepared to say." "Why not try it here?" Arkwright shook his head. "I did plan to, when I came over but I've changed my mind. I believe I'd
rather work while longer in America." "Hm-m," murmured Calderwell. There was a brief silence, followed by other questions and other
answers; after which the friends said good night. In his own room, as he was dropping off to sleep, Calderwell muttered
drowsily:

"By George! I haven't found out yet what that blamed 'M. J.' stands
for!" CHAPTER II. AUNT HANNAH GETS A LETTER


In the cozy living-room at Hillside, Billy Neilson's pretty home on
Corey Hill, Billy herself sat writing at the desk. Her pen had just
traced the date, "October twenty-fifth," when Mrs. Stetson entered with
a letter in her hand. "Writing, my dear? Then don't let me disturb you." She turned as if to
go. Billy dropped her pen, sprang to her feet, flew to the little woman's
side and whirled her half across the room. "There!" she exclaimed, as she plumped the breathless and scandalized
Aunt Hannah into the biggest easy chair. "I feel better. I just had to
let off steam some way. It's so lovely you came in just when you did!" "Indeed! I--I'm not so sure of that," stammered the lady, dropping the
letter into her lap, and patting with agitated fingers her cap, her
curls, the two shawls about her shoulders, and the lace at her throat. "My grief and conscience, Billy! Wors't you _ever_ grow up?" "Hope not," purred Billy cheerfully, dropping herself on to a low
hassock at Aunt Hannah's feet. "But, my dear, you--you're engaged!" Billy bubbled into a chuckling laugh. "As if I didn't know that, when I've just written a dozen notes to
announce it! And, oh, Aunt Hannah, such a time as I've had, telling what
a dear Bertram is, and how I love, love, _love_ him, and what beautiful
eyes he has, and _such_ a nose, and--"

"Billy!" Aunt Hannah was sitting erect in pale horror. "Eh?" Billy's eyes were roguish. "You didn't write that in those notes!" "Write it? Oh, no! That's only what I _wanted_ to write," chuckled
Billy. "What I really did write was as staid and proper as--here, let me
show you," she broke off, springing to her feet and running over to her
desk. "There! this is about what I wrote to them all," she finished,
whipping a note out of one of the unsealed envelopes on the desk and
spreading it open before Aunt Hannah's suspicious eyes. "Hm-m; that is very good--for you," admitted the lady. "Well, I like that!--after all my stern self-control and self-sacrifice
to keep out all those things I _wanted_ to write," bridled Billy. "Besides, they'd have been ever so much more interesting reading than
these will be," she pouted, as she took the note from her companion's
hand. "I don't doubt it," observed Aunt Hannah, dryly. Billy laughed, and tossed the note back on the desk. "I'm writing to Belle Calderwell, now," she announced musingly, dropping
herself again on the hassock. "I suppose she'll tell Hugh." "Poor boy! He'll be disappointed." Billy sighed, but she uptilted her chin a little. "He ought not to be. I told him long, long ago, the very first time,
that--that I couldn't." "I know, dear; but--they don't always understand." Aunt Hannah sighed
in sympathy with the far-away Hugh Calderwell, as she looked down at the
bright young face near her. There was a moment's silence; then Billy gave a little laugh. "He _will_ be surprised," she said. "He told me once that Bertram
wouldn't ever care for any girl except to paint. To paint, indeed! As
if Bertram didn't love me--just _me!_--if he never saw another tube of
paint!" "I think he does, my dear." Again there was silence; then, from Billy's lips there came softly:

"Just think; we've been engaged almost four weeks--and to-morrow it'll
be announced. I'm so glad I didn't ever announce the other two!" "The other _two!_" cried Aunt Hannah. Billy laughed. "Oh, I forgot. You didn't know about Cyril." "Cyril!" "Oh, there didn't anybody know it, either not even Cyril himself,"
dimpled Billy, mischievously. "I just engaged myself to him in
imagination, you know, to see how I'd like it. I didn't like it. But
it didn't last, anyhow, very long--just three weeks, I believe. Then I
broke it off," she finished, with unsmiling mouth, but dancing eyes. "Billy!" protested Aunt Hannah, feebly. "But I _am_ glad only the family knew about my engagement to Uncle
William--oh, Aunt Hannah, you don't know how good it does seem to call
him 'Uncle' again. It was always slipping out, anyhow, all the time we
were engaged; and of course it was awful then." "That only goes to prove, my dear, how entirely unsuitable it was, from
the start." A bright color flooded Billy's face. "I know; but if a girl _will_ think a man is asking for a wife when all
he wants is a daughter, and if she blandly says 'Yes, thank you, I'll
marry you,' I don't know what you can expect!" "You can expect just what you got--misery, and almost a tragedy,"
retorted Aunt Hannah, severely. A tender light came into Billy's eyes. "Dear Uncle William! What a jewel he was, all the way through! And he'd
have marched straight to the altar, too, with never a flicker of an
eyelid, I know--self-sacrificing martyr that he was!" "Martyr!" bristled Aunt Hannah, with extraordinary violence for her. "I'm thinking that term belonged somewhere else. A month ago, Billy
Neilson, you did not look as if you'd live out half your days. But I
suppose _you'd_ have gone to the altar, too, with never a flicker of an
eyelid!" "But I thought I had to," protested Billy. "I couldn't grieve Uncle
William so, after Mrs. Hartwell had said how he--he wanted me." Aunt Hannah's lips grew stern at the corners. "There are times when--when I think it would be wiser if Mrs. Kate
Hartwell would attend to her own affairs!" Aunt Hannah's voice fairly
shook with wrath. "Why-Aunt Hannah!" reproved Billy in mischievous horror. "I'm shocked at
you!" Aunt Hannah flushed miserably. "There, there, child, forget I said it. I ought not to have said it, of
course," she murmured agitatedly. Billy laughed. "You should have heard what Uncle William said! But never mind. We all
found out the mistake before it was too late, and everything is lovely
now, even to Cyril and Marie. Did you ever see anything so beatifically
happy as that couple are? Bertram says he hasn't heard a dirge from
Cyril's rooms for three weeks; and that if anybody else played the kind
of music he's been playing, it would be just common garden ragtime!" "Music! Oh, my grief and conscience! That makes me think, Billy. If I'm
not actually forgetting what I came in here for," cried Aunt Hannah,
fumbling in the folds of her dress for the letter that had slipped from
her lap. "I've had word from a young niece. She's going to study music
in Boston." "A niece?" "Well, not really, you know. She calls me 'Aunt,' just as you and the
Henshaw boys do. But I really am related to _her_, for her mother and I
are third cousins, while it was my husband who was distantly related to
the Henshaw family." "What's her name?" "'Mary Jane Arkwright.' Where is that letter?" "Here it is, on the floor," reported Billy. "Were you going to read it
to me?" she asked, as she picked it up. "Yes--if you don't mind." "I'd love to hear it." "Then I'll read it. It--it rather annoys me in some ways. I thought the
whole family understood that I wasn't living by myself any longer--that
I was living with you. I'm sure I thought I wrote them that, long ago. But this sounds almost as if they didn't understand it--at least, as if
this girl didn't." "How old is she?" "I don't know; but she must be some old, to be coming here to Boston to
study music, alone--singing, I think she said." "You don't remember her, then?" Aunt Hannah frowned and paused, the letter half withdrawn from its
envelope. "No--but that isn't strange. They live West. I haven't seen any of them
for years. I know there are several children--and I suppose I've been
told their names. I know there's a boy--the eldest, I think--who is
quite a singer, and there's a girl who paints, I believe; but I don't
seem to remember a 'Mary Jane.'" "Never mind! Suppose we let Mary Jane speak for herself," suggested
Billy, dropping her chin into the small pink cup of her hand, and
settling herself to listen. "Very well," sighed Aunt Hannah; and she opened the letter and began to
read. "DEAR AUNT HANNAH:--This is to tell you
     that I'm coming to Boston to study singing in
     the school for Grand Opera, and I'm planning to
     look you up. Do you object? I said to a friend
     the other day that I'd half a mind to write to Aunt
     Hannah and beg a home with her; and my friend
     retorted: 'Why don't you, Mary Jane?' But
     that, of course, I should not think of doing. "But I know I shall be lonesome, Aunt Hannah,
     and I hope you'll let me see you once in a
     while, anyway. I plan now to come next week
     --I've already got as far as New York, as you see
     by the address--and I shall hope to see you
     soon. "All the family would send love, I know. "M. J. ARKWRIGHT." "Grand Opera! Oh, how perfectly lovely," cried Billy. "Yes, but Billy, do you think she is expecting me to invite her to make
her home with me? I shall have to write and explain that I can't--if she
does, of course." Billy frowned and hesitated. "Why, it sounded--a little--that way; but--" Suddenly her face cleared. "Aunt Hannah, I've thought of the very thing. We _will_ take her!" "Oh, Billy, I couldn't think of letting you do that," demurred Aunt
Hannah. "You're very kind--but, oh, no; not that!" "Why not? I think it would be lovely; and we can just as well as not. After Marie is married in December, she can have that room. Until then
she can have the little blue room next to me." "But--but--we don't know anything about her." "We know she's your niece, and she's lonesome; and we know she's
musical. I shall love her for every one of those things. Of course we'll
take her!" "But--I don't know anything about her age." "All the more reason why she should be looked out for, then," retorted
Billy, promptly. "Why, Aunt Hannah, just as if you didn't want to give
this lonesome, unprotected young girl a home!" "Oh, I do, of course; but--"

"Then it's all settled," interposed Billy, springing to her feet. "But what if we--we shouldn't like her?" "Nonsense! What if she shouldn't like us?" laughed Billy. "However, if
you'd feel better, just ask her to come and stay with us a month. We
shall keep her all right, afterwards. See if we don't!" Slowly Aunt Hannah got to her feet. "Very well, dear. I'll write, of course, as you tell me to; and it's
lovely of you to do it. Now I'll leave you to your letters. I've
hindered you far too long, as it is." "You've rested me," declared Billy, flinging wide her arms. Aunt Hannah, fearing a second dizzying whirl impelled by those same
young arms, drew her shawls about her shoulders and backed hastily
toward the hall door. Billy laughed. "Oh, I won't again--to-day," she promised merrily. Then, as the lady
reached the arched doorway: "Tell Mary Jane to let us know the day
and train and we'll meet her. Oh, and Aunt Hannah, tell her to wear a
pink--a white pink; and tell her we will, too," she finished gayly. CHAPTER III. BILLY AND BERTRAM


Bertram called that evening. Before the open fire in the living-room he
found a pensive Billy awaiting him--a Billy who let herself be kissed,
it is true, and who even kissed back, shyly, adorably; but a Billy who
looked at him with wide, almost frightened eyes. "Why, darling, what's the matter?" he demanded, his own eyes growing
wide and frightened. "Bertram, it's--done!" "What's done? What do you mean?" "Our engagement. It's--announced. I wrote stacks of notes to-day,
and even now there are some left for to-morrow. And then there's--the
newspapers. Bertram, right away, now, _everybody_ will know it." Her
voice was tragic. Bertram relaxed visibly. A tender light came to his eyes. "Well, didn't you expect everybody would know it, my dear?" "Y-yes; but--"

At her hesitation, the tender light changed to a quick fear. "Billy, you aren't--sorry?" The pink glory that suffused her face answered him before her words did. "Sorry! Oh, never, Bertram! It's only that it won't be ours any
longer--that is, it won't belong to just our two selves. Everybody will
know it. And they'll bow and smile and say 'How lovely!' to our faces,
and 'Did you ever?' to our backs. Oh, no, I'm not sorry, Bertram; but I
am--afraid." "_Afraid_--Billy!" "Yes." Billy sighed, and gazed with pensive eyes into the fire. Across Bertram's face swept surprise, consternation, and dismay. Bertram
had thought he knew Billy in all her moods and fancies; but he did not
know her in this one. "Why, Billy!" he breathed. Billy drew another sigh. It seemed to come from the very bottoms of her
small, satin-slippered feet. "Well, I am. You're _the_ Bertram Henshaw. You know lots and lots of
people that I never even saw. And they'll come and stand around and
stare and lift their lorgnettes and say: 'Is that the one? Dear me!'" Bertram gave a relieved laugh. "Nonsense, sweetheart! I should think you were a picture I'd painted and
hung on a wall." "I shall feel as if I were--with all those friends of yours. Bertram,
what if they don't like it?" Her voice had grown tragic again. "_Like_ it!" "Yes. The picture--me, I mean." "They can't help liking it," he retorted, with the prompt certainty of
an adoring lover. Billy shook her head. Her eyes had gone back to the fire. "Oh, yes, they can. I can hear them. 'What, _she_--Bertram Henshaw's
wife?--a frivolous, inconsequential "Billy" like that?' Bertram!" --Billy
turned fiercely despairing eyes on her lover--"Bertram, sometimes I
wish my name were 'Clarissa Cordelia,' or 'Arabella Maud,' or 'Hannah
Jane'--anything that's feminine and proper!" Bertram's ringing laugh brought a faint smile to Billy's lips. But the
words that followed the laugh, and the caressing touch of the man's
hands sent a flood of shy color to her face. "'Hannah Jane,' indeed! As if I'd exchange my Billy for her or any
Clarissa or Arabella that ever grew! I adore Billy--flame, nature,
and--"

"And naughtiness?" put in Billy herself. "Yes--if there be any," laughed Bertram, fondly. "But, see," he added,
taking a tiny box from his pocket, "see what I've brought for this same
Billy to wear. She'd have had it long ago if she hadn't insisted on
waiting for this announcement business." "Oh, Bertram, what a beauty!" dimpled Billy, as the flawless diamond in
Bertram's fingers caught the light and sent it back in a flash of flame
and crimson. "Now you are mine--really mine, sweetheart!" The man's voice and hand
shook as he slipped the ring on Billy's outstretched finger. Billy caught her breath with almost a sob. "And I'm so glad to be--yours, dear," she murmured brokenly. "And--and
I'll make you proud that I am yours, even if I am just 'Billy,'" she
choked. "Oh, I know I'll write such beautiful, beautiful songs now." The man drew her into a close embrace. "As if I cared for that," he scoffed lovingly. Billy looked up in quick horror. "Why, Bertram, you don't mean you don't--care?" He laughed lightly, and took the dismayed little face between his two
hands. "Care, darling? of course I care! You know how I love your music. I
care about everything that concerns you. I meant that I'm proud of you
_now_--just you. I love _you_, you know." There was a moment's pause. Billy's eyes, as they looked at him, carried
a curious intentness in their dark depths. "You mean, you like--the turn of my head and the tilt of my chin?" she
asked a little breathlessly. "I adore them!" came the prompt answer. To Bertram's utter amazement, Billy drew back with a sharp cry. "No, no--not that!" "Why, _Billy!_"

Billy laughed unexpectedly; then she sighed. "Oh, it's all right, of course," she assured him hastily. "It's only--"
Billy stopped and blushed. Billy was thinking of what Hugh Calderwell
had once said to her: that Bertram Henshaw would never love any girl
seriously; that it would always be the turn of her head or the tilt of
her chin that he loved--to paint. "Well; only what?" demanded Bertram. Billy blushed the more deeply, but she gave a light laugh. "Nothing, only something Hugh Calderwell said to me once. You see,
Bertram, I don't think Hugh ever thought you would--marry." "Oh, didn't he?" bridled Bertram. "Well, that only goes to show how much
he knows about it. Er--did you announce it--to him?" Bertram's voice was
almost savage now. Billy smiled. "No; but I did to his sister, and she'll tell him. Oh, Bertram, such a
time as I had over those notes," went on Billy, with a chuckle. Her
eyes were dancing, and she was seeming more like her usual self, Bertram
thought. "You see there were such a lot of things I wanted to say, about
what a dear you were, and how much I--I liked you, and that you had such
lovely eyes, and a nose--"

"Billy!" This time it was Bertram who was sitting erect in pale horror. Billy threw him a roguish glance. "Goosey! You are as bad as Aunt Hannah! I said that was what I _wanted_
to say. What I really said was--quite another matter," she finished with
a saucy uptilting of her chin. Bertram relaxed with a laugh. "You witch!" His admiring eyes still lingered on her face. "Billy, I'm
going to paint you sometime in just that pose. You're adorable!" "Pooh! Just another face of a girl," teased the adorable one. Bertram gave a sudden exclamation. "There! And I haven't told you, yet. Guess what my next commission is." "To paint a portrait?" "Yes." "Can't. Who is it?" "J. G. Winthrop's daughter." "Not _the_ J. G. Winthrop?" "The same." "Oh, Bertram, how splendid!" "Isn't it? And then the girl herself! Have you seen her? But you
haven't, I know, unless you met her abroad. She hasn't been in Boston
for years until now." "No, I haven't seen her. Is she so _very_ beautiful?" Billy spoke a
little soberly. "Yes--and no." The artist lifted his head alertly. What Billy called
his "painting look" came to his face. "It isn't that her features are so
regular--though her mouth and chin are perfect. But her face has so much
character, and there's an elusive something about her eyes--Jove! If
I can only catch it, it'll be the best thing yet that I've ever done,
Billy." "Will it? I'm so glad--and you'll get it, I know you will," claimed
Billy, clearing her throat a little nervously. "I wish I felt so sure," sighed Bertram. "But it'll be a great thing if
I do get it--J. G. Winthrop's daughter, you know, besides the merit of
the likeness itself." "Yes; yes, indeed!" Billy cleared her throat again. "You've seen her, of
course, lately?" "Oh, yes. I was there half the morning discussing the details--sittings
and costume, and deciding on the pose." "Did you find one--to suit?" "Find one!" The artist made a despairing gesture. "I found a dozen that
I wanted. The trouble was to tell which I wanted the most." Billy gave a nervous little laugh. "Isn't that--unusual?" she asked. Bertram lifted his eyebrows with a quizzical smile. "Well, they aren't all Marguerite Winthrops," he reminded her. "Marguerite!" cried Billy. "Oh, is her name Marguerite? I do think
Marguerite is the dearest name!" Billy's eyes and voice were wistful. "I don't--not the _dearest_. Oh, it's all well enough, of course, but it
can't be compared for a moment to--well, say, 'Billy'!" Billy smiled, but she shook her head. "I'm afraid you're not a good judge of names," she objected. "Yes, I am; though, for that matter, I should love your name, no matter
what it was." "Even if 'twas 'Mary Jane,' eh?" bantered Billy. "Well, you'll have a
chance to find out how you like that name pretty quick, sir. We're going
to have one here." "You're going to have a Mary Jane here? Do you mean that Rosa's going
away?" "Mercy! I hope not," shuddered Billy. "You don't find a Rosa in every
kitchen--and never in employment agencies! My Mary Jane is a niece of
Aunt Hannah's,--or rather, a cousin. She's coming to Boston to study
music, and I've invited her here. We've asked her for a month, though I
presume we shall keep her right along." Bertram frowned. "Well, of course, that's very nice for--_Mary Jane_," he sighed with
meaning emphasis. Billy laughed. "Don't worry, dear. She won't bother us any." "Oh, yes, she will," sighed Bertram. "She'll be 'round--lots; you see
if she isn't. Billy, I think sometimes you're almost too kind--to other
folks." "Never!" laughed Billy. "Besides, what would you have me do when a
lonesome young girl was coming to Boston? Anyhow, _you're_ not the one
to talk, young man. I've known _you_ to take in a lonesome girl and give
her a home," she flashed merrily. Bertram chuckled. "Jove! What a time that was!" he exclaimed, regarding his companion with
fond eyes. "And Spunk, too! Is she going to bring a Spunk?" "Not that I've heard," smiled Billy; "but she _is_ going to wear a
pink." "Not really, Billy?" "Of course she is! I told her to. How do you suppose we could know her
when we saw her, if she didn't?" demanded the girl, indignantly. "And
what is more, sir, there will be _two_ pinks worn this time. _I_ sha'n't
do as Uncle William did, and leave off my pink. Only think what long
minutes--that seemed hours of misery--I spent waiting there in that
train-shed, just because I didn't know which man was my Uncle William!" Bertram laughed and shrugged his shoulders. "Well, your Mary Jane won't probably turn out to be quite such a
bombshell as our Billy did--unless she should prove to be a boy," he
added whimsically. "Oh, but Billy, she _can't_ turn out to be such a
dear treasure," finished the man. And at the adoring look in his eyes
Billy blushed deeply--and promptly forgot all about Mary Jane and her
pink. CHAPTER IV. FOR MARY JANE


"I have a letter here from Mary Jane, my dear," announced Aunt Hannah at
the luncheon table one day. "Have you?" Billy raised interested eyes from her own letters. "What
does she say?" "She will be here Thursday. Her train is due at the South Station at
four-thirty. She seems to be very grateful to you for your offer to let
her come right here for a month; but she says she's afraid you don't
realize, perhaps, just what you are doing--to take her in like that,
with her singing, and all." "Nonsense! She doesn't refuse, does she?" "Oh, no; she doesn't refuse--but she doesn't accept either, exactly, as
I can see. I've read the letter over twice, too. I'll let you judge for
yourself by and by, when you have time to read it." Billy laughed. "Never mind. I don't want to read it. She's just a little shy about
coming, that's all. She'll stay all right, when we come to meet her. What time did you say it was, Thursday?" "Half past four, South Station." "Thursday, at half past four. Let me see--that's the day of the
Carletons' 'At Home,' isn't it?" "Oh, my grief and conscience, yes! But I had forgotten it. What shall we
do?" "Oh, that will be easy. We'll just go to the Carletons' early and have
John wait, then take us from there to the South Station. Meanwhile we'll
make sure that the little blue room is all ready for her. I put in my
white enamel work-basket yesterday, and that pretty little blue case for
hairpins and curling tongs that I bought at the fair. I want the room to
look homey to her, you know." "As if it could look any other way, if _you_ had anything to do with
it," sighed Aunt Hannah, admiringly. Billy laughed. "If we get stranded we might ask the Henshaw boys to help us out, Aunt
Hannah. They'd probably suggest guns and swords. That's the way they
fixed up _my_ room." Aunt Hannah raised shocked hands of protest. "As if we would! Mercy, what a time that was!" Billy laughed again. "I never shall forget, _never_, my first glimpse of that room when Mrs.
Hartwell switched on the lights. Oh, Aunt Hannah, I wish you could have
seen it before they took out those guns and spiders!" "As if I didn't see quite enough when I saw William's face that morning
he came for me!" retorted Aunt Hannah, spiritedly. "Dear Uncle William! What an old saint he has been all the way through,"
mused Billy aloud. "And Cyril--who would ever have believed that the
day would come when Cyril would say to me, as he did last night, that he
felt as if Marie had been gone a month. It's been just seven days, you
know." "I know. She comes to-morrow, doesn't she?" "Yes, and I'm glad. I shall tell Marie she needn't leave Cyril on _my_
hands again. Bertram says that at home Cyril hasn't played a dirge since
his engagement; but I notice that up here--where Marie might be, but
isn't--his tunes would never be mistaken for ragtime. By the way," she
added, as she rose from the table, "that's another surprise in store for
Hugh Calderwell. He always declared that Cyril wasn't a marrying man,
either, any more than Bertram. You know he said Bertram only cared for
girls to paint; but--" She stopped and looked inquiringly at Rosa, who
had appeared at that moment in the hall doorway. "It's the telephone, Miss Neilson. Mr. Bertram Henshaw wants you." A few minutes later Aunt Hannah heard Billy at the piano. For fifteen,
twenty, thirty minutes the brilliant scales and arpeggios rippled
through the rooms and up the stairs to Aunt Hannah, who knew, by the
very sound of them, that some unusual nervousness was being worked off
at the finger tips that played them. At the end of forty-five minutes
Aunt Hannah went down-stairs. "Billy, my dear, excuse me, but have you forgotten what time it is? Weren't you going out with Bertram?" Billy stopped playing at once, but she did not turn her head. Her
fingers busied themselves with some music on the piano. "We aren't going, Aunt Hannah," she said. "Bertram can't." "_Can't!_"

"Well, he didn't want to--so of course I said not to. He's been painting
this morning on a new portrait, and she said he might stay to luncheon
and keep right on for a while this afternoon, if he liked. And--he did
like, so he stayed." "Why, how--how--" Aunt Hannah stopped helplessly. "Oh, no, not at all," interposed Billy, lightly. "He told me all about
it the other night. It's going to be a very wonderful portrait; and,
of course, I wouldn't want to interfere with--his work!" And again a
brilliant scale rippled from Billy's fingers after a crashing chord in
the bass. Slowly Aunt Hannah turned and went up-stairs. Her eyes were troubled. Not since Billy's engagement had she heard Billy play like that. Bertram did not find a pensive Billy awaiting him that evening. He
found a bright-eyed, flushed-cheeked Billy, who let herself be
kissed--once--but who did not kiss back; a blithe, elusive Billy, who
played tripping little melodies, and sang jolly little songs, instead
of sitting before the fire and talking; a Billy who at last turned, and
asked tranquilly:

"Well, how did the picture go?" Bertram rose then, crossed the room, and took Billy very gently into his
arms. "Sweetheart, you were a dear this noon to let me off like that," he
began in a voice shaken with emotion. "You don't know, perhaps, exactly
what you did. You see, I was nearly wild between wanting to be with you,
and wanting to go on with my work. And I was just at that point
where one little word from you, one hint that you wanted me to come
anyway--and I should have come. But you didn't say it, nor hint it. Like
the brave little bit of inspiration that you are, you bade me stay and
go on with my work." The "inspiration's" head drooped a little lower, but this only brought
a wealth of soft bronze hair to just where Bertram could lay his cheek
against it--and Bertram promptly took advantage of his opportunity. "And
so I stayed, Billy, and I did good work; I know I did good work. Why,
Billy,"--Bertram stepped back now, and held Billy by the shoulders at
arms' length--"Billy, that's going to be the best work I've ever done. I
can see it coming even now, under my fingers." Billy lifted her head and looked into her lover's face. His eyes were
glowing. His cheeks were flushed. His whole countenance was aflame with
the soul of the artist who sees his vision taking shape before him. And
Billy, looking at him, felt suddenly--ashamed. "Oh, Bertram, I'm proud, proud, _proud_ of you!" she breathed. "Come,
let's go over to the fire-and talk!" CHAPTER V. MARIE SPEAKS HER MIND


Billy with John and Peggy met Marie Hawthorn at the station. "Peggy"
was short for "Pegasus," and was what Billy always called her luxurious,
seven-seated touring car. "I simply won't call it 'automobile,'" she had declared when she bought
it. "In the first place, it takes too long to say it, and in the second
place, I don't want to add one more to the nineteen different ways to
pronounce it that I hear all around me every day now. As for calling it
my 'car,' or my 'motor car'--I should expect to see a Pullman or one
of those huge black trucks before my door, if I ordered it by either of
those names. Neither will I insult the beautiful thing by calling it a
'machine.' Its name is Pegasus. I shall call it 'Peggy.'" And "Peggy" she called it. John sniffed his disdain, and Billy's friends
made no secret of their amused tolerance; but, in an astonishingly short
time, half the automobile owners of her acquaintance were calling their
own cars "Peggy"; and even the dignified John himself was heard to order
"some gasoline for Peggy," quite as a matter of course. When Marie Hawthorn stepped from the train at the North Station she
greeted Billy with affectionate warmth, though at once her blue eyes
swept the space beyond expectantly and eagerly. Billy's lips curved in a mischievous smile. "No, he didn't come," she said. "He didn't want to--a little bit." Marie grew actually pale. "Didn't _want_ to!" she stammered. Billy gave her a spasmodic hug. "Goosey! No, he didn't--a _little_ bit; but he did a great _big_ bit. As if you didn't know he was dying to come, Marie! But he simply
couldn't--something about his concert Monday night. He told me over the
telephone; but between his joy that you were coming, and his rage that
he couldn't see you the first minute you did come, I couldn't quite make
out what was the trouble. But he's coming to dinner to-night, so he'll
doubtless tell you all about it." Marie sighed her relief. "Oh, that's all right then. I was afraid he was sick--when I didn't see
him." Billy laughed softly. "No, he isn't sick, Marie; but you needn't go away again before the
wedding--not to leave him on my hands. I wouldn't have believed Cyril
Henshaw, confirmed old bachelor and avowed woman-hater, could have acted
the part of a love-sick boy as he has the last week or two." The rose-flush on Marie's cheek spread to the roots of her fine yellow
hair. "Billy, dear, he--he didn't!" "Marie, dear--he--he did!" Marie laughed. She did not say anything, but the rose-flush deepened
as she occupied herself very busily in getting her trunk-check from the
little hand bag she carried. Cyril was not mentioned again until the two girls, veils tied and coats
buttoned, were snugly ensconced in the tonneau, and Peggy's nose was
turned toward home. Then Billy asked:

"Have you settled on where you're going to live?" "Not quite. We're going to talk of that to-night; but we _do_ know that
we aren't going to live at the Strata." "Marie!" Marie stirred uneasily at the obvious disappointment and reproach in her
friend's voice. "But, dear, it wouldn't be wise, I'm sure," she argued hastily. "There
will be you and Bertram--"

"We sha'n't be there for a year, nearly," cut in Billy, with swift
promptness. "Besides, I think it would be lovely--all together." Marie smiled, but she shook her head. "Lovely--but not practical, dear." Billy laughed ruefully. "I know; you're worrying about those puddings of yours. You're afraid
somebody is going to interfere with your making quite so many as you
want to; and Cyril is worrying for fear there'll be somebody else in the
circle of his shaded lamp besides his little Marie with the light on her
hair, and the mending basket by her side." "Billy, what are you talking about?" Billy threw a roguish glance into her friend's amazed blue eyes. "Oh, just a little picture Cyril drew once for me of what home meant for
him: a room with a table and a shaded lamp, and a little woman beside it
with the light on her hair and a great basket of sewing by her side." Marie's eyes softened. "Did he say--that?" "Yes. Oh, he declared he shouldn't want her to sit under that lamp all
the time, of course; but he hoped she'd like that sort of thing." Marie threw a quick glance at the stolid back of John beyond the two
empty seats in front of them. Although she knew he could not hear her
words, instinctively she lowered her voice. "Did you know--then--about--me?" she asked, with heightened color. "No, only that there was a girl somewhere who, he hoped, would sit under
the lamp some day. And when I asked him if the girl did like that sort
of thing, he said yes, he thought so; for she had told him once that
the things she liked best of all to do were to mend stockings and make
puddings. Then I knew, of course, 'twas you, for I'd heard you say the
same thing. So I sent him right along out to you in the summer-house." The pink flush on Marie's face grew to a red one. Her blue eyes turned
again to John's broad back, then drifted to the long, imposing line of
windowed walls and doorways on the right. The automobile was passing
smoothly along Beacon Street now with the Public Garden just behind them
on the left. After a moment Marie turned to Billy again. "I'm so glad he wants--just puddings and stockings," she began a little
breathlessly. "You see, for so long I supposed he _wouldn't_ want
anything but a very brilliant, talented wife who could play and sing
beautifully; a wife he'd be proud of--like you." "Me? Nonsense!" laughed Billy. "Cyril never wanted me, and I never
wanted him--only once for a few minutes, so to speak, when I thought,
I did. In spite of our music, we aren't a mite congenial. I like people
around; he doesn't. I like to go to plays; he doesn't. He likes rainy
days, and I abhor them. Mercy! Life with me for him would be one long
jangling discord, my love, while with you it'll be one long sweet song!" Marie drew a deep breath. Her eyes were fixed on a point far ahead up
the curveless street. "I hope it will, indeed!" she breathed. Not until they were almost home did Billy say suddenly:

"Oh, did Cyril write you? A young relative of Aunt Hannah's is coming
to-morrow to stay a while at the house." "Er--yes, Cyril told me," admitted Marie. Billy smiled. "Didn't like it, I suppose; eh?" she queried shrewdly. "N-no, I'm afraid he didn't--very well. He said she'd be--one more to be
around." "There, what did I tell you?" dimpled Billy. "You can see what you're
coming to when you do get that shaded lamp and the mending basket!" A moment later, coming in sight of the house, Billy saw a tall,
smooth-shaven man standing on the porch. The man lifted his hat and
waved it gayly, baring a slightly bald head to the sun. "It's Uncle William--bless his heart!" cried Billy. "They're all coming
to dinner, then he and Aunt Hannah and Bertram and I are going down to
the Hollis Street Theatre and let you and Cyril have a taste of what
that shaded lamp is going to be. I hope you won't be lonesome," she
finished mischievously, as the car drew up before the door. CHAPTER VI. AT THE SIGN OF THE PINK


After a week of beautiful autumn weather, Thursday dawned raw and cold. By noon an east wind had made the temperature still more uncomfortable. At two o'clock Aunt Hannah tapped at Billy's chamber door. She showed a
troubled face to the girl who answered her knock. "Billy, _would_ you mind very much if I asked you to go alone to the
Carletons' and to meet Mary Jane?" she inquired anxiously. "Why, no--that is, of course I should _mind_, dear, because I always
like to have you go to places with me. But it isn't necessary. You
aren't sick; are you?" "N-no, not exactly; but I have been sneezing all the morning, and taking
camphor and sugar to break it up--if it is a cold. But it is so raw and
Novemberish out, that--"

"Why, of course you sha'n't go, you poor dear! Mercy! don't get one
of those dreadful colds on to you before the wedding! Have you felt
a draft? Where's another shawl?" Billy turned and cast searching eyes
about the room--Billy always kept shawls everywhere for Aunt Hannah's
shoulders and feet. Bertram had been known to say, indeed, that a room,
according to Aunt Hannah, was not fully furnished unless it contained
from one to four shawls, assorted as to size and warmth. Shawls,
certainly, did seem to be a necessity with Aunt Hannah, as she usually
wore from one to three at the same time--which again caused Bertram to
declare that he always counted Aunt Hannah's shawls when he wished to
know what the thermometer was. "No, I'm not cold, and I haven't felt a draft," said Aunt Hannah now. "I
put on my thickest gray shawl this morning with the little pink one for
down-stairs, and the blue one for breakfast; so you see I've been very
careful. But I _have_ sneezed six times, so I think 'twould be safer not
to go out in this east wind. You were going to stop for Mrs. Granger,
anyway, weren't you? So you'll have her with you for the tea." "Yes, dear, don't worry. I'll take your cards and explain to Mrs.
Carleton and her daughters." "And, of course, as far as Mary Jane is concerned, I don't know her any
more than you do; so I couldn't be any help there," sighed Aunt Hannah. "Not a bit," smiled Billy, cheerily. "Don't give it another thought, my
dear. I sha'n't have a bit of trouble. All I'll have to do is to look
for a girl alone with a pink. Of course I'll have mine on, too, and
she'll be watching for me. So just run along and take your nap, dear,
and be all rested and ready to welcome her when she comes," finished
Billy, stooping to give the soft, faintly pink cheek a warm kiss. "Well, thank you, my dear; perhaps I will," sighed Aunt Hannah, drawing
the gray shawl about her as she turned away contentedly. Mrs. Carleton's tea that afternoon was, for Billy, not an occasion of
unalloyed joy. It was the first time she had appeared at a gathering of
any size since the announcement of her engagement; and, as she dolefully
told Bertram afterwards, she had very much the feeling of the picture
hung on the wall. "And they _did_ put up their lorgnettes and say, 'Is _that_ the one?'" she declared; "and I know some of them finished with 'Did you ever?' too," she sighed. But Billy did not stay long in Mrs. Carleton's softly-lighted,
flower-perfumed rooms. At ten minutes past four she was saying good-by
to a group of friends who were vainly urging her to remain longer. "I can't--I really can't," she declared. "I'm due at the South Station
at half past four to meet a Miss Arkwright, a young cousin of Aunt
Hannah's, whom I've never seen before. We're to meet at the sign of
the pink," she explained smilingly, just touching the single flower she
wore. Her hostess gave a sudden laugh. "Let me see, my dear; if I remember rightly, you've had experience
before, meeting at this sign of the pink. At least, I have a very vivid
recollection of Mr. William Henshaw's going once to meet a _boy_ with
a pink, who turned out to be a girl. Now, to even things up, your girl
should turn out to be a boy!" Billy smiled and reddened. "Perhaps--but I don't think to-day will strike the balance," she
retorted, backing toward the door. "This young lady's name is 'Mary
Jane'; and I'll leave it to you to find anything very masculine in
that!" It was a short drive from Mrs. Carleton's Commonwealth Avenue home to
the South Station, and Peggy made as quick work of it as the narrow,
congested cross streets would allow. In ample time Billy found herself
in the great waiting-room, with John saying respectfully in her ear:

"The man says the train comes in on Track Fourteen, Miss, an' it's on
time." At twenty-nine minutes past four Billy left her seat and walked down the
train-shed platform to Track Number Fourteen. She had pinned the pink
now to the outside of her long coat, and it made an attractive dash
of white against the dark-blue velvet. Billy was looking particularly
lovely to-day. Framing her face was the big dark-blue velvet picture hat
with its becoming white plumes. During the brief minutes' wait before the clanging locomotive puffed
into view far down the long track, Billy's thoughts involuntarily went
back to that other watcher beside a train gate not quite five years
before. "Dear Uncle William!" she murmured tenderly. Then suddenly she
laughed--so nearly aloud that a man behind her gave her a covert glance
from curious eyes. "My! but what a jolt I must have been to Uncle
William!" Billy was thinking. The next minute she drew nearer the gate and regarded with absorbed
attention the long line of passengers already sweeping up the narrow
aisle between the cars. Hurrying men came first, with long strides, and eyes that looked
straight ahead. These Billy let pass with a mere glance. The next group
showed a sprinkling of women--women whose trig hats and linen collars
spelled promptness as well as certainty of aim and accomplishment. To
these, also, Billy paid scant attention. Couples came next--the men
anxious-eyed, and usually walking two steps ahead of their companions;
the women plainly flustered and hurried, and invariably buttoning gloves
or gathering up trailing ends of scarfs or boas. The crowd was thickening fast, now, and Billy's eyes were alert. Children were appearing, and young women walking alone. One of these
wore a bunch of violets. Billy gave her a second glance. Then she saw a
pink--but it was on the coat lapel of a tall young fellow with a brown
beard; so with a slight frown she looked beyond down the line. Old men came now, and old women; fleshy women, and women with small
children and babies. Couples came, too--dawdling couples, plainly newly
married: the men were not two steps ahead, and the women's gloves were
buttoned and their furs in place. Gradually the line thinned, and soon there were left only an old man
with a cane, and a young woman with three children. Yet nowhere had
Billy seen a girl wearing a white carnation, and walking alone. With a deeper frown on her face Billy turned and looked about her. She
thought that somewhere in the crowd she had missed Mary Jane, and that
she would find her now, standing near. But there was no one standing
near except the good-looking young fellow with the little pointed
brown beard, who, as Billy noticed a second time, was wearing a white
carnation. 