












JUST DAVID

BY

ELEANOR H. (HODGMAN) PORTER


AUTHOR  POLLYANNA, MISS BILLY MARRIED, ETC. TO
  MY FRIEND
  Mrs. James Harness




CONTENTS

     I. THE MOUNTAIN HOME
    II. THE TRAIL
   III. THE VALLEY
    IV. TWO LETTERS
     V.  DISCORDS
    VI. NUISANCES, NECESSARY AND OTHERWISE
   VII. "YOU'RE WANTED--YOU'RE WANTED!" VIII. THE PUZZLING "DOS" AND "DON'TS"
    IX. JOE
     X. THE LADY OF THE ROSES
    XI. JACK AND JILL
   XII. ANSWERS THAT DID NOT ANSWER
  XIII. A SURPRISE FOR MR. JACK
   XIV. THE TOWER WINDOW
    XV. SECRETS
   XVI. DAVID'S CASTLE IN SPAIN
  XVII. "THE PRINCESS AND THE PAUPER"
 XVIII. DAVID TO THE RESCUE
   XIX. THE UNBEAUTIFUL WORLD
    XX. THE UNFAMILIAR WAY
   XXI. HEAVY HEARTS
  XXII. AS PERRY SAW IT
 XXIII. PUZZLES
  XXIV. A STORY REMODELED
   XXV. THE BEAUTIFUL WORLD




CHAPTER I

THE MOUNTAIN HOME

Far up on the mountain-side stood alone in the clearing. It was roughly
yet warmly built. Behind it jagged cliffs broke the north wind, and
towered gray-white in the sunshine. Before it a tiny expanse of green
sloped gently away to a point where the mountain dropped in another
sharp descent, wooded with scrubby firs and pines. At the left a
footpath led into the cool depths of the forest. But at the right the
mountain fell away again and disclosed to view the picture David loved
the best of all: the far-reaching valley; the silver pool of the lake
with its ribbon of a river flung far out; and above it the grays and
greens and purples of the mountains that climbed one upon another's
shoulders until the topmost thrust their heads into the wide dome of
the sky itself. There was no road, apparently, leading away from the cabin. There was
only the footpath that disappeared into the forest. Neither, anywhere,
was there a house in sight nearer than the white specks far down in the
valley by the river. Within the shack a wide fireplace dominated one side of the main room. It was June now, and the ashes lay cold on the hearth; but from the
tiny lean-to in the rear came the smell and the sputter of bacon
sizzling over a blaze. The furnishings of the room were simple, yet, in
a way, out of the common. There were two bunks, a few rude but
comfortable chairs, a table, two music-racks, two violins with their
cases, and everywhere books, and scattered sheets of music. Nowhere was
there cushion, curtain, or knickknack that told of a woman's taste or
touch. On the other hand, neither was there anywhere gun, pelt, or
antlered head that spoke of a man's strength and skill. For decoration
there were a beautiful copy of the Sistine Madonna, several photographs
signed with names well known out in the great world beyond the
mountains, and a festoon of pine cones such as a child might gather and
hang. From the little lean-to kitchen the sound of the sputtering suddenly
ceased, and at the door appeared a pair of dark, wistful eyes. "Daddy!" called the owner of the eyes. There was no answer. "Father, are you there?" called the voice, more insistently. From one of the bunks came a slight stir and a murmured word. At the
sound the boy at the door leaped softly into the room and hurried to
the bunk in the corner. He was a slender lad with short, crisp curls at
his ears, and the red of perfect health in his cheeks. His hands, slim,
long, and with tapering fingers like a girl's, reached forward eagerly. "Daddy, come! I've done the bacon all myself, and the potatoes and the
coffee, too. Quick, it's all getting cold!" Slowly, with the aid of the boy's firm hands, the man pulled himself
half to a sitting posture. His cheeks, like the boy's, were red--but
not with health. His eyes were a little wild, but his voice was low and
very tender, like a caress. "David--it's my little son David!" "Of course it's David! Who else should it be?" laughed the boy. "Come!" And he tugged at the man's hands. The man rose then, unsteadily, and by sheer will forced himself to
stand upright. The wild look left his eyes, and the flush his cheeks. His face looked suddenly old and haggard. Yet with fairly sure steps he
crossed the room and entered the little kitchen. Half of the bacon was black; the other half was transparent and like
tough jelly. The potatoes were soggy, and had the unmistakable taste
that comes from a dish that has boiled dry. The coffee was lukewarm and
muddy. Even the milk was sour. David laughed a little ruefully. "Things aren't so nice as yours, father," he apologized. "I'm afraid
I'm nothing but a discord in that orchestra to-day! Somehow, some of
the stove was hotter than the rest, and burnt up the bacon in spots;
and all the water got out of the potatoes, too,--though THAT didn't
matter, for I just put more cold in. I forgot and left the milk in the
sun, and it tastes bad now; but I'm sure next time it'll be better--all
of it." The man smiled, but he shook his head sadly. "But there ought not to be any 'next time,' David." "Why not? What do you mean? Aren't you ever going to let me try again,
father?" There was real distress in the boy's voice. The man hesitated. His lips parted with an indrawn breath, as if behind
them lay a rush of words. But they closed abruptly, the words still
unsaid. Then, very lightly, came these others:--

"Well, son, this isn't a very nice way to treat your supper, is it? Now, if you please, I'll take some of that bacon. I think I feel my
appetite coming back." If the truant appetite "came back," however, it could not have stayed;
for the man ate but little. He frowned, too, as he saw how little the
boy ate. He sat silent while his son cleared the food and dishes away,
and he was still silent when, with the boy, he passed out of the house
and walked to the little bench facing the west. Unless it stormed very hard, David never went to bed without this last
look at his "Silver Lake," as he called the little sheet of water far
down in the valley. "Daddy, it's gold to-night--all gold with the sun!" he cried
rapturously, as his eyes fell upon his treasure. "Oh, daddy!" It was a long-drawn cry of ecstasy, and hearing it, the man winced, as
with sudden pain. "Daddy, I'm going to play it--I've got to play it!" cried the boy,
bounding toward the cabin. In a moment he had returned, violin at his
chin. The man watched and listened; and as he watched and listened, his face
became a battle-ground whereon pride and fear, hope and despair, joy
and sorrow, fought for the mastery. It was no new thing for David to "play" the sunset. Always, when he was
moved, David turned to his violin. Always in its quivering strings he
found the means to say that which his tongue could not express. Across the valley the grays and blues of the mountains had become all
purples now. Above, the sky in one vast flame of crimson and gold, was
a molten sea on which floated rose-pink cloud-boats. Below, the valley
with its lake and river picked out in rose and gold against the shadowy
greens of field and forest, seemed like some enchanted fairyland of
loveliness. And all this was in David's violin, and all this, too, was on David's
uplifted, rapturous face. As the last rose-glow turned to gray and the last strain quivered into
silence, the man spoke. His voice was almost harsh with self-control. "David, the time has come. We'll have to give it up--you and I." The boy turned wonderingly, his face still softly luminous. "Give what up?" "This--all this." "This! Why, father, what do you mean? This is home!" The man nodded wearily. "I know. It has been home; but, David, you didn't think we could always
live here, like this, did you?" David laughed softly, and turned his eyes once more to the distant
sky-line. "Why not?" he asked dreamily. "What better place could there be? I like
it, daddy." The man drew a troubled breath, and stirred restlessly. The teasing
pain in his side was very bad to-night, and no change of position eased
it. He was ill, very ill; and he knew it. Yet he also knew that, to
David, sickness, pain, and death meant nothing--or, at most, words that
had always been lightly, almost unconsciously passed over. For the
first time he wondered if, after all, his training--some of it--had
been wise. For six years he had had the boy under his exclusive care and guidance. For six years the boy had eaten the food, worn the clothing, and
studied the books of his father's choosing. For six years that father
had thought, planned, breathed, moved, lived for his son. There had
been no others in the little cabin. There had been only the occasional
trips through the woods to the little town on the mountain-side for
food and clothing, to break the days of close companionship. All this the man had planned carefully. He had meant that only the good
and beautiful should have place in David's youth. It was not that he
intended that evil, unhappiness, and death should lack definition, only
definiteness, in the boy's mind. It should be a case where the good and
the beautiful should so fill the thoughts that there would be no room
for anything else. This had been his plan. And thus far he had
succeeded--succeeded so wonderfully that he began now, in the face of
his own illness, and of what he feared would come of it, to doubt the
wisdom of that planning. As he looked at the boy's rapt face, he remembered David's surprised
questioning at the first dead squirrel he had found in the woods. David
was six then. "Why, daddy, he's asleep, and he won't wake up!" he had cried. Then,
after a gentle touch: "And he's cold--oh, so cold!" The father had hurried his son away at the time, and had evaded his
questions; and David had seemed content. But the next day the boy had
gone back to the subject. His eyes were wide then, and a little
frightened. "Father, what is it to be--dead?" "What do you mean, David?" "The boy who brings the milk--he had the squirrel this morning. He said
it was not asleep. It was--dead." "It means that the squirrel, the real squirrel under the fur, has gone
away, David." "Where?" "To a far country, perhaps." "Will he come back?" "No." "Did he want to go?" "We'll hope so." "But he left his--his fur coat behind him. Didn't he need--that?" "No, or he'd have taken it with him." David had fallen silent at this. He had remained strangely silent
indeed for some days; then, out in the woods with his father one
morning, he gave a joyous shout. He was standing by the ice-covered
brook, and looking at a little black hole through which the hurrying
water could be plainly seen. "Daddy, oh, daddy, I know now how it is, about being--dead." "Why--David!" "It's like the water in the brook, you know; THAT'S going to a far
country, and it isn't coming back. And it leaves its little cold
ice-coat behind it just as the squirrel did, too. It does n't need it. It can go without it. Don't you see? And it's singing--listen!--it's
singing as it goes. It WANTS to go!" "Yes, David." And David's father had sighed with relief that his son
had found his own explanation of the mystery, and one that satisfied. Later, in his books, David found death again. It was a man, this time. The boy had looked up with startled eyes. "Do people, real people, like you and me, be dead, father? Do they go
to a far country? "Yes, son in time--to a far country ruled over by a great and good King
they tell us." David's father had trembled as he said it, and had waited fearfully for
the result. But David had only smiled happily as he answered:

"But they go singing, father, like the little brook. You know I heard
it!" And there the matter had ended. David was ten now, and not yet for him
did death spell terror. Because of this David's father was relieved;
and yet--still because of this--he was afraid. "David," he said gently. "Listen to me." The boy turned with a long sigh. "Yes, father." "We must go away. Out in the great world there are men and women and
children waiting for you. You've a beautiful work to do; and one can't
do one's work on a mountain-top." "Why not? I like it here, and I've always been here." "Not always, David; six years. You were four when I brought you here. You don't remember, perhaps." David shook his head. His eyes were again dreamily fixed on the sky. "I think I'd like it--to go--if I could sail away on that little
cloud-boat up there," he murmured. The man sighed and shook his head. "We can't go on cloud-boats. We must walk, David, for a way--and we
must go soon--soon," he added feverishly. "I must get you back--back
among friends, before--"

He rose unsteadily, and tried to walk erect. His limbs shook, and the
blood throbbed at his temples. He was appalled at his weakness. With a
fierceness born of his terror he turned sharply to the boy at his side. "David, we've got to go! We've got to go--TO-MORROW!" "Father!" "Yes, yes, come!" He stumbled blindly, yet in some way he reached the
cabin door. Behind him David still sat, inert, staring. The next minute the boy had
sprung to his feet and was hurrying after his father. CHAPTER II

THE TRAIL

A curious strength seemed to have come to the man. With almost steady
hands he took down the photographs and the Sistine Madonna, packing
them neatly away in a box to be left. From beneath his bunk he dragged
a large, dusty traveling-bag, and in this he stowed a little food, a
few garments, and a great deal of the music scattered about the room. David, in the doorway, stared in dazed wonder. Gradually into his eyes
crept a look never seen there before. "Father, where are we going?" he asked at last in a shaking voice, as
he came slowly into the room. "Back, son; we're going back." "To the village, where we get our eggs and bacon?" "No, no, lad, not there. The other way. We go down into the valley this
time." "The valley--MY valley, with the Silver Lake?" "Yes, my son; and beyond--far beyond." The man spoke dreamily. He was
looking at a photograph in his hand. It had slipped in among the loose
sheets of music, and had not been put away with the others. It was the
likeness of a beautiful woman. For a moment David eyed him uncertainly; then he spoke. "Daddy, who is that? Who are all these people in the pictures? You've
never told me about any of them except the little round one that you
wear in your pocket. Who are they?" Instead of answering, the man turned faraway eyes on the boy and smiled
wistfully. "Ah, David, lad, how they'll love you! How they will love you! But you
mustn't let them spoil you, son. You must remember--remember all I've
told you." Once again David asked his question, but this time the man only turned
back to the photograph, muttering something the boy could not
understand. After that David did not question any more. He was too amazed, too
distressed. He had never before seen his father like this. With nervous
haste the man was setting the little room to rights, crowding things
into the bag, and packing other things away in an old trunk. His cheeks
were very red, and his eyes very bright. He talked, too, almost
constantly, though David could understand scarcely a word of what was
said. Later, the man caught up his violin and played; and never before
had David heard his father play like that. The boy's eyes filled, and
his heart ached with a pain that choked and numbed--though why, David
could not have told. Still later, the man dropped his violin and sank
exhausted into a chair; and then David, worn and frightened with it
all, crept to his bunk and fell asleep. In the gray dawn of the morning David awoke to a different world. His
father, white-faced and gentle, was calling him to get ready for
breakfast. The little room, dismantled of its decorations, was bare and
cold. The bag, closed and strapped, rested on the floor by the door,
together with the two violins in their cases, ready to carry. "We must hurry, son. It's a long tramp before we take the cars." "The cars--the real cars? Do we go in those?" David was fully awake now. "Yes." "And is that all we're to carry?" "Yes. Hurry, son." "But we come back--sometime?" There was no answer. "Father, we're coming back--sometime?" David's voice was insistent now. The man stooped and tightened a strap that was already quite tight
enough. Then he laughed lightly. "Why, of course you're coming back sometime, David. Only think of all
these things we're leaving!" When the last dish was put away, the last garment adjusted, and the
last look given to the little room, the travelers picked up the bag and
the violins, and went out into the sweet freshness of the morning. As
he fastened the door the man sighed profoundly; but David did not
notice this. His face was turned toward the east--always David looked
toward the sun. "Daddy, let's not go, after all! Let's stay here," he cried ardently,
drinking in the beauty of the morning. "We must go, David. Come, son." And the man led the way across the
green slope to the west. It was a scarcely perceptible trail, but the man found it, and followed
it with evident confidence. There was only the pause now and then to
steady his none-too-sure step, or to ease the burden of the bag. Very
soon the forest lay all about them, with the birds singing over their
heads, and with numberless tiny feet scurrying through the underbrush
on all sides. Just out of sight a brook babbled noisily of its delight
in being alive; and away up in the treetops the morning sun played
hide-and-seek among the dancing leaves. And David leaped, and laughed, and loved it all, nor was any of it
strange to him. The birds, the trees, the sun, the brook, the scurrying
little creatures of the forest, all were friends of his. But the
man--the man did not leap or laugh, though he, too, loved it all. The
man was afraid. He knew now that he had undertaken more than he could carry out. Step
by step the bag had grown heavier, and hour by hour the insistent,
teasing pain in his side had increased until now it was a torture. He
had forgotten that the way to the valley was so long; he had not
realized how nearly spent was his strength before he even started down
the trail. Throbbing through his brain was the question, what if, after
all, he could not--but even to himself he would not say the words. At noon they paused for luncheon, and at night they camped where the
chattering brook had stopped to rest in a still, black pool. The next
morning the man and the boy picked up the trail again, but without the
bag. Under some leaves in a little hollow, the man had hidden the bag,
and had then said, as if casually:--

"I believe, after all, I won't carry this along. There's nothing in it
that we really need, you know, now that I've taken out the luncheon
box, and by night we'll be down in the valley." "Of course!" laughed David. "We don't need that." And he laughed again,
for pure joy. Little use had David for bags or baggage! They were more than halfway down the mountain now, and soon they
reached a grass-grown road, little traveled, but yet a road. Still
later they came to where four ways crossed, and two of them bore the
marks of many wheels. By sundown the little brook at their side
murmured softly of quiet fields and meadows, and David knew that the
valley was reached. David was not laughing now. He was watching his father with startled
eyes. David had not known what anxiety was. He was finding out
now--though he but vaguely realized that something was not right. For
some time his father had said but little, and that little had been in a
voice that was thick and unnatural-sounding. He was walking fast, yet
David noticed that every step seemed an effort, and that every breath
came in short gasps. His eyes were very bright, and were fixedly bent
on the road ahead, as if even the haste he was making was not haste
enough. Twice David spoke to him, but he did not answer; and the boy
could only trudge along on his weary little feet and sigh for the dear
home on the mountain-top which they had left behind them the morning
before. They met few fellow travelers, and those they did meet paid scant
attention to the man and the boy carrying the violins. As it chanced,
there was no one in sight when the man, walking in the grass at the
side of the road, stumbled and fell heavily to the ground. David sprang quickly forward. "Father, what is it? WHAT IS IT?" There was no answer. "Daddy, why don't you speak to me? See, it's David!" With a painful effort the man roused himself and sat up. For a moment
he gazed dully into the boy's face; then a half-forgotten something
seemed to stir him into feverish action. With shaking fingers he handed
David his watch and a small ivory miniature. Then he searched his
pockets until on the ground before him lay a shining pile of
gold-pieces--to David there seemed to be a hundred of them. "Take them--hide them--keep them. David, until you--need them," panted
the man. "Then go--go on. I can't." "Alone? Without you?" demurred the boy, aghast. "Why, father, I
couldn't! I don't know the way. Besides, I'd rather stay with you," he
added soothingly, as he slipped the watch and the miniature into his
pocket; "then we can both go." And he dropped himself down at his
father's side. The man shook his head feebly, and pointed again to the gold-pieces. "Take them, David,--hide them," he chattered with pale lips. Almost impatiently the boy began picking up the money and tucking it
into his pockets. "But, father, I'm not going without you," he declared stoutly, as the
last bit of gold slipped out of sight, and a horse and wagon rattled
around the turn of the road above. The driver of the horse glanced disapprovingly at the man and the boy
by the roadside; but he did not stop. After he had passed, the boy
turned again to his father. The man was fumbling once more in his
pockets. This time from his coat he produced a pencil and a small
notebook from which he tore a page, and began to write, laboriously,
painfully. David sighed and looked about him. He was tired and hungry, and he did
not understand things at all. Something very wrong, very terrible, must
be the matter with his father. Here it was almost dark, yet they had no
place to go, no supper to eat, while far, far up on the mountain-side
was their own dear home sad and lonely without them. Up there, too, the
sun still shone, doubtless,--at least there were the rose-glow and the
Silver Lake to look at, while down here there was nothing, nothing but
gray shadows, a long dreary road, and a straggling house or two in
sight. From above, the valley might look to be a fairyland of
loveliness, but in reality it was nothing but a dismal waste of gloom,
decided David. David's father had torn a second page from his book and was beginning
another note, when the boy suddenly jumped to his feet. One of the
straggling houses was near the road where they sat, and its presence
had given David an idea. With swift steps he hurried to the front door
and knocked upon it. In answer a tall, unsmiling woman appeared, and
said, "Well?" David removed his cap as his father had taught him to do when one of
the mountain women spoke to him. "Good evening, lady; I'm David," he began frankly. "My father is so
tired he fell down back there, and we should like very much to stay
with you all night, if you don't mind." The woman in the doorway stared. For a moment she was dumb with
amazement. Her eyes swept the plain, rather rough garments of the boy,
then sought the half-recumbent figure of the man by the roadside. Her
chin came up angrily. "Oh, would you, indeed! Well, upon my word!" she scouted. "Humph! We
don't accommodate tramps, little boy." And she shut the door hard. It was David's turn to stare. Just what a tramp might be, he did not
know; but never before had a request of his been so angrily refused. He
knew that. A fierce something rose within him--a fierce new something
that sent the swift red to his neck and brow. He raised a determined
hand to the doorknob--he had something to say to that woman!--when the
door suddenly opened again from the inside. "See here, boy," began the woman, looking out at him a little less
unkindly, "if you're hungry I'll give you some milk and bread. Go
around to the back porch and I'll get it for you." And she shut the
door again. David's hand dropped to his side. The red still stayed on his face and
neck, however, and that fierce new something within him bade him refuse
to take food from this woman.... But there was his father--his poor
father, who was so tired; and there was his own stomach clamoring to be
fed. No, he could not refuse. And with slow steps and hanging head
David went around the corner of the house to the rear. As the half-loaf of bread and the pail of milk were placed in his
hands, David remembered suddenly that in the village store on the
mountain, his father paid money for his food. David was glad, now, that
he had those gold-pieces in his pocket, for he could pay money. Instantly his head came up. Once more erect with self-respect, he
shifted his burdens to one hand and thrust the other into his pocket. A
moment later he presented on his outstretched palm a shining disk of
gold. "Will you take this, to pay, please, for the bread and milk?" he asked
proudly. The woman began to shake her head; but, as her eyes fell on the money,
she started, and bent closer to examine it. The next instant she jerked
herself upright with an angry exclamation. "It's gold! A ten-dollar gold-piece! So you're a thief, too, are you,
as well as a tramp? Humph! Well, I guess you don't need this then," she
finished sharply, snatching the bread and the pail of milk from the
boy's hand. The next moment David stood alone on the doorstep, with the sound of a
quickly thrown bolt in his ears. A thief! David knew little of thieves, but he knew what they were. Only
a month before a man had tried to steal the violins from the cabin; and
he was a thief, the milk-boy said. David flushed now again, angrily, as
he faced the closed door. But he did not tarry. He turned and ran to
his father. "Father, come away, quick! You must come away," he choked. So urgent was the boy's voice that almost unconsciously the sick man
got to his feet. With shaking hands he thrust the notes he had been
writing into his pocket. The little book, from which he had torn the
leaves for this purpose, had already dropped unheeded into the grass at
his feet. "Yes, son, yes, we'll go," muttered the man. "I feel better now. I
can--walk." And he did walk, though very slowly, ten, a dozen, twenty steps. From
behind came the sound of wheels that stopped close beside them. "Hullo, there! Going to the village?" called a voice. "Yes, sir." David's answer was unhesitating. Where "the village" was,
he did not know; he knew only that it must be somewhere away from the
woman who had called him a thief. And that was all he cared to know. "I'm going 'most there myself. Want a lift?" asked the man, still
kindly. "Yes, sir. Thank you!" cried the boy joyfully. And together they aided
his father to climb into the roomy wagon-body. There were few words said. The man at the reins drove rapidly, and paid
little attention to anything but his horses. The sick man dozed and
rested. The boy sat, wistful-eyed and silent, watching the trees and
houses flit by. The sun had long ago set, but it was not dark, for the
moon was round and bright, and the sky was cloudless. Where the road
forked sharply the man drew his horses to a stop. "Well, I'm sorry, but I guess I'll have to drop you here, friends. I
turn off to the right; but 't ain't more 'n a quarter of a mile for
you, now" he finished cheerily, pointing with his whip to a cluster of
twinkling lights. "Thank you, sir, thank you," breathed David gratefully, steadying his
father's steps. "You've helped us lots. Thank you!" In David's heart was a wild desire to lay at his good man's feet all of
his shining gold-pieces as payment for this timely aid. But caution
held him back: it seemed that only in stores did money pay; outside it
branded one as a thief! Alone with his father, David faced once more his problem. Where should
they go for the night? Plainly his father could not walk far. He had
begun to talk again, too,--low, half-finished sentences that David
could not understand, and that vaguely troubled him. There was a house
near by, and several others down the road toward the village; but David
had had all the experience he wanted that night with strange houses,
and strange women. There was a barn, a big one, which was nearest of
all; and it was toward this barn that David finally turned his father's
steps. "We'll go there, daddy, if we can get in," he proposed softly. "And
we'll stay all night and rest." CHAPTER III

THE VALLEY

The long twilight of the June day had changed into a night that was
scarcely darker, so bright was the moonlight. Seen from the house, the
barn and the low buildings beyond loomed shadowy and unreal, yet very
beautiful. On the side porch of the house sat Simeon Holly and his
wife, content to rest mind and body only because a full day's work lay
well done behind them. It was just as Simeon rose to his feet to go indoors that a long note
from a violin reached their ears. "Simeon!" cried the woman. "What was that?" The man did not answer. His eyes were fixed on the barn. "Simeon, it's a fiddle!" exclaimed Mrs. Holly, as a second tone
quivered on the air "And it's in our barn!" Simeon's jaw set. With a stern ejaculation he crossed the porch and
entered the kitchen. In another minute he had returned, a lighted lantern in his hand. "Simeon, d--don't go," begged the woman, tremulously. "You--you don't
know what's there." "Fiddles are not played without hands, Ellen," retorted the man
severely. "Would you have me go to bed and leave a half-drunken,
ungodly minstrel fellow in possession of our barn? To-night, on my way
home, I passed a pretty pair of them lying by the roadside--a man and a
boy with two violins. They're the culprits, likely,--though how they
got this far, I don't see. Do you think I want to leave my barn to
tramps like them?" "N--no, I suppose not," faltered the woman, as she rose tremblingly to
her feet, and followed her husband's shadow across the yard. Once inside the barn Simeon Holly and his wife paused involuntarily. The music was all about them now, filling the air with runs and trills
and rollicking bits of melody. Giving an angry exclamation, the man
turned then to the narrow stairway and climbed to the hayloft above. At
his heels came his wife, and so her eyes, almost as soon as his fell
upon the man lying back on the hay with the moonlight full upon his
face. Instantly the music dropped to a whisper, and a low voice came
out of the gloom beyond the square of moonlight which came from the
window in the roof. "If you'll please be as still as you can, sir. You see he's asleep and
he's so tired," said the voice. For a moment the man and the woman on the stairway paused in amazement,
then the man lifted his lantern and strode toward the voice. "Who are you? What are you doing here?" he demanded sharply. A boy's face, round, tanned, and just now a bit anxious, flashed out of
the dark. "Oh, please, sir, if you would speak lower," pleaded the boy. "He's so
tired! I'm David, sir, and that's father. We came in here to rest and
sleep." Simeon Holly's unrelenting gaze left the boy's face and swept that of
the man lying back on the hay. The next instant he lowered the lantern
and leaned nearer, putting forth a cautious hand. At once he
straightened himself, muttering a brusque word under his breath. Then
he turned with the angry question:--

"Boy, what do you mean by playing a jig on your fiddle at such a time
as this?" "Why, father asked me to play" returned the boy cheerily. "He said he
could walk through green forests then, with the ripple of brooks in his
ears, and that the birds and the squirrels--"

"See here, boy, who are you?" cut in Simeon Holly sternly. "Where did
you come from?" "From home, sir." "Where is that?" "Why, home, sir, where I live. In the mountains, 'way up, up, up--oh,
so far up! And there's such a big, big sky, so much nicer than down
here." The boy's voice quivered, and almost broke, and his eyes
constantly sought the white face on the hay. It was then that Simeon Holly awoke to the sudden realization that it
was time for action. He turned to his wife. "Take the boy to the house," he directed incisively. "We'll have to
keep him to-night, I suppose. I'll go for Higgins. Of course the whole
thing will have to be put in his hands at once. You can't do anything
here," he added, as he caught her questioning glance. "Leave everything
just as it is. The man is dead." "Dead?" It was a sharp cry from the boy, yet there was more of wonder
than of terror in it. "Do you mean that he has gone--like the water in
the brook--to the far country?" he faltered. Simeon Holly stared. Then he said more distinctly:--

"Your father is dead, boy." "And he won't come back any more?" David's voice broke now. There was no answer. Mrs. Holly caught her breath convulsively and
looked away. Even Simeon Holly refused to meet the boy's pleading eyes. With a quick cry David sprang to his father's side. "But he's here--right here," he challenged shrilly. "Daddy, daddy,
speak to me! It's David!" Reaching out his hand, he gently touched his
father's face. He drew back then, at once, his eyes distended with
terror. "He isn't! He is--gone," he chattered frenziedly. "This isn't
the father-part that KNOWS. It's the other--that they leave. He's left
it behind him--like the squirrel, and the water in the brook." Suddenly the boy's face changed. It grew rapt and luminous as he leaped
to his feet, crying joyously: "But he asked me to play, so he went
singing--singing just as he said that they did. And I made him walk
through green forests with the ripple of the brooks in his ears! Listen--like this!" And once more the boy raised the violin to his
chin, and once more the music trilled and rippled about the shocked,
amazed ears of Simeon Holly and his wife. For a time neither the man nor the woman could speak. There was nothing
in their humdrum, habit-smoothed tilling of the soil and washing of
pots and pans to prepare them for a scene like this--a moonlit barn, a
strange dead man, and that dead man's son babbling of brooks and
squirrels, and playing jigs on a fiddle for a dirge. At last, however,
Simeon found his voice. "Boy, boy, stop that!" he thundered. "Are you mad--clean mad? Go into
the house, I say!" And the boy, dazed but obedient, put up his violin,
and followed the woman, who, with tear-blinded eyes, was leading the
way down the stairs. Mrs. Holly was frightened, but she was also strangely moved. From the
long ago the sound of another violin had come to her--a violin, too,
played by a boy's hands. But of this, all this, Mrs. Holly did not like
to think. In the kitchen now she turned and faced her young guest. "Are you hungry, little boy?" David hesitated; he had not forgotten the woman, the milk, and the
gold-piece. "Are you hungry--dear?" stammered Mrs. Holly again; and this time
David's clamorous stomach forced a "yes" from his unwilling lips; which
sent Mrs. Holly at once into the pantry for bread and milk and a
heaped-up plate of doughnuts such as David had never seen before. Like any hungry boy David ate his supper; and Mrs. Holly, in the face
of this very ordinary sight of hunger being appeased at her table,
breathed more freely, and ventured to think that perhaps this strange
little boy was not so very strange, after all. "What is your name?" she found courage to ask then. "David." "David what?" "Just David." "But your father's name?" Mrs. Holly had almost asked, but stopped in
time. She did not want to speak of him. "Where do you live?" she asked
instead. "On the mountain, 'way up, up on the mountain where I can see my Silver
Lake every day, you know." "But you didn't live there alone?" "Oh, no; with father--before he--went away" faltered the boy. The woman flushed red and bit her lip. "No, no, I mean--were there no other houses but yours?" she stammered. "No, ma'am." "But, wasn't your mother--anywhere?" "Oh, yes, in father's pocket." "Your MOTHER--in your father's POCKET!" So plainly aghast was the questioner that David looked not a little
surprised as he explained. "You don't understand. She is an angel-mother, and angel-mothers don't
have anything only their pictures down here with us. And that's what we
have, and father always carried it in his pocket." "Oh----h," murmured Mrs. Holly, a quick mist in her eyes. Then, gently:
"And did you always live there--on the mountain?" "Six years, father said." "But what did you do all day? Weren't you ever--lonesome?" "Lonesome?" The boy's eyes were puzzled. "Yes. Didn't you miss things--people, other houses, boys of your own
age, and--and such things?" David's eyes widened. "Why, how could I?" he cried. "When I had daddy, and my violin, and my
Silver Lake, and the whole of the great big woods with everything in
them to talk to, and to talk to me?" "Woods, and things in them to--to TALK to you!" "Why, yes. It was the little brook, you know, after the squirrel, that
told me about being dead, and--"

"Yes, yes; but never mind, dear, now," stammered the woman, rising
hurriedly to her feet--the boy was a little wild, after all, she
thought. "You--you should go to bed. Haven't you a--a bag, or--or
anything?" "No, ma'am; we left it," smiled David apologetically. "You see, we had
so much in it that it got too heavy to carry. So we did n't bring it." "So much in it you didn't bring it, indeed!" repeated Mrs. Holly, under
her breath, throwing up her hands with a gesture of despair. "Boy, what
are you, anyway?" It was not meant for a question, but, to the woman's surprise, the boy
answered, frankly, simply:--

"Father says that I'm one little instrument in the great Orchestra of
Life, and that I must see to it that I'm always in tune, and don't drag
or hit false notes." "My land!" breathed the woman, dropping back in her chair, her eyes
fixed on the boy. Then, with an effort, she got to her feet. "Come, you must go to bed," she stammered. "I'm sure bed is--is the
best place you. I think I can find what--what you need," she finished
feebly. In a snug little room over the kitchen some minutes later, David found
himself at last alone. The room, though it had once belonged to a boy
of his own age, looked very strange to David. On the floor was a
rag-carpet rug, the first he had ever seen. On the walls were a
fishing-rod, a toy shotgun, and a case full of bugs and moths, each
little body impaled on a pin, to David's shuddering horror. The bed had
four tall posts at the corners, and a very puffy top that filled David
with wonder as to how he was to reach it, or stay there if he did gain
it. Across a chair lay a boy's long yellow-white nightshirt that the
kind lady had left, after hurriedly wiping her eyes with the edge of
its hem. In all the circle of the candlelight there was just one
familiar object to David's homesick eyes--the long black violin case
which he had brought in himself, and which held his beloved violin. With his back carefully turned toward the impaled bugs and moths on the
wall, David undressed himself and slipped into the yellow-white
nightshirt, which he sniffed at gratefully, so like pine woods was the
perfume that hung about its folds. Then he blew out the candle and
groped his way to the one window the little room contained. The moon still shone, but little could be seen through the thick green
branches of the tree outside. From the yard below came the sound of
wheels, and of men's excited voices. There came also the twinkle of
lanterns borne by hurrying hands, and the tramp of shuffling feet. In
the window David shivered. There were no wide sweep of mountain, hill,
and valley, no Silver Lake, no restful hush, no daddy,--no beautiful
Things that Were. There was only the dreary, hollow mockery of the
Things they had Become. Long minutes later, David, with the violin in his arms, lay down upon
the rug, and, for the first time since babyhood, sobbed himself to
sleep--but it was a sleep that brought no rest; for in it he dreamed
that he was a big, white-winged moth pinned with a star to an ink-black
sky. CHAPTER IV

TWO LETTERS

In the early gray dawn David awoke. His first sensation was the
physical numbness and stiffness that came from his hard bed on the
floor. "Why, daddy," he began, pulling himself half-erect, "I slept all night
on--" He stopped suddenly, brushing his eyes with the backs of his
hands. "Why, daddy, where--" Then full consciousness came to him. With a low cry he sprang to his feet and ran to the window. Through the
trees he could see the sunrise glow of the eastern sky. Down in the
yard no one was in sight; but the barn door was open, and, with a quick
indrawing of his breath, David turned back into the room and began to
thrust himself into his clothing. The gold in his sagging pockets clinked and jingled musically; and once
half a dozen pieces rolled out upon the floor. For a moment the boy
looked as if he were going to let them remain where they were. But the
next minute, with an impatient gesture, he had picked them up and
thrust them deep into one of his pockets, silencing their jingling with
his handkerchief. Once dressed, David picked up his violin and stepped softly into the
hall. At first no sound reached his ears; then from the kitchen below
came the clatter of brisk feet and the rattle of tins and crockery. Tightening his clasp on the violin, David slipped quietly down the back
stairs and out to the yard. It was only a few seconds then before he
was hurrying through the open doorway of the barn and up the narrow
stairway to the loft above. At the top, however, he came to a sharp pause, with a low cry. The next
moment he turned to see a kindly-faced man looking up at him from the
foot of the stairs. "Oh, sir, please--please, where is he? What have you done with him?" appealed the boy, almost plunging headlong down the stairs in his haste
to reach the bottom. Into the man's weather-beaten face came a look of sincere but awkward
sympathy. "Oh, hullo, sonny! So you're the boy, are ye?" he began diffidently. "Yes, yes, I'm David. But where is he--my father, you know? I mean
the--the part he--he left behind him?" choked the boy. "The part
like--the ice-coat?" The man stared. Then, involuntarily, he began to back away. "Well, ye see, I--I--"

"But, maybe you don't know," interrupted David feverishly. "You aren't
the man I saw last night. Who are you? Where is he--the other one,
please?" "No, I--I wa'n't here--that is, not at the first," spoke up the man
quickly, still unconsciously backing away. "Me--I'm only Larson, Perry
Larson, ye know. 'T was Mr. Holly you see last night--him that I works
for." "Then, where is Mr. Holly, please?" faltered the boy, hurrying toward
the barn door. "Maybe he would know--about father. Oh, there he is!" And David ran out of the barn and across the yard to the kitchen porch. It was an unhappy ten minutes that David spent then. Besides Mr. Holly,
there were Mrs. Holly, and the man, Perry Larson. And they all talked. But little of what they said could David understand. To none of his
questions could he obtain an answer that satisfied. Neither, on his part, could he seem to reply to their questions in a
way that pleased them. They went in to breakfast then, Mr. and Mrs. Holly, and the man, Perry
Larson. They asked David to go--at least, Mrs. Holly asked him. But
David shook his head and said "No, no, thank you very much; I'd rather
not, if you please--not now." Then he dropped himself down on the steps
to think. As if he could EAT--with that great choking lump in his
throat that refused to be swallowed! David was thoroughly dazed, frightened, and dismayed. He knew now that
never again in this world would he see his dear father, or hear him
speak. This much had been made very clear to him during the last ten
minutes. Why this should be so, or what his father would want him to
do, he could not seem to find out. Not until now had he realized at all
what this going away of his father was to mean to him. And he told
himself frantically that he could not have it so. HE COULD NOT HAVE IT
SO! But even as he said the words, he knew that it was so--irrevocably
so. David began then to long for his mountain home. There at least
he would have his dear forest all about him, with the birds and the
squirrels and the friendly little brooks. There he would have his
Silver Lake to look at, too, and all of them would speak to him of his
father. He believed, indeed, that up there it would almost seem as if
his father were really with him. And, anyway, if his father ever should
come back, it would be there that he would be sure to seek him--up
there in the little mountain home so dear to them both. Back to the
cabin he would go now, then. Yes; indeed he would! With a low word and a passionately intent expression, David got to his
feet, picked up his violin, and hurried, firm-footed, down the driveway
and out upon the main highway, turning in the direction from whence he
had come with his father the night before. The Hollys had just finished breakfast when Higgins, the coroner, drove
into the yard accompanied by William Streeter, the town's most
prominent farmer,--and the most miserly one, if report was to be
credited. "Well, could you get anything out of the boy?" demanded Higgins,
without ceremony, as Simeon Holly and Larson appeared on the kitchen
porch. "Very little. Really nothing of importance," answered Simeon Holly. "Where is he now?" "Why, he was here on the steps a few minutes ago." Simeon Holly looked
about him a bit impatiently. "Well, I want to see him. I've got a letter for him." "A letter!" exclaimed Simeon Holly and Larson in amazed unison. "Yes. Found it in his father's pocket," nodded the coroner, with all
the tantalizing brevity of a man who knows he has a choice morsel of
information that is eagerly awaited. "It's addressed to 'My boy David,'
so I calculated we'd better give it to him first without reading it,
seeing it's his. After he reads it, though, I want to see it. I want to
see if what it says is any nearer being horse-sense than the other one
is." "The other one!" exclaimed the amazed chorus again. "Oh, yes, there's another one," spoke up William Streeter tersely. "And
I've read it--all but the scrawl at the end. There couldn't anybody
read that!" Higgins laughed. "Well, I'm free to confess 't is a sticker--that name," he admitted. "And it's the name we want, of course, to tell us who they are--since
it seems the boy don't know, from what you said last night. I was in
hopes, by this morning, you'd have found out more from him." Simeon Holly shook his head. "'T was impossible." "Gosh! I should say 't was," cut in Perry Larson, with emphasis. "An'
queer ain't no name for it. One minute he'd be talkin' good common
sense like anybody: an' the next he'd be chatterin' of coats made o'
ice, an' birds an' squirrels an' babbling brooks. He sure is dippy! Listen. He actually don't seem ter know the diff'rence between himself
an' his fiddle. We was tryin' ter find out this mornin' what he could
do, an' what he wanted ter do, when if he didn't up an' say that his
father told him it didn't make so much diff'rence WHAT he did so long
as he kept hisself in tune an' didn't strike false notes. Now, what do
yer think o' that?" "Yes, I, know" nodded Higgins musingly. "There WAS something queer
about them, and they weren't just ordinary tramps. Did I tell you? I
overtook them last night away up on the Fairbanks road by the Taylor
place, and I gave 'em a lift. I particularly noticed what a decent sort
they were. They were clean and quiet-spoken, and their clothes were
good, even if they were rough. Yet they didn't have any baggage but
them fiddles." "But what was that second letter you mentioned?" asked Simeon Holly. Higgins smiled oddly, and reached into his pocket. "The letter? Oh, you're welcome to read the letter," he said, as he
handed over a bit of folded paper. Simeon took it gingerly and examined it. It was a leaf torn apparently from a note book. It was folded three
times, and bore on the outside the superscription "To whom it may
concern." The handwriting was peculiar, irregular, and not very
legible. But as near as it could be deciphered, the note ran thus:--


Now that the time has come when I must give David back to the world, I
have set out for that purpose. But I am ill--very ill, and should Death have swifter feet than I, I
must leave my task for others to complete. Deal gently with him. He
knows only that which is good and beautiful. He knows nothing of sin
nor evil. Then followed the signature--a thing of scrawls and flourishes that
conveyed no sort of meaning to Simeon Holly's puzzled eyes. "Well?" prompted Higgins expectantly. Simeon Holly shook his head. "I can make little of it. It certainly is a most remarkable note." "Could you read the name?" "No." "Well, I couldn't. Neither could half a dozen others that's seen it. But where's the boy? Mebbe his note'll talk sense." "I'll go find him," volunteered Larson. "He must be somewheres 'round." But David was very evidently not "somewheres 'round." At least he was
not in the barn, the shed, the kitchen bedroom, nor anywhere else that
Larson looked; and the man was just coming back with a crestfallen,
perplexed frown, when Mrs. Holly hurried out on to the porch. "Mr. Higgins," she cried, in obvious excitement, "your wife has just
telephoned that her sister Mollie has just telephoned HER that that
little tramp boy with the violin is at her house." "At Mollie's!" exclaimed Higgins. "Why, that's a mile or more from
here." "So that's where he is!" interposed Larson, hurrying forward. "Doggone
the little rascal! He must 'a' slipped away while we was eatin'
breakfast." "Yes. But, Simeon,--Mr. Higgins,--we hadn't ought to let him go like
that," appealed Mrs. Holly tremulously. "Your wife said Mollie said she
found him crying at the crossroads, because he didn't know which way to
take. He said he was going back home. He means to that wretched cabin
on the mountain, you know; and we can't let him do that alone--a child
like that!" "Where is he now?" demanded Higgins. "In Mollie's kitchen eating bread and milk; but she said she had an
awful time getting him to eat. And she wants to know what to do with
him. That's why she telephoned your wife. She thought you ought to know
he was there." "Yes, of course. Well, tell her to tell him to come back." "Mollie said she tried to have him come back, but that he said, no,
thank you, he'd rather not. He was going home where his father could
find him if he should ever want him. Mr. Higgins, we--we CAN'T let him
go off like that. Why, the child would die up there alone in those
dreadful woods, even if he could get there in the first place--which I
very much doubt." "Yes, of course, of course," muttered Higgins, with a thoughtful frown. "There's his letter, too. Say!" he added, brightening, "what'll you bet
that letter won't fetch him? He seems to think the world and all of his
daddy. Here," he directed, turning to Mrs. Holly, "you tell my wife to
tell--better yet, you telephone Mollie yourself, please, and tell her
to tell the boy we've got a letter here for him from his father, and he
can have it if he'll come back.". "I will, I will," called Mrs. Holly, over her shoulder, as she hurried
into the house. In an unbelievably short time she was back, her face
beaming. "He's started, so soon," she nodded. "He's crazy with joy, Mollie said. He even left part of his breakfast, he was in such a hurry. So I guess
we'll see him all right." "Oh, yes, we'll see him all right," echoed Simeon Holly grimly. "But
that isn't telling what we'll do with him when we do see him." "Oh, well, maybe this letter of his will help us out on that,"
suggested Higgins soothingly. "Anyhow, even if it doesn't, I'm not
worrying any. I guess some one will want him--a good healthy boy like
that." "Did you find any money on the body?" asked Streeter. "A little change--a few cents. Nothing to count. If the boy's letter
doesn't tell us where any of their folks are, it'll be up to the town
to bury him all right." "He had a fiddle, didn't he? And the boy had one, too. Wouldn't they
bring anything?" Streeter's round blue eyes gleamed shrewdly. Higgins gave a slow shake of his head. "Maybe--if there was a market for 'em. But who'd buy 'em? There ain't a
soul in town plays but Jack Gurnsey; and he's got one. Besides, he's
sick, and got all he can do to buy bread and butter for him and his
sister without taking in more fiddles, I guess. HE wouldn't buy 'em." "Hm--m; maybe not, maybe not," grunted Streeter. "An', as you say, he's
the only one that's got any use for 'em here; an' like enough they
ain't worth much, anyway. So I guess 't is up to the town all right." "Yes; but--if yer'll take it from me,"--interrupted Larson,--"you'll be
wise if ye keep still before the boy. It's no use ASKIN' him anythin'. We've proved that fast enough. An' if he once turns 'round an' begins
ter ask YOU questions, yer done for!" "I guess you're right," nodded Higgins, with a quizzical smile. "And as
long as questioning CAN'T do any good, why, we'll just keep whist
before the boy. Meanwhile I wish the little rascal would hurry up and
get here. I want to see the inside of that letter to HIM. I'm relying
on that being some help to unsnarl this tangle of telling who they are." "Well, he's started," reiterated Mrs. Holly, as she turned back into
the house; "so I guess he'll get here if you wait long enough." "Oh, yes, he'll get here if we wait long enough," echoed Simeon Holly
again, crustily. The two men in the wagon settled themselves more comfortably in their
seats, and Perry Larson, after a half-uneasy, half-apologetic glance at
his employer, dropped himself onto the bottom step. Simeon Holly had
already sat down stiffly in one of the porch chairs. Simeon Holly never
"dropped himself" anywhere. Indeed, according to Perry Larson, if there
were a hard way to do a thing, Simeon Holly found it--and did it. The
fact that, this morning, he had allowed, and was still allowing, the
sacred routine of the day's work to be thus interrupted, for nothing
more important than the expected arrival of a strolling urchin, was
something Larson would not have believed had he not seen it. Even now
he was conscious once or twice of an involuntary desire to rub his eyes
to make sure they were not deceiving him. Impatient as the waiting men were for the arrival of David, they were
yet almost surprised, so soon did he appear, running up the driveway. "Oh, where is it, please?" he panted. "They said you had a letter for
me from daddy!" "You're right, sonny; we have. And here it is," answered Higgins
promptly, holding out the folded paper. Plainly eager as he was, David did not open the note till he had first
carefully set down the case holding his violin; then he devoured it
with eager eyes. As he read, the four men watched his face. They saw first the quick
tears that had to be blinked away. Then they saw the radiant glow that
grew and deepened until the whole boyish face was aflame with the
splendor of it. They saw the shining wonder of his eyes, too, as he
looked up from the letter. "And daddy wrote this to me from the far country?" he breathed. Simeon Holly scowled. Larson choked over a stifled chuckle. William
Streeter stared and shrugged his shoulders; but Higgins flushed a dull
red. "No, sonny," he stammered. "We found it on the--er--I mean,
it--er--your father left it in his pocket for you," finished the man, a
little explosively. A swift shadow crossed the boy's face. "Oh, I hoped I'd heard--" he began. Then suddenly he stopped, his face
once more alight. "But it's 'most the same as if he wrote it from
there, isn't it? He left it for me, and he told me what to do." "What's that, what's that?" cried Higgins, instantly alert. "DID he
tell you what to do? Then, let's have it, so WE'LL know. You will let
us read it, won't you, boy?" "Why, y--yes," stammered David, holding it out politely, but with
evident reluctance. "Thank you," nodded Higgins, as he reached for the note. David's letter was very different from the other one. It was longer,
but it did not help much, though it was easily read. In his letter, in
spite of the wavering lines, each word was formed with a care that told
of a father's thought for the young eyes that would read it. It was
written on two of the notebook's leaves, and at the end came the single
word "Daddy." David, my boy [read Higgins aloud], in the far country I am waiting for
you. Do not grieve, for that will grieve me. I shall not return, but
some day you will come to me, your violin at your chin, and the bow
drawn across the strings to greet me. See that it tells me of the
beautiful world you have left--for it is a beautiful world, David;
never forget that. And if sometime you are tempted to think it is not a
beautiful world, just remember that you yourself can make it beautiful
if you will. You are among new faces, surrounded by things and people that are
strange to you. Some of them you will not understand; some of them you
may not like. But do not fear, David, and do not plead to go back to
the hills. Remember this, my boy,--in your violin lie all the things
you long for. You have only to play, and the broad skies of your
mountain home will be over you, and the dear friends and comrades of
your mountain forests will be about you. DADDY. "Gorry! that's worse than the other," groaned Higgins, when he had
finished the note. "There's actually nothing in it! Wouldn't you
think--if a man wrote anything at such a time--that he'd 'a' wrote
something that had some sense to it--something that one could get hold
of, and find out who the boy is?" There was no answering this. The assembled men could only grunt and nod
in agreement, which, after all, was no real help. CHAPTER V

DISCORDS

The dead man found in Farmer Holly's barn created a decided stir in the
village of Hinsdale. The case was a peculiar one for many reasons. First, because of the boy--Hinsdale supposed it knew boys, but it felt
inclined to change its mind after seeing this one. Second, because of
the circumstances. The boy and his father had entered the town like
tramps, yet Higgins, who talked freely of his having given the pair a
"lift" on that very evening, did not hesitate to declare that he did
not believe them to be ordinary tramps at all. As there had been little found in the dead man's pockets, save the two
notes, and as nobody could be found who wanted the violins, there
seemed to be nothing to do but to turn the body over to the town for
burial. Nothing was said of this to David; indeed, as little as
possible was said to David about anything after that morning when
Higgins had given him his father's letter. At that time the men had
made one more effort to "get track of SOMETHING," as Higgins had
despairingly put it. But the boy's answers to their questions were
anything but satisfying, anything but helpful, and were often most
disconcerting. The boy was, in fact, regarded by most of the men, after
that morning, as being "a little off"; and was hence let severely alone. Who the man was the town authorities certainly did not know, neither
could they apparently find out. His name, as written by himself, was
unreadable. His notes told nothing; his son could tell little more--of
consequence. A report, to be sure, did come from the village, far up
the mountain, that such a man and boy had lived in a hut that was
almost inaccessible; but even this did not help solve the mystery. David was left at the Holly farmhouse, though Simeon Holly mentally
declared that he should lose no time in looking about for some one to
take the boy away. On that first day Higgins, picking up the reins preparatory to driving
from the yard, had said, with a nod of his head toward David:--

"Well, how about it, Holly? Shall we leave him here till we find
somebody that wants him?" "Why, y--yes, I suppose so," hesitated Simeon Holly, with uncordial
accent. But his wife, hovering in the background, hastened forward at once. "Oh, yes; yes, indeed," she urged. "I'm sure he--he won't be a mite of
trouble, Simeon." "Perhaps not," conceded Simeon Holly darkly. "Neither, it is safe to
say, will he be anything else--worth anything." "That's it exactly," spoke up Streeter, from his seat in the wagon. "If
I thought he'd be worth his salt, now, I'd take him myself; but--well,
look at him this minute," he finished, with a disdainful shrug. David, on the lowest step, was very evidently not hearing a word of
what was being said. With his sensitive face illumined, he was again
poring over his father's letter. Something in the sudden quiet cut through his absorption as the noisy
hum of voices had not been able to do, and he raised his head. His eyes
were starlike. "I'm so glad father told me what to do," he breathed. "It'll be easier
now." Receiving no answer from the somewhat awkwardly silent men, he went on,
as if in explanation:--

"You know he's waiting for me--in the far country, I mean. He said he
was. And when you've got somebody waiting, you don't mind staying
behind yourself for a little while. Besides, I've GOT to stay to find
out about the beautiful world, you know, so I can tell him, when _I_
go. That's the way I used to do back home on the mountain, you
see,--tell him about things. Lots of days we'd go to walk; then, when
we got home, he'd have me tell him, with my violin, what I'd seen. And
now he says I'm to stay here." "Here!" It was the quick, stern voice of Simeon Holly. "Yes," nodded David earnestly; "to learn about the beautiful world. Don't you remember? And he said I was not to want to go back to my
mountains; that I would not need to, anyway, because the mountains, and
the sky, and the birds and squirrels and brooks are really in my
violin, you know. And--"  But with an angry frown Simeon Holly stalked
away, motioning Larson to follow him; and with a merry glance and a low
chuckle Higgins turned his horse about and drove from the yard. A
moment later David found himself alone with Mrs. Holly, who was looking
at him with wistful, though slightly fearful eyes. "Did you have all the breakfast you wanted?" she asked timidly,
resorting, as she had resorted the night before, to the everyday things
of her world in the hope that they might make this strange little boy
seem less wild, and more nearly human. "Oh, yes, thank you." David's eyes had strayed back to the note in his
hand. Suddenly he looked up, a new something in his eyes. "What is it
to be a--a tramp?" he asked. "Those men said daddy and I were tramps." "A tramp? Oh--er--why, just a--a tramp," stammered Mrs. Holly. "But
never mind that, David. I--I wouldn't think any more about it." "But what is a tramp?" persisted David, a smouldering fire beginning to
show in his eyes. "Because if they meant THIEVES--"

"No, no, David," interrupted Mrs. Holly soothingly. "They never meant
thieves at all." "Then, what is it to be a tramp?" "Why, it's just to--to tramp," explained Mrs. Holly desperately;--"walk
along the road from one town to another, and--and not live in a house
at all." "Oh!" David's face cleared. "That's all right, then. I'd love to be a
tramp, and so'd father. And we were tramps, sometimes, too, 'cause lots
of times, in the summer, we didn't stay in the cabin hardly any--just
lived out of doors all day and all night. Why, I never knew really what
the pine trees were saying till I heard them at night, lying under
them. You know what I mean. You've heard them, haven't you?" "At night? Pine trees?" stammered Mrs. Holly helplessly. "Yes. Oh, haven't you ever heard them at night?" cried the boy, in his
voice a very genuine sympathy as for a grievous loss. "Why, then, if
you've only heard them daytimes, you don't know a bit what pine trees
really are. But I can tell you. Listen! This is what they say,"
finished the boy, whipping his violin from its case, and, after a swift
testing of the strings, plunging into a weird, haunting little melody. In the doorway, Mrs. Holly, bewildered, yet bewitched, stood
motionless, her eyes half-fearfully, half-longingly fixed on David's
glorified face. She was still in the same position when Simeon Holly
came around the corner of the house. "Well, Ellen," he began, with quiet scorn, after a moment's stern
watching of the scene before him, "have you nothing better to do this
morning than to listen to this minstrel fellow?" "Oh, Simeon! Why, yes, of course. I--I forgot--what I was doing,"
faltered Mrs. Holly, flushing guiltily from neck to brow as she turned
and hurried into the house. David, on the porch steps, seemed to have heard nothing. He was still
playing, his rapt gaze on the distant sky-line, when Simeon Holly
turned upon him with disapproving eyes. "See here, boy, can't you do anything but fiddle?" he demanded. Then,
as David still continued to play, he added sharply:  "Did n't you hear
me, boy?" The music stopped abruptly. David looked up with the slightly dazed air
of one who has been summoned as from another world. "Did you speak to me, sir?" he asked. "I did--twice. I asked if you never did anything but play that fiddle." "You mean at home?" David's face expressed mild wonder without a trace
of anger or resentment. "Why, yes, of course. 