



Produced by Charles Keller





ALICE ADAMS

By Booth Tarkington



CHAPTER I

The patient, an old-fashioned man, thought the nurse made a mistake in
keeping both of the windows open, and her sprightly disregard of his
protests added something to his hatred of her. Every evening he told her
that anybody with ordinary gumption ought to realize that night air was
bad for the human frame. "The human frame won't stand everything,
Miss Perry," he warned her, resentfully. "Even a child, if it had just
ordinary gumption, ought to know enough not to let the night air blow on
sick people yes, nor well people, either! 'Keep out of the night air, no
matter how well you feel.' That's what my mother used to tell me when I
was a boy. 'Keep out of the night air, Virgil,' she'd say. 'Keep out of
the night air.'" "I expect probably her mother told her the same thing," the nurse
suggested. "Of course she did. My grandmother----"

"Oh, I guess your GRANDmother thought so, Mr. Adams! That was when all
this flat central country was swampish and hadn't been drained off yet. I guess the truth must been the swamp mosquitoes bit people and gave 'em
malaria, especially before they began to put screens in their windows. Well, we got screens in these windows, and no mosquitoes are goin' to
bite us; so just you be a good boy and rest your mind and go to sleep
like you need to." "Sleep?" he said. "Likely!" He thought the night air worst of all in April; he hadn't a doubt it
would kill him, he declared. "It's miraculous what the human frame WILL
survive," he admitted on the last evening of that month. "But you and
the doctor ought to both be taught it won't stand too dang much! You
poison a man and poison and poison him with this April night air----"

"Can't poison you with much more of it," Miss Perry interrupted him,
indulgently. "To-morrow it'll be May night air, and I expect that'll be
a lot better for you, don't you? Now let's just sober down and be a good
boy and get some nice sound sleep." She gave him his medicine, and, having set the glass upon the center
table, returned to her cot, where, after a still interval, she snored
faintly. Upon this, his expression became that of a man goaded out of
overpowering weariness into irony. "Sleep? Oh, CERTAINLY, thank you!" However, he did sleep intermittently, drowsed between times, and even
dreamed; but, forgetting his dreams before he opened his eyes, and
having some part of him all the while aware of his discomfort, he
believed, as usual, that he lay awake the whole night long. He was
conscious of the city as of some single great creature resting fitfully
in the dark outside his windows. It lay all round about, in the damp
cover of its night cloud of smoke, and tried to keep quiet for a few
hours after midnight, but was too powerful a growing thing ever to
lie altogether still. Even while it strove to sleep it muttered with
digestions of the day before, and these already merged with rumblings
of the morrow. "Owl" cars, bringing in last passengers over distant
trolley-lines, now and then howled on a curve; faraway metallic
stirrings could be heard from factories in the sooty suburbs on the
plain outside the city; east, west, and south, switch-engines chugged
and snorted on sidings; and everywhere in the air there seemed to be
a faint, voluminous hum as of innumerable wires trembling overhead to
vibration of machinery underground. In his youth Adams might have been less resentful of sounds such as
these when they interfered with his night's sleep: even during
an illness he might have taken some pride in them as proof of his
citizenship in a "live town"; but at fifty-five he merely hated them
because they kept him awake. They "pressed on his nerves," as he put it;
and so did almost everything else, for that matter. He heard the milk-wagon drive into the cross-street beneath his windows
and stop at each house. The milkman carried his jars round to the "back
porch," while the horse moved slowly ahead to the gate of the next
customer and waited there. "He's gone into Pollocks'," Adams thought,
following this progress. "I hope it'll sour on 'em before breakfast. Delivered the Andersons'. Now he's getting out ours. Listen to the darn
brute! What's HE care who wants to sleep!" His complaint was of the
horse, who casually shifted weight with a clink of steel shoes on the
worn brick pavement of the street, and then heartily shook himself in
his harness, perhaps to dislodge a fly far ahead of its season. Light
had just filmed the windows; and with that the first sparrow woke,
chirped instantly, and roused neighbours in the trees of the small yard,
including a loud-voiced robin. Vociferations began irregularly, but were
soon unanimous. "Sleep? Dang likely now, ain't it!" Night sounds were becoming day sounds; the far-away hooting of
freight-engines seemed brisker than an hour ago in the dark. A cheerful
whistler passed the house, even more careless of sleepers than the
milkman's horse had been; then a group of coloured workmen came by, and
although it was impossible to be sure whether they were homeward bound
from night-work or on their way to day-work, at least it was certain
that they were jocose. Loose, aboriginal laughter preceded them afar,
and beat on the air long after they had gone by. The sick-room night-light, shielded from his eyes by a newspaper propped
against a water-pitcher, still showed a thin glimmering that had grown
offensive to Adams. In his wandering and enfeebled thoughts, which
were much more often imaginings than reasonings, the attempt of the
night-light to resist the dawn reminded him of something unpleasant,
though he could not discover just what the unpleasant thing was. Here
was a puzzle that irritated him the more because he could not solve it,
yet always seemed just on the point of a solution. However, he may have
lost nothing cheerful by remaining in the dark upon the matter; for
if he had been a little sharper in this introspection he might have
concluded that the squalor of the night-light, in its seeming effort
to show against the forerunning of the sun itself, had stimulated some
half-buried perception within him to sketch the painful little synopsis
of an autobiography. In spite of noises without, he drowsed again, not knowing that he did;
and when he opened his eyes the nurse was just rising from her cot. He
took no pleasure in the sight, it may be said. She exhibited to him a
face mismodelled by sleep, and set like a clay face left on its cheek in
a hot and dry studio. She was still only in part awake, however, and by
the time she had extinguished the night-light and given her patient his
tonic, she had recovered enough plasticity. "Well, isn't that grand! We've had another good night," she said as she departed to dress in the
bathroom. "Yes, you had another!" he retorted, though not until after she had
closed the door. Presently he heard his daughter moving about in her room across the
narrow hall, and so knew that she had risen. He hoped she would come
in to see him soon, for she was the one thing that didn't press on his
nerves, he felt; though the thought of her hurt him, as, indeed, every
thought hurt him. But it was his wife who came first. She wore a lank cotton wrapper, and a crescent of gray hair escaped to
one temple from beneath the handkerchief she had worn upon her head for
the night and still retained; but she did everything possible to make
her expression cheering. "Oh, you're better again! I can see that, as soon as I look at you," she
said. "Miss Perry tells me you've had another splendid night." He made a sound of irony, which seemed to dispose unfavourably of Miss
Perry, and then, in order to be more certainly intelligible, he added,
"She slept well, as usual!" But his wife's smile persisted. "It's a good sign to be cross; it means
you're practically convalescent right now." "Oh, I am, am I?" "No doubt in the world!" she exclaimed. "Why, you're practically a well
man, Virgil--all except getting your strength back, of course, and that
isn't going to take long. You'll be right on your feet in a couple of
weeks from now." "Oh, I will?" "Of course you will!" She laughed briskly, and, going to the table in
the center of the room, moved his glass of medicine an inch or two,
turned a book over so that it lay upon its other side, and for a few
moments occupied herself with similar futilities, having taken on the
air of a person who makes things neat, though she produced no such
actual effect upon them. "Of course you will," she repeated, absently. "You'll be as strong as you ever were; maybe stronger." She paused for a
moment, not looking at him, then added, cheerfully, "So that you can fly
around and find something really good to get into." Something important between them came near the surface here, for though
she spoke with what seemed but a casual cheerfulness, there was a
little betraying break in her voice, a trembling just perceptible in the
utterance of the final word. And she still kept up the affectation of
being helpfully preoccupied with the table, and did not look at her
husband--perhaps because they had been married so many years that
without looking she knew just what his expression would be, and
preferred to avoid the actual sight of it as long as possible. Meanwhile, he stared hard at her, his lips beginning to move with little
distortions not lacking in the pathos of a sick man's agitation. "So that's it," he said. "That's what you're hinting at." "'Hinting?'" Mrs. Adams looked surprised and indulgent. "Why, I'm not
doing any hinting, Virgil." "What did you say about my finding 'something good to get into?'" he
asked, sharply. "Don't you call that hinting?" Mrs. Adams turned toward him now; she came to the bedside and would have
taken his hand, but he quickly moved it away from her. "You mustn't let yourself get nervous," she said. "But of course when
you get well there's only one thing to do. You mustn't go back to that
old hole again." "'Old hole?' That's what you call it, is it?" In spite of his weakness,
anger made his voice strident, and upon this stimulation she spoke more
urgently. "You just mustn't go back to it, Virgil. It's not fair to any of us, and
you know it isn't." "Don't tell me what I know, please!" She clasped her hands, suddenly carrying her urgency to plaintive
entreaty. "Virgil, you WON'T go back to that hole?" "That's a nice word to use to me!" he said. "Call a man's business a
hole!" "Virgil, if you don't owe it to me to look for something different,
don't you owe it to your children? Don't tell me you won't do what we
all want you to, and what you know in your heart you ought to! And if
you HAVE got into one of your stubborn fits and are bound to go back
there for no other reason except to have your own way, don't tell me so,
for I can't bear it!" He looked up at her fiercely. "You've got a fine way to cure a sick
man!" he said; but she had concluded her appeal--for that time--and
instead of making any more words in the matter, let him see that there
were tears in her eyes, shook her head, and left the room. Alone, he lay breathing rapidly, his emaciated chest proving itself
equal to the demands his emotion put upon it. "Fine!" he repeated, with
husky indignation. "Fine way to cure a sick man! Fine!" Then, after a
silence, he gave forth whispering sounds as of laughter, his expression
the while remaining sore and far from humour. "And give us our daily bread!" he added, meaning that his wife's little
performance was no novelty. CHAPTER II

In fact, the agitation of Mrs. Adams was genuine, but so well under her
control that its traces vanished during the three short steps she
took to cross the narrow hall between her husband's door and the one
opposite. Her expression was matter-of-course, rather than pathetic, as
she entered the pretty room where her daughter, half dressed, sat before
a dressing-table and played with the reflections of a three-leafed
mirror framed in blue enamel. That is, just before the moment of
her mother's entrance, Alice had been playing with the mirror's
reflections--posturing her arms and her expressions, clasping her hands
behind her neck, and tilting back her head to foreshorten the face in a
tableau conceived to represent sauciness, then one of smiling weariness,
then one of scornful toleration, and all very piquant; but as the door
opened she hurriedly resumed the practical, and occupied her hands in
the arrangement of her plentiful brownish hair. They were pretty hands, of a shapeliness delicate and fine. "The best
things she's got!" a cold-blooded girl friend said of them, and meant
to include Alice's mind and character in the implied list of possessions
surpassed by the notable hands. However that may have been, the rest
of her was well enough. She was often called "a right pretty
girl"--temperate praise meaning a girl rather pretty than otherwise,
and this she deserved, to say the least. Even in repose she deserved
it, though repose was anything but her habit, being seldom seen upon
her except at home. On exhibition she led a life of gestures, the unkind
said to make her lovely hands more memorable; but all of her usually
accompanied the gestures of the hands, the shoulders ever giving them
their impulses first, and even her feet being called upon, at the same
time, for eloquence. So much liveliness took proper place as only accessory to that of the
face, where her vivacity reached its climax; and it was unfortunate that
an ungifted young man, new in the town, should have attempted to define
the effect upon him of all this generosity of emphasis. He said that
"the way she used her cute hazel eyes and the wonderful glow of her
facial expression gave her a mighty spiritual quality." His actual
rendition of the word was "spirichul"; but it was not his pronunciation
that embalmed this outburst in the perennial laughter of Alice's girl
friends; they made the misfortune far less his than hers. Her mother comforted her too heartily, insisting that Alice had "plenty
enough spiritual qualities," certainly more than possessed by the other
girls who flung the phrase at her, wooden things, jealous of everything
they were incapable of themselves; and then Alice, getting more
championship than she sought, grew uneasy lest Mrs. Adams should repeat
such defenses "outside the family"; and Mrs. Adams ended by weeping
because the daughter so distrusted her intelligence. Alice frequently
thought it necessary to instruct her mother. Her morning greeting was an instruction to-day; or, rather, it was
an admonition in the style of an entreaty, the more petulant as Alice
thought that Mrs. Adams might have had a glimpse of the posturings to
the mirror. This was a needless worry; the mother had caught a thousand
such glimpses, with Alice unaware, and she thought nothing of the one
just flitted. "For heaven's sake, mama, come clear inside the room and shut the door! PLEASE don't leave it open for everybody to look at me!" "There isn't anybody to see you," Mrs. Adams explained, obeying. "Miss
Perry's gone downstairs, and----"

"Mama, I heard you in papa's room," Alice said, not dropping the note of
complaint. "I could hear both of you, and I don't think you ought to get
poor old papa so upset--not in his present condition, anyhow." Mrs. Adams seated herself on the edge of the bed. "He's better all the
time," she said, not disturbed. "He's almost well. The doctor says so
and Miss Perry says so; and if we don't get him into the right frame
of mind now we never will. The first day he's outdoors he'll go back to
that old hole--you'll see! And if he once does that, he'll settle down
there and it'll be too late and we'll never get him out." "Well, anyhow, I think you could use a little more tact with him." "I do try to," the mother sighed. "It never was much use with him. I
don't think you understand him as well as I do, Alice." "There's one thing I don't understand about either of you," Alice
returned, crisply. "Before people get married they can do anything they
want to with each other. Why can't they do the same thing after they're
married? When you and papa were young people and engaged, he'd have done
anything you wanted him to. That must have been because you knew how to
manage him then. Why can't you go at him the same way now?" Mrs. Adams sighed again, and laughed a little, making no other response;
but Alice persisted. "Well, WHY can't you? Why can't you ask him to do
things the way you used to ask him when you were just in love with each
other? Why don't you anyhow try it, mama, instead of ding-donging at
him?" "'Ding-donging at him,' Alice?" Mrs. Adams said, with a pathos somewhat
emphasized. "Is that how my trying to do what I can for you strikes
you?" "Never mind that; it's nothing to hurt your feelings." Alice disposed of
the pathos briskly. "Why don't you answer my question? What's the matter
with using a little more tact on papa? Why can't you treat him the way
you probably did when you were young people, before you were married? I
never have understood why people can't do that." "Perhaps you WILL understand some day," her mother said, gently. "Maybe
you will when you've been married twenty-five years." "You keep evading. Why don't you answer my question right straight out?" "There are questions you can't answer to young people, Alice." "You mean because we're too young to understand the answer? I don't see
that at all. At twenty-two a girl's supposed to have some intelligence,
isn't she? And intelligence is the ability to understand, isn't it? Why do I have to wait till I've lived with a man twenty-five years to
understand why you can't be tactful with papa?" "You may understand some things before that," Mrs. Adams said,
tremulously. "You may understand how you hurt me sometimes. Youth
can't know everything by being intelligent, and by the time you could
understand the answer you're asking for you'd know it, and wouldn't need
to ask. You don't understand your father, Alice; you don't know what it
takes to change him when he's made up his mind to be stubborn." Alice rose and began to get herself into a skirt. "Well, I don't think
making scenes ever changes anybody," she grumbled. "I think a little
jolly persuasion goes twice as far, myself." "'A little jolly persuasion!'" Her mother turned the echo of this phrase
into an ironic lament. "Yes, there was a time when I thought that, too! It didn't work; that's all." "Perhaps you left the 'jolly' part of it out, mama." For the second time that morning--it was now a little after seven
o'clock--tears seemed about to offer their solace to Mrs. Adams. "I
might have expected you to say that, Alice; you never do miss a chance,"
she said, gently. "It seems queer you don't some time miss just ONE
chance!" But Alice, progressing with her toilet, appeared to be little concerned. "Oh, well, I think there are better ways of managing a man than just
hammering at him." Mrs. Adams uttered a little cry of pain. "'Hammering,' Alice?" "If you'd left it entirely to me," her daughter went on, briskly, "I
believe papa'd already be willing to do anything we want him to." "That's it; tell me I spoil everything. Well, I won't interfere from now
on, you can be sure of it." "Please don't talk like that," Alice said, quickly. "I'm old enough to
realize that papa may need pressure of all sorts; I only think it makes
him more obstinate to get him cross. You probably do understand him
better, but that's one thing I've found out and you haven't. There!" She gave her mother a friendly tap on the shoulder and went to the door. "I'll hop in and say hello to him now." As she went, she continued the fastening of her blouse, and appeared in
her father's room with one hand still thus engaged, but she patted his
forehead with the other. "Poor old papa-daddy!" she said, gaily. "Every time he's better somebody
talks him into getting so mad he has a relapse. It's a shame!" Her father's eyes, beneath their melancholy brows, looked up at her
wistfully. "I suppose you heard your mother going for me," he said. "I heard you going for her, too!" Alice laughed. "What was it all
about?" "Oh, the same danged old story!" "You mean she wants you to try something new when you get well?" Alice
asked, with cheerful innocence. "So we could all have a lot more money?" At this his sorrowful forehead was more sorrowful than ever. The deep
horizontal lines moved upward to a pattern of suffering so familiar to
his daughter that it meant nothing to her; but he spoke quietly. "Yes;
so we wouldn't have any money at all, most likely." "Oh, no!" she laughed, and, finishing with her blouse, patted his cheeks
with both hands. "Just think how many grand openings there must be for
a man that knows as much as you do! I always did believe you could get
rich if you only cared to, papa." But upon his forehead the painful pattern still deepened. "Don't you
think we've always had enough, the way things are, Alice?" "Not the way things ARE!" She patted his cheeks again; laughed again. "It used to be enough, maybe anyway we did skimp along on it--but the
way things are now I expect mama's really pretty practical in her ideas,
though, I think it's a shame for her to bother you about it while you're
so weak. Don't you worry about it, though; just think about other things
till you get strong." "You know," he said; "you know it isn't exactly the easiest thing in the
world for a man of my age to find these grand openings you speak of. And
when you've passed half-way from fifty to sixty you're apt to see some
risk in giving up what you know how to do and trying something new." "My, what a frown!" she cried, blithely. "Didn't I tell you to stop
thinking about it till you get ALL well?" She bent over him, giving
him a gay little kiss on the bridge of his nose. "There! I must run to
breakfast. Cheer up now! Au 'voir!" And with her pretty hand she waved
further encouragement from the closing door as she departed. Lightsomely descending the narrow stairway, she whistled as she went,
her fingers drumming time on the rail; and, still whistling, she came
into the dining-room, where her mother and her brother were already at
the table. The brother, a thin and sallow boy of twenty, greeted her
without much approval as she took her place. "Nothing seems to trouble you!" he said. "No; nothing much," she made airy response. "What's troubling yourself,
Walter?" "Don't let that worry you!" he returned, seeming to consider this to be
repartee of an effective sort; for he furnished a short laugh to go
with it, and turned to his coffee with the manner of one who has
satisfactorily closed an episode. "Walter always seems to have so many secrets!" Alice said, studying
him shrewdly, but with a friendly enough amusement in her scrutiny. "Everything he does or says seems to be acted for the benefit of some
mysterious audience inside himself, and he always gets its applause. Take what he said just now: he seems to think it means something, but
if it does, why, that's just another secret between him and the secret
audience inside of him! We don't really know anything about Walter at
all, do we, mama?" Walter laughed again, in a manner that sustained her theory well enough;
then after finishing his coffee, he took from his pocket a flattened
packet in glazed blue paper; extracted with stained fingers a bent and
wrinkled little cigarette, lighted it, hitched up his belted trousers
with the air of a person who turns from trifles to things better worth
his attention, and left the room. Alice laughed as the door closed. "He's ALL secrets," she said. "Don't
you think you really ought to know more about him, mama?" "I'm sure he's a good boy," Mrs. Adams returned, thoughtfully. "He's
been very brave about not being able to have the advantages that are
enjoyed by the boys he's grown up with. I've never heard a word of
complaint from him." "About his not being sent to college?" Alice cried. "I should think you
wouldn't! He didn't even have enough ambition to finish high school!" Mrs. Adams sighed. "It seemed to me Walter lost his ambition when nearly
all the boys he'd grown up with went to Eastern schools to prepare for
college, and we couldn't afford to send him. If only your father would
have listened----"

Alice interrupted: "What nonsense! Walter hated books and studying, and
athletics, too, for that matter. He doesn't care for anything nice that
I ever heard of. What do you suppose he does like, mama? He must like
something or other somewhere, but what do you suppose it is? What does
he do with his time?" "Why, the poor boy's at Lamb and Company's all day. He doesn't get
through until five in the afternoon; he doesn't HAVE much time." "Well, we never have dinner until about seven, and he's always late for
dinner, and goes out, heaven knows where, right afterward!" Alice shook
her head. "He used to go with our friends' boys, but I don't think he
does now." "Why, how could he?" Mrs. Adams protested. "That isn't his fault, poor
child! The boys he knew when he was younger are nearly all away at
college." "Yes, but he doesn't see anything of 'em when they're here at
holiday-time or vacation. None of 'em come to the house any more." "I suppose he's made other friends. It's natural for him to want
companions, at his age." "Yes," Alice said, with disapproving emphasis. "But who are they? I've
got an idea he plays pool at some rough place down-town." "Oh, no; I'm sure he's a steady boy," Mrs. Adams protested, but her tone
was not that of thoroughgoing conviction, and she added, "Life might
be a very different thing for him if only your father can be brought to
see----"

"Never mind, mama! It isn't me that has to be convinced, you know; and
we can do a lot more with papa if we just let him alone about it for a
day or two. Promise me you won't say any more to him until--well, until
he's able to come downstairs to table. Will you?" Mrs. Adams bit her lip, which had begun to tremble. "I think you can
trust me to know a FEW things, Alice," she said. "I'm a little older
than you, you know." "That's a good girl!" Alice jumped up, laughing. "Don't forget it's the
same as a promise, and do just cheer him up a little. I'll say good-bye
to him before I go out." "Where are you going?" "Oh, I've got lots to do. I thought I'd run out to Mildred's to see what
she's going to wear to-night, and then I want to go down and buy a
yard of chiffon and some narrow ribbon to make new bows for my
slippers--you'll have to give me some money----"

"If he'll give it to me!" her mother lamented, as they went toward the
front stairs together; but an hour later she came into Alice's room with
a bill in her hand. "He has some money in his bureau drawer," she said. "He finally told me
where it was." There were traces of emotion in her voice, and Alice, looking shrewdly
at her, saw moisture in her eyes. "Mama!" she cried. "You didn't do what you promised me you wouldn't, did
you--NOT before Miss Perry!" "Miss Perry's getting him some broth," Mrs. Adams returned, calmly. "Besides, you're mistaken in saying I promised you anything; I said I
thought you could trust me to know what is right." "So you did bring it up again!" And Alice swung away from her, strode
to her father's door, flung it open, went to him, and put a light hand
soothingly over his unrelaxed forehead. "Poor old papa!" she said. "It's a shame how everybody wants to trouble
him. He shan't be bothered any more at all! He doesn't need to have
everybody telling him how to get away from that old hole he's worked in
so long and begin to make us all nice and rich. HE knows how!" Thereupon she kissed him a consoling good-bye, and made another gay
departure, the charming hand again fluttering like a white butterfly in
the shadow of the closing door. CHAPTER III

Mrs. Adams had remained in Alice's room, but her mood seemed to have
changed, during her daughter's little more than momentary absence. "What did he SAY?" she asked, quickly, and her tone was hopeful. "'Say?'" Alice repeated, impatiently. "Why, nothing. I didn't let him. Really, mama, I think the best thing for you to do would be to just keep
out of his room, because I don't believe you can go in there and not
talk to him about it, and if you do talk we'll never get him to do the
right thing. Never!" The mother's response was a grieving silence; she turned from her
daughter and walked to the door. "Now, for goodness' sake!" Alice cried. "Don't go making tragedy out of
my offering you a little practical advice!" "I'm not," Mrs. Adams gulped, halting. "I'm just--just going to dust the
downstairs, Alice." And with her face still averted, she went out into
the little hallway, closing the door behind her. A moment later she
could be heard descending the stairs, the sound of her footsteps
carrying somehow an effect of resignation. Alice listened, sighed, and, breathing the words, "Oh, murder!" turned
to cheerier matters. She put on a little apple-green turban with a dim
gold band round it, and then, having shrouded the turban in a white
veil, which she kept pushed up above her forehead, she got herself into
a tan coat of soft cloth fashioned with rakish severity. After that,
having studied herself gravely in a long glass, she took from one of
the drawers of her dressing-table a black leather card-case cornered in
silver filigree, but found it empty. She opened another drawer wherein were two white pasteboard boxes of
cards, the one set showing simply "Miss Adams," the other engraved in
Gothic characters, "Miss Alys Tuttle Adams." The latter belonged to
Alice's "Alys" period--most girls go through it; and Alice must have
felt that she had graduated, for, after frowning thoughtfully at the
exhibit this morning, she took the box with its contents, and let the
white shower fall from her fingers into the waste-basket beside her
small desk. She replenished the card-case from the "Miss Adams"
box; then, having found a pair of fresh white gloves, she tucked an
ivory-topped Malacca walking-stick under her arm and set forth. She went down the stairs, buttoning her gloves and still wearing
the frown with which she had put "Alys" finally out of her life. She
descended slowly, and paused on the lowest step, looking about her with
an expression that needed but a slight deepening to betoken bitterness. Its connection with her dropping "Alys" forever was slight, however. The small frame house, about fifteen years old, was already inclining
to become a new Colonial relic. The Adamses had built it, moving into it
from the "Queen Anne" house they had rented until they took this step in
fashion. But fifteen years is a long time to stand still in the midland
country, even for a house, and this one was lightly made, though the
Adamses had not realized how flimsily until they had lived in it for
some time. "Solid, compact, and convenient" were the instructions to the
architect, and he had made it compact successfully. Alice, pausing
at the foot of the stairway, was at the same time fairly in the
"living-room," for the only separation between the "living room" and the
hall was a demarcation suggested to willing imaginations by a pair of
wooden columns painted white. These columns, pine under the paint,
were bruised and chipped at the base; one of them showed a crack that
threatened to become a split; the "hard-wood" floor had become uneven;
and in a corner the walls apparently failed of solidity, where the
wall-paper had declined to accompany some staggerings of the plaster
beneath it. The furniture was in great part an accumulation begun with the wedding
gifts; though some of it was older, two large patent rocking-chairs and
a footstool having belonged to Mrs. Adams's mother in the days of hard
brown plush and veneer. For decoration there were pictures and vases. Mrs. Adams had always been fond of vases, she said, and every year
her husband's Christmas present to her was a vase of one sort or
another--whatever the clerk showed him, marked at about twelve or
fourteen dollars. The pictures were some of them etchings framed in
gilt: Rheims, Canterbury, schooners grouped against a wharf; and Alice
could remember how, in her childhood, her father sometimes pointed out
the watery reflections in this last as very fine. But it was a long time
since he had shown interest in such things--"or in anything much," as
she thought. Other pictures were two water-colours in baroque frames; one being the
Amalfi monk on a pergola wall, while the second was a yard-wide display
of iris blossoms, painted by Alice herself at fourteen, as a birthday
gift to her mother. Alice's glance paused upon it now with no great
pride, but showed more approval of an enormous photograph of the
Colosseum. This she thought of as "the only good thing in the room";
it possessed and bestowed distinction, she felt; and she did not regret
having won her struggle to get it hung in its conspicuous place of
honour over the mantelpiece. Formerly that place had been held for
years by a steel-engraving, an accurate representation of the Suspension
Bridge at Niagara Falls. It was almost as large as its successor, the
"Colosseum," and it had been presented to Mr. Adams by colleagues in
his department at Lamb and Company's. Adams had shown some feeling when
Alice began to urge its removal to obscurity in the "upstairs hall"; he
even resisted for several days after she had the "Colosseum" charged
to him, framed in oak, and sent to the house. She cheered him up, of
course, when he gave way; and her heart never misgave her that there
might be a doubt which of the two pictures was the more dismaying. Over the pictures, the vases, the old brown plush rocking-chairs and
the stool, over the three gilt chairs, over the new chintz-covered easy
chair and the gray velure sofa--over everything everywhere, was the
familiar coating of smoke grime. It had worked into every fibre of
the lace curtains, dingying them to an unpleasant gray; it lay on
the window-sills and it dimmed the glass panes; it covered the walls,
covered the ceiling, and was smeared darker and thicker in all corners. Yet here was no fault of housewifery; the curse could not be lifted, as
the ingrained smudges permanent on the once white woodwork proved. The
grime was perpetually renewed; scrubbing only ground it in. This particular ugliness was small part of Alice's discontent, for
though the coating grew a little deeper each year she was used to it. Moreover, she knew that she was not likely to find anything better in
a thousand miles, so long as she kept to cities, and that none of
her friends, however opulent, had any advantage of her here. Indeed,
throughout all the great soft-coal country, people who consider
themselves comparatively poor may find this consolation: cleanliness has
been added to the virtues and beatitudes that money can not buy. Alice brightened a little as she went forward to the front door, and
she brightened more when the spring breeze met her there. Then all
depression left her as she walked down the short brick path to the
sidewalk, looked up and down the street, and saw how bravely the maple
shade-trees, in spite of the black powder they breathed, were flinging
out their thousands of young green particles overhead. She turned north, treading the new little shadows on the pavement
briskly, and, having finished buttoning her gloves, swung down her
Malacca stick from under her arm to let it tap a more leisurely
accompaniment to her quick, short step. She had to step quickly if she
was to get anywhere; for the closeness of her skirt, in spite of its
little length, permitted no natural stride; but she was pleased to be
impeded, these brevities forming part of her show of fashion. Other pedestrians found them not without charm, though approval may have
been lacking here and there, and at the first crossing Alice suffered
what she might have accounted an actual injury, had she allowed herself
to be so sensitive. An elderly woman in fussy black silk stood there,
waiting for a streetcar; she was all of a globular modelling, with
a face patterned like a frost-bitten peach; and that the approaching
gracefulness was uncongenial she naively made too evident. Her round,
wan eyes seemed roused to bitter life as they rose from the curved high
heels of the buckled slippers to the tight little skirt, and thence with
startled ferocity to the Malacca cane, which plainly appeared to her as
a decoration not more astounding than it was insulting. Perceiving that the girl was bowing to her, the globular lady hurriedly
made shift to alter her injurious expression. "Good morning, Mrs.
Dowling," Alice said, gravely. Mrs. Dowling returned the salutation with
a smile as convincingly benevolent as the ghastly smile upon a Santa
Claus face; and then, while Alice passed on, exploded toward her a
single compacted breath through tightened lips. The sound was eloquently audible, though Mrs. Dowling remained unaware
that in this or any manner whatever she had shed a light upon her
thoughts; for it was her lifelong innocent conviction that other people
saw her only as she wished to be seen, and heard from her only what she
intended to be heard. At home it was always her husband who pulled down
the shades of their bedroom window. Alice looked serious for a few moments after the little encounter, then
found some consolation in the behaviour of a gentleman of forty or
so who was coming toward her. Like Mrs. Dowling, he had begun to show
consciousness of Alice's approach while she was yet afar off; but his
tokens were of a kind pleasanter to her. He was like Mrs. Dowling again,
however, in his conception that Alice would not realize the significance
of what he did. He passed his hand over his neck-scarf to see that it
lay neatly to his collar, smoothed a lapel of his coat, and adjusted
his hat, seeming to be preoccupied the while with problems that kept
his eyes to the pavement; then, as he came within a few feet of her,
he looked up, as in a surprised recognition almost dramatic, smiled
winningly, lifted his hat decisively, and carried it to the full arm's
length. Alice's response was all he could have asked. The cane in her right
hand stopped short in its swing, while her left hand moved in a pretty
gesture as if an impulse carried it toward the heart; and she smiled,
with her under lip caught suddenly between her teeth. Months ago she had
seen an actress use this smile in a play, and it came perfectly to Alice
now, without conscious direction, it had been so well acquired; but the
pretty hand's little impulse toward the heart was an original bit all
her own, on the spur of the moment. The gentleman went on, passing from her forward vision as he replaced
his hat. Of himself he was nothing to Alice, except for the gracious
circumstance that he had shown strong consciousness of a pretty girl. He
was middle-aged, substantial, a family man, securely married; and
Alice had with him one of those long acquaintances that never become
emphasized by so much as five minutes of talk; yet for this inconsequent
meeting she had enacted a little part like a fragment in a pantomime of
Spanish wooing. It was not for him--not even to impress him, except as a messenger. Alice was herself almost unaware of her thought, which was one of the
running thousands of her thoughts that took no deliberate form in words. Nevertheless, she had it, and it was the impulse of all her pretty
bits of pantomime when she met other acquaintances who made their
appreciation visible, as this substantial gentleman did. In Alice's
unworded thought, he was to be thus encouraged as in some measure a
champion to speak well of her to the world; but more than this: he was
to tell some magnificent unknown bachelor how wonderful, how mysterious,
she was. She hastened on gravely, a little stirred reciprocally with the
supposed stirrings in the breast of that shadowy ducal mate, who must be
somewhere "waiting," or perhaps already seeking her; for she more often
thought of herself as "waiting" while he sought her; and sometimes this
view of things became so definite that it shaped into a murmur on her
lips. "Waiting. Just waiting." And she might add, "For him!" Then, being
twenty-two, she was apt to conclude the mystic interview by laughing at
herself, though not without a continued wistfulness. She came to a group of small coloured children playing waywardly in a
puddle at the mouth of a muddy alley; and at sight of her they gave over
their pastime in order to stare. She smiled brilliantly upon them, but
they were too struck with wonder to comprehend that the manifestation
was friendly; and as Alice picked her way in a little detour to keep
from the mud, she heard one of them say, "Lady got cane! Jeez'!" She knew that many coloured children use impieties familiarly, and she
was not startled. She was disturbed, however, by an unfavourable hint in
the speaker's tone. He was six, probably, but the sting of a criticism
is not necessarily allayed by knowledge of its ignoble source, and
Alice had already begun to feel a slight uneasiness about her cane. Mrs.
Dowling's stare had been strikingly projected at it; other women more
than merely glanced, their brows and lips contracting impulsively; and
Alice was aware that one or two of them frankly halted as soon as she
had passed. She had seen in several magazines pictures of ladies with canes, and on
that account she had bought this one, never questioning that fashion is
recognized, even in the provinces, as soon as beheld. On the contrary,
these staring women obviously failed to realize that what they were
being shown was not an eccentric outburst, but the bright harbinger of
an illustrious mode. Alice had applied a bit of artificial pigment to
her lips and cheeks before she set forth this morning; she did not
need it, having a ready colour of her own, which now mounted high with
annoyance. Then a splendidly shining closed black automobile, with windows of
polished glass, came silently down the street toward her. Within it, as
in a luxurious little apartment, three comely ladies in mourning sat
and gossiped; but when they saw Alice they clutched one another. They
instantly recovered, bowing to her solemnly as they were borne by, yet
were not gone from her sight so swiftly but the edge of her side glance
caught a flash of teeth in mouths suddenly opened, and the dark glisten
of black gloves again clutching to share mirth. The colour that outdid the rouge on Alice's cheek extended its area and
grew warmer as she realized how all too cordial had been her nod and
smile to these humorous ladies. But in their identity lay a significance
causing her a sharper smart, for they were of the family of that Lamb,
chief of Lamb and Company, who had employed her father since before she
was born. "And know his salary! They'd be SURE to find out about that!" was her
thought, coupled with another bitter one to the effect that they had
probably made instantaneous financial estimates of what she wore though
certainly her walking-stick had most fed their hilarity. She tucked it under her arm, not swinging it again; and her breath
became quick and irregular as emotion beset her. She had been enjoying
her walk, but within the space of the few blocks she had gone since she
met the substantial gentleman, she found that more than the walk was
spoiled: suddenly her life seemed to be spoiled, too; though she did not
view the ruin with complaisance. These Lamb women thought her and her
cane ridiculous, did they? she said to herself. That was their parvenu
blood: to think because a girl's father worked for their grandfather
she had no right to be rather striking in style, especially when the
striking WAS her style. Probably all the other girls and women would
agree with them and would laugh at her when they got together, and,
what might be fatal, would try to make all the men think her a silly
pretender. Men were just like sheep, and nothing was easier than for
women to set up as shepherds and pen them in a fold. "To keep out
outsiders," Alice thought. "And make 'em believe I AM an outsider. What's the use of living?" All seemed lost when a trim young man appeared, striding out of a
cross-street not far before her, and, turning at the corner, came
toward her. Visibly, he slackened his gait to lengthen the time of his
approach, and, as he was a stranger to her, no motive could be ascribed
to him other than a wish to have a longer time to look at her. She lifted a pretty hand to a pin at her throat, bit her lip--not with
the smile, but mysteriously--and at the last instant before her shadow
touched the stranger, let her eyes gravely meet his. A moment later,
having arrived before the house which was her destination, she halted
at the entrance to a driveway leading through fine lawns to the
intentionally important mansion. It was a pleasant and impressive
place to be seen entering, but Alice did not enter at once. She paused,
examining a tiny bit of mortar which the masons had forgotten to scrape
from a brick in one of the massive gate-posts. She frowned at this tiny
defacement, and with an air of annoyance scraped it away, using the
ferrule of her cane an act of fastidious proprietorship. If any one had
looked back over his shoulder he would not have doubted that she lived
there. Alice did not turn to see whether anything of the sort happened or not,
but she may have surmised that it did. At all events, it was with
an invigorated step that she left the gateway behind her and went
cheerfully up the drive to the house of her friend Mildred. CHAPTER IV

Adams had a restless morning, and toward noon he asked Miss Perry to
call his daughter; he wished to say something to her. "I thought I heard her leaving the house a couple of hours ago--maybe
longer," the nurse told him. "I'll go see." And she returned from the
brief errand, her impression confirmed by information from Mrs. Adams. "Yes. She went up to Miss Mildred Palmer's to see what she's going to
wear to-night." Adams looked at Miss Perry wearily, but remained passive, making no
inquiries; for he was long accustomed to what seemed to him a kind of
jargon among ladies, which became the more incomprehensible when they
tried to explain it. A man's best course, he had found, was just to let
it go as so much sound. His sorrowful eyes followed the nurse as she
went back to her rocking-chair by the window, and her placidity showed
him that there was no mystery for her in the fact that Alice walked
two miles to ask so simple a question when there was a telephone in
the house. Obviously Miss Perry also comprehended why Alice thought it
important to know what Mildred meant to wear. Adams understood why Alice
should be concerned with what she herself wore "to look neat and tidy
and at her best, why, of course she'd want to," he thought--but he
realized that it was forever beyond him to understand why the clothing
of other people had long since become an absorbing part of her life. Her excursion this morning was no novelty; she was continually going to
see what Mildred meant to wear, or what some other girl meant to wear;
and when Alice came home from wherever other girls or women had been
gathered, she always hurried to her mother with earnest descriptions of
the clothing she had seen. At such times, if Adams was present, he might
recognize "organdie," or "taffeta," or "chiffon," as words defining
certain textiles, but the rest was too technical for him, and he
was like a dismal boy at a sermon, just waiting for it to get itself
finished. Not the least of the mystery was his wife's interest: she was
almost indifferent about her own clothes, and when she consulted Alice
about them spoke hurriedly and with an air of apology; but when Alice
described other people's clothes, Mrs. Adams listened as eagerly as the
daughter talked. "There they go!" he muttered to-day, a moment after he heard the front
door closing, a sound recognizable throughout most of the thinly built
house. Alice had just returned, and Mrs. Adams called to her from the
upper hallway, not far from Adams's door. "What did she SAY?" "She was sort of snippy about it," Alice returned, ascending the stairs. "She gets that way sometimes, and pretended she hadn't made up her mind,
but I'm pretty sure it'll be the maize Georgette with Malines flounces." "Didn't you say she wore that at the Pattersons'?" Mrs. Adams inquired,
as Alice arrived at the top of the stairs. "And didn't you tell me she
wore it again at the----"

"Certainly not," Alice interrupted, rather petulantly. "She's never worn
it but once, and of course she wouldn't want to wear anything to-night
that people have seen her in a lot." Miss Perry opened the door of Adams's room and stepped out. "Your father
wants to know if you'll come and see him a minute, Miss Adams." "Poor old thing! Of course!" Alice exclaimed, and went quickly into the
room, Miss Perry remaining outside. "What's the matter, papa? Getting
awful sick of lying on his tired old back, I expect." "I've had kind of a poor morning," Adams said, as she patted his hand
comfortingly. "I been thinking----"

"Didn't I tell you not to?" she cried, gaily. "Of course you'll have
poor times when you go and do just exactly what I say you mustn't. You
stop thinking this very minute!" He smiled ruefully, closing his eyes; was silent for a moment, then
asked her to sit beside the bed. "I been thinking of something I wanted
to say," he added. "What like, papa?" "Well, it's nothing--much," he said, with something deprecatory in his
tone, as if he felt vague impulses toward both humour and apology. "I
just thought maybe I ought to've said more to you some time or other
about--well, about the way things ARE, down at Lamb and Company's, for
instance." "Now, papa!" She leaned forward in the chair she had taken, and
pretended to slap his hand crossly. "Isn't that exactly what I said you
couldn't think one single think about till you get ALL well?" "Well----" he said, and went on slowly, not looking at her, but at the
ceiling. "I just thought maybe it wouldn't been any harm if some time or
other I told you something about the way they sort of depend on me down
there." "Why don't they show it, then?" she asked, quickly. "That's just what
mama and I have been feeling so much; they don't appreciate you." "Why, yes, they do," he said. "Yes, they do. They began h'isting my
salary the second year I went in there, and they've h'isted it a little
every two years all the time I've worked for 'em. I've been head of the
sundries department for seven years now, and I could hardly have more
authority in that department unless I was a member of the firm itself." "Well, why don't they make you a member of the firm? That's what they
ought to've done! Yes, and long ago!" Adams laughed, but sighed with more heartiness than he had laughed. "They call me their 'oldest stand-by' down there." He laughed again,
apologetically, as if to excuse himself for taking a little pride in
this title. "Yes, sir; they say I'm their 'oldest stand-by'; and I guess
they know they can count on my department's turning in as good a report
as they look for, at the end of every month; but they don't have to take
a man into the firm to get him to do my work, dearie." "But you said they depended on you, papa." "So they do; but of course not so's they couldn't get along without me." He paused, reflecting. "I don't just seem to know how to put it--I
mean how to put what I started out to say. I kind of wanted to tell
you--well, it seems funny to me, these last few years, the way your
mother's taken to feeling about it. I'd like to see a better
established wholesale drug business than Lamb and Company this side the
Alleghanies--I don't say bigger, I say better established--and it's kind
of funny for a man that's been with a business like that as long as
I have to hear it called a 'hole.' It's kind of funny when you think,
yourself, you've done pretty fairly well in a business like that, and
the men at the head of it seem to think so, too, and put your salary
just about as high as anybody could consider customary--well, what I
mean, Alice, it's kind of funny to have your mother think it's mostly
just--mostly just a failure, so to speak." His voice had become tremulous in spite of him; and this sign of
weakness and emotion had sufficient effect upon Alice. She bent over him
suddenly, with her arm about him and her cheek against his. "Poor papa!" she murmured. "Poor papa!" "No, no," he said. "I didn't mean anything to trouble you. I just
thought----" He hesitated. "I just wondered--I thought maybe it wouldn't
be any harm if I said something about how things ARE down there. I
got to thinking maybe you didn't understand it's a pretty good place. They're fine people to work for; and they've always seemed to think
something of me;--the way they took Walter on, for instance, soon as I
asked 'em, last year. Don't you think that looked a good deal as if they
thought something of me, Alice?" "Yes, papa," she said, not moving. "And the work's right pleasant," he went on. "Mighty nice boys in our
department, Alice. Well, they are in all the departments, for that
matter. We have a good deal of fun down there some days." She lifted her head. "More than you do at home 'some days,' I expect,
papa!" she said. He protested feebly. "Now, I didn't mean that--I didn't want to trouble
you----"

She looked at him through winking eyelashes. "I'm sorry I called it a
'hole,' papa." "No, no," he protested, gently. "It was your mother said that." "No. I did, too." "Well, if you did, it was only because you'd heard her." She shook her head, then kissed him. "I'm going to talk to her," she
said, and rose decisively. But at this, her father's troubled voice became quickly louder: "You
better let her alone. I just wanted to have a little talk with you. I
didn't mean to start any--your mother won't----"

"Now, papa!" Alice spoke cheerfully again, and smiled upon him. "I want
you to quit worrying! Everything's going to be all right and nobody's
going to bother you any more about anything. You'll see!" She carried her smile out into the hall, but after she had closed the
door her face was all pity; and her mother, waiting for her in the
opposite room, spoke sympathetically. "What's the matter, Alice? What did he say that's upset you?" "Wait a minute, mama." Alice found a handkerchief, used it for eyes and
suffused nose, gulped, then suddenly and desolately sat upon the bed. "Poor, poor, POOR papa!" she whispered. "Why?" Mrs. Adams inquired, mildly. "What's the matter with him? Sometimes you act as if he weren't getting well. What's he been talking
about?" "Mama--well, I think I'm pretty selfish. Oh, I do!" "Did he say you were?" "Papa? No, indeed! What I mean is, maybe we're both a little selfish to
try to make him go out and hunt around for something new." Mrs. Adams looked thoughtful. "Oh, that's what he was up to!" "Mama, I think we ought to give it up. I didn't dream it had really hurt
him." "Well, doesn't he hurt us?" "Never that I know of, mama." "I don't mean by SAYING things," Mrs. Adams explained, impatiently. "There are more ways than that of hurting people. When a man sticks to a
salary that doesn't provide for his family, isn't that hurting them?" "Oh, it 'provides' for us well enough, mama. We have what we need--if I
weren't so extravagant. Oh, _I_ know I am!" But at this admission her mother cried out sharply. "'Extravagant!' You haven't one tenth of what the other girls you go with have. And
you CAN'T have what you ought to as long as he doesn't get out of that
horrible place. It provides bare food and shelter for us, but what's
that?" "I don't think we ought to try any more to change him." "You don't?" Mrs. Adams came and stood before her. "Listen, Alice: your
father's asleep; that's his trouble, and he's got to be waked up. He
doesn't know that things have changed. When you and Walter were little
children we did have enough--at least it seemed to be about as much
as most of the people we knew. But the town isn't what it was in those
days, and times aren't what they were then, and these fearful PRICES
aren't the old prices. Everything else but your father has changed, and
all the time he's stood still. He doesn't know it; he thinks because
they've given him a hundred dollars more every two years he's quite a
prosperous man! And he thinks that because his children cost him more
than he and I cost our parents he gives them--enough!" "But Walter----" Alice faltered. "Walter doesn't cost him anything at
all any more." And she concluded, in a stricken voice, "It's all--me!" "Why shouldn't it be?" her mother cried. "You're young--you're just at
the time when your life should be fullest of good things and happiness. Yet what do you get?" Alice's lip quivered; she was not unsusceptible to such an appeal, but
she contrived the semblance of a protest. "I don't have such a bad time
not a good DEAL of the time, anyhow. I've got a good MANY of the things
other girls have----"

"You have?" Mrs. Adams was piteously satirical. "I suppose you've got
a limousine to go to that dance to-night? I suppose you've only got
to call a florist and tell him to send you some orchids? I suppose
you've----"

But Alice interrupted this list. Apparently in a single instant all
emotion left her, and she became businesslike, as one in the midst of
trifles reminded of really serious matters. She got up from the bed
and went to the door of the closet where she kept her dresses. "Oh, see
here," she said, briskly. "I've decided to wear my white organdie if you
could put in a new lining for me. I'm afraid it'll take you nearly all
afternoon." She brought forth the dress, displayed it upon the bed, and Mrs. Adams
examined it attentively. "Do you think you could get it done, mama?" "I don't see why not," Mrs. Adams answered, passing a thoughtful hand
over the fabric. "It oughtn't to take more than four or five hours." "It's a shame to have you sit at the machine that long," Alice said,
absently, adding, "And I'm sure we ought to let papa alone. Let's just
give it up, mama." Mrs. Adams continued her thoughtful examination of the dress. "Did you
buy the chiffon and ribbon, Alice?" "Yes. I'm sure we oughtn't to talk to him about it any more, mama." "Well, we'll see." "Let's both agree that we'll NEVER say another single word to him about
it," said Alice. "It'll be a great deal better if we just let him make
up his mind for himself." CHAPTER V

With this, having more immediately practical questions before them, they
dropped the subject, to bend their entire attention upon the dress; and
when the lunch-gong sounded downstairs Alice was still sketching repairs
and alterations. She continued to sketch them, not heeding the summons. "I suppose we'd better go down to lunch," Mrs. Adams said, absently. "She's at the gong again." "In a minute, mama. Now about the
sleeves----" And she went on with her planning. Unfortunately the
gong was inexpressive of the mood of the person who beat upon it. It
consisted of three little metal bowls upon a string; they were unequal
in size, and, upon being tapped with a padded stick, gave forth
vibrations almost musically pleasant. It was Alice who had substituted
this contrivance for the brass "dinner-bell" in use throughout her
childhood; and neither she nor the others of her family realized that
the substitution of sweeter sounds had made the life of that household
more difficult. In spite of dismaying increases in wages, the Adamses
still strove to keep a cook; and, as they were unable to pay the higher
rates demanded by a good one, what they usually had was a whimsical
coloured woman of nomadic impulses. In the hands of such a person the
old-fashioned "dinner-bell" was satisfying; life could instantly be
made intolerable for any one dawdling on his way to a meal; the bell was
capable of every desirable profanity and left nothing bottled up in the
breast of the ringer. But the chamois-covered stick might whack upon
Alice's little Chinese bowls for a considerable length of time and
produce no great effect of urgency upon a hearer, nor any other effect,
except fury in the cook. The ironical impossibility of expressing
indignation otherwise than by sounds of gentle harmony proved
exasperating; the cook was apt to become surcharged, so that explosive
resignations, never rare, were somewhat more frequent after the
introduction of the gong. Mrs. Adams took this increased frequency to be only another
manifestation of the inexplicable new difficulties that beset all
housekeeping. You paid a cook double what you had paid one a few years
before; and the cook knew half as much of cookery, and had no gratitude. The more you gave these people, it seemed, the worse they behaved--a
condition not to be remedied by simply giving them less, because you
couldn't even get the worst unless you paid her what she demanded. Nevertheless, Mrs. Adams remained fitfully an optimist in the matter. Brought up by her mother to speak of a female cook as "the girl," she
had been instructed by Alice to drop that definition in favour of one
not an improvement in accuracy: "the maid." Almost always, during
the first day or so after every cook came, Mrs. Adams would say, at
intervals, with an air of triumph: "I believe--of course it's a little
soon to be sure--but I do really believe this new maid is the treasure
we've been looking for so long!" Much in the same way that Alice dreamed
of a mysterious perfect mate for whom she "waited," her mother had
a fairy theory that hidden somewhere in the universe there was the
treasure, the perfect "maid," who would come and cook in the Adamses'
kitchen, not four days or four weeks, but forever. The present incumbent was not she. Alice, profoundly interested herself,
kept her mother likewise so preoccupied with the dress that they were
but vaguely conscious of the gong's soft warnings, though these were
repeated and protracted unusually. Finally the sound of a hearty voice,
independent and enraged, reached the pair. It came from the hall below. "I says goo'-BYE!" it called. "Da'ss all!" Then the front door slammed. "Why, what----" Mrs. Adams began. They went down hurriedly to find out. Miss Perry informed them. "I couldn't make her listen to reason," she said. "She rang the gong
four or five times and got to talking to herself; and then she went up
to her room and packed her bag. I told her she had no business to go out
the front door, anyhow." Mrs. Adams took the news philosophically. "I thought she had something
like that in her eye when I paid her this morning, and I'm not
surprised. Well, we won't let Mr. Adams know anything's the matter till
I get a new one." They lunched upon what the late incumbent had left chilling on the
table, and then Mrs. Adams prepared to wash the dishes; she would "have
them done in a jiffy," she said, cheerfully. But it was Alice who washed
the dishes. "I DON'T like to have you do that, Alice," her mother protested,
following her into the kitchen. "It roughens the hands, and when a girl
has hands like yours----"

"I know, mama." Alice looked troubled, but shook her head. "It can't be
helped this time; you'll need every minute to get that dress done." Mrs. Adams went away lamenting, while Alice, no expert, began to splash
the plates and cups and saucers in the warm water. After a while, as
she worked, her eyes grew dreamy: she was making little gay-coloured
pictures of herself, unfounded prophecies of how she would look and what
would happen to her that evening. She saw herself, charming and demure,
wearing a fluffy idealization of the dress her mother now determinedly
struggled with upstairs; she saw herself framed in a garlanded archway,
the entrance to a ballroom, and saw the people on the shining floor
turning dramatically to look at her; then from all points a rush of
young men shouting for dances with her; and she constructed a superb
stranger, tall, dark, masterfully smiling, who swung her out of the
clamouring group as the music began. She saw herself dancing with him,
saw the half-troubled smile she would give him; and she accurately
smiled that smile as she rinsed the knives and forks. These hopeful fragments of drama were not to be realized, she knew; but
she played that they were true, and went on creating them. In all of
them she wore or carried flowers--her mother's sorrow for her in this
detail but made it the more important--and she saw herself glamorous
with orchids; discarded these for an armful of long-stemmed, heavy
roses; tossed them away for a great bouquet of white camellias; and
so wandered down a lengthening hothouse gallery of floral beauty, all
costly and beyond her reach except in such a wistful day-dream. And upon
her present whole horizon, though she searched it earnestly, she could
discover no figure of a sender of flowers. Out of her fancies the desire for flowers to wear that night emerged
definitely and became poignant; she began to feel that it might be
particularly important to have them. "This might be the night!" She was
still at the age to dream that the night of any dance may be the vital
point in destiny. No matter how commonplace or disappointing other
dance nights have been this one may bring the great meeting. The unknown
magnifico may be there. Alice was almost unaware of her own reveries in which this being
appeared--reveries often so transitory that they developed and passed in
a few seconds. And in some of them the being was not wholly a stranger;
there were moments when he seemed to be composed of recognizable
fragments of young men she knew--a smile she had liked, from one; the
figure of another, the hair of another--and sometimes she thought
he might be concealed, so to say, within the person of an actual
acquaintance, someone she had never suspected of being the right seeker
for her, someone who had never suspected that it was she who "waited"
for him. Anything might reveal them to each other: a look, a turn of the
head, a singular word--perhaps some flowers upon her breast or in her
hand. She wiped the dishes slowly, concluding the operation by dropping a
saucer upon the floor and dreamily sweeping the fragments under the
stove. She sighed and replaced the broom near a window, letting her
glance wander over the small yard outside. The grass, repulsively
besooted to the colour of coal-smoke all winter, had lately come to life
again and now sparkled with green, in the midst of which a tiny shot of
blue suddenly fixed her absent eyes. They remained upon it for several
moments, becoming less absent. It was a violet. Alice ran upstairs, put on her hat, went outdoors and began to search
out the violets. She found twenty-two, a bright omen--since the number
was that of her years--but not enough violets. There were no more; she
had ransacked every foot of the yard. She looked dubiously at the little bunch in her hand, glanced at
the lawn next door, which offered no favourable prospect; then went
thoughtfully into the house, left her twenty-two violets in a bowl
of water, and came quickly out again, her brow marked with a frown of
decision. She went to a trolley-line and took a car to the outskirts of
the city where a new park had been opened. Here she resumed her search, but it was not an easily rewarded one,
and for an hour after her arrival she found no violets. She walked
conscientiously over the whole stretch of meadow, her eyes roving
discontentedly; there was never a blue dot in the groomed expanse; but
at last, as she came near the borders of an old grove of trees, left
untouched by the municipal landscapers, the little flowers appeared, and
she began to gather them. She picked them carefully, loosening the earth
round each tiny plant, so as to bring the roots up with it, that it
might live the longer; and she had brought a napkin, which she
drenched at a hydrant, and kept loosely wrapped about the stems of her
collection. The turf was too damp for her to kneel; she worked patiently, stooping
from the waist; and when she got home in a drizzle of rain at five
o'clock her knees were tremulous with strain, her back ached, and she
was tired all over, but she had three hundred violets. Her mother moaned
when Alice showed them to her, fragrant in a basin of water. "Oh, you POOR child! To think of your having to: work so hard to get
things that other girls only need; lift their little fingers for!" "Never mind," said Alice, huskily. "I've got 'em and I AM going to have
a good time to-night!" "You've just got to!" Mrs. Adams agreed, intensely sympathetic. "The
Lord knows you deserve to, after picking all these violets, poor thing,
and He wouldn't be mean enough to keep you from it. I may have to get
dinner before I finish the dress, but I can get it done in a few minutes
afterward, and it's going to look right pretty. Don't you worry about
THAT! And with all these lovely violets----"

"I wonder----" Alice began, paused, then went on, fragmentarily: "I
suppose--well, I wonder--do you suppose it would have been better policy
to have told Walter before----"

"No," said her mother. "It would only have given him longer to grumble." "But he might----"

"Don't worry," Mrs. Adams reassured her. "He'll be a little cross, but
he won't be stubborn; just let me talk to him and don't you say anything
at all, no matter what HE says." These references to Walter concerned some necessary manoeuvres which
took place at dinner, and were conducted by the mother, Alice having
accepted her advice to sit in silence. Mrs. Adams began by laughing
cheerfully. "I wonder how much longer it took me to cook this dinner
than it does Walter to eat it?" she said. "Don't gobble, child! There's
no hurry." In contact with his own family Walter was no squanderer of words. "Is for me," he said. "Got date." "I know you have, but there's plenty of time." He smiled in benevolent pity. "YOU know, do you? If you made any
coffee--don't bother if you didn't. Get some down-town." He seemed
about to rise and depart; whereupon Alice, biting her lip, sent a
panic-stricken glance at her mother. But Mrs. Adams seemed not at all disturbed; and laughed again. "Why,
what nonsense, Walter! I'll bring your coffee in a few minutes, but
we're going to have dessert first." "What sort?" "Some lovely peaches." "Doe' want 'ny canned peaches," said the frank Walter, moving back his
chair. "G'-night." "Walter! It doesn't begin till about nine o'clock at the earliest." He paused, mystified. "What doesn't?" "The dance." "What dance?" "Why, Mildred Palmer's dance, of course." Walter laughed briefly. "What's that to me?" "Why, you haven't forgotten it's TO-NIGHT, have you?" Mrs. Adams cried. "What a boy!" "I told you a week ago I wasn't going to that ole dance," he returned,
frowning. "You heard me." "Walter!" she exclaimed. "Of COURSE you're going. I got your clothes all
out this afternoon, and brushed them for you. They'll look very nice,
and----"

"They won't look nice on ME," he interrupted. "Got date down-town, I
tell you." "But of course you'll----"

"See here!" Walter said, decisively. "Don't get any wrong ideas in your
head. I'm just as liable to go up to that ole dance at the Palmers' as I
am to eat a couple of barrels of broken glass." "But, Walter----"

Walter was beginning to be seriously annoyed. "Don't 'Walter' me! I'm no
s'ciety snake. I wouldn't jazz with that Palmer crowd if they coaxed me
with diamonds." "Walter----"

"Didn't I tell you it's no use to 'Walter' me?" he demanded. "My dear child----"

"Oh, Glory!" At this Mrs. Adams abandoned her air of amusement, looked hurt, and
glanced at the demure Miss Perry across the table. "I'm afraid Miss
Perry won't think you have very good manners, Walter." "You're right she won't," he agreed, grimly. "Not if I haf to hear any
more about me goin' to----"

But his mother interrupted him with some asperity: "It seems very
strange that you always object to going anywhere among OUR friends,
Walter." "YOUR friends!" he said, and, rising from his chair, gave utterance to
an ironical laugh strictly monosyllabic. "Your friends!" he repeated,
going to the door. "Oh, yes! Certainly! Good-NIGHT!" And looking back over his shoulder to offer a final brief view of his
derisive face, he took himself out of the room. Alice gasped: "Mama----"

"I'll stop him!" her mother responded, sharply; and hurried after the
truant, catching him at the front door with his hat and raincoat on. "Walter----"

"Told you had a date down-town," he said, gruffly, and would have opened
the door, but she caught his arm and detained him. "Walter, please come back and finish your dinner. When I take all the
trouble to cook it for you, I think you might at least----"

"Now, now!" he said. "That isn't what you're up to. You don't want to
make me eat; you want to make me listen." "Well, you MUST listen!" She retained her grasp upon his arm, and
made it tighter. "Walter, please!" she entreated, her voice becoming
tremulous. "PLEASE don't make me so much trouble!" He drew back from her as far as her hold upon him permitted, and looked
at her sharply. "Look here!" he said. "I get you, all right! What's the
matter of Alice GOIN' to that party by herself?" "She just CAN'T!" "Why not?" "It makes things too MEAN for her, Walter. All the other girls have
somebody to depend on after they get there." "Well, why doesn't she have somebody?" he asked, testily. "Somebody
besides ME, I mean! Why hasn't somebody asked her to go? She ought to be
THAT popular, anyhow, I sh'd think--she TRIES enough!" "I don't understand how you can be so hard," his mother wailed, huskily. "You know why they don't run after her the way they do the other girls
she goes with, Walter. It's because we're poor, and she hasn't got any
background. "'Background?'" Walter repeated. "'Background?' What kind of talk is
that?" "You WILL go with her to-night, Walter?" his mother pleaded, not
stopping to enlighten him. "You don't understand how hard things are for
her and how brave she is about them, or you COULDN'T be so selfish! It'd
be more than I can bear to see her disappointed to-night! She went clear
out to Belleview Park this afternoon, Walter, and spent hours and hours
picking violets to wear. You WILL----"

Walter's heart was not iron, and the episode of the violets may have
reached it. "Oh, BLUB!" he said, and flung his soft hat violently at the
wall. His mother beamed with delight. "THAT'S a good boy, darling! You'll
never be sorry you----"

"Cut it out," he requested. "If I take her, will you pay for a taxi?" "Oh, Walter!" And again Mrs. Adams showed distress. "Couldn't you?" "No, I couldn't; I'm not goin' to throw away my good money like that,
and you can't tell what time o' night it'll be before she's willin' to
come home. What's the matter you payin' for one?" "I haven't any money." "Well, father----"

She shook her head dolefully. "I got some from him this morning, and
I can't bother him for any more; it upsets him. He's ALWAYS been so
terribly close with money----"

"I guess he couldn't help that," Walter observed. "We're liable to go to
the poorhouse the way it is. Well, what's the matter our walkin' to this
rotten party?" "In the rain, Walter?" "Well, it's only a drizzle and we can take a streetcar to within a block
of the house." Again his mother shook her head. "It wouldn't do." "Well, darn the luck, all right!" he consented, explosively. "I'll get
her something to ride in. It means seventy-five cents." "Why, Walter!" Mrs. Adams cried, much pleased. "Do you know how to get a
cab for that little? How splendid!" "Tain't a cab," Walter informed her crossly. "It's a tin Lizzie, but you
don't haf' to tell her what it is till I get her into it, do you?" Mrs. Adams agreed that she didn't. CHAPTER VI

Alice was busy with herself for two hours after dinner; but a little
before nine o'clock she stood in front of her long mirror, completed,
bright-eyed and solemn. Her hair, exquisitely arranged, gave all she
asked of it; what artificialities in colour she had used upon her face
were only bits of emphasis that made her prettiness the more distinct;
and the dress, not rumpled by her mother's careful hours of work, was a
white cloud of loveliness. Finally there were two triumphant bouquets
of violets, each with the stems wrapped in tin-foil shrouded by a bow of
purple chiffon; and one bouquet she wore at her waist and the other she
carried in her hand. Miss Perry, called in by a rapturous mother for the free treat of a look
at this radiance, insisted that Alice was a vision. "Purely and simply
a vision!" she said, meaning that no other definition whatever would
satisfy her. "I never saw anybody look a vision if she don't look one
to-night," the admiring nurse declared. "Her papa'll think the same I do
about it. You see if he doesn't say she's purely and simply a vision." Adams did not fulfil the prediction quite literally when Alice paid a
brief visit to his room to "show" him and bid him good-night; but he
chuckled feebly. "Well, well, well!" he said. "You look mighty fine--MIGHTY fine!" And he waggled a bony finger at her
two bouquets. "Why, Alice, who's your beau?" "Never you mind!" she laughed, archly brushing his nose with the violets
in her hand. "He treats me pretty well, doesn't he?" "Must like to throw his money around! These violets smell mighty sweet,
and they ought to, if they're going to a party with YOU. Have a good
time, dearie." "I mean to!" she cried; and she repeated this gaily, but with an
emphasis expressing sharp determination as she left him. "I MEAN to!" "What was he talking about?" her mother inquired, smoothing the rather
worn and old evening wrap she had placed on Alice's bed. "What were you
telling him you 'mean to?'" Alice went back to her triple mirror for the last time, then stood
before the long one. "That I mean to have a good time to-night," she
said; and as she turned from her reflection to the wrap Mrs. Adams held
up for her, "It looks as though I COULD, don't you think so?" "You'll just be a queen to-night," her mother whispered in fond emotion. "You mustn't doubt yourself." "Well, there's one thing," said Alice. "I think I do look nice enough to
get along without having to dance with that Frank Dowling! All I ask is
for it to happen just once; and if he comes near me to-night I'm going
to treat him the way the other girls do. Do you suppose Walter's got the
taxi out in front?" "He--he's waiting down in the hall," Mrs. Adams answered, nervously; and
she held up another garment to go over the wrap. Alice frowned at it. "What's that, mama?" "It's--it's your father's raincoat. I thought you'd put it on over----"

"But I won't need it in a taxicab." "You will to get in and out, and you needn't take it into the Palmers'. You can leave it in the--in the--It's drizzling, and you'll need it." "Oh, well," Alice consented; and a few minutes later, as with Walter's
assistance she climbed into the vehicle he had provided, she better
understood her mother's solicitude. "What on earth IS this, Walter?" she asked. "Never mind; it'll keep you dry enough with the top up," he returned,
taking his seat beside her. Then for a time, as they went rather jerkily
up the street, she was silent; but finally she repeated her question:
"What IS it, Walter?" "What's what?" "This--this CAR?" "It's a ottomobile." "I mean--what kind is it?" "Haven't you got eyes?" "It's too dark." "It's a second-hand tin Lizzie," said Walter. "D'you know what that
means? It means a flivver." "Yes, Walter." "Got 'ny 'bjections?" "Why, no, dear," she said, placatively. "Is it yours, Walter? Have you
bought it?" "Me?" he laughed. "_I_ couldn't buy a used wheelbarrow. I rent this
sometimes when I'm goin' out among 'em. Costs me seventy-five cents and
the price o' the gas." "That seems very moderate." "I guess it is! The feller owes me some money, and this is the only way
I'd ever get it off him." "Is he a garage-keeper?" "Not exactly!" Walter uttered husky sounds of amusement. "You'll be just
as happy, I guess, if you don't know who he is," he said. His tone misgave her; and she said truthfully that she was content not
to know who owned the car. "I joke sometimes about how you keep things
to yourself," she added, "but I really never do pry in your affairs,
Walter." "Oh, no, you don't!" "Indeed, I don't." "Yes, you're mighty nice and cooing when you got me where you want me,"
he jeered. "Well, _I_ just as soon tell you where I get this car." "I'd just as soon you wouldn't, Walter," she said, hurriedly. "Please
don't." But Walter meant to tell her. "Why, there's nothin' exactly CRIMINAL
about it," he said. "It belongs to old J. A. Lamb himself. He keeps it
for their coon chauffeur. I rent it from him." "From Mr. LAMB?" "No; from the coon chauffeur." "Walter!" she gasped. "Sure I do! I can get it any night when the coon isn't goin' to use it
himself. He's drivin' their limousine to-night--that little Henrietta
Lamb's goin' to the party, no matter if her father HAS only been dead
less'n a year!" He paused, then inquired: "Well, how d'you like it?" She did not speak, and he began to be remorseful for having imparted
so much information, though his way of expressing regret was his own. "Well, you WILL make the folks make me take you to parties!" he said. "I
got to do it the best way I CAN, don't I?" Then as she made no response, "Oh, the car's CLEAN enough," he said. "This coon, he's as particular as any white man; you needn't worry about
that." And as she still said nothing, he added gruffly, "I'd of had a
better car if I could afforded it. You needn't get so upset about it." "I don't understand--" she said in a low voice--"I don't understand how
you know such people." "Such people as who?" "As--coloured chauffeurs." "Oh, look here, now!" he protested, loudly. "Don't you know this is a
democratic country?" "Not quite that democratic, is it, Walter?" "The trouble with you," he retorted, "you don't know there's anybody in
town except just this silk-shirt crowd." He paused, seeming to await
a refutation; but as none came, he expressed himself definitely: "They
make me sick." They were coming near their destination, and the glow of the big,
brightly lighted house was seen before them in the wet night. Other
cars, not like theirs, were approaching this center of brilliance; long
triangles of light near the ground swept through the fine drizzle; small
red tail-lights gleamed again from the moist pavement of the street;
and, through the myriads of little glistening leaves along the curving
driveway, glimpses were caught of lively colours moving in a white glare
as the limousines released their occupants under the shelter of the
porte-cochere. Alice clutched Walter's arm in a panic; they were just at the driveway
entrance. "Walter, we mustn't go in there." "What's the matter?" "Leave this awful car outside." "Why, I----"

"Stop!" she insisted, vehemently. "You've got to! Go back!" "Oh, Glory!" The little car was between the entrance posts; but Walter backed it out,
avoiding a collision with an impressive machine which swerved away
from them and passed on toward the porte-cochere, showing a man's face
grinning at the window as it went by. "Flivver runabout got the wrong
number!" he said. "Did he SEE us?" Alice cried. "Did who see us?" "Harvey Malone--in that foreign coupe." "No; he couldn't tell who we were under this top," Walter assured her as
he brought the little car to a standstill beside the curbstone, out in
the street. "What's it matter if he did, the big fish?" Alice responded with a loud sigh, and sat still. "Well, want to go on back?" Walter inquired. "You bet I'm willing!" "No." "Well, then, what's the matter our drivin' on up to the porte-cochere? There's room for me to park just the other side of it." "No, NO!" "What you expect to do? Sit HERE all night?" "No, leave the car here." "_I_ don't care where we leave it," he said. 