



Produced by Greg Weeks, Jason Isbell, Sankar Viswanathan,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                         Transcriber's Note:

       Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
       copyright on this publication was renewed. _BRIGANDS of the MOON_



                                  by

                             RAY CUMMINGS




                           ACE BOOKS, INC.

               23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N. Y. Copyright, 1931, by Ray Cummings


       *       *       *       *       *




I


Our ship, the space-flyer, _Planetara_, whose home port was Greater
New York, carried mail and passenger traffic to and from both Venus
and Mars. Of astronomical necessity, our flights were irregular. The
spring of 2070, with both planets close to the Earth, we were making
two complete round trips. We had just arrived in Greater New York, one
May evening, from Grebhar, Venus Free State. With only five hours in
port here, we were departing the same night at the zero hour for
Ferrok-Shahn, capital of the Martian Union. We were no sooner at the landing stage than I found a code flash
summoning Dan Dean and me to Divisional Detective Headquarters. Dan
"Snap" Dean was one of my closest friends. He was electron-radio
operator of the _Planetara_. A small, wiry, red-headed chap, with a
quick, ready laugh and the kind of wit that made everyone like him. The summons to Detective-Colonel Halsey's office surprised us. Dean
eyed me. "You haven't been opening any treasure vaults, have you, Gregg?" "He wants you, also," I retorted. He laughed. "Well, he can roar at me like a traffic switch-man and my
private life will remain my own." We could not think why we should be wanted. It was the darkness of
mid-evening when we left the _Planetara_ for Halsey's office. It was
not a long trip. We went on the upper monorail, descending into the
subterranean city at Park Circle 30. We had never been to Halsey's office before. Now we found it to be a
gloomy, vaultlike place in one of the deepest corridors. The door
lifted. "Gregg Haljan and Daniel Dean." The guard stood aside. "Come in." I own that my heart was unduly thumping as we entered. The door
dropped behind us. It was a small blue-lit apartment--a steel-lined
room like a vault. Colonel Halsey sat at his desk. And the big, heavy-set, florid Captain
Carter--our commander on the _Planetara_--was here. That surprised us:
we had not seen him leave the ship. Halsey smiled at us gravely. Captain Carter spoke with an ominous
calmness: "Sit down, lads." We took the seats. There was an alarming solemnity about this. If I
had been guilty of anything that I could think of, it would have been
frightening. But Halsey's words reassured me. "It's about the Grantline Moon Expedition. In spite of our secrecy,
the news has gotten out. We want to know how. Can you tell us?" Captain Carter's huge bulk--he was about as tall as I am--towered over
us as we sat before Halsey's desk. "If you lads have told anyone--said
anything--let _slip_ the slightest hint about it...."

Snap smiled with relief; but he turned solemn at once. "I haven't. Not
a word!" "Nor have I!" I declared. The Grantline Moon Expedition! We had not thought of that as a reason
for this summons. Johnny Grantline was a close friend of ours. He had
organized an exploring expedition to the Moon. Uninhabited, with its
bleak, forbidding, airless, waterless surface, the Moon--even though
so close to the Earth--was seldom visited. No regular ship ever
stopped there. A few exploring parties of recent years had come to
grief. But there was a persistent rumor that upon the Moon, mineral riches of
fabulous wealth were awaiting discovery. The thing had already caused
some interplanetary complications. The aggressive Martians would be
only too glad to explore the Moon. But the United States of the World,
which came into being in 2067, definitely warned them away. The Moon
was Earth territory, we announced, and we would protect it as such. There was, nevertheless, a realization by our government, that
whatever riches might be upon the Moon should be seized at once and
held by some reputable Earth Company. And when John Grantline applied,
with his father's wealth and his own scientific record of attainment,
the government was glad to grant him its writ. The Grantline Expedition had started six months ago. The Martian
government had acquiesced to our ultimatum, yet brigands have been
known to be financed under cover of a government disavowal. And so our
expedition was kept secret. My words need give no offence to any Martian who comes upon them. I
refer to the history of our Earth only. The Grantline Expedition was
on the Moon now. No word had come from it. One could not flash helios
even in code without letting all the universe know that explorers were
on the Moon. And why they were there, anyone could easily guess. And now Colonel Halsey was telling us that the news was abroad! Captain Carter eyed us closely; his flashing eyes under the white
bushy brows would pry a secret from anyone. "You're sure? A girl of Venus, perhaps, with her cursed, seductive
lure! A chance word, with you lads befuddled by alcolite?" We assured him that we had been careful. By the heavens, I know that I
had been. Not a whisper, even to Snap, of the name Grantline in six
months or more. Captain Carter added abruptly, "We're insulated here, Halsey?" "Yes. Talk as freely as you like. An eavesdropping ray will never get
through to us." They questioned us. They were satisfied at last that, though the
secret had escaped, we had not given it away. Hearing it discussed, it
occurred to me to wonder why Carter was concerned. I was not aware
that he knew of Grantline's venture. I learned now the reason why the
_Planetara_, upon each of her last voyages, had managed to pass fairly
close to the Moon. It had been arranged with Grantline that if he
wanted help or had any important message, he was to flash it locally
to our passing ship. And this Snap knew, and had never mentioned it,
even to me. Halsey was saying, "Well, apparently we can't blame you: but the
secret is out." Snap and I regarded each other. What could anyone do? What would
anyone dare do? Captain Carter said abruptly, "Look here, lads, this is my chance now
to talk plainly to you. Outside, anywhere outside these walls, an
eavesdropping ray may be upon us. You know that? One may never even
dare to whisper since that accursed ray was developed." Snap opened his mouth to speak but decided against it. My heart was
pounding. Captain Carter went on: "I know I can trust you two more than anyone
under me on the _Planetara_." "What do you mean by that?" I demanded. "What--"

He interrupted me. "Just what I said." Halsey smiled grimly. "What he means, Haljan, is that things are not
always what they seem these days. One cannot always tell a friend from
an enemy. The _Planetara_ is a public vessel. You have--how many is
it, Carter?--thirty or forty passengers this trip tonight?" "Thirty-eight," said Carter. "There are thirty-eight people listed for the flight to Ferrok-Shahn
tonight," Halsey said slowly. "And some may not be what they seem." He
raised his thin dark hand. "We have information...." He paused. "I
confess, we know almost nothing--hardly more than enough to alarm us." Captain Carter interjected, "I want you and Dean to be on your guard. Once on the _Planetara_ it is difficult for us to talk openly, but be
watchful. I will arrange for us to be doubly armed." Vague, perturbing words! Halsey said, "They tell me George Prince is
listed for the voyage. I am suggesting, Haljan, that you keep your eye
especially on him. Your duties on the _Planetara_ leave you
comparatively free, don't they?" "Yes," I agreed. With the first and second officers on duty, and the
Captain aboard, my routine was more or less that of an understudy. I said, "George Prince? Who is he?" "A mechanical engineer," said Halsey. "An underofficial of the Earth
Federated Catalyst Corporation. But he associates with bad
companions--particularly Martians." I had never heard of this George Prince, though I was familiar with
the Federated Catalyst Corporation, of course. A semigovernment trust,
which controlled virtually the entire Earth supply of radiactum, the
catalyst mineral which was revolutionizing industry. "He was in the Automotive Department," Carter put in. "You've heard of
the Federated Radiactum Motor?" We had, of course. It was a recent Earth discovery and invention. An
engine of a new type, using radiactum as its fuel. Snap demanded, "What in the stars has this got to do with Johnny
Grantline?" "Much," said Halsey quietly, "or perhaps nothing. But George Prince
some years ago mixed in rather unethical transactions. We had him in
custody once. He is known as unusually friendly with several Martians
in Greater New York of bad reputation." "Well?" "What you don't know," Halsey said, "is that Grantline expects to find
radiactum on the Moon." We gasped. "Exactly," said Halsey. "The ill-fated Ballon Expedition thought they
had found it on the Moon, shortly after its merit was discovered. A
new type of ore--a lode of it is there somewhere, without doubt." He added vehemently, "Do you understand now why we should be
suspicious of this George Prince? He has a criminal record. He has a
thorough technical knowledge of radium ores. He associates with
Martians of bad reputation. A large Martian company has recently
developed a radiactum engine to compete with our Earth motor. There is
very little radiactum available on Mars, and our government will not
allow our own supply to be exported. What do you suppose that company
on Mars would pay for a few tons of richly radioactive radiactum such
as Grantline may have found on the Moon?" "But," I objected, "That is a reputable Martian company. It's backed
by the government of the Martian Union. The government of Mars would
not dare--"

"Of course not!" Captain Carter exclaimed sardonically. "Not openly! But if Martian Brigands had a supply of radiactum I don't imagine
where it came from would make much difference. The Martian company
would buy it, and you know that as well as I do!" Halsey added, "And George Prince, my agents inform me, seems to know
that Grantline is on the Moon. Put it all together, lads. Little
sparks show the hidden current. "More than that: George Prince knows that we have arranged to have the
_Planetara_ stop at the Moon and bring back Grantline's ore.... This
is your last voyage this year. You'll hear from Grantline this time,
we're convinced. He'll probably give you the signal as you pass the
Moon on your way out. Coming back, you'll stop at the Moon and
transport whatever radiactum ore Grantline has ready. The Grantline
Flyer is too small for ore transportation." Halsey's voice turned grimly sarcastic. "Doesn't it seem queer that
George Prince and a few of his Martian friends happen to be listed as
passengers for this voyage?" In the silence that followed, Snap and I regarded each other. Halsey
added abruptly:

"We had George Prince typed that time we arrested him four years ago. I'll show him to you." He snapped open an alcove, and said to his waiting attendant "Flash on
the type of George Prince." Almost at once, the image glowed on the grids before us. He stood
smiling sourly before us as he repeated the official formula:

"My name is George Prince. I was born in Greater New York twenty-five
years ago." I gazed at this televised image of George Prince. He stood somber in
the black detention uniform, silhouetted sharply against the
regulation backdrop of vivid scarlet. A dark, almost femininely
handsome fellow, well below medium height--the rod checking him showed
five foot four inches. Slim and slight. Long, wavy black hair, falling
about his ears. A pale, clean-cut, really handsome face, almost
beardless. I regarded it closely. A face that would have been
beautiful without its masculine touch of heavy black brows and firmly
set jaw. His voice as he spoke was low and soft; but at the end, with
the concluding words, "I am innocent!" it flashed into strong
masculinity. His eyes, shaded with long girlish black lashes, by
chance met mine. "I am innocent." His curving sensuous lips drew down
into a grim sneer....

Halsey snapped a button. He turned back to Snap and me as his
attendant drew the curtain, hiding the black grid. "Well, there he is. We have nothing tangible against him now. But I'll
say this: he's a clever fellow, one to be afraid of. I would not blare
it from the newscasters' stadium, but if he is hatching any plot, he
has been too clever for my agents!" We talked for another half-hour, and then Captain Carter dismissed us. We left Halsey's office with Carter's final words ringing in our ears. "Whatever comes, lads, remember I trust you...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Snap and I decided to walk part of the way back to the ship. It was
barely more than a mile through this subterranean corridor to where we
could get the vertical lift direct to the landing stage. We started off on the lower level. Once outside the insulation of
Halsey's office we did not dare talk of this thing. Not only
electrical ears, but every possible eavesdropping device might be upon
us. The corridor was two hundred feet or more below the ground level. At this hour of the night the business section was comparatively
deserted. The stores and office arcades were all closed. Our footfall echoed on the metal grids as we hurried along. I felt
depressed and oppressed. As though prying eyes were upon me. We walked
for a time in silence, each of us busy with memory of what had
transpired at Halsey's office. Suddenly Snap gripped me. "What's that?" "Where?" I whispered. We stopped at a corner. An entryway was here. Snap pulled me into it. I could feel him quivering with excitement. "What is it?" I demanded in a whisper. "We're being followed. Did you hear anything?" "No!" Yet I thought now that I could hear something. Vague footfalls. A rustling. And a microscopic whine, as though some device were within
range of us. Snap was fumbling in his pocket. "Wait! I've got a pair of low-scale
detectors." He put the little grids against his ears. I could hear the sharp
intake of his breath. Then he seized me, pulled me down to the metal
floor of the entryway. "Back, Gregg! Get back!" I could barely hear his whisper. We crouched
as far back into the doorway as we could get. I was armed. My official
permit for the carrying of the pencil heat ray allowed me always to
have it with me. I drew it now. But there was nothing to shoot at. I
felt Snap clamping the grids on my ears. And now I heard something! An
intensification of the vague footsteps I had thought I heard before. There was something following us! Something out in the corridor there
now! The corridor was dim, but plainly visible, and as far as I could
see it was empty. But there was something there. Something invisible! I could hear it moving. Creeping toward us. I pulled the grids off my
ears. Snap murmured, "You've got a local phone?" "Yes. I'll get them to give us the street glare!" I pressed the danger signal, giving our location to the operator. In a
second we got the light. The street in all this neighborhood burst
into a brilliant actinic glare. The thing menacing us was revealed! A
figure in a black cloak, crouching thirty feet away across the
corridor. Snap was unarmed but he flung his hands out menacingly. The figure,
which may perhaps not have been aware of our city safeguard, was taken
wholly by surprise. A human figure, seven feet tall at the least, and
therefore, I judged, a Martian man. The black cloak covered his head. He took a step toward us, hesitated, and then turned in confusion. Snap's shrill voice was bringing help. The whine of a street guard's
alarm whistle nearby sounded. The figure was making off! My pencil ray
was in my hand and I pressed its switch. The tiny heat ray stabbed
through the air, but I missed. The figure stumbled but did not fall. I
saw a bare gray arm come from the cloak, flung up to maintain its
balance. Or perhaps my pencil ray had seared his arm. The gray-skinned
arm of a Martian. Snap was shouting, "Give him another!" But the figure passed beyond
the actinic glare and vanished. We were detained in the turmoil of the corridor for ten minutes or
more with official explanations. Then a message from Halsey released
us. The Martian who had been following us in his invisible cloak was
never caught. We escaped from the crowd at last and made our way back to the
_Planetara_, where the passengers were already assembling for the
outward Martian voyage. II


I stood on the turret balcony of the _Planetara_ with Captain Carter
and Dr. Frank, the ship surgeon, watching the arriving passengers. It
was close to the zero hour; the level of the stage was a turmoil of
confusion. The escalators, with the last of the freight aboard, were
folded back. But the stage was jammed with incoming passenger luggage,
the interplanetary customs and tax officials with their x-ray and
zed-ray paraphernalia and the passengers themselves, lined up for the
export inspection. At this height, the city lights lay spread in a glare of blue and
yellow beneath us. The individual local planes came dropping like
birds to our stage. Thirty-eight passengers to Mars for this voyage,
but that accursed desire of every friend and relative to speed the
departing voyager brought a hundred or more extra people to crowd our
girders and add to everybody's troubles. Carter was too absorbed in his duties to stay with us long. But here
in the turret Dr. Frank and I found ourselves at the moment with
nothing much to do but watch. Dr. Frank was a thin, dark, rather smallish man of fifty, trim in his
blue and white uniform. I knew him well: we had made several flights
together. An American--I fancy of Jewish ancestry. A likable man, and
a skillful doctor and surgeon. He and I had always been good friends. "Crowded," he said. "Johnson says thirty-eight. I hope they're
experienced travelers. This pressure sickness is a rotten
nuisance--keeps me dashing around all night assuring frightened women
they're not going to die. Last voyage, coming out of the Venus
atmosphere--"

He plunged into a lugubrious account of his troubles with space sick
voyagers. But I was in no mood to listen to him. My gaze was down on
the spider incline, up which, over the bend of the ship's sleek,
silvery body, the passengers and their friends were coming in little
groups. The upper deck was already jammed with them. The _Planetara_, as flyers go, was not a large vessel. Cylindrical of
body, forty feet maximum beam, and two hundred and seventy-five feet
in length. The passenger superstructure--no more than a hundred feet
long--was set amidships. A narrow deck, metallically enclosed, and
with large bull's-eye windows, encircled the superstructure. Some of
the cabins opened directly onto the deck. Others had doors to the
interior corridors. There were half a dozen small but luxurious public
rooms. The rest of the vessel was given to freight storage and the mechanism
and control compartments. Forward of the passenger structure the deck
level continued under the cylindrical dome roof to the bow. The
forward watch tower observatory was here, officers' cabins, Captain
Carter's navigating rooms and Dr. Frank's office. Similarly, under the
stern dome, was the stern watch tower and a series of power
compartments. Above the superstructure a confusion of spider bridges, ladders and
balconies were laced like a metal network. The turret in which Dr.
Frank and I now stood was perched here. Fifty feet away, like a bird's
nest, Snap's instrument room stood clinging to the metal bridge. The
dome roof, with the glassite windows rolled back now, rose in a mound
peak to cover the highest middle portion of the vessel. Below, in the main hull, blue lit metal corridors ran the entire
length of the ship. Freight storage compartments; gravity control
rooms; the air renewal system; heater and ventilators and pressure
mechanisms--all were located there. And the kitchens, stewards'
compartments, and the living quarters of the crew. We carried a crew
of sixteen, this voyage, exclusive of the navigating officers, the
purser, Snap Dean, and Dr. Frank. The passengers coming aboard seemed a fair representation of what we
usually had for the outward voyage to Ferrok-Shahn. Most were Earth
people--and returning Martians. Dr. Frank pointed out one. A huge
Martian in a grey cloak. A seven foot fellow. "His name is _Set_ Miko," Dr. Frank remarked. "Ever heard of him?" "No," I said. "Should I?" "Well--" The doctor suddenly checked himself, as though he were sorry
he had spoken. "I never heard of him," I repeated slowly. An awkward silence fell between us. There were a few Venus passengers. I saw one of them presently coming
up the incline, and recognized her. A girl traveling alone. We had
brought her from Grebhar, last voyage but one. I remembered her. An
alluring sort of girl, as most of them are. Her name was Venza. She
spoke English well. A singer and dancer who had been imported to
Greater New York to fill some theatrical engagement. She'd made quite
a hit on the Great White Way. She came up the incline with the carrier ahead of her. Gazing up, she
saw Dr. Frank and me at the turret window, smiled and waved her white
arm in greeting. Dr. Frank laughed. "By the gods of the airways, there's Alta Venza! You saw that look, Gregg? That was for me, not you." "Reasonable enough," I retorted. "But I doubt it--the Venza is nothing
if not impartial." I wondered what could be taking Venza now to Mars. I was glad to see
her. She was diverting. Educated. Well traveled. Spoke English with a
colloquial, theatrical manner more characteristic of Greater New York
than of Venus. And for all her light banter, I would rather put my
trust in her than any Venus girl I had ever met. The hum of the departing siren was sounding. Friends and relatives of
the passengers were crowding the exit incline. The deck was clearing. I had not seen George Prince come aboard. And then I thought I saw him
down on the landing stage, just arrived from a private tube car. A
small, slight figure. The customs men were around him. I could only
see his head and shoulders. Pale, girlishly handsome face; long, black
hair to the base of his neck. He was bare-headed, with the hood of his
traveling cloak pushed back. I stared, and I saw that Dr. Frank was also gazing down. But neither
of us spoke. Then I said upon impulse, "Suppose we go down to the deck, Doctor?" He acquiesced. We descended to the lower room of the turret and
clambered down the spider ladder to the upper deck level. The head of
the arriving incline was near us. Preceded by two carriers who were
littered with hand luggage, George Prince was coming up the incline. He was closer now. I recognized him from the type we had seen in
Halsey's office. And then, with a shock, I saw it was not so. This was a girl coming
aboard. An arc light over the incline showed her clearly when she was
half way up. A girl with her hood pushed back; her face framed in
thick black hair. I saw now it was not a man's cut of hair; but long
braids coiled up under the dangling hood. Dr. Frank must have remarked my amazed expression. "Little beauty,
isn't she?" "Who is she?" We were standing back against the wall of the superstructure. A
passenger was near us--the Martian whom Dr. Frank had called Miko. He
was loitering here, quite evidently watching this girl come aboard. But as I glanced at him, he looked away and casually sauntered off. The girl came up and reached the deck. "I am in A22," she told the
carrier. "My brother came aboard a couple of hours ago." Dr. Frank answered my whisper. "That's Anita Prince." She was passing quite close to us on the deck, following the carrier,
when she stumbled and very nearly fell. I was nearest to her. I leaped
forward and caught her as she nearly went down. With my arm about her, I raised her up and set her upon her feet
again. She had twisted her ankle. She balanced herself upon it. The
pain of it eased up in a moment. "I'm all right--thank you!" In the dimness of the blue lit deck I met her eyes. I was holding her
with my encircling arm. She was small and soft against me. Her face,
framed in the thick, black hair, smiled up at me. Small, oval
face--beautiful--yet firm of chin, and stamped with the mark of its
own individuality. No empty-headed beauty, this. "I'm all right, thank you very much--"

I became conscious that I had not released her. I felt her hands
pushing at me. And then it seemed that for an instant she yielded and
was clinging. And I met her startled upflung gaze. Eyes like a purple
night with the sheen of misty starlight in them. I heard myself murmuring, "I beg your pardon. Yes, of course!" I
released her. She thanked me again and followed the carriers along the deck. She was
limping slightly. An instant she had clung to me. A brief flash of something, from her
eyes to mine--from mine back to hers. The poets write that love can be
born of such a glance. The first meeting, across all the barriers of
which love springs unsought, unbidden--defiant, sometimes. And the
troubadours of old would sing: "A fleeting glance; a touch; two wildly
beating hearts--and love was born." I think, with Anita and me, it must have been like that. I stood, gazing after her, unconscious of Dr. Frank, who was watching
me with his quizzical smile. And presently, no more than a quarter
beyond the zero hour, the _Planetara_ got away. With the dome windows
battened tightly, we lifted from the landing stage and soared over the
glowing city. The phosphorescence of the electronic tubes was like a
comet's tail behind us as we slid upward. III


At six A.M., Earth Eastern time, which we were still carrying, Snap
Dean and I were alone in his instrument room, perched in the network
over the _Planetara's_ deck. The bulge of the dome enclosed us; it
rounded like a great observatory window some twenty feet above the
ceiling of this little metal cubbyhole. The _Planetara_ was still in Earth's shadow. The firmament--black,
interstellar space with its blazing white, red and yellow stars--lay
spread around us. The Moon, with nearly all its disc illumined, hung,
a great silver ball, over our bow quarter. Behind it, to one side,
Mars floated like the red tip of a smoldering cigar in the blackness. The Earth, behind our stern, was dimly, redly visible--a giant sphere,
etched with the configurations of its oceans and continents. Upon one
limb a touch of sunlight hung on the mountain tops with a crescent
red-yellow sheen. And then we plunged from the cone shadow. The Sun with the leaping
corona, burst through the blackness behind us. The Earth lighted into
a huge, thin crescent with hooked cusps. To Snap and me, the glories of the heavens were too familiar to be
remarked. And upon this voyage particularly we were in no mood to
consider them. I had been in the radio room several hours. When the
_Planetara_ started, and my few routine duties were over, I could
think of nothing save Halsey's and Carter's admonition: "Be on your
guard. And particularly--watch George Prince." I had not seen George Prince. But I had seen his sister, whom Carter
and Halsey had not bothered to mention. My heart was still pounding
with the memory. Dr. Frank evidently was having little trouble with pressure sick
passengers. The _Planetara's_ equalizers were fairly efficient. Prowling through the silent metal lounges and passages, I went to the
door of A22. It was on the deck level, in a tiny transverse passage
just off the main lounging room. Its name-grid glowed with the
letters: _Anita Prince_. I stood in my short white trousers and white
silk shirt, like a cabin steward staring. Anita Prince! I had never
heard the name until this night. But there was magic music in it now,
as I murmured it. She was here, doubtless asleep, behind this small metal door. It
seemed as though that little oval grid were the gateway to a fairyland
of my dreams. I turned away. Thought of the Grantline Moon Expedition stabbed at me. George Prince--Anita's brother--he whom I had been warned to watch. This renegade--associate of dubious Martians, plotting God knows what. I saw, upon the adjoining door, A20, _George Prince_. I listened. In
the humming stillness of the ship's interior there was no sound from
these cabins. A20 was without windows, I knew. But Anita's room had a
window and a door which gave upon the deck. I went through the lounge,
out its arch and walked the deck length. The deck door and window of
A22 were closed and dark. The deck was dim with white starlight from the side ports. Chairs were
here but they were all empty. From the bow windows of the arching dome
a flood of moonlight threw long, slanting shadows down the deck. At
the corner where the superstructure ended, I thought I saw a figure
lurking as though watching me. I went that way, but it vanished. I turned the corner, went the width of the ship to the other side. There was no one in sight save the observer on his spider bridge, high
in the bow network, and the second officer, on duty on the turret
balcony almost directly over me. As I stood and listened, I suddenly heard footsteps. From the
direction of the bow a figure came. Purser Johnson. He greeted me. "Cooling off, Gregg?" "Yes," I said. He passed me and went into the smoking room door nearby. I stood a moment at one of the deck windows, gazing at the stars; and
for no reason at all I realized I was tense. Johnson was a great one
for his regular sleep--it was wholly unlike him to be roaming about
the ship at such an hour. Had he been watching me? I told myself it
was nonsense. I was suspicious of everyone, everything, this voyage. I heard another step. Captain Carter appeared from his chart room
which stood in the center of the narrowing open deck space near the
bow. I joined him at once. "Who was that?" he half whispered. "Johnson." "Oh, yes." He fumbled in his uniform; his gaze swept the moonlit deck. "Gregg--take this." He handed me a small metal box. I stuffed it at
once into my shirt. "An insulator," he added swiftly. "Snap is in his office. Take it to
him, Gregg. Stay with him--you'll have a measure of security--and you
can help him to make the photographs." He was barely whispering. "I
won't be with you--no use making it look as though we were doing
anything unusual. If your graphs show anything--or if Snap picks up
any message--bring it to me." He added aloud, "Well, it will be cool
enough presently, Gregg." He sauntered away toward his chart room. "By heavens, what a relief!" Snap murmured as the current went on. We
had wired his cubby with the insulator; within its barrage we could at
least talk with a degree of freedom. "You've seen George Prince, Gregg?" "No. He's assigned A20. But I saw his sister. Snap, no one ever
mentioned--"

Snap had heard of her, but he hadn't known that she was listed for
this voyage. "A real beauty, so I've heard. Accursed shame for a
decent girl to have a brother like that." I could agree with him there.... It was now six A.M. Snap had been busy all night with routine
cosmos-radios from the Earth, following our departure. He had a pile
of them beside him. "Nothing queer looking?" I suggested. "No. Not a thing." We were at this time no more than sixty-five thousand miles from the
Moon's surface. The _Planetara_ presently would swing upon her direct
course for Mars. There was nothing which could cause passenger
comment in this close passing of the Moon; normally we used the
satellite's attraction to give us additional starting speed. It was now or never that a message would come from Grantline. He was
supposed to be upon the Earthward side of the Moon. While Snap had
rushed through with his routine, I searched the Moon's surface with
our glass. But there was nothing. Copernicus and Kepler lay in full sunlight. The
heights of the lunar mountains, the depths of the barren, empty seas
were etched black and white, clear and clean. Grim, forbidding
desolation, this unchanging Moon. In romance, moonlight may shimmer
and sparkle to light a lover's smile; but the reality of the Moon is
cold and bleak. There was nothing to show my prying eyes where the
intrepid Grantline might be. "Nothing at all, Snap." And Snap's instruments, attuned for an hour now to pick up the
faintest signal, were motionless. "If he has concentrated any appreciable amount of ore," said Snap. "We
should get an impulse from its rays." But our receiving shield was dark, untouched. Our mirror grid gave the
magnified images; the spectro, with its wave length selection,
pictured the mountain levels and slowly descended into the deepest
seas. There was nothing. Yet in those Moon caverns--a million million recesses amid the crags
of that tumbled, barren surface--the pin point of movement which might
have been Grantline's expedition could so easily be hiding! Could he
have the ore insulated, fearing its rays would betray its presence to
hostile watchers? Or might disaster have come to him? He might not be on this hemisphere
of the Moon at all....

My imagination, sharpened by fancy of a lurking menace which seemed
everywhere about the _Planetara_ this voyage, ran rife with fears for
Johnny Grantline. He had promised to communicate this voyage. It was
now, or perhaps never. Six-thirty came and passed. We were well beyond the Earth's shadow
now. The firmament blazed with its vivid glories; the Sun behind us
was a ball of yellow-red leaping flames. The Earth hung, a huge, dull
red half sphere. We were within forty thousand miles of the Moon. A giant white
ball--all of its disc visible to the naked eye. It poised over the
bow, and presently, as the _Planetara_ swung upon its course for Mars,
it shifted sidewise. The light of it glared white and dazzling in our
windows. Snap, with his habitual red celluloid eyeshade shoved high on his
forehead, worked over our instruments. "Gregg!" The receiving shield was glowing a trifle. Rays were bombarding it! It
glowed, gleamed phosphorescent, and the audible recorder began
sounding its tiny tinkling murmurs. Gamma rays! Snap sprang to the dials. The direction and strength were
soon obvious. A richly radioactive ore body was concentrated upon this
hemisphere of the Moon! It was unmistakable. "He's got it, Gregg! He's--"

The tiny grids began quivering. Snap exclaimed triumphantly, "Here he
comes! By God, the message at last!" Snap decoded it. _Success! Stop for ore on your return voyage. Will give you our
location later. Success beyond wildest hopes._

Snap murmured, "That's all. He's got the ore!" We were sitting in darkness, and abruptly I became aware that across
our open window, where the insulation barrage was flung, the air was
faintly hissing. An interference there! I saw a tiny swirl of purple
sparks. Someone--some hostile ray from the deck beneath us, or from
the spider bridge that led to our little room--someone out there was
trying to pry in! Snap impulsively reached for the absorbers to let in the outside
light. But I checked him. "Wait!" I cut off our barrage, opened our door and stepped to the
narrow metal bridge. "You stay there, Snap!" I whispered. Then I added aloud, "Well, Snap,
I'm going to bed. Glad you've cleaned up that batch of work." I banged the door upon him. The lacework of metal bridges seemed
empty. I gazed up to the dome, and forward and aft. Twenty feet
beneath me was the metal roof of the cabin superstructure. Below it,
both sides of the deck showed. All patched with moonlight. No one visible down there. I descended a ladder. The deck was empty. But in the silence something was moving! Footsteps moving away from me
down the deck! I followed; and suddenly I was running. Chasing
something I could hear, but could not see. It turned into the smoking
room. I burst in. And a real sound smothered the phantom. Johnson the purser
was sitting here alone in the dimness. He was smoking. I noticed that
his cigar held a long frail ash. It could not have been him I was
chasing. He was sitting there quite calmly. A thick-necked, heavy
fellow, easily out of breath. But he was breathing calmly now. He sat up in amazement at my wild-eyed appearance, and the ash jarred
from his cigar. "Gregg! What in the devil--"

I tried to grin. "I'm on my way to bed--worked all night helping
Snap." I went past him, out the door into the main corridor. It was the only
way the invisible prowler could have gone. But I was too late now--I
could hear nothing. I dashed forward into the main lounge. It was
empty, dim and silent, a silence broken presently by a faint click, a
stateroom door hastily closing. I swung and found myself in a tiny
transverse passage. The twin doors of A20 and A22 were before me. The invisible eavesdropper had gone into one of these rooms! I
listened at each of the panels, but there was only silence within. The interior of the ship was suddenly singing with the steward's
siren--the call to awaken the passengers. It startled me. I moved
swiftly away. But as the siren shut off, in the silence I heard a
soft, musical voice:

"Wake up, Anita, I think that's the breakfast call." And her answer, "All right, George." IV


I did not appear at that morning meal. I was exhausted and drugged
with lack of sleep. I had a moment with Snap to tell him what had
occurred. Then I sought out Carter. He had his little chart room
insulated. And we were cautious. I told him what Snap and I had
learned: the rays from the Moon, proving that Grantline had
concentrated a considerable ore body. I also told him of Grantline's
message. "We'll stop on the way back, as he directs, Gregg." He bent closer to
me. "At Ferrok-Shahn I'm going to bring back a cordon of
Interplanetary Police. The secret will be out, of course, when we stop
at the Moon. We have no right, even now, to be flying this vessel as
unguarded as it is." He was very solemn. And he was grim when I told him of the invisible
eavesdropper. "You think he overheard Grantline's message? Who was it? You seem to
feel it was George Prince?" I told him I was convinced the prowler went into A20. When I mentioned
the purser, who seemed to have been watching me earlier in the night,
and again was sitting in the smoking room when the eavesdropper fled
past, Carter looked startled. "Johnson is all right, Gregg." "Does he know anything about this Grantline affair?" "No--no," said Carter hastily. "You haven't mentioned it, have you?" "Of course I haven't. But why didn't Johnson hear that eavesdropper? And what was he doing there, anyway, at that hour of the morning?" The Captain ignored my questions. "I'm going to have that Prince
suite searched--we can't be too careful.... Go to bed, Gregg, you need
rest." I went to my cabin. It was located aft, on the stern deck, near the
stern watch tower. A small metal room with a chair, a desk and a bunk. I made sure no one was in it. I sealed the lattice grill and the door,
set the alarm trigger against any opening of them, and went to bed. The siren for the midday meal awakened me. I had slept heavily. I felt
refreshed. I found the passengers already assembled at my table when I arrived in
the dining salon. It was a low vaulted metal room with blue and yellow
tube lights. At its sides the oval windows showed the deck, with its
ports on the dome side, through which a vista of the starry firmament
was visible. We were well on our course to Mars. The Moon had dwindled
to a pin point of light beside the crescent Earth. And behind them our
Sun blazed, visually the largest orb in the heavens. It was some
sixty-eight million miles from the Earth to Mars. A flight,
ordinarily, of some ten days. There were five tables in the dining salon, each with eight seats. Snap and I had one of the tables. We sat at the ends, with the
passengers on each of the sides. Snap was in his seat when I arrived. He eyed me down the length of the
table. In a gay mood, he introduced me to the three men already
seated:

"This is our third officer, Gregg Haljan. Big, handsome fellow, isn't
he? And as pleasant as he is good-looking. Gregg, this is Sero Ob
Hahn." I met the keen, somber gaze of a Venus man of middle age. A small,
slim graceful man, with sleek black hair. His pointed face,
accentuated by the pointed beard, was pallid. He wore a white and
purple robe; upon his breast was a huge platinum ornament, a device
like a star and cross entwined. "I am happy to meet you, sir." His voice was soft and deep. "Ob Hahn," I repeated. "I should have heard of you, no doubt, but--"

A smile plucked at his thin, gray lips. "That is an error of mine, not
yours. My mission is that all the universe shall hear of me." "He's preaching the religion of the Venus mystics," Snap explained. "And this enlightened gentleman," said Ob Hahn ironically, nodding to
the man, "has just termed it fetishism. The ignorance--"

"Oh, I say!" protested the man at Ob Hahn's side. "I mean, you seem to
think I meant something offensive. And as a matter of fact--"

"We've an argument, Gregg," laughed Snap. "This is Sir Arthur
Coniston, an English gentleman, lecturer and sky-trotter--that is, he
will be a sky-trotter; he tells us he plans a number of voyages." The tall Englishman, in his white linen suit, bowed acknowledgement. "My compliments, Mr. Haljan. I hope you have no strong religious
convictions, else we will make your table here very miserable!" The third passenger had evidently kept out of the argument. Snap
introduced him as Rance Rankin. An American--a quiet, blond fellow of
thirty-five or forty. I ordered my breakfast and let the argument go on. "Won't make me miserable," said Snap. "I love an argument. You said,
Sir Arthur--"

"I mean to say, I think I said too much. Mr. Rankin, you are more
diplomatic." Rankin laughed. "I am a magician," he said to me. "A theatrical
entertainer. I deal in tricks--how to fool an audience--" His keen,
amused gaze was on Ob Hahn. "This gentleman from Venus and I have too
much in common to argue." "A nasty one!" the Englishman exclaimed. "By Jove! Really, Mr. Rankin,
you're a bit too cruel!" I could see we were doomed to have turbulent meals this voyage. I
like to eat in quiet; arguing passengers always annoy me. There were
still three seats vacant at our table; I wondered who would occupy
them. I soon learned the answer--for one seat at least. Rankin said
calmly:

"Where is the little Venus girl this meal?" His glance went to the
empty seat at my right hand. "The Venza, isn't that her name? She and
I are destined for the same theater in Ferrok-Shahn." So Venza was to sit beside me. It was good news. Ten days of a
religious argument three times a day would be intolerable. But the
cheerful Venza would help. "She never eats the midday meal," said Snap. "She's on the deck,
having orange juice. I guess it's the old gag about diet, eh?" My attention wandered about the salon. Most of the seats were
occupied. At the Captain's table I saw the objects of my search:
George Prince and his sister, one on each side of the Captain. I saw
George Prince in the life now as a man who looked hardly twenty-five. He was at this moment evidently in a gay mood. His clean-cut, handsome
profile, with its poetic dark curls, was turned toward me. There
seemed little of the villain about him. And I saw Anita Prince now as a dark-haired, black-eyed little beauty,
in feature resembling her brother very strongly. She presently
finished her meal. She rose, with him after her. She was dressed in
Earth-fashion--white blouse and dark jacket, wide, knee-length
trousers of gray, with a red sash her only touch of color. She went
past me, flashed me a smile. My heart was pounding. I answered her greeting, and met George
Prince's casual gaze. He, too, smiled, as though to signify that his
sister had told him of the service I had done her. Or was his smile an
ironical memory of how he had eluded me this morning when I chased
him? I gazed after his small white-suited figure as he followed Anita from
the salon. And thinking of her, I prayed that Carter and Halsey might
be wrong. Whatever plotting against the Grantline Expedition might be
going on, I hoped that George Prince was innocent of it. Yet I knew in
my heart it was a futile hope. Prince had been the eavesdropper
outside the radio room. I could not doubt it. But that his sister must
be ignorant of what he was doing, I was sure. My attention was brought suddenly back to the reality of our table. I
heard Ob Hahn's silky voice. "We passed quite close to the Moon last
night, Mr. Dean." "Yes," said Snap. "We did, didn't we? Always do--it's a technical
problem of the exigencies of interstellar navigation. Explain it to
them, Gregg. You're an expert." I waved it away with a laugh. There was a brief silence. I could not
help noticing Sir Arthur Coniston's queer look, and I have never seen
so keen a glance as Rance Rankin shot at me. Were all three people
aware of Grantline's treasure on the Moon? It suddenly seemed so. I
wished fervently at that instant that the ten days of this voyage were
over. Captain Carter was right. Coming back we should have a cordon of
Interplanetary Police aboard. Sir Arthur broke the awkward silence. "Magnificent sight, the Moon,
from so close--though I was too much afraid of pressure sickness to be
up to see it." I had nearly finished my hasty meal when another incident shocked me. The two other passengers at our table came in and took their seats. A
Martian girl and man. The girl had the seat at my left, with the man
beside her. All Martians are tall. The girl was about my own height. That is, six feet, two inches. The man was seven feet or more. Both
wore the Martian outer robe. The girl flung hers back. Her limbs were
encased in pseudomail. She looked, as all Martians like to look, a
very warlike Amazon. But she was a pretty girl. She smiled at me with
a keen-eyed, direct gaze. "Mr. Dean said at breakfast that you were big and handsome. You are." They were brother and sister, these Martians. Snap introduced them as
_Set_ Miko and _Setta_ Moa--the Martian equivalent of Mr. and Miss. This Miko was, from our Earth standards, a tremendous, brawny giant. Not spindly, like most Martians, this fellow, for all his seven feet
in height was almost heavy set. He wore a plaited leather jerkin
beneath his robe and knee pants of leather out of which his lower legs
showed as gray, hairy pillars of strength. He had come into the salon
with a swagger, his sword ornament clanking. "A pleasant voyage so far," he said to me as he started his meal. His
voice had the heavy, throaty rasp characteristic of the Martian. He
spoke perfect English--both Martians and Venus people are by heritage
extraordinary linguists. Miko and his sister Moa, had a touch of
Martian accent, worn almost away by living for some years in Greater
New York. The shock to me came within a few minutes. Miko, absorbed in attacking
his meal, inadvertently pushed back his robe to bare his forearm. An
instant only, then it dropped to his wrist. But in that instant I had
seen, upon the gray flesh, a thin sear turned red. A very recent
burn--as though a pencil ray of heat had caught his arm. My mind flung back. Only last night in the city corridor, Snap and I
had been followed by a Martian. I had shot at him with a heat ray: I
thought I had hit him on the arm. Was this the mysterious Martian who
had followed us from Halsey's office? V


Shortly after that midday meal I encountered Venza sitting on the
starlit deck. I had been in the bow observatory; taken my routine
castings of our position and worked them out. I was, I think, of the
_Planetara's_ officers the most expert handler of the mathematical
calculators. The locating of our position and charting the trajectory
of our course was, under ordinary circumstances, about all I had to
do. And it took only a few minutes every twelve hours. I had a moment with Carter in the isolation of his chart room. "This voyage! Gregg, I'm getting like you--too fanciful. We've a normal
group of passengers apparently, but I don't like the look of any of
them. That Ob Hahn, at your table--"

"Snaky looking fellow," I commented. "He and the Englishman are great
on arguments. Did you have Princes' cabin searched?" My breath hung on his answer. "Yes. Nothing unusual among his things. We searched both his room and
his sister's." I did not follow that up. Instead I told him about the burn on Miko's
thick arm. He stared. "I wish we were at Ferrok-Shahn. Gregg, tonight when the
passengers are asleep, come here to me. Snap will be here, and Dr.
Frank. We can trust him." "He knows about--about the Grantline treasure?" "Yes. And so do Balch and Blackstone." Balch and Blackstone were our
first and second officers. "We'll all meet here, Gregg--say about the zero hour. We must take
some precautions." Then he dismissed me. I found Venza seated alone in a starlit corner of the secluded deck. A
porthole, with the black heavens and the blazing stars was before her. There was an empty seat nearby. She greeted me with the Venus form of jocular, intimate greeting:

"Hola-lo, Gregg! Sit here with me. I have been wondering when you
would come after me." I sat down beside her. "Why are you going to Mars, Venza? I'm glad to
see you." "Many thanks. But I am glad to see you, Gregg. So handsome a man. Do
you know, from Venus to Earth, and I have no doubt on all of Mars, no
man will please me more." "Glib tongue," I laughed. "Born to flatter the male--every girl of
your world." And I added seriously, "You don't answer my question. What takes you to Mars?" "Contract. By the stars, what else? Of course, a chance to make a
voyage with you--"

"Don't be silly, Venza." I enjoyed her. I gazed at her small, slim figure reclining in the deck
chair. Her long, gray robe parted by design, I have no doubt, to
display her shapely, satin-sheathed legs. Her black hair was coiled in
a heavy knot at the back of her neck; her carmine lips were parted
with a mocking, alluring smile. The exotic perfume of her enveloped
me. She glanced at me sidewise from beneath her sweeping black lashes. "Be serious," I added. "I am serious. Sober. Intoxicated by you, but sober." I said, "What sort of a contract?" "A theater in Ferrok-Shahn. Good money, Gregg. I'll be there a year." She sat up to face me. "There's a fellow here on the _Planetara_,
Rance Rankin, he calls himself. At our table--a big, good-looking
blond American. He says he is a magician. Ever hear of him?" "That's what he told me. No, I never heard of him." "Nor did I. And I thought I had heard of everyone of importance. He is
listed for the same theater I am. Nice sort of fellow." She paused,
then added, "If he's a professional entertainer, I'm a motor oiler." It startled me. "Why do you say that?" Instinctively my gaze swept the deck. An Earth woman and child and a
small Venus man were in sight, but not within earshot. "Why do you look so furtive?" she retorted. "Gregg, there's something
strange about this voyage. I'm no fool, nor you, so you must know it
as well as I do." "Rance Rankin--" I prompted. She leaned closer toward me. "He could fool you. But not me--I've
known too many magicians." She grinned. "I challenged him to trick
me. You should have seen him evading!" "Do you know Ob Hahn?" I interrupted. She shook her head. "Never heard of him. But he told me plenty at
breakfast. By Satan, what a flow of words that devil driver can
muster! He and the Englishman don't mesh very well, do they?" She stared at me. I had not answered her grin; my mind was too busy
with queer fancies. Halsey's words: "Things are not always what they
seem--" Were these passengers masqueraders? Were they put here by
George Prince? And then I thought of Miko the Martian, and the burn
upon his arm. "Come back, Gregg! Don't go wandering off like that!" She dropped her
voice to a whisper. "I'll be serious. I want to know what in hell is
going on aboard this ship. I'm a woman and I'm curious. You tell me." "What do you mean?" I parried. "I mean a lot of things. What we've just been talking about. And what
was the excitement you were in just before breakfast this morning?" "Excitement?" "Gregg, you may trust me." For the first time she was wholly serious. Her gaze made sure no one was within hearing. She put her hand on my
arm. I could barely hear her whisper: "I know they might have a ray
upon us. I'll be careful." "They?" "Anyone. Something's going on. You know it. You are in it. I saw you
this morning, Gregg. Wild-eyed, chasing a phantom--"

"You?" "And I heard the phantom! A man's footsteps. A magnetic, deflecting,
invisible cloak. You couldn't fool an audience with that, it's too
commonplace. If Rance Rankin tried--"

I gripped her. "Don't ramble, Venza! You saw me?" "Yes. My stateroom door was open. I was sitting with a cigarette. I
saw the purser in the smoking room. He was visible from--"

"Wait! Venza, that prowler went through the smoking room!" "I know he did. I could hear him." "Did the purser hear him?" "Of course. The purser looked up, followed the sound with his gaze. I
thought that was queer. He never made a move. And then you came along
and he acted innocent. Why? What's going on, that's what I want to
know?" I held my breath. "Venza, where did the prowler run to? Can you--"

She whispered calmly, "Into A20. I saw the door open and close. I even
thought I could see his blurred outline." She added, "Why should
George Prince be sneaking around with you after him? And the purser
acting innocent? And who is this George Prince, anyway?" The huge Martian, Miko, with his sister Moa came strolling along the
deck. They nodded as they passed us. I whispered, "I can't explain anything now. But you're right, Venza:
there is something going on. Listen! Whatever you learn--whatever you
encounter which looks unusual--will you tell me? I ... well, I do
trust you. Really I do, but the whole thing isn't mine to tell." The somber pools of her eyes were shining. "You are very lovable,
Gregg. I won't question you." She was trembling with excitement. "Whatever it is, I want to be in on it. Here's something I can tell
you now. We've two high class gold leaf gamblers aboard. Do you know
that?" "Who are they?" "Shac and Dud Ardley. Every detective in Greater New York knows them. They had a wonderful game with that Englishman, Sir Arthur, this
morning. Stripped him of half a pound of eight-inch leaves--a neat
little stack. A crooked game, of course. 