



Produced by Gregory D. Weeks, Jason Isbell, Irma Spehar
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









=THE DOOR THROUGH SPACE=

Marion Zimmer Bradley


ACE BOOKS
A Division of Charter Communications Inc.
1120 Avenue of the Americas
New York, N.Y. 10036




THE DOOR THROUGH SPACE

Copyright (c), 1961, by Ace Books, Inc.

All Rights Reserved




... _across half a Galaxy, the Terran Empire maintains its sovereignty
with the consent of the governed. It is a peaceful reign, held by
compact and not by conquest. Again and again, when rebellion threatens
the Terran Peace, the natives of the rebellious world have turned
against their own people and sided with the men of Terra; not from fear,
but from a sense of dedication._

_There has never been open war. The battle for these worlds is fought in
the minds of a few men who stand between worlds; bound to one world by
interest, loyalties and allegiance; bound to the other by love._

_Such a world is Wolf. Such a man was Race Cargill of the Terran Secret
Service._


       *       *       *       *       *

RENDEZVOUS ON A LOST WORLD
Copyright (c), 1961, by Ace Books, Inc. Printed in U.S.A.

       *       *       *       *       *


=Author's Note:--=

I've always wanted to write. But not until I discovered the old pulp
science-fantasy magazines, at the age of sixteen, did this general
desire become a specific urge to write science-fantasy adventures. I took a lot of detours on the way. I discovered s-f in its golden age:
the age of Kuttner, C.L. Moore, Leigh Brackett, Ed Hamilton and Jack
Vance. But while I was still collecting rejection slips for my early
efforts, the fashion changed. Adventures on faraway worlds and strange
dimensions went out of fashion, and the new look in
science-fiction--emphasis on the _science_--came in. So my first stories were straight science-fiction, and I'm not trying to
put down that kind of story. It has its place. By and large, the kind of
science-fiction which makes tomorrow's headlines as near as this
morning's coffee, has enlarged popular awareness of the modern,
miraculous world of science we live in. It has helped generations of
young people feel at ease with a rapidly changing world. But fashions change, old loves return, and now that Sputniks clutter up
the sky with new and unfamiliar moons, the readers of science-fiction
are willing to wait for tomorrow to read tomorrow's headlines. Once
again, I think, there is a place, a wish, a need and hunger for the
wonder and color of the world way out. The world beyond the stars. The
world we _won't_ live to see. That is why I wrote THE DOOR THROUGH
SPACE. --MARION ZIMMER BRADLEY

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER ONE


Beyond the spaceport gates, the men of the Kharsa were hunting down a
thief. I heard the shrill cries, the pad-padding of feet in strides just
a little too long and loping to be human, raising echoes all down the
dark and dusty streets leading up to the main square. But the square itself lay empty in the crimson noon of Wolf. Overhead
the dim red ember of Phi Coronis, Wolf's old and dying sun, gave out a
pale and heatless light. The pair of Spaceforce guards at the gates,
wearing the black leathers of the Terran Empire, shockers holstered at
their belts, were drowsing under the arched gateway where the
star-and-rocket emblem proclaimed the domain of Terra. One of them, a
snub-nosed youngster only a few weeks out from Earth, cocked an
inquisitive ear at the cries and scuffling feet, then jerked his head at
me. "Hey, Cargill, you can talk their lingo. What's going on out there?" I stepped out past the gateway to listen. There was still no one to be
seen in the square. It lay white and windswept, a barricade of
emptiness; to one side the spaceport and the white skyscraper of the
Terran Headquarters, and at the other side, the clutter of low
buildings, the street-shrine, the little spaceport cafe smelling of
coffee and _jaco_, and the dark opening mouths of streets that rambled
down into the Kharsa--the old town, the native quarter. But I was alone
in the square with the shrill cries--closer now, raising echoes from the
enclosing walls--and the loping of many feet down one of the dirty
streets. Then I saw him running, dodging, a hail of stones flying round his head;
someone or something small and cloaked and agile. Behind him the
still-faceless mob howled and threw stones. I could not yet understand
the cries; but they were out for blood, and I knew it. I said briefly, "Trouble coming," just before the mob spilled out into
the square. The fleeing dwarf stared about wildly for an instant, his
head jerking from side to side so rapidly that it was impossible to get
even a fleeting impression of his face--human or nonhuman, familiar or
bizarre. Then, like a pellet loosed from its sling, he made straight for
the gateway and safety. And behind him the loping mob yelled and howled and came pouring over
half the square. Just half. Then by that sudden intuition which
permeates even the most crazed mob with some semblance of reason, they
came to a ragged halt, heads turning from side to side. I stepped up on the lower step of the Headquarters building, and looked
them over. Most of them were _chaks_, the furred man-tall nonhumans of the Kharsa,
and not the better class. Their fur was unkempt, their tails naked with
filth and disease. Their leather aprons hung in tatters. One or two in
the crowd were humans, the dregs of the Kharsa. But the star-and-rocket
emblem blazoned across the spaceport gates sobered even the wildest
blood-lust somewhat; they milled and shifted uneasily in their half of
the square. For a moment I did not see where their quarry had gone. Then I saw him
crouched, not four feet from me, in a patch of shadow. Simultaneously
the mob saw him, huddled just beyond the gateway, and a howl of
frustration and rage went ringing round the square. Someone threw a
stone. It zipped over my head, narrowly missing me, and landed at the
feet of the black-leathered guard. He jerked his head up and gestured
with the shocker which had suddenly come unholstered. The gesture should have been enough. On Wolf, Terran law has been
written in blood and fire and exploding atoms; and the line is drawn
firm and clear. The men of Spaceforce do not interfere in the old town,
or in any of the native cities. But when violence steps over the
threshold, passing the blazon of the star and rocket, punishment is
swift and terrible. The threat should have been enough. Instead a howl of abuse went up from the crowd. "_Terranan!_"

"Son of the Ape!" The Spaceforce guards were shoulder to shoulder behind me now. The
snub-nosed kid, looking slightly pale, called out. "Get inside the
gates, Cargill! If I have to shoot--"

The older man motioned him to silence. "Wait. Cargill," he called. I nodded to show that I heard. "You talk their lingo. Tell them to haul off! Damned if I want to
shoot!" I stepped down and walked into the open square, across the crumbled
white stones, toward the ragged mob. Even with two armed Spaceforce men
at my back, it made my skin crawl, but I flung up my empty hand in token
of peace:

"Take your mob out of the square," I shouted in the jargon of the
Kharsa. "This territory is held in compact of peace! Settle your
quarrels elsewhere!" There was a little stirring in the crowd. The shock of being addressed
in their own tongue, instead of the Terran Standard which the Empire has
forced on Wolf, held them silent for a minute. I had learned that long
ago: that speaking in any of the languages of Wolf would give me a
minute's advantage. But only a minute. Then one of the mob yelled, "We'll go if you give'm
to us! He's no right to Terran sanctuary!" I walked over to the huddled dwarf, miserably trying to make himself
smaller against the wall. I nudged him with my foot. "Get up. Who are you?" The hood fell away from his face as he twitched to his feet. He was
trembling violently. In the shadow of the hood I saw a furred face, a
quivering velvety muzzle, and great soft golden eyes which held
intelligence and terror. "What have you done? Can't you talk?" He held out the tray which he had shielded under his cloak, an ordinary
peddler's tray. "Toys. Sell toys. Children. You got'm?" I shook my head and pushed the creature away, with only a glance at the
array of delicately crafted manikins, tiny animals, prisms and crystal
whirligigs. "You'd better get out of here. Scram. Down that street." I
pointed. A voice from the crowd shouted again, and it had a very ugly sound. "He
is a spy of Nebran!" "_Nebran--_" The dwarfish nonhuman gabbled something then doubled
behind me. I saw him dodge, feint in the direction of the gates, then,
as the crowd surged that way, run for the street-shrine across the
square, slipping from recess to recess of the wall. A hail of stones
went flying in that direction. The little toy-seller dodged into the
street-shrine. Then there was a hoarse "Ah, aaah!" of terror, and the crowd edged away,
surged backward. The next minute it had begun to melt away, its entity
dissolving into separate creatures, slipping into the side alleys and
the dark streets that disgorged into the square. Within three minutes
the square lay empty again in the pale-crimson noon. The kid in black leather let his breath go and swore, slipping his
shocker into its holster. He stared and demanded profanely, "Where'd the
little fellow go?" "Who knows?" the other shrugged. "Probably sneaked into one of the
alleys. Did you see where he went, Cargill?" I came slowly back to the gateway. To me, it had seemed that he ducked
into the street-shrine and vanished into thin air, but I've lived on
Wolf long enough to know you can't trust your eyes here. I said so, and
the kid swore again, gulping, more upset than he wanted to admit. "Does
this kind of thing happen often?" "All the time," his companion assured him soberly, with a sidewise wink
at me. I didn't return the wink. The kid wouldn't let it drop. "Where did you learn their lingo, Mr. Cargill?" "I've been on Wolf a long time," I said, spun on my heel and walked
toward Headquarters. I tried not to hear, but their voices followed me
anyhow, discreetly lowered, but not lowered enough. "Kid, don't you know who he is? That's Cargill of the Secret Service! Six years ago he was the best man in Intelligence, before--" The voice
lowered another decibel, and then there was the kid's voice asking,
shaken, "But what the hell happened to his face?" I should have been used to it by now. I'd been hearing it, more or less
behind my back, for six years. Well, if my luck held, I'd never hear it
again. I strode up the white steps of the skyscraper, to finish the
arrangements that would take me away from Wolf forever. To the other end
of the Empire, to the other end of the galaxy--anywhere, so long as I
need not wear my past like a medallion around my neck, or blazoned and
branded on what was left of my ruined face. CHAPTER TWO


The Terran Empire has set its blazon on four hundred planets circling
more than three hundred suns. But no matter what the color of the sun,
the number of moons overhead, or the geography of the planet, once you
step inside a Headquarters building, you are on Earth. And Earth would
be alien to many who called themselves Earthmen, judging by the
strangeness I always felt when I stepped into that marble-and-glass
world inside the skyscraper. I heard the sound of my steps ringing into
thin resonance along the marble corridor, and squinted my eyes,
readjusting them painfully to the cold yellowness of the lights. The Traffic Division was efficiency made insolent, in glass and chrome
and polished steel, mirrors and windows and looming electronic clerical
machines. Most of one wall was taken up by a TV monitor which gave a
view of the spaceport; a vast open space lighted with blue-white mercury
vapor lamps, and a chained-down skyscraper of a starship, littered over
with swarming ants. The process crew was getting the big ship ready for
skylift tomorrow morning. I gave it a second and then a third look. I'd
be on it when it lifted. Turning away from the monitored spaceport, I watched myself stride
forward in the mirrored surfaces that were everywhere; a tall man, a
lean man, bleached out by years under a red sun, and deeply scarred on
both cheeks and around the mouth. Even after six years behind a desk, my
neat business clothes--suitable for an Earthman with a desk job--didn't
fit quite right, and I still rose unconsciously on the balls of my feet,
approximating the lean stooping walk of a Dry-towner from the Coronis
plains. The clerk behind the sign marked TRANSPORTATION was a little rabbit of a
man with a sunlamp tan, barricaded by a small-sized spaceport of desk,
and looking as if he liked being shut up there. He looked up in civil
inquiry. "Can I do something for you?" "My name's Cargill. Have you a pass for me?" He stared. A free pass aboard a starship is rare except for professional
spacemen, which I obviously wasn't. "Let me check my records," he
hedged, and punched scanning buttons on the glassy surface. Shadows came
and went, and I saw myself half-reflected, a tipsy shadow in a flurry of
racing colors. The pattern finally stabilized and the clerk read off
names. "Brill, Cameron ... ah, yes. Cargill, Race Andrew, Department 38,
transfer transportation. Is that you?" I admitted it and he started punching more buttons when the sound of the
name made connection in whatever desk-clerks use for a brain. He stopped
with his hand halfway to the button. "Are you Race Cargill of the Secret Service, sir? _The_ Race Cargill?" "It's right there," I said, gesturing wearily at the projected pattern
under the glassy surface. "Why, I thought--I mean, everybody took it for granted--that is, I
heard--"

"You thought Cargill had been killed a long time ago because his name
never turned up in news dispatches any more?" I grinned sourly, seeing
my image dissolve in blurring shadows, and feeling the long-healed scar
on my mouth draw up to make the grin hideous. "I'm Cargill, all right. I've been up on Floor 38 for six years, holding down a desk any clerk
could handle. You for instance." He gaped. He was a rabbit of a man who had never stepped out of the safe
familiar boundaries of the Terran Trade City. "You mean _you're_ the man
who went to Charin in disguise, and routed out The Lisse? The man who
scouted the Black Ridge and Shainsa? And you've been working at a desk
upstairs all these years? It's--hard to believe, sir." My mouth twitched. It had been hard for me to believe while I was doing
it. "The pass?" "Right away, sir." He punched buttons and a printed chip of plastic
extruded from a slot on the desk top. "Your fingerprint, please?" He
pressed my finger into the still-soft surface of the plastic, indelibly
recording the print; waited a moment for it to harden, then laid the
chip in the slot of a pneumatic tube. I heard it whoosh away. "They'll check your fingerprint against that when you board the ship. Skylift isn't till dawn, but you can go aboard as soon as the process
crew finishes with her." He glanced at the monitor screen, where the
swarming crew were still doing inexplicable things to the immobile
spacecraft. "It will be another hour or two. Where are you going, Mr. Cargill?" "Some planet in the Hyades Cluster. Vainwal, I think, something like
that." "What's it like there?" "How should I know?" I'd never been there either. I only knew that
Vainwal had a red sun, and that the Terran Legate could use a trained
Intelligence officer. And _not_ pin him down to a desk. There was respect, and even envy in the little man's voice. "Could
I--buy you a drink before you go aboard, Mr. Cargill?" "Thanks, but I have a few loose ends to tie up." I didn't, but I was
damned if I'd spend my last hour on Wolf under the eyes of a deskbound
rabbit who preferred his adventure safely secondhand. But after I'd left the office and the building, I almost wished I'd
taken him up on it. It would be at least an hour before I could board
the starship, with nothing to do but hash over old memories, better
forgotten. The sun was lower now. Phi Coronis is a dim star, a dying star, and once
past the crimson zenith of noon, its light slants into a long
pale-reddish twilight. Four of Wolf's five moons were clustered in a
pale bouquet overhead, mingling thin violet moonlight into the crimson
dusk. The shadows were blue and purple in the empty square as I walked across
the stones and stood looking down one of the side streets. A few steps, and I was in an untidy slum which might have been on
another world from the neat bright Trade City which lay west of the
spaceport. The Kharsa was alive and reeking with the sounds and smells
of human and half-human life. A naked child, diminutive and
golden-furred, darted between two of the chinked pebble-houses, and
disappeared, spilling fragile laughter like breaking glass. A little beast, half snake and half cat, crawled across a roof, spread
leathery wings, and flapped to the ground. The sour pungent reek of
incense from the open street-shrine made my nostrils twitch, and a
hulked form inside, not human, cast me a surly green glare as I passed. I turned, retracing my steps. There was no danger, of course, so close
to the Trade City. Even on such planets as Wolf, Terra's laws are
respected within earshot of their gates. But there had been rioting here
and in Charin during the last month. After the display of mob violence
this afternoon, a lone Terran, unarmed, might turn up as a solitary
corpse flung on the steps of the HQ building. There had been a time when I had walked alone from Shainsa to the Polar
Colony. I had known how to melt into this kind of night, shabby and
inconspicuous, a worn shirtcloak hunched round my shoulders, weaponless
except for the razor-sharp skean in the clasp of the cloak; walking on
the balls of my feet like a Dry-towner, not looking or sounding or
smelling like an Earthman. That rabbit in the Traffic office had stirred up things I'd be wiser to
forget. It had been six years; six years of slow death behind a desk,
since the day when Rakhal Sensar had left me a marked man; death-warrant
written on my scarred face anywhere outside the narrow confines of the
Terran law on Wolf. Rakhal Sensar--my fists clenched with the old impotent hate. _If I could
get my hands on him!_

It had been Rakhal who first led me through the byways of the Kharsa,
teaching me the jargon of a dozen tribes, the chirping call of the
Ya-men, the way of the catmen of the rain-forests, the argot of thieves
markets, the walk and step of the Dry-towners from Shainsa and Daillon
and Ardcarran--the parched cities of dusty, salt stone which spread out
in the bottoms of Wolf's vanished oceans. Rakhal was from Shainsa,
human, tall as an Earthman, weathered by salt and sun, and he had worked
for Terran Intelligence since we were boys. We had traveled all over our
world together, and found it good. And then, for some reason I had never known, it had come to an end. Even now I was not wholly sure why he had erupted, that day, into
violence and a final explosion. Then he had disappeared, leaving me a
marked man. And a lonely one: Juli had gone with him. I strode the streets of the slum unseeing, my thoughts running a
familiar channel. Juli, my kid sister, clinging around Rakhal's neck,
her gray eyes hating me. I had never seen her again. That had been six years ago. One more adventure had shown me that my
usefulness to the Secret Service was over. Rakhal had vanished, but he
had left me a legacy: my name, written on the sure scrolls of death
anywhere outside the safe boundaries of Terran law. A marked man, I had
gone back to slow stagnation behind a desk. I'd stood it as long as I
could. When it finally got too bad, Magnusson had been sympathetic. He was the
Chief of Terran Intelligence on Wolf, and I was next in line for his
job, but he understood when I quit. He'd arranged the transfer and the
pass, and I was leaving tonight. I was nearly back to the spaceport by now, across from the street-shrine
at the edge of the square. It was here that the little toy-seller had
vanished. But it was exactly like a thousand, a hundred thousand other
such street-shrines on Wolf, a smudge of incense reeking and stinking
before the squatting image of Nebran, the Toad God whose face and symbol
are everywhere on Wolf. I stared for a moment at the ugly idol, then
slowly moved away. The lighted curtains of the spaceport cafe attracted my attention and I
went inside. A few spaceport personnel in storm gear were drinking
coffee at the counter, a pair of furred _chaks_, lounging beneath the
mirrors at the far end, and a trio of Dry-towners, rangy, weathered men
in crimson and blue shirt cloaks, were standing at a wall shelf, eating
Terran food with aloof dignity. In my business clothes I felt more conspicuous than the _chaks_. What
place had a civilian here, between the uniforms of the spacemen and the
colorful brilliance of the Dry-towners? A snub-nosed girl with alabaster hair came to take my order. I asked for
_jaco_ and bunlets, and carried the food to a wall shelf near the
Dry-towners. Their dialect fell soft and familiar on my ears. One of
them, without altering the expression on his face or the easy tone of
his voice, began to make elaborate comments on my entrance, my
appearance, my ancestry and probably personal habits, all defined in the
colorfully obscene dialect of Shainsa. That had happened before. The Wolfan sense of humor is only half-human. The finest joke is to criticize and insult a stranger, preferably an
Earthman, to his very face, in an unknown language, perfectly deadpan. In my civilian clothes I was obviously fair game. A look or gesture of resentment would have lost face and dignity--what
the Dry-towners call their _kihar_--permanently. I leaned over and
remarked in their own dialect that I would, at some future and
unspecified time, appreciate the opportunity to return their
compliments. By rights they should have laughed, made some barbed remark about my
command of language and crossed their hands in symbol of a jest decently
reversed on themselves. Then we would have bought each other a drink,
and that would be that. But it didn't happen that way. Not this time. The tallest of the three
whirled, upsetting his drink in the process. I heard its thin shatter
through the squeal of the alabaster-haired girl, as a chair crashed
over. They faced me three abreast, and one of them fumbled in the clasp
of his shirtcloak. I edged backward, my own hand racing up for a skean I hadn't carried in
six years, and fronted them squarely, hoping I could face down the
prospect of a roughhouse. They wouldn't kill me, this close to the HQ,
but at least I was in for an unpleasant mauling. I couldn't handle three
men; and if nerves were this taut in the Kharsa, I might get knifed. Quite by accident, of course. The _chaks_ moaned and gibbered. The Dry-towners glared at me and I
tensed for the moment when their steady stare would explode into
violence. Then I became aware that they were gazing, not at me, but at something
or someone behind me. The skeans snicked back into the clasps of their
cloaks. Then they broke rank, turned and ran. They _ran_, blundering into
stools, leaving havoc of upset benches and broken crockery in their
wake. One man barged into the counter, swore and ran on, limping. I let
my breath go. Something had put the fear of God into those brutes, and
it wasn't my own ugly mug. I turned and saw the girl. She was slight, with waving hair like spun black glass, circled with
faint tracery of stars. A black glass belt bound her narrow waist like
clasped hands, and her robe, stark white, bore an ugly embroidery across
the breasts, the flat sprawl of a conventionalized Toad God, Nebran. Her
features were delicate, chiseled, pale; a Dry-town face, all human, all
woman, but set in an alien and unearthly repose. The great eyes gleamed
red. They were fixed, almost unseeing, but the crimson lips were curved
with inhuman malice. She stood motionless, looking at me as if wondering why I had not run
with the others. In half a second, the smile flickered off and was
replaced by a startled look of--recognition? Whoever and whatever she was, she had saved me a mauling. I started to
phrase formal thanks, then broke off in astonishment. The cafe had
emptied and we were entirely alone. Even the _chaks_ had leaped through
an open window--I saw the whisk of a disappearing tail. We stood frozen, looking at one another while the Toad God sprawled
across her breasts rose and fell for half a dozen breaths. Then I took one step forward, and she took one step backward, at the
same instant. In one swift movement she was outside in the dark street. It took me only an instant to get into the street after her, but as I
stepped across the door there was a little stirring in the air, like the
rising of heat waves across the salt flats at noon. Then the
street-shrine was empty, and nowhere was there any sign of the girl. She
had vanished. She simply was not there. I gaped at the empty shrine. She had stepped inside and vanished, like a
wraith of smoke, like--

--Like the little toy-seller they had hunted out of the Kharsa. There were eyes in the street again and, becoming aware of where I was,
I moved away. The shrines of Nebran are on every corner of Wolf, but
this is one instance when familiarity does not breed contempt. The
street was dark and seemed empty, but it was packed with all the little
noises of living. I was not unobserved. And meddling with a
street-shrine would be just as dangerous as the skeans of my three
loud-mouthed Dry-town roughnecks. I turned and crossed the square for the last time, turning toward the
loom of the spaceship, filing the girl away as just another riddle of
Wolf I'd never solve. How wrong I was! CHAPTER THREE


From the spaceport gates, exchanging brief greetings with the guards, I
took a last look at the Kharsa. For a minute I toyed with the notion of
just disappearing down one of those streets. It's not hard to disappear
on Wolf, if you know how. And I knew, or had known once. Loyalty to
Terra? What had Terra given me except a taste of color and adventure,
out there in the Dry-towns, and then taken it away again? If an Earthman is very lucky and very careful, he lasts about ten years
in Intelligence. I had had two years more than my share. I still knew
enough to leave my Terran identity behind like a worn-out jacket. I
could seek out Rakhal, settle our blood-feud, see Juli again....

How could I see Juli again? As her husband's murderer? No other way. Blood-feud on Wolf is a terrible and elaborate ritual of the code
duello. And once I stepped outside the borders of Terran law, sooner or
later Rakhal and I would meet. And one of us would die. I looked back, just once, at the dark rambling streets away from the
square. Then I turned toward the blue-white lights that hurt my eyes,
and the starship that loomed, huge and hateful, before me. A steward in white took my fingerprint and led me to a coffin-sized
chamber. He brought me coffee and sandwiches--I hadn't, after all, eaten
in the spaceport cafe--then got me into the skyhook and strapped me,
deftly and firmly, into the acceleration cushions, tugging at the
Garensen belts until I ached all over. A long needle went into my
arm--the narcotic that would keep me safely drowsy all through the
terrible tug of interstellar acceleration. Doors clanged, buzzers vibrated lower down in the ship, men tramped the
corridors calling to one another in the language of the spaceports. I
understood one word in four. I shut my eyes, not caring. At the end of
the trip there would be another star, another world, another language. Another life. I had spent all my adult life on Wolf. Juli had been a child under the
red star. But it was a pair of wide crimson eyes and black hair combed
into ringlets like spun black glass that went down with me into the
bottomless pit of sleep....

       *       *       *       *       *

Someone was shaking me. "Ah, come on, Cargill. Wake up, man. Shake your boots!" My mouth, foul-tasting and stiff, fumbled at the shapes of words. "Wha'
happened? Wha' y' want?" My eyes throbbed. When I got them open I saw
two men in black leathers bending over me. We were still inside gravity. "Get out of the skyhook. You're coming with us." "Wha'--" Even through the layers of the sedative, that got to me. Only a
criminal, under interstellar law, can be removed from a passage-paid
starship once he has formally checked in on board. I was legally, at
this moment, on my "planet of destination." "I haven't been charged--"

"Did I say you had?" snapped one man. "Shut up, he's doped," the other said hurriedly. "Look," he continued,
pronouncing every word loudly and distinctly, "get up now, and come with
us. The co-ordinator will hold up blastoff if we don't get off in three
minutes, and Operations will scream. Come on, please." Then I was stumbling along the lighted, empty corridor, swaying between
the two men, foggily realizing the crew must think me a fugitive caught
trying to leave the planet. The locks dilated. A uniformed spaceman watched us, fussily regarding a
chronometer. He fretted. "The dispatcher's office--"

"We're doing the best we can," the Spaceforce man said. "Can you walk,
Cargill?" I could, though my feet were a little shaky on the ladders. The violet
moonlight had deepened to mauve, and gusty winds spun tendrils of grit
across my face. The Spaceforce men shepherded me, one on either side, to
the gateway. "What the hell is all this? Is something wrong with my pass?" The guard shook his head. "How would I know? Magnusson put out the
order, take it up with him." "Believe me," I muttered, "I will." They looked at each other. "Hell," said one, "he's not under arrest, we
don't have to haul him around like a convict. Can you walk all right
now, Cargill? You know where the Secret Service office is, don't you? Floor 38. The Chief wants you, and make it fast." I knew it made no sense to ask questions, they obviously knew no more
than I did. I asked anyhow. "Are they holding the ship for me? I'm supposed to be leaving on it." "Not that one," the guard answered, jerking his head toward the
spaceport. I looked back just in time to see the dust-dimmed ship leap
upward, briefly whitened in the field searchlights, and vanish into the
surging clouds above. My head was clearing fast, and anger speeded up the process. The HQ
building was empty in the chill silence of just before dawn. I had to
rout out a dozing elevator operator, and as the lift swooped upward my
anger rose with it. I wasn't working for Magnusson any more. What right
had he, or anybody, to grab me off an outbound starship like a criminal? By the time I barged into his office, I was spoiling for a fight. The Secret Service office was full of grayish-pink morning and yellow
lights left on from the night before. Magnusson, at his desk, looked as
if he'd slept in his rumpled uniform. He was a big bull of a man, and
his littered desk looked, as always, like the track of a typhoon in the
salt flats. The clutter was weighted down, here and there, with solidopic cubes of
the five Magnusson youngsters, and as usual, Magnusson was fiddling with
one of the cubes. He said, not looking up, "Sorry to pull this at the
last minute, Race. There was just time to put out a pull order and get
you off the ship, but no time to explain." I glared at him. "Seems I can't even get off the planet without trouble! You raised hell all the time I was here, but when I try to leave--what
is this, anyhow? I'm sick of being shoved around!" Magnusson made a conciliating gesture. "Wait until you hear--" he began,
and broke off, looking at someone who was sitting in the chair in front
of his desk, somebody whose back was turned to me. Then the person
twisted and I stopped cold, blinking and wondering if this were a
hallucination and I'd wake up in the starship's skyhook, far out in
space. Then the woman cried, "Race, _Race_! Don't you know me?" I took one dazed step and another. Then she flew across the space
between us, her thin arms tangling around my neck, and I caught her up,
still disbelieving. "_Juli!_"

"Oh, Race, I thought I'd die when Mack told me you were leaving tonight. It's been the only thing that's kept me alive, knowing--knowing I'd see
you." She sobbed and laughed, her face buried in my shoulder. I let her cry for a minute, then held my sister at arm's length. For a
moment I had forgotten the six years that lay between us. Now I saw
them, all of them, printed plain on her face. Juli had been a pretty
girl. Six years had fined her face into beauty, but there was tension in
the set of her shoulders, and her gray eyes had looked on horrors. She looked tiny and thin and unbearably frail under the scanty folds of
her fur robe, a Dry-town woman's robe. Her wrists were manacled, the
jeweled tight bracelets fastened together by the links of a long fine
chain of silvered gilt that clashed a little, thinly, as her hands fell
to her sides. "What's wrong, Juli? Where's Rakhal?" She shivered and now I could see that she was in a state of shock. "Gone. He's gone, that's all I know. And--oh, Race, Race, he took Rindy
with him!" From the tone of her voice I had thought she was sobbing. Now I realized
that her eyes were dry; she was long past tears. Gently I unclasped her
clenched fingers and put her back in the chair. She sat like a doll, her
hands falling to her sides with a thin clash of chains. When I picked
them up and laid them in her lap she let them lie there motionless. I
stood over her and demanded, "Who's Rindy?" She didn't move. "My daughter, Race. Our little girl." Magnusson broke in, his voice harsh. "Well, Cargill, should I have let
you leave?" "Don't be a damn fool!" "I was afraid you'd tell the poor kid she had to live with her own
mistakes," growled Magnusson. "You're capable of it." For the first time Juli showed a sign of animation. "I was afraid to
come to you, Mack. You never wanted me to marry Rakhal, either." "Water under the bridge," Magnusson grunted. "And I've got lads of my
own, Miss Cargill--Mrs.--" he stopped in distress, vaguely remembering
that in the Dry-towns an improper form of address can be a deadly
insult. But she guessed his predicament. "You used to call me Juli, Mack. It will do now." "You've changed," he said quietly. "Juli, then. Tell Race what you told
me. All of it." She turned to me. "I shouldn't have come for myself--"

I knew that. Juli was proud, and she had always had the courage to live
with her own mistakes. When I first saw her, I knew this wouldn't be
anything so simple as the complaint of an abused wife or even an
abandoned or deserted mother. I took a chair, watching her and
listening. She began. "You made a mistake when you turned Rakhal out of the
Service, Mack. In his way he was the most loyal man you had on Wolf." Magnusson had evidently not expected her to take this tack. He scowled
and looked disconcerted, shifting uneasily in his big chair, but when
Juli did not continue, obviously awaiting his answer, he said, "Juli, he
left me no choice. I never knew how his mind worked. That final deal he
engineered--have you any idea how much that cost the Service? And have
you taken a good look at your brother's face, Juli girl?" Juli raised her eyes slowly, and I saw her flinch. I knew how she felt. For three years I had kept my mirror covered, growing an untidy
straggle of beard because it hid the scars and saved me the ordeal of
facing myself to shave. Juli whispered, "Rakhal's is just as bad. Worse." "That's some satisfaction," I said, and Mack stared at us, baffled. "Even now I don't know what it was all about." "And you never will," I said for the hundredth time. "We've been over
this before. Nobody could understand it unless he'd lived in the
Dry-towns. Let's not talk about it. You talk, Juli. What brought you
here like this? What about the kid?" "There's no way I can tell you the end without telling you the
beginning," she said reasonably. "At first Rakhal worked as a trader in
Shainsa." I wasn't surprised. The Dry-towns were the core of Terran trade on Wolf,
and it was through their cooperation that Terra existed here peaceably,
on a world only half human, or less. The men of the Dry-towns existed strangely poised between two worlds. They had made dealings with the first Terran ships, and thus gave
entrance to the wedge of the Terran Empire. And yet they stood proud and
apart. They alone had never yielded to the Terranizing which overtakes
all Empire planets sooner or later. There were no Trade Cities in the Dry-towns; an Earthman who went there
unprotected faced a thousand deaths, each one worse than the last. There
were those who said that the men of Shainsa and Daillon and Ardcarran
had sold the rest of Wolf to the Terrans, to keep the Terrans from their
own door. Even Rakhal, who had worked with Terra since boyhood, had finally come
to a point of decision and gone his own way. And it was not Terra's way. That was what Juli was saying now. "He didn't like what Terra was doing on Wolf. I'm not so sure I like it
myself--"

Magnusson interrupted her again. "Do you know what Wolf was like when we
came here? Have you seen the Slave Colony, the Idiot's Village? Your own
brother went to Shainsa and routed out The Lisse." "And Rakhal helped him!" Juli reminded him. "Even after he left you, he
tried to keep out of things. He could have told them a good deal that
would hurt you, after ten years in Intelligence, you know." I knew. It was, although I wasn't going to tell Juli this, one reason
why, at the end--during that terrible explosion of violence which no
normal Terran mind could comprehend--I had done my best to kill him. We
had both known that after this, the planet would not hold the two of us. We could both go on living only by dividing it unevenly. I had been
given the slow death of the Terran Zone. And he had all the rest. "But he never told them anything! I tell you, he was one of the most
loyal--"

Mack grunted, "Yeah, he's an angel. Go ahead." She didn't, not immediately. Instead she asked what sounded like an
irrelevant question. "Is it true what he told me? That the Empire has a
standing offer of a reward for a working model of a matter transmitter?" "That offer's been standing for three hundred years, Terran reckoning. One million credits cash. Don't tell me he was figuring to invent one?" "I don't think so. But I think he heard rumors about one. He said with
that kind of money he could bargain the Terrans right out of Shainsa. That was where it started. He began coming and going at odd times, but
he never said any more about it. He wouldn't talk to me at all." "When was all this?" "About four months ago." "In other words, just about the time of the riots in Charin." She nodded. "Yes. He was away in Charin when the Ghost Wind blew, and he
came back with knife cuts in his thigh. I asked if he had been mixed-up
in the anti-Terran rioting, but he wouldn't tell me. Race, I don't know
anything about politics. I don't really care. But just about that time,
the Great House in Shainsa changed hands. I'm sure Rakhal had something
to do with that. "And then--" Juli twisted her chained hands together in her lap--"he
tried to mix Rindy up in it. It was crazy, awful! He'd brought her some
sort of nonhuman toy from one of the lowland towns, Charin I think. It
was a weird thing, scared me. But he'd sit Rindy down in the sunlight
and have her look into it, and Rindy would gabble all sorts of nonsense
about little men and birds and a toymaker." The chains about Juli's wrists clashed as she twisted her hands
together. I stared somberly at the fetters. The chain, which was long,
did not really hamper her movements much. Such chains were symbolic
ornaments, and most Dry-town women went all their lives with fettered
hands. But even after the years I'd spent in the Dry-towns, the sight
still brought an uneasiness to my throat, a vague discomfort. "We had a terrible fight over that," Juli went on. "I was afraid, afraid
of what it was doing to Rindy. I threw it out, and Rindy woke up and
screamed--" Juli checked herself and caught at vanishing self-control. "But you don't want to hear about that. It was then I threatened to
leave him and take Rindy. The next day--" Suddenly the hysteria Juli had
been forcing back broke free, and she rocked back and forth in her
chair, shaken and strangled with sobs. "He took Rindy! Oh, Race, he's
crazy, crazy. I think he hates Rindy, he--he, Race, _he smashed her
toys_. He took every toy the child had and broke them one by one,
smashed them into powder, every toy the child had--"

"Juli, please, please," Magnusson pleaded, shaken. "If we're dealing
with a maniac--"

"I don't dare think he'd harm her! He warned me not to come here, or I'd
never see her again, but if it meant war against Terra I had to come. But Mack, please, don't do anything against him, please, please. He's
got my baby, he's got my little girl...." Her voice failed and she
buried her face in her hands. Mack picked up the solidopic cube of his five-year-old son, and turned
it between his pudgy fingers, saying unhappily, "Juli, we'll take every
precaution. But can't you see, we've got to get him? If there's a
question of a matter transmitter, or anything like that, in the hands of
Terra's enemies--"

I could see that, too, but Juli's agonized face came between me and the
picture of disaster. I clenched my fist around the chair arm, not
surprised to see the fragile plastic buckle, crack and split under my
grip. _If it had been Rakhal's neck...._

"Mack, let me handle this. Juli, shall I find Rindy for you?" A hope was born in her ravaged face, and died, while I looked. "Race,
he'd kill you. Or have you killed." "He'd try," I admitted. The moment Rakhal knew I was outside the Terran
zone, I'd walk with death. I had accepted the code during my years in
Shainsa. But now I was an Earthman and felt only contempt. "Can't you see? Once he knows I'm at large, that very code of his will
force him to abandon any intrigue, whatever you call it, conspiracy, and
come after me first. That way we do two things: we get him out of
hiding, and we get him out of the conspiracy, if there is one." I looked at the shaking Juli and something snapped. I stooped and lifted
her, not gently, my hands biting her shoulders. "And I won't kill him,
do you hear? He may wish I had; by the time I get through with him--I'll
beat the living hell out of him; I'll cram my fists down his throat. But
I'll settle it with him like an Earthman. I won't kill him. _Hear me,
Juli?_ Because that's the worst thing I could do to him--catch him and
let him live afterward!" Magnusson stepped toward me and pried my crushing hands off her arms. Juli rubbed the bruises mechanically, not knowing she was doing it. Mack
said, "You can't do it, Cargill. You wouldn't get as far as Daillon. You
haven't been out of the zone in six years. Besides--"

His eyes rested full on my face. "I hate to say this, Race, but damn it,
man, go and take a good look at yourself in a mirror. Do you think I'd
ever have pulled you off the Secret Service otherwise? How in hell can
you disguise yourself now?" "There are plenty of scarred men in the Dry-towns," I said. "Rakhal will
remember my scars, but I don't think anyone else would look twice." Magnusson walked to the window. His huge form bulked against the light,
perceptibly darkening the office. He looked over the faraway panorama,
the neat bright Trade City below and the vast wilderness lying outside. I could almost hear the wheels grinding in his head. Finally he swung
around. "Race, I've heard these rumors before. But you're the only man I could
have sent to track them down, and I wouldn't send you out in cold blood
to be killed. I won't now. Spaceforce will pick him up." I heard the harsh inward gasp of Juli's breath and said, "Damn it, no. The first move you make--" I couldn't finish. Rindy was in his hands,
and when I knew Rakhal, he hadn't been given to making idle threats. We
all three knew what Rakhal might do at the first hint of the long arm of
Terran law reaching out for him. I said, "For God's sake let's keep Spaceforce out of it. Let it look
like a personal matter between Rakhal and me, and let us settle it on
those terms. Remember he's got the kid." Magnusson sighed. Again he picked up one of the cubes and stared into
the clear plastic, where the three-dimensional image of a nine-year-old
girl looked out at him, smiling and innocent. His face was transparent
as the plastic cube. Mack acts tough, but he has five kids and he is as
soft as a dish of pudding where a kid is concerned. "I know. Another thing, too. If we send out Spaceforce, after all the
riots--how many Terrans are on this planet? A few thousand, no more. What chance would we have, if it turned into a full-scale rebellion? None at all, unless we wanted to order a massacre. Sure, we have bombs
and dis-guns and all that. "But would we dare to use them? And where would we be after that? We're
here to keep the pot from boiling over, to keep out of planetary
incidents, not push them along to a point where bluff won't work. That's
why we've got to pick up Rakhal before this gets out of hand." I said, "Give me a month. Then you can move in, if you have to. Rakhal
can't do much against Terra in that time. And I might be able to keep
Rindy out of it." Magnusson stared at me, hard-eyed. "If you do this against my advice, I
won't be able to step in and pull you out of a jam later on, you know. And God help you if you start up the machines and can't stop them." I knew that. A month wasn't much. Wolf is forty thousand miles of
diameter, at least half unexplored; mountain and forest swarming with
nonhuman and semi-human cities where Terrans had never been. Finding Rakhal, or any one man, would be like picking out one star in
the Andromeda nebula. Not impossible. Not _quite_ impossible. Mack's eyes wandered again to his child's face, deep in the transparent
cube. He turned it in his hands. "Okay, Cargill," he said slowly, "so
we're all crazy. I'll be crazy too. Try it your way." CHAPTER FOUR


By sunset I was ready to leave. I hadn't had any loose ends to tie up in
the Trade City, since I'd already disposed of most of my gear before
boarding the starship. I'd never been in better circumstances to take
off for parts unknown. Mack, still disapproving, had opened the files to me, and I'd spent most
of the day in the back rooms of Floor 38, searching Intelligence files
to refresh my memory, scanning the pages of my own old reports sent
years ago from Shainsa and Daillon. He had sent out one of the nonhumans
who worked for us, to buy or acquire somewhere in the Old Town a
Dry-towner's outfit and the other things I would wear and carry. I would have liked to go myself. I felt that I needed the practice. I
was only now beginning to realize how much I might have forgotten in the
years behind a desk. But until I was ready to make my presence known, no
one must know that Race Cargill had not left Wolf on the starship. Above all, I must not be seen in the Kharsa until I went there in the
Dry-town disguise which had become, years ago, a deep second nature,
almost an alternate personality. About sunset I walked through the clean little streets of the Terran
Trade City toward the Magnusson home where Juli was waiting for me. Most of the men who go into Civil Service of the Empire come from Earth,
or from the close-in planets of Proxima and Alpha Centaurus. They go out
unmarried, and they stay that way, or marry women native to the planets
where they are sent. But Joanna Magnusson was one of the rare Earth women who had come out
with her husband, twenty years ago. There are two kinds of Earthwomen
like that. They make their quarterings a little bit of home, or a little
bit of hell. Joanna had made their house look like a transported corner
of Earth. I never knew quite what to think of the Magnusson household. It seemed
to me almost madness to live under a red sun, yet come inside to yellow
light, to live on a world with the wild beauty of Wolf and yet live as
they might have lived on their home planet. Or maybe I was the one who
was out of step. I had done the reprehensible thing they called "going
native." Possibly I had done just that, and in absorbing myself into the
new world, had lost the ability to fit into the old. Joanna, a chubby comfortable woman in her forties, opened the door and
gave me her hand. "Come in, Race. Juli's expecting you." "It's good of you." I broke off, unable to express my gratitude. Juli
and I had come from Earth--our father had been an officer on the old
starship _Landfall_ when Juli was only a child. He had died in a wreck
off Procyon, and Mack Magnusson had found me a place in Intelligence
because I spoke four of the Wolf languages and haunted the Kharsa with
Rakhal whenever I could get away. They had also taken Juli into their own home, like a younger sister. They hadn't said much--because they had liked Rakhal--when the breakup
came. But that terrible night when Rakhal and I nearly killed each
other, and Rakhal came with his face bleeding and took Juli away with
him, had hurt them hard. Yet it had made them all the kinder to me. Joanna said forthrightly, "Nonsense, Race! What else could we do?" She
drew me along the hall. "You can talk in here." I delayed a minute before going through the door she indicated. "How is
Juli?" "Better, I think. I put her to bed in Meta's room, and she slept most of
the day. She'll be all right. I'll leave you to talk." Joanna opened the
door, and went away. Juli was awake and dressed, and already some of the terrible frozen
horror was gone from her face. She was still tense and devil-ridden, but
not hysterical now. The room, one of the children's bedrooms, wasn't a big one. Even at the
top of the Secret Service, a cop doesn't live too well. Not on Terra's
Civil Service pay scale. Not, with five youngsters. It looked as if all
five of the kids had taken it to pieces, one at a time. I sat down on a too-low chair and said, "Juli, we haven't much time,
I've got to be out of the city before dark. I want to know about Rakhal,
what he does, what he's like now. Remember, I haven't seen him for
years. Tell me everything--his friends, his amusements, everything you
know." "I always thought you knew him better than I did." Juli had a fidgety
little way of coiling the links of the chain around her wrists and it
made me nervous. "It's routine, Juli. Police work. Mostly I play by ear, but I try to
start out by being methodical." She answered everything I asked her, but the sum total wasn't much and
it wouldn't help much. As I said, it's easy to disappear on Wolf. Juli
knew he had been friendly with the new holders of the Great House on
Shainsa, but she didn't even know their name. I heard one of the Magnusson children fly to the street door and return,
shouting for her mother. Joanna knocked at the door of the room and came
in. "There's a _chak_ outside who wants to see you, Race." I nodded. "Probably my fancy dress. Can I change in the back room,
Joanna? Will you keep my clothes here till I get back?" I went to the door and spoke to the furred nonhuman in the sibilant
jargon of the Kharsa and he handed me what looked like a bundle of rags. There were hard lumps inside. The _chak_ said softly, "I hear a rumor in
the Kharsa, _Raiss_. Perhaps it will help you. Three men from Shainsa
are in the city. They came here to seek a woman who has vanished, and a
toymaker. They are returning at sunrise. Perhaps you can arrange to
travel in their caravan." I thanked him and carried the bundle inside. In the empty back room I
stripped to the skin and unrolled the bundle. There was a pair of baggy
striped breeches, a worn and shabby shirtcloak with capacious pockets, a
looped belt with half the gilt rubbed away and the base metal showing
through, and a scuffed pair of ankle-boots tied with frayed thongs of
different colors. There was a little cluster of amulets and seals. I
chose two or three of the commonest kind, and strung them around my
neck. One of the lumps in the bundle was a small jar, holding nothing but the
ordinary spices sold in the market, with which the average Dry-towner
flavors food. I rubbed some of the powder on my body, put a pinch in the
pocket of my shirtcloak, and chewed a few of the buds, wrinkling my nose
at the long-unfamiliar pungency. The second lump was a skean, and unlike the worn and shabby garments,
this was brand-new and sharp and bright, and its edge held a razor
glint. I tucked it into the clasp of my shirtcloak, a reassuring weight. It was the only weapon I could dare to carry. The last of the solid objects in the bundle was a flat wooden case,
about nine by ten inches. I slid it open. It was divided carefully into
sections cushioned with sponge-absorbent plastic, and in them lay tiny
slips of glass, on Wolf as precious as jewels. They were lenses--camera
lenses, microscope lenses, even eyeglass lenses. Packed close, there
were nearly a hundred of them nested by the shock-absorbent stuff. They were my excuse for travel to Shainsa. Over and above the
necessities of trade, a few items of Terran manufacture--vacuum tubes,
transistors, lenses for cameras and binoculars, liquors and finely
forged small tools--are literally worth their weight in platinum. Even in cities where Terrans have never gone, these things bring
exorbitant prices, and trading in them is a Dry-town privilege. Rakhal
had been a trader, so Juli told me, in fine wire and surgical
instruments. Wolf is not a mechanized planet, and has never developed
any indigenous industrial system; the psychology of the nonhuman seldom
runs to technological advances. I went down the hallway again to the room where Juli was waiting. Catching a glimpse in a full-length mirror, I was startled. All traces
of the Terran civil servant, clumsy and uncomfortable in his ill-fitting
clothes, had dropped away. A Dry-towner, rangy and scarred, looked out
at me, and it seemed that the expression on his face was one of
amazement. Joanna whirled as I came into the room and visibly paled before,
recovering her self-control, she gave a nervous little giggle. "Goodness, Race, I didn't know you!" Juli whispered, "Yes, I--I remember you better like that. You're--you
look so much like--"

The door flew open and Mickey Magnusson scampered into the room, a
chubby little boy browned by a Terra-type sunlamp and glowing with
health. In his hand he held some sparkling thing that gave off tiny
flashes and glints of color. I gave the kid a grin before I realized that I was disguised anyhow and
probably a hideous sight. The little boy backed off, but Joanna put her
plump hand on his shoulder, murmuring soothing things. Mickey toddled toward Juli, holding up the shining thing in his hands as
if to display something very precious and beloved. Juli bent and held
out her arms, then her face contracted and she snatched at the
plaything. "Mickey, what's that?" He thrust it protectively behind his back. "Mine!" "Mickey, don't be naughty," Joanna chided. "Please let me see," Juli coaxed, and he brought it out, slowly, still
suspicious. It was an angled prism of crystal, star-shaped, set in a
frame which could get the star spinning like a solidopic. But it
displayed a new and comical face every time it was turned. Mickey turned it round and round, charmed at being the center of
attention. There seemed to be dozens of faces, shifting with each spin
of the prism, human and nonhuman, all dim and slightly distorted. My own
face, Juli's, Joanna's came out of the crystal surface, not a reflection
but a caricature. A choked sound from Juli made me turn in dismay. She had let herself
drop to the floor and was sitting there, white as death, supporting
herself with her two hands. "Race! Find out where he got that--that _thing_!" I bent and shook her. "What's the matter with you?" I demanded. She had
lapsed into the dazed, sleepwalking horror of this morning. She
whispered, "It's not a toy. Rindy had one. Joanna, _where did he get
it_?" She pointed at the shining thing with an expression of horror
which would have been laughable had it been less real, less filled with
terror. Joanna cocked her head to one side and wrinkled her forehead,
reflectively. "Why, I don't know, now you come to ask me. I thought
maybe one of the _chaks_ had given it to Mickey. Bought it in the
bazaar, maybe. He loves it. Do get up off the floor, Juli!" Juli scrambled to her feet. She said, "Rindy had one. It--it terrified
me. She would sit and look at it by the hour, and--I told you about it,
Race. I threw it out once, and she woke up and screamed. She shrieked
for hours and hours and she ran out in the dark and dug for it in the
trash pile, where I'd buried it. She went out in the dark, broke all her
fingernails, but she dug it out again." She checked herself, staring at
Joanna, her eyes wide in appeal. "Well, dear," said Joanna with mild, rebuking kindness, "you needn't be
so upset. I don't think Mickey's so attached to it as all that, and
anyhow I'm not going to throw it away." She patted Juli reassuringly on
the shoulder, then gave Mickey a little shove toward the door and turned
to follow him. "You'll want to talk alone before Race leaves. Good luck,
wherever you're going, Race." She held out her hand forthrightly. "And don't worry about Juli," she added in an undertone. "We'll take
good care of her." When I came back to Juli she was standing by the window, looking through
the oddly filtered glass that dimmed the red sun to orange. "Joanna
thinks I'm crazy, Race." "She thinks you're upset." "Rindy's an odd child, a real Dry-towner. But it's not my imagination,
Race, it's not. There's something--" Suddenly she sobbed aloud again. "Homesick, Juli?" "I was, a little, the first years. But I was happy, believe me." She
turned her face to me, shining with tears. "You've got to believe I
never regretted it for a minute." "I'm glad," I said dully. _That made it just fine._

"Only that toy--"

"Who knows? It might be a clue to something." The toy had reminded me of
something, too, and I tried to remember what it was. I'd seen nonhuman
toys in the Kharsa, even bought them for Mack's kids. When a single man
is invited frequently to a home with five youngsters, it's about the
only way he can repay that hospitality, by bringing the children odd
trifles and knicknacks. But I had never seen anything quite like this
one, until--

--Until yesterday. The toy-seller they had hunted out of the Kharsa, the
one who had fled into the shrine of Nebran and vanished. He had had half
a dozen of those prism-and-star sparklers. I tried to call up a mental picture of the little toy-seller. I didn't
have much luck. I'd seen him only in that one swift glance from beneath
his hood. "Juli, have you ever seen a little man, like a _chak_ only
smaller, twisted, hunchbacked? He sells toys--"

She looked blank. "I don't think so, although there are dwarf _chaks_ in
the Polar Cities. But I'm sure I've never seen one." "It was just an idea." But it was something to think about. A toy-seller
had vanished. Rakhal, before disappearing, had smashed all Rindy's toys. And the sight of a plaything of cunningly-cut crystal had sent Juli into
hysterics. "I'd better go before it's too dark," I said. I buckled the final clasp
of my shirtcloak, fitted my skean another notch into it, and counted the
money Mack had advanced me for expenses. "I want to get into the Kharsa
and hunt up the caravan to Shainsa." "You're going there first?" "Where else?" Juli turned, leaning one hand against the wall. She looked frail and
ill, years older than she was. Suddenly she flung her thin arms around
me, and a link of the chain on her fettered hands struck me hard, as she
cried out, "Race, Race, he'll kill you! How can I live with that on my
conscience too?" "You can live with a hell of a lot on your conscience." I disengaged her
arms firmly from my neck. A link of the chain caught on the clasp of my
shirtcloak, and again something snapped inside me. I grasped the chain
in my two hands and gave a mighty heave, bracing my foot against the
wall. The links snapped asunder. A flying end struck Juli under the eye. I ripped at the seals of the jeweled cuffs, tore them from her arms,
find threw the whole assembly into a corner, where it fell with a
clash. "Damn it," I roared, "that's over! You're never going to wear _those_
things again!" Maybe after six years in the Dry-towns, Juli was
beginning to guess what those six years behind a desk had meant to me. "Juli, I'll find your Rindy for you, and I'll bring Rakhal in alive. But
don't ask more than that. Just _alive_. And don't ask me how." He'd be alive when I got through with him. Sure, he'd be alive. Just. CHAPTER FIVE


It was getting dark when I slipped through a side gate, shabby and
inconspicuous, into the spaceport square. Beyond the yellow lamps, I
knew that the old city was beginning to take on life with the falling
night. Out of the chinked pebble-houses, men and woman, human and
nonhuman, came forth into the moonlit streets. If anyone noticed me cross the square, which I doubted, they took me for
just another Dry-town vagabond, curious about the world of the strangers
from beyond the stars, and who, curiosity satisfied, was drifting back
where he belonged. I turned down one of the dark alleys that led away,
and soon was walking in the dark. The Kharsa was not unfamiliar to me as a Terran, but for the last six
years I had seen only its daytime face. I doubted if there were a dozen
Earthmen in the Old Town tonight, though I saw one in the bazaar, dirty
and lurching drunk; one of those who run renegade and homeless between
worlds, belonging to neither. This was what I had nearly become. I went further up the hill with the rising streets. Once I turned, and
saw below me the bright-lighted spaceport, the black many-windowed loom
of the skyscraper like a patch of alien shadow in the red-violet
moonlight. I turned my back on them and walked on. At the fringe of the thieves market I paused outside a wineshop where
Dry-towners were made welcome. A golden nonhuman child murmured
something as she pattered by me in the street, and I stopped, gripped by
a spasm of stagefright. Had the dialect of Shainsa grown rusty on my
tongue? Spies were given short shrift on Wolf, and a mile from the
spaceport, I might as well have been on one of those moons. There were
no spaceport shockers at my back now. And someone might remember the
tale of an Earthman with a scarred face who had gone to Shainsa in
disguise.... I shrugged the shirtcloak around my shoulders, pushed the door and went
in. I had remembered that Rakhal was waiting for me. Not beyond this
door, but at the end of the trail, behind some other door, somewhere. And we have a byword in Shainsa: _A trail without beginning has no end_. Right there I stopped thinking about Juli, Rindy, the Terran Empire, or
what Rakhal, who knew too many of Terra's secrets, might do if he had
turned renegade. My fingers went up and stroked, musingly, the ridge of
scar tissue along my mouth. At that moment I was thinking only of
Rakhal, of an unsettled blood-feud, and of my revenge. Red lamps were burning inside the wineshop, where men reclined on frowsy
couches. I stumbled over one of them, found an empty place and let
myself sink down on it, arranging myself automatically in the sprawl of
Dry-towners indoors. In public they stood, rigid and formal, even to eat
and drink. Among themselves, anything less than a loose-limbed sprawl
betrayed insulting watchfulness; only a man who fears secret murder
keeps himself on guard. A girl with a tangled rope of hair down her back came toward me. Her
hands were unchained, meaning she was a woman of the lowest class, not
worth safeguarding. Her fur smock was shabby and matted with filth. I
sent her for wine. When it came it was surprisingly good, the sweet and
treacherous wine of Ardcarran. I sipped it slowly, looking round. If a caravan for Shainsa were leaving tomorrow, it would be known here. A word dropped that I was returning there would bring me, by ironbound
custom, an invitation to travel in their company. When I sent the woman for wine a second time, a man on a nearby couch
got up, and walked over to me. He was tall even for a Dry-towner, and there was something vaguely
familiar about him. He was no riffraff of the Kharsa, either, for his
shirtcloak was of rich silk interwoven with metallic threads, and
crusted with heavy embroideries. The hilt of his skean was carved from a
single green gem. He stood looking down at me for some time before he
spoke. "I never forget a voice, although I cannot bring your face to mind. Have
I a duty toward you?" I had spoken a jargon to the girl, but he addressed me in the lilting,
sing-song speech of Shainsa. I made no answer, gesturing him to be
seated. On Wolf, formal courtesy requires a series of polite _non
sequiturs_, and while a direct question merely borders on rudeness, a
direct answer is the mark of a simpleton. "A drink?" "I joined you unasked," he retorted, and summoned the tangle-headed
girl. "Bring us better wine than this swill!" With that word and gesture I recognized him and my teeth clamped hard on
my lip. This was the loudmouth who had shown fight in the spaceport
cafe, and run away before the dark girl with the sign of Nebran sprawled
on her breast. But in this poor light he had not recognized me. I moved deliberately
into the full red glow. If he did not know me for the Terran he had
challenged last night in the spaceport cafe, it was unlikely that anyone
else would. He stared at me for some minutes, but in the end he only
shrugged and poured wine from the bottle he had ordered. Three drinks later I knew that his name was Kyral and that he was a
trader in wire and fine steel tools through the nonhuman towns. And I
had given him the name I had chosen, Rascar. He asked, "Are you thinking of returning to Shainsa?" Wary of a trap, I hesitated, but the question seemed harmless, so I only
countered, "Have you been long in the Kharsa?" "Several weeks." "Trading?" "No." He applied himself to the wine again. "I was searching for a
member of my family." "Did you find him?" "Her," said Kyral, and ceremoniously spat. "No, I didn't find her. What
is your business in Shainsa?" I chuckled briefly. "As a matter of fact, I am searching for a member of
my family." He narrowed his eyelids as if he suspected me of mocking him, but
personal privacy is the most rigid convention of the Dry-towns and such
mockery showed a sensible disregard for prying questions if I did not
choose to answer them. He questioned no further. "I can use an extra man to handle the loads. Are you good with pack
animals? If so, you are welcome to travel under the protection of my
caravan." I agreed. Then, reflecting that Juli and Rakhal must, after all, be
known in Shainsa, I asked, "Do you know a trader who calls himself
Sensar?" He started slightly; I saw his eyes move along my scars. Then reserve,
like a lowered curtain, shut itself over his face, concealing a brief
satisfied glimmer. "No," he lied, and stood up. "We leave at first daylight. Have your gear ready." He flipped something
at me, and I caught it in midair. It was a stone incised with Kyral's
name in the ideographs of Shainsa. "You can sleep with the caravan if
you care to. Show that token to Cuinn." *       *       *       *       *

Kyral's caravan was encamped in a barred field past the furthest gates
of the Kharsa. About a dozen men were busy loading the pack
animals--horses shipped in from Darkover, mostly. I asked the first man
I met for Cuinn. He pointed out a burly fellow in a shiny red
shirtcloak, who was busy at chewing out one of the young men for the way
he'd put a packsaddle on his beast. Shainsa is a good language for cursing, but Cuinn had a special talent
at it. I blinked in admiration while I waited for him to get his breath
so I could hand him Kyral's token. In the light of the fire I saw what I'd half expected: he was the second
of the Dry-towners who'd tried to rough me up in the spaceport cafe. Cuinn barely glanced at the cut stone and tossed it back, pointing out
one of the packhorses. "Load your personal gear on that one, then get
busy and show this mush-headed wearer of sandals"--an insult carrying
particularly filthy implications in Shainsa--"how to fasten a
packstrap." He drew breath and began to swear at the luckless youngster again, and I
relaxed. He evidently hadn't recognized me, either. I took the strap in
my hand, guiding it through the saddle loop. "Like that," I told the
kid, and Cuinn stopped swearing long enough to give me a curt nod of
acknowledgment and point out a heap of boxed and crated objects. "Help him load up. We want to get clear of the city by daybreak," he
ordered, and went off to swear at someone else. Kyral turned up at dawn, and a few minutes later the camp had vanished
into a small scattering of litter and we were on our way. Kyral's caravan, in spite of Cuinn's cursing, was well-managed and
well-handled. The men were Dry-towners, eleven of them, silent and
capable and most of them very young. They were cheerful on the trail,
handled the pack animals competently, during the day, and spent most of
the nights grouped around the fire, gambling silently on the fall of the
cut-crystal prisms they used for dice. Three days out of the Kharsa I began to worry about Cuinn. It was of course a spectacular piece of bad luck to find all three of
the men from the spaceport cafe in Kyral's caravan. Kyral had obviously
not known me, and even by daylight he paid no attention to me except to
give an occasional order. The second of the three was a gangling kid who
probably never gave me a second look, let alone a third. But Cuinn was another matter. He was a man my own age, and his fierce
eyes had a shrewdness in them that I did not trust. More than once I
caught him watching me, and on the two or three occasions when he drew
me into conversation, I found his questions more direct than Dry-town
good manners allowed. I weighed the possibility that I might have to
kill him before we reached Shainsa. We crossed the foothills and began to climb upward toward the mountains. The first few days I found myself short of breath as we worked upward
into thinner air, then my acclimatization returned and I began to fall
into the pattern of the days and nights on the trail. The Trade City
was still a beacon in the night, but its glow on the horizon grew dimmer
with each day's march. Higher we climbed, along dangerous trails where men had to dismount and
let the pack animals pick their way, foot by foot. Here in these
altitudes the sun at noonday blazed redder and brighter, and the
Dry-towners, who come from the parched lands in the sea-bottoms, were
burned and blistered by the fierce light. I had grown up under the
blazing sun of Terra, and a red sun like Wolf, even at its hottest,
caused me no discomfort. This alone would have made me suspect. Once
again I found Cuinn's fierce eyes watching me. As we crossed the passes and began to descend the long trail through the
thick forests, we got into nonhuman country. Racing against the Ghost
Wind, we skirted the country around Charin, and the woods inhabited by
the terrible Ya-men, birdlike creatures who turn cannibal when the Ghost
Wind blows. Later the trail wound through thicker forests of indigo trees and
grayish-purple brushwood, and at night we heard the howls of the catmen
of these latitudes. At night we set guards about the caravan, and the
dark spaces and shadows were filled with noises and queer smells and
rustlings. Nevertheless, the day's marches and the night watches passed without
event until the night I shared guard with Cuinn. I had posted myself at
the edge of the camp, the fire behind me. The men were sleeping rolls of
snores, huddled close around the fire. The animals, hobbled with double
ropes, front feet to hind feet, shifted uneasily and let out long
uncanny whines. I heard Cuinn pacing behind me. I heard a rustle at the edge of the
forest, a stir and whisper beyond the trees, and turned to speak to him,
then saw him slipping away toward the outskirts of the clearing. For a moment I thought nothing of it, thinking that he was taking a few
steps toward the gap in the trees where he had disappeared. I suppose I
had the idea that he had slipped away to investigate some noise or
shadow, and that I should be at hand. Then I saw the flicker of lights beyond the trees--light from the
lantern Cuinn had been carrying in his hand! He was signaling! I slipped the safety clasp from the hilt of my skean and went after him. In the dimming glow of the fire I fancied I saw luminous eyes watching
me, and the skin on my back crawled. I crept up behind him and leaped. We went down in a tangle of flailing legs and arms, and in less than a
second he had his skean out and I was gripping his wrist, trying
desperately to force the blade away from my throat. I gasped, "Don't be a fool! One yell and the whole camp will be awake! Who were you signaling?" In the light of the fallen lantern, lips drawn back in a snarl, he
looked almost inhuman. He strained at the knife for a moment, then
dropped it. "Let me up," he said. I got up and kicked the fallen skean toward him. "Put that away. What in
hell were you doing, trying to bring the catmen down on us?" For a moment he looked taken aback, then his fierce face closed down
again and he said wrathfully, "Can't a man walk away from the camp
without being half strangled?" I glared at him, but realized I really had nothing to go by. He might
have been answering a call of nature, and the movement of the lantern
accidental. And if someone had jumped me from behind, I might have
pulled a knife on him myself. 