



Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             POLICE YOUR PLANET

                              By ERIC VAN LHIN




    SCIENCE FICTION
    AVALON BOOKS
    22 EAST 60TH STREET NEW YORK

    Copyright, 1956, by Eric van Lhin

    [Transcriber's note: This is a rule 6 clearance. A copyright
    renewal could not be found.] Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 56-13313

    PUBLISHED SIMULTANEOUSLY IN THE DOMINION OF CANADA
    BY THE RYERSON PRESS, TORONTO

    PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
    BY THE COLONIAL PRESS INC., CLINTON, MASSACHUSETTS




CONTENTS


       I One Way Ticket

      II Honest Izzy

     III The Graft Is Green

      IV Captain Murdoch

       V Recall

      VI Sealed Letter

     VII Electioneering

    VIII Vote Early and Often

      IX Contraband

       X Marriage of Convenience

      XI The Sky's the Limit

     XII Wife or Prisoner? XIII Arrest Mayor Wayne! XIV Full Circle

      XV Murdoch's Mantle

     XVI Get the Dome! XVII Security Payoff




POLICE YOUR PLANET




Chapter I

ONE WAY TICKET


There were ten passengers in the little pressurized cabin of the
electric bus that shuttled between the rocket field and Marsport. Ten
men, the driver--and Bruce Gordon. He sat apart from the others, as he had kept to himself on the ten-day
trip between Earth and Mars, with the yellow stub of his ticket still
stuck defiantly in the band of his hat, proclaiming that Earth had paid
his passage without his permission being asked. His big, lean body was
slumped slightly in the seat. There was no expression on his face. He listened to the driver explaining to a couple of firsters that they
were actually on what appeared to be one of the mysterious canals when
viewed from Earth. Every book on Mars gave the fact that the canals were
either an illusion or something which could not be detected on the
surface of the planet. He glanced back toward the rocket that still pointed skyward back on the
field, and then forward toward the city of Marsport, sprawling out in a
mess of slums beyond the edges of the dome that had been built to hold
air over the central part. And at last he stirred and reached for the
yellow stub. He grimaced at the ONE WAY stamped on it, then tore it into
bits and let the pieces scatter over the floor. He counted them as they
fell; thirty pieces, one for each year of his life. Little ones for the
two years he'd wasted as a cop. Shreds for the four years as a kid in
the ring before that--he'd never made the top. Bigger bits for two years
also wasted in trying his hand at professional gambling; and the six
final pieces that spelled his rise from a special reporter helping out
with a police shake-up coverage, through a regular leg-man turning up
rackets, and on up like a meteor until.... He'd made his big scoop, all
right. He'd dug up enough about the Mercury scandals to double
circulation. And the government had explained what a fool he'd been for printing half
of a story that was never supposed to be printed until all could be
revealed. They'd given Bruce Gordon his final assignment. He shrugged. He'd bought a suit of airtight coveralls and a helmet at
the field; he had some cash, and a set of reader cards in his pocket. The supply house, Earthside, had assured him that this pattern had never
been exported to Mars. With them and the knife he'd selected, he might
get by. The Solar Security office had given him the knife practice, to make sure
he could use it, just as they'd made sure he hadn't taken extra money
with him beyond the regulation amount. "You're a traitor, and we'd like nothing better than seeing your guts
spilled," the Security man had told him. "That paper you swiped was
marked top secret. But we don't get many men with your background--cop,
tinhorn, fighter--who have brains enough for our work. So you're bound
for Mars, rather than the Mercury mines. If..."

It was a big _if_, and a vague one. They needed men on Mars who could
act as links in their information bureau, and be ready to work on their
side when the expected trouble came. They wanted men who could serve
them loyally, even without orders. If he did them enough service, they
might let him back to Earth. If he caused trouble enough, they could
still ship him to Mercury. "And suppose nothing happens?" he asked. "Then who cares? You're just lucky enough to be alive." "And what makes you think I'm going to be a spy for Security?" The other had shrugged. "Why not, Gordon? You've been a spy for a yellow
scandal sheet. Why not for us?" Gordon had been smart enough to realize that perhaps Security was right. They were in the slums around the city now. Marsport had been settled
faster than it was ready to receive. Temporary buildings had been thrown
up, and then had remained, decaying into deathtraps. It wasn't a pretty
view that visitors got as they first reached Mars. But nobody except the
romantic fools had ever thought frontiers were pretty. The drummer who had watched Gordon tear up his yellow stub moved forward
now. "First time?" he asked. Gordon nodded, mentally cataloguing the drummer as the cockroach type,
midway between the small-businessman slug and the petty-crook spider
types that weren't worth bothering with. But the other took it as
interest. "Been here dozens of times, myself. Risking your life just to go into
Marsport. Why Congress doesn't clean it up, _I'll_ never know!" Gordon's mind switched to the readers in his bag. The cards were
plastic, and should be good for a week or so of use before they showed
wear. During that time, by playing it carefully, he should have his
stake. Then, if the gaming tables here were as crudely run as an
oldtimer he'd known on Earth had said, he could try a coup. "... be at Mother Corey's soon," the fat little drummer babbled on. "Notorious--worst place on Mars. Take it from me, brother, that's
something! Even the cops are afraid to go in there. See it? There, to
your left!" The name was vaguely familiar as one of the sore spots of Marsport. Bruce Gordon looked, and spotted the ragged building, half a mile
outside the dome. It had been a rocket-maintenance hangar once, then had
been turned into temporary dwelling for the first deportees, when Earth
began flooding Mars. Now, seeming to stand by habit alone, it radiated
desolation and decay. He stood up, grabbing for his bag, and spinning the drummer aside. He
jerked forward, and caught the driver's shoulder. "Getting off!" The driver shrugged his hand away. "Don't be crazy, mister! They--" He
turned, saw it was Gordon, and his face turned blank. "It's your life,
buster," he said, and reached for the brake. "I'll give you five minutes
to get into coveralls and helmet and out through the airlock." Gordon needed less than that; he'd practiced all the way from Earth. The
transparent plastic of the coveralls went on easily enough, and his
hands found the seals quickly. He slipped his few possessions into a bag
at his belt, slid the knife into a spring holster above his wrist, and
picked up the bowl-shaped helmet. It seated on a plastic seal, and the
little air compressor at his back began to hum, ready to turn the thin
wisp of Mars' atmosphere into a barely breathable pressure. He tested
the Marspeaker--an amplifier and speaker in another pouch, designed to
raise the volume of his voice to a level where it would carry through
even the air of Mars. The driver swore at the lash of sound, and grabbed for the airlock
switch. *       *       *       *       *

Gordon moved down unpaved streets that zig-zagged along, thick with the
filth of garbage and poverty--the part of Mars never seen in the
newsreels, outside the shock movies. Thin kids with big eyes and sullen
mouths crowded the streets in their airsuits, yelling profanity. The
street was filled with people watching with a numbed hunger for any kind
of excitement. It was late afternoon, obviously. Men were coming from the few bus
routes, lugging tools and lunch baskets, slumped and beaten from labor
in the atomic plants, the Martian conversion farms, and the industries
that had come inevitably where inefficiency was better than the high
prices of imports. The saloons were doing well enough, apparently, from
the number that streamed in through their airlock entrances. But Gordon
saw one of the bartenders paying money to a thickset person with an
arrogant sneer; he knew then that the few profits from the cheap beer
were never going home with the man. Storekeepers in the cheap little
shops had the same lines on their faces as they saw on those of their
customers. Poverty and misery were the keynotes here, rather than the evil
half-world the drummer had babbled about. But to Gordon's trained eyes,
there was plenty of outright rottenness, too. He grimaced, grateful that the supercharger on his airsuit filtered out
some of the smell which the thin air carried. He'd thought he was
familiar with human misery from his own Earth slum background. But there
was no attempt to disguise it here. Ahead, Mother Corey's reared up--a huge, ugly half-cylinder of pitted
metal and native bricks, showing the patchwork of decades, before
repairs had been abandoned. There were no windows, though once there had
been; and the front was covered with a big sign that spelled out
_Condemned_. The airseal was filthy, and there was no bell. Gordon kicked against the side, waited, and kicked again. A slit opened
and closed. He waited, then drew his knife and began prying at the worn
cement around the airseal, looking for the lock that had been there. The seal suddenly quivered, indicating that metal inside had been
withdrawn. Gordon grinned tautly, stepped through, and pushed the blade
against the inner plastic. "All right, all right," a voice whined out of the darkness. "You don't
have to puncture my seal. You're in." "Then call them off!" A wheezing chuckle answered him, and a phosphor bulb glowed weakly,
shedding some light on a filthy hall. "Okay, boys," the voice said,
"come on down. He's alone, anyhow. What's pushing, stranger?" "A yellow ticket," Gordon told him, "and a government allotment that'll
last me two weeks in the dome. I figure on making it last six here, and
don't let my being a firster give you hot palms. My brother was Lanny
Gordon!" It happened to be true, though Bruce Gordon hadn't seen his brother from
the time the man had left the family, as a young punk, to the day they
finally convicted him on his twenty-first murder. But here, if it was
like places he'd known on Earth, even second-hand contact with "muscle"
was useful. It seemed to work. A huge man oozed out of the shadows, his gray face
contorting its doughy fat into a yellow-toothed grin, and a filthy hand
waved back the others. There were a few wisps of long, gray hair on the
head and face, and they quivered as he moved forward. "Looking for a room?" he whined. "I'm looking for Mother Corey." "Then you're looking at him, cobber. Sleep on the floor, want a bunk,
squat with four, or room and duchess to yourself?" There was a period of haggling, followed by a wait as Mother Corey
kicked four grumbling men out of a four-by-seven hole on the second
floor. Gordon's money had carried more weight than his brother's
reputation; for that, Corey humored his guest's wish for privacy. "All
yours, cobber, while your crackle's blue." It was a filthy, dark place. In one corner was an unsheeted bed. There
was a rusty bucket for water, a hole kicked through the floor for waste
water. Plumbing, and such luxuries, apparently hadn't existed for
years--except for the small cistern and worn water-recovery plant in the
basement, beside the tired-looking weeds in the hydroponic tanks that
tried unsuccessfully to keep the air breathable. "What about a lock on the door?" Gordon asked. "What good would it do you? Got a different way here, we have. One
credit a week, and you get Mother Corey's word nobody busts in. And it
sticks, cobber--one way or the other." Gordon paid, and tossed his pouch on the filthy bed. With a little work,
the place could be cleaned enough. He pulled the cards out of his pouch, trying to be casual. Mother Corey
stood staring at the pack while Bruce Gordon changed out of his airsuit,
gagging faintly as the full effluvium of the place hit him. "Where does
a man eat around here?" Mother Corey pried his eyes off the cards and ran a thick tongue over
heavy lips. "Eh? Oh. Eat. There's a place about ten blocks back. Cobber,
stop teasing me! With elections coming up, and the boys loaded with vote
money back in town--with a deck of cheaters like that--you want to
_eat_?" He picked the deck up fondly, while a faraway look came into his clouded
eyes. "Same ones--same identical ones I wore out nigh twenty years ago. Smuggled two decks up here. Set to clean up--and I did, for a while." He
shook his head sadly, and handed the deck back to Gordon. "Come on down. For the sight of these, I'll give you the lay for your pitch. And when
your luck's made or broken, remember Mother Corey was your friend first,
and your old Mother can get longer use from them than you can." He waddled off, telling of his plans to take Mars for a cleaning, once
long ago. Gordon followed him, staring at the surrounding filth. His thoughts were churning so busily that he didn't see the blonde girl
until she had forced her way past them on the stairs. Then he turned
back, but she had vanished into one of the rooms. Chapter II

HONEST IZZY


A lot could be done in ten days, when a man knew what he was after. It
was exactly ten days later. Bruce Gordon stood in the motley crowd
inside the barnlike room where Fats ran a bar along one wall, and filled
the rest of the space with assorted tables--all worn. Gordon was
sweating slightly as he stood at the roulette table, where both zero and
double-zero were reserved for the house. The croupier was a little wizened man wanted on Earth. His eyes darted
down to the point of the knife that showed under Gordon's sleeve, and he
licked his lips, showing snaggled teeth. The wheel hesitated and came to
a halt, with the ball trembling in a pocket. "Twenty-one wins again." He pushed chips toward Gordon, as if every one
of them came out of his own pay. "Place your bets." Two others around the table watched narrowly as Gordon left his chips
where they were; they then exchanged looks and shook their heads. In a
Martian roulette game, numbers with that much riding just didn't turn
up. The croupier shifted his weight, then caught the wheel and spun it
savagely. Gordon's leg ached from his strained position, but he shifted his weight
onto it more heavily, and sweat popped out on the croupier's face. His
eyes darted down, to where the full weight of Gordon seemed to rest on
the heel that was grinding into his instep. He tried to pull his foot
off the button that was concealed in the floor. The heel ground harder, bringing a groan from him. And the ball hovered
over Twenty-one and came to rest there once more. Slowly, painfully, the little man counted stacks of chips and moved them
across the table toward Gordon, his hands trembling. Gordon straightened from his awkward position, drawing his foot back,
and reached out for the pile of chips. Then he scooped it up and nodded. "Okay. I'm not greedy." The strain of watching the games until he could spot the fix, and then
holding the croupier down, had left him momentarily weak, but Gordon
could still feel the tensing of the crowd. Now he let his eyes run over
them--the night citizens of Marsport, lower-dome section. Spacemen who'd
missed their ships; men who'd come here with dreams, and stayed without
them--the shopkeepers who couldn't meet their graft and were here to try
to win it on a last chance; street women and petty grifters. The air was
thick with their unwashed bodies--all Mars smelled, since water was
still too rare for frequent bathing--and their cheap perfume, and
clouded with cheap Marsweed cigarettes. Gordon swung where their eyes pointed, until he saw Fats Eller sidling
through the groups, then let the knife slip into the palm of his hand as
the crowd seemed to hold its breath. Fats plucked a sheaf of Martian
bank notes from his pocket and tossed them to the croupier. "Cash in his chips." Then his pouchy eyes turned to Gordon. "Get your
money, punk, and get out! And stay out!" For a moment, as he began pocketing the bills, Gordon thought he was
going to get away that easily. Fats watched him dourly, then swung on
his heel, just as a shrill, strangled cry went up from someone in the
crowd. The deportee let his glance jerk to it, then froze. His eyes caught the
sight of a hand pointing behind him, and he knew it was too crude a
trick to bother with. But he paused, shocked to see the girl he'd seen
on Mother Corey's stairs gazing at him in well-feigned warning. In spite
of his better judgment, she caught his eyes and drew them down over
curves and swells that would always be right for arousing a man's
passion. He glanced back at Fats, who had started to turn again. Gordon took a
step backwards, preparing to duck. Again the girl's finger motioned
behind him; he disregarded it--and then realized it was a mistake. It was the faintest swish in the air that caught his ear; he brought his
shoulders up and his head down. Fast as his reaction was, it was almost
too late. The weapon crunched against his shoulder and slammed over the
back of his neck, almost knocking him out. His heel lashed back and caught the shin of the man behind him. Gordon's
other leg spun him around, still crouching; the knife in his hand
started coming up, sharp edge leading, and aimed for the belly of the
bruiser who confronted him. The pug saw the blade and tried to check his
lunge. Gordon felt the blade strike; but he was already pulling his swing, and
it only gashed a long streak. The thug shrieked hoarsely and fell over. That left the way clear to the door; Bruce Gordon was through it and
into the night in two soaring leaps. After only a few days on Mars, his
legs were still hardened to Earth gravity, and he had more than a double
advantage over the others. Outside, it was the usual Martian night in the poorer section of the
dome, which meant near-darkness. Most of the street lights had never
been installed--graft had eaten up the appropriations, instead--and the
nearest one was around the corner, leaving the side of Fats' Place in
the shadow. Gordon checked his speed, threw himself flat, and rolled
back against the building, just beyond the steps that led to the street. Feet pounded out of the door above as Fats and the bouncer broke
through. Gordon's hand had already knotted a couple of coins into his
kerchief; he waited until the two turned uncertainly up the street and
tossed it. It struck the wall near the corner, sailed on, and struck
again at the edge of the unpaved street with a muffled sound. Fats and the other swung, just in time to see a bit of dust where it had
hit. "Around the corner!" Fats yelled. "After him, and shoot!" In the shadows, Gordon jerked sharply. It was rare enough to have a gun
here; but to use one inside the dome was unthinkable. His eyes shot up,
to where the few dim lights were reflected off the great plastic sheet
that was held up by air pressure and reinforced with heavy webbing. It
was the biggest dome ever built--large enough to cover all of Marsport
before the slums sprawled out beyond it; it still covered half the city,
and made breathing possible here without a helmet. But the dome wasn't
designed to stand stray bullets; and having firearms inside it--except
for a few chosen men--was a crime punishable by death. Fats had swung back, and was now herding the crowd inside his place. He
might have been only a small gambling-house owner, but within his own
circle his words carried weight. Gordon got to his hands and knees and began crawling away from the
corner. He came to a dark alley, smelling of decay where garbage had
piled up without being carted away. Beyond lay a lighted street, and a
sign that announced _Mooney's Amusement Palace--Drinks Free to Patrons!_
He looked up and down the street, then walked briskly toward the
somewhat plusher gambling hall there. Fats couldn't touch him in a
competitor's place. Inside Mooney's, he headed quickly for the dice table. He lost steadily
on small bets for half an hour, admiring the skilled palming of the
"odds" cubes. The loss was only a tiny dent in his new pile, but Gordon
bemoaned it properly--as if he were broke--and moved over to the bar. This one had seats. The bartender had a consolation boilermaker waiting;
he gulped half of it before he realized it had been needled with ether. Beside him, a cop was drinking the same slowly, watching another
policeman at a Canfield game. He was obviously winning, and now he got
up and came over to cash in his chips. "You'd think they'd lose count once in a while," he complained to his
companion. "But nope--fifty even a night, no more ... Well, come on,
Pete. We'd better get back to Fats and tell him the swindler got away." Gordon followed them out and turned south, down the street toward the
edge of the dome and the entrance where he'd parked his airsuit and
helmet. He kept glancing back, whenever he was in the thicker shadows,
but there seemed to be no one following him. At the gate of the dome, he looked back again, then ducked into the
locker building. He threaded through the maze of the lockers with his
knife ready in his hand, trying not to attract suspicion. At this hour,
though, most of the place was empty. The crowds of foremen and
deliverymen who'd be going in and out through the day were lacking. He found his suit and helmet and clamped them on quickly, transferring
the knife to its spring sheath outside the suit. He checked the tiny
batteries that were recharged by generators in the soles of the boots
with every step. Then he paid his toll for the opening of the private
slit and went through, into the darkness outside the dome. Lights bobbed about--police in pairs, patrolling in the better streets,
walking as far from the houses as they could; a few groups, depending on
numbers for safety; some of the very poor, stumbling about and hoping
for a drink somehow; and probably hoods from the gangs that ruled the
nights here. Gordon left his torch unlighted, and moved along; there was a little
illumination from the phosphorescent markers at some of the corners, and
from the stars. He could just make his way without marking himself with
a light. Damn it, he should have hired a few of the younger bums from Mother
Corey's. Here he couldn't hear footsteps. He located a pair of
patrolling cops, and followed them down one street, until they swung
off. Then he was on his own again. "Gov'nor!" The word barely reached him, and Bruce Gordon spun around,
the knife twitching into his hand. It was a thin kid of perhaps eighteen
behind him, carrying a torch that was filtered to bare visibility. It
swung up, and he saw a pock-marked face that was twisted in a smile
meant to be ingratiating. "You've got a pad on your tail," the kid said, again as low as his
amplifier would permit. "Need a convoy?" Gordon studied him briefly, and grinned. Then his grin wiped out as the
kid's arm flashed to his shoulder and back, a series of quick jerks that
seemed almost a blur. Four knives stood buried in the ground at Gordon's
feet, forming a square--and a fifth was in the kid's hand. "How much?" he asked, as the kid scooped up the blades and shoved them
expertly back into shoulder sheaths. The kid's hand shaped a C quickly,
and Gordon slipped his arm through a self-sealing slit in the airsuit
and brought out two of them. "Thanks, gov'nor," the kid said, stowing them away. "You won't regret
it." Gordon started to turn. Then the kid's voice rose sharply to a
yell. "Okay, honey, he's the Joe!" Out of the darkness, ten to a dozen figures loomed up. The kid had
jumped aside with a lithe leap, and now stood between Gordon and the
group moving in for the kill. Gordon swung to run, and found himself
surrounded. His eyes flickered around, trying to spot something in the
darkness that would give him shelter. A bludgeon was suddenly hurtling toward him, and he ducked it, his blood
thick in his throat and his ears ringing with the same pressure of fear
he'd always known just before he was kayoed in the ring. Then he
selected what he hoped was the thinnest section of the attackers and
leaped forward. With luck, he might jump over them, using his Earth
strength. There was a flicker of dawnlight in the sky, now, however; and he made
out others behind, ready for just such a move. He changed his lunge in
mid-stride, and brought his arm back with the knife. It met a small
round shield on the arm of the man he had chosen, and was deflected at
once. "Give 'em hell, gov'nor," the kid's voice yelled, and the little figure
was beside him, a shower of blades seeming to leap from his hand in the
glare of his bare torch. Shields caught them frantically, and then the
kid was in with a heavy club he'd torn from someone's hand. Gordon had no time to consider his sudden traitor-ally. He bent to the
ground, seizing the first rocks he could find, and threw them. One of
the hoods dropped his club in ducking; Gordon caught it up and swung in
a single motion that stretched the other out. Then it was a melee. The kid's open torch, stuck on his helmet, gave
them light enough, until Gordon could switch on his own. Then the kid
dropped behind him, fighting back-to-back. Here, in close quarters, the
attackers were no longer using knives. One might be turned on its owner,
and a slit suit meant death by asphyxiation. Gordon saw the blonde girl on the outskirts, her face taut and glowing. He tried to reach her with a thrown club wrested from another man, but
she leaped nimbly aside, shouting commands. Two burly goons were suddenly working together. Gordon swung at one,
ducked a blow from the other, and then saw the first swinging again. He
tried to bring his club up--but knew it was too late. A dull weight hit
the side of his head, and he felt himself falling. *       *       *       *       *

It took only minutes for dawn to become day on Mars, and the sun was
lighting up the messy section of back street when Bruce Gordon's eyes
opened and the pain of sight struck his aching head. He groaned, then
looked frantically for the puff of escaping air. But his suit was still
sealed. Ahead of him, the kid lay sprawled out, blood trickling from an
ugly bruise along his jaw. Then Gordon felt something on his suit, and his eyes darted to hands
just finishing an emergency patch. His eyes darted up and met those of
the blonde vixen! Amazement kept him motionless for a second. There were tears in the eyes
of the girl, and a sniffling sound reached him through her Marspeaker. Apparently, she hadn't noticed that he had revived, though her eyes were
on him. She finished the patch, and ran perma-sealer over it. Then she
began putting her supplies away, tucking them into a bag that held notes
that could only have been stolen from his pockets--her share of the
loot, apparently. He was still thinking clumsily as she got to her feet and turned to
leave. She cast a glance back, hesitated, and then began to move off. He got his feet under him slowly, but he was reviving enough to stand
the pain in his head. He came to his feet, and leaped after her. In the
thin air, his lunge was silent, and he was grabbing her before she knew
he was up. She swung with a single gasp, and her hand darted down for her knife,
sweeping it up and toward him; he barely caught the wrist coming toward
him. Then he had her firmly, bringing her arm back and up, until the
knife fell from her fingers. She screamed and began writhing, twisting her hard young body like a boa
constrictor in his hands. But he was stronger. He bent her back over his
knee, until a mangled moan was coming from her speaker; then his foot
kicked out, knocking her feet out from under her. He let her hit the
ground, caught both her wrists in his, and brought his knee down on her
throat, applying more pressure until she lay still. Then he reached for
the pouch. "Damn you!" Her cry was more in anguish then it had been when he was
threatening to break her back. "You damned firster, I'll kill you if
it's the last thing I do. And after I saved your miserable life...."

"Thanks for that," he grunted. "Next time don't be a fool. When you kill
a man for his money, he doesn't feel very grateful for your reviving
him." He started to count the money. About a tenth of what he had won--not
even enough to open a cheap poker den, let alone bribe his way back to
Earth. The girl was out from under his knee at the first relaxation of
pressure. Her hand scooped up the knife, and she came charging toward
him, her mouth a taut slit across half-bared teeth. Gordon rolled out of
her swing, and brought his foot up. It caught her squarely under the
chin, and she went down and out. He picked up the scattered money and her knife, then made sure she was
still breathing. He ran his hands over her, looking for a hiding place
for more money; there was none. "Good work, gov'nor," the kid's thin voice approved, and Gordon swung to
see the other getting up painfully. The kid grinned, rubbing his bruise. "No hard feelings, gov'nor, now! They paid me to stall you, so I did. You bonused me to protect you, and I bloody well tried. Honest Izzy,
that's me. Gonna buy me a job as a cop. That's why I needed the scratch. Okay, gov'nor?" Gordon hauled back his hand to knock the other from his feet, and then
dropped it. A grin writhed onto his face, and broke into sudden grudging
laughter. "Okay, Izzy," he admitted. "For this stinking planet, I guess you're
something of a saint. Come along, and we'll both apply for that
job--after I get my stuff." He might as well join the law. Security had wanted him to police their
damned planet for them--and he might as well do it officially. He tossed the girl's knife down beside her, motioned to Izzy, and began
heading for Mother Corey's. Chapter III

THE GRAFT IS GREEN


Izzy seemed surprised when he found that Gordon was turning in to the
quasi-secret entrance to Mother Corey's. "Coming here myself," he
explained. "Mother got ahold of a load of snow, and sent me out to
contact a big pusher. Coming back, the goons picked me up and gave me
the job on you. Hey, Mother!" Bruce Gordon didn't ask how Mother Corey had acquired the dope. When
Earth had deported all addicts two decades before, it had practically
begged for dope smuggling. The gross hulk of Mother Corey appeared almost at once. "Izzy and Bruce. Didn't know you'd met, cobbers. Contact, Izzy?" "Ninety per cent for uncut," Izzy answered. They went up to Gordon's hole-in-the-wall, with Mother Corey wheezing
behind, while the rotten wood of the stairs groaned under his grotesque
bulk. At his questions, Gordon told the story tersely. Mother Corey nodded. "Same old angles, eh? Get enough to do the job,
they mug you. Stop halfway, and the halls are closed to you. Pretty
soon, they'll be trick-proof, anyhow; they're changing over to electric
eyes. Eh, you haven't forgotten me, cobber?" Gordon hadn't. The old wreck had demanded five per cent of his winnings
for tipping him off. Mother Corey had too many cheap hoods among his
friends to be fooled with. Gordon counted out the money reluctantly,
while Izzy explained that they were going to be cops. The old man shook his head, estimating what was left to Gordon. "Enough
to buy a corporal's job, pay for your suit, and maybe get by," he
decided. "Don't do it, cobber. You're the wrong kind. You take what
you're doing serious. When you set out to tinhorn a living, you're a
crook. Get you in a cop's outfit, and you'll turn honest. No place here
for an honest cop--not with elections coming up, cobber. Well, I guess
you gotta find out for yourself. Want a good room?" Gordon's lips twitched. "Thanks, Mother, but I'll be staying inside the
dome, I guess." "So'll I," the old man gloated. "Setting in a chair all day, being an
honest citizen. Cobber, I already own a joint there--a nice one, they
tell me. Lights. Two water closets. Big rooms, six-by-ten--fifty of
them, big enough for whole families. And strictly on the level, cobber. It's no hide-out, like this." He rolled the money in his greasy fingers. "Now, with what I get from
the pusher, I can buy off that hot spot on the police blotter. I can go
in the dome and walk around, just like you." His eyes watered, and a
tear went dripping down his nose. "I'm getting old. They'll be calling
me 'Grandmother' pretty soon. So I'm turning my Chicken House over to my
granddaughter and I'm going honest. Want a room?" Gordon grinned, and nodded. Mother Corey knew the ropes, and could be
trusted. "Didn't know you had a granddaughter." Izzy snorted, and Mother Corey grinned wolfishly. "You met her, cobber. The blonde you shook down! Came up from Earth eight years ago, looking
for me. I sold her to the head of the East Point gang. Since she killed
him, she's been doing pretty well on her own. Mostly. Except when she
makes a fool of herself, like she did with you. But she'll come around
to where I'm proud of her, yet.... If you two want to carry in the snow,
collect, and turn it over to Commissioner Arliss for me--I can't pass
the dome till he gets it--I'll give you both rooms for six months free. Except for the lights and water, of course." Izzy nodded, and Gordon shrugged. On Mars, it didn't seem odd to begin
applying for a police job by carrying in narcotics. He wondered how
they'd go about contacting the commissioner. But that turned out to be simple enough. After collecting, Izzy led the
way into a section marked "Special Taxes" and whispered a few casual
words. The man at the desk went into an office marked private, and came
back a few minutes later. "Your friend has no record with us," he said in a routine voice. "I've
checked through his tax forms, and they're all in order. We'll confirm
officially, of course." *       *       *       *       *

In the Applications section of the big Municipal Building, at the center
of the dome, there was a long form to fill out at the desk; but the
captain there had already had answers typed in. "Save time, boys," he said genially. "And time's valuable, ain't it? Ah,
yes." He took the sums they had ready--there was a standard price--and
stamped their forms. "And you'll want suits. Isaacs? Good, here's your
receipt. And you, Corporal Gordon. Right. Get your suits one floor down,
end of the hall. And report in eight tomorrow morning!" It was as simple as that. Bruce Gordon was lucky enough to get a fair
fit in his suit. He'd almost forgotten what it felt like to be in
uniform. Izzy was more businesslike. "Hope they don't give us too bad territory,
gov'nor," he remarked. "Pickings are always a little lean on the first
few beats, but you can work some fairly well." Gordon's chest fell; this was Mars! The room at the new Mother Corey's--an unkempt old building near the
edge of the dome--proved to be livable, though it was a shock to see
Mother Corey himself in a decent suit, and using perfume. The beat was in a shabby section where clerks and skilled laborers
worked. It wasn't poor enough to offer the universal desperation that
gave the gang hoodlums protective coloring, nor rich enough to have
major rackets of its own. Izzy was disgusted. "Cripes! Hope they've got a few cheap pushers around
that don't pay protection direct to the captain. You take that store;
I'll go in this one!" The proprietor was a druggist who ran his own fountain where the
synthetics that replaced honest Earth foods were compounded into sweet
and sticky messes for the neighborhood kids. He looked up as Gordon came
in; then his face fell. "New cop, eh? No wonder Gable collected
yesterday, ahead of time. All right, you can look at my books. I've been
paying fifty, but you'll have to wait until Friday." Gordon nodded and swung on his heel, surprised to find that his stomach
was turning. The man obviously couldn't afford fifty credits a week. But
it was the same all along the street. Even Izzy admitted finally that
they'd have to wait. "That damned cop before us! He really tapped them! And we can't take
less, so I guess we gotta wait until Friday." *       *       *       *       *

The next day, Bruce Gordon made his first arrest. It was near the end of
his shift, just as darkness was falling and the few lights were going
on. He turned a corner and came to a short, heavy hoodlum backing out of
a small liquor store with a knife in throwing position. The crook
grunted as he started to turn and stumbled onto Gordon. His knife
flashed up. Without the need to worry about an airsuit, Gordon moved in, his arm
jerking forward. He clipped the crook on the inside of the elbow, while
grabbing the wrist with his other hand. The man went sailing over
Gordon's head, to crash into the side of the building. He let out a
yell. Gordon rifled the hood's pockets, and located a roll of bills stuffed
in. He dragged them out, before snapping cuffs on the man. Then he
pulled the crook inside the store. A woman stood there, moaning over a pale man on the floor; blood oozed
from a welt on the back of his head. There was both gratitude and
resentment as she looked up at Gordon. "You'd better call the hospital," he told her sharply. "He may have a
concussion. I've got the man who held you up." "Hospital?" Her voice broke into another wail. "And who can afford
hospitals? All week we work, all hours. He's old, he can't handle the
cases. I do that. Me! And then you come, and you get your money. And
_he_ comes for his protection. Papa is sick. Sick, do you hear? He sees
a doctor, he buys medicine. Then Gable comes. This man comes. We can't
pay him! So what do we get--we get knifes in the faces, saps on the
head--a concussion, you tell me! And all the money--the money we had to
pay to get stocks to sell to pay off from the profits we don't make--all
of it, he wants! Hospitals! You think they give away at the hospitals
free?" She fell to her knees, crying over the injured man. Gordon tossed the roll of bills onto the floor beside her; the injury
seemed only a scalp wound, and the old man was already beginning to
groan. He opened his eyes and saw the bills in front of him, at which
the woman was staring unbelievingly. His hand darted out, clutching it. "God!" he moaned softly, and his eyes turned up slowly to Gordon. "In there!" It was a shout from outside. Gordon had just time to
straighten up before the doorway was filled with two knife-men and a
heavier one behind them. His hands dropped to the handcuffed man on the floor, and he caught him
up with a jerk, slapping his body back against the counter. He took a
step forward, jerking his hands up and putting his Earth-adapted
shoulders behind it. The hood sailed up and struck the two knife-men
squarely. There was a scream as their automatic attempts to save themselves buried
both knives in the body of their friend. Then they went crashing down,
and Gordon was over them. *       *       *       *       *

The desk captain at the precinct house groaned as they came in, then
shook his head. "Damn it," he said. "I suppose it can't be helped,
though; you're new, Gordon. Hennessy, get the corpse to the morgue, and
mark it down as a robbery attempt. I'm going to have to book you and
your men, Mr. Jurgens!" The heavy leader of the two angry knife-men grinned. "Okay, Captain. But
it's going to slow down the work I'm doing on the Mayor's campaign for
re-election! Damn that Maxie--I told him to be discreet. Hey, you know
what you've got, though--a real considerate man! He gave the old guy his
money back!" They took Bruce Gordon's testimony, and sent him home. Jurgens was waiting for him when he came on the beat. From his look of
having slept well, he must have been out almost as soon as he was
booked. Two other men stood behind Gordon, while Jurgens explained that
he didn't like being interrupted on business calls "about the Mayor's
campaign, or anything else," and that next time there'd be real hard
feelings. Gordon was surprised when he wasn't beaten, but not when the
racketeer suggested that any money found at a crime was evidence and
should go to the police. The captain had told him the same. By Friday, he had learned. He made his collections early. Gable had sold
him the list of what was expected, and he used it, though he cut down
the figures in a few cases. There was no sense in killing the geese that
laid the eggs. The couple at the liquor store had their payment waiting, and they
handed it over, looking embarrassed. It wasn't until he was gone that he
found a small bottle of fairly good whiskey tucked into his pouch. He
started to throw it away, and then lifted it to his lips. Maybe they'd
known how he felt better than he had. Mother Corey's words about his
change of attitude came back. Damn it, he had to dig up enough money to
get back to Earth. He collected, down to the last account. It was a nice haul; at that
rate, he'd have to stand it only for a few months. Then Gordon's lips
twisted, as he realized it wasn't all gravy. There were angles, or the
price of a corporalcy would have been higher. One of the older men answered his questions. "Fifty per cent of the take
to the Orphan's and Widow's fund. Better make it more than Gable turned
in, if you want to get a better beat." The envelopes were lying on a table marked "Voluntary Donations"; Gordon
filled his out, with a figure a bit higher than half of Gable's take,
and dropped it in the box. The captain, who had been watching him
carefully, settled back and smiled. "Widows and Orphans sure appreciate a good man," he said. "I was kind of
worried about you, Gordon, but you got a nice touch. One of my new
boys--Isaacs, you know him--was out checking up after you, and the dopes
seem to like you." Gordon had wondered why Izzy had been pulled off the beat. As he turned
to leave, the captain held up a hand. "Special meeting tomorrow. We
gotta see about getting out a good vote. Election only three weeks
away." Gordon went home. He'd learned by now that the native Martians--those
who'd been here for at least thirty years, or had been born here--were
backing a reform candidate and new ticket. But Mayor Wayne had all of
the rest of the town in his hand. He'd been in twice, and had lifted the
graft take by a truly remarkable figure. From where Gordon stood, it
looked like a clear victory for the reformer, Nolan. He went into the meeting willing to agree to anything. He applauded all
the speeches about how much Mayor Wayne had done for them, and signed
the pledge expressing his confidence, along with the implied duty he had
to make his beat vote right. Then he stopped, as the captain stood up. "We gotta be neutral, boys," he boomed. "But it don't mean we can't show
how well we like the Mayor. Just remember, he got us our jobs! Now I
figure we can all kick in a little to help his campaign. I'm going to
start it off with five thousand credits, two thousand of them right
now." They fell in line, though there was no cheering. The price might have
been fixed in advance. A thousand for a plain cop, fifteen hundred for a
corporal, and so on, each contributing a third of it now. Gordon
grimaced; he had six hundred left. This would take nearly all of it. A man named Fell shook his head, fearfully. "Can't do a thing now. My
wife had a baby and an operation, and----"

"Okay, Fell," the captain said, without a sign of disapproval. "Freitag,
what about you? Fine, fine!" Gordon's name came, and he shook his head. "I'm new--and I'm strapped
now. I'd like----"

"Quite all right, Gordon," the captain boomed. "Harwick!" He finished the roll, and settled back, smiling. "I guess that's all,
boys. Thanks from the Mayor. And go on home.... Oh, Fell, Gordon,
Lativsky--stick around. I've got some overtime for you, since you need
extra money. The boys out in Ward Three are shorthanded. Afraid I'll
have to order you out there!" *       *       *       *       *

Ward Three was the hangout of a cheap gang of hoodlums, numbering some
four hundred, who went in for small crimes mostly. But they had recently
declared war on the cops. After eight hours of overtime, Gordon reported in with every bone sore
from small missiles, and his suit filthy from assorted muck. He had a
beautiful shiner where a stone had clipped him. The captain smiled. "Rough, eh? But I hear robbery went down on your
beat last night. Fine work, Gordon. We need men like you. Hate to do it,
but I'm afraid you'll have to take the next shift at Main and Broad,
directing traffic. The usual man is sick, and you're the only one I can
trust with the job!" Gordon stuck it out, somehow, but it wasn't worth it. He reported back
to the precinct with the five hundred in his hand, and his pen itching
for the donation agreement. The captain took it, and nodded. "I wasn't kidding about your being a
good man, Gordon. Go home and get some sleep, take the next day off. After that, we've got a new job for you!" Chapter IV

CAPTAIN MURDOCH


The new assignment was to the roughest section in all Marsport--the slum
area beyond the dome, out near the rocket field. Here all the riffraff
that had been unable to establish itself in better quarters had found
some sort of a haven. At one time, there had been a small dome and a
tiny city devoted to the rocket field. But Marsport had flourished
enough to kill it off. The dome had failed from neglect, and the
buildings inside had grown shabbier. Bruce Gordon was trapped; he couldn't break his job with the police--if
he did, he'd be brought back as a criminal. Some of Mars' laws dated
from the time when law enforcement had been hampered by lack of men,
rather than by the type of men. The Stonewall gang numbered perhaps five hundred. They hired out members
to other gangs, during the frequent wars. Between times, they picked up
what they could by mugging and theft, with a reasonable amount of murder
thrown in at a modest price. Even derelicts and failures had to eat; there were stores and shops
throughout the district which eked out some kind of a marginal living. They were safe from protection racketeers there--none bothered to come
so far out. And police had been taken off the beats there after it grew
unsafe even for men in pairs to patrol the area. The shopkeepers, and some of the less unfortunate people there, had
protested loud enough to reach clear back to Earth. Marsport had hired a
man from Earth to come in and act as chief of the section. Captain
Murdoch was an unknown factor, and now was asking for more men. The
pressure was enough to get them for him. Gordon reported for work with a sense of the bottom falling out, mixed
with a vague relief. "You're going to be busy," Murdoch announced shortly in the dilapidated
building that had been hastily converted to a precinct house. "Damn it,
you're men, not sharks. I've got a free hand, and we're going to run
this the way we would on Earth. Your job is to protect the citizens
here--and that means everyone not breaking the laws--whether you feel
like it or not. No graft. The first man making a shakedown will get the
same treatment we're going to use on the Stonewall boys. You'll get
double pay here, and you can live on it!" He opened up a box on his desk and pulled out six heavy wooden sticks,
each thirty inches long and nearly two inches in diameter. There was a
shaped grip on each, with a thong of leather to hold it over the wrist. He picked out five of the men, including Gordon "You five will come with
me. I'm going to show how we operate. The rest of you can team up any
way you want tonight, pick any route that's open. Okay, men, let's go." Bruce Gordon grinned slowly as he swung the stick, and Murdoch's eyes
fell on him. "Earth cop!" "Two years," Gordon admitted. "Then you should be ashamed to be in this mess. But whatever your
reasons, you'll be useful. Take those two and give them some lessons,
while I do the same with these." For a second, Gordon cursed himself. Murdoch had fixed it so he'd be a
squad leader, and that meant he'd be unable to step out of line. At
double standard pay, with normal Mars expenses, he might be able to pay
for passage back to Earth in three years--if Security let him. Otherwise, it would take thirty. He began wondering about Security, then. Nobody had tried to get in
touch with him. Were they waiting for him to get up on a soapbox? There was a crude lighting system here, put up by the citizens. At the
front of each building, a dim phosphor bulb glowed; when darkness fell,
they would have nothing else to see by. Murdoch bunched them together. "A good clubbing beats hanging," he told
them. "But it has to be _good_. Go in for business, and don't stop just
because the other guy quits. Give them hell!" Moving in two groups of threes, at opposite sides of the street, they
began their beat. They were covering an area of six blocks one way, and
two the other. They had traveled the six blocks and were turning down a side street
when they found their first case; it was still daylight. Two of the
Stonewall boys were working over a tall man in a newer airsuit. As the
police swung around, one of the thugs casually ripped the airsuit open. A thin screech like a whistle came from Murdoch's Marspeaker, and the
captain went forward, with Gordon at his heels. The hoodlums tossed the
man aside easily, and let out a yell. From the buildings around, an
assortment of toughs came at the double, swinging knives, picks, and
bludgeons. There was no chance to save the citizen, who was dying from lack of air. Gordon felt the solid pleasure of the finely turned club in his hands. It was light enough for speed, but heavy enough to break bones where it
hit. A skilled man could knock a knife, or even a heavy club, out of
another's hand with a single flick of the wrist. And he'd had practice. He saw Murdoch's club dart in and take out two of the gang, one on the
forward swing, one on the recover. Gordon's eyes popped at that. The man
was totally unlike a Martian captain, and a knot of homesickness for
Earth ran through his stomach. He swallowed the sentiment; his own club was moving now. Standing beside
Murdoch, they were moving forward. The other four cops had come in
reluctantly. "Knock them out and kick them down!" Murdoch yelled. "And don't let them
get away!" Gordon was after a thug who was attempting to run away. He brought him
to the ground with a single blow across the kidneys. It was soon over. They rounded up the men of the gang, and one of the
cops started off. Murdoch called, "Where are you going?" "To find a phone and call the wagon." "We're not using wagons," Murdoch told him. "Line them up." When the hoods came to, they found themselves helpless, and facing
police with clubs. If they tried to run, they were hit from behind; if
they stood still, they were clubbed carefully. If they fought back, the
pugnaciousness was knocked out of them at once. Murdoch indicated one who stood with his shoulders shaking and tears
running down his cheeks. The captain's face was as sick as Gordon felt. "Take him aside. Names." Gordon found a section away from the others. "I want the name of every
man in the gang you can remember," he told the man. Horror shot over the other's bruised features. "Colonel, they'd kill me! I don't know." His screams were almost worse than the beating but names began to come. Gordon took them down, and then returned with the man to the others. Murdoch took his nod as evidence enough, and turned to the wretched
toughs. "He squealed," he announced. "If he should turn up dead, I'll
know you boys are responsible, and I'll find you. Now get out of this
district, or get honest jobs! Because every time one of my men sees one
of you, this will happen again. And you can pass the word along that the
Stonewall gang is dead!" He turned and moved off down the street, the others at his side. Gordon
nodded. "I've heard the theory, but never saw it in practice. Suppose
the whole gang jumps us at once?" Murdoch shrugged. "Then we're taken. The old book I got the idea from
didn't mention that." *       *       *       *       *

Trouble began brewing shortly after, though. Men stood outside, studying
the cops on their beat. Murdoch sent one of the men to pick up a second
squad of six, and then a third. After that, the watchers began to melt
away. "We'd better shift to another territory," Murdoch decided. Gordon
realized that the gang had figured that concentrating the police here
meant other territories would be safe. Two more groups were given the treatment. In the third one, Bruce Gordon
spotted one of the men who'd been beaten before. He was a sick-looking
spectacle. Murdoch nodded. "Object lesson!" The one good thing about the captain, Gordon decided, was that he
believed in doing his own dirtiest work. When he was finished, he turned
to two of the other captives. "Get a stretcher, and take him wherever he belongs," he ordered. "I'm
leaving you two able to walk for that. But if _you_ get caught again,
you'll get still worse." The squad went in, tired and sore; all had taken a severe beating in the
brawls. But there was little grumbling. Gordon saw grudging admiration
in their eyes for Murdoch, who had taken more punishment than they had. Gordon rode back in the official car with Murdoch and both were silent
most of the way. But the captain stirred finally, sighing. "Poor
devils!" Gordon jerked up in surprise. "The gang?" "No, the cops they're giving me. We're covered, Gordon. But the
Stonewall gang is backing Wayne. He's let me come in because he figures
it will get him more votes. But afterwards, he'll have me out; and then
the boys with me will be marks for the gang when it comes back. Besides,
it'll show on the books that they didn't kick into his fund. I can
always go back to Earth, and I'll try to take you along. But it's going
to be tough on them." Bruce Gordon grimaced. "I've got a yellow ticket, from Security." Murdoch blinked. He dropped his eyes slowly. "So you're _that_ Gordon? But you're still a good cop." They rode on further in silence, until Gordon broke the ice to ease the
tension. He found himself liking the other. "What makes you think Wayne will be re-elected? Nobody wants him, except
a gang of crooks and those in power." Murdoch grinned bitterly. "Ever see a Martian election? No, you're a
firster. He can't lose! And then hell is going to pop, and this whole
planet may be blown wide open!" It fitted with the dire predictions of Security, and with the spying
Gordon was going to do--according to them. He discussed it with Mother Corey, who agreed that Wayne would be
re-elected. "Can't lose," the old man said. He was getting even fatter, now that he
was eating better food from the fair restaurant around the corner. "He'll win," Mother Corey repeated. "And you'll turn honest all over,
now you're in uniform. Take me, cobber. I figured on laying low for a
while, then opening up a few rooms for a good pusher or two, maybe a
high-class duchess. Cost 'em more, but they'd be respectable. Only now
I'm respectable myself, they don't look so good. But this honesty stuff,
it's like dope. You start out on a little, and you have to go all the
way." "It didn't affect Honest Izzy," Gordon pointed out. "Nope. Because Izzy is always honest, according to how he sees it. But
you got Earth ideas of the stuff, like I had once. Too bad." He sighed
ponderously. *       *       *       *       *

The week moved on. The groups grew more experienced, and Murdoch was
training a new squad every night. Gordon's own squad was equipped with
shields now, and they were doing better. The number of muggings and
holdups in the section was going down. They seldom saw a man after he'd
been treated. One of the squads was jumped by a gang of about forty, and two of the
men were killed before the nearest other squad could pull a rear attack. That day the whole force worked overtime hunting for the men who had
escaped; and by evening the Stonewall boys had received proof that it
didn't pay to go against the police in large numbers. After that, they began to go hunting for the members of the gang. They
had the names of nearly all of them, and some pretty good ideas of their
hide-outs. It wasn't exactly legal; but nothing was, here. If a doctor's job was to
prevent illness, instead of merely curing it, then why shouldn't it be a
policeman's job to prevent crime? Here, that was best done by wiping out
the Stonewall gang to the last member. This could lead to abuses, as he'd seen on Earth. But there probably
wouldn't be time for it if Mayor Wayne was re-elected. The gang had begun to break up, but the nucleus would be the last to go. The police had orders to beat any member on sight, now. Citizens were
appearing on the streets at night for the first time in years. And there
were smiles--hungry, beaten smiles, but still genuine ones--for the
cops. Chapter V

RECALL


It was night outside, and the phosphor bulbs at the corners glowed
dimly, giving him barely enough light by which to locate the way to the
extemporized precinct house. Bruce Gordon reached the outskirts of the
miserable business section, noticing that a couple of the shops were
still open. It had probably been years since any had dared risk it after
the sun went down. And the slow, doubtful respect on the faces of the
citizens as they nodded to him was even more proof that Haley's system
was working. Gordon nodded to a couple, and they grinned faintly at him. Damn it, Mars could be cleaned up.... He grinned at himself, then something needled at his mind, until he
swung back. The man who had just passed was carrying a lunch basket, and
was wearing the coveralls of one of the crop-prospector crews; but the
expression on his face had been wrong. Red hair, too heavily built, a lighter section where a mustache had been
shaved and the skin not quite perfectly powdered.... Gordon moved
forward quickly, until he could make out the thin scar showing through
the make-up over the man's eyes. He'd been right--this was O'Neill, head
of the Stonewall gang. Gordon hit the signal switch, and the Marspeaker let out a shrill
whistle. O'Neill had turned to run, and then seemed to think better of
it. His hand darted down to his belt, just as Gordon reached him. The heavy locust stick met the man's wrist before the weapon was half
drawn--another gun! Guns suddenly seemed to be flourishing everywhere. The gun dropped from O'Neill's hand as the wrist snapped, and the
Stonewall chief let out a high-pitched cry of pain. Then another cop
came around a corner at a run. "You can't do it to me! I'm reformed; I'm going straight! You damned
cops can't...." O'Neill was blubbering. The small crowd that was
collecting was all to the good, Gordon knew, and he let O'Neill go on. Nothing could help break up the gangs more than having a leader break
down in public. The other cop had yanked out O'Neill's wallet, and now tossed it to
Gordon. One look was enough--the work papers had the telltale
over-thickening of the signature that had showed up on other papers,
obviously forgeries. The cops had been passing them on the hope of
finding one of the leaders. Some turned away as Gordon and the other cop went to work, but most of
them weren't squeamish. When it was over, the two picked up their
whimpering captive. Gordon pocketed the revolver with his free hand. "Walk, O'Neill!" he ordered. "Your legs are still whole. Use them!" The man staggered between them, whimpering at each step. If any members
of the gang were around, they made no attempt to rescue him. Jenkins, the other cop, had been holding the wallet. Now he held it out
toward Gordon. "The gee was heeled, Corporal. Must of been making a big
contact in something. Fifty-fifty?" "Turn it in to Murdoch," Gordon said, and then cursed himself. There
must have been over two thousand credits in the wallet. *       *       *       *       *

The captain's face had been buried in a pile of papers, but now Murdoch
came around to stare at the gang leader. He inspected the forged work
papers, and jerked his thumb toward one of the hastily built cells where
a doctor would look O'Neill over--eventually. When Gordon and Jenkins
came back, Murdoch tossed the money to them. "Split it. You guys earned
it by keeping your hands off it. Anyhow, you're as entitled to it as he
was--or the grafters back at Police Headquarters. I never saw it. Gordon, you've got a visitor!" His voice was bitter, but he made no opening for them to question him as
he picked up the papers and began going through them again. Gordon went
down the passage to the end of the hall, in the direction Murdoch had
indicated. Waiting for him was the lean, cynical little figure of Honest
Izzy, complete with uniform and sergeant's stripes. "Hi, gov'nor," the little man greeted him. "Long time no see. With you
out here and me busy nights doing a bit of convoy work on the side, we
might as well not both live at Mother's." Bruce Gordon nodded, grinning in spite of himself. "Convoy duty, Izzy? Or dope running?" "Whatever comes to hand, gov'nor. The Force pays for my time during the
day, and I figure my time's my own at night. Of course, if I ever catch
myself doing anything shady during the day, I'll have to turn myself in. But it ain't likely." He grinned in satisfaction. "Now that I've dug up
the scratch to buy these stripes and get made sergeant--and that takes
the real crackle--I'm figuring on taking it easy." "Like this social call?" Gordon asked him. The little man shook his head, his ancient eighteen-year-old face
turning sober. "Nope. I've been meaning to see you, so I volunteered to
run out some red tape for your captain. You owe me some bills, gov'nor. Eleven hundred fifty credits. You didn't pay up your pledge to the
campaign fund, so I hadda fill in. A thousand, interest at ten per cent
a week, standard. Right?" Gordon had heard of the friendly interest charged on the side here, but
he shook his head. "Wrong, Izzy. If they want to collect that dratted
pledge of theirs, let them put me where I can make it. There's no graft
out here." "Huh?" Izzy turned it over, and shook his head. Finally he shrugged. "Don't matter, gov'nor. Nothing about that in the pledge, and when you
sign something, you gotta pay it. You _gotta_." "All right," Gordon admitted. He was suddenly in no mood to quibble with
Izzy's personal code. "So you paid it. Now show me where I signed any
agreement saying I'd pay _you_ back!" For a second, Izzy's face went blank; then he chuckled. "Jet me! You're
right, gov'nor. I sure asked for that one. Okay; I'm bloody well
suckered, so forget it." Gordon shrugged and gave up. He pulled out the bills and handed them
over. "Thanks, Izzy." "Thanks, yourself." The kid pocketed the money cheerfully, nodding. "Buy
you a beer. Anyhow, you won't miss it. I came out to tell you I got the
sweetest beat in Marsport--over a dozen gambling joints on it--and I
need a right gee to work it with me. So you're it!" For a moment, Gordon wondered what Izzy had done to earn that beat, but
he could guess. The little guy knew Mars as few others did, apparently,
from all sides. And if any of the other cops had private rackets of
their own, Izzy was undoubtedly the man to find it out, and use the
information. With a beat such as that, even going halves, and with all
the graft to the upper brackets, he'd still be able to make his pile in
a matter of months. But he shook his head. "I'm assigned here, Izzy, at least for another
week, until after elections...."

"Better take him up, Gordon," Murdoch told him bitterly. The captain
looked completely beaten as he came into the room and dropped onto the
bench. "Go on, accept, damn it. You're not assigned here any more. None
of us are. Mayor Wayne found an old clause in the charter and got a
rigged decision, pulling me back under his full authority. I thought I
had full responsibility to Earth, but he's got me. Wearing their uniform
makes me a temporary citizen! So we're being smothered back into the
Force, and they'll have their patsies out here, setting things up for
the Stonewall boys to come back by election time. So grab while the
grabbing's good, because by tomorrow morning I'll have this all closed
down!" He shook off Gordon's hand and stood up roughly, to head back up the
hallway. Then he stopped and looked back. "One thing, though, I've still
got enough authority to make you a sergeant. It's been a pleasure
working with you, Sergeant Gordon!" He swung out of view abruptly, leaving Gordon with a heavy weight in his
stomach. Izzy whistled, and began picking up his helmet, preparing to go
outside. "So that's the dope I brought out, eh? Takes it kind of hard,
doesn't he?" "Yeah," Gordon answered. There was no use trying to explain it to Izzy. "Yeah, we do. Come on." Outside, Gordon saw other cops moving from house to house, and he
realized that Murdoch must be sending out warnings to the citizens that
things would soon be rough again. Izzy held out a hand to Gordon. "Let's get a beer, gov'nor--on me!" It was as good an idea as any he had, Gordon decided. He might as well
enjoy what life he still had while he could. The Stonewall gang--what
was left of it--and all its friends would be gunning for him now. The
Force wouldn't have been fooled when Izzy paid his pledge, and they'd
mark him down as disloyal--if they didn't automatically mark down all
who'd served under Murdoch. And he didn't have the ghost of an idea as
to what Security wanted of him, or where they were hiding themselves. "Make it two beers, Izzy," he said. "Needled!" Chapter VI

SEALED LETTER


In the few days at the short-lived Nineteenth Precinct, Bruce Gordon had
begun to feel like a cop again, but the feeling disappeared as he
reported in at Captain Isaiah Trench's Seventh Precinct. Trench had once
been a colonel in the Marines, before a court-martial and sundry
unpleasantnesses had driven him off Earth. His dark, scowling face and
lean body still bore a military air. He looked Bruce Gordon over sourly. "I've been reading your record. It
stinks. Making trouble for Jurgens--could have been charged as false
arrest. No co-operation with your captain until he forced it; out in the
sticks beating up helpless men. Now you come crawling back to your only
friend, Isaacs. Well, I'll give it a try. But step out of line and I'll
have you cleaning streets with your bare hands. All right, _Corporal_
Gordon. Dismissed. Get to your beat." Gordon grinned wryly at the emphasis on his title. No need to ask what
had happened to Murdoch's recommendation. He joined Izzy in the locker
room, summing up the situation. "Yeah." Izzy looked worried, his thin face pinched in. "Maybe I didn't
do you a favor, gov'nor, pulling you here. I dunno. I got some pics of
Trench from a guy I know. That's how I got my beat so fast in the
Seventh. But Trench ain't married, and I guess I've used up the touch. Maybe I could try it, though." "Forget it," Gordon told him. "I'll work it out somehow." The beat was a gold mine. It lay through the section where Gordon had
first tried his luck on Mars. There were a dozen or so gambling joints,
half a dozen cheap saloons, and a fair number of places listed as
rooming houses, though they made no bones about the fact that all their
permanent inhabitants were female. Then the beat swung off, past a row
of small businesses and genuine rooming houses, before turning back to
the main section. They began in the poorer section. It wasn't the day to collect the
"tips" for good service, which had been an honest attempt to promote
good police service before it became a racket. But they were met
everywhere by sullen faces. Izzy explained it. The city had passed a new
poll tax--to pay for election booths, supposedly--and had made the
police collect it. Murdoch must have disregarded the order, but the rest
of the force had been busy helping the administration. But once they hit the main stem, things were mere routine. The gambling
joints took it for granted that beat cops had to be paid, and considered
it part of their operating expense. The only problem was that Fats'
Place was the first one on the list. Gordon didn't expect to be too
welcome there. There was no sign of the thug, but Fats came out of his back office just
as Gordon reached the little bar. He came over, nodded, picked up a cup
and dice and began shaking them. "High man for sixty," he said automatically, and expertly rolled
bull's-eyes for a two. "Izzy said you'd be around. Sorry my man drew
that _knife_ on you the last time, Corporal." Gordon rolled an eight, pocketed the bills, and shrugged. 