



Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     THEY OPENED THE PANDORA'S BOX
                            OF ATOMIC TRAVEL


When George Randolph first caught sight of Orena, he was astounded by
its gleaming perfection. Here were hills and valleys, lakes and streams,
glowing with the light of the most precious of metals. And, more
astonishing than that, it was a world of _miniature_ perfection--an
infinitely tiny universe within a golden atom! But for Randolph it was also a world aglow with danger. Somewhere in its
tiny vastness were the friends he had to rescue. Captives of a madman,
they had been reduced to native Orena size; to return to Earth they
needed the growth capsules Randolph was bringing them. It was up to
Randolph to find them--and quickly--for the longer they stayed tiny, the
closer they came to passing BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT! CAST OF CHARACTERS


 FRANZ POLTER
 He found a gold mine in a land where there was no gold. DR. KENT
 His scientific studies could mean life or death to an entire universe! GEORGE RANDOLPH
 He crossed the border into Canada, and found himself in another world. ALAN KENT
 Twenty feet tall, or two inches high--which should he be? GLORA
 She was only as large as a thumbnail, but she carried a gigantic secret. BABS KENT
 Did she live in a golden cage or a magnificent palace? BEYOND THE
              VANISHING POINT


                   by
              RAY CUMMINGS


             ACE BOOKS, INC.
 23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N. Y. BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT
 Copyright (C), 1958, by Ace Books, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved

 Printed in U.S.A.




CHAPTER I


It was shortly after noon of December 31, 1970, when the series of weird
and startling events began which took me into the tiny world of an atom
of gold, beyond the vanishing point, beyond the range of even the
highest-powered electric-microscope. My name is George Randolph. I was,
that momentous afternoon, assistant chemist for the Ajax International
Dye Company, with main offices in New York City. It was twelve-twenty when the local exchange call-sorter announced
Alan's connection from Quebec. "Hello, George? Look here, you've got to come up here at once. Chateau
Frontenac, Quebec. Will you come?" I could see his face imaged in the little mirror on my desk; the
anxiety, tenseness in his voice, was duplicated in his expression. "Well--" I began. "You must, George. Babs and I need you. See here...."

He tried at first to make it sound like an invitation for a New Year's
Eve holiday. But I knew it was not that. Alan and Barbara were my best
friends. They were twins, eighteen years old. I felt that Alan would
always be my best friend; but for Babs, my hopes, longings, went far
deeper, though as yet I had never brought myself to the point of telling
her so. "I'd like to come, Alan. But--"

"You've got to George! I can't tell you everything over the public air. But I've seen _him_: He's diabolical. I know it now!" _Him_! It could only mean, of all the world, one person! "He's here!" he went on. "Near here. We saw him today! I didn't want to
tell you, but that's why we came. It seemed a long chance, but it's he,
I'm positive!" I was staring at the image of Alan's eyes; there was horror in them. And
his voice too. "God, George, it's weird! Weird, I tell you. His
looks--he--oh I can't tell you now! Only, come!" *       *       *       *       *

I was busy at the office in spite of the holiday season, but I dropped
everything and went. By one o'clock that afternoon I was wheeling my
little sport Midge from its cage on the roof of the Metropole building,
and went into the air. It was a cold gray afternoon with the feel of coming snow. I made a good
two hundred and fifty miles at first, taking the northbound
through-traffic lane which today the meteorological conditions had
placed at an altitude of 6,200 feet. Flying is largely automatic. There was not enough traffic to bother me. The details of leaving the office so hastily had been too engrossing for
thought of Alan and Babs. But now, in my little pit at the controls, my
mind flung ahead. They had located him. That meant Franz Polter, for
whom we had been searching nearly four years. And my memory went back
into the past with vivid vision....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Kents, four years ago, were living on Long Island. Alan and Babs
were fourteen at the time, and I was seventeen. Even then Babs was
something kind of special to me. I lived in a neighboring house that
summer and saw them every day. To my adolescent mind a thrilling mystery hung upon the Kent family. The
mother was dead. Dr. Kent, father of Alan and Babs, maintained a
luxurious home, with only a housekeeper and no other servant. Dr. Kent
was a retired chemist. He had, in his home, a laboratory in which he was
working upon some mysterious problem. His children did not know what it
was, nor, of course, did I. And none of us had ever been in the
laboratory, except that when occasion offered we stole surreptitious
peeps. I recall Dr. Kent as a kindly, iron-gray haired gentleman. He was stern
with the discipline of his children; but he loved them, and was
indulgent in many ways. They loved him; and I, an orphan, began looking
upon him almost as a father. I was interested in chemistry. He knew it,
and did his best to help and encourage me in my studies. There came an afternoon in the summer of 1966, when arriving at the Kent
home, I ran upon a startling scene. The only other member of the
household was a young fellow of twenty-five, named Franz Polter. He was
a foreigner, born, I understood, in one of the Balkan Protectorates; he
was here, employed by Dr. Kent as laboratory assistant. He had been with the Kents, at this time, two years. Alan and Babs
didn't like him, nor did I. He must have been a clever, skillful
chemist. No doubt he was. But he was, to us, repulsive. A hunchback,
with a short, thick body; dangling arms that suggested a gorilla; barrel
chest; a lump set askew on his left shoulder, and his massive head
planted down with almost no neck. His face was rugged in feature; a wide
mouth, a high-bridged heavy nose; and above the face a great shock of
wavy black hair. It was an intelligent face; in itself, not repulsive. But I think we all three feared Franz Polter. There was always something
sinister about him, that had nothing to do with his deformity. When I came, that afternoon, Babs and Polter were under a tree on the
Kent lawn. Babs, at fourteen, with long black braids down her back,
bare-legged and short-skirted in a summer sport costume, was standing
against the tree with Polter facing her. They were about the same
height. To my youthful imaginative mind rose the fleeting picture of a
young girl in a forest menaced by a gorilla. I came upon them suddenly. I heard Polter say:

"But I lof you. And you are almos' a woman. Some day you lof me." He put out his thick hand and gripped her shoulder. She tried to twist
away. She was frightened, but she laughed. "You--you're crazy!" He was suddenly holding her in his arms, and she was fighting him. I
dashed forward. Babs was always a spunky sort of girl. In spite of her
fear now, she kept on struggling, and she shouted:

"You--let me go, you--you hunchback!" He did let her go; but in a frenzy of rage he hauled back his hand and
struck her in the face. I was upon him the next second. I had him down
on the lawn, punching him; but though at seventeen I was a reasonably
husky lad, the hunchback with his thick, hairy gorilla arms proved much
stronger. He heaved me off. The commotion had brought Alan and without
waiting to find out what the trouble was, he jumped on Polter. Between
us, I think we would have beaten him pretty badly. But the housekeeper
summoned Dr. Kent and the fight was over. Polter left for good within an hour. He did not speak to any of us. But
I saw him as he put his luggage into the taxi which Dr. Kent had
summoned. I was standing silently nearby with Babs and Alan. The look he
flung us as he drove away carried an unmistakable menace--the promise of
vengeance. And I think now that in his warped and twisted mind he was
telling himself that he would some day make Babs regret that she had
repulsed his love. What happened that night none of us ever knew. Dr. Kent worked late in
his laboratory; he was there when Alan and Babs and the housekeeper went
to bed. He had written a note to Alan; it was found on his desk in a
corner of the laboratory next morning, addressed in care of the family
lawyer to be given Alan in the event of his death. It said very little. Described a tiny fragment of gold quartz rock the size of a walnut which
would be found under the giant microscope in the laboratory; and told
Alan to give it to the American Scientific Society to be guarded and
watched very carefully. This note was found, but Dr. Kent had vanished! There had been a
midnight marauder. The laboratory was on the lower floor of the house. Through one of its open windows, so the police said, an intruder had
entered. There was evidence of a struggle, but it must have been short,
because neither Babs, Alan, the housekeeper, nor any of the neighbors
had heard anything. And the fragment of golden quartz was gone! The police investigation came to nothing. Polter was found in New York. He withstood the police questions. There was nothing except suspicion
upon which he could be held, and he was finally released. Immediately
thereafter, he disappeared. Neither Alan, Babs nor I saw Polter again. Dr. Kent had never been heard
from to this day, four years later when I flew to join the twins in
Quebec. And now Alan told me that Polter was up there! We had never
ceased to believe that Dr. Kent was alive, and that Polter was the
midnight marauder. As we grew older, we began to search for Polter. It
seemed to us, that if we could once get our hands on him, we could drag
from him the truth which the police had failed to get. The call of a traffic director in mid-Vermont brought me back from these
memories. My buzzer was clanging; a peremptory halting signal day-beam
came darting up at me from below. It caught me and clung. I shouted down
at it. "What's the matter?" I gave my name and number and all the details in
one breath. Above everything I had no wish to be halted now. "What's the
matter? I haven't done anything wrong." "The hell you haven't," the director roared. "Come down to three
thousand. That lane's barred." I dove obediently and his beam followed me. "Once more, like that, young
fellow--" But he went busy with somebody else and I didn't hear the end
of his threat. I crossed into Maine in mid-afternoon. It was already twilight. The sky
was solid lead and the landscape all up through here was gray-white with
snow in the gathering darkness. I passed the City of Jackman, crossing
full over it to take no chances of annoying the border officials; and a
few miles further, I dropped to the glaring lights of International
Inspection Field. The formalities were soon finished. I was ready to
take-off when Alan rushed at me. "George! I thought I could connect here." He gripped me. He was
wild-eyed, incoherent. He waved his taxiplane away. "I'm going with you,
George. I'm almost out of my mind. I can't--I don't know what's happened
to her. She's gone, now--"

"Who's gone? Babs?" "Yes." He pushed me into my plane and climbed in after me. "Don't talk. Get us up! I'll tell you then. I shouldn't have left." When we were up in the air, I swung on him. "What are you talking about? Babs gone?" I could feel myself shuddering with a nameless horror. "I don't know what I'm talking about, George. I'm about crazy. The
Quebec police think I am, anyway. I've been raising hell with them for
an hour. Babs is gone! I can't find her. I don't know where she is." He finally calmed down enough to tell me what happened. Shortly after
his radiophone to me in New York, he had missed Babs. They had had lunch
in the huge hotel and then walked on the Dufferin Terrace--the famous
promenade outside looking down over the Lower City, the great sweep of
the St. Lawrence River and the gray-white distant Laurentian mountains. "I was to meet her inside. I went in ahead of her. But she didn't come. I went back to the Terrace but she was gone. She wasn't in our rooms. Nor the library, the lobby--anywhere." But it was afternoon, in the public place of a civilized city. In the
daylight of the Dufferin Terrace, beside the long ice toboggan slide,
under the gaze of skaters on the ice-rink and several hundred holiday
merrymakers, a young girl could hardly be murdered, or kidnapped,
without attracting attention! The Quebec police thought the young
American unduly excited about his sister, who was missing only an hour. They would do what they could, if by dark she had not rejoined him. They
suggested that doubtless the young lady had gone shopping. "Maybe she did," I agreed. But in my heart, I felt differently. "She'll
be waiting for us in the Hotel when we get there, Alan." "But I'm telling you we saw Polter this morning. He lives here--not
thirty miles from Quebec. We saw him on the Terrace after breakfast. Recognized him immediately of course." "Did he see you?" "I don't know. He was lost in the crowd in a minute. But I asked a
young French fellow if he knew him. He did know him, as Frank Rascor. That must be the name he wears now. He's a famous man up here--well
known, immensely rich. I didn't know if he saw us or not. What a fool I
was to leave Babs alone, even for a minute." We were speeding over a white-clad valley with a little frozen river
winding down its middle. Night had almost come. The leaden sky was low
above us. It began snowing. The lights of the small villages along the
river were barely visible. "Can you land us, Alan?" "Yes, surely. At the Municipal Field just beyond the Citadel. We can get
to the Hotel in five minutes." *       *       *       *       *

It was a flight of only half an hour. During it, Alan told me about
Polter. The hunchback, known now as Frank Rascor, owned a mine in the
Laurentians, some thirty miles from Quebec City--a fabulously productive
mine of gold. It was an anomaly that gold should be produced in this
region. No vein of gold-bearing rock had been found, except the one on
Polter's property. Alan had seen a newspaper account of the strangeness
of it; and on a hunch had come to Quebec, being intrigued by the
description of the mine owner. He had seen Frank Rascor on the Dufferin
Terrace, and recognized him as Polter. Again my thoughts went back into the past. Had Polter stolen that
missing fragment of golden quartz the size of a walnut which had been
beneath Dr. Kent's microscope? We always thought so. Dr. Kent had some
secret, some great problem upon which he was working. Polter, his
assistant, had evidently known, or partially known, its details. And
now, four years later, Polter was immensely rich, with a "gold mine" in
mountains where there was no other evidence of gold! I seemed to see some connection. Alan, I knew, was groping with a dim
idea, so strange he hardly dared voice it. "I tell you, it's weird, George. The sight of him. Polter--heavens, one
couldn't mistake that build--and his face, his features, just the same
as when we knew him." "Then what's so weird?" I demanded. "His age." There was a queer solemn hush in Alan's voice. "George, when
we knew Polter, he was about twenty-five, wasn't he? Well, that was four
years ago. But he isn't twenty-nine now. I swear it is the same man, but
he isn't around thirty. Don't ask me what I'm talking about. I don't
know. But he isn't thirty. He's nearer fifty! Unnatural! Weird! I felt
it, and so did Babs, just that brief look we had of him." I didn't answer. My attention was on managing the plane. The lights of
Levis were under us. Beyond the City cliffs, the St. Lawrence lay in its
deep valley; the Quebec lights, the light-dotted ramparts with the
Terrace and the great fortresslike Hotel showed across the river. "Better take the stick, Alan. I don't know where the field is. And don't
you worry about Babs. She'll be back by now." *       *       *       *       *

But she was not. We went to the two connecting rooms in the tower of the
Hotel which Alan and Babs had engaged. We inquired with half a dozen
phone calls. No one had seen or heard from her. The Quebec police were
sending a man up to talk with Alan. "Well, we won't be here," Alan called to me. He was standing by the
window in Babs' room; he was trembling too much to use the phone. I hung
up the receiver and went though the connecting door to join him. Babs' room! It sent a pang through me. A few of her garments were lying
around. A negligee was laid out on the large bed. A velvet boudoir
doll--she had always loved them--stood on the dresser. Upon this Hotel
room, in one day, she had impressed her personality. Her perfume was in
the air. And now she was gone. "We won't be here," Alan was repeating. He gripped me at the window. "Look." In his hand was an ugly-looking, smokeless, soundless automatic
of the Essen type. "And I've got another one for you. Brought them with
me." His face was white and drawn, but his hands had steadied. The tremble
was gone out of his voice. "I'm going after him, George! Now! Understand that? Now? His place is
only thirty miles from here, out there in the mountains. You can see it
in the daylight--a wall around his property and a stone castle which he
built in the middle of it. A gold mine? Hell!" There was nothing to be seen now out of the window but the snow-filled
darkness, the blurred lights of Lower Quebec and the line of dock lights
five hundred feet below us. "Will you fly me, George?" "Of course." I was the one trembling now; the cool feel of the automatic which Alan
thrust into my hand seemed suddenly to crystallize Babs' peril. I was
here in her room, with the scent of her perfume around me, and this
deadly weapon was needed! But the trembling was gone in a moment. "Yes, of course, Alan. No use talking to the police. I gave them all the
information--a description of her, what you said she was wearing. No
sense dragging Polter's name into it, with nothing tangible to go on. The police won't ransack the castle of a rich man just because you can't
find your sister. Come on. You can tell me what this place is like as we
go." *       *       *       *       *

Bundled in our flying suits we hurried from the Hotel, climbed the
Citadel slope and in ten minutes were in the air. The wind sucked at us. The snow now was falling with thick, huge flakes. Directed by Alan, I
headed out over this ice-filled St. Lawrence, past the frozen Ile
d'Orleans, toward Polter's mysterious mountain castle. Suddenly Alan burst out, "I know what father's secret was! I can piece
it together now, from little things that were meaningless when I was a
kid. He invented the electro-microscope. You know that. The infinitely
small fascinated him. I remember he once said that if we could see far
enough down into smallness, we would come upon human life!" Alan's low, tense voice was more vehement than I had ever heard it
before. "It's clear to me now, George. That little fragment of golden
quartz which he wanted me to be so careful of contained a world with
human inhabitants! Father knew it, or suspected it. And I think the
chemical problem on which he was working aimed for some drug. I know it
was a drug they were compounding, Polter said so once, a radioactive
drug; I remember listening at the door. A drug, George, capable of
making a human being infinitely small!" I did not answer when momentarily Alan paused. So strange a thing. My
mind whirled with it; struggled to encompass it. And like the
meaningless individual pieces of a puzzle, dropping so easily into place
when the key piece is fitted, I saw Polter stealing that fragment of
gold; abducting Dr. Kent--perhaps because Polter himself was not fully
acquainted with the secret. And now, Polter up here with a fabulously
rich "gold mine." And Babs, abducted by him, to be taken--where? It set me shuddering. "That's what it was," Alan reiterated. "And Polter, here now with what
he calls a 'mine.' It isn't a mine, it's a laboratory! He's got father
too, hidden God knows where! And now Babs. We've got to get them,
George! The police can't help us! It's just you and me, to fight this
thing. And it's diabolical!" CHAPTER II


We soared over the divided channel of the St. Lawrence, between Orleans
and the mainland. Montmorency Falls in a moment showed dimly white
through the murk to our left, a great hanging veil of ice higher than
Niagara. Further ahead, the lights of the little village of St. Anne de
Beaupre were visible with the gray-black towering hills behind them. "Swing left, George. Over the mainland. That's St. Anne. We pass this
side of it. Put the mufflers on. This damn thing roars like a tower
siren." I cut in the muffler and switched off our wing-lights. It was illegal
but we were past all thought of that. We were both desperate; the slow
prudent process of acting within the law had nothing to do with this
affair. We both knew it. Our little plane was dark, and amid the sounds of this night blizzard
our muffled engine couldn't be heard. Alan touched me. "There are his lights; see them?" We had passed St. Anne. The hills lay ahead--a wild mountainous country
stretching northward to the foot of Hudson Bay. The blizzard was roaring
out of the North and we were heading into it. I saw, on what seemed like
a dome-shaped hill perhaps a thousand feet above the river level, a
small cluster of lights which marked Polter's property. "Fly over it once, George," Alan said. "Low--we can chance it. And find
a place to land near the walls." We presently had it under us. I held the plane at five hundred feet, and
cut our speed to the minimum of twenty miles an hour facing the gale,
though it was sixty or seventy when we turned. There were a score or two
of hooded ground lights. But there was little reflection aloft, and in
the murk of the snowfall I felt we could escape notice. We crossed, turned and went back in an arc following Polter's curved
outer wall. We had a good view of it. A weird enough looking place, here
on its lonely hilltop. No wonder the wealthy "Frank Rascor" had attained
local prominence! The whole property was irregularly circular, perhaps a mile in diameter
covering the almost flat dome of the hilltop. Around it, completely
enclosing it, Polter had built a stone and brick wall. A miniature of
the Great Wall in China! We could see that it was fully thirty feet high
with what evidently were naked high-voltage wires protecting its top. There were half a dozen little gates, securely barred, with doubtless a
guard at each of them. Within the walls there were several buildings: a few small stone houses
suggesting workmen's dwellings; an oblong stone structure with smoke
funnels which looked like a smelter; a huge domelike spread of
translucent glass over what might have been the top of a mineshaft. It
looked more like the dome of an observatory--an inverted bowl fully a
hundred feet wide and equally as high, set upon the ground. What did it
cover? And there was Polter's residence--a castlelike brick and stone building
with a tower not unlike a miniature of the Chateau Frontenac. We saw a
stone corridor on the ground connecting the lower floor of the castle
with the dome, which lay about a hundred feet to one side. Could we chance landing inside the wall? There was a dark, level expanse
of snow where we could have done it, but our descending plane doubtless
would have been discovered. But the mile-wide inner area was dark in
many places. Spots of light were at the little wall-gates. There was a
glow all along the top of the wall. Lights were on in Polter's house;
they slanted out in yellow shafts to the nearby white ground. But for
the rest, the whole place was dark, save a dim glow from under the dome. I shook my head at Alan's suggestion that we land inside the walls. We
had circled back and were a mile or so off toward the river. "The
trees--and you saw guards down there. But that low stretch outside the
gate on this side...."

A plan was coming to me. Heaven knows it was desperate enough, but we
had no alternative. We would land and accost one of the gate guards. Force our way in. Once inside the wall, on foot in the darkness of this
blizzard, we could hide; slip up to that dome. Beyond that my
imagination could not go. We landed in the snow a quarter of a mile from one of the gates. We left
the plane and plunged into the darkness. It was a steady upward slope. A packed snowfield was underfoot, firm
enough to hold our weight, with a foot or so of loose, soft snow on its
top. The falling flakes whirled around us. The darkness was solid. Our
helmeted leather-furred flying suits were soon shapeless with a
gathering white shroud. We carried our Essens in our gloved hands. The
night was cold, around zero I imagine, though with that biting wind it
felt far colder. From the gloom a tiny spot of light loomed up. "There it is, Alan. Easy now! Let me go first." The wind tore away my
words. We could see the narrow rectangle of bars at the gate, with a
glow of light behind them. "Hide your gun, Alan." I gripped him. "Do you hear me?" "Yes." "Let me go first. I'll do the talking. When he opens the gate, let me
handle him. You--if there are two of them--you take the other." We emerged from the darkness, into the glow of light by the gate. I had
the horrible feeling that a shot would greet us. A challenge came, at
first in French and then in English. "Stop! What do you want?" "To see Mr. Rascor." We were up to the bars now, shapeless hooded bundles of snow and frost. A man stood in the doorway of a lighted little cubby behind the bars. A
black muzzle in his hand was leveled at us. "He sees no one. Who are you?" Alan was pressing at me from behind. I shoved him back, and took a step
forward. I touched the bars. "My name is Fred Davis. Newspaperman from Montreal I must see Mr. Rascor." "You cannot. You may send in your call. The mouthpiece is there--out
there to the left. Bare your face; he talks to no one without the face
image." The guard had drawn back into his cubby; there was only his extended
hand and the muzzle of his weapon left visible. I took a step forward. "I don't want to talk by phone. Won't you open
the gate? It's cold out here. We have important business. We'll wait
with you." Abruptly the gate lattice slid aside. Beyond the cubby doorway was the
open darkness within the wall. A scuffed path leading inward from the
gate showed for a few feet. I walked over the threshold, with Alan crowding me. The Essen in my coat
pocket was leveled. But from the cubby doorway, I saw that the guard was
gone! Then I saw him crouching behind a metal shield. His voice rang
out. "Stand!" A light struck my face--a thin beam from a television sender beside me. It all happened in an instant, so quickly Alan and I had barely time to
make a move. I realized my image was now doubtless being presented to
Polter. He would recognize me! I ducked my head, yelling, "Don't do that!" It was too late! The guard had received a signal. I heard its buzz. From the shield a tiny jet of fluid leapt at me. It struck my hood. There was a heavy sickening-sweet smell. It seemed like chloroform. I
felt my senses going. The cubby room was turning dark, was roaring. I think I fired at the shield. And Alan leapt aside. I heard the faint
hiss of his Essen, and his choked, horrified voice:

"George, run! Don't fall!" I crumpled; slid into blackness. And it seemed, as I went down, that
Alan's inert body was falling on top of me....

       *       *       *       *       *

I recovered after a nameless interval, a phantasmagoria of wild, drugged
dreams. My senses came slowly. At first, there were dim muffled voices
and the tread of footsteps. Then I knew that I was lying on the ground,
and that I was indoors. It was warm. My overcoat was off. Then I
realized that I was bound and gagged. I opened my eyes. Alan was lying inert beside me, roped and with a black
gag around his face and in his mouth. We were in a huge dim open space. Presently, as my vision cleared, I saw that the dome was overhead. This
was a circular, hundred-foot-wide room. It was dimly lighted. The
figures of men were moving about, their great misshapen shadows shifting
with them. Twenty feet from me there was a pile of golden rock--chunks
of gold the size of a man's fist, or his head, and larger, heaped
loosely into a mound ten feet high. Beyond this pile of ore, near the center of the room, twenty feet above
the concrete floor, there was a large hanging electrolier. It cast a
circular glow downward. Under it I saw a low platform raised a foot or
two above the ground. A giant electro-microscope was hung with its
twenty foot cylinder above the platform. Its intensification tubes were
glowing in a dim phosphorescent row on a nearby bracket. A man sat in a
chair on the platform at the microscope's eyepiece. I saw all this with a brief glance, then my attention went to a white
stone slab under the giant lense. It rested on the platform floor, a
two-foot square surface of smooth white marble. A little roped railing a
few inches high fenced it. And in its center lay a fragment of golden
quartz the size of a walnut! There was a movement across my line of vision. Two figures advanced. I
recognized both of them. And I strained at my bonds; mouthed the gag
with futile, frenzied effort. I could no more than writhe; and I
couldn't make a sound. I lay, after a moment exhausted, and stared with
horror. The familiar hunched figure of Polter advanced toward the microscope. And with him, his huge hand holding her wrists, was Babs. They were
nearly fifty feet from me, but with the light over them I could see them
clearly. Babs' slim figure was clad in a long skirted dress--pale blue,
now, with the light on it. Her long black hair had fallen disheveled to
her shoulders. I couldn't see her face. She did not cry out. Polter was
half dragging her as she resisted him; and then abruptly she ceased
struggling. I heard his guttural voice. "That iss better." They mounted the platform. They were very small and seemed to be far
away. I blinked. Horror surged over me. Their figures were dwindling as
they stood there. Polter was saying something to the man at the
microscope. Other men were nearby, watching. All were normal, save
Polter and Babs. A moment passed. Polter was standing by the chair in
which the man at the microscope was sitting. And Polter's head barely
reached its seat! Babs was clinging to him now. Another moment and they
were both tiny figures down by the chair-leg. Then they began walking
with swaying steps toward the miniature railing of the white slab. The
white reflection from the slab plainly illumined them. Polter's arm was
around Babs. I had not realized how small they were until I saw Polter
lift the rope of the little four-inch fence, and he and Babs stooped and
walked under it. The fragment of quartz lay a foot from them in the
center of the white surface. They walked unsteadily toward it. But soon
they were running. My horrified senses whirled. Then abruptly I felt something touch my
face! Alan and I were lying in shadow. No one had noticed my writhing
movements, and Alan was still in drugged unconsciousness. Something tiny
and light and soundless as a butterfly wing brushed my face! I jerked my
head aside. On the floor, within six inches of my eyes, I saw the tiny
figure of a girl an inch high! She stood, with a warning gesture to her
lips--a human girl in a filmy flowing robe. Long, pale golden tresses
lay on her white shoulders; her face, small as my little fingernail,
colorful as a miniature painted on ivory, was so close to my eyes that I
could see her expression--warning me not to move. There was a faint glow of light on the floor where she stood, but in a
moment she moved out of it. Then I felt her brush against the back of my
head. My ear was near the ground. A tiny warm hand touched my ear lobe;
clung to it. A tiny voice sounded in my ear. "Please do not move your head. You might kill me!" There was a pause. I held myself rigid. Then the tiny voice came again. "I am Glora, a friend. I have the drug! I will help you!" CHAPTER III


It seemed that Alan was stirring. I felt the tiny hand leave my ear. I
thought that I could hear faint little footfalls as the girl scampered
away, fearful that a sudden movement by Alan would crush her. I turned
cautiously after a moment and saw Alan's eyes upon me. He too had seen,
with a blurred returning consciousness, the dwindling figures of Babs
and Polter. I followed his gaze. The while slab with the golden quartz
under the microscope seemed empty. The several men in this huge circular
dome-room were dispersing to their affairs; three of them sat whispering
by what I now saw was a pile of gold ingots stacked crosswise. But the
fellow at the microscope held his place, his eyes glued to its aperture
as he watched the vanishing figures of Polter and Babs on the
rock-fragment. Alan was trying to convey something to me. He could only gaze and jerk
his head. I saw behind his head the figures of the tiny girl on the
floor behind him. She wanted evidently to approach his head, but didn't
dare. When for an instant he was quiet, she ran forward, but at once
scampered back. From the group by the ingots, one of the men rose and came toward us. Alan held still, watching. And the girl, Glora, seized the opportunity
to come nearer. We both heard her tiny voice:

"Do not move! Close your eyes! Make him think you are still
unconscious." Then she was gone, like a mouse hiding in the shadows near us. Amazement swept Alan's face; he twisted, mouthed at his gag. But he saw
my eager nod and took his cue from me. I closed my eyes and lay stiff, breathing slowly. Footsteps approached. A man bent over Alan and me. "Are you no conscious yet?" It was the voice of a foreigner, with a
queer, indescribable intonation. A foot prodded us. "Wake up!" Then the footsteps retreated, and when I dared to look, the man was
rejoining his fellows. It was a strange looking trio. They were
heavy-set men in leather jackets and short, wide knee-length trousers. One wore tight, high boots, and the others a sort of white buckskin,
with ankle straps. All were bare-headed--round, bullet heads of
close-clipped black hair. I suddenly had another startling realization. These men were not of
normal size as I had assumed! They were eight or ten feet tall at the
very least! And they and the pile of ingots, instead of being close to
me, were more distant than I had thought. Alan was trying to signal me. The tiny girl was again at his ear,
whispering to him. And then she came to me. "I have a knife. See?" She backed away. I caught the pinpoint gleam of
what might have been a knife in her hand. "I will get a little larger. I
am too small to cut your ropes. You lie still, even after I have cut
them." I nodded. The movement frightened her so that she leaped backward; but
she came again, smiling. The three men were talking earnestly by the
ingots. No one else was near us. Glora's tiny voice was louder, so that we both could hear it at once. "When I free you, do not move or they may see that you are loose. I get
larger now--a little larger--and return." She darted away and vanished. Alan and I lay listening to the voices of
the three men. Two were talking in a strange tongue. One called to the
man at the microscope, and he responded. The third man said suddenly:

"Say, talk English. You know damn well I can't understand that lingo." "We say, McGuire, the two prisoners soon wake up." "What we oughta do is kill 'em. Polter's a fool." "The doctor say, wait for him return. Not long, what you call three,
four hours." "And have the Quebec police up here lookin' for 'em? An' that damn girl
he stole off the Terrace. What did he call her, Barbara Kent?" "These two who are drugged, their bodies can be thrown in a gully down
behind St. Anne. That what the doctor plan to do, I think. Then the
police find them--days maybe from now--and their smashed airship with
them." Gruesome suggestion! The man at the microscope called, "They are almost gone I can hardly see
them any more." He left the platform and joined the others. And I saw
that he was much smaller than they--about my own size possibly. There seemed six men here altogether. Four now, by the ingots, and two
others far across the room where I saw the dark entrance of the
corridor-tunnel which led to Polter's castle. Again I felt a warning hand touch my face, and saw the figure of Glora
standing by my head. She was larger now--about a foot tall. She moved
past my eyes; stood by my mouth; bent down over my gag. I felt the
cautious slide of a tiny knife-blade inserted under the fabric of the
gag. She hacked, tugged at it, and in a moment ripped it through. She stood panting from the effort. My heart was pounding with fear that
she would be seen; but the man had turned the central light off when he
left the microscope, and it was far darker here now than before. I moistened my dry mouth. My tongue was thick, but I could talk. "Thank you, Glora." "Quiet!" I felt her hacking at the ropes around my wrists. And then at my ankles. It took her a long time, but at last I was free! I rubbed my arms and
legs; felt the returning circulation in them. And presently Alan was free. "George, what--" he began. "Wait," I whispered. "Easy! Let her tell us what to do." We were unarmed. Two, against these six, three of whom were giants. Glora whispered, "Do not move! I have the drugs. But I can not give them
to you when I am still so small. I have not enough. I will hide--there." Her little arm gestured to where, near us, half a dozen boxes were
piled. "When I am large as you, I come back. Be ready, quickly to act. I
may be seen. I give you then the drug." "But wait," Alan whispered. "Tell us--"

"The drug to make you large. Large enough to fight these men. I had
planned to do that myself, until I saw you held captive. That girl of
your world the doctor just now steal, she is friend of yours?" "Yes! But--" A thousand questions were springing in my mind, but this
was no time to ask them. I amended, "Go on! Hurry! Give us the drug when
you can." The little figure moved away from us and disappeared. Alan and I lay as
we had before. But now we could whisper. We tried to anticipate what
would happen; tried to plan, but that was futile. The thing was too
strange, too astoundingly fantastic. How long Glora was gone I don't know. I think, not over three or four
minutes. She came from her hiding place, crouching this time, and joined
us. She was, probably, of normal Earth size--a small, frail-looking girl
something over five feet tall. We saw now that she was quite young,
still in her teens. We lay staring at her, amazed at her beauty. Her
small oval face was pale, with the flush of pink upon her cheeks--a face
queerly, transcendingly beautiful. It was wholly human, yet somehow
unearthly, as though unmarked by even the heritage of our Earthly
strifes. "Now! I am ready." She was fumbling at her robe. "I will give you each
the same." Her gestures were rapid. She flung a quick glance at the distant men. Alan and I were tense. We could easily be discovered now, but we had to
chance it. We were sitting erect. Alan murmured:

"But what do we do? What happens? What--"

On the palm of her hand were two pink-white pellets. "Take these--one
for each of you. Quickly!" Involuntarily we drew back. The thing abruptly was gruesome,
frightening. Horribly frightening. "Quickly," she urged. "The drug is what you call highly radioactive. And
volatile. Exposed to the air, it is gone very soon. You are afraid? No,
I assure you it is not harmful." With a muttered curse at his own reluctance, Alan seized the small
pellet. I stopped him. "Wait!" The men momentarily were engaged in a low-voiced, earnest discussion. I
dared to hesitate a moment longer. "Glora, where will you be?" "Here. Right here. I will hide." "We want to go after Mr. Polter," I gestured. "Into the little piece of
golden rock. That's where he went with the Earth girl, isn't it?" "Yes. My world is there--within an atom there in that rock." "Will you take us?" "Yes! But later." Alan whispered vehemently, "Why not now? We could get smaller, now." But she shook her head. "That is not possible. We would be seen as we
climbed the platform and crossed the white slab." "No," I protested, "not if we get very small, hiding here first." She was smiling, but urgently fearful of this delay. "Should we get that
small, then it would be, from here"--she gestured toward the
microscope--"to there, a journey of very many miles. Don't you
understand?" This thing so strange! Alan was plucking at me. "Ready, George?" "Yes." I put the pellet on my tongue. It tasted slightly sweet, but seemed to
melt quickly and I swallowed it hastily. My heart, was pounding, but
that was apprehension, not the drug. A thrill of heat ran through my
veins as though my blood were on fire. Alan was clinging to me as we sat together. Glora again had vanished. In
the background of my whirling consciousness the sudden thought hovered
that she had tricked us; done to us something diabolical. But the
thought was swept away in the confused flood of impressions upon me. I turned dizzily. "You all right, Alan?" "Yes, I--I guess so." My ears were roaring, the room seemed whirling, but in a moment that
passed. I felt a sudden growing sense of lightness. A humming was within
me--a soundless tingle. The drug had gone to every tiny microscopic cell
in my body. The myriad pores of my skin seemed thrilling with activity. I know now that it was the exuding volatile gas of this disintegrating
drug. Like an aura it enveloped me, acted upon my garments. I learned later much of the principles of this and its companion drug
but I had no thought for such things now. The huge dimly illumined room
under the dome was swaying. Then abruptly it steadied. The strange
sensations within me were lessening, or I forgot them, and I became
aware of externals. The room was shrinking! As I stared, not with horror now, but with
amazement and a coming triumph, I saw everywhere a slow, steady,
crawling movement. The whole place was dwindling. The platform, the
microscope, were nearer than before, and smaller. The pile of ingots,
and men near there, were shifting toward me. "George! My God--this is weird!" I saw Alan's white face as I turned toward him. He was growing at the
same rate as myself evidently, for in all the scene he only was
unchanged. We could feel the movement. The floor under us was shifting, crawling
slowly. From all directions it contracted as though it was being
squeezed beneath us. In reality our expanding bodies were pushing
outward. The pile of boxes which had been a few feet away, were thrusting
themselves at me. I moved incautiously and knocked them over. They
seemed small now, perhaps half their former size. Glora was standing
behind them. I was sitting and she was standing, but across the litter
our faces were level. "Stand up!" she murmured. "You all right now. I hide!" I struggled to my feet, drawing Alan up with me. Now! The time for
action was upon us! We had already been discovered. The men were
shouting, clambering to their feet. Alan and I stood swaying. The
dome-room had contracted to half its former size. Near us was a little
platform, chair and microscope. Small figures of men were rushing at us. I shouted, "Alan! Watch yourself!" We were unarmed. These men might have automatic weapons. But evidently
they did not. Only knives were in their hands. The whole place was
ringing with shouts. And then a shrill siren alarm from outside started
clanging. The first of the men--a few moments before he had seemed a giant--flung
himself upon me. His head was lower than my shoulders. I met him with a
blow of my fist in his face. He toppled backward; but from one side
another figure came at me. A knife-blade bit into the flesh of my thigh. The pain seemed to fire my brain. A madness descended upon me. It was
the madness of abnormality. I saw Alan with two dwarfed figures clinging
to him. But he threw them off, and they turned and ran. The man at my thigh stabbed again, but I caught his wrist and, as though
he were a child, whirled him around me and flung him away. He landed
with a crash against the shrunken pile of gold nuggets and lay still. The place was in a turmoil. Other men were appearing from outside. But
they now stood well away from us. Alan backed against me. His laugh rang
out, half hysterical with the madness upon him as it was upon me. "God! George, look at them! So small!" They were now hardly the height of our knees. This was now a small
circular room, under a lowering concave dome. A shot came from the group
of Pygmy figures. I saw the small stab of flame, heard the zing of the
bullet. We rushed, with the full frenzy of madness upon us--enraged giants. What
actually happened I cannot recount. I recall scattering the little
figures; seizing them; flinging them headlong. A bullet, tiny now, stung
the calf of my leg. Little chairs and tables under my feet were
crashing. Alan was lunging back and forth; stamping; flinging his tiny
adversaries away. There were twenty or thirty of the figures here now. I feared that they
might produce more up-to-date weapons. But my fears were unfounded: soon
I saw these figures making their escape. The room was littered with wreckage. I saw that by some miracle of
chance the microscope was still standing, and I had a moment of sanity. "Alan! Watch out! The microscope--the platform! Don't smash them! And
Glora be careful not to hurt her!" I suddenly became aware that my head and my shoulders had struck the
dome roof. Why, this was a tiny room! Alan and I found ourselves backed
together, panting in the small confines of a circular cubby with an
arching dome close over us. At our feet the platform with the microscope
over it hardly reached our boot tops. There was a sudden silence, broken
only by our heavy breathing. The tiny forms of humans strewn around us
were all motionless. The others had fled. Then we heard a small voice. "Here! Take this! Quickly! You are too
large. Quickly!" Alan took a step. And sudden panic was on us both. Glora was here at our
feet. We did not dare turn; hardly dared to move. To change position
might have crushed her now that she had left her hiding place. My leg
hit the top of the microscope cylinder. It rocked but did not fall. Where was Glora? In the gloom we could not see her. We were in a panic. Alan began, "George, I--"

The contracting inner curve of the dome bumped gently against my head. Our panic and confusion turned into cold fear. The room was closing in
to crush us. I muttered, "Alan! I'm going out!" I braced myself and heaved against
the side and top curve of the dome. Its metal ribs and heavy
translucent, reinforced glass plates resisted me. There was an instant
when Alan and I were desperately frightened. We were trapped, to be
crushed in here by our own horrible growth. Then the dome yielded under
our smashing blows. The ribs bent; the plates cracked. We straightened, pushed upward and emerged through the broken dome, with
head and shoulders towering into the outside darkness and the wind and
snow of the blizzard howling around us. CHAPTER IV


"Glora--that was horrible!" We stood, again in normal size, with the wrecked dome-laboratory around
us. The dome had a great jagged hole halfway up one of its sides,
through which the snow was falling. The broken bodies strewn around were
gruesome. Alan repeated, "Horrible, Glora. The power of this drug is diabolical." Glora had grown large after us and had given us the companion drug. I
need not detail the strange sensations of our dwindling. We were so soon
to experience them again! We had searched, when still large, all of Polter's grounds. Some of his
men undoubtedly escaped, made off into the blizzard. How many, we never
knew. None of them ever made themselves known again. We were ready to start into the atom. The fragment of golden quartz
still lay under the microscope on the white square of stone slab. We had
hurried with our last preparations. The room was chilling. We were all
inadequately dressed for such cold. I left a note scribbled on a square of paper by the microscope. With
daylight Polter's wrecked place would be discovered and the police would
surely come. _Guard this piece of golden quartz. Take it at once, very carefully, to
the Royal Canadian Scientific Society. Have it watched day and night. We
will return._

I signed it George Randolph. And as I did so, the extra ordinary aspect
of these events swept me anew. Here in Polter's weird place I had been
living in some strange fantastic realm. But this was the Province of
Quebec, in civilized Canada. These were the Quebec authorities I was
addressing. I flung the thoughts away. "Ready, Glora?" "Yes." Then doubts assailed me. None of Polter's men had gotten large enough to
fight us. Evidently he did not trust them with the drug. We could well
believe that, for the thing misused, was diabolical beyond human
conception. A single giant, a criminal, a madman, by the power of giant
size alone, could menace and destroy beyond belief. The drug lost, or
carelessly handled, could get loose. Animals, insects eating it, could
roam the Earth, gigantic monsters. Vegetation nourished with the drug,
might in a day overrun a big city, burying it with jungle growth! How terrible a thing, if the realm of smallness were suddenly to emerge,
consume this awe inspiring drug! Monsters of the sea, marine organisms,
could expand until even the ocean was too small for them. Microbes of
disease, feeding upon it--

Alan was prodding me. "We're ready, George." "Okay, let's go." This was not the largeness we were facing now, but smallness. I thought
of Babs, down there with Polter, beyond the vanishing point in the realm
of infinitely small. They had been gone an hour at least. Every moment
lost now was adding to Babs' danger. Glora sat with us on the platform. Strange little creature! She was
wholly calm now; methodical with her last directions. There had been no
time for her to tell us anything about herself. Alan had asked her why
she had come here and how she had gotten the drugs. She waved him away. "On the way down. Plenty of time then." "How long will it take us?" Alan demanded. "Not too long if we are careful with managing the trip. About ten
hours." And now we were ready to start. She told us calmly:

"I will give you each your share of the drugs, but then you take only as
I tell you." She produced from her robe several small vials a few inches long. They
were tightly stoppered. The feel of them was cool and sleek; they seemed
to be made of some strange, polished metal. Some of them were tinted
black while the others glowed opalescent. She gave each of us one vial
of each kind. "The light ones are for diminishing," she said. "We take them very
carefully, one small pellet only at first." Alan was opening one of his, but she checked him. "Wait! The drug evaporates very quickly. I have more to say. First we
sit here together. Then you follow me to the white slab. We climb upon
the little rock." She laid her hands on my arms. Her blue eyes regarded us earnestly. Her
manner was naive; childlike. But I could not mistake her intelligence or
the force of character stamped on her face for all its dainty, ethereal
beauty. "Alan--" She smiled at him, and tossed back a straying lock of her hair
which was annoying her. "You pay attention, Alan. You are very young,
reckless. You listen. We must not be separated. You understand that,
both of you? We will be always in that little piece of rock. But there
will be miles of distance. And to be lost in size--"

What a strange journey upon which we were now starting! Lost in size? "You understand me? Lost in size. If that happens, we might never find
each other. And if we come upon the Doctor Polter and the girl he holds
captive--if we can overtake them--"

"We must!" I exclaimed. "And we must get started." She showed us which pellet to select. They were of several sizes, I
found. And as she afterward told us, the larger ones were not only
larger but of an intensified strength. We took the smallest. It was
barely a thousandth part of the strength of the largest. In unison we
placed the pellets on our tongues, and hastily swallowed. The first sensations were as before. And, familiar now, they caused no
more than a fleeting discomfort. But I think I could never get used to
the outward strangeness! The room in a moment was expanding. I could feel the platform floor
crawling outward beneath me, so that I had to hitch and change my
position as it pulled. We were seated together, Alan and I on each side
of Glora. My fingers were on her arm. It did not change size, but it
slowly drew away with a space opening between us. Overhead, the dome
roof, the great jagged hole there, was receding, lifting, moving upward
and away. Glora pulled us to our feet. 