



Produced by Greg Weeks, Geoffrey Kidd, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Cover Illustration]




                             PAGAN PASSIONS

                         Adult Science Fiction,
              with the supernatural making complete sense. The Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Greece and Rome had returned to
Earth--with all their awesome powers intact, and Earth was transformed
almost overnight. War on any scale was outlawed, along with
boom-and-bust economic cycles, and prudery--no change was more startling
than the face of New York, where, for instance, the Empire State
Building became the Tower of Zeus! In this totally altered world, William Forrester was an acolyte of
Athena, Goddess of Wisdom, and therefore a teacher, in this case of a
totally altered history--and Maya Wilson, girl student, evidently had a
totally altered way of grading in mind--but what else would a worshipper
of Venus, Goddess of Love, have in mind? This was just the first of the many Trials of Forrester, every bit as
mighty and perilous as the Labors of Hercules. In love with Gerda Symes,
like him a devotee of Athena, like him a frequenter of the great Temple
of Pallas Athena (formerly known as the 42nd Street Library)--dedicated,
in short, to the pleasures of the mind--Forrester was under the soft,
compelling pressure of soft, compelling devotees of Venus, Bacchus and
the like, and in need of all the strength that he and his Goddess, the
beautiful and intellectual Athena, could muster to save him from the
endless temptations of this new Earth. And into this sensuous strife strode Temple Myrmidons--religious cops
sworn to obey orders without question or hesitation--with a pickup order
for William Forrester. Where he was taken, what happened to him, the truly fantastic
discoveries he made about himself and the Gods and Goddesses--here are
the ingredients that make up this science fiction novel of suspense,
intrigue, mystery and danger. For science fiction it is, with the
supernatural making complete sense, and fun too, despite the Sword of
Damocles hanging by a thread over Forrester's head! _by Randall Garrett and
                             Larry M. Harris_




 P
 a
 g
 a
 n

  P
  a
  s
  s
  i
  o
  n
  s




 A GALAXY Selected Novel
 For
 BEACON BOOKS




 P
 a
 g
 a
 n

  P
  a
  s
  s
  i
  o
  n
  s

   _By
   Randall Garrett
   and
   Larry M. Harris_

   _Published by
   Galaxy Publishing Corp.
   New York 14, New York_




 ALL CHARACTERS IN THIS WORK ARE WHOLLY
 FICTITIOUS AND ANY RESEMBLANCE TO PERSONS
 LIVING OR DEAD IS PURELY COINCIDENTAL

 Copyright 1959 by Galaxy Publishing Corp.

 _Galaxy Novels_ are sturdy, inexpensive editions of choice
 works of imaginative suspense, both original and reprint,
 selected by the editors of _Galaxy Magazine_ for Beacon Books. THIS IS BEACON BOOK NO. 263

 _Cover by Robert Stanley_

 Printed in the U.S.A. by
 THE GUINN COMPANY INC.
 New York 14, N. Y.




Transcriber's Note

Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
have been corrected without note. CHAPTER ONE


The girl came toward him across the silent room. She was young. She was
beautiful. Her red hair curled like a flame round her eager,
heart-shaped face. Her arms reached for him. Her hands touched him. Her
eyes were alive with the light of pure love. I am yours, the eyes kept
saying. Do with me as you will. Forrester watched the eyes with a kind of fascination. Now the girl's mouth opened, the lips parted slightly, and her husky
voice murmured softly: "Take me. Take me." Forrester blinked and stepped back. "My God," he said. "This is ridiculous." The girl pressed herself against him. The sensation was, Forrester
thought with a kind of awe, undeniably pleasant. He tried to remember
the girl's name, and couldn't. She wriggled slightly and her arms went
up around him. Her hands clasped at the back of his neck and her mouth
moved, close to his ear. "Please," she whispered. "I want you...."

Forrester felt his head swimming. He opened his mouth but nothing
whatever came out. He shut his mouth and tried to think what to do with
his hands. They were hanging foolishly at his sides. The girl came even
closer, something Forrester would have thought impossible. Time stopped. Forrester swam in a pink haze of sensations. Only one
small corner of his brain refused to lose itself in the magnificence of
the moment. In that corner, Forrester felt feverishly uncomfortable. He
tried again to remember the girl's name, and failed again. Of course,
there was really no reason why he should have known the name. It was,
after all, only the first day of class. "Please," he said valiantly. "Miss--"

He stopped. "I'm Maya Wilson," the girl said in his ear. "I'm in your class, Mr.
Forrester. Introductory World History." She bit his ear gently. Forrester jumped. None of the textbooks of propriety he had ever seen seemed to cover the
situation he found himself in. What did one do when assaulted
(pleasantly, to be sure, but assault was assault) by a lovely girl who
happened to be one of your freshman students? She had called him Mr.
Forrester. That was right and proper, even if it was a little silly. But
what should he call her? Miss Wilson? That didn't sound right at all. But, for other reasons, Maya sounded
even worse. The girl said: "Please," and added to the force of the word with another
little wriggle against Forrester. It solved his problems. There was now
only one thing to do, and he did it. He broke away, found himself on the other side of his desk, looking
across at an eager, wet-lipped freshman student. "Well," he said. There was a lone little bead of sweat trickling down
his forehead, across his frontal ridge and down one cheek. He ignored it
bravely, trying to think what to do next. "Well," he repeated at last,
in what he hoped was a gentle and fatherly tone. "Well, well, well,
well, well." It didn't seem to have any effect. Perhaps, he thought, an
attempt to put things back on the teacher-student level might have
better results. "You wanted me to see you?" he said in a grave,
scholarly tone. Then, gulping briefly, he amended it in a voice that had
suddenly grown an octave: "You wanted to see me? I mean, you--"

"Oh," Maya Wilson said. "Oh, my goodness, _yes_, Mr. Forrester!" She made a sudden sensuous motion that looked to Forrester as if she had
suddenly abolished bones. But it wasn't unpleasant. Far from it. Quite
the contrary. Forrester licked his lips, which were suddenly very dry. "Well," he
said. "What about, Miss--uh--Miss Wilson?" "Please call me Maya, Mr. Forrester. And I'll call you--" There was a
second of hesitation. "Mr. Forrester," Maya said plaintively, "what is
your first name?" "First name?" Forrester tried to think of his first name. "You want to
know my first name?" "Well," Maya said, "I want to call you something. Because after all--"
She looked as if she were going to leap over the desk. "You may call me," Forrester said, grasping at his sanity, "Mr. Forrester." Maya sidled around the desk quietly. "Mr. Forrester," she said, reaching
for him, "I wanted to talk to you about the Introductory World History
course." Forrester shivered as if someone had thrown cold water on his rising
aspirations. "Oh," he said. "That's right," Maya whispered. Her mouth was close to his ear again. Other parts of her were close to other parts of him once more. Forrester
found it difficult to concentrate. "I've _got_ to pass the course, Mr. Forrester," Maya whispered. "I've
just _got_ to." Somehow, Forrester retained just enough control of his faculties to
remember the standard answer to protestations like that one. "Well, I'm
sure you will," he said in what he hoped was a calm, hearty, hopeful
voice. He was reasonably sure it wasn't any of those, and even surer
that it wasn't all three. "You seem like a--like a fairly intelligent
young lady," he finished lamely. "Oh, no," she said. "I'm sure I won't be able to remember all those
old-fashioned dates and things. Never. Never." Suddenly she pressed
herself wildly against him, throwing him slightly off balance. Locked
together, the couple reeled against the desk. Forrester felt it digging
into the small of his back. "I'll do anything to pass the course, Mr. Forrester!" she vowed. "Anything!" The insistent pressure of the desk top robbed the moment of some of its
natural splendor. Forrester disengaged himself gently and slid a little
out of the way. "Now, now," he said, moving rapidly across the room
toward a blank wall. "This sort of thing isn't usually done, Maya. I
mean, Miss Wilson. I mean--"

"But--"

"People just don't do such things," Forrester said sternly. He thought
of escaping through the door, but the picture that arose immediately in
his mind dissuaded him. He saw Maya pursuing him passionately through
the halls while admiring students and faculty stared after them. "Anyhow," he added as an afterthought, "not at the _beginning_ of the
semester." "Oh," Maya said. She was advancing on him slowly. "You mean, I ought to
see if I can pass the course on my own first, and _then_--"

"Not at all," Forrester cut in. Maya sniffed sadly. "Oh, you just don't understand," she said. "You're
an Athenian, aren't you?" "Athenan," Forrester said automatically. It was a correction he found
himself called upon to make ten or twelve times a week. "An Athenian is
a resident of Athens, while an Athenan is a worshipper of the Goddess
Athena. We--"

"I understand," Maya said. "I suppose it's like us. We don't like to be
called Aphrodisiacs, you know. We prefer Venerans." She was leaning across the desk. Forrester, though he supposed some
people might be fussy about it, could see no objection whatever to the
term Aphrodisiacs. A wild thought dealing with Spheres of Influence
strayed into his mind, and he suppressed it firmly. The girl was a Veneran. A worshipper of Venus, Goddess of Love. Her choice of religion, he thought, was unusually appropriate. And as for his....




CHAPTER TWO


It was hard to believe that, only an hour or so before, he had been
peaceful and calm, entirely occupied with his duties in the great Temple
of Pallas Athena. His mind gave a sudden, panic-stricken leap and he was
back there again, standing at the rear of the vast room and focusing all
of his strained attention on it. The glowing embers in the golden incense tripods were dying now, but the
heavy clouds of frankincense, still tingled with the sweet aroma of
balsam and clove, hung heavily in the quiet air over the main altar. In
the flickering illumination of the gas sconces around the walls, the
figures on the great tapestries seemed to move with a subtle life of
their own. Even though the great brazen gong had sounded for the last time twenty
minutes before, marking the end of the service, there were still a few
worshippers in the pews, seated with heads bowed in prayer to the
Goddess. Forrester considered them carefully: average-looking people, a
sprinkling of youngsters, and in the far corner a girl who looked just a
little like ...

Forrester peered more closely. It wasn't just a slight resemblance; the
girl really seemed to be Gerda Symes. Her long blonde hair shone in the
dimness. Forrester couldn't see her very clearly, but his imagination
was working overtime. Her magnificently curved figure, her wonderful
face, her fiery personality were as much a part of his dreams as the bed
he slept on. If not for her brother ...

Forrester sighed and forced himself to return his attention to his
duties. His hands remained clasped reverently at his breast. Whatever
battle went on in his mind, the remaining few people in the great room
would see nothing but what was fitting. At any rate, he told himself, he
made rather an imposing sight in his robes, and, with a stirring of
vanity which he prayed Athena to chasten, he was rather proud of it. He was a fairly tall man, just a shade under six feet, but his slight
paunch made him seem shorter than he was. His face was round and smooth
and pleasant, and that made him look younger than he was: twenty-one
instead of twenty-seven. As befitted an acolyte of the Goddess of
Wisdom, his dark, curly hair was cut rather long. When he bowed to a
departing worshipper, lowering his head in graceful acknowledgment of
their deferential nods, he felt that he made a striking and commanding
picture. Though, of course, the worshippers weren't doing him any honor. That bow
was not for him, but directed toward the Owl, the symbol of the Goddess
embroidered on the breast of the white tunic. As an acolyte, after all,
he rated just barely above a layman; he had no powers whatever. Athena knew that, naturally. But somehow it was a little difficult to
get it through his own doubtless too-thick skull. He'd often dreamed of
power. Being a priest or a priestess, for instance--now that meant
something. At least people paid attention to you if you were a member of
the hierarchy, favored of the Gods. But, Forrester knew, there was no
chance of that any more. Either you were picked before you were
twenty-one, or you weren't picked at all, and that was all there was to
it. In spite of his looks, Forrester was six years past the limit. And so he'd become an acolyte. Sometimes he wondered how much of that
had been an honest desire to serve Athena, and how much a sop to his
worldly vanity. Certainly a college history instructor had enough to do,
without adding the unpaid religious services of an acolyte to his work. But these were thoughts unworthy of his position. They reminded him of
his own childhood, when he had dreamed of becoming one of the Lesser
Gods, or even Zeus himself! Zeus had provided the best answer to those
dreams, Forrester knew. "Now I am a man," Zeus had said, "and I put away
childish things." Well, Forrester considered, it behooved him to put away childish things,
too. A mere vanity, a mere love of spectacle, was unworthy of the
Goddess he served. And his costume and bearing certainly hadn't got him
very far with Gerda. He tore his eyes away from her again, and sighed. Before he could bring his mind back to Athena, there was an
interruption. Another white-clad acolyte moved out of the shadows to his right and
came softly toward him. "Forrester?" he whispered. Forrester turned, recognizing young Bates, a chinless boy of perhaps
twenty-two, with the wide, innocent eyes of the born fanatic. But it
didn't become a servant of Athena to think ill of her other servants,
Forrester reminded himself. Brushing the possibility of a rude reply
from his mind, Forrester said simply: "Yes? What is it?" "There's a couple of Temple Myrmidons to see you outside," Bates
whispered. "I'll take over your post." Forrester responded with no more than a simple nod, as if the occurrence
were one that happened every day. But it was not only the thought of
leaving Gerda that moved him. As he turned and strode to the small door
that led to the side room off the main auditorium, he was thinking
furiously under his calm exterior. Temple Myrmidons! What could they want with him? As an acolyte, he was
at least immune to arrest by the civil police, and even the Temple
Myrmidons had no right to take him into custody without a warrant from
the Pontifex himself. But such a warrant was a serious affair. What had he done wrong? He tried to think of some cause for an arrest. Blasphemy? Sacrilege? But
he found nothing except his interior thoughts. And those, he told
himself with a blaze of anger fierce enough to surprise him, were
nobody's business but his own and Athena's. Authorities either less
personal or more temporal had no business dealing with thoughts. Beyond those, there wasn't a thing. No irreverence toward any of the
Gods, in his private life, his religious functions or his teaching
position, at least as far as he could recall. The Gods knew that
unorthodoxy in an Introductory History course, for instance, was not
only unwise but damned difficult. Of course, he was aware of the real position of the Gods. They weren't
omnipotent. Their place in the scheme of things was high, but they were
certainly not equal with the One who had created the Universe and the
Gods themselves in the first place. Possibly, Forrester had always
thought, they could be equated with the indefinite "angels" of the
religions that had been popular during his grandfather's time, sixty
years ago, before the return of the Gods. But that was an uncertain
theological notion, and Forrester was quite ready to abandon it in the
face of good argument to the contrary. Whatever they were, the Gods were certainly the Gods of Earth now. The Omnipotent Creator had evidently left it for them to run, while he
went about his own mysterious business, far from the understanding or
the lives of men. The Gods, omnipotent or not, ran the world and
everything in it. And if, like Forrester, you knew that omnipotence wasn't their strong
point, you just didn't mention it. It would have been impolite to have
done so--like talking about sight to a blind man. And "impolite" was not
the only word that covered the case. The Gods had enough power, as
everyone knew, to avenge any blasphemies against them. And careless
mention of limitations on their power would surely be construed as
blasphemy, true or not. Forrester had never even thought of doing such a thing. So what, he thought, did the Temple Myrmidons want with him? He came to the anteroom and went in, seeing the two of them at once. They were big, burly chaps with hard faces, and the pistols that were
holstered at their sides looked completely unnecessary. Forrester took a
deep breath and went a step forward. There he stopped, staring. The Myrmidons were strangers to him--and now he understood why. Neither
was wearing the shoulder-patch Owl of Minerva/Athena. Both proudly
sported the Thunderbolt of Zeus/Jupiter, the All-Father himself. _Whatever it is_, Forrester told himself with a sinking sensation, _it's
serious_. One of the Myrmidons looked him up and down in a casual,
half-contemptuous way. "You're William Forrester?" "That's right," Forrester said, knowing that he looked quite calm, and
wondering, at the same time, whether or not he would live out the next
few minutes. The Myrmidons of Zeus/Jupiter didn't come around to other
temples on unimportant errands. "May I help you?" he went on, feeling
foolish. "Let's see your ID card, please," the Myrmidon said in the same tone as
before. That puzzled Forrester. He doubted whether examination of
credentials was a part of the routine preceding arrest--or execution,
for that matter. The usual procedure was, and probably always had been,
to act first and apologize later, if at all. Maybe whatever he'd done had been so important they couldn't afford to
make mistakes. But did the Myrmidon really think that an imposter could parade around
in an acolyte's tunic in the very Temple of Pallas Athena without being
caught by one of the Athenan Myrmidons, or some other acolyte or priest? Maybe a thing like that could happen in one of the other Temples,
Forrester thought. But here at Pallas Athena people took the Goddess's
attribute of wisdom seriously. What the Dionysians might do, he
reflected, was impossible to say. Or, for that matter, the Venerans. But he produced his identity card and handed it to the Myrmidon. It was
compared with a card the Myrmidon dug out of his pouch, and the
thumbprints on both cards were examined side by side. After a while, Forrester got his card back. The Myrmidon said: "We--" and began to cough. His companion came over to slap him on the back with bone-crushing
blows. Forrester watched without changing expression. Some seconds passed. Then the Myrmidon choked, swallowed, straightened and said, his face
purple: "All this incense. Not like what we've got over at the
All-Father's Temple. Enough to choke a man to death." Forrester murmured politely. "Back to business--right?" He favored Forrester with a rather
savage-looking smile, and Forrester allowed his own lips to curve gently
and respectfully upward. It didn't look as if he _were_ going to be killed, after all. "Important instructions for you," the Myrmidon said. "From the Pontifex
Maximus. And not to be repeated to any mortal--understand?" Forrester nodded. "And that means _any_ mortal," the Myrmidon said. "Girl friend, wife--or
don't you Athenans go in for that sort of thing? Now, up at the
All-Father's Temple, we--"

His companion gave him a sharp dig in the ribs. "Oh," the Myrmidon said. "Sure. Well. Instructions not to be repeated. Right?" "Right," Forrester said. Instructions? From the Pontifex Maximus? _Secret_ instructions? Forrester's mind spun dizzily. This was no arrest. This was something
very special and unique. He tried once more to imagine what it was going
to be, and gave it up in wonder. The Myrmidon produced another card from his pouch. There was nothing on
it but the golden Thunderbolt of the All-Father--but that was quite
enough. Forrester accepted the card dumbly. "You will report to the Tower of Zeus at eighteen hundred hours
exactly," the Myrmidon said. "Got that?" "You mean today?" Forrester said, and cursed himself for sounding
stupid. But the Myrmidon appeared not to have noticed. "Today, sure," he said. "Eighteen hundred. Just present this card." He stepped back, obviously getting ready to leave. Forrester watched him
for one long second, and then burst out: "What do I do after that?" "Just be a good boy. Do what you're told. Ask no questions. It's better
that way." Forrester thought of six separate replies and settled on a seventh. "All
right," he said. "And remember," the Myrmidon said, at the outside door, "don't mention
this to anyone. _Not anyone!_"

The door banged shut. Forrester found himself staring at the card he held. He put it away in
his case, alongside the ID card. Then, dazed, he went on back to the
acolyte's sacristy, took off his white tunic and put on his street
clothes. What did they want with him at the Tower of Zeus? It didn't really sound
like an arrest. If it had been that, the Myrmidons themselves would have
taken him. So what did the Pontifex Maximus want with William Forrester? He spent some time considering it, and then, taking a deep breath, he
forced it out of his mind. He would know at eighteen hundred, and such
were the ways of the Gods that he would not know one second before. So there was no point in worrying about it, he told himself. He almost
made himself believe it. But wiping speculation out of his mind left an unwelcome and uneasy
vacancy. Forrester replaced it with thought of the morning's service in
the Temple. Such devotion was probably valuable, anyhow, in a spiritual
sense. It brought him closer to the Gods.... The Gods he wanted desperately to be like. That, he told himself sharply, was foolishness of the most senseless
kind. He blinked it away. The Goddess Athena had appeared herself at the service--sufficient
reason for thinking of it now. The statuesquely beautiful Goddess with
her severely swept-back blonde hair and her deep gray eyes was the
embodiment of the wisdom and strength for which her worshippers
especially prayed. Her beauty was almost unworldly, impossible of
existence in a world which contained mortals. She reminded Forrester, ever so slightly (and, of course, in a reverent
way), of Gerda Symes. There seemed to be a great many forbidden thoughts floating around this
day. Resolutely, Forrester went back to thinking about the morning's
service. The Goddess had appeared only long enough to impart her blessing, but
her calm, beautifully controlled contralto voice had brought a sense of
peace to everyone in the auditorium. To be doggedly practical, there was
no way of knowing whether the Goddess's presence was an appearance--in
person, or an "appearance" by Divine Vision. But that really didn't
matter. The effect was always just the same. Forrester went on out the front portals of the Temple of Wisdom and down
the long, wide steps onto Fifth Avenue. He paid homage with a passing
glance to the great Owls flanking the entrance. Symbolic of Athena, they
had replaced the stone lions which had formerly stood there. The street was busy with hurrying crowds, enlivened here and there by
Temple Myrmidons--from the All-Father, from Bacchus, from Venus--even
one from Pallas Athena herself, a broad-beamed swaggerer whom Forrester
knew and disliked. The man came striding up the steps, greeted Forrester
with a bare nod, and disappeared at top speed into the Temple. Forrester sighed and glanced south, down toward 34th Street, where the
huge Tower of Zeus, a hundred and four stories high, loomed over all the
other buildings in the city. At eighteen hundred he would be in that tower--for what purpose, he had
no idea. Well, that was in the future, and he ...

A voice said: "Well! Hello, Bill!" Forrester turned, knowing exactly what to expect, and disliking it in
advance. The bluff over-heartiness of the voice was matched by the gross
and hairy figure that confronted him. In some disarray, and managing to
look as if he needed simultaneously a bath, a shave, a disinfecting and
a purgative, the figure approached Forrester with a rolling walk that
was too flat-footed for anything except an elephant. "How's the Owl-boy today?" said the voice, and the body stuck out a
flabby, hairy white hand. Forrester winced. "I'm fine," he said evenly. "And how's the
winebibber?" "Good for you," the figure said. "A little wine for your Stomach's sake,
as good old Bacchus always says. Only we make it a lot, eh?" He winked
and nudged Forrester in the ribs. "Sure, sure," Forrester said. He wished desperately that he could take
the gross fool and tear him into tastefully arranged pieces. But there
was always Gerda. And since this particular idiot happened to be her
younger brother, Ed Symes, anything in the nature of violence was
unthinkable. Gerda's opinion of her brother was touching, reverent, and--Forrester
thought savagely--not in the least borne out by any discoverable facts. And a worshipper of Bacchus! Not that Forrester had anything against the
orgiastic rites indulged in by the Dionysians, the Panites, the
Apollones or even the worst and wildest of them all, the Venerans. If
that was how the Gods wanted to be worshipped, then that was how they
should be worshipped. And, as a matter of fact, it sounded like fun--if, Forrester considered,
entirely too public for his taste. If he preferred the quieter rites of Athena, or of Juno, Diana or
Ceres--and even Ceresians became a little wild during the spring
fertility rites, especially in the country, where the farmers depended
on her for successful crops--well, that was no more than a personal
preference. But the idea of Ed Symes involved in a Bacchic orgy was just a little
too much for the normal mind, or the normal stomach. "Hey," Ed said suddenly. "Where's Gerda? Still in the Temple?" "I didn't see her," Forrester said. There _had_ been a woman who'd
looked like her. But that hadn't been Gerda. _She'd_ have waited for him
here. And--

"Funny," Ed said. "Why?" Forrester said. "I didn't see her. I don't think she attended the
service this morning, that's all." He wanted very badly to hit Symes. Just once. But he knew he couldn't. First of all, there was Gerda. And then, as an acolyte, he was
proscribed by law from brawling. No one would hit an acolyte; and if the
acolyte were built like Forrester, striking another man might be the
equivalent of murder. One good blow from Forrester's fist might break
the average man's jaw. That was, he discovered, a surprisingly pleasant thought. But he made
himself keep still as the fat fool went on. "Funny she didn't attend," Symes said. "But maybe she's gotten wise to
herself. There was a celebration up at the Temple of Pan in Central
Park, starting at midnight, and going on through the morning. Spring
Rites. Maybe she went there." "I doubt it," Forrester said instantly. "That's hardly her type of
worship." "Isn't it?" Symes said. "It doesn't fit her. That kind of--"

"I know. Gerda's like you. A little stuffy." "It's not being stuffy," Forrester started to explain. "It's--"

"Sure," Symes said. "Only she's not as much of a prude as you are. I
couldn't stand her if she were." "On the other hand, she's not a--"

"Not an Owl-boy of Owl-boys like you." "Not a drunken blockhead," Forrester finished triumphantly. "At least
she's got a decent respect for wisdom and learning." Symes stepped back, a movement for which Forrester felt grateful. No
matter how far away Ed Symes was, he was still too close. "Who you calling a blockhead, buster?" Symes said. His eyes narrowed to
piggish little slits. Forrester took a deep breath and reminded himself not to hit the other
man. "You," he said, almost mildly. "If brains were radium, you couldn't
make a flicker on a scintillation counter." It was just a little doubtful that Symes understood the insult. But he
obviously knew it had been one. His face changed color to a kind of
grayish purple, and his hands clenched slowly at his sides. Forrester
stood watching him quietly. Symes made a sound like _Rrr_ and took a breath. "If you weren't an
acolyte, I'd take a poke at you just to see you bounce." "Sure you would," Forrester agreed politely. Symes went _Rrr_ again and there was a longer silence. Then he said:
"Not that I'd hit you anyhow, buster. It'd go against my grain. Not the
acolyte business--if you didn't look so much like Bacchus, I'd take the
chance." Forrester's jaw ached. In a second he realized why; he was clenching his
teeth tightly. Perhaps it was true that he did look a little like
Bacchus, but not enough for Ed Symes to kid about it. Symes grinned at him. Symes undoubtedly thought the grin gave him a
pleasant and carefree expression. It didn't. "Suppose I go have a look
for Gerda myself," he said casually, heading up the stairs toward the
temple entrance. "After all, you're so busy looking at books, you might
have missed her." And what, Forrester asked himself, was the answer to that--except a
punch in the mouth? It really didn't matter, anyhow. Symes was on his way into the temple,
and Forrester could just ignore him. But, damn it, why did he let the young idiot get his goat that way? Didn't he have enough self-control just to ignore Symes and his oafish
insults? Forrester supposed sadly that he didn't. Oh, well, it just made another
quality he had to pray to Athena for. Then he glanced at his wristwatch and stopped thinking about Symes
entirely. It was twelve-forty-five. He had to be at work at thirteen hundred. Still angry, underneath the sudden need for speed, he turned and
sprinted toward the subway. *       *       *       *       *

"And thus," Forrester said tiredly, "having attempted to make himself
the equal of the Gods, Man was given a punishment befitting such
arrogance." He paused and took a breath, surveying the twenty-odd
students in the classroom (and some, he told himself wryly, _very_ odd)
with a sort of benign boredom. History I, Introductory Survey of World History, was a simple enough
course to teach, but its very simplicity was its undoing, Forrester
thought. The deadly dullness of the day-after-day routine was enough to
wear out the strongest soul. Freshmen, too, seemed to get stupider every year. Certainly, when _he'd_
been seventeen, he'd been different altogether. Studious, earnest,
questioning ...

Then he stopped himself and grinned. He'd probably seemed even worse to
his own instructors. Where had he been? Slowly, he picked up the thread. There was a young
blonde girl watching him eagerly from a front seat. What was her name? Forrester tried to recall it and couldn't. Well, this was only the first
day of term. He'd get to know them all soon enough--well enough,
anyhow, to dislike most of them. But the eager expression on the girl's face unnerved him a little. The
rest of the class wasn't paying anything like such strict attention. As
a matter of fact, Forrester suspected two young boys in the back of
being in a trance. Well, he could stop that. But ...

She was really quite attractive, Forrester told himself. Of course, she
was nothing but a fresh, pretty, eager seventeen-year-old, with a figure
that ...

She was, Forrester reminded himself sternly, a student. And he was supposed to be an instructor. He cleared his throat. "Man went hog-wild with his new-found freedom
from divine guidance," he said. "Woman did, too, as a matter of fact." Now what unholy devil had made him say that? It wasn't a part of the
normal lecture for first day of the new term. It was--well, it was
just a little risque for students. Some of their parents might complain,
and ... But the girl in the front row was smiling appreciatively. _I wonder what
she's doing in an Introductory course_, Forrester thought, leaping with
no evidence at all to the conclusion that the girl's mind was much too
fine and educated to be subjected to the general run of classes. _Private tutoring_ ... he began, and then cut himself off sharply, found
his place in the lecture again and went on:

"When the Gods decided to sit back and observe for a few thousand years,
they allowed Man to go his merry way, just to teach him a lesson." The boys in the back of the room were definitely in a trance. Forrester sighed. "And the inevitable happened," he said. "From the
eighth century B.C., Old Style, until the year 1971 A.D., Old Style,
Man's lot went from bad to worse. Without the Gods to guide him he bred
bigger and bigger wars and greater and greater empires--beginning with
the conquests of the mad Alexander of Macedonia and culminating in the
opposing Soviet and American Spheres of Influence during the last
century." Spheres of Influence....

Forrester's gaze fell on the blonde girl again. She certainly had a
well-developed figure. And she did seem so eager and attentive. He
smiled at her tentatively. She smiled back. "Urg ..." he said aloud. The class didn't seem to notice. That, Forrester told himself sourly,
was probably because they weren't listening. He swallowed, wrenched his gaze from the girl, and said: "The
Soviet-American standoff--for that is what it was--would most probably
have resulted in the destruction of the human race." It had no effect on
the class. The destruction of the human race interested nobody. "However," Forrester said gamely, "this form of insanity was too much
for the Gods to allow. They therefore--"

The bell rang, signifying the end of the period. Forrester didn't know
whether to feel relieved or annoyed. "All right," he said. "That's all for today. Your first assignment will
be to read and carefully study Chapters One and Two of the textbook." Silence gave way to a clatter of noise as the students began to file
out. Forrester saw the front-row blonde rise slowly and gracefully. Any
doubts he might have entertained (that is, he told himself wryly, any
_entertaining_ doubts) about her figure were resolved magnificently. He
felt a little sweat on the palm of his hands, told himself that he was
being silly, and then answered himself that the hell he was. The blonde gave him a slow, sweet smile. The smile promised a good deal
more than Forrester thought likely of fulfillment. He smiled back. It would have been impolite, he assured himself, not to have done so. The girl left the room, and a remaining crowd of students hurried out
after her. The crowd included two blinking boys, awakened by the bell
from what had certainly been a trance. Forrester made a mental note to
inquire after their records and to speak with the boys himself when he
got the chance. No sense in disturbing a whole class to discipline them. He stacked his papers carefully, taking a good long time about it in
order to relax himself and let his palms dry. His mind drifted back to
the blonde, and he reined it in with an effort and let it go exploring
again on safer ground. The class itself ... actually, he thought, he
rather liked teaching. In spite of the petty irritations that came from
driving necessary knowledge into the heads of stubbornly unwilling
students, it was a satisfying and important job. And, of course, it was
an honor to hold the position he did. Ever since it had been revealed
that the goddess Columbia was another manifestation of Pallas Athena
herself, the University had grown tremendously in stature. And after all ...

Whistling faintly behind his teeth, Forrester zipped up his filled
briefcase and went out into the hall. He ignored the masses of students
swirling back and forth in the corridors, and, finding a stairway, went
up to his second-floor office. He fumbled for his key, found it, and opened the ground-glass door. Then, stepping in, he came to a full stop. The girl had been waiting for him--Maya Wilson. *       *       *       *       *

And now here she was, talking about the Goddess of Love. Forrester
gulped. "Anyhow," he said at random, "I'm an Athenan." He remembered that he had
already said that. Did it matter? "But what does all this have to do
with your passing, or not passing, the course?" he went on. "Oh," Maya said. "Well, I prayed to Aphrodite for help in passing the
course. And the Temple Priestess told me I'd have to make a sacrifice to
the Goddess. In a way." "A sacrifice?" Forrester gulped. "You mean--"

"Not the First Sacrifice," she laughed. "That was done with solemn
ceremonies when I was seventeen." "Now, wait a minute--"

"Please," Maya said. "Won't you listen to me?" Forrester looked at her limpid blue eyes and her lovely face. "Sure. Sorry." "Well, then, it's like this. If a person loves a subject, it's that much
easier to understand it. And the Goddess has promised me that if I love
the instructor, I'll love the subject. It's like sympathetic
magic--see?" Her explanation was so brisk and simple that Forrester recoiled. "Hold
on," he said. "Just hold your horses. Do you mean you're in love with
me?" Maya smiled. "I think so," she said, and very suddenly she was on
Forrester's side of the desk, pressing up against him. Her hand caressed
the back of his neck and her fingers tangled in his hair. "Kiss me and
let's find out." CHAPTER THREE


Resistance, such as it was, crumbled in a hurry. Forrester complied with
fervor. An endless time went by, punctuated only by short breaths
between the kisses. Forrester's hands began to rove. So did Maya's. She began to unbutton his shirt. Not to be outdone, his own fingers got busy with buttons, zippers, hooks
and the other temporary fastenings with which female clothing is
encumbered. He was swimming in a red sea of passion and the Egyptians
were nowhere in sight. Absently, he got an arm out of his shirt, and at
the same time somehow managed to undo the final button of a series. Maya's blouse fell free. Forrester felt like stout Cortez. He pulled the girl to him, feeling the surprisingly cool touch of her
flesh against his. Under the blouse and skirt, he was discovering, she
wore very little, and that was just as well; nagging thoughts about the
doubtful privacy of his office were beginning to assail him. Nevertheless, he persevered. Maya was as eager as he had ever dreamed of
being, and their embrace reached a height of passion and began to climb
and climb to hitherto unknown peaks of sensation. Forrester was busy for some time discovering things he had never known,
and a lot of things he had known before, but never so well. Every motion
was met with a reaction that was more than equal and opposite, every
sensation unlocked the doors to whole galleries of new sensations. Higher and higher went his emotional thermometer, higher and higher and
higher and higher and ... Very suddenly, he discovered how to breathe again, and it was over. "My goodness," Maya said after a brief resting spell. "I suppose I
_must_ love you for sure. My _good_ness!" "Sure," Forrester said. "And now--if you'll pardon the indelicacy and
hand me my pants--" he found he was still puffing a little and paused
until he could go on--"I've got an appointment I simply can't afford to
miss." "Oh, all right," Maya said. "But Mr. Forrester--"

He rolled over and looked at her while he began dressing. "I suppose it
would be all right if you called me Bill," he said carefully. "In class, too?" Forrester shook his head. "No," he said. "Not in class." "But what I wanted to ask--"

"Yes?" Forrester said. "Mr.--Bill--do you think I'll pass Introductory World History?" Forrester considered that question. There was certainly a wide variety
of answers he could construct. When he had finished buttoning his shirt
he had decided on one. "I don't see why not," he said, "so long as you complete your
assignments regularly." *       *       *       *       *

Nearly two hours later, feeling somewhat light-headed but otherwise in
perfectly magnificent fettle, Forrester found himself on the downtown
subway. He'd showered and changed and he was whistling a gay little tune
as he checked his watch. The time was five minutes to five. He had just over an hour before he
was due to appear at the Tower of Zeus All-Father, but it was better to
be a few minutes early than even a single second late. The train ride was a little bumpy, but Forrester didn't really mind. He
was pretty well past being irritated by anything. Nevertheless, he was
speculating with just a faint unease as to what the Pontifex Maximus
wanted with him. What was in store for him at the strange appointment? And why all the secrecy? His brooding was interrupted right away. At 100th Street, a bearded old
man got on and sat down next to him. He nudged Forrester in the ribs and
muttered: "Look at that now, Daddy-O. Look at that." "What?" Forrester said, constrained into conversation. "Damn subways, that's what," the old man said. "Worse every year. Bumpier and slower and worse. Just look around, Daddy-O. Look around." "I wouldn't quite say--" Forrester began, but the old man gave him
another dig in the ribs and cut in:

"Wouldn't say, wouldn't say," he muttered. "Listen, man, there ain't
been an improvement in years. You realize that?" "Well, I--"

"No progress, man, not in more than half a century. Listen, when I was a
teen king--War Councilor for the Boppers, I was, and let me tell you
that was big time, Daddy-O--when I was a teen king, we were going
places. Going places for real. Mars. Venus. We were going to have
spaceships, man." Forrester smiled spasmically at the old man. "I'm sure you--"

"But what happened?" the old man interrupted. "Tell you what happened,
man. We never got to Mars and Venus. Mars and Venus came to us instead. Right along with Jupiter and Neptune and Pluto and all the rest of the
Gods. And we had no progress ever since that day, Daddy-O, no progress
at all and you can believe it." He dug Forrester in the ribs one final time and sat back with melancholy
satisfaction. "Well," Forrester said mildly, "what good is progress?" The old man, he
assured himself after a moment's reflection, wasn't actually saying
anything blasphemous. After all, the Gods didn't expect their
worshippers to be mindless slaves. Somehow the notion made him feel happier. He'd have hated reporting the
old man. Something in the outdated slang made him feel--almost
patriotic. The old man was a part of America, a respected and important
part. The respected part of America made itself felt again in Forrester's
ribs. "Progress?" the old man said. "What good's progress? Listen,
Daddy-O--how can the human race get anywhere without progress? Answer me
that, will you, man? Because it's for-sure real we're not going any
place now. No place at all." "Now look," Forrester said patiently, "progress is an outmoded idea. We've got to be in step with the times. We've got to ask ourselves what
progress ever did for us. How did we stand when the Gods returned?" For
a brief flash he was back in his history class, but he went on: "Half
the world ready to fight the other half with weapons that would have
wiped both halves out. You ought to be grateful the Gods returned when
they did." "But we're getting into Nowheresville, man," the old man complained. "We're not in orbit. We can't progress." Forrester sighed. Why was he talking to the old man, anyway? The answer
came to him as soon as he'd asked the question. He wanted to keep his
mind off the Tower of Zeus and his own unknown fate there. It was an
unpleasant answer; Forrester blanked it out. "Now, friend," he said. "What have you got? Just what mankind's been
looking for all these centuries. Security. You've got security. Nobody's
going to blow you to pieces tomorrow. Your job isn't going to vanish
overnight. I mean, if you--"

"I got a job," the old man said. "Really?" Forrester said politely. "What is it?" "Retired. And it's a tough job, too." "Oh," Forrester said. "And anyhow," the old man went on, "what's all this got to do with
progress?" Forrester thought. "Well--"

"Well, nothing," the old man said. "Listen to me, man. I say nothing
against the Gods--right? Nothing at all. Wouldn't want to do anything
like that. But at the same time, it looks to me like we ought to be able
to--reap the fruits of our labors. I read that some place." "But--"

"In the three thousand years the Gods were gone, we weren't a total
loss, man. Not anything like. We discovered a lot. About nature and
science and like that. We invented science all by ourselves. So how come
the Gods don't let us use it?" The old man dug his elbow once more into
Forrester's rib. "How come?" "The Gods haven't taken anything away from us," Forrester said. "Haven't they?" the old man demanded. "How about television? Want to
answer that one, Daddy-O? Years ago, everybody had a television set. Color and 3-D. The most. The end. Now there's no television at all. Why
not? What happened to it?" "Well," Forrester said reasonably, "what good is television?" "What good?" Once more Forrester's rib felt the old man's elbow. "Let me
tell you--"

"No," Forrester interrupted, suddenly irritated with the whole
conversation. "Let _me_ tell _you_. The trouble with your generation was
that all they wanted to do was sit around on their _glutei maximi_ and
be entertained. Like a bunch of hypnotized geese. They didn't want to
do anything for themselves. Half of them couldn't even read. And now
you want to tell me that--"

"Hold it, Daddy-O," the old man said. "You're telling me that the Gods
took away television just because we were a bunch of hypnotized geese. That it?" "That's it." "Okay," the old man said. "So tell me--what are we now? With the Gods
and everything. I mean, man, really--what are we?" "Now?" Forrester said. "Now you're retired. You're a bunch of retired
hypnotized geese." The doors of the train slid creakily open and Forrester got out onto the
34th Street platform, walking angrily toward a stairway without looking
back. True enough, the old man hadn't committed blasphemy, but it had
certainly come close enough there at the end. And if pokes with the
elbow weren't declared blasphemous, or at least equivalent to malicious
mischief, he thought, there was no justice in the world. The real trouble was that the man had had no respect for the Gods. There
were a good many of the older generation like him. They seemed to feel
that humanity had been better off when the Gods had been away. Forrester
couldn't see it, and felt vaguely uncomfortable in the presence of
someone who believed it. After all, mankind _had_ been on the verge of
mass suicide, and the Gods had mercifully come back from their
self-imposed exile and taken care of things. The exile had been designed
to prove, in the drastic laboratory of three thousand years, that Man by
himself headed like a lemming for self-destruction. And, for Forrester,
the point had been proven. Yet now that the human race had been saved, there were still men who
griped about the Gods and their return. Forrester silently wished the
pack of them in Hades, enjoying the company of Pluto and his ilk. At the corner of 34th and Broadway, as he came out of the subway
tunnels, he bought a copy of the _News_ and glanced quickly through the
headlines. But, as always, there was little sensational news. Mars was
doing pretty well for himself, of course: there were two wars going on
in Asia, one in Europe and three revolutions in South and Central
America. That last did seem to be overdoing things a bit, but not
seriously. Forrester shrugged, wondering vaguely when the United States
was going to have its turn. But he couldn't concentrate on the paper and, after a little while, he
got rid of it and took a look at his watch. Twenty to six. Forrester decided he could use a drink to brace himself
and steady his nerves. Just one. On Sixth Avenue, near 34th Street, there was a bar called, for some
obscure reason, the _Boat House_. Forrester headed for it, went inside
and leaned against the bar. The bartender, a tall man with crew-cut
reddish hair, raised his eyebrows in a questioning fashion. "What'll it be, friend?" "Vodka and ginger ale," Forrester said. "A double." It was still, he told himself uneasily, just one drink. And that was all
he was going to have. The bartender brought it and Forrester sipped at it, watching his
reflection in the mirror and wishing he felt easier in his mind about
the whole Tower of Zeus affair. Then, very suddenly, he noticed that the
man next to him was looking at him oddly. Forrester didn't like the look
or, for that matter, the man himself, a raw-boned giant with deep-set
eyes and a shock of dead-black hair, but so long as nobody bothered him,
Forrester wasn't going to start anything. Unfortunately, somebody bothered him. The tall man leaned over and said
loudly: "What's the matter with you, bud? An infidel or something?" Forrester hesitated. The accusation that he didn't believe in the
practices ordained by the Gods themselves was an irritating one. But he
could see the other side of the question, too. The tall man was
undoubtedly a Dionysian; and, more than that, a member of a small sect
inside the general _corpus_ of Bacchus/Dionysus worshippers. He held
that it was wrong to distill grape or grain products "too far," until
there was nothing left but the alcohol. That meant disapproval of gin and vodka on the grounds that, unlike
whiskey or brandy, they'd had the "life" distilled out of them. Forrester, however, was not really fond of brandy and whiskey. He
decided to explain this to the tall man, but at the same time he began
to develop the sinking feeling that it wasn't going to do any good. Oh, well, there was still room for patience. "Don't fire," as Mars had
said somewhere, "until you see the whites of their eyes." "No, I'm no infidel," Forrester said politely. "You see, I'm--"

"_No infidel?_" the tall man roared. "Then I tell you what you do. You
pour that slop out and drink a proper drink." He made a grab for
Forrester's glass. Forrester jerked it back, sloshing it a little in the process--and a few
drops splattered on the other's hand. "Now look here," Forrester said in a reasonable tone of voice. "I--"

"You spilling that stuff on me? What the blazes are you doing that for? I got a good mind to--"

Another man stepped into the altercation. This was a square-built,
bullet-headed man with an air that was both truculent and eager. "What's
the matter, Herb?" he asked the tall man. "This guy giving you trouble
or something?" He favored Forrester with a fierce scowl. Forrester
smiled pleasantly back, a little unsure as to how to proceed. "This guy?" Herb said. "_Trouble?_ Sam, he's an _infidel_!" Forrester said: "I--"

"He drinks vodka," Herb said. "And I guess he drinks gin too." "Great Bacchus," Sam said in a tone of wonder. "You run into them
everywhere these days. Can't get away from the sons of--"

"Now--" Forrester started. "And not only that," Herb said, "but he spills the stuff on me. Just
because I ask him to have a regular drink like a man." "_Spills_ it on you?" Sam said. Herb said: "Look," and extended his arm. On the sleeve of his jacket a
few spots were slowly drying. "Well, that's too much," Sam said heavily. "Just too damn much." He
scowled at Forrester again. "You know, buddy, somebody ought to teach
guys like you a lesson." Forrester took a swallow of his drink and set the glass down
unhurriedly. If either Herb or Sam attacked him, he knew his oath would
permit his fighting back. And after the day he'd had, he rather looked
forward to the chance. But he had to do his part to hold off an actual
fight. "Now look here, friend--"

"Friend?" Sam said. "Don't call me your friend, buddy. I make no friends
with infidels." And, at that point, Forrester realized that he wasn't going to have a
fight with Herb or Sam. He was going to have a fight with Herb _and_
Sam--and with the third gentleman, a shaggy, beefy man who needed a
shave, who stepped up behind them and asked: "Trouble?" in a voice that
indicated that trouble was exactly what he was looking for. "Maybe it is trouble, at that," Herb said tightly, without turning
around. "This infidel here's been committing blasphemy." Three against one wasn't as happy a thought as an even fight had been,
but it was too late to back out now. "That's a lie!" Forrester snapped. "Call me a liar?" Sam roared. He stepped forward and swung a hamlike
fist at Forrester's head. Forrester ducked. The heavy fist swished by his ear harmlessly, and he
felt a strange new mixture of elation and fright. He grabbed his
vodka-and-ginger from the bar and swung it in a single sweeping arc
before him. Liquid rained on the faces of the three men. Sam was still a little off balance. Forrester slammed the edge of his
right hand into his side, and Sam stumbled to the floor. In the same
motion, Forrester let fly with the now-empty glass. The shaggy man stood
directly in his path. The glass conked him on the forehead and bounced
to the floor, where it shattered unnoticed. The shaggy man blinked and
Forrester, moving forward, discovered that he had no time to follow
matters up in that direction. Herb was snarling inarticulately, wiping vodka-and-ginger from his eyes. He blocked Forrester's advance toward the shaggy man. Forrester smiled
gently and put a hard fist into Herb's solar plexus. The tall man
doubled up in completely silent agony. Forrester took a breath and started forward again. The shaggy man was
shaking his head, trying to clear it. Then Forrester's head became unclear. Something had banged against his
right temple and the room was suddenly filled with pain and small, hard
stars. Sam, Forrester discovered, had managed to get to his feet. The
something had been a small brass ashtray that Sam had thrown at him. Somehow, he stayed on his feet. The stars were still swirling around
him, but he began to be able to see through them, and peered at the
figure of the shaggy man, coming at him again. He let his knees bend a
little, as if he were going to pass out. The shaggy man seemed to gain
confidence from this, and stepped in carefully to kick Forrester in the
stomach. Forrester stepped back, grabbed the upcoming foot, and stood straight,
lifting the foot and levering it into the air. The shaggy man, surprise written all over his shaveless face, went over
backward with great abruptness. His head hit the floor with an audible
and satisfying _whack_, and then his limbs settled and he remained
there, sprawled out and very quiet. Forrester, meanwhile, was whirling to meet Sam, who was coming in like a
bear, his arms outspread and a glaze of hatred in his eyes. Forrester,
expressionless, ducked under the man's flailing arms and slammed a fist
into his midsection. It was a harder midsection than he'd expected;
unlike Herb, Sam had good muscles, and hitting them was like hitting
thick rubber. The blow didn't put Sam down. It only made him gasp once. That was enough. Forrester doubled his right fist and let Sam have one
more blow, this one into the face. Sam's mouth opened as his eyes
closed. His left arm pawed the air aimlessly for a tenth of a second. Then he dropped like an empty overcoat. There was a second of absolute silence. Then Forrester heard a noise
behind him and whirled. But it was only Herb, doubled up on the floor and very quietly retching. Catching his breath, Forrester looked around him. The fight had
attracted a lot of attention from the other customers in the bar, but
none of them seemed to want to prolong it by joining in. They were all trying to look as if they were minding their own business,
while the bartender ...

Forrester stared. The bartender was at the other end of the bar, far
away from the scene of action. He was, as Forrester saw him, just hanging up the telephone. Forrester put a bill on the bar, turned and walked out into the street. He had absolutely no desire to get mixed up with the secular police. After all, he had an appointment to keep. And now--after a quiet drink
that had turned into a three-against-one battle royal--he had to go and
keep it. CHAPTER FOUR


It wasn't a very long walk from the _Boat House_ to the Tower of Zeus,
but it was long enough. By the time Forrester got to the Tower, he was
feeling a lot worse than he'd felt when he left the bar. Being perfectly
frank with himself, he admitted that he felt terrible. The blow from the brass ashtray wasn't a sharp pain any longer. It had
developed into a nice, dependable ache that had spread all over the side
of his head. And his right eye was beginning to swell, probably from the
same cause. He'd skinned the knuckles of his right hand, too, probably
on Sam's face, and they set up their own smarting. True, it wasn't a bad list of injuries to result from the odds he'd
faced. But that wasn't the point. You just didn't go up to the Tower of Zeus looking like a back-street
brawler. However, there was no help for it. He straightened his jacket and went
in through the Fifth Avenue entrance of the Tower, heading for the first
bank of elevators. Zeus All-Father would know everything about his fight, and would know
that it hadn't been his fault. (Hadn't it, though? Forrester asked
himself. He remembered the joy he'd felt at the prospect of battle. How
far would it count against him?) Zeus All-Father, through his priests,
would make what allowances should be made. Forrester hoped that the Godhead was feeling in a kind and merciful
mood. He reached the bank of elevators, and the burly Myrmidon who stood
there, wearing the lightning-bolt shoulder patch of the All-Father. Ahead of him was a chattering crowd of five: mother, father, two
daughters and a small son, all obviously out-of-towners. The Tower of
Zeus was always a big tourist attraction. The Myrmidon directed them to
the stairway that led to the second-floor Arcade, the main attraction
for most visitors to the Tower. The Temple of Sacrifice was located up
there, while the ground floor was filled with glass-fronted offices of
the secretaries of various dignitaries. Chattering gaily, and looking around them in a kind of happy awe, the
family group moved off and Forrester stepped up to the Myrmidon, who
said: "Stairway's right over there to your--"

"No," Forrester said. He reached into his jacket pocket, feeling his
muscles ache as he did so. He drew out his wallet and managed to extract
the simple card he'd been given in the Temple of Pallas Athena, the card
which carried nothing but a lightning bolt. He handed it to the Myrmidon, who looked down at it, frowned, and then
looked up. "What's this for?" he said. "Well--" Forrester began, and then caught himself. He'd been told not to
explain about the card to any mortal. And the Myrmidon was certainly
just as mortal as Forrester himself, or any other hireling of the Gods. True, there was always the consideration that he might be Zeus
All-Father himself, in disguise. But that was a consideration that bore no weight at present. Even if the
Myrmidon turned out to be a God in disguise, Forrester wouldn't be
excused if he said anything about the card. You had to go by
appearances; that was the principle on which everything rested, and a
very good principle too. Not that there weren't a few unprincipled young men around who pretended
to be Gods in disguise in order to seduce various local and ingenuous
maidens. But Zeus always found out about them. And ...

Forrester recognized that his thoughts were beginning to veer once more. Without changing his expression, he said evenly: "You're supposed to
know," and waited. The Myrmidon studied him for what seemed about three days. At last he
nodded, looked down at the card intently, raised his head and nodded
again. "Okay," he said. "Take Car One." Forrester moved off. Car One was not the first elevator car. As a matter
of fact, it was in the middle bank, identified only by a small placard. It took him almost five minutes to find it, and by the time he stepped
toward it clocks were ticking urgently in his head. It would do him absolutely no good to be late. But another Myrmidon was standing beside the closed doors of the
elevator car. Forrester hissed in his breath with impatience--none of
which showed on his face--and then caught himself. Certainly Zeus
All-Father knew what he was doing, and if Zeus had thrown these delays
in his path, it was not for him to complain. The thought was soothing. Nevertheless, Forrester showed his card to the
Myrmidon with an abrupt action very like impatience. This Myrmidon
merely glanced at it in a bored fashion and pushed a button on the wall
behind him. The elevator doors opened, Forrester stepped inside, and the
doors closed. Forrester was alone in a small bronzed cubicle which began at once to
rise rapidly. Just how rapidly, he was unable to tell. There were no
indicators at all on the elevator, and the opaque doors made it
impossible to see floors flit by. But his ears rang with the speed, and
when the car finally stopped, it did so with a slight jerk that threw
Forrester, stiff and worried, off balance. He almost fell out of the car
as the door opened, and clutched at something for support. The something was the arm of a Myrmidon. Forrester gaped and looked
around. He was in a plain hallway of polished marble. There was no way
to tell how many stories above the street he was. The Myrmidon seemed a more friendly sort than his compatriots
downstairs, and wore in addition to the usual lightning-bolt patch the
two silver ants of a Captain on the shoulders of his uniform. He nearly
smiled at Forrester--but not quite. "You're William Forrester?" he said. Forrester nodded. He produced the ID card and handed it with the special
card to the Myrmidon. "Right," the Myrmidon said. Forrester turned right. The Myrmidon stared at him. "No," he said. "I mean it's all right. You're all right." "Thank you," Forrester said. "Oh--" The Myrmidon looked at him, then shrugged his shoulders. "You're
expected," he said at last in a flat voice. "Come with me." He started down the hallway. Forrester followed him around a corner to
an ornate bronzed door, covered with bas-reliefs depicting the actions
of the Gods among themselves, and among men. The Myrmidon seemed
unimpressed by the magnificence of the thing; he pushed it open and
bowed low to, as far as Forrester could see, nobody in particular. Taking no chances, Forrester copied his bow. He was still bent when the
Myrmidon announced: "Forrester is here, Your Concupiscence," in a
reverent tone of voice, and backed off a step, narrowly missing
Forrester himself in the process. He waved a hand and Forrester went in. The door shut halfway behind him. The room was perfectly unbelievable. Its rich hangings were purple
velvet, draping a large window that looked out on ...

Forrester gulped. It was impossible to be this high. New York was spread
out below like a toy city. He jerked his eyes away from the window and back to the rest of the
room. It was furnished mainly with couches: big couches, little couches,
puffy ones, spare ones, in felt, velvet, fur, and every other material
Forrester could think of. The rooms were flocked in a pale pink, and on
the floor was a deep-purple rug of a richer pile than Forrester had ever
seen. And on one of the couches, the largest and the softest, she reclined. She was clad only in the diaphanous robes of her calling, and she was
stacked. Beside her, little Maya Wilson would have looked about eight
years old. Her hair was as red as the inside of a blast furnace, and had
about the same effect on Forrester's pulse rate. Her face was a slightly
rounded oval, her body a series of mathematically indescribable curves. Forrester did the only thing he could do. He bowed again, even lower than before. "Come in, William Forrester," said the High Priestess of
Venus/Aphrodite, the veritable Primate of Venus for New York herself, in
a voice that managed to be all at once regal, pleasant and seductive. Forrester, already in, could think of nothing to say. The gaze of Her
Concupiscence fell on the half-open door. "You may retire, Captain," she
said to the waiting Myrmidon. "And allow no one to enter here until I
give notice." "Very well, Your Concupiscence," the Myrmidon said. The door shut. Forrester snapped erect from his bow, and then realized that he could do
nothing but stand there until he had more information. What was the
High Priestess of Aphrodite doing in the Tower of Zeus All-Father
anyway? And--always supposing she had the right to be there, as of
course she must have had--what did she want with William Forrester? He heaved a great sigh. This was turning into an extremely puzzling day. First there had been the message and the card admitting him to the
Tower. Then there had been (the sigh changed in character) Maya Wilson. And then (the sigh changed again, into a faint echo of a groan) the
fight in the _Boat House_. Now he was having an audience with the Primate of Venus for New York. Why? The High Priestess's smile gave him no hint. She raised herself to a
sitting position and patted the couch. "Sit over here," she said. "Next
to me." Then she changed her mind. "No," she added. "First just walk
over here, stand up and turn around. 