



Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            GOLD IN THE SKY

                           By ALAN E. NOURSE

                         ILLUSTRATOR LLEWELLYN

                BOOK-LENGTH NOVEL COMPLETE IN THIS ISSUE

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Amazing Science
Fiction Stories September 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any
evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.] CONTENTS


  1. TROUBLE TIMES TWO

  2. JUPITER EQUILATERAL

  3. TOO MANY WARNINGS

  4. "BETWEEN MARS AND JUPITER..."

  5. THE BLACK RAIDER

  6. THE LAST RUN OF THE SCAVENGER

  7. PRISONERS

  8. THE SCAVENGERS OF SPACE

  9. THE INVISIBLE MAN

 10. THE TRIGGER

 11. THE HAUNTED SHIP

 12. THE SINISTER BONANZA

 13. PINPOINT IN SPACE

 14. THE MISSING ASTEROID

 15. THE FINAL MOVE




YOU WILL MEET--


Greg Hunter. Test pilot--happy only when his life hung in the balance. Tom Hunter. A pioneer--his frontier was hidden in test tubes. Johnny Coombs. A prospector--he returned from the asteroids too soon. Merrill Tawney. An industrialist--he sought plunder even beyond the
stars. Major Briarton. A government man--his creed was law and order. [Illustration: They fought with whatever was handy, not bothering to
figure the odds.] 1. Trouble Times Two


The sun was glowing dull red as it slipped down behind the curving
horizon of Mars, but Gregory Hunter was not able to see it. There was no viewscreen in the ship's cabin; it was too tiny for that. Greg twisted around in the cockpit that had been built just big enough
to hold him, and shifted his long legs against the brace-webbing, trying
to get them comfortable. He knew he was afraid ... but nobody else knew that, not even the
captain waiting at the control board on the satellite, and in spite of
the fear Greg Hunter would not have traded places at this moment with
anyone else in the universe. He had worked too hard and waited too long for this moment. He heard the count-down monitor clicking in his ears, and his hands
clenched into fists. How far from Mars would he be ten minutes from now? He didn't know. Farther than any man had ever traveled before in the
space of ten minutes, he knew, and faster. How far and how fast would
depend on him alone. "All set, Greg?" It was the captain's voice in the earphones. "All set, Captain." "You understand the program?" Greg nodded. "Twenty-four hours out, twenty-four hours back, ninety
degrees to the ecliptic, and all the accelleration I can stand both
ways." Greg grinned to himself. He thought of the months of conditioning he had
gone through to prepare for this run ... the hours in the centrifuge to
build up his tolerance to accelleration, the careful diet, the rigorous
hours of physical conditioning. It was only one experiment, one tiny
step in the work that could someday give men the stars, but to Gregory
Hunter at this moment it was everything. "Good luck, then." The captain cut off, and the blastoff buzzer sounded. He was off. His heart hammered in his throat, and his eyes ached
fiercely, but he paid no attention. His finger crept to the air-speed
indicator, then to the cut-off switch. When the pressure became too
great, when he began to black out, he would press it. But not yet. It was speed they wanted; they had to know how much
accelleration a man could take for how long and still survive, and now
it was up to him to show them. Fleetingly, he thought of Tom ... poor old stick-in-the-mud Tom, working
away in his grubby little Mars-bound laboratory, watching bacteria grow. Tom could never have qualified for a job like this. Tom couldn't even go
into free-fall for ten minutes without getting sick all over the place. Greg felt a surge of pity for his brother, and then a twinge of
malicious anticipation. Wait until Tom heard the reports on _this_ run! It was all right to spend your time poking around with bottles and test
tubes if you couldn't do anything else, but it took something special to
pilot an XP ship for Project Star-Jump. And after this run was over,
even Tom would have to admit it.... There was a lurch, and quite suddenly the enormous pressure was gone. Something was wrong. He hadn't pushed the cut-off button, yet the ship's
engines were suddenly silent. He jabbed at the power switch. Nothing
happened. Then the side-jets sputted, and he was slammed sideways into
the cot. He snapped on the radio speaker. "Control ... can you hear me? Something's gone wrong out here...."

"Nothing's wrong," the captain's voice said in his earphones. "Just sit
tight. I'm bringing you back in. There's a call here from Sun Lake City. They want you down there in a hurry. We'll have to scratch you on this
run." "_Who_ wants me down there?" "The U.N. Council office. Signed by Major Briarton himself and I can't
argue with the Major. We're bringing you in." Greg Hunter sank back, disappointment so thick he could taste it in his
mouth. Sun Lake City! That meant two days at least, one down, one back,
maybe more if connections weren't right. It meant that the captain would
send Morton or one of the others out in his place. It meant.... Suddenly he thought of what else it meant, and a chill ran up his back. There was only one reason Major Briarton would call him in like this. Something had happened to Dad. Greg leaned back in the cot, suddenly tense, as a thousand frightful
possibilities flooded his mind. It could only mean that Dad was in some
kind of trouble. And if anything had happened to Dad....

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun was sinking rapidly toward the horizon when the city finally
came into sight in the distance, but try as he would, Tom Hunter could
not urge more than thirty-five miles an hour from the huge lurching
vehicle he was driving. On an open paved highway the big pillow-wheeled Sloppy Joe would do
sixty in a breeze, but this desert route was far from a paved road. Inside the pressurized passenger cab, Tom gripped the shock-bars with
one arm and the other leg, and jammed the accelerator to the floor. The
engine coughed, but thirty-five was all it would do. Through the windshield Tom could see the endless rolling dunes of the
Martian desert stretching to the horizon on every side. They called Mars
the Red Planet, but it was not red when you were close to it. There were
multitudes of colors here ... yellow, orange, brown, gray, occasional
patches of gray-green ... all shifting and changing in the fading
sunlight. Off to the right were the worn-down peaks of the Mesabi II,
one of the long, low mountain ranges of almost pure iron ore that helped
give the planet its dull red appearance from outer space. And behind
him, near the horizon, the tiny sun glowed orange out of a blue-black
sky. Tom fought the wheel as the Sloppy Joe jounced across a dry creek bed,
and swore softly to himself. Why hadn't he kept his head and waited for
the mail ship that had been due at the Lab to give him a lift back? He'd
have been in Sun Lake City an hour ago ... but the urgency of the
message had driven caution from his mind. A summons from the Mars Coordinator of the U.N. Interplanetary Council
was the same as an order ... but there was more to Tom's haste than
that. There was only one reason that Major Briarton would be calling him
in to Sun Lake City, and that reason meant trouble. Something was wrong. Something had happened to Dad. Now Tom peered up at the dark sky, squinting into the sun. Somewhere out
there between Mars and Jupiter was a no-man's-land of danger, a great
circling ring of space dirt and debris, the Asteroid belt. And somewhere
out there, Dad was working. Tom thought for a moment of the pitiful little mining rig that Roger
Hunter had taken out to the Belt ... the tiny orbit-ship to be used for
headquarters and storage of the ore; the even tinier scout ship, Pete
Racely's old _Scavenger_ that he had sold to Roger Hunter for back taxes
and repairs when he went broke in the Belt looking for his Big Strike. It wasn't much of a mining rig for anybody to use, and the dangers of a
small mining operation in the Asteroid Belt were frightening. It took
skill to bring a little scout-ship in for a landing on an asteroid rock
hardly bigger than the ship itself; it took even more skill to rig the
controlled-Murexide charges to blast the rock into tiny fragments, and
then run out the shiny magnetic net to catch the explosion debris and
bring it in to the hold of the orbit-ship....

Tom Hunter scowled, trying to shake off the feeling of uneasiness that
was nibbling at his mind. Asteroid mining was dangerous ... but Dad was
no novice. Nobody on Mars knew how to handle a mining rig better than
Roger Hunter did. He knew what he was doing out there, there was no real
danger for him or was there....

Roger Hunter, a good man, a gentle and peaceful man, had finally seen
all he could stomach of Jupiter Equilateral and its company mining
policies six months before. He had told them so in plain, simple
language when he turned in his resignation. They didn't try to stop
him ... a man was still free to quit a job on Mars if he wanted to, even
a job with Jupiter Equilateral. But it was an open secret that the big
mining outfit had not liked Roger Hunter's way of resigning, taking half
a dozen of their first-rate mining engineers with him. There had been
veiled threats, rumors of attempts to close the markets to Roger
Hunter's ore, in open violation of U.N. Council policies on Mars....

Tom fought the wheel as the big tractor lumbered up another rise, and
the huge plastic bubble of Sun Lake City came into view far down the
valley below. He thought of Greg. Had Greg been summoned too? He closed his lips
tightly as a wave of anger passed through his mind. If anything had
happened, no matter what, he thought, Greg would be there. Taking over
and running things, as usual. He thought of the last time he had seen
his brother, and then deliberately blocked out the engulfing bitterness. That had been more than a year ago. Maybe Greg had changed since then. But somehow, Tom didn't think so. The Sloppy Joe was on the valley floor now, and ahead the bubble
covering the city was drawing closer. The sun was almost gone; lights
were appearing inside the plastic shielding. Born and raised on Mars,
Tom had seen the teeming cities of Earth only once in his life ... but
to him none of the splendors of the Earth cities could match the simple,
quiet beauty of this Martian outpost settlement. There had been a time
when people had said that Sun Lake City could never be built, that it
could never survive if it were, but with each successive year it grew
larger and stronger, the headquarters city for the planet that had
become the new frontier of Earth. The radiophone buzzed, and the airlock guard hailed him when he returned
the signal. Tom gave his routine ID. He guided the tractor into the
lock, waited until pressure and atmosphere rose to normal, and then
leaped out of the cab. Five minutes later he was walking across the lobby of the Interplanetary
Council building, stepping into the down elevator. Three flights below
he stepped out into the office corridor of the U.N. Interplanetary
Council on Mars. If there was trouble, this was where he would find it. He paused for a minute before the gray plastic door marked MAJOR FRANK
BRIARTON in raised stainless steel letters. Then he pushed open the door
and walked into the ante-room. It was empty. Suddenly he felt a touch on his shoulder. Behind him, a
familiar voice said, "Hello, Twin." *       *       *       *       *

At first glance they looked like carbon copies of each other, although
they were no more identical than identical twins ever are. Greg stood a
good two inches taller than Tom. His shoulders were broad, and there was
a small gray scar over one eye that stood out in contrast to the healthy
tanned color of his face. Tom was of slighter build, and wirier, his
skin much more pale. But they had the same dark hair, the same gray eyes, the same square,
stubborn line to the jaw. They looked at each other for a moment without
speaking. Then Greg grinned and clapped his brother on the shoulder. "So you got here, finally," he said. "I was beginning to think I'd have
to go out on the desert and find you." "Oh, I got here, all right," Tom said. "I see you did too." "Yes," Greg said heavily. "Can't argue with the major, you know." "But what does he want?" "How should I know? All he said was to get down here fast. And now he
isn't even here himself." "Is Dad on Mars?" Tom asked. Greg looked at him. "I don't know." "We could check the register." "I already checked it. He has not logged in, but that doesn't mean
anything." "I suppose not," Tom said glumly. They were silent for a moment. Then Greg said, "Look, what are you
worried about? Nothing could have happened to Dad. He's been mining the
Belt for years." "I know. I just wish he were here, that's all. If he's in some kind of
trouble...."

"What kind of trouble? You're looking for spooks." "Spooks like Jupiter Equilateral, maybe," Tom said. "They could make
plenty of trouble for Dad." "With the U.N. in the driver's seat here? They wouldn't dare. Why do you
think the major rides them so hard with all the claim-filing
regulations? He'd give his right arm for a chance to break that outfit
into pieces." "I still wish somebody had gone out to the Belt with Dad," Tom said. Just then the door opened. The newcomer was a tall, gray-haired man with
U.N. Council stripes on his lapel, and major's rockets on his shoulders. "Sorry I'm late, boys," Major Briarton said. "I'd hoped to be here when
you arrived. I'm sorry to pull you in here like this, but I'm afraid I
had no choice. When did you boys hear from your father last?" They looked at each other. "I saw him six weeks ago," Tom said. "Just
before he left to go out to the Belt again." "Nothing since then?" "Not a word." The major chewed his lip. "Greg?" "I had a note at Christmas, I think. But what...."

"What did he say in the note?" "He said Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. Dad isn't much of a letter
writer." "Nothing at all about what he was doing?" Greg shook his head. "Look, Major, if there's some sort of trouble...."

"Yes, I'm afraid there's trouble," the major said. He looked up at them,
and spread his hands helplessly. "There isn't any easy way to tell you,
but you've got to know. There's been an accident, out in the Belt." "Accident?" Greg said. "A very serious accident. A fuel tank exploded in the scooter your
father was riding back to the _Scavenger_. It must have been very
sudden, and by the time help arrived...." The major broke off, unable to
find words. For a long moment there was utter silence in the room. Outside, an
elevator was buzzing, and a typewriter clicked monotonously somewhere in
the building. Then Tom Hunter broke the silence. "Who was it, Major?" he said. "Who
killed Dad? Tell us, or we'll find out!" 2. Jupiter Equilateral


For a moment, Major Briarton just stared at him. Then he was on his
feet, shaking his head as he came around the desk. "Tom, use your head,"
he said. "It's as much of a shock to me as it is to you, but you can't
afford to jump to false conclusions...."

Tom Hunter looked up bitterly. "He's dead, isn't he?" "Yes, he's dead. He must have died the instant of the explosion...."

"You mean you don't know?" "I wasn't there at the time it happened, no." "Then who was?" *       *       *       *       *

Major Briarton spread his hands helplessly. "Nobody was. Your father was
alone. From what we could tell later, he'd left the _Scavenger_ to land
on one of his claims, using the ship's scooter for the landing. He was
on the way back to the _Scavenger_ when the rear tank exploded. There
wasn't enough left of it to tell what went wrong ... but it was an
accident, there was no evidence to suggest anything else." Tom looked at him. "You really believe that?" "I can only tell you what we found." "Well, I don't believe it for a minute," Tom said angrily. "How long
have you and Dad been friends? Twenty years? Twenty-five? Do you really
think Dad would have an accident with a mining rig?" "I know he was an expert engineer," the major said. "But things can
happen that even an expert can't foresee, mining in the Belt." "Things like a fuel tank exploding? Not to Dad, they would never happen. I don't care what anybody says...."

"Easy, Tom," Greg said. "Well, I won't take it easy. Dad was too careful for something like that
to happen. If he had an accident, somebody _made_ it happen." Greg turned to the major. "What was Dad doing out there?" "Mining." "By himself? No crew at all?" "No, he was alone." "I thought the regulations said there always had to be at least two men
working an asteroid claim." "That's right. Your father had Johnny Coombs with him when he left Sun
Lake City. They signed out as a team ... and then Johnny came back to
Mars on the first shuttle ship." "How come?" "Not even Johnny knows. Your father just sent him back, and there was
nothing we could do about it then. The U.N. has no jurisdiction in the
belt, unless a major crime has been committed." Major Briarton shook his
head helplessly. "If a man is determined to mine a claim all by himself
out there, he can find a dozen different ways to wiggle out of the
regulations." "But Dad would never be that stupid," Greg said. "If he was alone when
it happened, who found him?" "A routine U.N. Patrol ship. When Roger failed to check in at the
regular eight-hour signal, they went out to see what was wrong. But by
the time they reached him, it was too late to help." "I just don't get it," Greg said. "Dad had more sense than to try to
mine out there all by himself." "I know," the major said. "I don't know the answer. I had the Patrol
ship go over the scene of the accident with a comb after they found what
had happened, but there was nothing there to find. It was an accident,
and that's that." "What about Jupiter Equilateral?" Tom said hotly. "Everybody knows they
were out to get Dad ... why don't you find out what _they_ were doing
when it happened, bring them in for questioning...."

"I can't do that, I haven't a scrap of evidence," the major said
wearily. "Why can't you? You're the Mars Coordinator, aren't you? You act like
you're scared of them." Major Briarton's lips tightened angrily. "All right, since you put it
that way ... I _am_ scared of them. They're big, and they're powerful. If they had their way, there wouldn't be any United Nations control on
Mars, there wouldn't be _anybody_ to fight them and keep them in check. There wouldn't be any independent miners out in the Belt, either,
because they'd all be bought out or dead, and Earth would pay through
the nose for every ounce of metal that they got from the Asteroid Belt. That company has been trying to drive the U.N. off Mars for thirty
years, and they've come so close to it that it scares me plenty." He
pushed his chair back sharply and rose to his feet. "And that is
exactly why I refuse to stir up a mess over this thing, unhappy as
it is, without something more than suspicions and rumors to back me
up ... because all Jupiter Equilateral needs is one big issue to make us
look like fools out here, and we're through." He crossed the room to a wall cabinet, opened it, and pulled out a
scarred aluminum box. "We found this in the cabin of the _Scavenger_. I
thought you boys might want it." They both recognized it instantly ... the battered old spacer's pack
that Roger Hunter had used for as long as they could remember. It seemed
to them, suddenly, as if a part of him had appeared here in the room
with them. Greg looked at the box and turned away. "You open it," he
said to Tom in a sick voice. There was nothing much inside ... some clothing, a pipe and tobacco
pouch, a jack knife, half a dozen other items so familiar that Tom could
hardly bear to touch them. At the bottom of the pack was the heavy
leather gun case which had always held Roger Hunter's ancient .44
revolver. Tom dropped it back without even opening the flap. He closed
the box and took a deep breath. "Then you really believe that it was an
accident and nothing more?" he said to the major. Major Briarton shook his head. "What I think or don't think doesn't make
any difference. It just doesn't matter. In order to do anything, I've
got to have evidence, and there just isn't any evidence. I can't even
take a ship out there for a second look, with the evidence I have, and
that's all there is to it." "But you think that maybe it wasn't an accident, just the same," Tom
pursued. The major hesitated. Then he shook his head again. "I'm sorry, but I've
got to stand on what I've said. And I think you'd better stand on it,
too. There's nothing else to be done." *       *       *       *       *

It should have been enough, but it wasn't. As Tom Hunter walked with his
brother down the broad Upper Ramp to the business section of Sun Lake
City, he could not shake off the feeling of helpless anger, the growing
conviction that Roger Hunter's death involved something more than the
tragic accident in space that Major Briarton had insisted it was. "He didn't tell us everything he knew," Tom said fiercely. "He didn't
say everything he wanted to say, either. He doesn't think it was an
accident any more than I do." "How do you know, are you a mind reader?" "No." "Well, Dad wasn't a superman, either. He was taking an awful risk,
trying to work a mining rig by himself, and he had a bad break. Why do
you have to have somebody to blame for it?" "Keep talking," Tom said. "You'll convince yourself yet." Greg just jammed his hands in his pockets, and they walked in silence
for a moment. For Tom and Greg Hunter, Sun Lake City had always been home. Now they
walked along the Main Concourse, Tom with the aluminum box under his
arm, Greg with his own spacer's pack thrown over his shoulder. They
didn't talk; rather than being drawn closer by the news of the tragedy,
it seemed that they had drawn farther apart, as though the one common
link that had held them together had suddenly been broken. Finally Tom broke the silence. "At least there's one thing we can do,"
he said. "I'm going to call Johnny Coombs." He shortly found a phone booth and dialed a number. Johnny had been a
friend of the family for years; he and Roger Hunter had been partners in
many mining ventures in the Asteroid Belt before Roger had taken his
position with Jupiter Equilateral. If Johnny had any suspicions that
Roger Hunter's accident had been more than an accident, he certainly
would not hesitate to voice them....

After a dozen rings, Tom hung up, tried another number. There was no
answer there, either. Frowning, Tom rang the city's central paging
system. "Put in a personal call for Johnny Coombs," he said when the
"record" signal flashed on. "Tell him to contact the Hunters when he
comes in. We'll be at home...."

They resumed their silent walk. When they reached H wing on the fourth
level, they turned right down an apartment corridor, and stopped in
front of a familiar doorway. Tom pressed his palm against the
lock-plate, and the door swung open. It was home to them, the only home they had ever known. Soft lights
sprang up on the walls of the apartment as the door opened. Tom saw the
old bookcases lining the walls, the drafting-board and light at the far
end of the room, the simple chairs and dining table, the door which led
into the bedroom and kitchen beyond. The room had the slightly
disheveled look that it had had ever since Mom had died ... a slipper on
the floor here, a book face down on the couch there.... It looked as though Dad had just stepped out for an hour or so. Tom was three steps into the room before he saw the visitor. The man was sitting comfortably in Roger Hunter's easy chair, a short,
fat man with round pink cheeks that sagged a little and a double chin
that rested on his neck scarf. There were two other men in the room,
both large and broad-shouldered; one of them nodded to the fat man, and
moved to stand between the boys and the door. The fat man was out of his seat before the boys could speak, smiling at
them and holding out his hand. "I wanted to be sure to see you before
you left the city," he was saying, "so we just came on in to wait. I
hope you don't mind our ... butting in, so to speak." He chuckled,
looking from one twin to the other. "You don't know me, I suppose. I'm
Merrill Tawney. Representing Jupiter Equilateral, you know." Tom took the card he was holding out, looked at the name and the tiny
gold symbol in the corner, a letter "J" in the center of a triangle. He
handed the card to Greg. "I've seen you before," he told the fat man. "What do you want with us?" Tawney smiled again, spreading his hands. "We've heard about the
tragedy, of course. A shocking thing ... Roger was one of our group so
recently. We wanted you to know that if there is anything at all we can
do to help, we'd be only too glad...."

"Thanks," Greg said. "But we're doing just fine." Tawney's smile tightened a little, but he hung onto it. "I always felt
close to your father," he said. "All of us at Jupiter Equilateral did. We were all sorry to see him leave." "I bet you were," Greg said, "he was the best mining engineer you ever
had. But Dad could never stand liars, or crooked ways of doing
business." One of the men started for Greg, but the fat man stopped him with a wave
of his hand. "We had our differences of opinion," he said. "We saw
things one way, your father saw them another way. But he was a fine man,
one of the finest...."

"Look, Mr. Tawney, you'd better say what you came to say and get out of
here," Greg said dangerously, "before we give your friends here
something to do." "I merely came to offer you some help," Tawney said. He was no longer
smiling. "Since your father's death, you two have acquired certain
responsibilities. I thought we might relieve you of some of them." "What sort of responsibilities?" "You have an unmanned orbit-ship which is now a derelict in the Asteroid
Belt. You have a scout-ship out there also. You can't just leave them
there as a navigation hazard to every ship traveling in the sector. There are also a few mining claims which aren't going to be of much
value to you now." "I see," Greg said. "Are you offering to buy Dad's mining rig?" "Well, I doubt very much that we'd have any use for it, as such. But we
could save you the trouble of going out there to haul it in." "That's very thoughtful," Greg said. "How much are you offering?" Tom looked up in alarm. "Wait a minute," he said. "That rig's not for
sale...."

"How much?" Greg repeated. "Forty thousand dollars," Merrill Tawney said. "Ship, rig and claims. We'll even pay the transfer tax." Tom stared at the man, wondering if he had heard right. He knew what
Roger Hunter had paid for the rig; he had been with Dad when the papers
were signed. Tawney's offer was three times as much as the rig was
worth. But Greg was shaking his head. "I don't think we could sell at that
price." The fat man's hands fluttered. "You understand that those ships are
hardly suited to a major mining operation like ours," he said, "and the
claims...." He dismissed them with a wave of his hand. "Still, we'd want
you to be happy with the price. Say, forty-five thousand?" Greg hesitated, shook his head again. "I guess we'd better think it
over, Mr. Tawney." "Fifty thousand is absolutely the top," Tawney said sharply. "I have the
papers right here, drawn up for your signatures, but I'm afraid we can't
hold the offer open." "I don't know, we might want to do some mining ourselves," Greg said. "For all we know, Dad might have struck some rich ore on one of those
claims." Tawney laughed. "I hardly think so. Those claims were all Jupiter
Equilateral rejects. Our own engineers found nothing but low grade ore
on any of them." "Still, it might be fun to look." "It could be very expensive fun. Asteroid mining is a dangerous
business, even for experts. For amateurs...." Tawney spread his hands. "Accidents occur...."

"Yes, we've heard about those accidents," Greg said coldly. "I don't
think we're quite ready to sell, Mr. Tawney. We may never be ready to
sell to you, so don't stop breathing until we call you. Now if there's
nothing else, why don't you take your friends and go somewhere else?" The fat man scowled; he started to say something more, then saw the look
on Greg's face, and shrugged. "I'd advise you to give it some careful
thought," he said as he started for the door. "It might be very foolish
for you to try to use that rig." Smiling, Greg closed the door in his face. Then he turned and winked at
Tom. "Great fellow, Mr. Tawney. He almost had me sold." "So I noticed," Tom said. "For a while I thought you were serious." "Well, we found out how high they'd go. That's a very generous outfit
Mr. Tawney works for." "Or else a very crooked one," Tom said. "Are you wondering the same
thing I'm wondering?" "Yes," Greg said slowly. "I think I am." "Then that makes three of us," a heavy voice rumbled from the bedroom
door. *       *       *       *       *

Johnny Coombs was a tall man, so thin he was almost gangling, with a
long nose and shaggy eyebrows jutting out over his eyes. With his rudely
cropped hair and his huge hands, he looked like a caricature of a
frontier Mars-farmer, but the blue eyes under the eyebrows were not
dull. "Johnny!" Tom cried. "We were trying to find you." "I know," Johnny said. "So have a lot of other people, includin' your
friends there." "Well, did you hear what Tawney wanted?" "I'm not so quick on my feet any more," Johnny Coombs said, "but I got
nothin' wrong with my ears." He scratched his jaw and looked up sharply
at Greg. "Not many people nowadays get a chance to bargain with Merrill
Tawney." Greg shrugged. "He named a price and I didn't like it." "Three times what the rig is worth," Coombs said. "That's what I didn't like," Greg said. "That outfit wouldn't give us a
break like that just for old times' sake. Do you think they would?" "Well, I don't know," Johnny said slowly. "Back before they built the
city here, they used to have rats getting into the grub. Came right down
off the ships. Got rid of most of them, finally, but it seems to me
we've still got some around, even if they've got different shapes now." He jerked his thumb toward the bedroom door. "In case you're wondering,
that's why I was standin' back there all this time ... just to make sure
you didn't sell out to Tawney no matter what price he offered." Tom jumped up excitedly. "Then you know something about Dad's accident!" "No, I can't say I do. I wasn't there." "Do you really think it was an accident?" "Can't prove it wasn't." "But at least you've got some ideas," Tom said. "Takes more than ideas to make a case," he said at length. "But there's
one thing I do know. I've got no proof, not a shred of it, but I'm sure
of one thing just as sure as I'm on Mars." He looked at the twins
thoughtfully. "Your dad wasn't just prospecting, out in the Belt. He'd
run onto something out there, something big." The twins looked at him. "Run onto something?" Greg said. "You mean...."

"I mean I think your dad hit a Big Strike out there, rich metal, a real
bonanza lode. Maybe the biggest strike that's ever been made," the miner
said slowly. "And then somebody got to him before he could bring it in." 3. Too Many Warnings


For a moment, neither of the boys could say anything at all. From the time they had learned to talk, they had heard stories and tales
that the miners and prospectors told about the Big Strike, the pot of
gold at the end of the rainbow, the wonderful, elusive goal of every man
who had ever taken a ship into the Asteroid Belt. For almost a hundred and fifty years ... since the earliest days of
space exploration ... there had been miners prospecting in the
Asteroids. Out there, beyond the orbit of Mars and inside the orbit of
Jupiter, were a hundred thousand ... maybe a hundred million, for all
anybody knew ... chunks of rock, metal and debris, spinning in silent
orbit around the sun. Some few of the Asteroids were big enough to be
called planets ... Ceres, five hundred miles in diameter; Juno, Vesta,
Pallas, half a dozen more. A few hundred others, ranging in size from
ten to a hundred miles in diameter, had been charted and followed in
their orbits by the observatories, first from Earth's airless Moon, then
from Mars. There were tens of thousands more that had never been
charted. Together they made up the Asteroid Belt, spread out in space
like a broad road around the sun, echoing the age-old call of the
bonanza. For there was wealth in the Asteroids ... wealth beyond a man's wildest
dreams ... if only he could find it. Earth, with its depleted iron ranges, its exhausted tin and copper
mines, and its burgeoning population, was hungry for metal. Earth needed
steel, tin, nickel, and zinc; more than anything, Earth needed
ruthenium, the rare-earth catalyst that made the huge solar energy
converters possible. Mars was rich in the ores of these metals ... but the ores were buried
deep in the ground. The cost of mining them, and of lifting the heavy
ore from Mars' gravitational field and carrying it to Earth was
prohibitive. Only the finest carbon steel, and the radioactive metals,
smelted and purified on Mars and transported to Earth, could be made
profitable. But from the Asteroid Belt, it was a different story. There was no
gravity to fight on the tiny asteroids. On these chunks of debris, the
metals lay close to the surface, easy to mine. Ships orbiting in the
Belt could fill their holds with their precious metal cargoes and
transfer them in space to the interplanetary orbit-ships spinning back
toward Earth. It was hard work, and dangerous work; most of the ore was
low-grade, and brought little return. But always there was the lure of
the Big Strike, the lode of almost-pure metal that could bring a fortune
back to the man who found it. *       *       *       *       *

A few such strikes had been made. Forty years before a single claim had
brought its owner seventeen million dollars in two years. A dozen other
men had stumbled onto fortunes in the Belt ... but such metal-rich
fragments were grains of sand in a mighty river. For every man who found
one, a thousand others spent years looking and then perished in the
fruitless search. And now Johnny Coombs was telling them that their father had been one of
that incredible few. "You really think Dad hit a bonanza lode out there?" "That's what I said." "Did you see it with your own eyes?" "No." "You weren't even out there with him!" "No." "Then why are you so sure he found something?" "Because he told me so," Johnny Coombs said quietly. The boys looked at each other. "He actually _said_ he'd found a rich
lode?" Tom asked eagerly. "Not exactly," Johnny said. "Matter of fact, he never actually told me
_what_ he'd found. He needed somebody to sign aboard the _Scavenger_
with him in order to get a clearance to blast off, but he never did plan
to take me out there with him. 'I can't take you now, Johnny,' he told
me. 'I've found something out there, but I've got to work it alone for a
while.' I asked him what he'd found, and he just gave me that funny
little grin of his and said, 'Never mind what it is, it's big enough for
both of us. You just keep your mouth shut, and you'll find out soon
enough.' And then he wouldn't say another word until we were homing in
on the shuttle ship to drop me off." Johnny finished his coffee and pushed the cup aside. "I knew he wasn't
joking. He was excited, and I think he was scared, too. Just before I
left him, he said, 'There's one other thing, Johnny. Things might not
work out quite the way I figure them, and if they don't ... make sure
the twins know what I've told you.' I told him I would, and headed back. That was the last I heard from him until the Patrol ship found him
floating in space with a torn-open suit and a ruined scooter floating a
few miles away." "Do you think that Jupiter Equilateral knew Dad had found something?" Tom asked. "Who knows? I'm sure that _he_ never told them, but it's awful hard to
keep a secret like that, and they sound awful eager to buy that rig,"
Johnny Coombs said. "Yes, and it doesn't make sense. I mean, if they were responsible for
Dad's accident, why didn't they just check in for him on schedule and
then quietly bring in their rig to jump the claim?" "Maybe they couldn't find it," Johnny said. "If they'd killed your dad,
they wouldn't have dared hang around very long right then. Even if
they'd kept the signal going, a Patrol ship might have come into the
region any time. And if a U.N. Patrol ship ever caught them working a
dead man's claim without reporting the dead man, the suit would really
start to leak." Johnny shook his head. "Remember, your Dad had a dozen
claims out there. They might have had to scout the whole works to find
the right one. Much easier to do it out in the open, with your
signatures on a claim transfer. But one thing is sure ... if they _knew_
what Roger found out there, and where it was, Tawney would never be
offering you triple price for the rig." "Then whatever Dad found is still out there," Tom said. "I'd bet my last dime on it." "There might even be something to show that the accident wasn't an
accident," Tom went on. "Something even the Major would have to admit
was evidence." Johnny Coombs pursed his lips, looking up at Tom. "Might be," he
conceded. "Well, what are we waiting for? We turned Tawney's offer down ... he
might be sending a crew out to jump the claim right now." "If he hasn't already," Johnny said. "Then we've got to get out there." Johnny turned to Greg. "You could pilot us out and handle the
navigation, and as for Tom...."

"As for Tom, he could get sick all over the place and keep us busy just
taking care of him," Greg said sourly. "You and me, yes. Not Tom. You
don't know that boy in a spaceship." Tom started to his feet, glaring at his brother. "That's got nothing to
do with it...."

"It's true, isn't it? You'd be a big help out there." Johnny looked at Tom. "You always get sick in free fall?" "Look, let's be reasonable," Greg said. "You'd just be in the way. There
are plenty of things you could do right here, and Johnny and I could
handle the rig alone...."

Tom faced his brother angrily. "If you think I'm going to stay here and
keep myself company, you're crazy," he said. "This is one show you're
not going to run, so just quit trying. If you go out there, I go." Greg shrugged. "Okay, Twin. It's your stomach, not mine." "Then let me worry about it." "I hope," Johnny said, "that that's the worst we have to worry about. Let's get started planning." *       *       *       *       *

Time was the factor uppermost in their minds. They knew that even under
the best of conditions, it could take weeks to outfit and prepare for a
run out to the Belt. A ship had to be leased and fueled; there were
supplies to lay in. There was the problem of clearance to take care of,
claims to be verified and spotted, orbit coordinates to be computed and
checked ... a thousand details to be dealt with, anyone of which might
delay embarkation from an hour to a day or more. It was not surprising that Tom and Greg were dubious when Johnny told
them they could be ready to clear ground in less than twenty-four hours. Even knowing that Merrill Tawney might already have a mining crew at
work on Roger Hunter's claims, they could not believe that the red tape
of preparation and clearance could be cut away so swiftly. They underestimated Johnny Coombs. Six hours after he left them, he was back with a signed lease giving
them the use of a scout-ship and fuel to take them out to the Belt and
back again; the ship was in the Sun Lake City racks waiting for them
whenever they were ready. "What kind of a ship?" Greg wanted to know. "A Class III Flying Dutchman with overhauled atomics and hydrazine
side-jets," Johnny said, waving the transfer order. "Think you can fly
it?" Greg whistled. "Can I? I trained in a Dutchman ... just about the
fastest scouter there is. What condition?" "Lousy ... but it's fueled, with six weeks' supplies in the hold, and it
doesn't cost us a cent. Courtesy of a friend. You'll have to check it
over, but it'll do." They inspected the ship, a weatherbeaten scouter that looked like a
relic of the '90's. Inside there were signs of many refittings and
overhauls, but the atomics were well shielded, and it carried a
surprising chemical fuel auxiliary for the cabin size. Greg disappeared
into the engine room, and Tom and Johnny left him testing valves and
circuits while they headed down to the U.N. Registry office in the
control tower. On the way Johnny outlined the remaining outfitting steps. Tom would be
responsible for getting the clearance permit through Registry; Johnny
would check out all supplies, and then contact the observatory for the
orbit coordinates of Roger Hunter's claims. "I thought the orbits were mapped on the claim papers," Tom said. "I
mean, every time an asteroid is claimed, the orbit has to be
charted...."

"That's right, but the orbit goes all the way around the sun. We know
where the _Scavenger_ was when the Patrol ship found her ... but she's
been travelling in orbit ever since. The observatory computer will
pinpoint her for us and chart a collision course so we can cut out and
meet her instead of trailing her for a week. Do you have the crew-papers
Greg and I signed?" "Right here." They were stepping off the ramp below the ship when a man loomed up out
of the shadows. It was a miner Tom had never seen before. Johnny nodded
as he approached. "Any news, Jack?" "Quiet as a church," the man said. "We'll be held up another eight hours at least," Johnny said. "Don't go
to sleep on us, Jack." "Don't worry about us sleepin'," the man said grimly. "There's been
nobody around but yourselves, so far ... except the clearance
inspector." Johnny looked up sharply. "You check his papers?" "_And_ his prints. He was all right." Johnny took Tom's arm, and they headed through the gate toward the
control tower. "I guess I'm just naturally suspicious," he grinned, "but
I'd sure hate to have a broken cut-off switch, or a fuel valve go out of
whack at just the wrong moment." "You think Tawney would dare to try something here?" Tom said. "Never hurts to check. We've got our hands full for a few hours getting
set, so I just asked my friends to keep an eye on things. Always did say
that a man who's going to gamble is smart to cover his bets." At the control tower they parted, and Tom walked into the clearance
office. Johnny's watch-man had startled him, and for the first time he
felt a chill of apprehension. If they were right ... if this trip to the
Belt were not a wild goose chase from the very start ... then Roger
Hunter's accident had been no accident at all. Quite suddenly, Tom felt very thankful that Johnny Coombs had
friends....

       *       *       *       *       *

"I don't like it," the Major said, facing Tom and Greg across the desk
in the U.N. Registry office below the control tower. "You've gotten an
idea in your heads, and you just won't listen to reason." Somewhere above them, Tom could hear the low-pitched rumble of a
scout-ship blasting from its launching rack. "All we want to do is go
out and work Dad's claim," he said for the second time. "I know perfectly well what you want to do, that's why I told the people
here to alert me if you tried to clear a ship. You don't know what
you're doing ... and I'm not going to sign those clearance papers." "Why not?" Greg said. "Because you're going out there asking for trouble, that's why not." "But you told us before that there wasn't any trouble. Dad had an
accident, that was all. So how could we get in trouble?" The Major's face was an angry red. He started to say something, then
stopped, and scowled at them instead. They met his stare. Finally he
threw up his hands. "All right, so I can't legally stop you," he said. "But at least I can beg you to use your heads. You're wasting time and
money on a foolish idea. You're walking into dangers and risks that you
can't handle, and I hate to see it happen. "Mining in the Belt is a job for experienced men, not rank novices." "Johnny Coombs is no novice." "No, but he's lost his wits, taking you two out there." "Well, are there any other dangers you have in mind?" Once more the Major searched for words, and failed to find them. "No,"
he sighed, "and you wouldn't listen if I did." "It seems everybody is warning us about how dangerous this trip is
likely to be," Greg said quietly. "Last night it was Merrill Tawney. He
offered to buy us out, he was so eager for a deal that he offered us a
fantastic price. Then Johnny tells us that Dad mined some rich ore when
he was out there on his last trip, but never got a chance to bring it in
because of his ... accident. Up until now I haven't been so sure Dad
_didn't_ just have an accident, but now I'm beginning to wonder. Too
many people have been warning us...."

"You're determined to go out there, then?" "That's about right." The Major picked up the clearance papers, glanced at them quickly,
and signed them. "All right, you're cleared. I hate to do it, but I
suppose I'd go with you if the law would let me. And I'll tell you one
thing ... if you can find a single particle of evidence that will link
Jupiter Equilateral or anybody else to your father's death, I'll use all
the power I have to break them." He handed the papers back to Tom. "But
be careful, because if Jupiter Equilateral is involved in it, they're
going to play dirty." At the door he turned. "Good trip, and good luck." Tom folded the papers and stuck them thoughtfully into his pocket. They met Johnny Coombs in the Registry offices upstairs; Tom patted his
pocket happily. "We're cleared in forty-five minutes," he said. Johnny grinned. "Then we're all set." They headed up the ramp, reached
ground level, and started out toward the launching racks. At the far end of the field a powerful Class I Ranger, one of the
Jupiter Equilateral scout fleet, was settling down into its slot in a
perfect landing maneuver. The triangle-and-J-insignia gleamed brightly
on her dark hull. She was a rich, luxurious-looking ship. Many miners on
Mars could remember when Jupiter Equilateral had been nothing more than
a tiny mining company working claims in the remote "equilateral" cluster
of asteroids far out in Jupiter's orbit. Gradually the company had grown
and flourished, accumulating wealth and power as it grew, leaving behind
it a thousand half-confirmed stories of cheating, piracy, murder and
theft. Other small mining outfits had fallen by the wayside until now
over two-thirds of all asteroid mining claims were held by Jupiter
Equilateral, and the small independent miners were forced more and more
to take what was left. They reached the gate to the Dutchman's launching slot and entered. Inside the ship Tom and Johnny strapped down while Greg made his final
check-down on the engines, gyros and wiring. The cabin was a tiny vault,
with none of the spacious "living room" of the orbit-ships. Tom leaned
back in the accelleration cot, and listened to the count-down signals
that came at one minute intervals now. In the earphones he could hear
the sporadic chatter between Greg and the control tower. No hint that
this was anything but a routine blastoff.... But there was trouble ahead, Tom was certain of that. Everybody on Mars
was aware that Roger Hunter's sons were heading out to the Belt to pick
up where he had left off. Greg had secured a leave of absence from
Project Star-Jump ... unhappily granted, even though his part in their
program had already been disrupted. Even they had heard the rumors that
were adrift....

And if there was trouble now, they were on their own. The Asteroid Belt
was a wilderness, untracked and unexplored, and except for an almost
insignificant fraction, completely unknown. If there was trouble out
there, there would be no one to help. Somewhere below the engines roared, and Tom felt the weight on his
chest, sudden and breath-taking. They were on their way. 4. "Between Mars and Jupiter...."


After all the tension of preparing for it, the trip out seemed
interminable. They were all impatient to reach their destination. During blastoff and
accelleration they had watched Mars dwindle to a tiny red dot; then time
seemed to stop altogether, and there was nothing to do but wait. For the first eight hours of free fall, after the engines had cut out,
Tom was violently ill. He fought it desperately, gulping the pills
Johnny offered and trying to keep them down. Gradually the waves of
nausea subsided, but it was a full twenty-four hours before Tom felt
like stirring from his cot to take up the shipboard routine. And then there was nothing for him to do. Greg handled the navigation
skilfully, while Johnny kept radio contact and busied himself in the
storeroom, so Tom spent hours at the viewscreen. On the second day he
spotted a tiny chunk of rock that was unquestionably an asteroid moving
swiftly toward them. It passed at a tangent ten thousand miles ahead of
them, and Greg started work at the computer, feeding in the data tapes
that would ultimately guide the ship to its goal. *       *       *       *       *

Pinpointing a given spot in the Asteroid Belt was a gargantuan task,
virtually impossible without the aid of the ship's computer to compute
orbits, speeds, and distances. Tom spent more and more time at the
viewscreen, searching the blackness of space for more asteroid
sightings. But except for an occasional tiny bit of debris hurtling by,
he saw nothing but the changeless panorama of stars. Johnny Coombs found him there on the third day, and laughed at his sour
expression. "Gettin' impatient?" "Just wondering when we'll reach the Belt, is all," Tom said. Johnny chuckled. "Hope you're not holdin' your breath. We've already
been _in_ the Belt for the last forty-eight hours." "Then where are all the asteroids?" Tom said. "Oh, they're here. You just won't see many of them. People always think
there ought to be dozens of them around, like sheep on a hillside, but
it just doesn't work that way." Johnny peered at the screen. "Of course,
to an astronomer the Belt is just loaded ... hundreds of thousands of
chunks, all sizes from five hundred miles in diameter on down. But
actually, those chunks are all tens of thousands of miles apart, and the
Belt _looks_ just as empty as the space between Mars and Earth." "Well, I don't see how we're ever going to find one particular rock,"
Tom said, watching the screen gloomily. "It's not too hard. Every asteroid has its own orbit around the sun, and
everyone that's been registered as a claim has the orbit charted. The
one we want isn't where it was when your Dad's body was found ... it's
been travelling in its orbit ever since. But by figuring in the fourth
dimension, we can locate it." Tom blinked. "Fourth dimension?" "Time," Johnny Coombs said. "If we just used the three linear
dimensions ... length, width and depth ... we'd end up at the place where
the asteroid _was_, but that wouldn't help us much because it's been
moving in orbit ever since the Patrol Ship last pinpointed it. So we
figure in a fourth dimension ... the time that's passed since it was last
spotted ... and we can chart a collision course with it, figure out just
where _we'll_ have to be to meet it." It was the first time that the idea of time as a "dimension" had ever
made sense to Tom. They talked some more, until Johnny started bringing
in fifth and sixth dimensions, and problems of irrational space and
hyperspace, and got even himself confused. "Anyway," Tom said, "I'm glad we've got a computer aboard." "And a navigator," Johnny added. "Don't sell your brother short." "Fat chance of that. Greg would never stand for it." Johnny frowned. "You lads don't like each other very much, do you?" he
said. Tom was silent for a moment. Then he looked away. "We get along, I
guess." "Maybe. But sometimes just gettin' along isn't enough. Especially when
there's trouble. Give it a thought, when you've got a minute or two...."

Later, the three of them went over the computer results together. Johnny
and Greg fed the navigation data into the ship's drive mechanism,
checking and rechecking speeds and inclination angles. Already the
Dutchman's orbital speed was matching the speed of Roger Hunter's
asteroid ... but the orbit had to be tracked so that they would arrive
at the exact point in space to make contact. Tom was assigned to the
viewscreen, and the long wait began. He spotted their destination point an hour before the computer had
predicted contact ... at first a tiny pinpoint of reflected light in the
scope, gradually resolving into two pinpoints, then three in a tiny
cluster. Greg cut in the rear and lateral jets momentarily, stabilizing
their contact course; the dots grew larger. Ten minutes later, Tom could see their goal clearly in the
viewscreen ... the place where Roger Hunter had died. *       *       *       *       *

It was neither large nor small for an asteroid, an irregular chunk of
rock and metal, perhaps five miles in diameter, lighted only by the dull
reddish glow from the dime-sized sun. Like many such jagged chunks of
debris that sprinkled the Belt, this asteroid did not spin on any axis,
but constantly presented the same face to the sun. Just off the bright side the orbit-ship floated, stable in its orbit
next to the big rock, but so small in comparison that it looked like a
tiny glittering toy balloon. And clamped on its rack on the orbit-ship's
side, airlock to airlock, was the _Scavenger_, the little scout ship
that Roger Hunter had brought out from Mars on his last journey. While Greg maneuvered the Dutchman into the empty landing rack below the
_Scavenger_ on the hull of the orbit-ship, Johnny scanned the blackness
around them through the viewscope, a frown wrinkling his forehead. "Do you see anybody?" Tom asked. "Not a sign ... but I'm really looking for other rocks. I can see three
that aren't too far away, but none of them have claim marks. This one
must have been the only one Roger was working." They stared at the ragged surface of the planetoid. Raw veins of
metallic ore cut through it with streaks of color, but most of the
sun-side showed only the dull gray of iron and granite. There was
nothing unusual about the surface that Tom could see. "Could there be
anything on the dark side?" "Could be," Johnny said. "We'll have to go over it foot by foot ... but
first, we should go through the orbit-ship and the _Scavenger_. If the
Patrol ship missed anything, we want to know it." The interior of the orbit-ship was dark. It spun slowly on its axis,
giving them just enough weight so they would not float free whenever
they moved. Their boots clanged on the metal decks as they climbed up
the curving corridor toward the control cabin. Then Johnny threw a light switch, and they stared around them in
amazement. The cabin was a shambles. Everything that was not bolted down had been
ripped open and thrown aside. Greg whistled through his teeth. "The Major said the Patrol crew had
gone through the ship ... but he didn't say they'd wrecked it." "They didn't," Johnny said grimly. "No Patrol ship would ever do this. Somebody else has been here since." He turned to the control panel,
flipped switches, checked gauges. "Hydroponics are all right. Atmosphere
is still good; we can take off these helmets. Fuel looks all right,
storage holds ..." He shook his head. "They weren't looting, but they
were looking for something, all right. Let's look around and see if they
missed anything." It took them an hour to survey the wreckage. Not a compartment had been
missed. Even the mattresses on the accelleration cots had been torn
open, the spring-stuffing tossed about helter-skelter. Tom went through
the lock into the _Scavenger_; the scout ship too had been searched,
rapidly but thoroughly. But there was no sign of anything that Roger Hunter might have found. Back in the control cabin Johnny was checking the ship's log. The old
entries were on microfilm, stored on their spools near the reader. More
recent entries were still recorded on tape. From the jumbled order,
there was no doubt that marauders had examined them. Johnny ran through
them nevertheless, but there was nothing of interest. Routine
navigational data; a record of the time of contact with the asteroid; a
log of preliminary observations on the rock; nothing more. The last tape
recorded the call-schedule Roger Hunter had set up with the Patrol, a
routine precaution used by all miners, to bring help if for some reason
they should fail to check in on schedule. There was no hint in the log of any extraordinary discovery. "Are any tapes missing?" Greg wanted to know. "Doesn't look like it. There's one here for each day-period." "I wonder," Tom said. "Dad always kept a personal log. You know, a sort
of a diary, on microfilm." He peered into the film storage bin, checked
through the spools. Then, from down beneath the last row of spools he
pulled out a slightly smaller spool. "Here's something our friends
missed, I bet." It was not really a diary, just a sequence of notes, calculations and
ideas that Roger Hunter had jotted down and microfilmed from time to
time. The entries on the one spool went back for several years. Tom fed
the spool into the reader, and they stared eagerly at the last few
entries. A series of calculations, covering several pages, but with no notes to
indicate what, exactly, Roger Hunter had been calculating. "Looks like
he was plotting an orbit," Greg said. "But what orbit? And why? Nothing
here to tell." "It must have been important, though, or Dad wouldn't have filmed the
pages," Tom said. "Anything else?" Another sheet with more calculations. Then a short paragraph written in
Roger Hunter's hurried scrawl. "No doubt now what it is," the words
said. "Wish Johnny were here, show him a _real_ bonanza, but he'll know
soon enough if...."

They stared at the scribbled, uncompleted sentence. Then Johnny Coombs
let out a whoop. "I told you he found something! And he found it _here_,
not somewhere else." "Hold it," Greg said, peering at the film reader. "There's something
more on the last page, but I can't read it." Tom blinked at the entry. "'Inter Jovem et Martem planetam interposui,'"
he read. He scratched his head. "That's Latin, and it's famous, too. Kepler wrote it, back before the asteroids were discovered. 'Between
Jupiter and Mars I will put a planet.'" Greg and Johnny looked at each other. "I don't get it," Greg said. "Dad told me about that once," Tom said. "Kepler couldn't understand
the long jump between Mars and Jupiter, when Venus and Earth and Mars
were so close together. He figured there ought to be a planet out
here ... and he was right, in a way. There wasn't any one planet, unless
you'd call Ceres a planet, but it wasn't just empty space between Mars
and Jupiter either. The asteroids were here." "But why would Dad be writing that down?" Greg asked. "And what has it
got to do with what he found out here?" He snapped off the reader switch
angrily. "I don't understand any of this, and I don't like it. If Dad
found something out here, where is it? And who tore this ship apart
after the Patrol ship left?" "Probably the same ones that caused the 'accident' in the first place,"
Johnny said. "But why did they come back?" Greg protested. "If they killed Dad, they
must have known what he'd found before they killed him." "You'd think so," Johnny conceded. "Then why take the risk of coming back here again?" "Maybe they _didn't_ know," Tom said thoughtfully. "What do you mean?" "I mean maybe they killed him too soon. Maybe they thought they knew
what he'd found and where it was ... and then found out that they
didn't, after all. Maybe Dad hid it...."

Johnny Coombs shook his head. "No way a man can hide an ore strike." "But suppose Dad did, somehow, and whoever killed him couldn't find it? It would be too late to make him tell them. They'd _have_ to come back
and look again, wouldn't they? And from the way they went about it, it
looks as though they weren't having much luck." "Then whatever Dad found would still be here, somewhere," Greg said. "That's right." "But where? There's nothing on this ship." "Maybe not," Tom said, "but I'd like to take a look at that asteroid
before we give up." *       *       *       *       *

They paused in the big ore-loading lock to reclamp their pressure
suit helmets, and looked down at the jagged chunk of rock a hundred
yards below them. In the lock they had found scooters ... the little
one-man propulsion units so commonly used for short distance work in
space ... but decided not to use them. "They're clumsy," Johnny said,
"and the bumper units in your suits will do just as well for this
distance." He looked down at the rock. "I'll take the center section. You each take an edge and work in. Look for any signs of work on the
surface ... chisel marks, Murexide charges, anything." "What about the dark side?" Greg asked. "If we want to see anything there, we'll either have to rig up lights or
turn the rock around," Johnny said. "Let's cover this side first and see
what we come up with." He turned and leaped from the airlock, moving gracefully down toward
the surface, using the bumper unit to guide himself with short bursts
of compressed CO_{2}, from the nozzle. Greg followed, pushing off
harder and passing Johnny halfway down. Tom hesitated. It looked easy
enough ... but he remembered the violent nausea of his first few hours
of free fall. Finally he gritted his teeth and jumped off after Greg. Instantly he
knew that he had jumped too hard. He shot away from the orbit-ship like
a bullet; the jagged asteroid surface leaped up at him. Frantically he
grabbed for the bumper nozzle and pulled the trigger, trying to break
his fall. He felt the nozzle jerk in his hand, and then, abruptly, he was spinning
off at a wild tangent from the asteroid, head over heels. For a moment
it seemed that asteroid, orbit-ship and stars were all wheeling crazily
around him. Then he realized what had happened. He fired the bumper
again, and went spinning twice as fast. The third time he timed the
blast, aiming the nozzle carefully, and the spinning almost stopped. He fought down nausea, trying to get his bearings. He was three hundred
yards out from the asteroid, almost twice as far from the orbit-ship. He
stared down at the rock as he moved slowly away from it. Before, from
the orbit-ship, he had been able to see only the bright side of the huge
rock; now he could see the sharp line of darkness across one side. But there was something else.... He fired the bumper again to steady himself, peering into the blackness
beyond the light-line on the rock. He snapped on his helmet lamp, aimed
the spotlight beam down to the dark rock surface. Greg and Johnny were
landing now on the bright side, with Greg almost out of sight over the
"horizon" ... but Tom's attention was focussed on something he could see
only now as he moved away from the asteroid surface. His spotlight caught it ... something bright and metallic, completely
hidden on the dark side, lying in close to the surface but not quite on
the surface. Then suddenly Tom knew what it was ... the braking jets of
a Class I Ranger, crouching beyond the reach of sunlight in the shadow
of the asteroid....

Swiftly he fired the bumper again, turning back toward the orbit-ship. His hand went to the speaker-switch, but he caught himself in time. Any
warning shouted to Greg and Johnny would certainly be picked up by the
ship. But he had to give warning somehow. He tumbled into the airlock, searching for a flare in his web belt. It
was a risk ... the Ranger ship might pick up the flash ... but he had to
take it. He was unscrewing the fuse cap from the flare when he saw Greg
and Johnny leap up from the asteroid surface. Then he saw what had alarmed them. Slowly, the Ranger was moving out
from its hiding place behind the rock. Tom reached out to catch Greg as
he came plummeting into the lock. There was a flash from the Ranger's
side, and Johnny Coombs' voice boomed in his earphones: "Get inside! Get
the lock closed, fast ... hurry up, can't waste a second." Johnny caught the lip of the lock, dragged himself inside frantically. They were spinning the airlock door closed when they heard the
thundering explosion, felt the ship lurch under their feet, and all
three of them went crashing to the deck. 5. The Black Raider


For a stunned moment they were helpless as they struggled to pick
themselves up. The stable airlock deck was suddenly no longer
stable ... it was lurching back and forth like a rowboat on a heavy sea,
and they grabbed the shock-bars along the bulkheads to steady themselves. "What happened?" Greg yelped. "I saw a ship...."

As if in answer there was another crash belowdecks, and the lurching
became worse. "They're firing on us, that's what happened," Johnny
Coombs growled. "Well, they're shaking us loose at the seams," Greg said. "We've got to
get this crate out of here." He reached for his helmet, began unsnapping
his pressure suit. "Leave it on," Johnny snapped. "But we can't move fast enough in these things...."

"Leave it on all the same. If they split the hull open, you'll be dead
in ten seconds without a suit." Somewhere below they heard the steady _clang-clang-clang_ of the
emergency-station's bell ... already one of the compartments somewhere
had been breached, and was pouring its air out into the vacuum of space. "But what can we do?" Greg said. "They could tear us apart!" "First, we see what they've already done," Johnny said, spinning the
wheel on the inner lock. "If they plan to tear us apart, we're done for,
but they may want to try to board us.... We'll wait and see." An orbit-ship under fire was completely vulnerable. One well-placed
shell could rip it open like a balloon. Tom and Greg followed Johnny to where the control cabin was located. In
control they found alarm lights flashing in three places on the
instrument panel. Another muffled crash roared through the ship, and a
new row of lights sprang on along the panel. "How are the engines?" Greg said, staring at the flickering lights. "Can't tell. Looks like they're firing at the main jets, but they've
ripped open three storage holds, too. They're trying to disable us...."

"What about the _Scavenger_?" Johnny checked a gauge. "The airlock compartment is all right, so the
scout ships haven't been touched. They couldn't fire on them without
splitting the whole ship down the middle." Johnny leaned forward,
flipped on the viewscreen, and an image came into focus. *       *       *       *       *

It was a Class I Ranger, and there was no doubt of its origin. Like the
one they had seen berthing at the Sun Lake City racks, this ship had a
glossy black hull, with the golden triangle-and-J insignia standing out
in sharp relief in the dim sunlight. "It's our friends, all right," Johnny said. "But what are they trying to do?" Tom said. Even as they watched, a pair of scooters broke from the side of the
Ranger and slid down toward the sun side of the asteroid. "I don't
know," Johnny said. "I think they intended to stay hidden, until Tom
lost control of his bumper, and got far enough around there to spot
them." He frowned as the first scooter touched down on the asteroid
surface. "Can't we fire on them?" Greg said angrily. "Not the way this tub is lurching around. They've got our main gyros,
and the auxilliaries aren't powerful enough to steady us. Another blast
or two could send us spinning like a top, and we'd have nothing to
stabilize us...."

There was another flash from the Ranger's hull, and the ship jerked
under their feet. "Well, we're a sitting duck here," Greg said. "Maybe
those engines will still work." He slid into the control seat, flipped
the drive switches to fire the side jets in opposite pairs. They fired,
steadying the lurching of the ship somewhat, but there was no response
from the main engines. "No good. We couldn't begin to run from them. We're stuck here." "They could outrun us anyway," Tom said, watching the viewscreen. "And
they're moving in closer now." "They're going to board us," Tom said. Johnny nodded, his eyes suddenly bright. "I think you're right. And if
they do, we may have a chance. But we've got to split up.... Greg, you
take the control cabin here, try to keep them out if you can. Tom can
cover the main corridor to the storage holds, and I'll take the engine
room section. That will sew up the entrances to control, here, and give
us a chance to stop them." "They may have a dozen men," Tom said. "They could just shoot us down." "I don't think so," Johnny said. 