



Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

   This etext was produced from Astounding Stories June, September,
   November 1932, January 1933. Extensive research did not uncover
   any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. The Table of Contents is not part of the original magazines. Two Thousand Miles Below

                         _A Four-Part Novel_



                      By Charles Willard Diffin

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER
         PROLOGUE
      I  A Man Named Smith
     II  Gold! III  Red Drops
     IV  The Light in the Crater
      V  The Attack
     VI  Into the Crater
    VII  The Ring
   VIII  The Darkness
     IX  A Subterranean World
      X  Plumb Loco
     XI  The White-Hot Pit
    XII  Dreams
   XIII  "N-73 Clear!" XIV  Emergency Order
     XV  The Lake of Fire
    XVI  The Metal Shell
   XVII  Gor
  XVIII  The Dance of Death
    XIX  The Voice of the Mountain
     XX  Taloned Hands
    XXI  Suicide? XXII  The Red-Flowering Vine
  XXIII  Oro and Grah
   XXIV  The Bargain
    XXV  Smithy
   XXVI  Power! *       *       *       *       *




PROLOGUE

[Sidenote: Rawson learns to his cost that the life-spark of a fabled
race glows in the black heart of a dead, Western volcano.] [Illustration: _The derrick was falling as he fired again._]


In the gray darkness the curved fangs of a saber-toothed tiger gleamed
white and ghostly. The man-figure that stood half crouched in the
mouth of the cave involuntarily shivered. "Gwanga!" he said. "He goes, too!" But the man did not move more than to shift a club to his right hand. Heavy, that club, and knotted and with a head of stone tied and
wrapped with leather thongs; but Gor of the tribe of Zoran swung it
easily with one of his long arms. He paid only casual attention as the
great cat passed on into the night. One leathery hand was raised to shield his slitted eyes; the wind from
the north struck toward the mouth of the cave, and it brought with it
cold driving rain and whirling flurries of frozen pellets that bit and
stung. Snow! Gor had traveled far, but never had he seen a storm like this
with white cold in the air. Again a shiver that was part fear rippled
through his muscles and gripped with invisible fingers at his knotted
arms. "The Beast of the North is angry!" he told himself. Through the dark and storm, animals drifted past before the blasts of
cold. They were fleeing; they were full of fear--fear of something
that the dull mind of Gor could not picture. But in that mind was the
same wordless panic. Gor, the man-animal of that pre-glacial day, stared wondering,
stupidly, into the storm with eyes like those of the wild pig. His
arms were long, almost to his knees; his hair, coarse and matted, hung
in greasy locks about his savage face. Behind his low, retreating
forehead was place for little of thought or reason. Yet Gor was a man,
and he met the threat of disaster by something better than blind,
terrified, animal flight. A scant hundred in the tribe--men and women and little pot-bellied
brown children--Gor gathered them together in the cave far back from
the mouth. "For many moons," he told them by words and signs, "the fear has been
upon us. There have been signs for us to see and for all the
Four-feet--for Hathor, the great, and for little Wahti in his hole in
the sand-hill. Hathor has swung his long snout above his curved tusks
and has cried his fear, and the Eaters of the Dead have circled above
him and cried _their_ cry. "And now the Sun-god does not warm us. He has gone to hide behind the
clouds. He is afraid--afraid of the cold monster that blows white
stinging things in his breath. "The Sun-god is gone--now, when he should be making hot summer! The
Four-feet are going. Even Gwanga, the long-toothed, puts his tail
between his legs and runs from the cold." *       *       *       *       *

The naked bodies shivered in the chill that struck in from the
storm-wrapped world; they drew closer their coverings of fur and
hides. The light of their flickering fires played strange tricks with
their savage faces to make them still uglier and to show the dull
terror that gripped them. "Run--we must run--run away--the breath of the beast is on us--he
follows close--run...." Through the mutterings and growls a sick child
whimpered once, then was still. Gor was speaking again:

"Run! Run away!" he mocked them. "And where shall the tribe of Zoran
go? With Gwanga, to make food for his cat belly or to be hammered to
death with the stones of the great tribes of the south?" There was none to reply--only a despairing moan from ugly lips. Gor
waited, then answered his own question. "No!" he shouted, and beat upon his hairy chest that was round as the
trunk of a tree. "Gor will save you--Gor, the wanderer! You named me
well: my feet have traveled far. Beyond the red-topped mountains of
the north I have gone; I have seen the tribes of the south, and I
brought you a head for proof. I have followed the sun, and I have gone
where it rises." In the half light, coarse strands of hair waved as hideous heads were
nodded in confirmation of the boast, though many still drooped
despairingly. "If Gor leads, where will he go?" a voice demanded. Another growled: "Gor's feet have gone far: where have they gone where
the Beast cannot follow our scent?" "Down!" said Gor with unconscious dramatic effect, and he pointed at
the rocky floor of the cave. "I have gone where even the Beast of the
North cannot go. The caves back of this you have seen, but only Gor
has seen the hole--the hole where a strong man can climb down; a hole
too small for the great beast to get through. Gor has gone down to
find more caves below and more caves below them. "Far down is a place where it is always warm. There is water in lakes
and streams. Gor has caught fish in that water, and they were good. There are growing things like the round earth-plants that come in the
night, and they, too, were good. "Will you follow Gor?" he demanded. "And when the Beast is gone and
the Sun-god comes back we will return--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The blast that found its way inside the cave furnished its own answer;
the echoing, "We follow! We follow!" spoken through chattering teeth
was not needed. The women of the tribe shivered more from the cold
than from fear as they gathered together their belongings, their furs
and hides and crude stone implements; and the shambling man-shape,
called Gor, led them to the hole down which a strong man might climb,
led them down and still down.... But, as to the rest--Gor's promise of safe return to the light of day
and that outer world where the Sun-god shone--how was Gor to know that
a mighty glacier would lock the whole land in ice for endless years,
and, retreating, leave their upper caves filled and buried under a
valley heaped with granite rocks? Even had the way been open to the land above, Gor himself could never
have known when that ice-sheet left. For when that day came and once
more the Sun-god drew steamy spirals from the drenched and thawing
ground, Gor, deep down in the earth, had been dead for countless
years. Only the remote descendants of that earlier tribe now lived in
their subterranean home, though even with them there were some who
spoke at times of those legends of another world which their ancestors
had left. And through the long centuries, while evolution worked its slow
changes, they knew nothing of the vanishing ice, of the sun and the
gushing waters, the grass and forests that came to cover the earth. Nor did their descendants, exploring interminable caves, learning to
tame the internal fires, always evolving, always growing, have any
remote conception of a people who sailed strange seas to find new
lands and live and multiply and build up a country of sky-reaching
cities and peaceful farmlands, of sunlit valleys and hills. But always there were adventurous souls who made their way deeper and
deeper into the earth; and among them in every generation was one
named Gor who was taught the tribal legends and who led the
adventurers on. But legends have a trick of changing, and instead of
searching upward, it was through the deeper strata that they made
their slow way in their search for a mystic god and the land of their
fathers' fathers....




CHAPTER I

_A Man Named Smith_


Heat! Heat of a white-hot sun only two hours old. Heat of blazing
sands where shimmering, gassy waves made the sparse sagebrush seem
about to burst into flames. Heat of a wind that might have come out of
the fire-box of a Mogul on an upgrade pull. A highway twisted among black masses of outcropping lava rock or
tightened into a straightaway for miles across the desert that swept
up to the mountain's base. The asphalt surface of the pavement was
almost liquid; it clung stickily to the tires of a big car, letting go
with a continuous, ripping sound. Behind the wheel of the weatherbeaten, sunburned car, Dean Rawson
squinted his eyes against the glare. His lean, tanned face was almost
as brown as his hair. The sun had done its work there; it had set
crinkly lines about the man's eyes of darker brown. But the deeper
lines in that young face had been etched by responsibility; they made
the man seem older than his twenty-three years, until the steady eyes,
flashing into quick amusement, gave them the lie. And now Rawson's lips twisted into a little grin at his own
discomfort--but he knew the desert driver's trick. "A hundred plus in the shade," he reasoned silently. "That's hot any
way you take it. But taking it in the face at forty-five an hour is
too much like looking into a Bessemer converter!" He closed the windows of his old coupe to within an inch of the top,
then opened the windshield a scant half inch. The blast that had been
drawing the moisture from his body became a gently circulating current
of hot air. He had gone only another ten miles after these preparations for fast
driving, when he eased the big weatherbeaten car to a stop. *       *       *       *       *

On his right, reaching up to the cool heights under a cloudless blue
sky, the gray peaks of the Sierras gave promise of relief from the
furnace breath of the desert floor. There were even valleys of snow
glistening whitely where the mountains held them high. A watcher, had
there been one to observe in the empty land, might have understood
another traveler's pausing to admire the serene majesty of those
heights--but he would have wondered could he have seen Rawson's eyes
turned in longing away from the mountains while he stared across the
forbidding sands. There were other mountains, lavender and gray, in the distance. And
nearer by, a matter of twenty or thirty elusive miles through the
dancing waves of hot air, were other barren slopes. Across the rolling
sand-hills wheel marks, faint and wind-blown, led straight from the
highway toward the parched peaks. "Tonah Basin!" Rawson was thinking. "It's there inside these hills. It's hotter than this is by twenty degrees right this minute--but I
wish I could see it. I'd like to have one more look before I face that
hard-boiled bunch in the city!" He looked at his watch and shook his head. "Not a chance," he
admitted. "I'm due up in Erickson's office in five hours. I wonder if
I've got a chance with them...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Five hours of driving, and Rawson walked into the office of Erickson,
Incorporated, with a steady step. Another hour, and his tanned face
had gone a trifle pale; his lips were set grimly in a straight line
that would not relax under the verdict he felt certain he was about to
hear. For an hour he had faced the steely-eyed man across the long table in
the Directors Room--faced him and replied to questions from this man
and the half-dozen others seated there. Skeptical questions, tricky
questions; and now the man was speaking:

"Rawson, six months ago you laid your Tonah Basin plans before
us--plans to get power from the center of the Earth, to utilize that
energy, and to control the power situation in this whole Southwest. It looked like a wild gamble then, but we investigated. It still looks
like a gamble." "Yes," said Rawson, "it is a gamble. Did I ever call it anything
else?" "The Ehrmann oscillator," the man continued imperturbably, "invented
in 1940, two years ago, solves the wireless transmission problem, but
the success of your plan depends upon your own invention--upon your
straight-line drills that you say will not wander off at a tangent
when they get down a few miles. And more than that, it depends upon
you. "Even that does not damn the scheme; but, Rawson, there's only one
factor we gamble on. No wild plans, no matter how many hundreds of
millions they promise: no machines, no matter what they are designed
to do, get a dollar of our backing. It's men we back with our money!" Rawson's face was set to show no emotion, but within his mind were
insistent, clamoring thoughts:

"Why can't he say it and get it over with? I've lost--what a
hard-boiled bunch they are!--but he doesn't need to drag out the
agony." But--but what was the man saying? "Men, Rawson!" the emotionless voice continued. "And we've checked up
on you from the time you took your nourishment out of a bottle; it's
you we're backing. That's why we have organized the little company of
Thermal Explorations, Limited. That's why we've put a million of hard
coin into it. That's why we've put you in charge of operations." He was extending a hand that Dean Rawson had to reach for blindly. "I'd drill through to hell," Dean said and fought to keep his voice
steady, "with backing like that!" He allowed his emotion to express itself in a shaky laugh. "Perhaps I
will at that," he added: "I'll certainly be heading in the right
direction." *       *       *       *       *

Under another day's sun the hot asphalt was again taking the print of
the tires of Rawson's old car. But this time, when he came to the
almost obliterated marks that led through the sand toward distant
mountains, he stopped, partially deflated the tires to give them a
grip on the sand, and swung off. "A fool, kid trick," he admitted to himself, "but I want to see the
place. I'll see plenty of it before I'm through, but right now I've
got to have a look; then I'll buckle down to work. "Thermal Explorations, Limited!" The name rang triumphantly in his
mind. "A million things to do--men, crews for the drills, derricks....
We'll have to truck in over this road; I'll lay a plank road over the
sand. And water--we'll have to haul that, too, until we can sink a
well. We'll find water under there somewhere. I've got to see the
place...."

The black sides of the mountains were nearer: every outcropping rock
was plainly volcanic, and great sweeping slopes were beds of ash and
pumice; the wheel marks, where they showed at all, wound off and into
a canyon hidden in the tremendous hills that thrust themselves
abruptly from the desert floor. The mountains themselves towered hugely at closer range, but the road
that Rawson followed climbed through them without traversing the
highest slopes. It was scarcely more than a trail, barely wide enough
for the car at times, but boulder-filled gullies showed where the
hands of men had worked to build it. *       *       *       *       *

He came at last into the open where a shoulder of rock bent the road
outward above a sea of sand far below. And now the mountains showed
their circular arrangement--a great ring, twenty miles across. At one
side were three conical peaks, unmistakable craters, whose scarred
sides were smothered under ash and sand that had rained down from
their shattered tops in ages past. Yet, so hot they were, so clear-cut
the irregularly rimmed cups at their tops, that they seemed to have
pushed themselves up through the earth in that very instant. At their
bases were signs of human habitation--broken walls, scattered stone
buildings whose empty windows gaped blackly. This was all that
remained of New Rhyolite. Rawson looked at the "ghost town" which had never failed to interest
him, but he gave no thought now to the hardy prospectors who had built
it or to the vein of gold that had failed them. His searching eyes
came back to the fiery pit, the Tonah Basin, a vast cauldron of sand
and ash--great sweeps of yellow and gray and darker brown into which
the sun was pouring its rays with burning-glass fierceness. But to Rawson, there was more than the eye could see. He was picturing
a great powerhouse, steel derricks, capped pipes that led off to
whirring turbines, generators, strings of cables stretching out on
steel supports into the distance, a wireless transmitter--and all of
this the result of his own vision, of the stream he would bring from
deep in the earth! Then, abruptly, the pictures faded. Far below him on the yellow,
sun-blasted floor, a fleck of shadow had moved. It appeared suddenly
from the sand, moved erratically, staggeringly, for a hundred feet,
then vanished as if something had blotted it out--and Dean Rawson
knew that it was the shadow of a man. *       *       *       *       *

The road widened beyond the turn. He had intended to swing around; he
had wanted only to take a clear picture of the place with him. But now
the big car's gears wailed as he took the downgrade in second, and the
brakes, jammed on at the sharp curves, added their voice to the chorus
of haste. "Confounded desert rats!" Rawson was saying under his breath. "They'll
chance anything--but imagine crossing country like that! And he hasn't
a burro--he's got only the water he can carry in a canteen!" But even the canteen was empty, he found, when he stopped the car in a
whirl of loose sand beside a prone figure whose khaki clothes were
almost indistinguishable against the desert soil. Before Rawson could get his own lanky six feet of wiry length from the
car, the man had struggled to his feet. Again the little blot of
shadow began its wavering, uncertain, forward movement. He was a little shorter than Rawson, a little heavier of build, and
younger by a year or two, although his flushed face and a two days'
stubble of black beard might have been misleading. Rawson caught the
staggering man and half carried him to the shadow of the car, the only
shelter in that whole vast cauldron of the sun. From a mouth where a swollen tongue protruded thickly came an agonized
sound that was a cry for, "Water--water!" Rawson gave it to him as
rapidly as he dared, until he allowed the man to drink from the desert
bag at the last. And his keen eyes were taking in all the significant
details as he worked. The khaki clothes earned a nod of silent approval. The compact roll
that had been slung from the younger man's shoulders, even the broad
shoulders themselves, and the square jaw, unshaved and grimy, got
Rawson's inaudible, "O. K.!" But the face was more burned than tanned. *       *       *       *       *

He introduced himself when the stranger was able to stand. "I'm
Rawson, Dean Rawson, mining engineer when I'm working at it," he
explained. "I'm bound north. I'll take you out of this. You can travel
with me as far as you please." The dark-haired youngster was plainly youthful now, as he stood erect. His voice was recovering what must have been its usual hearty ring. "I'm not trying to say 'thank you,'" he said, as he took Rawson's
hand. "I was sure sunk--going down for the last time--taps--all that
sort of thing! You pulled me out--the good old helping hand. Can't
thank a fellow for that--just return the favor or pass it on to
someone else. And, by the way--you won't believe it--but my name is
Smith." Rawson smiled good-naturedly. "No," he agreed, "I don't believe it. But it's a good, handy name. All right, Smithy, jump in! Here, let me
give you a lift; you're still woozy." Rawson found his passenger uncommunicative. Not but what Smithy talked
freely of everything but himself, but it was of himself that Rawson
wanted to know. "Drop me at the first town," said Smithy. "You're going north: I'm
south-bound--looking for a job down in Los. I won't take any more
short cuts; I was two days on this last one. I'll stick to the road." They were through the mountains that ringed in the fiery pit of Tonah
Basin. Smooth sand lay ahead; only the shallow marks that his own
tires had ploughed needed to be followed. Dean Rawson turned and
looked with fair appraisal at the man he had saved. "Drifter?" he asked himself silently. "Road bum? He doesn't look the
part; there's something about him...."

Aloud he inquired: "What's your line? What do you know?" And the young man answered frankly: "Not a thing!" *       *       *       *       *

Dean sensed failure, inefficiency. He resented it in this youngster
who had fought so gamely with death. His voice was harsh with a
curious sense of his own disappointment as he asked:

"Found the going too hard for you up north, did you? Well, it won't be
any easier--" But Smithy had interrupted with a weak movement of his
hand. "Not too hard," he said laconically; "too damn soft! I don't know what
I'm looking for--pretty dumb: got a lot to learn!--but it'll be a job
that needs to take a good licking!" "'Too damn soft!'" Dean was thinking. "And he tackled the desert
alone!" There was a lot here he did not understand. But the look in
the eyes of Smithy that met his own searching gaze and returned it
squarely if a bit whimsically--that was something he _could_
understand. Dean Rawson was a judge of men. The sudden impulse that
moved him was founded upon certainty. "You've found that job," he said. "The desert almost got you a little
while ago--now it's due to take that licking you were talking about. I'm going to teach it to lie down and roll over and jump through
hoops. Fact is, my job is to get it into harness and put it to work. I'll be working right out there in the Basin where I found you. It
will be only about two degrees cooler than hell. If that sounds good
to you, Smithy, stick around." He warmed oddly to the look in the younger man's deep-set, dark eyes,
as Smithy replied:

"Try to put me out, Rawson--just try to put me out!" CHAPTER II

_Gold!_

    "Ten miles down, drillers! Hell-bound, and proud of it! Ten miles down, drillers! Hark to what I say:
    You're pokin' through the crust of hell
    And braggin' too damn loud of it,
    For, when you get to hell, you'll find
    The devil there to pay." From the black, night-wrapped valley, far below, the singer's voice
went silent with the slamming of a door in one of the bunkhouses. The
song was popular; some rimester in the Tonah Basin camp had written
the parody for the tormenting of the drill crews. And, high on the
mountainside, Dean Rawson hummed a few bars of the lilting air after
the singer's voice had ceased. "Ten miles down!" he said at last to his assistant, sprawled out on
the stone beside him. "That's about right, Smithy. And maybe the rest
of the doggerel isn't so far off either. 'Pokin' through the crust of
hell'--well, there was hell popping around here once, and I am
gambling that the furnaces aren't all out." They were on the outthrust shoulder of rock where the mountain road
hung high above the valley floor. Below, where, months before, Rawson
had rescued a man from desert death, was blackness punctured by points
of light--bunkhouse windows, the drilling-floor lights at the foot of
a big derrick, a single warning light at the derrick's top. But the
buildings and the towering steelwork of the derrick that handled the
rotary drills were dim and ghostly in the light of the stars. "We've gone through some places I'd call plenty warm," said Smithy,
"but you--you craves it _hot_! Think we're about due?" he asked. Rawson answered indirectly. "One great big old he-crater!" he said. His outstretched arm swept the
whole circle of starlit mountains that enclosed the Basin. "That's
what this was once. Twenty miles across--and when it blew its head off
it must have sprayed this whole Southwest. "Now, those craters"--he pointed contemptuously toward the three
conical peaks off to the right--"those were just blow-holes on the
side of this big one." *       *       *       *       *

In the ragged ring of mountains, the throat of some volcanic monster
of an earlier age, the three cones towered hugely. Their tops were
plainly cupped; their ashy sloping sides swept down to the desert
floor. At their base, the gray walls of stone in the ghost town of
Little Rhyolite gleamed palely, like skeleton remains. "I've seen steam, live steam," Rawson went on, "coming out of a
fissure in the rocks. I know there's heat and plenty of it down below. We're about due to hit it. The boys are pulling the drill now; they
cut through into a whale of a cave down below there--"

He broke off abruptly to fix his attention on the dark valley below,
where lights were moving. One white slash of brilliance cut across the
dark ground; another, then a cluster of flood lights blazed out. They
picked the skeleton framework of the giant derrick in black relief
against the white glare of the sand. From far below; through the
quiet air, came sounds of excited shouting; the voices of men were
raised in sudden clamor. "They've pulled the drill," said Rawson. "But why all the excitement?" He had already turned toward their car when the crackle of six quick
shots came from below. His abrupt command was not needed; Smithy was
in the car while still the echoes were rolling off among the hills. Their own lights flashed on to show the mountain grade waiting for
their quick descent. *       *       *       *       *

The sandy floor of this part of the Tonah Basin was littered with the
orderly disorder of a big construction job--mountains of casing,
tubular drill rod, a foot in diameter; segmental bearings to clamp
around the rod every hundred feet and give it smooth play. Dean drove
his car swiftly along the surfaced road that was known as "Main
Street" to the entire camp. There were men running toward the derrick--men of the day shift who
had been aroused from their sleep. Others were clustered about the
wide concrete floor where the derrick stood. Clad only in trousers and
shoes, their bodies, tanned by the desert sun, were almost black in
the glare of the big floods. They milled wildly about the derrick;
and, through all their clamor and shouting, one word was repeated
again and again:

"Gold! Gold! Gold!" The big drill head was suspended above the floor. Dean Rawson, with
Smithy close at hand, pushed through the crowd. He was prepared to see
traces of gold in the sludge that was bailed out through the hollow
shaft--quartz, perhaps, whose richness had set the men wild before
they realized how impossible it would be to develop such a mine. But
Rawson stopped almost aghast at the glaring splendor of the golden
drill hanging naked in the blinding light. *       *       *       *       *

Riley, foreman of the night shift, was standing beside it, a pistol in
his hand. "L'ave it be," he was commanding. "Not a hand do ye lay on
it till the boss gets here." At sight of Rawson he stepped forward. "I shot in the air," he explained. "I knew ye were up in the hills for
a breath of coolness. I wanted to get ye here quick." "Right," said Rawson tersely. "But, man, what have you done with the
drill? It's smeared over with gold!" "Fair clogged wid it, sir," Riley's voice betrayed his own excitement. "You remimber we couldn't pull it at first--the drill was jammed-like
after it bruk through at the ten-mile livil. Then it come free--and
luk at it! Luk at the damn thing! Sent down for honest work, it was,
and it comes back all dressed up in jewelry like a squaw Indian whin
there's oil struck on the reservation! Or is it gold ye were after all
the time?" he demanded. "Gold! Gold!" a hundred voices were shouting. Dean hardly heard the
voice of the foreman, made suddenly garrulous with excitement. He
stared at the big drill head, heaped high with the precious metal. It
was jammed into the diamond-studded face of the drill; it filled every
crack and crevice, a smooth, solid mass on top of the head and against
the stem. A workman had brought a singlejack and chisel; he was prying
at a ribbon of the yellow stuff. Riley went for him, gun in hand. "L'ave it be!" he shouted. "But, confound it all, Dean," Smithy's voice was saying in a tone of
disgust, "I thought we were working on a power plant. Not that a gold
mine is so bad; but we can't work it--we can't go down after it at ten
miles." "Gold mine!" Rawson echoed. "I'll say it's a gold mine--but not
because of the gold. Do you notice anything peculiar about that,
Smithy?" His assistant replied with a quick exclamation:

"You're right, Dean! I knew there was something haywire with that. Solid chunk--been cast around that stem--melted on. And that means--"

"Heat," said Rawson. "It means we've found what we're after. Give the
gold to the men; tell them we'll divide it evenly among them. There's
more down there, but there's something better: there's energy, power!" He snapped out quick orders. "Get the temperature. Drop a recording
pyrometer. Let me know at once. There'll be plenty doing now!" *       *       *       *       *

Drill rods and cables, all were made of the newest aluminum alloy. The
long tube that held the pyrometer was formed of the same metal. Smithy
sent it down to get a recording of the temperatures of that
subterranean cave into which their tools had plunged. He adjusted the recording mechanism himself and stood beside the
twenty-inch casing that held back the loose sand from the big bore. Then he watched ten sections of cable, each a mile in length, each
heavier than the last, as they went hissing into the earth. From the cable control shed the voice of Riley was calling the depth. "Fifty-two thousand." Then by hundreds until he cried:
"Fifty-two-seven. We're into the big cave! Now another hundred feet." The cable was moving slowly. In the middle of Riley's call of
"Fifty-two-eight," a jangling bell told that the bottom of the
pyrometer carrier had touched. "Up with it," Smithy ordered. "Make it snappy. We'll see if we've got
another cargo of gold." There was an undeniable thrill in this reaching to a tremendous
distance underground, this groping about in a deep-hidden cave, where
molten gold was to be found. What had they tapped?--he asked himself. He saw visions of some vast pool of hot, liquid gold. Perhaps Dean
would have to change his plans. They could rig up some kind of a
bailer; they could bring out thousands of dollars at a time. He was watching for the first sight of the metal carrier, far more
interested in what might be clinging to it than in the record of the
pyrometer it held. He saw it emerge--then he stared in disbelief at
the stubby mass at the cable's end, where all that remained of the
long tube he had sent down was a dangling two feet of discolored
metal, warped and distorted. The lower part, a full twenty feet in
length, had been fused cleanly off. Dean Rawson was there to watch the next attempt. Again Riley's roaring
bass rolled out the count, but this time the call stopped at
fifty-two-seven. The jangling bell told that the carrier had touched. "Divil a bit do I understand this," Riley was calling. "We're right at
the point where we dropped through into the clear. Right at the roof
of the big cave--fifty-two-seven, it says--and no lower do we go. The
bottom of the hole is plugged!" *       *       *       *       *

Rawson made no reply. He was scowling while he stared speculatively at
the mouth of the twenty-inch bore--a vertical tunnel that led from the
drilling floor down, down to some inner vault. "Molten gold," he was
thinking. "It melted a cylinder of the new Krieger alloy--melted it
when its melting point is way higher than that of any rock that we've
hit. And now the bore is closed...."

He was trying vainly to project his mental vision through those miles
of hard rock to see what manner of mystery this was into which he had
probed. He shook his head slowly in baffled speculation, then spoke
sharply. "Drill it out!" he ordered. "We're into a hot spot sure enough, though
I can't just figure out the how of it. But we'll tame it, Smithy. Send
down the drill. Clean it out. Then we'll poke around down there and
get the answer to all this." Five days were needed to send down the big drill with a new drill-head
replacing the other too fouled with gold for any use. The tubular
sections, a hundred feet in length, were hooked together and lowered
one by one. Each joint meant the coupling of the air-pipe as well. Air, mixed with water from the outer jacket, must come foaming up
through the central core to bring the powdered rock to the surface. Five days, then one hour of boring, and another five days to pull out
the drill before Rawson could hope for his answer. But he found it in
the severed shaft of the great drill where the head had been melted
completely off. The big stem that would have resisted all but electric
furnace heat, and been cut through like a tallow candle in the blast
of an oxy-acetylene flame. CHAPTER III

_Red Drops_


The flat-roofed shack of yellow boards that was Dean Rawson's "office"
had a second canopy roof built above it and extending out on all sides
like a wooden umbrella. Thick pitch fried almost audibly from the fir
boards when the sun drove straight from overhead, but beneath their
shelter the heat was more bearable. By an open window, where a hot breeze stirred sluggishly, Rawson sat
in silent contemplation of the camp. His face was as copper-colored as
an Apache's and as motionless. His eyes were fixed unwaveringly upon a
distant derrick and the blasted stub of a big drill that hung unmoving
above the concrete floor. But the man's eyes did not consciously record the details of that
scene. He saw nothing of the derrick or of the heat waves that made
the steel seem writhingly alive; he was looking at something far more
distant, something many miles away, something vague and mysterious,
hidden miles beneath the surface of the earth. "Heat," he said at last, as if talking in a dream. "Heat, terrific
temperatures--but I can't make it out; I can't see it!" The younger, broad-shouldered man, whose khaki shirt, thrown open at
the neck showed a chest tanned to the black-brown of his face, stopped
his restless pacing back and forth in the hot room. "Yes?" he asked with a touch of irritation in his tone. "There's
plenty of heat there--heat enough to melt off the shaft of that
high-temp alloy! What the devil's the use of wondering about the heat,
Dean? What gets me is this: the shaft has been plugged again. Now,
what kind of...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dean Rawson's face had not moved a muscle during the other's outburst. His eyes were still fixed on that place that was so far away, yet
which he tried to bring close in his mind, close enough to see, to
comprehend the mystery that should be so plain. "Lava wouldn't do it!" he said softly. "No melted stone would melt the
Krieger alloy, unless it was under pressure, which this was not. There was no blast coming out of our shaft. Yet we dipped into that
gold; we stuck the drill right down into it. But what did we go into
the next time? What did we dip into?" He swung quickly, violently, toward Smithy who was facing him from the
middle of the room. He aimed one finger at him as if it were a pistol,
and his words cracked out as sharply as if they came from a gun:

"That tube you sent down--that piece of casing! How was it burned? Were there straggling ends, frozen gobs of metal? Did it look like an
old-fashioned molasses candy bar that's been melted? Did it?" "Why, no," said Smithy. "It hadn't dripped any; it was cut off nice
and clean." "Cut!" Rawson almost shouted the word. "You said it, Smithy. So was
the shaft of the drill. And if you ever saw a piece of this alloy
being melted you know that it's as gummy as a pot of old paint. It was
cut, Smithy! Dipping into that melted gold threw us off the track; we
were thinking of ramming the drill down into a mess of lava. But we
didn't. It was cut off by a blast of flame so much hotter than lava
that melted rock would seem cold!" "And that helps us a lot, doesn't it," asked Smithy, scornfully, "when
the flame melts the end of the shaft shut as fast as we open it?" Dean Rawson's lean, muscular hands took Smithy's broad shoulders and
spun the younger man around. "Cheer up," Dean told him. "We've got it
licked. Why it doesn't blow out of that shaft like hell out for noon
is more than I can see; but the heat's there! We've won!" "But--" Smithy began. Rawson sent him spinning toward the door in a
good-natured showing of strength that his assistant had not yet
guessed. "Soup!" he ordered. "Break out the nitroglycerine, Smithy. Get that
Swede, Hanson, on the job; he's a shooter. He knows his stuff. We'll
blow open the bottom end of our shaft so it'll never go shut!" *       *       *       *       *

Hanson knew his stuff and did it. But he met Rawson's inquiring eyes
with a puzzled shake of his head when the open mouth of the
twenty-inch bore gave faint echo of the deep explosion and followed
after a time with only a feeble puff of air. "Like a cannon, she should have gone," Hanson stated. "And she yoost
go _phht_!" "It's open down below," said Rawson briefly. "This is a different kind
of a well from the kind you've been shooting." To the waiting Riley he said: "Hook a bailer onto that cable and send
it down. See what you can tell about the hole." Again ten miles of cable hissed smoothly down the gaping throat. Then
it slowed. "Fifty-two-seven," said Riley, "and she's open. Seven twenty-five! Seven fifty, and we're on bottom!" "Up," Rawson ordered, "if there's anything left of the bailer. It's
probably melted into scrap." But strangely it was not. It hung from the dangling cable spinning
lazily until Riley stepped in to check its motion. There was a check valve in the bottom--a door that opened inwardly, to
take in water and fragments of rock when need arose. Riley,
disregarding the possible heat of the twirling bailer, reached for it
with bare hands. He drew them back, then held them before him--and a
hundred watching eyes saw what had been unseen before: the slow
dropping of red liquid from the bailer's end. The same drops were
falling from Riley's hands that had touched that end. "Blood!" The word came from the foreman's throat in one horrified
gasp. It ran in a whispering echo from one to another of the watching
crew. From far across the hot sands came the rattle of a truck that
brought the first of many loads of cement and steel for Rawson's
buildings. Its driver was singing lustily:

    "Hark to what I say:
    You're pokin' through the crust of hell
    And braggin' too damn loud of it,
    For, when you get to hell, you'll find
    The devil there to pay!" But Rawson, looking dazedly into Smithy's eyes, said only: "It's
cold--the bailer's cold. There's no heat there." CHAPTER IV

_The Light in the Crater_


"Of course it wasn't blood!" said Smithy explosively. "But try to tell
the men that. See how far you get. 'Devils!' That's been their talk
since yesterday when Riley got smeared up--and now that the bailer's
gone we can't prove a thing." Again he was pacing restlessly back and forth in the little board
shack that was Rawson's field head-quarters. Rawson, seated by the
window, was looking at tables of comparative melting points. He
glanced up sharply. "You haven't found it yet?" he questioned. "A forty-foot bailer! Now
that's a nice easy little thing to mislay." Riley had followed the excited Smithy into the room; he stood silently
by the door until he caught Rawson's questioning glance. "Forty feet or forty inches," he said, "'tis gone! 'Twas there by the
derrick last night, and this marnin'--"

"That's fine," Rawson interrupted with heavy sarcasm. "I haven't
enough down below ground to keep my mind occupied--I need a few
mysteries up top. Now do you really expect me to believe that a thing
like that bailer has been carried off?" This time it was Smithy who interrupted. "You can just practise
believing on that, Dean," he said. "When you get so you can believe a
forty-foot bailer can vanish into thin air, then you'll be ready for
what I've got. This is what I came in to tell you: that one truckload
of steel grillage beams for the turbine footings--they were put out
where we surveyed for the first power house--dumped on the sand...."

"Well?" questioned Rawson, as Smithy paused. His look was daring
Smithy to say what he knew was coming. "Five tons of steel beams," said Smithy softly, "gone--just like that! Just a hollow in the sand!" *       *       *       *       *

The big figure of the Irish foreman was still beside the door. Rawson
saw one clumsy hand make the sign of the Cross; then Riley held that
hand before him and stared at it in horror. "Divils' blood," he
whispered. "And I dipped my hands in it. Saints protect us all!" "That will be all of that!" Dean Rawson's usually quiet voice was as
full of crackling emphasis as if it had been charged with electrical
energy. "If anyone thinks that I have gone this far, just to be scared
out by some dirty sabotage....

"I see it all. I don't know how they did it, but it's all come since
the gold was found. Someone else wants it. They think they can scare
off the men, maybe take a pot-shot at me, come back here and clean up
later on, pull up gold by the pailful, I suppose--"

Riley leaped forward and banged his big fist down on the table. "Right
ye are!" he shouted, until loitering men in the open "street" outside
stared curiously. "Divils they are, but they're the kind of divils we
know how to handle. And now I'll tell ye somethin' else, sir: I know
where they are hidin'. "There was no work for anyone last night, but I'm used to bein' up. I
couldn't sleep. I was wanderin' around, thinkin' of nothin' at all out
of the way, and I thought I saw some shadows, like it might be men,
way off on the sand. Then later over to the old ghost town, d'ye mind! I saw a light, a queer, green sort of light. Sure, a fool I was
callin' meself at the time, but now I believe it." *       *       *       *       *

Dean Rawson had crossed the room while the man was still speaking. He
dragged a wooden case from beneath his cot and smashed at the lid with a
wrecking bar. Then he reached inside and drew forth a blue-black .45. He tossed the pistol to Riley. "Know how to use one of these?" he
asked. The manner in which the big Irishman snapped open the side
ejection was sufficient answer. Dean handed another gun to Smithy,
then pulled out more and laid them on his cot together with a little
pile of cartridge boxes. "You're all right, Riley," he said. "Just keep your head. Don't let
your damned superstitions run away with you, and I wouldn't ask for a
better man to stand alongside of in a scrap." The foreman beamed with pleasure: Rawson went on in crisp sentences:

"Take these guns. Take plenty of ammunition. Pick five or six men you
know you can depend on. Mount guard around this camp to-night. I'll
post an order saying you're in charge--and I'm telling you now to use
those guns on anything you see. "Smithy," he said to the other man who had been quietly listening,
"you and I are going to start for town. Only Riley will know that
we're gone for the night. We'll have a little listening post of our
own up here in the hills." But Rawson postponed their going. More material was arriving; one
casting in particular needed all the men and Rawson's supervision to
place it on the sand where an erection crew could swing it into place
at some later date. And then, when he and Smithy had driven away from
camp with the distant city as their announced destination, Rawson
still did not go directly to the mountain grade. He swung off instead
where rolling sand-hills blocked all view from the camp, and he headed
the car into a gusty wind that brought whirling clouds of dust; they
almost obscured the crumbling walls at the volcano's base. The ghost towns that are found here and there in the forsaken
wilderness of the West are depressing to one who walks their empty
streets. Little Rhyolite was no exception. In gray, ghostly walls,
empty windows stared steadily, disconcertingly like sockets of dead
eyes in tattered, weatherbeaten skulls. *       *       *       *       *

Dean and Smithy walked among the roofless ruins. Lizards, the color of
the cold, gray walls, slipped from sight on silent, clinging feet. Once a sidewinder, almost invisible against the sand, looped away from
the intruders with smooth deliberation. "No marks here," said Rawson at last. "Even an Indian can't read sign
in this ashy sand when the wind has dusted it off." He turned his head from a whirl of fine ash where the wind, sweeping
around a wall of stone, was scouring at a sand dune's sloping side. "Dean," said Smithy, "old Riley may have been looking for banshees
when he saw these lights. Superstitious old cuss, Riley! Maybe there
wasn't anything here. But, Dean, there's some confoundedly funny
things happening around here." "Are you telling me?" Rawson asked grimly. "But we want to remember
one thing," he added: "We've punched a hole in the ground, and we've
got into a place that is hot enough to melt Krieger alloy one minute
and is stone cold the next. That's disturbing enough, but we don't
want to get that mixed up with what's happening up top. There's dirty
work going on--"

He stopped. His eyes, that had never ceased to search for some mark of
special meaning, had come to rest upon an object half hidden in the
sand. He stooped and picked it up. "Now what the devil is this?" Smithy began. But Rawson was staring at
the smooth lava block that was in his hand. It was tapered; it was
pierced through with a straight, smooth hole, and its base was round
and ringed as if it had been held in a clamp. "That," he said at last, "was brought in from outside. Outside,
Smithy--get that." *       *       *       *       *

Dean Rawson's face was wreathed in a sudden smile of pure pleasure. "No, I
don't know what the darn thing is," he admitted. "And I don't care. But I
know that someone, or some bunch of someones--outsiders--are trying to
horn in. I might even go so far as to say that I suspect the power
monopoly gentlemen. I think they have started in on us, plan to run off
our men, interfere in every way and drive me out of the field with the
boring a failure. Smithy, I begin to think I'm going to enjoy this job!" Again the hot wind, only beginning to cool with the setting of the
sun, swept around the building where they stood and tore at the hill
of sand. "Come on," said Rawson. "It's getting dark. We'll get up to
our lookout--"

"Hold on!" called Smithy sharply. Rawson turned. Smithy was rubbing his eyes when the whirl of
wind-borne sand had passed; he was staring at the sand dunes. "I'm seeing things, I guess," he said. "I thought for a minute there
was a hole there, and the sand was slipping. I'm getting as bad as
Riley." The two went back through the gathering shadows to their waiting car. And Smithy's involuntary shiver told Rawson that he was not the only
one to feel a sense of relief at the sound of the exhaust as their car
took them away from the dead bones of a dead city in a barren,
trackless waste. *       *       *       *       *

The shoulder of rock, where the mountain road swung out, gave a
comprehensive view of camp and desert and the encircling mountains. Above in a vault of black was the dazzling array of stars as the
desert lands know them; so low they were, the ragged, broken tops of
the three ancient craters seemed touching the warm velvet of the sky
on which the stars were hung. Beyond their smooth slopes a spreading
glow gave promise of the rising moon. Rawson headed the car downgrade in readiness for a quick return; he
ran it close to the inner wall of rock out of which the road had been
carved, then seated himself on the outer rim without thought of the
thousand-foot sheer drop beneath his dangling legs. With a glass he
was sweeping the foreground where the scattered lights of the camp
were like vagrant reflections of the stars thrown back to them from
the dead sea of sand. "Riley's on the job," he told Smithy when he passed over the glass
later on. "And I've got my pocket portable." He took the little radio
receiver from his pocket as he spoke. "Riley will signal me from my
office if he sees anything." The moon had cleared the mountains; its flood of light poured across
their rugged heights and filled the bowl of Tonah Basin as some master
of a great theatrical switchboard might have flooded a dark stage with
magic illumination, half concealing, transforming whatever things it
touched. All the hard brilliance of sunlit sands was gone. The rolling dunes
were softly mellow; the more distant mountains were dream-peaks. Half
real, they seemed, and half imagined in a veil of haze. Even the
buildings, the scattered piles of material, the gaunt skeleton of the
derrick--their stark blackness of outline and clear-cut shadow were
gone; the whole land was drenched in the mystery and magic of a desert
moon. *       *       *       *       *

Rawson and the man beside him were silent. Even a mind perplexed by
unanswerable problems must pause before the witchery of nature's
softer moods. "If Riley were here," said Smithy softly at last, "he wouldn't be
seeing any devils. Fairies, pixies, the 'little people'--he'd be
seeing them dancing." Rawson shot his companion a sidelong, appraising glance. He had never
penetrated before to this sub-stratum of Smithy's nature. He had
never, in fact, felt that he knew much about Smithy, whose past was
still the one topic that was never mentioned. He saw his thick mop of
black hair and the profile of his face as Smithy stared fixedly down
toward the sleeping camp. It was a matter of a minute or so before he
knew that the head was outlined against an aura of red light. Smithy was seated at his right. Off beyond him the three extinct
craters made a dark background where the moonlight had not yet reached
to their inner slopes. Smithy's head was directly in line with the
largest crater's irregularly broken top; and about it was the faintest
tinge of red. For a moment the light flamed close; it seemed to be hovering about
the head of the silent, seated man. Then Rawson moved, looked past,
and found a true perspective for the phenomenon. One rugged cleft in
the rim of the crater's cup made a peephole for seeing within. It was
plainly red--the light came from inside the age-old throat. *       *       *       *       *

"It's alive!" Rawson whispered in quick consternation. Almost he
expected to see billowing clouds of smoke, the fearful pyrotechnics of
volcanic eruption. He sensed more than saw that Smithy had not turned his head. "Look!" he was shouting by now. "Wake up, Smithy! Good Lord!" He stopped, open-mouthed. The red glow had meant volcanic fires; to
have it change abruptly to a green radiance was disconcerting. Green--pale green. Only through the gap, like a space where a tooth
was missing in the giant jaw, could Dean Rawson see the changed light. Only from this one point could the view be had--there would be nothing
visible from the camp below. And as quickly as it had come all
thought of volcanic fires left him; he knew with quick certainty that
this was something that concerned him, that threatened, and that was
linked up with the other threatening, mysterious happenings of the
recent nights and days. Still Smithy had not turned. Rawson felt one quick flash of annoyance
at his helper's dullness--or indifference; then he knew that Smithy's
dark-haired head was reached forward, that he was bending at a
precarious angle to stare below him into the valley. Then:

"They're there!" said Smithy in a hushed voice, as if someone or
something on that desert floor far below might hear and take alarm. "Look, Dean. Where's your glass? What are they?" *       *       *       *       *

His cautious whispering was unnecessary. Below them a thin line of
light pierced the darkness; another; then three more in quick
succession before the sharp crack of pistol fire came to the men a
thousand feet above. Rawson had snatched up his binoculars. "To the left," Smithy was directing. "Off there, by the big casting. Great Scott! what's that light?" Rawson got it in the glass--a single flash of green that cut the
blackness with an almost audible hiss. It was gone in an instant while
a man's voice screamed once in fear and agony, one scream that broke
like brittle steel in the same instant that it began. Dean found the big casting in the circle of his glass. There were
black figures moving near it; they were indistinct. He changed the
focus--they were gone before he could get their images sharp. But the casting! Plainly he saw its great bulk that many men had
worked to ease down to the sand. It was outlined clearly now until its
edge became a blur, until the sand rolled in upon it, and its black
mass became a circle that shrank and shrank and vanished utterly at
the last. "It's gone!" Rawson shouted. "It sank into the sand! I saw it...."

He was running for the car. A clamor of voices was coming from below;
the sound died under the thunder of the car's exhaust as Rawson gave
it the gun and sent the big machine leaping toward the waiting curves. CHAPTER V

_The Attack_


Every light of the camp was on as Rawson and his assistant approached. A shallow depression in the sand marked the place where the big
casting had been. Beyond it a hundred feet was a black swarm of men
that parted as the car drew near. They had been gathered about a
figure upon the sand. Dean sensed something peculiar about that figure as the big car
ploughed to a stop. He leaped out and ran forward. He knew it was Riley there on the ground, knew it while still he was a
score of feet away. Only when he was close, however, did he realize
that the body ended in two stubs of legs; only when he leaned above
him did he know that the Irish foreman's big frame had been cut in two
as if by a knife. The severed legs lay a short distance beyond the body; they had fallen
side by side in horrible awkwardness, their stumps of flesh protruding
from charred clothing--and suddenly, shockingly, Rawson knew that the
flesh of body and legs had been seared. The knife had been hot--its
blade had been forged of flame! He heard Smithy cursing softly, unconsciously, at his side. "The green light," Smithy was saying in horrified understanding. "But
who did it? How did they do it? Where did they go?" "Quiet!" ordered Rawson sharply. He dropped to his knees beside the
mutilated body. Riley's eyes had opened in a sudden movement of
consciousness. *       *       *       *       *

The voice that came from his lips was a ghastly whisper at first, but
in that stricken thing that had been the body of Riley, foreman of the
night drilling crew, some reservoir of strength must still have
remained untapped. He drew upon it now. His voice roared again as it had done so many
times before through the Tonah Basin camp. It reached to every
listening ear where crowding men stood hushed and motionless; and the
overtone of terror that altered its customary timber was apparent to
all. "Devils!" said Riley. "Devils, straight out o' hell!... I saw 'em--I
saw 'em plain!... I shot--as if hot lead could harm the imps of
Satan....

"Oh, sir,"--his eyes had found those of Dean Rawson who was leaning
above--"for the love of hivin, Mister Rawson, do ye be quittin'
drillin'. The place is damned. L'ave it, sir; go away...."

His eyes closed. But he started up once more; he raised his head from
the sand with one final convulsive movement, and his voice was high
and shrill. "The fire! The fire of hell! He's turnin' it on me! God help...."

But Riley, before his failing mind could recall again that torturing
jet of flame, must have slipped away into a darkness as softly
enveloping as the velvet shadow world behind the low-hung stars. Rawson's hand that felt for a moment above the heart, confirmed the
message of the closed eyes and the head that fell inertly back. He came slowly to his feet. "Keep the floods on!" he ordered. "Take command of the armed guard,
Smithy; keep the whole camp patrolled." Then to the men:

"Boys, Riley was wrong. He believed what he said, all right, but Smith
and I know better. Don't worry about devils. These're just some dirty,
skulking dogs who got away with murder this time but who won't do it
again. We know where they're hiding. I'm checking up on them right
now. After that you'll all get a chance to square accounts for poor
old Riley!" *       *       *       *       *

"But the casting!" Smithy protested when he and Rawson were alone. "You can't explain that disappearance so easy, Dean." "No, I can't explain that," Rawson's words came slowly. "They've got
something that we don't understand as yet--but I'm going to know the
answer, and I'm going to find out to-night!" He was seated behind the wheel of his old car. "I'm as good a desert man as there is in this crowd," he told Smith. "And it's my fight, you know. I'm going alone. But there'll be no
fighting this trip; I'll just be scouting around." He leaned from the car to grip Smithy's shoulder with a hand firm and
steady. "You didn't see the crater when the show was on. You think that I'm
crazy to believe it, but up in that crater is where I'll find the
answer to a lot of questions. Lord knows what that answer will be. I've quit trying to guess. I'm just going up there to find out." He was gone, the rear wheels of the car throwing a spray of sand as he
started heedless of Smithy's protests against the plan. Rawson was in
no mood to argue. He must climb the mountain while it was night; under
the sun he would never reach the top alive. He would go alone and
unseen. He swung wide of the deserted town at the mountain's base. The
spectral walls of Little Rhyolite still showed their empty windows
that stared like dead eyes, and the man guided his car without lights
along a hidden stretch of hard, salt-crusted desert. He felt certain
that other eyes were watching. *       *       *       *       *

He began his climb at a point five miles away. The slopes that seemed
smooth and hard from a distance became, at closer range, a place of
wind-heaped, sandy ash, carved and scoured into fantastic forms. But
its very roughness offered protection, and Rawson fought the dragging
sand, and the gray, choking ash that dried his throat and cut it like
emery, without fear of being observed. He fought against time, too. Above Little Rhyolite, whatever
mysterious men were making the ascent would find the going easy. There
were windswept areas, long fields of pumice; a man could make good
time there. Rawson had none of these to aid him. He cast anxious
glances toward the eastern sky as he struggled on, till he saw gray
light change to rose and gold--but he stood in the titanic cleft in
the crater's rim as the first straight rays of the sun struck across. The volcano's top had been stripped clean by the winds of countless
years. Rocks, black, brown, even blood-red, were naked to the pitiless
glare of the sun. Their colors were mingled in a weird fantasy of
twisted lines that told of the inferno of heat in which they had been
formed. They towered high above the head of Dean Rawson as he stood, panting
and trembling with exhaustion. The cleft before him had become
enormous: it was a canyon, half filled with pumice and coarse ash. *       *       *       *       *

Rawson stood for long minutes in quiet listening. At the canyon's end
would lie the crater, and in that crater he would find.... But there
was no slightest picture in his mind of what he might see. He knew
only that he himself must remain unseen. He went forward cautiously. Rocky walls; a floor of sand where his feet left no mark. He was
watching ahead and above him. His gun was ready in his hand; he did
not propose to be ambushed. He moved with never a sound. The silence persisted; no living thing other than himself lent any
flicker of motion to the scene. Not even a lizard could hope for
existence amid these dead and barren heights. He was alone--the
certainty of it had driven deeply into his mind before the canyon end
was reached. And, desert man though he was and accustomed to traveling
the waste places of the earth, Rawson learned a new meaning and depth
of solitude. Here was no voiceless companionship of trees or brush or cactus; no
little living things scuttled across the rocks--he was alone, the only
speck of life in a place where life seemed forbidden. So sure of this was he that he stepped boldly from the canyon's end. He knew before he looked that he would see only more of the same
desolation. And his mind was filled equally with anger and
disappointment. *       *       *       *       *

Something was opposing him! Something had come into their camp--had
killed old Riley. And he, Rawson, had been so sure he would find
traces here that would allow him to give that opposing force a
name.... He stared out from the rocky cleft into a sun-blasted pit. Already
the rising sun was pouring its energy ever the jagged rim of bleak
rocks and down into the vast throat, choked and filled with ash. It sloped gently from all sides, the gray-brown powder that had been
coughed from within the earth. It made a floor where Rawson could have
walked with safety. But he did not go on. "Damn it!" he said with sudden savagery. "What a fool I was to think
of finding anyone here. Who would ever pick out a spot like this for a
base of operations?" He stared angrily at the floor of ash, at the black, outcropping
masses of tufa. He was angry with himself, angry and baffled and tired
from his climb. Far down in the vast, shallow pit blazing sunlight
glinted from massive blocks whose sides were mirror-smooth. A whirl of
wind eddied there for a moment and lifted the dust into a vertical
gray column--the only sign of motion in the whole desolate scene. Rawson turned and tramped back toward the long hot descent to the
floor of the Basin. *       *       *       *       *

He tried to maintain an air of confidence before the men. He kept them
busy placing and stacking materials; to all appearances the work would
go on despite the mysterious happenings of the night. Dean even prepared to resume drilling operations. He sent down another
bailer on the end of the ten-mile cable, but he left it there; he did
not care to raise it and risk more inexplicable results with the
consequent destruction of the men's morale. "Too late to do any more," he said to Smithy that afternoon. "We'll
drop all work--let the men get a good night's sleep. I'll take guard
duty to-night, and you can run the job to-morrow." There were men of the drilling crew standing near, though Rawson was
handling the hoisting drums himself. A ratchet release lever hooked
its end under a ring on Rawson's hand and pinched the flesh. Dean made
this an excuse for waiting a moment while the drillers walked away. "Ought not to wear it, I suppose," he said, and dabbed at a spot of
blood under the gold band. "But it's an old cameo--it belonged to my
Dad." He was showing the ring to Smithy as the men passed from hearing. "Don't want to be seen talking," he explained tersely. "Mustn't let
the men know we are on edge--they're about ready to bolt. But you be
ready for a call. Have your men armed. I am looking for more trouble
to-night." The two were laughing loudly as they followed the men toward the
building where the cook was banging on an iron tire that served as a
bell. *       *       *       *       *

Some three hours later Rawson was not smiling as he climbed the steel
ladder of the great derrick; he was grimly intent upon the job at
hand. All thought of his drilling operations had gone from him. He was not
anxious about the project. This was merely an interruption; the work
would go on later. But right now there was an enemy to be met and a
mystery to be solved. A rifle slung from his shoulder bumped against him satisfyingly as he
climbed. A man was on duty at a master switch--he would flood the camp
with light at the rifle's first crack. Dean seated himself at the top of the derrick. The cylinder of a huge
floodlight was beside him. Beyond was the massive sheave block; the
cables ran dizzily down to the concrete drilling floor so far below. And on every side the quiet camp spread out dark and silent in the
night. Dean surveyed it all with satisfaction. Nothing would get by
him now. But his further reflections were not so satisfying. "Who did it? How? Where did they go?" He was echoing Smithy's
questions and finding no ready answers. And that flame-thrower that
had cut down old Riley--how was that worked? Its one green flash had
been almost instantaneous. He was puzzling over such futile questioning when he saw the first
sign of attack. *       *       *       *       *

At the foot of the derrick was the hoisting shed. Except for that,
there was clear sand for a radius of fifty feet around the derrick's
base. Dean was staring suspiciously at that open space almost directly
underneath. Moving sand! He hardly knew what he had seen at first. Then the sand
at one point bulged upward unmistakably. For one instant Dean's thoughts shot off at a tangent. It was like the
work of a huge gopher--he had seen the little animals break through
like that. Then the sand parted, and something, indistinct, blurred,
dark against the yellow background, broke from cover. Rawson swung the rifle's muzzle over and down. Below him the vague
shadow had moved. Dean caught the blurred mass beyond his sights, then
swung the weapon aside. Who was it? He would have a look first. The thin crack of his rifle ripped the silence of the sleeping camp. Dean had aimed to one side and he regretted it in the instant of
firing. For, in the same second, there had come from the moving shadow
the gleam of starlight reflected upward from polished metal. *       *       *       *       *

Dean swung the rifle back. He fired quickly a second time. Beside him
the big light hissed into action and the whole camp sprang to sudden,
blazing light. And through the quick brilliance, more dazzling even
than the white glare itself, was one blinding line of green flame. Dean saw it as it began. It came from the dim shadow that had sprung
suddenly into sharp outline as the big lights came on. He saw the
figure. He sensed that it was a man, though he knew vaguely that the
figure was grotesque and hideous in some manner he had no time to
discern. The thin line of green flame ripped straight out, swinging in a quick,
sweeping trajectory, slashing through the steelwork of the great
derrick itself! Dean knew he was lost in the blinding instant while that fiery jet was
sweeping in a fan-shaped sector of vivid green. A knife of flame! It
had destroyed a man: it was now cutting down a framework of steel as
well! The derrick was falling as he fired again. There came a crushing jar
downward as the metal melted and failed, and the wild outward swing in
the beginning of the toppling fall. In the mind of Dean Rawson was but
one thought: the sights--and a something blurred beyond--a trigger to
be pressed. He was still firing when the shriek of torn steel went to thundering
silence, and even the lights of Tonah Basin Camp were swallowed up in
the whirling night....




CHAPTER VI

_Into the Crater_


Smithy's agonized face was above him when he came back to life. "God!" Smithy was breathing. "I thought you were gone, Dean! I thought you
were dead!" As it had been with Riley, there was one thought uppermost in Rawson's
bewildered mind: "The fire!" he choked. "He's swinging it...."

Then, after a time: "The derrick--it's falling! I went down with
it!... I hit--"

"I'll say you did," said the relieved Smithy. "The derrick smashed
across the bunkhouse, snapped you off, sent you skidding down the side
of a sand dune. It darned near scoured the clothes off you at that." Slowly Rawson began to feel the return flow of life through his body;
the shock had jarred every nerve to insensibility. Slowly he
remembered and comprehended what had happened. He was in his little office; he recognized his surroundings now. The
windows were open. Outside the sun was shining. He realized at last
the utter silence of that outer world. He tried to raise himself from the cot, but fell back as his
surroundings began to spin. "The camp!" he gasped weakly. "The men--I
don't hear them." "Gone!" Smith told him, while his eyes narrowed at some recollection
and his hand came up unconsciously to a bruise of his cheek. "They
beat it--went last night after the derrick fell. I tried to stop them. The fools were crazy with fear--devils, hell, all that kind of stuff. It all wound up in a fight--I couldn't hold 'em. "You've got to get better kind of fast," he told Rawson. "We've got to
get out of here ourselves--that flame-throwing stuff is too strong for
me to take." Rawson suddenly remembered the vague figure that had directed that
flame. "Did I get him?" he demanded eagerly. "You got him, yes, but then a whole swarm of things boiled up out of
nowhere and carried him off! We weren't any of us close enough to
see. The men said they were devils; I'm not sure they were wrong,
either. Dean, old man, we're up against something rotten. We've got to
get fixed for a fight; we can't handle this by ourselves." *       *       *       *       *

Rawson was silent. He spoke slowly at last:

"You mean we've got to quit--quit without knowing what we're up
against. Can you imagine what they'll say to me back in town? Scared
out, licked by something I've never even seen!" "Scared?" Smithy inquired. "You couldn't find a better word for it if
you hunted through the whole dictionary. Scared? Why, say, I'm so damn
scared I'm shaking yet, and the only thing that will cure me of it is
to look at those devils along the top of a machine gun! We'll go catch
us some equipment and a few service men--"

"You're a good guy, Smithy," Rawson reached out and gripped one brown
hand. "And we'll do as you say; but first I've got to get a line on
things. I'm becoming as irrational as the men. I'm imagining all sort
of crazy things." "You don't have to imagine them." Smithy's voice was strained; it
showed the tension under which he was laboring. "Men or beasts--God
knows what they are!--but when they come up from nowhere--"

"Out of the sand," Rawson explained. Smithy stared at him. "Out of the sand," he repeated. "Then, when they
cut a man in two, melt steel as if it were butter, pull a few tons of
metal down out of sight as easy as we would sink it in the ocean,
flash their lights over in the ghost town, up on top of a volcano--"

"Stop!" shouted Rawson unexpectedly. Some sudden gleam of
understanding had flashed through his mind. He dragged himself to his
feet and staggered to the doorway where he clung until the nausea of a
whirling world had passed. "The dust! The dust!" he gasped. Smithy put a hand on his shoulder. Plainly he thought Rawson out of
his mind. "Easy, old-timer," he cautioned. "We'll get out of here. I
hate to make you walk in the shape you're in, but the dirty cowards
ran off with the trucks. They even took your car; there isn't a thing
here on wheels." But Rawson did not hear. He was staring off across the sand, and he
was muttering bitter words. "Fool! Oh, you utter fool!" he said. "The dust--the dust." Then he let
the roughly tender hands of Smithy guide him back to the cot where he
fell into a troubled sleep. *       *       *       *       *

The comparative coolness of dusk was tempering the feverish midday
heat when Rawson awoke. And, strangely, his troubles and all his
conflicting plans had been simplified by the magic of sleep. His
course was entirely plain. He was going to the crater again. "What's there?" Smithy demanded. "What do you think that you'll find?" "I don't know," was the reply. "Then why--what the devil's the idea?" "It's my job. They put it up to me, Erickson and his crowd. I've got
to go." And nothing Smithy could say seemed able to reach Rawson and swerve
him from his single idea. "You'll be safe on the road," Rawson told him, while he filled a
canteen with water in preparation for his own trip. "You can get to
the highway by morning." Smithy did not trouble to reply. Was Rawson out of his mind? He could
not be sure. Certainly he had got an awful bump, but there were no
bones broken. However, it might be that he was still dazed--a crack on
the head might have done it. But there was no use in further argument, he admitted to himself. Dean
was going to the crater again--there was no stopping him--but he was
not going alone; Smithy could see to that. *       *       *       *       *

Again Rawson took the more difficult ascent. They went first to the
ghost town: the slope above Little Rhyolite would save weary miles. But, once there, they knew that the route was not a place where they
would care to be in the night. The realization came when Smithy,
walking where they had been the day before, passing the sand dune
where the wind had been scouring, seized Rawson's arm. "I thought so," he said softly. "I thought I saw something there the
other day, but the sand fell in and hid it. I didn't know the
old-timers went in for subways in Little Rhyolite." And Rawson looked as did Smithy, in wondering amazement, at the
roughly round opening in the sand, a tunnel mouth, driven through the
shifting sands--a tunnel, if Rawson was any judge, lined with brown
glistening glass. Understanding came quickly. "The jet of flame!" he exclaimed half under his breath. "They melted
their way through; the sand turned to glass; they held it some way for
an instant while it hardened." He walked cautiously toward the dark
entrance and peered inside. Darkness but for the nearer glinting reflections from walls that had
once been molten and dripping. The tunnel dipped down at a slight
angle, then straightened off horizontally. Rawson could have stood
upright in it with easily another two feet of headroom to spare. "And that," said Smithy, "is how the dirty rats got over to the camp. Like moles in their runway. No wonder they could pop up from nowhere. But, Dean, old man, I'm thinkin' we're up against something we haven't
dared speak of to each other. Don't tell me that it's just men we've
got to meet--"

"Wait," Rawson begged in a hushed whisper. "Wait till we know. That's
why I didn't dare go out without something definite to report. We'll
go up--but not here. We'll get a line on this up top." *       *       *       *       *

He led the way from the crumbling walls and skirted the mountain's
base to the place where he had climbed before. And, with the help of a
supporting arm at times, he found himself again in the great cleft in
the rocks. Darkness now made the passageway a place of somber shadows. The broad
cupped crater lay beyond in silent waiting; the vast sand-filled pit
seemed, under the starlight, to have been only that instant cooled. The twisted rocks that formed the rim had been caught in the very
instant of their tortures and frozen to deep silence and eternal
death: the black masses of tufa, protruding from the packed ashy sand
might have been buried by the smothering mass but a moment before. It
was a place of death, a place where nothing moved--until again the
breeze that whirled gustily over the saw-tooth crags snatched at the
sand in that lowest pit and drew it up in a spiral of dust. The word was on Rawson's lips. "Dust--dust in the crater. Fool! I said
I could read sign; I thought I was a desert man." "Dust? And why shouldn't there be dust? How do you usually have your
volcanoes arranged, old man?" "Fine dust!" Rawson interrupted in the same whisper. He was glancing
sharply about him as if in fear of being overheard. "See, the wind is
blowing it. Coarse sand and pumice--that's to be expected; but light
dust in a place that the winds have been sweeping for the last million
years! I don't have them arranged that way, Smithy--not unless the
sand has been recently disturbed!" *       *       *       *       *

He moved soundlessly across the sand. There was no chance for
concealment; the surface was too smooth for that. Yet he wished, as he
moved onward down the long, gentle slope, that he had been able to
keep under cover. In all the wide bowl of the great crater top was
nothing but dead ashes of fires gone long centuries before, coarse,
igneous rock--nothing to set the little nerves of one's spine to
tingling. Rawson tried to tell himself he was alone. Even the gun in
his hand seemed an absurd precaution. Yet he knew, with a certainty
that went beyond mere seeing, that invisible eyes were upon him. The blocks were massive when he drew near to them. They were buried in
the sand, their sides like mirrors, their edges true and straight. "Crystals," Rawson tried to tell himself, but he knew they were not. Gun in hand, he moved among the great rocks. Open sand lay beyond,
running off at a steeper pitch to make a throat--a smaller pit in the
great pit of the crater itself. Rawson noted it, then forgot it as he
stooped for something that lay half hidden, its protruding end shining
under the light of the stars, as he had seen it gleam before at the
derrick's base. He snatched up the metal tube, noting the lava tip, and that it was
like the one Smithy had found in the ghost town. The tube, clearly,
was part of some other mechanism, and Rawson realized with startling
suddenness that he was holding in his hand the jet of a
flame-thrower--the same one, perhaps, that had almost sent him to his
death. The thought, while he was still thinking it, was blotted from his
mind. He was thrown suddenly to the sandy earth; the sand was slipping
swiftly from beneath his feet; he was scrambling on all fours, clawing
wildly for some anchorage that would keep him from being swept away. *       *       *       *       *

He touched a corner of shining stone, drew himself to it, reached its
slanting side, then scrambled frenziedly to the top and threw himself
about to face the place of slipping sands. 