



Produced by Andrew Sly









A Strange Manuscript Found in a Copper Cylinder

By James De Mille



CONTENTS

      I. The Finding of the Copper Cylinder
     II. Adrift in the Antarctic Ocean
    III. A World of Fire and Desolation
     IV. The Sight of Human Beings
      V. The Torrent Sweeping Under the Mountains
     VI. The New World
    VII. Scientific Theories and Scepticism
   VIII. The Cave-Dwellers
     IX. The Cavern of the Dead
      X. The Sacred Hunt
     XI. The Swamp Monster
    XII. The Baleful Sacrifice
   XIII. The Awful "Mista Kosek"
    XIV. I Learn My Doom
     XV. The Kohen is Inexorable
    XVI. The Kosekin
   XVII. Belief and Unbelief
  XVIII. A Voyage over the Pole
    XIX. The Wonders of the "Amir"
     XX. The Dark Maiden Layelah
    XXI. The Flying Monster
   XXII. Escape
  XXIII. The Island of Fire
   XXIV. Recapture
    XXV. Falling, like Icarus, into the Sea
   XXVI. Grimm's Law Again
  XXVII. Oxenden Preaches a Sermon
 XXVIII. In Prison
   XXIX. The Ceremony of Separation
    XXX. The Day of Sacrifice
   XXXI. Conclusion




CHAPTER I

THE FINDING OF THE COPPER CYLINDER


It occurred as far back as February 15, 1850. It happened on that
day that the yacht Falcon lay becalmed upon the ocean between the
Canaries and the Madeira Islands. This yacht Falcon was the property
of Lord Featherstone, who, being weary of life in England, had taken
a few congenial friends for a winter's cruise in these southern
latitudes. They had visited the Azores, the Canaries, and the Madeira
Islands, and were now on their way to the Mediterranean. The wind had failed, a deep calm had succeeded, and everywhere, as far
as the eye could reach, the water was smooth and glassy. The yacht
rose and fell at the impulse of the long ocean undulations, and the
creaking of the spars sounded out a lazy accompaniment to the motion
of the vessel. All around was a watery horizon, except in the one
place only, toward the south, where far in the distance the Peak of
Teneriffe rose into the air. The profound calm, the warm atmosphere, the slow pitching of the
yacht, and the dull creaking of the spars all combined to lull into a
state of indolent repose the people on board. Forward were the crew;
some asleep, others smoking, others playing cards. At the stern were
Oxenden, the intimate friend of Featherstone, and Dr. Congreve, who
had come in the double capacity of friend and medical attendant. These two, like the crew, were in a state of dull and languid
repose. Suspended between the two masts, in an Indian hammock, lay
Featherstone, with a cigar in his mouth and a novel in his hand, which
he was pretending to read. The fourth member of the party, Melick, was
seated near the mainmast, folding some papers in a peculiar way. His
occupation at length attracted the roving eyes of Featherstone, who
poked forth his head from his hammock, and said in a sleepy voice:

"I say, Melick, you're the most energetic fellah I ever saw. By Jove! you're the only one aboard that's busy. What are you doing?" "Paper boats," said Melick, in a business-like tone. "Paper boats! By Jove!" said Featherstone. "What for?" "I'm going to have a regatta," said Melick. "Anything to kill time,
you know." "By Jove!" exclaimed Featherstone again, raising himself higher in his
hammock, "that's not a bad idea. A wegatta! By Jove! glowious! glowious! I say, Oxenden, did you hear that?" "What do you mean by a regatta?" asked Oxenden, lazily. "Oh, I mean a race with these paper boats. We can bet on them,
you know." At this Featherstone sat upright, with his legs dangling out of
the hammock. "By Jove!" he exclaimed again. "Betting! So we can. Do you know,
Melick, old chap, I think that's a wegular piece of inspiration. A wegatta! and we can bet on the best boat." "But there isn't any wind," said Oxenden. "Well, you know, that's the fun of it," said Melick, who went solemnly
on as he spoke, folding his paper boats; "that's the fun of it. For
you see if there was a wind we should be going on ourselves, and the
regatta couldn't come off; but, as it is, the water is just right. You pick out your boat, and lay your bet on her to race to some given
point." "A given point? But how can we find any?" "Oh, easily enough; something or anything--a bubble'll do, or we can
pitch out a bit of wood." Upon this Featherstone descended from his perch, and came near to
examine the proceedings, while the other two, eager to take advantage
of the new excitement, soon joined him. By this time Melick had
finished his paper boats. There were four of them, and they were made
of different colors, namely, red, green, yellow, and white. "I'll put these in the water," said Melick, "and then we can lay our
bets on them as we choose. But first let us see if there is anything
that can be taken as a point of arrival. If there isn't anything, I
can pitch out a bit of wood, in any direction which may seem best." Saying this, he went to the side, followed by the others, and all
looked out carefully over the water. "There's a black speck out there," said Oxenden. "So there is," said Featherstone. "That'll do. I wonder what it is?" "Oh, a bit of timber," said Melick. "Probably the spar of some ship." "It don't look like a spar," said the doctor; "it's only a round spot,
like the float of some net." "Oh, it's a spar," said Melick. "It's one end of it, the rest is under
water." The spot thus chosen was a dark, circular object, about a hundred
yards away, and certainly did look very much like the extremity of
some spar, the rest of which was under water. Whatever it was,
however, it served well enough for their present purpose, and no one
took any further interest in it, except as the point toward which the
paper boats should run in their eventful race. Melick now let himself down over the side, and placed the paper boats
on the water as carefully as possible. After this the four stood
watching the little fleet in silence. The water was perfectly still,
and there was no perceptible wind, but there were draughts of air
caused by the rise and fall of the yacht, and these affected the tiny
boats. Gradually they drew apart, the green one drifting astern, the
yellow one remaining under the vessel, while the red and the white
were carried out in the direction where they were expected to go, with
about a foot of space between them. "Two to one on the red!" cried Featherstone, betting on the one which
had gained the lead. "Done," said Melick, promptly taking his offer. Oxenden made the same bet, which was taken by Melick and the doctor. Other bets were now made as to the direction which they would take, as
to the distance by which the red would beat the white, as to the time
which would be occupied by the race, and as to fifty other things
which need not be mentioned. All took part in this; the excitement
rose high and the betting went on merrily. At length it was noticed
that the white was overhauling the red. The excitement grew intense;
the betting changed its form, but was still kept up, until at last
the two paper boats seemed blended together in one dim spot which
gradually faded out of sight. It was now necessary to determine the state of the race, so
Featherstone ordered out the boat. The four were soon embarked, and
the men rowed out toward the point which had been chosen as the end of
the race. On coming near they found the paper boats stuck together,
saturated with water, and floating limp on the surface. An animated
discussion arose about this. Some of the bets were off, but others
remained an open question, and each side insisted upon a different
view of the case. In the midst of this, Featherstone's attention was
drawn to the dark spot already mentioned as the goal of the race. "That's a queer-looking thing," said he, suddenly. "Pull up, lads, a
little; let's see what it is. It doesn't look to me like a spar." The others, always on the lookout for some new object of interest,
were attracted by these words, and looked closely at the thing in
question. The men pulled. The boat drew nearer. "It's some sort of floating vessel," said Oxenden. "It's not a spar," said Melick, who was at the bow. And as he said this he reached out and grasped at it. He failed to get
it, and did no more than touch it. It moved easily and sank, but soon
came up again. A second time he grasped at it, and with both hands. This time he caught it, and then lifted it out of the water into the
boat. These proceedings had been watched with the deepest interest;
and now, as this curious floating thing made its appearance among
them, they all crowded around it in eager excitement. "It looks like a can of preserved meat," said the doctor. "It certainly is a can," said Melick, "for it's made of metal; but as
to preserved meat, I have my doubts." The article in question was made of metal and was cylindrical in
shape. It was soldered tight and evidently contained something. It was
about eighteen inches long and eight wide. The nature of the metal was
not easily perceptible, for it was coated with slime, and covered over
about half its surface with barnacles and sea-weed. It was not heavy,
and would have floated higher out of the water had it not been for
these encumbrances. "It's some kind of preserved meat," said the doctor. "Perhaps
something good--game, I dare say--yes, Yorkshire game-pie. They pot
all sorts of things now." "If it's game," said Oxenden, "it'll be rather high by this time. Man
alive! look at those weeds and shells. It must have been floating for
ages." "It's my belief," said Featherstone, "that it's part of the provisions
laid in by Noah for his long voyage in the ark. So come, let's open
it, and see what sort of diet the antediluvians had." "It may be liquor," said Oxenden. Melick shook his head. "No," said he; "there's something inside, but whatever it is, it isn't
liquor. It's odd, too. The thing is of foreign make, evidently. I
never saw anything like it before. It may be Chinese." "By Jove!" cried Featherstone, "this is getting exciting. Let's go
back to the yacht and open it." The men rowed back to the yacht. "It's meat of some sort," continued the doctor. "I'm certain of that. It has come in good time. We can have it for dinner." "You may have my share, then," said Oxenden. "I hereby give and
bequeath to you all my right, title, and interest in and to anything
in the shape of meat that may be inside." "Meat cans," said Melick, "are never so large as that." "Oh, I don't know about that," said the doctor, "they make up pretty
large packages of pemmican for the arctic expeditions." "But they never pack up pemmican in copper cylinders," said Melick,
who had been using his knife to scrape off the crust from the vessel. "Copper!" exclaimed Oxenden. "Is it copper?" "Look for yourselves," said Melick, quietly. They all looked, and could see, where the knife had cut into the
vessel, that it was as he said. It was copper. "It's foreign work," said Melick. "In England we make tin cans for
everything. It may be something that's drifted out from Mogadore or
some port in Morocco." "In that case," said Oxenden, "it may contain the mangled remains of
one of the wives of some Moorish pasha." By this time they had reached the yacht and hurried aboard. All were
eager to satisfy their curiosity. Search was made for a cold-chisel,
but to no purpose. Then Featherstone produced a knife which was used
to open sardine boxes, but after a faithful trial this proved useless. At length Melick, who had gone off in search of something more
effective, made his appearance armed with an axe. With this he
attacked the copper cylinder, and by means of a few dexterous blows
succeeded in cutting it open. Then he looked in. "What do you see?" asked Featherstone. "Something," said Melick, "but I can't quite make it out." "If you can't make it out, then shake it out," said Oxenden. Upon this Melick took the cylinder, turned it upside down, shook it
smartly, and then lifted it and pounded it against the deck. This
served to loosen the contents, which seemed tightly packed, but came
gradually down until at length they could be seen and drawn forth. Melick drew them forth, and the contents of the mysterious copper
cylinder resolved themselves into two packages. The sight of these packages only served to intensify their curiosity. If it had been some species of food it would at once have revealed
itself, but these packages suggested something more important. What
could they be? Were there treasures inside--jewels, or golden
ornaments from some Moorish seraglio, or strange coin from far Cathay? One of the packages was very much larger than the other. It was
enclosed in wrappers made of some coarse kind of felt, bound tight
with strong cords. The other was much smaller, and, was folded in the
same material without being bound. This Melick seized and began to
open. "Wait a minute," said Featherstone. "Let's make a bet on it. Five
guineas that it's some sort of jewels!" "Done," said Oxenden. Melick opened the package, and it was seen that Featherstone had lost. There were no jewels, but one or two sheets of something that looked
like paper. It was not paper, however, but some vegetable product
which was used for the same purpose. The surface was smooth, but the
color was dingy, and the lines of the vegetable fibres were plainly
discernible. These sheets were covered with writing. "Halloa!" cried Melick. "Why, this is English!" At this the others crowded around to look on, and Featherstone in his
excitement forgot that he had lost his bet. There were three sheets,
all covered with writing--one in English, another in French, and a
third in German. It was the same message, written in these three
different languages. But at that moment they scarcely noticed this. All that they saw was the message itself, with its mysterious meaning. It was as follows:


"To the finder of this:

"Sir,--I am an Englishman, and have been carried by a series of
incredible events to a land from which escape is as impossible as from
the grave. I have written this and committed it to the sea, in the
hope that the ocean currents may bear it within the reach of civilized
man. Oh, unknown friend! whoever you are. I entreat you to let this
message be made known in some way to my father, Henry More, Keswick,
Cumberland, England, so that he may learn the fate of his son. The MS.
accompanying this contains an account of my adventures, which I should
like to have forwarded to him. Do this for the sake of that mercy
which you may one day wish to have shown to yourself. "ADAM MORE." "By Jove!" cried Featherstone, as he read the above, "this is really
getting to be something tremendous." "This other package must be the manuscript," said Oxenden, "and it'll
tell all about it." "Such a manuscript'll be better than meat," said the doctor,
sententiously. Melick said nothing, but, opening his knife, he cut the cords and
unfolded the wrapper. He saw a great collection of leaves, just like
those of the letter, of some vegetable substance, smooth as paper, and
covered with writing. "It looks like Egyptian papyrus," said the doctor. "That was the
common paper of antiquity." "Never mind the Egyptian papyrus," said Featherstone, in feverish
curiosity. "Let's have the contents of the manuscript. You, Melick,
read; you're the most energetic of the lot, and when you're tired the
rest of us will take turns." "Read? Why, it'll take a month to read all this," said Melick. "All the better," said Featherstone; "this calm will probably last a
month, and we shall have nothing to interest us." Melick made no further objection. He was as excited as the rest, and
so he began the reading of the manuscript. CHAPTER II

ADRIFT IN THE ANTARCTIC OCEAN


My name is Adam More. I am the son of Henry More, apothecary, Keswick,
Cumberland. I was mate of the ship Trevelyan (Bennet, master), which
was chartered by the British Government to convey convicts to Van
Dieman's Land. This was in 1843. We made our voyage without any
casualty, landed our convicts in Hobart Town, and then set forth on
our return home. It was the 17th of December when we left. From the
first adverse winds prevailed, and in order to make any progress we
were obliged to keep well to the south. At length, on the 6th of
January, we sighted Desolation Island. We found it, indeed, a desolate
spot. In its vicinity we saw a multitude of smaller islands, perhaps a
thousand in number, which made navigation difficult, and forced us to
hurry away as fast as possible. But the aspect of this dreary spot was
of itself enough to repel us. There were no trees, and the multitude
of islands seemed like moss-covered rocks; while the temperature,
though in the middle of the antarctic summer, was from 38 to 58
degrees Fahr. In order to get rid of these dangerous islands we stood south and
west, and at length found ourselves in south latitude 65 degrees,
longitude 60 degrees east. We were fortunate enough not to find any
ice, although we were within fifteen hundred miles of the South Pole,
and far within that impenetrable icy barrier which, in 1773, had
arrested the progress of Captain Cook. Here the wind failed us, and we
lay becalmed and drifting. The sea was open all around us, except to
the southeast, where there was a low line along the horizon
terminating in a lofty promontory; but though it looked like land we
took it for ice. All around us whales and grampuses were gambolling
and spouting in vast numbers. The weather was remarkably fine and
clear. For two or three days the calm continued, and we drifted along
helplessly, until at length we found ourselves within a few miles of
the promontory above mentioned. It looked like land, and seemed to be
a rocky island rising from the depths of the sea. It was, however, all
covered with ice and snow, and from this there extended eastward as
far as the eye could reach an interminable line of ice, but toward the
southwest the sea seemed open to navigation. The promontory was very
singular in shape, rising up to a peak which was at least a thousand
feet in height, and forming a striking object, easily discovered and
readily identified by any future explorer. We named it, after our
ship, Trevelyan Peak, and then felt anxious to lose sight of it
forever. But the calm continued, and at length we drifted in close
enough to see immense flocks of seals dotting the ice at the foot of
the peak. Upon this I proposed to Agnew, the second mate, that we should go
ashore, shoot some seals, and bring them back. This was partly for the
excitement of the hunt, and partly for the honor of landing in a place
never before trodden by the foot of man. Captain Bennet made some
objections, but he was old and cautious, and we were young and
venturesome, so we laughed away his scruples and set forth. We did not
take any of the crew, owing to the captain's objections. He said that
if we chose to throw away our own lives he could not help it, but that
he would positively refuse to allow a single man to go with us. We
thought this refusal an excess of caution amounting to positive
cowardice, but were unable to change his mind. The distance was not
great, the adventure was attractive, and so the captain's gig was
lowered, and in this Agnew and I rowed ashore. We took with us a
double-barrelled rifle apiece, and also a pistol. Agnew took a glass. We rowed for about three miles, and reached the edge of the ice, which
extended far out from the promontory. Here we landed, and secured the
boat by means of a small grappling-iron, which we thrust into the ice. We then walked toward the promontory for about a mile, and here we
found a multitude of seals. These animals were so fearless that they
made not the slightest movement as we came up, but stared at us in an
indifferent way. We killed two or three, and then debated whether to
go to the promontory or not. Agnew was eager to go, so as to touch the
actual rock; but I was satisfied with what we had done, and was now
desirous of returning. In the midst of this I felt a flake of snow on
my cheek. I started and looked up. To my great surprise I saw that the
sky had changed since I had last noticed it. When we left the ship it
was clear and blue, but now it was overspread with dark,
leaden-colored clouds, and the snow-flakes that had fallen were
ominous of evil. A snow-storm here, in the vicinity of the ice, was
too serious a thing to be disregarded. But one course now remained,
and that was an immediate return to the ship. Each of us seized a seal and dragged it after us to the boat. We
reached it and flung them in. Just at that moment a gun sounded over
the water. It was from the ship--the signal of alarm--the summons from
the captain for our return. We saw now that she had been drifting
since we left her, and had moved southwest several miles. The row back
promised to be far harder than the pull ashore, and, what was worse,
the wind was coming up, the sea was rising, and the snow was
thickening. Neither of us said a word. We saw that our situation was
very serious, and that we had been very foolhardy; but the words were
useless now. The only thing to be done was to pull for the ship with
all our strength, and that was what we did. So we pushed off, and rowed as we had never rowed before. Our progress
was difficult. The sea grew steadily rougher; the wind increased; the
snow thickened; and, worst of all, the day was drawing to a close. We
had miscalculated both as to distance and time. Even if it had
continued calm we should have had to row back in the dark; but now the
sun was setting, and with the darkness we had to encounter the
gathering storm and the blinding snow. We rowed in silence. At every
stroke our situation grew more serious. The wind was from the south,
and therefore favored us to some extent, and also made less of a sea
than would have been produced by a wind from any other quarter; but
then this south wind brought dangers of its own, which we were soon to
feel--new dangers and worse ones. For this south wind drove the ship
farther from us, and at the same time broke up the vast fields of ice
and impelled the fractured masses northward. But this was a danger
which we did not know just then. At that time we were rowing for the
ship, and amid the darkness and the blinding snow and the dashing
waves we heard from time to time the report of signal-guns fired from
the ship to guide us back. These were our only guide, for the darkness
and the snow had drawn the ship from our sight, and we had to be
guided by our hearing only. We were rowing for our lives, and we knew it; but every moment our
situation grew more desperate. Each new report of the gun seemed to
sound farther away. We seemed always to be rowing in the wrong
direction. At each report we had to shift the boat's course somewhat,
and pull toward the last point from which the gun seemed to sound. With all this the wind was increasing rapidly to a gale, the sea was
rising and breaking over the boat, the snow was blinding us with its
ever-thickening sleet. The darkness deepened and at length had grown
so intense that nothing whatever could be seen--neither sea nor sky,
not even the boat itself--yet we dared not stop; we had to row. Our
lives depended on our efforts. We had to row, guided by the sound of
the ship's gun, which the ever-varying wind incessantly changed, till
our minds grew all confused, and we rowed blindly and mechanically. So we labored for hours at the oars, and the storm continually
increased, and the sea continually rose, while the snow fell thicker
and the darkness grew intenser. The reports of the gun now grew
fainter; what was worse, they were heard at longer intervals, and this
showed us that Captain Bennet was losing heart; that he was giving us
up; that he despaired of finding us, and was now firing only an
occasional gun out of a mournful sense of duty. This thought reduced
us to despair. It seemed as if all our efforts had only served to take
us farther away from the ship, and deprived us of all motive for
rowing any harder than was barely necessary to keep the boat steady. After a time Agnew dropped his oar and began to bail out the boat--a
work which was needed; for, in spite of our care, she had shipped many
seas, and was one third full of water. He worked away at this while I
managed the boat, and then we took turns at bailing. In this way we
passed the dreary night. Morning came at last. The wind was not so violent, but the snow was so
thick that we could only see for a little distance around us. The ship
was nowhere visible, nor were there any signs of her. The last gun had
been fired during the night. All that we could see was the outline of
a gaunt iceberg--an ominous spectacle. Not knowing what else to do we
rowed on as before, keeping in what seemed our best course, though
this was mere conjecture, and we knew all the time that we might be
going wrong. There was no compass in the boat, nor could we tell the
sun's position through the thick snow. We rowed with the wind,
thinking that it was blowing toward the north, and would carry us in
that direction. We still hoped to come within sound of the ship's gun,
and kept straining our ears incessantly to hear the wished-for report. But no such sound ever came again, and we heard nothing except the
plash of the waves and the crash of breaking ice. Thus all that day we
rowed along, resting at intervals when exhausted, and then resuming
our labors, until at length night came; and again to the snow and ice
and waves was added the horror of great darkness. We passed that night
in deep misery. We had eaten nothing since we left the ship, but
though exhausted by long fasting and severe labor, the despair of our
hearts took away all desire for food. We were worn out with hard work,
yet the cold was too great to allow us to take rest, and we were
compelled to row so as to keep ourselves from perishing. But fatigue
and drowsiness overcame us, and we often sank into sleep even while
rowing; and then after a brief slumber we would awake with benumbed
limbs to wrestle again with the oars. In this way we passed that
night. Another morning came, and we found to our great joy that the snow had
ceased. We looked eagerly around to see if there were any signs of the
ship. Nothing could be seen of her. Far away on one side rose a peak,
which looked like the place where we had landed. Judging from the
wind, which we still supposed to be southerly, the peak lay toward the
northeast; in which case we had been carried steadily, in spite of all
our efforts, toward the south. About a mile on one side of us the ice
began, and extended far away; while on the other side, at the distance
of some ten miles, there was another line of ice. We seemed to have
been carried in a southwesterly direction along a broad strait that
ran into the vast ice-fields. This discovery showed how utterly
useless our labors had been; for in spite of all, even with the wind
in our favor, we had been drawn steadily in an opposite direction. It
was evident that there was some current here, stronger than all our
strength, which had brought us to this place. We now determined to land on the ice, and try to cook a portion of our
seals. On approaching it we noticed that there was a current which
tended to draw us past the ice in what I supposed to be a
southwesterly direction. This confirmed my worst fears. But now the
labor of landing and building a fire on the ice served to interest us
for a time and divert our thoughts. We brushed away the snow, and then
broke up a box which was in the boat, and also the stern seats. This
we used very sparingly, reserving the rest for another occasion. Then
we cut portions from one of the seals, and laid them in thin strips on
the flames. The cooking was but slight, for the meat was merely
singed; but we were ravenous, and the contact of the fire was enough
to give it an attractive flavor. With this food we were greatly
refreshed; and as for drink, we had all around us an endless extent of
ice and snow. Then, taking our precious fragments of cooked meat, we
returned to the boat and put off. We could scarcely tell what to do
next, and while debating on this point we fell asleep. We slept far
into the night, then awoke benumbed with cold; then took to the oars
till we were weary; then fell asleep again, to be again awakened by
the cold and again to pull at the oars. So the night passed, and
another day came. The snow still held off, but the sky was overcast with dark,
leaden-colored clouds, and looked threatening. Ice was all around us
as before; and the open water had diminished now from ten miles to
five miles of width. The ice on one side was low, but on the opposite
side it arose to the height of one hundred feet. We saw here, as we
watched the shore, that the current which had already borne us thus
far was now stronger than ever, and was carrying us along at a rate
which made all efforts of ours against it utterly useless. And now a
debate arose between us as to the direction of this current. Agnew
suddenly declared his belief that it was running north, while I was
firm in the conviction that it ran south. "There's no use rowing any more," said Agnew. "If it runs south we
can't resist it. It's too strong. But I always like to look on the
bright side, and so I believe it runs north. In that case there is no
use rowing, for it will carry us along fast enough." Then I proposed that we should go ashore on the ice. To this Agnew
objected, but afterward consented, at my earnest request. So we tried
to get ashore, but this time found it impossible; for the ice
consisted of a vast sheet of floating lumps, which looked like the
ruin of bergs that had been broken up in some storm. After this I had
nothing to say, nor was there anything left for us but to drift
wherever the current might carry us. So we drifted for some days, Agnew all the time maintaining that we
were going north, while I was sure that we were going south. The sky
remained as cloudy as ever, the wind varied incessantly, and there was
nothing by which we could conjecture the points of the compass. We
lived on our seal, and for drink we chewed ice and snow. One thing was
certain--the climate was no colder. Agnew laid great stress on this. "You see," said he, "we must be going north. If we were going south we
should be frozen stiff by this time." "Yes; but if we were going north," said I, "we ought to find it
growing warmer." "No," said he, "not with all this ice around us. It's the ice that
keeps the temperature in this cold state." Argument could do no good, and so we each remained true to our
belief--his leading him to hope, and mine dragging me down to despair. At length we finished the last fragment of the seal that we had
cooked, and, finding ourselves near some firm ice, we went ashore and
cooked all that was left, using the remainder of our wood for fuel,
and all that we dared to remove from the boat. Re-embarking with this,
we drifted on as before. Several more days passed. At last one night I was roused by Agnew. He
pointed far away to the distant horizon, where I saw a deep red glow
as of fire. We were both filled with wonder at the sight, and were
utterly unable to account for it. We knew that it could not be caused
by the sun or the moon, for it was midnight, and the cause lay on the
earth and not in the skies. It was a deep, lurid glow, extending along
the horizon, and seemed to be caused by some vast conflagration. CHAPTER III

A WORLD OF FIRE AND DESOLATION


At the sight of that deep-red glow various feelings arose within us:
in me there was new dejection; in Agnew there was stronger hope. I
could not think but that it was our ship that was on fire, and was
burning before our eyes. Agnew thought that it was some burning
forest, and that it showed our approach to some habitable and
inhabited land. For hour after hour we watched, and all the time the
current drew us nearer, and the glow grew brighter and more intense. At last we were too weak to watch any longer, and we fell asleep. On waking our first thoughts were about the fire, and we looked
eagerly around. It was day, but the sky was as gloomy as ever, and the
fire was there before our eyes, bright and terrible. We could now see
it plainly, and discern the cause also. The fire came from two points,
at some distance apart--two peaks rising above the horizon, from which
there burst forth flames and smoke with incessant explosions. All was
now manifest. It was no burning ship, no blazing forest, no land
inhabited by man: those blazing peaks were two volcanoes in a state of
active eruption, and at that sight I knew the worst. "I know where we are now," I said, despairingly. "Where?" asked Agnew. "That," said I, "is the antarctic continent." "The antarctic fiddlestick," said he, contemptuously. "It is far more
likely to be some volcanic island in the South Sea. There's a
tremendous volcano in the Sandwich Islands, and these are something
like it." "I believe," said I, "that these are the very volcanoes that Sir James
Ross discovered last year." "Do you happen to know where he found them?" Agnew asked. "I do not," I answered. "Well, I do," said he, "and they're thousands of miles away from this. They are south latitude 77 degrees, east longitude 167 degrees; while
we, as I guess, are about south latitude 40 degrees, east longitude
60 degrees." "At any rate," said I, "we're drifting straight toward them." "So I see," said Agnew, dryly. "At any rate, the current will take us
somewhere. We shall find ourselves carried past these volcanic
islands, or through them, and then west to the Cape of Good Hope. Besides, even here we may find land with animals and vegetation; who
knows?" "What! amid all this ice?" I cried. "Are you mad?" "Mad?" said he; "I should certainly go mad if I hadn't hope." "Hope!" I repeated; "I have long since given up hope." "Oh, well," said he, "enjoy your despair, and don't try to deprive me
of my consolation. My hope sustains me, and helps me to cheer you up. It would never do, old fellow, for both of us to knock under." I said nothing more, nor did Agnew. We drifted on, and all our
thoughts were taken up with the two volcanoes, toward which we were
every moment drawing nearer. As we approached they grew larger and
larger, towering up to a tremendous height. I had seen Vesuvius and
Stromboli and AEtna and Cotopaxi; but these appeared far larger than
any of them, not excepting the last. They rose, like the Peak of
Teneriffe, abruptly from the sea, with no intervening hills to dwarf
or diminish their proportions. They were ten or twelve miles apart,
and the channel of water in which we were drifting flowed between
them. Here the ice and snow ended. We thus came at last to land; but it was
a land that seemed more terrible than even the bleak expanse of ice
and snow that lay behind, for nothing could be seen except a vast and
drear accumulation of lava-blocks of every imaginable shape, without
a trace of vegetation--uninhabited, uninhabitable, and unpassable to
man. But just where the ice ended and the rocks began there was a
long, low reef, which projected for more than a quarter of a mile into
the water, affording the only possible landing-place within sight. Here we decided to land, so as to rest and consider what was best to
be done. Here we landed, and walked up to where rugged lava-blocks prevented
any further progress. But at this spot our attention was suddenly
arrested by a sight of horror. It was a human figure lying prostrate,
face downward. At this sight there came over us a terrible sensation. Even Agnew's
buoyant soul shrank back, and we stared at each other with quivering
lips. It was some time before we could recover ourselves; then we went
to the figure, and stooped down to examine it. The clothes were those of a European and a sailor; the frame was
emaciated and dried up, till it looked like a skeleton; the face was
blackened and all withered, and the bony hands were clinched tight. It
was evidently some sailor who had suffered shipwreck in these
frightful solitudes, and had drifted here to starve to death in this
appalling wilderness. It was a sight which seemed ominous of our own
fate, and Agnew's boasted hope, which had so long upheld him, now sank
down into a despair as deep as my own. What room was there now for
hope, or how could we expect any other fate than this? At length I began to search the pockets of the deceased. "What are you doing?" asked Agnew, in a hoarse voice. "I'm trying to find out who he is," I said. "Perhaps there may be
papers." As I said this I felt something in the breast-pocket of his jacket,
and drew it forth. It was a leather pocket-book, mouldy and rotten
like the clothing. On opening it, it fell to pieces. There was nothing
in it but a piece of paper, also mouldy and rotten. This I unfolded
with great care, and saw writing there, which, though faded, was still
legible. It was a letter, and there were still signs of long and
frequent perusals, and marks, too, which looked as though made by
tears--tears, perhaps of the writer, perhaps of the reader: who can
tell? I have preserved this letter ever since, and I now fasten it
here upon this sheet of my manuscript. THE LETTER. "Bristol April 20. 1820. "my darling tom

"i writ you these few lines in hast i don like youar gon a walen an in
the south sea dont go darlin tom or mebbe ill never se you agin for
ave bad drems of you darlin tom an im afraid so don go my darlin tom
but come back an take anoth ship for America baby i as wel as ever but
mises is pa an as got a new tooth an i think yo otnt go a walen o
darlin tom * * * sea as the wages was i in New York an better go thar
an id like to go ther for good for they gives good wages in America. O
come back my Darlin tom and take me to America an the baby an weel all
live an love an di together

"Your loving wife Polley Reed." I began to read this, but there came a lump in my throat, and I had to
stop. Agnew leaned on my shoulder, and we both read it in silence. He
rubbed the back of his hand over his eyes and drew a long breath. Then
he walked away for a little distance, and I put the letter carefully
away in my own pocket-book. After a little while Agnew came back. "More," said he, "do you remember any of the burial-service?" I understood his meaning at once. "Yes," I said, "some of it--a good deal of it, I think." "That's good," said he. "Let's put the poor fellow under ground." "It would be hard to do that," I said; "we'll have to bury him in the
snow." At this Agnew went off for a little distance and clambered over the
rocks. He was not gone long. When he returned he said, "I've found
some crumbled pumice-stone; we can scoop a grave for him there." We then raised the body and carried it to the place which Agnew had
found. So emaciated was the poor dead sailor that his remains were no
heavier than a small boy. On reaching the spot, we found the crumbled
pumice-stone. We placed the body in a crevice among the lava rocks,
and then I said what I could remember of the burial-service. After
this we carried in our hands the crumbled pumice-stone until we had
covered the body, and thus gave the poor fellow a Christian burial. We then returned to the shore. "More, old fellow," said Agnew, "I feel the better for this; the
service has done me good." "And me too," said I. "It has reminded me of what I had forgotten. This world is only a part of life. We may lose it and yet live on. There is another world; and if we can only keep that in our minds we
sha'n't be so ready to sink into despair--that is, I sha'n't. Despair
is my weakness; you are more hopeful." "Yes," said Agnew, solemnly; "but my hope thus far has referred only
to the safety of my skin. After this I shall try to think of my soul,
and cultivate, not the hope of escape, but the hope full of
immortality. Yes, More, after all we shall live, if not in England,
then, let us hope, in heaven." There was a long silence after this--that kind of silence which one
may preserve who is at the point of death. "I wonder how he got here?" said Agnew, at last. "The letter mentions
a whaler. No doubt the ship has been driven too far south; it has
foundered; he has escaped in a boat, either alone or with others; he
has been carried along this channel, and has landed here, afraid to go
any farther." "But his boat, what has become of that?" "His boat! That must have gone long ago. The letter was written in
1820. At any rate, let's look around." We did so. After some search we found fragments of a rotted rope
attached to a piece of rock. "That," said Agnew, "must have been fastened to the boat; and as for
the boat herself, she has long ago been swept away from this." "What shall we do now?" I said, after a long silence. "There's only one thing," said Agnew. "We must go on." "Go on?" I asked, in wonder. "Certainly," said he, confidently. "Will you stay here? No. Will you
go back? You can't. We must, therefore, go on. That is our only hope." "Hope!" I cried. "Do you still talk of hope?" "Hope?" said Agnew; "of course. Why not? There are no limits to hope,
are there? One can hope anything anywhere. It is better to die while
struggling like a man, full of hope and energy than to perish in
inaction and despair. It is better to die in the storm and furious
waters than to waste away in this awful place. So come along. Let's
drift as before. Let's see where this channel will take us. It will
certainly take us somewhere. Such a stream as this must have some
outlet." "This stream," said I, "will take us to death, and death only. The
current grows swifter every hour. I've heard some old yarn of a vast
opening at each of the poles, or one of them, into which the waters of
the ocean pour. They fall into one, and some say they go through and
come out at the other." Agnew laughed. "That," said he, "is a madman's dream. In the first place, I don't
believe that we are approaching the south, but the north. The warmth
of the climate here shows that. Yes, we are drawing north. We shall
soon emerge into warm waters and bright skies. So come along, and let
us lose no more time." I made no further objection. There was nothing else to be done, and
at the very worst we could not be in greater danger while drifting on
than in remaining behind. Soon, therefore, we were again in the boat,
and the current swept us on as before. The channel now was about four miles wide. On either side arose
the lofty volcanoes vomiting forth flames and smoke with furious
explosions; vast stones were hurled up into the air from the craters;
streams of molten lava rolled down, and at intervals there fell great
showers of ashes. The shores on either side were precipitous and
rugged beyond all description, looking like fiery lava streams which
had been arrested by the flood, and cooled into gloomy, overhanging
cliffs. The lava rock was of a deep, dull slate-color, which at a
distance looked black; and the blackness which thus succeeded to
the whiteness of the snow behind us seemed like the funeral pall of
nature. Through scenes like these we drifted on, and the volcanoes on
either side of the channel towered on high with their fiery floods of
lava, their incessant explosions, their fierce outbursts of flames,
and overhead there rolled a dense black canopy of smoke--altogether
forming a terrific approach to that unknown and awful pathway upon
which we were going. So we passed this dread portal, and then there
lay before us--what? Was it a land of life or a land of death? Who
could say? It was evening when we passed through. Night came on, and the darkness
was illuminated by the fiery glow of the volcanic flames. Worn out
with fatigue, we fell asleep. So the night passed, and the current
bore us on until, at length, the morning came. We awoke, and now, for
the first time in many days, we saw the face of the sun. The clouds
had at last broken, the sky was clear, and behind us the sun was
shining. That sight told us all. It showed us where we were going. I pointed to the sun. "Look there," said I. "There is the sun in the northern sky--behind
us. We have been drifting steadily toward the south." At this Agnew was silent, and sat looking back for a long time. There
we could still see the glow of the volcanic fires, though they were
now many miles away; while the sun, but lately risen, was lying on a
course closer to the horizon than we had ever seen it before. "We are going south," said I--"to the South Pole. This swift current
can have but one ending--there may be an opening at the South Pole, or
a whirlpool like the Maelstrom." Agnew looked around with a smile. "All these notions," said he, "are dreams, or theories, or guesses. There is no evidence to prove them. Why trouble yourself about a
guess? You and I can guess, and with better reason; for we have now,
it seems, come farther south than any human being who has ever lived. Do not imagine that the surface of the earth is different at the poles
from what it is anywhere else. If we get to the South Pole we shall
see there what we have always seen--the open view of land or water,
and the boundary of the horizon. As for this current, it seems to me
like the Gulf Stream, and it evidently does an important work in the
movement of the ocean waters. It pours on through vast fields of ice
on its way to other oceans, where it will probably become united with
new currents. Theories about openings at the poles, or whirlpools,
must be given up. Since the Maelstrom has been found to be a fiction,
no one need believe in any other whirlpool. For my own part, I now
believe that this current will bear us on, due south, over the pole,
and then still onward, until at last we shall find ourselves in the
South Pacific Ocean. So cheer up--don't be downhearted; there's still
hope. We have left the ice and snow behind, and already the air is
warmer. Cheer up; we may find our luck turn at any moment." To this I had no reply to make. Agnew's confidence seemed to me to be
assumed, and certainly did not alleviate my own deep gloom, nor was
the scene around calculated to rouse me in the slightest degree out of
my despair. The channel had now lessened to a width of not more than
two miles; the shores on either side were precipitous cliffs, broken
by occasional declivities, but all of solid rock, so dark as to be
almost black, and evidently of volcanic origin. At times there arose
rugged eminences, scarred and riven, indescribably dismal and
appalling. There was not only an utter absence of life here in these
abhorrent regions, but an actual impossibility of life which was
enough to make the stoutest heart quail. The rocks looked like iron. It seemed a land of iron penetrated by this ocean stream which had
made for itself a channel, and now bore us onward to a destination
which was beyond all conjecture. Through such scenes we drifted all that day. Night came, and in the
skies overhead there arose a brilliant display of the aurora
australis, while toward the north the volcanic fires glowed with
intense lustre. That night we slept. On awakening we noticed a change
in the scene. The shores, though still black and forbidding, were no
longer precipitous, but sloped down gradually to the water; the
climate was sensibly milder, and far away before us there arose a line
of giant mountains, whose summits were covered with ice and snow that
gleamed white and purple in the rays of the sun. Suddenly Agnew gave a cry, and pointed to the opposite shore. "Look!" he cried--"do you see? They are men!" I looked, and there I saw plainly some moving figures that were,
beyond a doubt, human beings. CHAPTER IV

THE SIGHT OF HUMAN BEINGS


The sight of human beings, thus unexpectedly found, filled us with
strange feelings--feelings which I cannot explain. The country was
still iron-bound and dark and forbidding, and the stream ran on in a
strong current, deep, black as ink, and resistless as fate; the sky
behind was lighted up by the volcanic glare which still shone from
afar; and in front the view was bounded by the icy heights of a
mountain chain. Here was, indeed, a strange country for a human
habitation; and strange, indeed, were the human beings whom we saw. "Shall we land?" said Agnew. "Oh no," said I. "Don't be hasty. The elements are sometimes kinder
than men, and I feel safer here, even in this river of death, than
ashore with such creatures as those." Agnew made no reply. We watched the figures on the shore. We saw them
coming down, staring and gesticulating. We drew on nearer to them till
we were able to see them better. A nearer view did not improve them. They were human beings, certainly, but of such an appalling aspect
that they could only be likened to animated mummies. They were small,
thin, shrivelled, black, with long matted hair and hideous faces. They
all had long spears, and wore about the waist short skirts that seemed
to be made of the skin of some sea-fowl. We could not imagine how these creatures lived, or where. There were
no signs of vegetation of any kind--not a tree or a shrub. There were
no animals; but there were great flocks of birds, some of which seemed
different from anything that we had ever seen before. The long spears
which the natives carried might possibly be used for catching these,
or for fishing purposes. This thought made them seem less formidable,
since they would thus be instruments of food rather than weapons of
war. Meanwhile we drifted on as before, and the natives watched us,
running along the shore abreast of us, so as to keep up with the boat. There seemed over a hundred of them. We could see no signs of any
habitations--no huts, however humble; but we concluded that their
abodes were farther inland. As for the natives themselves, the longer
we looked at them the more abhorrent they grew. Even the wretched
aborigines of Van Dieman's Land, who have been classed lowest in the
scale of humanity, were pleasing and congenial when compared with
these, and the land looked worse than Tierra del Fuego. It looked like
a land of iron, and its inhabitants like fiends. Agnew again proposed to land, but I refused. "No," I said; "I'd rather starve for a week, and live on hope. Let us
drift on. If we go on we may have hope if we choose, but if we land
here we shall lose even that. Can we hope for anything from such
things as these? Even if they prove friendly, can we live among them? To stay here is worse than death; our only hope is to go on." Agnew made no reply, and we drifted on for two hours, still followed
by the natives. They made no hostile demonstrations. They merely
watched us, apparently from motives of curiosity. All this time we
were drawing steadily nearer to the line of lofty mountains, which
with their icy crests rose before us like an inaccessible and
impassable barrier, apparently closing up all farther progress; nor
was there any indication of any pass or any opening, however narrow,
through which the great stream might run. Nothing was there but one
unbroken wall of iron cliffs and icy summits. At last we saw that the
sloping shores grew steeper, until, about a mile or two before us,
they changed to towering cliffs that rose up on each side for about a
thousand feet above the water; here the stream ran, and became lost to
view as completely as though swallowed up by the earth. "We can go no farther," said Agnew. "See--this stream seems to make a
plunge there into the mountains. There must be some deep canyon there
with cataracts. To go on is certain death. We must stop here, if only
to deliberate. Say, shall we risk it among these natives? After all,
there is not, perhaps, any danger among them. They are little
creatures and seem harmless. They are certainly not very good-looking;
but then, you know, appearances often deceive, and the devil's not so
black as he's painted. What do you say?" "I suppose we can do nothing else," said I. In fact, I could see that we had reached a crisis in our fate. To go
on seemed certain death. To stop was our only alternative; and as we
were armed we should not be altogether at the mercy of these
creatures. Having made this decision we acted upon it at once, for in
such a current there was no time for delay; and so, seizing the oars,
we soon brought the boat ashore. As we approached, the crowd of natives stood awaiting us, and looked
more repulsive than ever. We could see the emaciation of their bony
frames; their toes and fingers were like birds' claws; their eyes were
small and dull and weak, and sunken in cavernous hollows, from which
they looked at us like corpses--a horrible sight. They stood quietly,
however, and without any hostile demonstration, holding their spears
carelessly resting upon the ground. "I don't like the looks of them," said I. "I think I had better fire a
gun." "Why?" cried Agnew. "For Heaven's sake, man, don't hurt any of them!" "Oh no," said I; "I only mean to inspire a little wholesome respect." Saying this I fired in the air. The report rang out with long echoes,
and as the smoke swept away it showed us all the natives on the
ground. They had seated themselves with their hands crossed on their
laps, and there they sat looking at us as before, but with no
manifestation of fear or even surprise. I had expected to see them
run, but there was nothing of the kind. This puzzled us. Still, there
was no time now for any further hesitation. The current was sweeping
us toward the chasm between the cliffs, and we had to land without
delay. This we did, and as I had another barrel still loaded and a
pistol, I felt that with these arms and those of Agnew we should be
able to defend ourselves. It was in this state of mind that we landed,
and secured the boat by means of the grappling-iron. The natives now all crowded around us, making many strange gestures,
which we did not understand. Some of them bowed low, others prostrated
themselves; on the whole these seemed like marks of respect, and it
occurred to me that they regarded us as superior beings of some sort. It was evident that there was nothing like hostility in their minds. At the same time, the closer survey which I now made of them filled me
with renewed horror; their meagre frames, small, watery, lack-lustre
eyes, hollow, cavernous sockets, sunken cheeks, protruding teeth,
claw-like fingers, and withered skins, all made them look more than
ever like animated mummies, and I shrank from them involuntarily, as
one shrinks from contact with a corpse. Agnew, however, was very different, and it was evident that he felt no
repugnance whatever. He bowed and smiled at them, and shook hands with
half a dozen of them in succession. The hand-shaking was a new thing
to them, but they accepted it in a proper spirit, and renewed their
bows and prostrations. After this they all offered us their lances. This certainly seemed like an act of peace and good-will. I shook my
head and declined to touch them; but Agnew accepted one of them, and
offered his rifle in return. The one to whom he offered it refused to
take it. He seemed immensely gratified because Agnew had taken his
lance, and the others seemed disappointed at his refusal to take
theirs. But I felt my heart quake as I saw him offer his rifle, and
still more when he offered it to one or two others, and only regained
my composure as I perceived that his offer was refused by all. They now made motions to us to follow, and we all set forth together. "My dear More," said Agnew, cheerily, "they're not a bad lot. They
mean well. They can't help their looks. You're too suspicious and
reserved. Let's make friends with them, and get them to help us. Do as
I do." I tried to, but found it impossible, for my repugnance was immovable. It was like the horror which one feels toward rats, cockroaches,
earwigs, or serpents. It was something that defied reason. These
creatures seemed like human vermin. We marched inland for about half a mile, crossed a ridge, and came to
a valley, or rather a kind of hollow, at the other side of which we
found a cave with a smouldering fire in front. The fire was made of
coal, which must exist here somewhere. It was highly bituminous, and
burned with a great blaze. The day was now drawing to a close; far away I could see the lurid
glow of the volcanoes, which grew brighter as the day declined: above,
the skies twinkled with innumerable stars, and the air was filled with
the moan of rushing waters. We entered the cave. As we did so the natives heaped coal upon the
fire, and the flames arose, lighting up the interior. We found here a
number of women and children, who looked at us without either fear or
curiosity. The children looked like little dwarfs; the women were
hags, hideous beyond description. One old woman in particular, who
seemed to be in authority, was actually terrible in her awful and
repulsive ugliness. A nightmare dream never furnished forth a more
frightful object. This nightmare hag prostrated herself before each of
us with such an air of self-immolation that she looked as though she
wished us to kill her at once. The rough cave, the red light of the
fire, all made the scene more awful; and a wild thought came to me
that we had actually reached, while yet living, the infernal world,
and that this was the abode of devils. Yet their actions, it must be
confessed, were far from devilish. Everyone seemed eager to serve us. Some spread out couches formed of the skins of birds for us to sit on;
others attended to the fire; others offered us gifts of large and
beautiful feathers, together with numerous trinkets of rare and
curious workmanship. This kind attention on their part was a great
puzzle to me, and I could not help suspecting that beneath all this
there must be some sinister design. Resolving to be prepared for the
worst, I quietly reloaded the empty barrel of my rifle and watched
with the utmost vigilance. As for Agnew, he took it all in the most
unsuspicious manner. He made signs to them, shook hands with them,
accepted their gifts, and even tried to do the agreeable to the
formidable hags and the child-fiends around him. He soon attracted the
chief attention, and while all looked admiringly upon him, I was left
to languish in comparative neglect. At length a savory odor came through the cave, and a repast was spread
before us. It consisted of some large fowl that looked like a goose,
but was twice as large as the largest turkey that I had ever seen. The
taste was like that of a wild-goose, but rather fishy. Still to us it
seemed delicious, for our prolonged diet of raw seal had made us ready
to welcome any other food whatever; and this fowl, whatever it was,
would not have been unwelcome to any hungry man. It was evident that
these people lived on the flesh of birds of various sorts. All around
us we saw the skins of birds dried with the feathers on, and used for
clothing, for mats, and for ornaments. The repast being finished, we both felt greatly strengthened and
refreshed. Agnew continued to cultivate his new acquaintances, and
seeing me holding back, he said,

"More, old fellow, these good people give me to understand that there
is another place better than this, and want me to go with them. Will
you go?" At this a great fear seized me. "Don't go!" I cried--"don't go! We are close by the boat here, and if
anything happens we can easily get to it." Agnew laughed in my face. "Why, you don't mean to tell me," said he, "that you are still
suspicious, and after that dinner? Why, man, if they wanted to harm
us, would they feast us in this style? Nonsense, man! Drop your
suspicions and come along." I shook my head obstinately. "Well," said he, "if I thought there was anything in your suspicions I
would stay by you; but I'm confident they mean nothing but kindness,
so I'm going off to see the place." "You'll be back again?" said I. "Oh yes," said he, "of course I'll come back, and sleep here." With these words he left, and nearly all the people accompanied him. I
was left behind with the women and children and about a dozen men. These men busied themselves with some work over bird-skins; the women
were occupied with some other work over feathers. No one took any
notice of me. There did not seem to be any restraint upon me, nor was
I watched in any way. Once the nightmare hag came and offered me a
small roasted fowl, about the size of a woodcock. I declined it, but
at the same time this delicate attention certainly surprised me. I was now beginning to struggle with some success against my feelings
of abhorrence, when suddenly I caught sight of something which chased
away every other thought, and made my blood turn cold in my veins. It
was something outside. At the mouth of the cave--by the fire which was
still blazing bright, and lighting up the scene--I saw four men who
had just come to the cave: they were carrying something which I at
first supposed to be a sick or wounded companion. On reaching the fire
they put it down, and I saw, with a thrill of dismay, that their
burden was neither sick nor wounded, but dead, for the corpse lay
rigid as they had placed it. Then I saw the nightmare hag approach it
with a knife. An awful thought came to me--the crowning horror! The
thought soon proved to be but too well founded. The nightmare hag
began to cut, and in an instant had detached the arm of the corpse,
which she thrust among the coals in the very place where lately she
had cooked the fowl. Then she went back for more. For a moment my brain reeled, and I gasped for breath. Then I rose and
staggered out, I know not how. No one tried to stop me, nor did anyone
follow me; and, for my part, I was ready to blow out the brains of the
first who dared to approach me. In this way I reached the open air,
and passed by the hag and the four men as they were busy at their
awful work. But at this point I was observed and followed. A number of
men and women came after me, jabbering their uncouth language and
gesticulating. I warned them off, angrily. They persisted, and though
none of them were armed, yet I saw that they were unwilling to have me
leave the cave, and I supposed that they would try to prevent me by
force. The absence of Agnew made my position a difficult one. Had it not been
for this I would have burst through them and fled to the boat; but as
long as he was away I felt bound to wait; and though I longed to fly,
I could not for his sake. The boat seemed to be a haven of rest. I
longed to be in her once more, and drift away, even if it should be to
my death. Nature was here less terrible than man; and it seemed better
to drown in the waters, to perish amid rocks and whirlpools, than to
linger here amid such horrors as these. These people were not like
human beings. The vilest and lowest savages that I had ever seen were
not so odious as these. A herd of monkeys would be far more congenial,
a flock of wolves less abhorrent. They had the caricature of the human
form; they were the lowest of humanity; their speech was a mockery of
language; their faces devilish, their kindness a cunning pretence; and
most hideous of all was the nightmare hag that prepared the cannibal
repast. I could not begin hostilities, for I had to wait for Agnew; so I stood
and looked, and then walked away for a little distance. They followed
me closely, with eager words and gesticulations, though as yet no one
touched me or threatened me. Their tone seemed rather one of
persuasion. After a few paces I stood still, with all of them around
me. The horrible repast showed plainly all that was in store for us. They received us kindly and fed us well only to devote us to the most
abhorrent of deaths. Agnew, in his mad confidence, was only insuring
his own doom. He was putting himself completely in the power of
devils, who were incapable of pity and strangers to humanity. To make
friends with such fiends was impossible, and I felt sure that our only
plan was to rule by terror--to seize, to slay, to conquer. But still I
had to wait for him, and did not dare to resort to violence while he
was absent; so I waited, while the savages gathered round me,
contenting themselves with guarding me, and neither touching me nor
threatening me. And all this time the hag went on, intent on her
preparation of the horrible repast. While standing there looking, listening, waiting for Agnew, I noticed
many things. Far away the volcanoes blazed, and the northern sky was
red with a lurid light. There, too, higher up, the moon was shining
overhead, the sky was gleaming with stars; and all over the heavens
there shone the lustre of the aurora australis, brighter than any I
had ever seen--surpassing the moon and illuminating all. It lighted up
the haggard faces of the devils around me, and it again seemed to me
as though I had died and gone to the land of woe--an iron land, a land
of despair, with lurid fires all aglow and faces of fear. Suddenly, there burst upon my ears the report of a gun, which sounded
like a thunder-peal, and echoed in long reverberations. At once I
understood it. My fears had proved true. These savages had enticed
Agnew away to destroy him. In an instant I burst through the crowd
around me, and ran wildly in the direction of that sound, calling his
name, as I ran, at the top of my voice. I heard a loud cry; then another report. I hurried on, shouting his
name in a kind of frenzy. The strange courage of these savages had
already impressed me deeply. They did not fear our guns. They were all
attacking him, and he was alone, fighting for his life. Then there was another report; it was his pistol. I still ran on, and
still shouted to him. At last I received an answer. He had perhaps heard me, and was
answering, or, at any rate, he was warning me. "More," he cried, "fly, fly, fly to the boat! Save yourself!" "Where are you?" I cried, as I still rushed on. "Fly, More, fly! Save yourself! You can't save me. I'm lost. Fly for
your life!" Judging from his cries, he did not seem far away. I hurried on. I
could see nothing of him. All the time the savages followed me. None
were armed; but it seemed to me that they were preparing to fling
themselves upon me and overpower me with their numbers. They would
capture me alive, I thought, bind me, and carry me back, reserving me
for a future time! I turned and waved them back. They took no notice of my gesture. Then
I ran on once more. They followed. They could not run so fast as I
did, and so I gained on them rapidly, still shouting to Agnew. But
there was no response. I ran backward and forward, crossing and
recrossing, doubling and turning, pursued all the time by the savages. At last, in rage and despair, I fired upon them, and one of them fell. But, to my dismay, the others did not seem to care one whit; they did
not stop for one moment, but pursued as before. My situation was now plain in all its truth. They had enticed Agnew
away; they had attacked him. He had fought, and had been overpowered. He had tried to give me warning. His last words had been for me to
fly--to fly: yes, for he well knew that it was better far for me to go
to death through the raging torrent than to meet the fate which had
fallen upon himself. For him there was now no more hope. That he was
lost was plain. If he were still alive he would call to me; but his
voice had been silenced for some time. All was over, and that noble
heart that had withstood so bravely and cheerily the rigors of the
storm, and the horrors of our desperate voyage, had been stilled in
death by the vilest of miscreants. I paused for a moment. Even though Agnew was dead, I could not bear to
leave him, but felt as though I ought to share his fate. The savages
came nearer. At their approach I hesitated no longer. That fate was
too terrible: I must fly. But before I fled I turned in fury to wreak vengeance upon them for
their crimes. Full of rage and despair, I discharged my remaining
rifle-barrel into the midst of the crowd. Then I fled toward the boat. On the way I had a frightful thought that she might have been sent
adrift; but, on approaching the place, I found her there just as I had
left her. The savages, with their usual fearlessness, still pursued. For a moment I stood on the shore, with the grapple in my hand and the
boat close by, and as they came near I discharged my pistol into the
midst of them. Then I sprang into the boat; the swift current bore me
away, and in a few minutes the crowd of pursuing demons disappeared
from view. CHAPTER V

THE TORRENT SWEEPING UNDER THE MOUNTAINS


The boat drifted on. The light given by the aurora and the low moon
seemed to grow fainter; and as I looked behind I saw that the distant
glow from the volcanic fires had become more brilliant in the
increasing darkness. The sides of the channel grew steeper, until at
last they became rocky precipices, rising to an unknown height. The
channel itself grew narrower, till from a width of two miles it had
contracted to a tenth of those dimensions; but with this lessening
width the waters seemed to rush far more swiftly. Here I drifted
helplessly, and saw the gloomy, rocky cliffs sweep past me as I was
hurled onward on the breast of the tremendous flood. I was in despair. The fate of Agnew had prepared me for my own, and I was only thankful
that my fate, since it was inevitable, would be less appalling. Death
seemed certain, and my chief thought now was as to the moment when it
would come. I was prepared. I felt that I could meet it calmly,
sternly, even thankfully; far better was a death here amid the roar of
waters than at the hands of those abhorrent beings by whose treachery
my friend had fallen. As I went on, the precipices rose higher and seemed to overhang, the
channel grew narrower, the light grew fainter, until at last all
around me grew dark. I was floating at the bottom of a vast chasm,
where the sides seemed to rise precipitously for thousands of feet,
where neither watery flood nor rocky wall was visible, and where, far
above, I could see the line of sky between the summits of the cliffs,
and watch the glowing stars. And as I watched them there came to me
the thought that this was my last sight on earth, and I could only
hope that the life which was so swiftly approaching its end might live
again somewhere among those glittering orbs. So I thought; and with
these thoughts I drifted on, I cannot tell how long, until at length
there appeared a vast black mass, where the open sky above me
terminated, and where the lustre of the stars and the light of the
heavens were all swallowed up in utter darkness. This, then, I thought, is the end. Here, amid this darkness, I must
make the awful plunge and find my death I fell upon my knees in the
bottom of the boat and prayed. As I knelt there the boat drew nearer,
the black mass grew blacker. The current swept me on. There were no
breakers; there was no phosphorescent sparkle of seething waters, and
no whiteness of foam. I thought that I was on the brink of some
tremendous cataract a thousand times deeper than Niagara; some fall
where the waters plunged into the depths of the earth; and where,
gathering for the terrific descent, all other movements--all dashings
and writhings and twistings--were obliterated and lost in the one
overwhelming onward rush. Suddenly all grew dark--dark beyond all
expression; the sky above was in a moment snatched from view; I had
been flung into some tremendous cavern; and there, on my knees, with
terror in my heart, I waited for death. The moments passed, and death delayed to come. The awful plunge was
still put off; and though I remained on my knees and waited long,
still the end came not. The waters seemed still, the boat motionless. It was borne upon the surface of a vast stream as smooth as glass; but
who could tell how deep that stream was, or how wide? At length I rose
from my knees and sank down upon the seat of the boat, and tried to
peer through the gloom. In vain. Nothing was visible. It was the very
blackness of darkness. I listened, but heard nothing save a deep,
dull, droning sound, which seemed to fill all the air and make it
all tremulous with its vibrations. I tried to collect my thoughts. I
recalled that old theory which had been in my mind before this, and
which I had mentioned to Agnew. This was the notion that at each pole
there is a vast opening; that into one of them all the waters of the
ocean pour themselves, and, after passing through the earth, come out
at the other pole, to pass about its surface in innumerable streams. It was a wild fancy, which I had laughed at under other circumstances,
but which now occurred to me once more, when I was overwhelmed
with despair, and my mind was weakened by the horrors which I had
experienced; and I had a vague fear that I had been drawn into the
very channel through which the ocean waters flowed in their course to
that terrific, that unparalleled abyss. Still, there was as yet no
sign whatever of anything like a descent, for the boat was on even
keel, and perfectly level as before, and it was impossible for me to
tell whether I was moving swiftly or slowly, or standing perfectly
still; for in that darkness there were no visible objects by which
I could find out the rate of my progress; and as those who go up in
balloons are utterly insensible of motion, so was I on those calm
but swift waters. At length there came into view something which arrested my attention
and engrossed all my thoughts. It was faint glow that at first caught
my gaze; and, on turning to see it better, I saw a round red spot
glowing like fire. I had not seen this before. It looked like the moon
when it rises from behind clouds, and glows red and lurid from the
horizon; and so this glowed, but not with the steady light of the
moon, for the light was fitful, and sometimes flashed into a baleful
brightness, which soon subsided into a dimmer lustre. New alarm arose
within me, for this new sight suggested something more terrible than
anything that I had thus far thought of. This, then, I thought, was to
be the end of my voyage; this was my goal--a pit of fire, into which I
should be hurled! Would it be well, I thought, to wait for such a
fate, and experience such a death-agony? Would it not be better for me
to take my own life before I should know the worst? I took my pistol
and loaded it, so as to be prepared, but hesitated to use it until my
fate should be more apparent. So I sat, holding my pistol, prepared to
use it, watching the light, and awaiting the time when the glowing
fires should make all further hope impossible. But time passed, and
the light grew no brighter; on the contrary, it seemed to grow
fainter. There was also another change. Instead of shining before me,
it appeared more on my left. From this it went on changing its
position until at length it was astern. All the time it continued to
grow fainter, and it seemed certain that I was moving away from it
rather than toward it. In the midst of this there occurred a new
thought, which seemed to account for this light--this was, that it
arose from these same volcanoes which had illuminated the northern sky
when I was ashore, and followed me still with their glare. I had been
carried into this darkness, through some vast opening which now lay
behind me, disclosing the red volcano glow, and this it was that
caused that roundness and resemblance to the moon. I saw that I was
still moving on away from that light as before, and that its changing
position was due to the turning of the boat as the water drifted it
along, now stern foremost, now sidewise, and again bow foremost. From
this it seemed plainly evident that the waters had borne me into some
vast cavern of unknown extent, which went under the mountains--a
subterranean channel, whose issue I could not conjecture. Was this the
beginning of that course which should ultimately become a plunge deep
down into some unutterable abyss? or might I ever hope to emerge again
into the light of day--perhaps in some other ocean--some land of ice
and frost and eternal night? But the old theory of the flow of water
through the earth had taken hold of me and could not be shaken off. I
knew some scientific men held the opinion that the earth's interior is
a mass of molten rock and pent-up fire, and that the earth itself had
once been a burning orb, which had cooled down at the surface; yet,
after all, this was only a theory, and there were other theories which
were totally different. As a boy I had read wild works of fiction
about lands in the interior of the earth, with a sun at the centre,
which gave them the light of a perpetual day. These, I knew, were only
the creations of fiction; yet, after all, it seemed possible that the
earth might contain vast hollow spaces in its interior--realms of
eternal darkness, caverns in comparison with which the hugest caves on
the surface were but the tiniest cells. I was now being borne on to
these. In that case there might be no sudden plunge, after all. The
stream might run on for many thousand miles through this terrific
cavern gloom, in accordance with natural laws; and I might thus live,
and drift on in this darkness, until I should die a lingering death of
horror and despair. There was no possible way of forming any estimate as to speed. All was
dark, and even the glow behind was fading away; nor could I make any
conjecture whatever as to the size of the channel. At the opening it
had been contracted and narrow; but here it might have expanded itself
to miles, and its vaulted top might reach almost to the summit of
the lofty mountains. While sight thus failed me, sound was equally
unavailing, for it was always the same--a sustained and unintermittent
roar, a low, droning sound, deep and terrible, with no variations
of dashing breakers or rushing rapids or falling cataracts. Vague
thoughts of final escape came and went; but in such a situation hope
could not be sustained. The thick darkness oppressed the soul; and
at length even the glow of the distant volcanoes, which had been
gradually diminishing, grew dimmer and fainter, and finally faded out
altogether. That seemed to me to be my last sight of earthly things. After this nothing was left. There was no longer for me such a thing
as sight; there was nothing but darkness--perpetual and eternal night. I was buried in a cavern of rushing waters, to which there would be no
end, where I should be borne onward helplessly by the resistless tide
to a mysterious and an appalling doom. The darkness grew so intolerable that I longed for something to dispel
it, if only for a moment. I struck a match. The air was still, and the
flame flashed out, lighting up the boat and showing the black water
around me. This made me eager to see more. I loaded both barrels of
the rifle, keeping my pistol for another purpose, and then fired one
of them. There was a tremendous report, that rang in my ears like a
hundred thunder-volleys, and rolled and reverberated far along, and
died away in endless echoes. The flash lighted up the scene for an
instant, and for an instant only; like the sudden lightning, it
revealed all around. I saw a wide expanse of water, black as ink--a
Stygian pool; but no rocks were visible, and it seemed as though I
had been carried into a subterranean sea. I loaded the empty barrel and waited. The flash of light had revealed
nothing, yet it had distracted my thoughts, and the work of reloading
was an additional distraction. Anything was better than inaction. I
did not wish to waste my ammunition, yet I thought that an occasional
shot might serve some good purpose, if it was only to afford me some
relief from despair. And now, as I sat with the rifle in my hands, I was aware of a
sound--new, exciting, different altogether from the murmur of
innumerable waters that filled my ears, and in sharp contrast with
the droning echoes of the rushing flood. It was a sound that spoke of
life. I heard quick, heavy pantings, as of some great living thing;
and with this there came the noise of regular movements in the water,
and the foaming and gurgling of waves. It was as though some living,
breathing creature were here, not far away, moving through these
midnight waters; and with this discovery there came a new fear--the
fear of pursuit. I thought that some sea-monster had scented me in
my boat, and had started to attack me. This new fear aroused me to
action. It was a danger quite unlike any other which I had ever known;
yet the fear which it inspired was a feeling that roused me to action,
and prompted me, even though the coming danger might be as sure as
death, to rise against it and resist to the last. So I stood up with
my rifle and listened, with all my soul in my sense of hearing. The
sounds arose more plainly. They had come nearer. They were immediately
in front. I raised my rifle and took aim. Then in quick succession two
reports thundered out with tremendous uproar and interminable echoes,
but the long reverberations were unheeded in the blaze of sudden light
and the vision that was revealed. For there full before me I saw,
though but for an instant, a tremendous sight. It was a vast monster,
moving in the waters against the stream and toward the boat. Its head
was raised high, its eyes were inflamed with a baleful light, its
jaws, opened wide, bristled with sharp teeth, and it had a long neck
joined to a body of enormous bulk, with a tail that lashed all the
water into foam. It was but for an instant that I saw it, and then
with a sudden plunge the monster dived, while at the same moment all
was as dark as before. Full of terror and excitement, I loaded my rifle again and waited,
listening for a renewal of the noise. I felt sure that the monster,
balked of his prey, would return with redoubled fury, and that I
should have to renew the conflict. I felt that the dangers of the
subterranean passage and of the rushing waters had passed away, and
that a new peril had arisen from the assault of this monster of the
deep. Nor was it this one alone that was to be dreaded. Where one was,
others were sure to be; and if this one should pass me by it would
only leave me to be assailed by monsters of the same kind, and these
would probably increase in number as I advanced farther into this
realm of darkness. And yet, in spite of these grisly thoughts, I
felt less of horror than before, for the fear which I had was now
associated with action; and as I stood waiting for the onset and
listening for the approach of the enemy, the excitement that ensued
was a positive relief from the dull despair into which I had sunk but
a moment before. Yet, though I waited for a new attack, I waited in vain. The monster
did not come back. Either the flash and the noise had terrified him,
or the bullets had hit him, or else in his vastness he had been
indifferent to so feeble a creature as myself; but whatever may have
been the cause, he did not emerge again out of the darkness and
silence into which he had sunk. For a long time I stood waiting; then
I sat down, still watchful, still listening, but without any result,
until at length I began to think that there was no chance of any new
attack. Indeed, it seemed now as though there had been no attack at
all, but that the monster had been swimming at random without any
thought of me, in which case my rifle-flashes had terrified him more
than his fearful form had terrified me. On the whole this incident
had greatly benefited me. It had roused me from my despair. I grew
reckless, and felt a disposition to acquiesce in whatever fate might
have in store for me. And now, worn out with fatigue and exhausted from long watchfulness
and anxiety, I sank down in the bottom of the boat and fell into a
deep sleep. CHAPTER VI

THE NEW WORLD


How long I slept I do not know. My sleep was profound, yet disturbed
by troubled dreams, in which I lived over again all the eventful
scenes of the past; and these were all intermingled in the wildest
confusion. The cannibals beckoned to us from the peak, and we landed
between the two volcanoes. There the body of the dead sailor received
us, and afterward chased us to the boat. Then came snow and volcanic
eruptions, and we drifted amid icebergs and molten lava until we
entered an iron portal and plunged into darkness. Here there were vast
swimming monsters and burning orbs of fire and thunderous cataracts
falling from inconceivable heights, and the sweep of immeasurable
tides and the circling of infinite whirlpools; while in my ears there
rang the never-ending roar of remorseless waters that came after us,
with all their waves and billows rolling upon us. It was a dream in
which all the material terrors of the past were renewed; but these
were all as nothing when compared with a certain deep underlying
feeling that possessed my soul--a sense of loss irretrievable, an
expectation of impending doom, a drear and immitigable despair. In the midst of this I awoke. It was with a sudden start, and I looked
all around in speechless bewilderment. The first thing of which I
was conscious was a great blaze of light--light so lately lost, and
supposed to be lost forever, but now filling all the universe--bright,
brilliant, glowing bringing hope and joy and gladness, with all the
splendor of deep blue skies and the multitudinous laughter of ocean
waves that danced and sparkled in the sun. I flung up my arms and
laughed aloud. Then I burst into tears, and falling on my knees,
I thanked the Almighty Ruler of the skies for this marvellous
deliverance. Rising from my knees I looked around, and once more amazement
overwhelmed me. I saw a long line of mountains towering up to
immeasurable heights, their summits covered with eternal ice and
snow. There the sun blazed low in the sky, elevated but a few degrees
above the mountain crests, which gleamed in gold and purple under its
fiery rays. The sun seemed enlarged to unusual dimensions, and the
mountains ran away on every side like the segment of some infinite
circle. At the base of the mountains lay a land all green with
vegetation, where cultivated fields were visible, and vineyards and
orchards and groves, together with forests of palm and all manner
of trees of every variety of hue, which ran up the sides of the
mountains till they reached the limits of vegetation and the regions
of snow and ice. Here in all directions there were unmistakable signs of human
life--the outlines of populous cities and busy towns and hamlets;
roads winding far away along the plain or up the mountain-sides, and
mighty works of industry in the shape of massive structures, terraced
slopes, long rows of arches, ponderous pyramids, and battlemented
walls. From the land I turned to the sea. I saw before me an expanse of water
intensely blue--an extent so vast that never before in all my ocean
voyages had anything appeared at all comparable with it. Out at sea,
wherever I had been, the water had always limited the view; the
horizon had never seemed far away; ships soon sank below it, and the
visible surface of the earth was thus always contracted; but here, to
my bewilderment, the horizon appeared to be removed to an immeasurable
distance and raised high in the air, while the waters were prolonged
endlessly. Starting from where I was, they went away to inconceivable
distances, and the view before me seemed like a watery declivity
reaching for a thousand miles, till it approached the horizon far up
in the sky. Nor was it any delusion of the senses that caused this
unparalleled spectacle. I was familiar with the phenomena of the
mirage, and knew well that there was nothing of that kind here; for
the mirage always shows great surfaces of stillness, or a regular
vibration--glassy tides and indistinct distances; but here everything
was sharply defined in the clear atmosphere: the sky overhung a deep
blue vault; the waves danced and sparkled in the sun; the waters
rolled and foamed on every side; and the fresh breeze, as it blew over
the ocean, brought with it such exhilarating influences that it acted
upon me like some reviving cordial. From the works of nature I turned to those of man. These were visible
everywhere: on the land, in cities and cultivated fields and mighty
constructions; on the sea, in floating craft, which appeared wherever
I turned my eyes--boats like those of fishermen, ships long and low,
some like galleys, propelled by a hundred oars, others provided with
one huge square-sail, which enabled them to run before the wind. 