

E-text prepared by Les Bowler, St. Ives, Dorset



THE GOLDEN LION OF GRANPERE, BY ANTHONY TROLLOPE. CHAPTER I. Up among the Vosges mountains in Lorraine, but just outside the old
half-German province of Alsace, about thirty miles distant from the
new and thoroughly French baths of Plombieres, there lies the
village of Granpere. Whatever may be said or thought here in
England of the late imperial rule in France, it must at any rate be
admitted that good roads were made under the Empire. Alsace, which
twenty years ago seems to have been somewhat behindhand in this
respect, received her full share of Napoleon's attention, and
Granpere is now placed on an excellent road which runs from the town
of Remiremont on one line of railway, to Colmar on another. The
inhabitants of the Alsatian Ballon hills and the open valleys among
them seem to think that the civilisation of great cities has been
brought near enough to them, as there is already a diligence running
daily from Granpere to Remiremont;--and at Remiremont you are on the
railway, and, of course, in the middle of everything. And indeed an observant traveller will be led to think that a great
deal of what may most truly be called civilisation has found its way
in among the Ballons, whether it travelled thither by the new-fangled
railways and imperial routes, or found its passage along the
valley streams before imperial favours had been showered upon the
district. We are told that when Pastor Oberlin was appointed to his
cure as Protestant clergyman in the Ban de la Roche a little more
than one hundred years ago,--that was, in 1767,--this region was
densely dark and far behind in the world's running as regards all
progress. The people were ignorant, poor, half-starved, almost
savage, destitute of communication, and unable to produce from their
own soil enough food for their own sustenance. Of manufacturing
enterprise they understood nothing, and were only just far enough
advanced in knowledge for the Protestants to hate the Catholics, and
the Catholics to hate the Protestants. Then came that wonderful
clergyman, Pastor Oberlin,--he was indeed a wonderful clergyman,--and
made a great change. Since that there have been the two empires,
and Alsace has looked up in the world. Whether the thanks
of the people are more honestly due to Oberlin or to the late
Emperor, the author of this little story will not pretend to say;
but he will venture to express his opinion that at present the rural
Alsatians are a happy, prosperous people, with the burden on their
shoulders of but few paupers, and fewer gentlemen,--apparently a
contented people, not ambitious, given but little to politics. Protestants and Catholics mingled without hatred or fanaticism,
educated though not learned, industrious though not energetic, quiet
and peaceful, making linen and cheese, growing potatoes, importing
corn, coming into the world, marrying, begetting children, and dying
in the wholesome homespun fashion which is so sweet to us in that
mood of philosophy which teaches us to love the country and to
despise the town. Whether it be better for a people to achieve an
even level of prosperity, which is shared by all, but which makes
none eminent, or to encounter those rough, ambitious, competitive
strengths which produce both palaces and poor-houses, shall not be
matter of argument here; but the teller of this story is disposed to
think that the chance traveller, as long as he tarries at Granpere,
will insensibly and perhaps unconsciously become an advocate of the
former doctrine; he will be struck by the comfort which he sees
around him, and for a while will dispense with wealth, luxury,
scholarships, and fashion. Whether the inhabitants of these hills
and valleys will advance to farther progress now that they are again
to become German, is another question, which the writer will not
attempt to answer here. Granpere in itself is a very pleasing village. Though the amount of
population and number of houses do not suffice to make it more than
a village, it covers so large a space of ground as almost to give it
a claim to town honours. It is perhaps a full mile in length; and
though it has but one street, there are buildings standing here and
there, back from the line, which make it seem to stretch beyond the
narrow confines of a single thoroughfare. In most French villages
some of the houses are high and spacious, but here they seem almost
all to be so. And many of them have been constructed after that
independent fashion which always gives to a house in a street a
character and importance of its own. They do not stand in a simple
line, each supported by the strength of its neighbour, but occupy
their own ground, facing this way or that as each may please,
presenting here a corner to the main street, and there an end. There are little gardens, and big stables, and commodious barns; and
periodical paint with annual whitewash is not wanting. The
unstinted slates shine copiously under the sun, and over almost
every other door there is a large lettered board which indicates
that the resident within is a dealer in the linen which is produced
throughout the country. All these things together give to Granpere
an air of prosperity and comfort which is not at all checked by the
fact that there is in the place no mansion which we Englishmen would
call the gentleman's house, nothing approaching to the ascendancy of
a parish squire, no baron's castle, no manorial hall,--not even a
chateau to overshadow the modest roofs of the dealers in the linen
of the Vosges. And the scenery round Granpere is very pleasant, though the
neighbouring hills never rise to the magnificence of mountains or
produce that grandeur which tourists desire when they travel in
search of the beauties of Nature. It is a spot to love if you know
it well, rather than to visit with hopes raised high, and to leave
with vivid impressions. There is water in abundance; a pretty lake
lying at the feet of sloping hills, rivulets running down from the
high upper lands and turning many a modest wheel in their course, a
waterfall or two here and there, and a so-called mountain summit
within an easy distance, from whence the sun may be seen to rise
among the Swiss mountains;--and distant perhaps three miles from the
village the main river which runs down the valley makes for itself a
wild ravine, just where the bridge on the new road to Munster
crosses the water, and helps to excuse the people of Granpere for
claiming for themselves a great object of natural attraction. The
bridge and the river and the ravine are very pretty, and perhaps
justify all that the villagers say of them when they sing to
travellers the praises of their country. Whether it be the sale of linen that has produced the large inn at
Granpere, or the delicious air of the place, or the ravine and the
bridge, matters little to our story; but the fact of the inn matters
very much. There it is,--a roomy, commodious building, not easily
intelligible to a stranger, with its widely distributed parts,
standing like an inverted V, with its open side towards the main
road. On the ground-floor on one side are the large stables and
coach-house, with a billiard-room and cafe over them, and a long
balcony which runs round the building; and on the other side there
are kitchens and drinking-rooms, and over these the chamber for
meals and the bedrooms. All large, airy, and clean, though,
perhaps, not excellently well finished in their construction, and
furnished with but little pretence to French luxury. And behind the
inn there are gardens, by no means trim, and a dusty summer-house,
which serves, however, for the smoking of a cigar; and there is
generally space and plenty and goodwill. Either the linen, or the
air, or the ravine, or, as is more probable, the three combined,
have produced a business, so that the landlord of the Lion d'Or at
Granpere is a thriving man. The reader shall at once be introduced to the landlord, and informed
at the same time that, in so far as he may be interested in this
story, he will have to take up his abode at the Lion d'Or till it be
concluded; not as a guest staying loosely at his inn, but as one who
is concerned with all the innermost affairs of the household. He
will not simply eat his plate of soup, and drink his glass of wine,
and pass on, knowing and caring more for the servant than for the
servant's master, but he must content himself to sit at the
landlord's table, to converse very frequently with the landlord's
wife, to become very intimate with the landlord's son--whether on
loving or on unloving terms shall be left entirely to himself--and
to throw himself, with the sympathy of old friendship, into all the
troubles and all the joys of the landlord's niece. If the reader be
one who cannot take such a journey, and pass a month or two without
the society of persons whom he would define as ladies and gentlemen,
he had better be warned at once, and move on, not setting foot
within the Lion d'Or at Granpere. Michel Voss, the landlord, in person was at this time a tall, stout,
active, and very handsome man, about fifty years of age. As his son
was already twenty-five--and was known to be so throughout the
commune--people were sure that Michel Voss was fifty or thereabouts;
but there was very little in his appearance to indicate so many
years. He was fat and burly to be sure; but then he was not fat to
lethargy, or burly with any sign of slowness. There was still the
spring of youth in his footstep, and when there was some weight to
be lifted, some heavy timber to be thrust here or there, some huge
lumbering vehicle to be hoisted in or out, there was no arm about
the place so strong as that of the master. His short, dark, curly
hair--that was always kept clipped round his head--was beginning to
show a tinge of gray, but the huge moustache on his upper lip was
still of a thorough brown, as was also the small morsel of beard
which he wore upon his chin. He had bright sharp brown eyes, a nose
slightly beaked, and a large mouth. He was on the whole a man of
good temper, just withal, and one who loved those who belonged to
him; but he chose to be master in his own house, and was apt to
think that his superior years enabled him to know what younger
people wanted better than they would know themselves. He was loved
in his house and respected in his village; but there was something
in the beak of his nose and the brightness of his eye which was apt
to make those around him afraid of him. And indeed Michel Voss
could lose his temper and become an angry man. Our landlord had been twice married. By his first wife he had now
living a single son, George Voss, who at the time of our tale had
already reached his twenty-fifth year. George, however, did not at
this time live under his father's roof, having taken service for a
time with the landlady of another inn at Colmar. George Voss was
known to be a clever young man; many in those parts declared that he
was much more so than his father; and when he became clerk at the
Poste in Colmar, and after a year or two had taken into his hands
almost the entire management of that house--so that people began to
say that old-fashioned and wretched as it was, money might still be
made there--people began to say also that Michel Voss had been wrong
to allow his son to leave Granpere. But in truth there had been a
few words between the father and the son; and the two were so like
each other that the father found it difficult to rule, and the son
found it difficult to be ruled. George Voss was very like his father, with this difference, as he
was often told by the old folk about Granpere, that he would never
fill his father's shoes. He was a smaller man, less tall by a
couple of inches, less broad in proportion across the shoulders,
whose arm would never be so strong, whose leg would never grace a
tight stocking with so full a development. But he had the same eye,
bright and brown and very quick, the same mouth, the same aquiline
nose, the same broad forehead and well-shaped chin, and the same
look in his face which made men know as by instinct that he would
sooner command than obey. So there had come to be a few words, and
George Voss had gone away to the house of a cousin of his mother's,
and had taken to commanding there. Not that there had been any quarrel between the father and the son;
nor indeed that George was aware that he had been in the least
disobedient to his parent. There was no recognised ambition for
rule in the breasts of either of them. It was simply this, that
their tempers were alike; and when on an occasion Michel told his
son that he would not allow a certain piece of folly which the son
was, as he thought, likely to commit, George declared that he would
soon set that matter right by leaving Granpere. Accordingly he did
leave Granpere, and became the right hand, and indeed the head, and
backbone, and best leg of his old cousin Madame Faragon of the Poste
at Colmar. Now the matter on which these few words occurred was a
question of love--whether George Voss should fall in love with and
marry his step-mother's niece Marie Bromar. But before anything
farther can be said of these few words, Madame Voss and her niece
must be introduced to the reader. Madame Voss was nearly twenty years younger than her husband, and
had now been a wife some five or six years. She had been brought
from Epinal, where she had lived with a married sister, a widow,
much older than herself--in parting from whom on her marriage there
had been much tribulation. 'Should anything happen to Marie,' she
had said to Michel Voss, before she gave him her troth, 'you will
let Minnie Bromar come to me?' Michel Voss, who was then hotly
in love with his hoped-for bride--hotly in love in spite of his
four-and-forty years--gave the required promise. The said 'something'
which had been suspected had happened. Madame Bromar had died, and
Minnie Bromar her daughter--or Marie as she was always afterwards
called--had at once been taken into the house at Granpere. Michel
never thought twice about it when he was reminded of his promise. 'If I hadn't promised at all, she should come the same,' he said. 'The house is big enough for a dozen more yet.' In saying this he
perhaps alluded to a little baby that then lay in a cradle in his
wife's room, by means of which at that time Madame Voss was able to
make her big husband do pretty nearly anything that she pleased. So
Marie Bromar, then just fifteen years of age, was brought over from
Epinal to Granpere, and the house certainly was not felt to be too
small because she was there. Marie soon learned the ways and wishes
of her burly, soft-hearted uncle; would fill his pipe for him, and
hand him his soup, and bring his slippers, and put her soft arm
round his neck, and became a favourite. She was only a child when
she came, and Michel thought it was very pleasant; but in five
years' time she was a woman, and Michel was forced to reflect that
it would not be well that there should be another marriage and
another family in the house while he was so young himself,--there
was at this time a third baby in the cradle,--and then Marie Bromar
had not a franc of dot. Marie was the sweetest eldest daughter in
the world, but he could not think it right that his son should marry
a wife before he had done a stroke for himself in the world. Prudence made it absolutely necessary that he should say a word to
his son. Madame Voss was certainly nearly twenty years younger than her
husband, and yet the pair did not look to be ill-sorted. Michel was
so handsome, strong, and hale; and Madame Voss, though she was a
comely woman,--though when she was brought home a bride to Granpere
the neighbours had all declared that she was very handsome,--carried
with her a look of more years than she really possessed. She had
borne many of a woman's cares, and had known much of woman's sorrows
before she had become wife to Michel Voss; and then when the babes
came, and she had settled down as mistress of that large household,
and taught herself to regard George Voss and Marie Bromar almost as
her own children, all idea that she was much younger than her
husband departed from her. She was a woman who desired to excel her
husband in nothing,--if only she might be considered to be in some
things his equal. There was no feeling in the village that Michel
Voss had brought home a young wife and had made a fool of himself. He was a man entitled to have a wife much younger than himself. Madame Voss in those days always wore a white cap and a dark stuff
gown, which was changed on Sundays for one of black silk, and brown
mittens on her hands, and she went about the house in soft carpet
shoes. She was a conscientious, useful, but not an enterprising
woman; loving her husband much and fearing him somewhat; liking to
have her own way in certain small matters, but willing to be led in
other things so long as those were surrendered to her; careful with
her children, the care of whom seemed to deprive her of the power of
caring for the business of the inn; kind to her niece, good-humoured
in her house, and satisfied with the world at large as long as she
might always be allowed to entertain M. le Cure at dinner on
Sundays. Michel Voss, Protestant though he was, had not the
slightest objection to giving M. le Cure his Sunday dinner, on
condition that M. le Cure on these occasions would confine his
conversation to open subjects. M. le Cure was quite willing to eat
his dinner and give no offence. A word too must be said of Marie Bromar before we begin our story. Marie Bromar is the heroine of this little tale; and the reader must
be made to have some idea of her as she would have appeared before
him had he seen her standing near her uncle in the long room
upstairs of the hotel at Granpere. Marie had been fifteen when she
was brought from Epinal to Granpere, and had then been a child; but
she had now reached her twentieth birthday, and was a woman. She
was not above the middle height, and might seem to be less indeed in
that house, because her aunt and her uncle were tall; but she was
straight, well made, and very active. She was strong and liked to
use her strength, and was very keen about all the work of the house. During the five years of her residence at Granpere she had
thoroughly learned the mysteries of her uncle's trade. She knew
good wine from bad by the perfume; she knew whether bread was the
full weight by the touch; with a glance of her eye she could tell
whether the cheese and butter were what they ought to be; in a
matter of poultry no woman in all the commune could take her in; she
was great in judging eggs; knew well the quality of linen; and was
even able to calculate how long the hay should last, and what should
be the consumption of corn in the stables. Michel Voss was well
aware before Marie had been a year beneath his roof that she well
earned the morsel she ate and the drop she drank; and when she had
been there five years he was ready to swear that she was the
cleverest girl in Lorraine or Alsace. And she was very pretty, with
rich brown hair that would not allow itself to be brushed out of its
crisp half-curls in front, and which she always wore cut short
behind, curling round her straight, well-formed neck. Her eyes were
gray, with a strong shade indeed of green, but were very bright and
pleasant, full of intelligence, telling stories by their glances of
her whole inward disposition, of her activity, quickness, and desire
to have a hand in everything that was being done. Her father Jean
Bromar had come from the same stock with Michel Voss, and she, too,
had something of that aquiline nose which gave to the innkeeper and
his son the look which made men dislike to contradict them. Her
mouth was large, but her teeth were very white and perfect, and her
smile was the sweetest thing that ever was seen. Marie Bromar was a
pretty girl, and George Voss, had he lived so near to her and not
have fallen in love with her, must have been cold indeed. At the end of these five years Marie had become a woman, and was
known by all around her to be a woman much stronger, both in person
and in purpose, than her aunt; but she maintained, almost
unconsciously, many of the ways in the house which she had assumed
when she first entered it. Then she had always been on foot, to be
everybody's messenger,--and so she was now. When her uncle and aunt
were at their meals she was always up and about,--attending them,
attending the public guests, attending the whole house. And it
seemed as though she herself never sat down to eat or drink. Indeed, it was rare enough to find her seated at all. She would
have a cup of coffee standing up at the little desk near the public
window when she kept her books, or would take a morsel of meat as
she helped to remove the dishes. She would stand sometimes for a
minute leaning on the back of her uncle's chair as he sat at his
supper, and would say, when he bade her to take her chair and eat
with them, that she preferred picking and stealing. In all things
she worshipped her uncle, observing his movements, caring for his
wants, and carrying out his plans. She did not worship her aunt,
but she so served Madame Voss that had she been withdrawn from the
household Madame Voss would have found herself altogether unable to
provide for its wants. Thus Marie Bromar had become the guardian
angel of the Lion d'Or at Granpere. There must be a word or two more said of the difference between
George Voss and his father which had ended in sending George to
Colmar; a word or two about that, and a word also of what occurred
between George and Marie. Then we shall be able to commence our
story without farther reference to things past. As Michel Voss was
a just, affectionate, and intelligent man, he would not probably
have objected to a marriage between the two young people, had the
proposition for such a marriage been first submitted to him, with a
proper amount of attention to his judgment and controlling power. But the idea was introduced to him in a manner which taught him to
think that there was to be a clandestine love affair. To him George
was still a boy, and Marie not much more than a child, and--without
much thinking--he felt that the thing was improper. 'I won't have it, George,' he had said. 'Won't have what, father?' 'Never mind. You know. If you can't get over it in any other way,
you had better go away. You must do something for yourself before
you can think of marrying.' 'I am not thinking of marrying.' 'Then what were you thinking of when I saw you with Marie? I won't
have it for her sake, and I won't have it for mine, and I won't have
it for your own. You had better go away for a while.' 'I'll go away to-morrow if you wish it, father.' Michel had turned
away, not saying another word; and on the following day George did go
away, hardly waiting an hour to set in order his part of his father's
business. For it must be known that George had not been an idler
in his father's establishment. There was a trade of wood-cutting
upon the mountain-side, with a saw-mill turned by water beneath,
over which George had presided almost since he had left the
school of the commune. When his father told him that he was bound
to do something before he got married, he could not have intended to
accuse him of having been hitherto idle. Of the wood-cutting and
the saw-mill George knew as much as Marie did of the poultry and the
linen. Michel was wrong, probably, in his attempt to separate them. The house was large enough, or if not, there was still room for
another house to be built in Granpere. They would have done well as
man and wife. But then the head of a household naturally objects to
seeing the boys and girls belonging to him making love under his
nose without any reference to his opinion. 'Things were not made so
easy for me,' he says to himself, and feels it to be a sort of duty
to take care that the course of love shall not run altogether
smooth. George, no doubt, was too abrupt with his father; or
perhaps it might be the case that he was not sorry to take an
opportunity of leaving for a while Granpere and Marie Bromar. It
might be well to see the world; and though Marie Bromar was bright
and pretty, it might be that there were others abroad brighter and
prettier. His father had spoken to him on one fine September afternoon, and
within an hour George was with the men who were stripping bark from
the great pine logs up on the side of the mountain. With them, and
with two or three others who were engaged at the saw-mills, he
remained till the night was dark. Then he came down and told
something of his intentions to his stepmother. He was going to
Colmar on the morrow with a horse and small cart, and would take
with him what clothes he had ready. He did not speak to Marie that
night, but he said something to his father about the timber and the
mill. Gaspar Muntz, the head woodsman, knew, he said, all about the
business. Gaspar could carry on the work till it would suit Michel
Voss himself to see how things were going on. Michel Voss was sore
and angry, but he said nothing. He sent to his son a couple of
hundred francs by his wife, but said no word of explanation even to
her. On the following morning George was off without seeing his
father. But Marie was up to give him his breakfast. 'What is the meaning of
this, George?' she said. 'Father says that I shall be better away from this,--so I'm going
away.' 'And why will you be better away?' To this George made no answer. 'It will be terrible if you quarrel with your father. Nothing can
be so bad as that.' 'We have not quarrelled. That is to say, I have not quarrelled with
him. If he quarrels with me, I cannot help it.' 'It must be helped,' said Marie, as she placed before him a mess of
eggs which she had cooked for him with her own hands. 'I would
sooner die than see anything wrong between you two.' Then there was
a pause. 'Is it about me, George?' she asked boldly. 'Father thinks that I love you:--so I do.' Marie paused for a few minutes before she said anything farther. She was standing very near to George, who was eating his breakfast
heartily in spite of the interesting nature of the conversation. As
she filled his cup a second time, she spoke again. 'I will never do
anything, George, if I can help it, to displease my uncle.' 'But why should it displease him? He wants to have his own way in
everything.' 'Of course he does.' 'He has told me to go;--and I'll go. I've worked for him as no
other man would work, and have never said a word about a share in
the business;--and never would.' 'Is it not all for yourself, George?' 'And why shouldn't you and I be married if we like it?' 'I will never like it,' said she solemnly, 'if uncle dislikes it.' 'Very well,' said George. 'There is the horse ready, and now I'm
off.' So he went, starting just as the day was dawning, and no one saw him
on that morning except Marie Bromar. As soon as he was gone she
went up to her little room, and sat herself down on her bedside. She knew that she loved him, and had been told that she was beloved. She knew that she could not lose him without suffering terribly; but
now she almost feared that it would be necessary that she should
lose him. His manner had not been tender to her. He had indeed
said that he loved her, but there had been nothing of the tenderness
of love in his mode of saying so;--and then he had said no word of
persistency in the teeth of his father's objection. She had
declared--thoroughly purposing that her declaration should be
true--that she would never become his wife in opposition to her
uncle's wishes; but he, had he been in earnest, might have said
something of his readiness to attempt at least to overcome his
father's objection. But he had said not a word, and Marie, as she sat
upon her bed, made up her mind that it must be all over. But she made
up her mind also that she would entertain no feeling of anger against
her uncle. She owed him everything, so she thought--making no
account, as George had done, of labour given in return. She was
only a girl, and what was her labour? For a while she resolved that
she would give a spoken assurance to her uncle that he need fear
nothing from her. It was natural enough to her that her uncle
should desire a better marriage for his son. But after a while she
reflected that any speech from her on such a subject would be
difficult, and that it would be better that she should hold her
tongue. So she held her tongue, and thought of George, and
suffered;--but still was merry, at least in manner, when her uncle
spoke to her, and priced the poultry, and counted the linen, and
made out the visitors' bills, as though nothing evil had come upon
her. She was a gallant girl, and Michel Voss, though he could not
speak of it, understood her gallantry and made notes of it on the
note-book of his heart. In the mean time George Voss was thriving at Colmar,--as the Vosses
did thrive wherever they settled themselves. But he sent no word to
his father,--nor did his father send word to him,--though they were
not more than ten leagues apart. Once Madame Voss went over to see
him, and brought back word of his well-doing. CHAPTER II. Exactly at eight o'clock every evening a loud bell was sounded in
the hotel of the Lion d'Or at Granpere, and all within the house
sat down together to supper. The supper was spread on a long table
in the saloon up-stairs, and the room was lighted with camphine
lamps,--for as yet gas had not found its way to Granpere. At this
meal assembled not only the guests in the house and the members of the
family of the landlord,--but also many persons living in the village
whom it suited to take, at a certain price per month, the chief meal
of the day, at the house of the innkeeper, instead of eating in
their own houses a more costly, a less dainty, and probably a lonely
supper. Therefore when the bell was heard there came together some
dozen residents of Granpere, mostly young men engaged in the linen
trade, from their different lodgings, and each took his accustomed
seat down the sides of the long board, at which, tied in a knot, was
placed his own napkin. At the top of the table was the place of
Madame Voss, which she never failed to fill exactly three minutes
after the bell had been rung. At her right hand was the chair of
the master of the house,--never occupied by any one else;--but it
would often happen that some business would keep him away. Since
George had left him he had taken the timber into his own hands, and
was accustomed to think and sometimes to say that the necessity was
cruel on him. Below his chair and on the other side of Madame Voss
there would generally be two or three places kept for guests who
might be specially looked upon as the intimate friends of the
mistress of the house; and at the farther end of the table, close to
the window, was the space allotted to travellers. Here the napkins
were not tied in knots, but were always clean. And, though the
little plates of radishes, cakes, and dried fruits were continued
from one of the tables to the other, the long-necked thin bottles of
common wine came to an end before they reached the strangers'
portion of the board; for it had been found that strangers would
take at that hour either tea or a better kind of wine than that
which Michel Voss gave to his accustomed guests without any special
charge. When, however, the stranger should please to take the
common wine, he was by no means thereby prejudiced in the eyes of
Madame Voss or her husband. Michel Voss liked a profit, but he
liked the habits of his country almost as well. One evening in September, about twelve months after the departure of
George, Madame Voss took her seat at the table, and the young men of
the place who had been waiting round the door of the hotel for a few
minutes, followed her into the room. And there was M. Goudin, the
Cure, with another young clergyman, his friend. On Sundays the Cure
always dined at the hotel at half-past twelve o'clock, as the friend
of the family; but for his supper he paid, as did the other guests. I rather fancy that on week days he had no particular dinner; and
indeed there was no such formal meal given in the house of Michel
Voss on week days. There was something put on the table about noon
in the little room between the kitchen and the public window; but
except on Sundays it could hardly be called a dinner. On Sundays a
real dinner was served in the room up-stairs, with soup, and
removes, and entrees and the roti, all in the right place,--which
showed that they knew what a dinner was at the Lion d'Or;--but,
throughout the week, supper was the meal of the day. After M.
Goudin, on this occasion, there came two maiden ladies from Epinal
who were lodging at Granpere for change of air. They seated
themselves near to Madame Voss, but still leaving a place or two
vacant. And presently at the bottom of the table there came an
Englishman and his wife, who were travelling through the country;
and so the table was made up. A lad of about fifteen, who was known
in Granpere as the waiter at the Lion d'Or, looked after the two
strangers and the young men, and Marie Bromar, who herself had
arranged the board, stood at the top of the room, by a second table,
and dispensed the soup. It was pleasant to watch her eyes, as she
marked the moment when the dispensing should begin, and counted her
guests, thoughtful as to the sufficiency of the dishes to come; and
noticed that Edmond Greisse had sat down with such dirty hands that
she must bid her uncle to warn the lad; and observed that the more
elderly of the two ladies from Epinal had bread too hard to suit
her,--which should be changed as soon as the soup had been
dispensed. She looked round, and even while dispensing saw
everything. It was suggested in the last chapter that another house
might have been built in Granpere, and that George Voss might have
gone there, taking Marie as his bride; but the Lion d'Or would
sorely have missed those quick and careful eyes. Then, when that dispensing of the soup was concluded, Michel entered
the room bringing with him a young man. The young man had evidently
been expected; for, when he took the place close at the left hand of
Madame Voss, she simply bowed to him, saying some word of courtesy
as Michel took his place on the other side. Then Marie dispensed
two more portions of soup, and leaving one on the farther table for
the boy to serve, though she could well have brought the two, waited
herself upon her uncle. 'And is Urmand to have no soup?' said
Michel Voss, as he took his niece lovingly by the hand. 'Peter is bringing it,' said Marie. And in a moment or two Peter
the waiter did bring the young man his soup. 'And will not Mademoiselle Marie sit down with us?' said the young
man. 'If you can make her, you have more influence than I,' said Michel. 'Marie never sits, and never eats, and never drinks.' She was
standing now close behind her uncle with both her hands upon his
head; and she would often stand so after the supper was commenced,
only moving to attend upon him, or to supplement the services of
Peter and the maid-servant when she perceived that they were
becoming for a time inadequate to their duties. She answered her
uncle now by gently pulling his ears, but she said nothing. 'Sit down with us, Marie, to oblige me,' said Madame Voss. 'I had rather not, aunt. It is foolish to sit at supper and not
eat. I have taken my supper already.' Then she moved away, and
hovered round the two strangers at the end of the room. After
supper Michel Voss and the young man--Adrian Urmand by name--lit
their cigars and seated themselves on a bench outside the front
door. 'Have you never said a word to her?' said Michel. 'Well;--a word; yes.' 'But you have not asked her--; you know what I mean;--asked her
whether she could love you.' 'Well,--yes. I have said as much as that, but I have never got an
answer. And when I did ask her, she merely left me. She is not
much given to talking.' 'She will not make the worse wife, my friend, because she is not
much given to such talking as that. When she is out with me on a
Sunday afternoon she has chat enough. By St. James, she'll talk for
two hours without stopping when I'm so out of breath with the hill
that I haven't a word.' 'I don't doubt she can talk.' 'That she can; and manage a house better than any girl I ever saw. You ask her aunt.' 'I know what her aunt thinks of her. Madame Voss says that neither
you nor she can afford to part with her.' Michel Voss was silent for a moment. It was dusk, and no one could
see him as he brushed a tear from each eye with the back of his
hand. 'I'll tell you what, Urmand,--it will break my heart to lose
her. Do you see how she comes to me and comforts me? But if it
broke my heart, and broke the house too, I would not keep her here. It isn't fit. If you like her, and she can like you, it will be a
good match for her. You have my leave to ask her. She brought
nothing here, but she has been a good girl, a very good girl, and
she will not leave the house empty-handed.' Adrian Urmand was a linen-buyer from Basle, and was known to have a
good share in a good business. He was a handsome young man too,
though rather small, and perhaps a little too apt to wear rings on
his fingers and to show jewelry on his shirt-front and about his
waistcoat. So at least said some of the young people of Granpere,
where rings and gold studs are not so common as they are at Basle. But he was one who understood his business, and did not neglect it;
he had money too; and was therefore such a young man that Michel
Voss felt that he might give his niece to him without danger, if he
and she could manage to like each other sufficiently. As to
Urmand's liking, there was no doubt. Urmand was ready enough. 'I will see if she will speak to me just now,' said Urmand after a
pause. 'Shall her aunt try it, or shall I do it?' said Michel. But Adrian Urmand thought that part of the pleasure of love lay in
the making of it himself. So he declined the innkeeper's offer, at
any rate for the present occasion. 'Perhaps,' said he, 'Madame Voss
will say a word for me after I have spoken for myself.' 'So let it be,' said the landlord. And then they finished their
cigars in silence. It was in vain that Adrian Urmand tried that night to obtain
audience from Marie. Marie, as though she well knew what was wanted
of her and was determined to thwart her lover, would not allow
herself to be found alone for a moment. When Adrian presented
himself at the window of her little bar, he found that Peter was
with her, and she managed to keep Peter with her till Adrian was
gone. And again, when he hoped to find her alone for a few moments
after the work of the day was over in the small parlour where she
was accustomed to sit for some half hour before she would go up to
her room, he was again disappointed. She was already up-stairs with
her aunt and the children, and all Michel Voss's good nature in
keeping out of the way was of no avail. But Urmand was determined not to be beaten. He intended to return
to Basle on the next day but one, and desired to put this matter a
little in forwardness before he took his departure. On the
following morning he had various appointments to keep with
countrymen and their wives, who sold linen to him, but he was quick
over his business and managed to get back to the inn early in the
afternoon. From six till eight he well knew that Marie would allow
nothing to impede her in the grand work of preparing for supper; but
at four o'clock she would certainly be sitting somewhere about the
house with her needle in her hand. At four o'clock he found her,
not with her needle in her hand, but, better still, perfectly idle. She was standing at an open window, looking out upon the garden as
he came behind her, standing motionless with both hands on the sill
of the window, thinking deeply of something that filled her mind. It might be that she was thinking of him. 'I have done with my customers now, and I shall be off to Basle
to-morrow,' said he, as soon as she had looked round at the sound of
his footsteps and perceived that he was close to her. 'I hope you have bought your goods well, M. Urmand.' 'Ah! for the matter of that the time for buying things well is clean
gone. One used to be able to buy well; but there is not an old
woman now in Alsace who doesn't know as well as I do, or better,
what linen is worth in Berne and Paris. They expect to get nearly
as much for it here at Granpere.' 'They work hard, M. Urmand, and things are dearer than they were. It is well that they should get a price for their labour.' 'A price, yes:--but how is a man to buy without a profit? They
think that I come here for their sakes,--merely to bring the market
to their doors.' Then he began to remember that he had no special
object in discussing the circumstances of his trade with Marie
Bromar, and that he had a special object in another direction. But
how to turn the subject was now a difficulty. 'I am sure you do not buy without a profit,' said Marie Bromar, when
she found that he was silent. 'And then the poor people, who have
to pay so dear for everything!' She was making a violent attempt to
keep him on the ground of his customers and his purchases. 'There was another thing that I wanted to say to you, Marie,' he
began at last abruptly. 'Another thing,' said Marie, knowing that the hour had come. 'Yes;--another thing. I daresay you know what it is. I need not
tell you now that I love you, need I, Marie? You know as well as I
do what I think of you.' 'No, I don't,' said Marie, not intending to encourage him to tell
her, but simply saying that which came easiest to her at the moment. 'I think this,--that if you will consent to be my wife, I shall be a
very happy man. That is all. Everybody knows how pretty you are,
and how good, and how clever; but I do not think that anybody loves
you better than I do. Can you say that you will love me, Marie? Your uncle approves of it,--and your aunt.' He had now come quite
close to her, and having placed his hand behind her back, was
winding his arm round her waist. 'I will not have you do that, M. Urmand,' she said, escaping from
his embrace. 'But that is no answer. Can you love me, Marie?' 'No,' she said, hardly whispering the word between her teeth. 'And is that to be all?' 'What more can I say?' 'But your uncle wishes it, and your aunt. Dear Marie, can you not
try to love me?' 'I know they wish it. It is easy enough for a girl to see when such
things are wished or when they are forbidden. Of course I know that
uncle wishes it. And he is very good;--and so are you, I daresay. And I'm sure I ought to be very proud, because you are so much above
me.' 'I am not a bit above you. If you knew what I think, you wouldn't
say so.' 'But--'

'Well, Marie. Think a moment, dearest, before you give me an answer
that shall make me either happy or miserable.' 'I have thought. I would almost burn myself in the fire, if uncle
wished it.' 'And he does wish this.' 'But I cannot do this even because he wishes it.' 'Why not, Marie?' 'I prefer being as I am. I do not wish to leave the hotel, or to be
married at all.' 'Nay, Marie, you will certainly be married some day.' 'No; there is no such certainty. Some girls never get married. I
am of use here, and I am happy here.' 'Ah! it is because you cannot love me.' 'I don't suppose I shall ever love any one, not in that way. I must
go away now, M. Urmand, because I am wanted below.' She did go, and Adrian Urmand spoke no farther word of love to her
on that occasion. 'I will speak to her about it myself,' said Michel Voss, when he
heard his young friend's story that evening, seated again upon the
bench outside the door, and smoking another cigar. 'It will be of no use,' said Adrian. 'One never knows,' said Michel. 'Young women are queer cattle to
take to market. One can never be quite certain which way they want
to go. After you are off to-morrow, I will have a few words with
her. She does not quite understand as yet that she must make her
hay while the sun shines. Some of 'em are all in a hurry to get
married, and some of 'em again are all for hanging back, when their
friends wish it. It's natural, I believe, that they should be
contrary. But Marie is as good as the best of them, and when I
speak to her, she'll hear reason.' Adrian Urmand had no alternative but to assent to the innkeeper's
proposition. The idea of making love second-hand was not pleasant
to him; but he could not hinder the uncle from speaking his mind to
the niece. One little suggestion he did make before he took his
departure. 'It can't be, I suppose, that there is any one else that
she likes better?' To this Michel Voss made no answer in words, but
shook his head in a fashion that made Adrian feel assured that there
was no danger on that head. But Michel Voss, though he had shaken his head in a manner so
satisfactory, had feared that there was such danger. He had
considered himself justified in shaking his head, but would not be
so false as to give in words the assurance which Adrian had asked. That night he discussed the matter with his wife, declaring it as
his purpose that Marie Bromar should marry Adrian Urmand. 'It is
impossible that she should do better,' said Michel. 'It would be very well,' said Madame Voss. 'Very well! Why, he is worth thirty thousand francs, and is as
steady at his business as his father was before him.' 'He is a dandy.' 'Psha! that is nothing!' said Michel. 'And he is too fond of money.' 'It is a fault on the right side,' said Michel. 'His wife and
children will not come to want.' Madame Voss paused a moment before she made her last and grand
objection to the match. 'It is my belief,' said she, 'that Marie is
always thinking of George.' 'Then she had better cease to think of him,' said Michel; 'for
George is not thinking of her.' He said nothing farther, but
resolved to speak his own mind freely to Marie Bromar. CHAPTER III. The old-fashioned inn at Colmar, at which George Voss was acting as
assistant and chief manager to his father's distant cousin, Madame
Faragon, was a house very different in all its belongings from the
Lion d'Or at Granpere. It was very much larger, and had much higher
pretensions. It assumed to itself the character of a first-class
hotel; and when Colmar was without a railway, and was a great
posting-station on the high road from Strasbourg to Lyons, there was
some real business at the Hotel de la Poste in that town. At
present, though Colmar may probably have been benefited by the
railway, the inn has faded, and is in its yellow leaf. Travellers
who desire to see the statue which a grateful city has erected to
the memory of its most illustrious citizen, General Rapp, are not
sufficient in number to keep a first-class hotel in the glories of
fresh paint and smart waiters; and when you have done with General
Rapp, there is not much to interest you in Colmar. But there is the
hotel; and poor fat, unwieldy Madame Faragon, though she grumbles
much, and declares that there is not a sou to be made, still keeps
it up, and bears with as much bravery as she can the buffets of a
world which seems to her to be becoming less prosperous and less
comfortable and more exacting every day. In her younger years, a
posting-house in such a town was a posting-house; and when M.
Faragon married her, the heiress of the then owner of the business,
he was supposed to have done uncommonly well for himself. Madame
Faragon is now a childless widow, and sometimes declares that she
will shut the house up and have done with it. Why maintain a
business without a profit, simply that there may be an Hotel de la
Poste at Colmar? But there are old servants whom she has not the
heart to send away; and she has at any rate a roof of her own over
her head; and though she herself is unconscious that it is so, she
has many ties to the old business; and now, since her young cousin
George Voss has been with her, things go a little better. She is
not robbed so much, and the people of the town, finding that they
can get a fair bottle of wine and a good supper, come to the inn;
and at length an omnibus has been established, and there is a little
glimmer of returning prosperity. It is a large old rambling house, built round an irregularly-shaped
court, with another court behind it; and in both courts the stables
and coach-houses seem to be so mixed with the kitchens and
entrances, that one hardly knows what part of the building is equine
and what part human. Judging from the smell which pervades the
lower quarters, and, alas, also too frequently the upper rooms, one
would be inclined to say that the horses had the best of it. The
defect had been pointed out to Madame Faragon more than once; but
that lady, though in most of the affairs of life her temper is
gentle and kindly, cannot hear with equanimity an insinuation that
any portion of her house is either dirty or unsweet. Complaints
have reached her that the beds were--well, inhabited--but no servant
now dares to hint at anything wrong in this particular. If this
traveller or that says a word to her personally in complaint, she
looks as sour as death, and declines to open her mouth in reply; but
when that traveller's back is turned, the things that Madame Faragon
can say about the upstart coxcombry of the wretch, and as to the
want of all real comforts which she is sure prevails in the home
quarters of that ill-starred complaining traveller, are proof to
those who hear them that the old landlady has not as yet lost all
her energy. It need not be doubted that she herself religiously
believes that no foul perfume has ever pervaded the sanctity of her
chambers, and that no living thing has ever been seen inside the
sheets of her beds, except those guests whom she has allocated to
the different rooms. Matters had not gone very easily with George Voss in all the changes
he had made during the last year. Some things he was obliged to do
without consulting Madame Faragon at all. Then she would discover
what was going on, and there would be a 'few words.' At other times
he would consult her, and carry his purpose only after much
perseverance. Twice or thrice he had told her that he must go away,
and then with many groans she had acceded to his propositions. It
had been necessary to expend two thousand francs in establishing the
omnibus, and in that affair the appearance of things had been at one
time quite hopeless. And then when George had declared that the
altered habits of the people required that the hour of the morning
table-d'hote should be changed from noon to one, she had sworn that
she would not give way. She would never lend her assent to such
vile idleness. It was already robbing the business portion of the
day of an hour. She would wrap her colours round her and die upon
the ground sooner than yield. 'Then they won't come,' said George,
'and it's no use you having the table then. They will all go to the
Hotel de l'Imperatrice.' This was a new house, the very mention of
which was a dagger-thrust into the bosom of Madame Faragon. 'Then
they will be poisoned,' she said. 'And let them! It is what they
are fit for.' But the change was made, and for the first three days
she would not come out of her room. When the bell was rung at the
obnoxious hour, she stopped her ears with her two hands. But though there had been these contests, Madame Faragon had made
more than one effort to induce George Voss to become her partner and
successor in the house. If he would only bring in a small sum of
money--a sum which must be easily within his father's reach--he
should have half the business now, and all of it when Madame Faragon
had gone to her rest. Or if he would prefer to give Madame Faragon
a pension--a moderate pension--she would give up the house at once. At these tender moments she used to say that he probably would not
begrudge her a room in which to die. But George Voss would always
say that he had no money, that he could not ask his father for
money, and that he had not made up his mind to settle at Colmar. Madame Faragon, who was naturally much interested in the matter, and
was moreover not without curiosity, could never quite learn how
matters stood at Granpere. A word or two she had heard in a
circuitous way of Marie Bromar, but from George himself she could
never learn anything of his affairs at home. She had asked him once
or twice whether it would not be well that he should marry, but he
had always replied that he did not think of such a thing--at any
rate as yet. He was a steady young man, given more to work than to
play, and apparently not inclined to amuse himself with the girls of
the neighbourhood. One day Edmond Greisse was over at Colmar--Edmond Greisse, the lad
whose untidy appearance at the supper-table at the Lion d'Or had
called down the rebuke of Marie Bromar. He had been sent over on
some business by his employer, and had come to get his supper and
bed at Madame Faragon's hotel. He was a modest, unassuming lad, and
had been hardly more than a boy when George Voss had left Granpere. From time to time George had seen some friend from the village, and
had thus heard tidings from home. Once, as has been said, Madame
Voss had made a pilgrimage to Madame Faragon's establishment to
visit him; but letters between the houses had not been frequent. Though postage in France--or shall we say Germany?--is now almost as
low as in England, these people of Alsace have not yet fallen into
the way of writing to each other when it occurs to any of them that
a word may be said. Young Greisse had seen the landlady, who now
never went upstairs among her guests, and had had his chamber
allotted to him, and was seated at the supper-table, before he met
George Voss. It was from Madame Faragon that George heard of his
arrival. 'There is a neighbour of yours from Granpere in the house,' said
she. 'From Granpere? And who is he?' 'I forget the lad's name; but he says that your father is well, and
Madame Voss. He goes back early to-morrow with the roulage and some
goods that his people have bought. I think he is at supper now.' The place of honour at the top of the table at the Colmar inn was
not in these days assumed by Madame Faragon. She had, alas, become
too stout to do so with either grace or comfort, and always took her
meals, as she always lived, in the little room downstairs, from
which she could see, through the apertures of two doors, all who
came in and all who went out by the chief entrance of the hotel. Nor had George usurped the place. It had now happened at Colmar, as
it has come to pass at most hotels, that the public table is no
longer the table-d'hote. The end chair was occupied by a stout,
dark man, with a bald head and black beard, who was proudly filling
a place different from that of his neighbours, and who would
probably have gone over to the Hotel de l'Imperatrice had anybody
disturbed him. On the present occasion George seated himself next
to the lad, and they were soon discussing all the news from
Granpere. 'And how is Marie Bromar?' George asked at last. 'You have heard about her, of course,' said Edmond Greisse. 'Heard what?' 'She is going to be married.' 'Minnie Bromar to be married? And to whom?' Edmond at once understood that his news was regarded as being
important, and made the most of it. 'O dear, yes. It was settled last week when he was there.' 'But who is he?' 'Adrian Urmand, the linen-buyer from Basle.' 'Marie to be married to Adrian Urmand?' Urmand's journeys to Granpere had been commenced before George Voss
had left the place, and therefore the two young men had known each
other. 'They say he's very rich,' said Edmond. 'I thought he cared for nobody but himself. And are you sure? Who
told you?' 'I am quite sure; but I do not know who told me. They are all
talking about it.' 'Did my father ever tell you?' 'No, he never told me.' 'Or Marie herself?' 'No, she did not tell me. Girls never tell those sort of things of
themselves.' 'Nor Madame Voss?' asked George. 'She never talks much about anything. But you may be sure it's
true. I'll tell you who told me first, and he is sure to know,
because he lives in the house. It was Peter Veque.' 'Peter Veque, indeed! And who do you think would tell him?' 'But isn't it quite likely? She has grown to be such a beauty! Everybody gives it to her that she is the prettiest girl round
Granpere. And why shouldn't he marry her? If I had a lot of money,
I'd only look to get the prettiest girl I could find anywhere.' After this, George said nothing farther to the young man as to the
marriage. If it was talked about as Edmond said, it was probably
true. And why should it not be true? Even though it were true, no
one would have cared to tell him. She might have been married twice
over, and no one in Granpere would have sent him word. So he
declared to himself. And yet Marie Bromar had once sworn to him
that she loved him, and would be his for ever and ever; and, though
he had left her in dudgeon, with black looks, without a kind word of
farewell, yet he had believed her. Through all his sojourn at
Colmar he had told himself that she would be true to him. He
believed it, though he was hardly sure of himself--had hardly
resolved that he would ever go back to Granpere to seek her. His
father had turned him out of the house, and Marie had told him as he
went that she would never marry him if her uncle disapproved it. Slight as her word had been on that morning of his departure, it had
rankled in his bosom, and made him angry with her through a whole
twelvemonth. And yet he had believed that she would be true to him! He went out in the evening when it was dusk and walked round and
round the public garden of Colmar, thinking of the news which he had
heard--the public garden, in which stands the statue of General
Rapp. It was a terrible blow to him. Though he had remained a
whole year in Colmar without seeing Marie, or hearing of her,
without hardly ever having had her name upon his lips, without even
having once assured himself during the whole time that the happiness
of his life would depend on the girl's constancy to him,--now that
he heard that she was to be married to another man, he was torn to
pieces by anger and regret. He had sworn to love her, and had never
even spoken a word of tenderness to another girl. She had given him
her plighted troth, and now she was prepared to break it with the
first man who asked her! As he thought of this, his brow became
black with anger. But his regrets were as violent. What a fool he
had been to leave her there, open to persuasion from any man who
came in the way, open to persuasion from his father, who would, of
course, be his enemy. How, indeed, could he expect that she should
be true to him? The year had been long enough to him, but it must
have been doubly long to her. He had expected that his father would
send for him, would write to him, would at least transmit to him
some word that would make him know that his presence was again
desired at Granpere. But his father had been as proud as he was,
and had not sent any such message. Or rather, perhaps, the father
being older and less impatient, had thought that a temporary absence
from Granpere might be good for his son. It was late at night when George Voss went to bed, but he was up in
the morning early to see Edmond Greisse before the roulage should
start for Munster on its road to Granpere. Early times in that part
of the world are very early, and the roulage was ready in the back
court of the inn at half-past four in the morning. 'What? you up at this hour?' said Edmond. 'Why not? It is not every day we have a friend here from Granpere,
so I thought I would see you off.' 'That is kind of you.' 'Give my love to them at the old house, Edmond.' 'Of course I will.' 'To father, and Madame Voss, and the children, and to Marie.' 'All right.' 'Tell Marie that you have told me of her marriage.' 'I don't know whether she'll like to talk about that to me.' 'Never mind; you tell her. She won't bite you. Tell her also that
I shall be over at Granpere soon to see her and the rest of them. I'll be over--as soon as ever I can get away.' 'Shall I tell your father that?' 'No. Tell Marie, and let her tell my father.' 'And when will you come? We shall all be so glad to see you.' 'Never you mind that. You just give my message. Come in for a
moment to the kitchen. There's a cup of coffee for you and a slice
of ham. We are not going to let an old friend like you go away
without breaking his fast.' As Greisse had already paid his modest bill, amounting altogether to
little more than three francs, this was kind of the young landlord,
and while he was eating his bread and ham he promised faithfully
that he would give the message just as George had given it to him. It was on the third day after the departure of Edmond Greisse that
George told Madame Faragon that he was going home. 'Going where, George?' said Madame Faragon, leaning forward on the
table before her, and looking like a picture of despair. 'To Granpere, Madame Faragon.' 'To Granpere! and why? and when? and how? O dear! Why did you not
tell me before, child?' 'I told you as soon as I knew.' 'But you are not going yet?' 'On Monday.' 'O dear! So soon as that! Lord bless me! We can't do anything
before Monday. And when will you be back?' 'I cannot say with certainty. I shall not be long, I daresay.' 'And have they sent for you?' 'No, they have not sent for me, but I want to see them once again. And I must make up my mind what to do for the future.' 'Don't leave me, George; pray do not leave me!' exclaimed Madame
Faragon. 'You shall have the business now if you choose to take
it--only pray don't leave me!' George explained that at any rate he would not desert her now at
once; and on the Monday named he started for Granpere. He had not
been very quick in his action, for a week had passed since he had
given Edmond Greisse his breakfast in the hotel kitchen. CHAPTER IV. Adrian Urmand had been three days gone from Granpere before Michel
Voss found a fitting opportunity for talking to his niece. It was
not a matter, as he thought, in which there was need for any great
hurry, but there was need for much consideration. Once again he
spoke on the subject to his wife. 'If she's thinking about George, she has kept it very much to
herself,' he remarked. 'Girls do keep it to themselves,' said Madame Voss. 'I'm not so sure of that. They generally show it somehow. Marie
never looks lovelorn. I don't believe a bit of it; and as for him,
all the time he has been away he has never so much as sent a word of
a message to one of us.' 'He sent his love to you, when I saw him, quite dutifully,' said
Madame Voss. 'Why don't he come and see us if he cares for us? It isn't of him
that Marie is thinking.' 'It isn't of anybody else then,' said Madame Voss. 'I never see her
speak a word to any of the young men, nor one of them ever speaking
a word to her.' Pondering over all this, Michel Voss resolved that he would have it
all out with his niece on the following Sunday. On the Sunday he engaged Marie to start with him after dinner to the
place on the hillside where they were cutting wood. It was a
beautiful autumn afternoon, in that pleasantest of all months in the
year, when the sun is not too hot, and the air is fresh and balmy,
and one is still able to linger abroad, loitering either in or out
of the shade, when the midges cease to bite, and the sun no longer
scorches and glares; but the sweet vestiges of summer remain, and
everything without doors is pleasant and friendly, and there is the
gentle unrecognised regret for the departing year, the unconscious
feeling that its glory is going from us, to add the inner charm of a
soft melancholy to the outer luxury of the atmosphere. I doubt
whether Michel Voss had ever realised the fact that September is the
kindliest of all the months, but he felt it, and enjoyed the leisure
of his Sunday afternoon when he could get his niece to take a
stretch with him on the mountain-side. On these occasions Madame
Voss was left at home with M. le Cure, who liked to linger over his
little cup of coffee. Madame Voss, indeed, seldom cared to walk
very far from the door of her own house; and on Sundays to go to the
church and back again was certainly sufficient exercise. Michel Voss said no word about Adrian Urmand as they were ascending
the hill. He was too wise for that. He could not have given effect
to his experience with sufficient eloquence had he attempted the
task while the burden of the rising ground was upon his lungs and
chest. They turned into a saw-mill as they went up, and counted the
scantlings of timber that had been cut; and Michel looked at the
cradle to see that it worked well, and to the wheels to see that
they were in good order, and observed that the channel for the water
required repairs, and said a word as to the injury that had come to
him because George had left him. 'Perhaps he may come back soon,'
said Marie. To this he made no answer, but continued his path up
the mountain-side. 'There will be plenty of feed for the cows this
autumn,' said Marie Bromar. 'That is a great comfort.' 'Plenty,' said Michel; 'plenty.' But Marie knew from the tone of
his voice that he was not thinking about the grass, and so she held
her peace. But the want or plenty of the pasture was generally a
subject of the greatest interest to the people of Granpere at that
special time of the year, and one on which Michel Voss was ever
ready to speak. Marie therefore knew that there was something on
her uncle's mind. Nevertheless he inspected the timber that was
cut, and made some remarks about the work of the men. They were not
so careful in barking the logs as they used to be, and upon the
whole he thought that the wood itself was of a worse quality. What
is there that we do not find to be deteriorating around us when we
consider the things in detail, though we are willing enough to admit
a general improvement? 'Yes,' said he, in answer to some remarks
from Marie, 'we must take it, no doubt, as God gives it to us, but
we need not spoil it in the handling. Sit down, my dear; I want to
speak to you for a few minutes.' Then they sat down together on a
large prostrate pine, which was being prepared to be sent down to
the saw-mill. 'My dear,' said he, 'I want to speak to you about
Adrian Urmand.' She blushed and trembled as she placed herself
beside him; but he hardly noticed it. He was not quite at his ease
himself, and was a little afraid of the task he had undertaken. 'Adrian tells me that he asked you to take him as your lover, and
that you refused.' 'Yes, Uncle Michel.' 'But why, my dear? How are you to do better? Perhaps I, or your
aunt, should have spoken to you first, and told you that we thought
well of the match.' 'It wasn't that, uncle. I knew you thought well of it; or, at
least, I believed that you did.' 'And what is your objection, Marie?' 'I don't object to M. Urmand, uncle;--at least, not particularly.' 'But he says you do object. You would not accept him when he
offered himself.' 'No; I did not accept him.' 'But you will, my dear,--if he comes again?' 'No, uncle.' 'And why not? Is he not a good young man?' 'O, yes,--that is, I daresay.' 'And he has a good business. I do not know what more you could
expect.' 'I expect nothing, uncle,--except not to go away from you.' 'Ah,--but you must go away from me. I should be very wrong, and so
would your aunt, to let you remain here till you lose your good
looks, and become an old woman on our hands. You are a pretty girl,
Marie, and fit to be any man's wife, and you ought to take a
husband. I am quite in earnest now, my dear; and I speak altogether
for your own welfare.' 'I know you are in earnest, and I know that you speak for my
welfare.' 'Well;--well;--what then? Of course, it is only reasonable that you
should be married some day. Here is a young man in a better way of
business than any man, old or young, that comes into Granpere. He
has a house in Basle, and money to put in it whatever you want. And
for the matter of that, Marie, my niece shall not go away from me
empty-handed.' She drew herself closer to him and took hold of his arm and pressed
it, and looked up into his face. 'I brought nothing with me,' she said, 'and I want to take nothing
away.' 'Is that it?' he said, speaking rapidly. 'Let me tell you then, my
girl, that you shall have nothing but your earnings,--your fair
earnings. Don't you take trouble about that. Urmand and I will
settle that between us, and I will go bail there shall be no
unpleasant words. As I said before, my girl sha'n't leave my house
empty-handed; but, Lord bless you, he would only be too happy to
take you in your petticoat, just as you are. I never saw a fellow
more in love with a girl. Come, Marie, you need not mind saying the
word to me, though you could not bring yourself to say it to him.' 'I can't say that word, uncle, either to you or to him.' 'And why the devil not?' said Michel Voss, who was beginning to be
tired of being eloquent. 'I would rather stay at home with you and my aunt.' 'O, bother!' 'Some girls stay at home always. All girls do not get married. I
don't want to be taken to Basle.' 'This is all nonsense,' said Michel, getting up. 'If you're a good
girl, you will do as you are told.' 'It would not be good to be married to a man if I do not love him.' 'But why shouldn't you love him? He's just the man that all the
girls always love. Why don't you love him?' As Michel Voss asked this last question, there was a tone of anger
in his voice. He had allowed his niece considerable liberty, and
now she was unreasonable. Marie, who, in spite of her devotion to
her uncle, was beginning to think that she was ill-used by this
tone, made no reply. 'I hope you haven't been falling in love with
any one else,' continued Michel. 'No,' said Marie, in a low whisper. 'I do hope you're not still thinking of George, who has left us
without casting a thought upon you. I do hope that you are not such
a fool as that.' Marie sat perfectly silent, not moving; but there
was a frown on her brow and a look of sorrow mixed with anger on her
face. But Michel Voss did not see her face. He looked straight
before him as he spoke, and was flinging chips of wood to a distance
in his energy. 'If it's that, Marie, I tell you you had better get
quit of it at once. It can come to no good. Here is an excellent
husband for you. Be a good girl, and say that you will accept him.' 'I should not be a good girl to accept a man whom I do not love.' 'Is it any thought about George that makes you say so, child?' Michel paused a moment for an answer. 'Tell me,' he continued, with
almost angry energy, 'is it because of George that you refuse
yourself to this young man?' Marie paused again for a moment, and then she replied, 'No, it is
not.' 'It is not?' 'No, uncle.' 'Then why will you not marry Adrian Urmand?' 'Because I do not care for him. Why won't you let me remain with
you, uncle?' She was very close to him now, and leaning against him; and her
throat was half choked with sobs, and her eyes were full of tears. Michel Voss was a soft-hearted man, and inclined to be very soft of
heart where Marie Bromar was concerned. On the other hand he was
thoroughly convinced that it would be for his niece's benefit that
she should marry this young trader; and he thought also that it was
his duty as her uncle and guardian to be round with her, and make
her understand, that as her friends wished it, and as the young
trader himself wished it, it was her duty to do as she was desired. Another uncle and guardian in his place would hardly have consulted
the girl at all. Between his desire to have his own way and reduce
her to obedience, and the temptation to put his arm round her waist
and kiss away her tears, he was uneasy and vacillating. She gently
put her hand within his arm, and pressed it very close. 'Won't you let me remain with you, uncle? I love you and Aunt
Josey' (Madame Voss was named Josephine, and was generally called
Aunt Josey) 'and the children. I could not go away from the
children. And I like the house. I am sure I am of use in the
house.' 'Of course you are of use in the house. It is not that.' 'Why, then, should you want to send me away?' 'What nonsense you talk, Marie! Don't you know that a young woman
like you ought to be married some day--that is if she can get a
fitting man to take her? What would the neighbours say of me if we
kept you at home to drudge for us, instead of settling you out in
the world properly? You forget, Marie, that I have a duty to
perform, and you should not make it so difficult.' 'But if I don't want to be settled?' said Marie. 'Who cares for the
neighbours? If you and I understand each other, is not that
enough?' 'I care for the neighbours,' said Michel Voss with energy. 'And must I marry a man I don't care a bit for, because of the
neighbours, Uncle Michel?' asked Marie, with something approaching
to indignation in her voice. Michel Voss perceived that it was of no use for him to carry on the
argument. He entertained a half-formed idea that he did not quite
understand the objections so strongly urged by his niece; that there
was something on her mind that she would not tell him, and that
there might be cruelty in urging the matter upon her; but, in
opposition to this, there was his assured conviction that it was his
duty to provide well and comfortably for his niece, and that it was
her duty to obey him in acceding to such provision as he might make. And then this marriage was undoubtedly a good marriage--a match that
would make all the world declare how well Michel Voss had done for
the girl whom he had taken under his protection. It was a marriage
that he could not bear to see go out of the family. It was not
probable that the young linen-merchant, who was so well to do in the
world, and who, no doubt, might have his choice in larger places
than Granpere--it was not probable, Michel thought, that he would
put up with many refusals. The girl would lose her chance, unless
he, by his firmness, could drive this folly out of her. And yet how
could he be firm, when he was tempted to throw his great arms about
her, and swear that she should eat of his bread and drink of his
cup, and be unto him as a daughter, till the last day of their joint
existence. When she crept so close to him and pressed his arm, he
was almost overcome by the sweetness of her love and by the
tenderness of his own heart. 'It seems to me that you don't understand,' he said at last. 'I
didn't think that such a girl as you would be so silly.' To this she made no reply; and then they began to walk down the hill
together. They had walked half way home, he stepping a little in
advance,--because he was still angry with her, or angry rather with
himself in that he could not bring himself to scold her properly,--and
she following close behind his shoulder, when he stopped suddenly and
asked her a question which came from the direction his thoughts were
taking at the moment. 'You are sure,' he said, 'that you are not
doing this because you expect George to come back to you?' 'Quite sure,' she said, bearing forward a moment, and answering him
in a whisper when she spoke. 'By my word, then, I can't understand it. I can't indeed. Has
Urmand done anything to offend you?' 'Nothing, uncle.' 'Nor said anything?' 'Not a word; uncle. I am not offended. Of course I am much obliged
to him. Only I don't love him.' 'By my faith I don't understand it. I don't indeed. It is sheer
nonsense, and you must get over it. I shouldn't be doing my duty if
I didn't tell you that you must get over it. He will be here again
in another ten days, and you must have thought better of it by that
time. You must indeed, Marie.' Then they walked down the hill in silence together, each thinking
intently on the purpose of the other, but each altogether
misunderstanding the other. Michel Voss was assured--as she had
twice implied as much--that she was altogether indifferent to his
son George. What he might have said or done had she declared her
affection for her absent lover, he did not himself know. He had not
questioned himself on that point. Though his wife had told him that
Marie was ever thinking of George, he had not believed that it was
so. He had no reason for disliking a marriage between his son and
his wife's niece. When he had first thought that they were going to
be lovers, under his nose, without his permission,--going to
commence a new kind of life between themselves without so much as a
word spoken to him or by him,--he had found himself compelled to
interfere, compelled as a father and an uncle. That kind of thing
could never be allowed to take place in a well-ordered house without
the expressed sanction of the head of the household. He had
interfered,--rather roughly; and his son had taken him at his word. He was sore now at his son's coldness to him, and was disposed to
believe that his son cared not at all for any one at Granpere. His
niece was almost as dear to him as his son, and much more dutiful. Therefore he would do the best he could for his niece. Marie's
declaration that George was nothing to her,--that she did not think
of him,--was in accordance with his own ideas. His wife had been
wrong. His wife was usually wrong when any headwork was required. There could be no good reason why Marie Bromar should not marry
Adrian Urmand. But Marie, as she knew very well, had never declared that George
Voss was nothing to her,--that he was forgotten, or that her heart
was free. He had gone from her and had forgotten her. She was quite
sure of that. And should she ever hear that he was married to some
one else,--as it was probable that she would hear some day,--then
she would be free again. Then she might take this man or that,
if her friends wished it--and if she could bring herself to endure
the proposed marriage. But at present her troth was plighted to
George Voss; and where her troth was given, there was her heart
also. She could understand that such a circumstance, affecting one
of so little importance as herself, should be nothing to a man like
her uncle; but it was everything to her. George had forgotten her,
and she had wept sorely over his want of constancy. But though
telling herself that this certainly was so, she had declared to
herself that she would never be untrue till her want of truth had
been put beyond the reach of doubt. Who does not know how hope
remains, when reason has declared that there is no longer ground for
hoping? Such had been the state of her mind hitherto; but what would be the
good of entertaining hope, even if there were ground for hoping,
when, as was so evident, her uncle would never permit George and her
to be man and wife? And did she not owe everything to her uncle? And was it not the duty of a girl to obey her guardian? Would not
all the world be against her if she refused this man? Her mind was
tormented by a thousand doubts, when her uncle said another word to
her, just as they were entering the village. 'You will try and think better of it;--will you not, my dear?' She
was silent. 'Come, Marie, you can say that you will try. Will you
not try?' 'Yes, uncle,--I will try.' Michel Voss went home in a good humour, for he felt that he had
triumphed; and poor Marie returned broken-hearted, for she was aware
that she had half-yielded. She knew that her uncle was triumphant. CHAPTER V.

When Edmond Greisse was back at Granpere he well remembered his
message, but he had some doubt as to the expediency of delivering
it. He had to reflect in the first place whether he was quite sure
that matters were arranged between Marie and Adrian Urmand. The
story had been told to him as being certainly true by Peter the
waiter. And he had discussed the matter with other young men, his
associates in the place, among all of whom it was believed that
Urmand was certainly about to carry away the young woman with whom
they were all more or less in love. But when, on his return to
Granpere, he had asked a few more questions, and had found that even
Peter was now in doubt on a point as to which he had before been so
sure, he began to think that there would be some difficulty in
giving his message. He was not without some little fear of Marie,
and hesitated to tell her that he had spread the report about her
marriage. So he contented himself with simply announcing to her
that George Voss intended to visit his old home. 'Does my uncle know?' Marie asked. 'No;--you are to tell him,' said Greisse. 'I am to tell him! Why should I tell him? You can tell him.' 'But George said that I was to let you know, and that you would tell
your uncle.' This was quite unintelligible to Marie; but it was
clear to her that she could make no such announcement, after the
conversation which she had had with her uncle. It was quite out of
the question that she should be the first to announce George's
return, when she had been twice warned on that Sunday afternoon not
to think of him. 'You had better let my uncle know yourself,' she
said, as she walked away. But young Greisse, knowing that he was
already in trouble, and feeling that he might very probably make it
worse, held his peace. When therefore one morning George Voss
showed himself at the door of the inn, neither his father nor Madame
Voss expected him. But his father was kind to him, and his mother-in-law hovered round
him with demonstrations of love and gratitude, as though much were
due to him for coming back at all. 'But you expected me,' said
George. 'No, indeed,' said his father. 'We did not expect you now any more
than on any other day since you left us.' 'I sent word by Edmond Greisse,' said George. Edmond was
interrogated, and declared that he had forgotten to give the
message. George was too clever to pursue the matter any farther,
and when he first met Marie Bromar, there was not a word said
between them beyond what might have been said between any young
persons so related, after an absence of twelve months. George Voss
was very careful to make no demonstration of affection for a girl
who had forgotten him, and who was now, as he believed, betrothed to
another man; and Marie was determined that certainly no sign of the
old love should first be shown by her. He had come back,--perhaps
just in time. He had returned just at the moment in which something
must be decided. She had felt how much there was in the little word
which she had spoken to her uncle. When a girl says that she will
try to reconcile herself to a man's overtures, she has almost
yielded. The word had escaped her without any such meaning on her
part,--had been spoken because she had feared to continue to
contradict her uncle in the full completeness of a positive refusal. She had regretted it as soon as it had been spoken, but she could
not recall it. She had seen in her uncle's eye and had heard in the
tone of his voice for how much that word had been taken;--but it had
gone forth from her mouth, and she could not now rob it of its
meaning. Adrian Urmand was to be back at Granpere in a few days--in
ten days Michel Voss had said; and there were those ten days for her
in which to resolve what she would do. Now, as though sent from
heaven, George had returned, in this very interval of time. Might
it not be that he would help her out of her difficulty? If he would
only tell her to remain single for his sake, she would certainly
turn her back upon her Swiss lover, let her uncle say what he might. She would make no engagement with George unless with her uncle's
sanction; but a word, a look of love, would fortify her against that
other marriage. George, she thought, had come back a man more to be worshipped than
ever, as far as appearance went. What woman could doubt for a
moment between two such men? Adrian Urmand was no doubt a pretty
man, with black hair, of which he was very careful, with white
hands, with bright small dark eyes which were very close together,
with a thin regular nose, a small mouth, and a black moustache,
which he was always pointing with his fingers. It was impossible to
deny that he was good-looking after a fashion; but Marie despised
him in her heart. She was almost bigger than he was, certainly
stronger, and had no aptitude for the city niceness and POINT-DEVICE
fastidiousness of such a lover. George Voss had come back, not
taller than when he had left them, but broader in the shoulders, and
more of a man. And then he had in his eye, and in his beaked nose,
and his large mouth, and well-developed chin, that look of command,
which was the peculiar character of his father's face, and which
women, who judge of men by their feelings rather than their
thoughts, always love to see. Marie, if she would consent to marry
Adrian Urmand, might probably have her own way in the house in
everything; whereas it was certain enough that George Voss, wherever
he might be, would desire to have his way. But yet there needed not
a moment, in Marie's estimation, to choose between the two. George
Voss was a real man; whereas Adrian Urmand, tried by such a
comparison, was in her estimation simply a rich trader in want of a
wife. In a day or two the fatted calf was killed, and all went happily
between George and his father. They walked together up into the
mountains, and looked after the wood-cutting, and discussed the
prospects of the inn at Colmar. Michel was disposed to think that
George had better remain at Colmar, and accept Madame Faragon's
offer. 'If you think that the house is worth anything, I will give
you a few thousand francs to set it in order; and then you had
better agree to allow her so much a year for her life.' He probably
felt himself to be nearly as young a man as his son; and then
remember too that he had other sons coming up, who would be able to
carry on the house at Granpere when he should be past his work. Michel was a loving, generous-hearted man, and all feeling of anger
with his son was over before they had been together two days. 'You
can't do better, George,' he said. 'You need not always stay away
from us for twelve months, and I might take a turn over the
mountain, and get a lesson as to how you do things at Colmar. If
ten thousand francs will help you, you shall have them. Will that
make things go straight with you?' George Voss thought the sum
named would make things go very straight; but as the reader knows,
he had another matter near to his heart. He thanked his father; but
not in the joyous thoroughly contented tone that Michel had
expected. 'Is there anything wrong about it?' Michel said in that
sharp tone which he used when something had suddenly displeased him. 'There is nothing wrong; nothing wrong at all,' said George slowly. 'The money is much more than I could have expected. Indeed I did
not expect any.' 'What is it then?' 'I was thinking of something else. Tell me, father; is it true that
Marie is going to be married to Adrian Urmand?' 'What makes you ask?' 'I heard a report of it,' said George. 'Is it true?' The father reflected a moment what answer he should give. It did
not seem to him that George spoke of such a marriage as though the
rumour of it had made him unhappy. The question had been asked
almost with indifference. And then the young man's manner to Marie,
and Marie's manner to him, during the last two days had made him
certain that he had been right in supposing that they had both
forgotten the little tenderness of a year ago. And Michel had
thoroughly made up his mind that it would be well that Marie should
marry Adrian. He believed that he had already vanquished Marie's
scruples. She had promised 'to try and think better of it,' before
George's return; and therefore was he not justified in regarding the
matter as almost settled? 'I think that they will be married,' said
he to his son. 'Then there is something in it?' 'O, yes; there is a great deal in it. Urmand is very eager for it,
and has asked me and her aunt, and we have consented.' 'But has he asked her?' 'Yes; he has done that too,' said Michel. 'And what answer did he get?' 'Well;--I don't know that it would be fair to tell that. Marie is
not a girl likely to jump into a man's arms at the first word. But
I think there is no doubt that they will be betrothed before Sunday
week. He is to be here again on Wednesday.' 'She likes him, then?' 'O, yes; of course she likes him.' Michel Voss had not intended to
say a word that was false. He was anxious to do the best in his
power for both his son and his niece. He thoroughly understood that
it was his duty as a father and a guardian to start them well in the
world, to do all that he could for their prosperity, to feed their
wants with his money, as a pelican feeds her young with blood from
her bosom. Had he known the hearts of each of them, could he have
understood Marie's constancy, or the obstinate silent strength of
his son's disposition, he would have let Adrian Urmand, with his
business and his house at Basle, seek a wife in any other quarter
where he listed, and would have joined together the hands of these two
whom he loved, with a paternal blessing. But he did not understand. He thought that he saw everything when he saw nothing;--and now he was
deceiving his son; for it was untrue that Marie had any such 'liking'
for Adrian Urmand as that of which George had spoken. 'It is as good as settled, then?' said George, not showing by any
tone of his voice the anxiety with which the question was asked. 'I think it is as good as settled,' Michel answered. Before they
got back to the inn, George had thanked his father for his liberal
offer, had declared that he would accede to Madame Faragon's
proposition, and had made his father understand that he must return
to Colmar on the next Monday,--two days before that on which Urmand
was expected at Granpere. The Monday came, and hitherto there had been no word of explanation
between George and Marie. Every one in the house knew that he was
about to return to Colmar, and every one in the house knew that he
had been entirely reconciled to his father. Madame Voss had asked
some question about him and Marie, and had been assured by her
husband that there was nothing in that suspicion. 'I told you from
the beginning,' said he, 'that there was nothing of that sort. I
only wish that George would think of marrying some one, now that he
is to have a large house of his own over his head.' George had determined a dozen times that he would, and a dozen times
that he would not, speak to Marie about her coming marriage,
changing his mind as often as it was formed. Of what use was it to
speak to her? he would say to himself. Then again he would resolve
that he would scorch her false heart by one withering word before he
went. Chance at last arranged it for him. Before he started he
found himself alone with her for a moment, and it was almost
impossible that he should not say something. Then he did speak. 'They tell me you are going to be married, Marie. I hope you will
be happy and prosperous.' 'Who tells you so?' 'It is true at any rate, I suppose.' 'Not that I know of. If my uncle and aunt choose to dispose of me,
I cannot help it.' 'It is well for girls to be disposed of sometimes. It saves them a
world of trouble.' 'I don't know what you mean by that, George;--whether it is intended
to be ill-natured.' 'No, indeed. Why should I be ill-natured to you? I heartily wish
you to be well and happy. I daresay M. Urmand will make you a good
husband. Good-bye, Marie. I shall be off in a few minutes. Will
you not say farewell to me?' 'Farewell, George.' 'We used to be friends, Marie.' 'Yes;--we used to be friends.' 'And I have never forgotten the old days. I will not promise to
come to your marriage, because it would not make either of us happy,
but I shall wish you well. God bless you, Marie.' Then he put his
arm round her and kissed her, as he might have done to a sister,--as
it was natural that he should do to Marie Bromar, regarding her as a
cousin. She did not speak a word more, and then he was gone! She had been quite unable to tell him the truth. The manner in
which he had first addressed her made it impossible for her to tell
him that she was not engaged to marry Adrian Urmand,--that she was
determined, if possible, to avoid the marriage, and that she had no
love for Adrian Urmand. Had she done so, she would in so doing have
asked him to come back to her. That she should do this was
impossible. And yet as he left her, some suspicion of the truth,
some half-formed idea of the real state of the man's mind in
reference to her, flashed across her own. She seemed to feel that
she was specially unfortunate, but she felt at the same time that
there was no means within her reach of setting things right. And
she was as convinced as ever she had been, that her uncle would
never give his consent to a marriage between her and George Voss. As for George himself, he left her with an assured conviction that
she was the promised bride of Adrian Urmand. CHAPTER VI. The world seemed very hard to Marie Bromar when she was left alone. Though there were many who loved her, of whose real affection she
had no doubt, there was no one to whom she could go for assistance. Her uncle in this matter was her enemy, and her aunt was completely
under her uncle's guidance. Madame Voss spoke to her often in these
days of the coming of Adrian Urmand, but the manner of her speaking
was such that no comfort could be taken from it. Madame Voss would
risk an opinion as to the room which the young man ought to occupy,
and the manner in which he should be fed and entertained. For it
was thoroughly understood that he was coming on this occasion as a
lover and not as a trader, and that he was coming as the guest of
Michel Voss, and not as a customer to the inn. 'I suppose he can
take his supper like the other people,' Marie said to her aunt. And
again, when the question of wine was mooted, she was almost saucy. 'If he's thirsty,' she said, 'what did for him last week, will do
for him next week:  and if he's not thirsty, he had better leave it
alone.' But girls are always allowed to be saucy about their
lovers, and Madame Voss did not count this for much. Marie was always thinking of those last words which had been spoken
between her and George, and of the kiss that he had given her. 'We
used to be friends,' he had said, and then he had declared that he
had never forgotten old days. Marie was quick, intelligent, and
ready to perceive at half a glance,--to understand at half a word,
as is the way with clever women. A thrill had gone through her as
she heard the tone of the young man's voice, and she had half told
herself all the truth. He had not quite ceased to think of her. Then he went, without saying the other one word that would have been
needful, without even looking the truth into her face. He had gone,
and had plainly given her to understand that he acceded to this
marriage with Adrian Urmand. How was she to read it all? Was there
more than one way in which a wounded woman, so sore at heart, could
read it? He had told her that though he loved her still, it did not
suit him to trouble himself with her as a wife; and that he would
throw upon her head the guilt of having been false to their old
vows. Though she loved him better than all the world, she despised
him for his thoughtful treachery. In her eyes it was treachery. He
must have known the truth. What right had he to suppose that she
would be false to him,--he, who had never known her to lie to him? And was it not his business, as a man, to speak some word, to ask
some question, by which, if he doubted, the truth might be made
known to him? She, a woman, could ask no question. She could speak
no word. She could not renew her assurances to him, till he should
have asked her to renew them. He was either false, or a traitor, or
a coward. She was very angry with him;--so angry that she was
almost driven by her anger to throw herself into Adrian's arms. She
was the more angry because she was full sure that he had not
forgotten his old love,--that his heart was not altogether changed. Had it appeared to her that the sweet words of former days had
vanished from his memory, though they had clung to hers,--that he
had in truth learned to look upon his Granpere experiences as the
simple doings of his boyhood,--her pride would have been hurt, but
she would have been angry with herself rather than with him. But it
had not been so. The respectful silence of his sojourn in the house
had told her that it was not so. The tremor in his voice as he
reminded her that they once had been friends had plainly told her
that it was not so. He had acknowledged that they had been
betrothed, and that the plight between them was still strong; but,
wishing to be quit of it, he had thrown the burden of breaking it
upon her. She was very wretched, but she did not go about the house with
downcast eyes or humble looks, or sit idle in a corner with her
hands before her. She was quick and eager in the performance of her
work, speaking sharply to those who came in contact with her. Peter
Veque, her chief minister, had but a poor time of it in these days;
and she spoke an angry word or two to Edmond Greisse. She had, in
truth, spoken no words to Edmond Greisse that were not angry since
that ill-starred communication of which he had only given her the
half. To her aunt she was brusque, and almost ill-mannered. 'What is the matter with you, Marie?' Madame Voss said to her one
morning, when she had been snubbed rather rudely by her niece. Marie in answer shook her head and shrugged her shoulders. 'If you
cannot put on a better look before M. Urmand comes, I think he will
hardly hold to his bargain,' said Madame Voss, who was angry. 'Who wants him to hold to his bargain?' said Marie sharply. Then
feeling ill-inclined to discuss the matter with her aunt, she left
the room. Madame Voss, who had been assured by her husband that
Marie had no real objection to Adrian Urmand, did not understand it
all. 'I am sure Marie is unhappy,' she said to her husband when he came
in at noon that day. 'Yes,' said he. 'It seems strange, but it is so, I fancy, with the
best of our young women. Her feeling of modesty--of bashfulness if
you will--is outraged by being told that she is to admit this man as
her lover. She won't make the worse wife on that account, when he
gets her home.' Madame Voss was not quite sure that her husband was right. She had
not before observed young women to be made savage in their daily
work by the outrage to their modesty of an acknowledged lover. But,
as usual, she submitted to her husband. Had she not done so, there
would have come that glance from the corner of his eye, and that
curl in his lip, and that gentle breath from his nostril, which had
become to her the expression of imperious marital authority. Nothing could be kinder, more truly affectionate, than was the heart
of her husband towards her niece. Therefore Madame Voss yielded,
and comforted herself by an assurance that as the best was being
done for Marie, she need not subject herself to her husband's
displeasure by contradiction or interference. Michel Voss himself said little or nothing to his niece at this
time. She had yielded to him, making him a promise that she would
endeavour to accede to his wishes, and he felt that he was bound in
honour not to trouble her farther, unless she should show herself to
be disobedient when the moment of trial came. He was not himself at
ease, he was not comfortable at heart, because he knew that Marie
was avoiding him. Though she would still stand behind his chair at
supper,--when for a moment she would be still,--she did not put her
hands upon his head, nor did she speak to him more than the nature
of her service required. Twice he tried to induce her to sit with
them at table, as though to show that her position was altered now
that she was about to become a bride; but he was altogether
powerless to effect any such change as this. No words that could
have been spoken would have induced Marie to seat herself at the
table, so well did she understand all that such a change in her
habits would have seemed to imply. There was now hardly one person
in the supper-room of the hotel who did not instinctively understand
the reason which made Michel Voss anxious that his niece should sit
down, and that other reason which made her sternly refuse to comply
with his request. 