



Produced by Amy E Zelmer, Sue Asscher, and Robert Prince








EVERY MAN IN HIS HUMOR

(The Anglicized Edition)


By Ben Jonson




INTRODUCTION

THE greatest of English dramatists except Shakespeare, the first
literary dictator and poet-laureate, a writer of verse, prose, satire,
and criticism who most potently of all the men of his time affected the
subsequent course of English letters: such was Ben Jonson, and as such
his strong personality assumes an interest to us almost unparalleled, at
least in his age. Ben Jonson came of the stock that was centuries after to give to the
world Thomas Carlyle; for Jonson's grandfather was of Annandale, over
the Solway, whence he migrated to England. Jonson's father lost his
estate under Queen Mary, "having been cast into prison and forfeited." He entered the church, but died a month before his illustrious son was
born, leaving his widow and child in poverty. Jonson's birthplace was
Westminster, and the time of his birth early in 1573. He was thus nearly
ten years Shakespeare's junior, and less well off, if a trifle better
born. But Jonson did not profit even by this slight advantage. His
mother married beneath her, a wright or bricklayer, and Jonson was for a
time apprenticed to the trade. As a youth he attracted the attention of
the famous antiquary, William Camden, then usher at Westminster School,
and there the poet laid the solid foundations of his classical learning. Jonson always held Camden in veneration, acknowledging that to him he
owed,

"All that I am in arts, all that I know:"

and dedicating his first dramatic success, "Every Man in His Humour,"
to him. It is doubtful whether Jonson ever went to either university,
though Fuller says that he was "statutably admitted into St. John's
College, Cambridge." He tells us that he took no degree, but was later
"Master of Arts in both the universities, by their favour, not his
study." When a mere youth Jonson enlisted as a soldier trailing his pike
in Flanders in the protracted wars of William the Silent against the
Spanish. Jonson was a large and raw-boned lad; he became by his own
account in time exceedingly bulky. In chat with his friend William
Drummond of Hawthornden, Jonson told how "in his service in the Low
Countries he had, in the face of both the camps, killed an enemy, and
taken 'opima spolia' from him;" and how "since his coming to England,
being appealed to the fields, he had killed his adversary which had hurt
him in the arm and whose sword was ten inches longer than his." Jonson's
reach may have made up for the lack of his sword; certainly his prowess
lost nothing in the telling. Obviously Jonson was brave, combative, and
not averse to talking of himself and his doings. In 1592, Jonson returned from abroad penniless. Soon after he married,
almost as early and quite as imprudently as Shakespeare. He told
Drummond curtly that "his wife was a shrew, yet honest"; for some
years he lived apart from her in the household of Lord Albany. Yet two
touching epitaphs among Jonson's 'Epigrams', "On my first daughter," and
"On my first son," attest the warmth of the poet's family affections. The daughter died in infancy, the son of the plague; another son grew up
to manhood little credit to his father whom he survived. We know nothing
beyond this of Jonson's domestic life. How soon Jonson drifted into what we now call grandly "the theatrical
profession" we do not know. In 1593 Marlowe made his tragic exit from
life, and Greene, Shakespeare's other rival on the popular stage,
had preceded Marlowe in an equally miserable death the year before. Shakespeare already had the running to himself. Jonson appears first in
the employment of Philip Henslowe, the exploiter of several troupes of
players, manager, and father-in-law of the famous actor, Edward Alleyn. From entries in 'Henslowe's Diary', a species of theatrical account book
which has been handed down to us, we know that Jonson was connected with
the Admiral's men; for he borrowed 4 pounds of Henslowe, July 28, 1597,
paying back 3s. 9d. on the same day on account of his "share" (in what
is not altogether clear); while later, on December 3, of the same year,
Henslowe advanced 20s. to him "upon a book which he showed the plot unto
the company which he promised to deliver unto the company at Christmas
next." In the next August Jonson was in collaboration with Chettle and
Porter in a play called "Hot Anger Soon Cold." All this points to an
association with Henslowe of some duration, as no mere tyro would be
thus paid in advance upon mere promise. From allusions in Dekker's play,
"Satiromastix," it appears that Jonson, like Shakespeare, began life as
an actor, and that he "ambled in a leather pitch by a play-wagon" taking
at one time the part of Hieronimo in Kyd's famous play, "The Spanish
Tragedy." By the beginning of 1598, Jonson, though still in needy
circumstances, had begun to receive recognition. Francis Meres--well
known for his "Comparative Discourse of our English Poets with the
Greek, Latin, and Italian Poets," printed in 1598, and for his mention
therein of a dozen plays of Shakespeare by title--accords to Ben Jonson
a place as one of "our best in tragedy," a matter of some surprise, as
no known tragedy of Jonson from so early a date has come down to us. That Jonson was at work on tragedy, however, is proved by the entries in
Henslowe of at least three tragedies, now lost, in which he had a
hand. These are "Page of Plymouth," "King Robert II. of Scotland,"
and "Richard Crookback." But all of these came later, on his return to
Henslowe, and range from August 1599 to June 1602. Returning to the autumn of 1598, an event now happened to sever for
a time Jonson's relations with Henslowe. In a letter to Alleyn, dated
September 26 of that year, Henslowe writes: "I have lost one of my
company that hurteth me greatly; that is Gabriel [Spencer], for he is
slain in Hogsden fields by the hands of Benjamin Jonson, bricklayer." The last word is perhaps Henslowe's thrust at Jonson in his displeasure
rather than a designation of his actual continuance at his trade up to
this time. It is fair to Jonson to remark however, that his adversary
appears to have been a notorious fire-eater who had shortly before
killed one Feeke in a similar squabble. Duelling was a frequent
occurrence of the time among gentlemen and the nobility; it was an
imprudent breach of the peace on the part of a player. This duel is the
one which Jonson described years after to Drummond, and for it Jonson
was duly arraigned at Old Bailey, tried, and convicted. He was sent to
prison and such goods and chattels as he had "were forfeited." It is
a thought to give one pause that, but for the ancient law permitting
convicted felons to plead, as it was called, the benefit of clergy,
Jonson might have been hanged for this deed. The circumstance that the
poet could read and write saved him; and he received only a brand of the
letter "T," for Tyburn, on his left thumb. While in jail Jonson became a
Roman Catholic; but he returned to the faith of the Church of England a
dozen years later. On his release, in disgrace with Henslowe and his former associates,
Jonson offered his services as a playwright to Henslowe's rivals,
the Lord Chamberlain's company, in which Shakespeare was a prominent
shareholder. A tradition of long standing, though not susceptible
of proof in a court of law, narrates that Jonson had submitted the
manuscript of "Every Man in His Humour" to the Chamberlain's men and had
received from the company a refusal; that Shakespeare called him back,
read the play himself, and at once accepted it. Whether this story is
true or not, certain it is that "Every Man in His Humour" was accepted
by Shakespeare's company and acted for the first time in 1598, with
Shakespeare taking a part. The evidence of this is contained in the list
of actors prefixed to the comedy in the folio of Jonson's works, 1616. But it is a mistake to infer, because Shakespeare's name stands first
in the list of actors and the elder Kno'well first in the 'dramatis
personae', that Shakespeare took that particular part. The order of a
list of Elizabethan players was generally that of their importance or
priority as shareholders in the company and seldom if ever corresponded
to the list of characters. "Every Man in His Humour" was an immediate success, and with it Jonson's
reputation as one of the leading dramatists of his time was established
once and for all. This could have been by no means Jonson's earliest
comedy, and we have just learned that he was already reputed one of "our
best in tragedy." Indeed, one of Jonson's extant comedies, "The Case
is Altered," but one never claimed by him or published as his, must
certainly have preceded "Every Man in His Humour" on the stage. The
former play may be described as a comedy modelled on the Latin plays of
Plautus. (It combines, in fact, situations derived from the "Captivi"
and the "Aulularia" of that dramatist). But the pretty story of the
beggar-maiden, Rachel, and her suitors, Jonson found, not among the
classics, but in the ideals of romantic love which Shakespeare had
already popularised on the stage. Jonson never again produced so fresh
and lovable a feminine personage as Rachel, although in other respects
"The Case is Altered" is not a conspicuous play, and, save for the
satirising of Antony Munday in the person of Antonio Balladino and
Gabriel Harvey as well, is perhaps the least characteristic of the
comedies of Jonson. "Every Man in His Humour," probably first acted late in the summer of
1598 and at the Curtain, is commonly regarded as an epoch-making play;
and this view is not unjustified. As to plot, it tells little more than
how an intercepted letter enabled a father to follow his supposedly
studious son to London, and there observe his life with the gallants of
the time. The real quality of this comedy is in its personages and in
the theory upon which they are conceived. Ben Jonson had theories about
poetry and the drama, and he was neither chary in talking of them nor in
experimenting with them in his plays. This makes Jonson, like Dryden
in his time, and Wordsworth much later, an author to reckon with;
particularly when we remember that many of Jonson's notions came for
a time definitely to prevail and to modify the whole trend of English
poetry. First of all Jonson was a classicist, that is, he believed in
restraint and precedent in art in opposition to the prevalent ungoverned
and irresponsible Renaissance spirit. Jonson believed that there was a
professional way of doing things which might be reached by a study of
the best examples, and he found these examples for the most part among
the ancients. To confine our attention to the drama, Jonson objected to
the amateurishness and haphazard nature of many contemporary plays, and
set himself to do something different; and the first and most striking
thing that he evolved was his conception and practice of the comedy of
humours. As Jonson has been much misrepresented in this matter, let us quote his
own words as to "humour." A humour, according to Jonson, was a bias of
disposition, a warp, so to speak, in character by which

    "Some one peculiar quality
    Doth so possess a man, that it doth draw
    All his affects, his spirits, and his powers,
    In their confluctions, all to run one way." But continuing, Jonson is careful to add:

    "But that a rook by wearing a pied feather,
    The cable hat-band, or the three-piled ruff,
    A yard of shoe-tie, or the Switzers knot
    On his French garters, should affect a humour! O, it is more than most ridiculous." Jonson's comedy of humours, in a word, conceived of stage personages
on the basis of a ruling trait or passion (a notable simplification
of actual life be it observed in passing); and, placing these typified
traits in juxtaposition in their conflict and contrast, struck the
spark of comedy. Downright, as his name indicates, is "a plain squire";
Bobadill's humour is that of the braggart who is incidentally, and with
delightfully comic effect, a coward; Brainworm's humour is the finding
out of things to the end of fooling everybody: of course he is fooled
in the end himself. But it was not Jonson's theories alone that made the
success of "Every Man in His Humour." The play is admirably written
and each character is vividly conceived, and with a firm touch based on
observation of the men of the London of the day. Jonson was neither in
this, his first great comedy (nor in any other play that he wrote),
a supine classicist, urging that English drama return to a slavish
adherence to classical conditions. He says as to the laws of the old
comedy (meaning by "laws," such matters as the unities of time and place
and the use of chorus): "I see not then, but we should enjoy the same
licence, or free power to illustrate and heighten our invention as they
[the ancients] did; and not be tied to those strict and regular forms
which the niceness of a few, who are nothing but form, would thrust upon
us." "Every Man in His Humour" is written in prose, a novel practice
which Jonson had of his predecessor in comedy, John Lyly. Even the word
"humour" seems to have been employed in the Jonsonian sense by Chapman
before Jonson's use of it. Indeed, the comedy of humours itself is only
a heightened variety of the comedy of manners which represents life,
viewed at a satirical angle, and is the oldest and most persistent
species of comedy in the language. None the less, Jonson's comedy
merited its immediate success and marked out a definite course in which
comedy long continued to run. To mention only Shakespeare's Falstaff
and his rout, Bardolph, Pistol, Dame Quickly, and the rest, whether in
"Henry IV." or in "The Merry Wives of Windsor," all are conceived in
the spirit of humours. So are the captains, Welsh, Scotch, and Irish
of "Henry V.," and Malvolio especially later; though Shakespeare never
employed the method of humours for an important personage. It was not
Jonson's fault that many of his successors did precisely the thing
that he had reprobated, that is, degrade the humour: into an oddity of
speech, an eccentricity of manner, of dress, or cut of beard. There was
an anonymous play called "Every Woman in Her Humour." Chapman wrote "A
Humourous Day's Mirth," Day, "Humour Out of Breath," Fletcher later,
"The Humourous Lieutenant," and Jonson, besides "Every Man Out of His
Humour," returned to the title in closing the cycle of his comedies in
"The Magnetic Lady or Humours Reconciled." With the performance of "Every Man Out of His Humour" in 1599, by
Shakespeare's company once more at the Globe, we turn a new page in
Jonson's career. Despite his many real virtues, if there is one feature
more than any other that distinguishes Jonson, it is his arrogance; and
to this may be added his self-righteousness, especially under criticism
or satire. "Every Man Out of His Humour" is the first of three
"comical satires" which Jonson contributed to what Dekker called the
'poetomachia' or war of the theatres as recent critics have named
it. This play as a fabric of plot is a very slight affair; but as a
satirical picture of the manners of the time, proceeding by means of
vivid caricature, couched in witty and brilliant dialogue and sustained
by that righteous indignation which must lie at the heart of all
true satire--as a realisation, in short, of the classical ideal of
comedy--there had been nothing like Jonson's comedy since the days of
Aristophanes. "Every Man in His Humour," like the two plays that follow
it, contains two kinds of attack, the critical or generally satiric,
levelled at abuses and corruptions in the abstract; and the personal,
in which specific application is made of all this in the lampooning of
poets and others, Jonson's contemporaries. The method of personal attack
by actual caricature of a person on the stage is almost as old as the
drama. Aristophanes so lampooned Euripides in "The Acharnians" and
Socrates in "The Clouds," to mention no other examples; and in English
drama this kind of thing is alluded to again and again. What Jonson
really did, was to raise the dramatic lampoon to an art, and make out
of a casual burlesque and bit of mimicry a dramatic satire of literary
pretensions and permanency. With the arrogant attitude mentioned above
and his uncommon eloquence in scorn, vituperation, and invective, it
is no wonder that Jonson soon involved himself in literary and even
personal quarrels with his fellow-authors. The circumstances of the
origin of this 'poetomachia' are far from clear, and those who have
written on the topic, except of late, have not helped to make them
clearer. The origin of the "war" has been referred to satirical
references, apparently to Jonson, contained in "The Scourge of
Villainy," a satire in regular form after the manner of the ancients by
John Marston, a fellow playwright, subsequent friend and collaborator
of Jonson's. On the other hand, epigrams of Jonson have been discovered
(49, 68, and 100) variously charging "playwright" (reasonably identified
with Marston) with scurrility, cowardice, and plagiarism; though the
dates of the epigrams cannot be ascertained with certainty. Jonson's
own statement of the matter to Drummond runs: "He had many quarrels with
Marston, beat him, and took his pistol from him, wrote his 'Poetaster'
on him; the beginning[s] of them were that Marston represented him on
the stage. "*

      *The best account of this whole subject is to be
      found in the edition of 'Poetaster' and 'Satiromastrix' by
      J. H. Penniman in 'Belles Lettres Series' shortly to appear. See also his earlier work, 'The War of the Theatres', 1892,
      and the excellent contributions to the subject by H. C. Hart
      in 'Notes and Queries', and in his edition of Jonson, 1906. Here at least we are on certain ground; and the principals of the
quarrel are known. "Histriomastix," a play revised by Marston in 1598,
has been regarded as the one in which Jonson was thus "represented on
the stage"; although the personage in question, Chrisogonus, a poet,
satirist, and translator, poor but proud, and contemptuous of the common
herd, seems rather a complimentary portrait of Jonson than a caricature. As to the personages actually ridiculed in "Every Man Out of His
Humour," Carlo Buffone was formerly thought certainly to be Marston,
as he was described as "a public scurrilous, and profane jester," and
elsewhere as "the grand scourge or second untruss [that is, satirist],
of the time" (Joseph Hall being by his own boast the first, and
Marston's work being entitled "The Scourge of Villainy"). Apparently we
must now prefer for Carlo a notorious character named Charles Chester,
of whom gossipy and inaccurate Aubrey relates that he was "a bold
impertinent fellow...a perpetual talker and made a noise like a drum in
a room. So one time at a tavern Sir Walter Raleigh beats him and seals
up his mouth (that is his upper and nether beard) with hard wax. From
him Ben Jonson takes his Carlo Buffone ['i.e. ', jester] in 'Every Man
in His Humour' ['sic']." Is it conceivable that after all Jonson was
ridiculing Marston, and that the point of the satire consisted in an
intentional confusion of "the grand scourge or second untruss" with "the
scurrilous and profane" Chester? We have digressed into detail in this particular case to exemplify the
difficulties of criticism in its attempts to identify the allusions in
these forgotten quarrels. We are on sounder ground of fact in recording
other manifestations of Jonson's enmity. In "The Case is Altered" there
is clear ridicule in the character Antonio Balladino of Anthony Munday,
pageant-poet of the city, translator of romances and playwright as well. In "Every Man in His Humour" there is certainly a caricature of Samuel
Daniel, accepted poet of the court, sonneteer, and companion of men of
fashion. These men held recognised positions to which Jonson felt his
talents better entitled him; they were hence to him his natural enemies. It seems almost certain that he pursued both in the personages of his
satire through "Every Man Out of His Humour," and "Cynthia's Revels,"
Daniel under the characters Fastidious Brisk and Hedon, Munday as
Puntarvolo and Amorphus; but in these last we venture on quagmire once
more. Jonson's literary rivalry of Daniel is traceable again and again,
in the entertainments that welcomed King James on his way to London, in
the masques at court, and in the pastoral drama. As to Jonson's personal
ambitions with respect to these two men, it is notable that he became,
not pageant-poet, but chronologer to the City of London; and that, on
the accession of the new king, he came soon to triumph over Daniel as
the accepted entertainer of royalty. "Cynthia's Revels," the second "comical satire," was acted in 1600, and,
as a play, is even more lengthy, elaborate, and impossible than "Every
Man Out of His Humour." Here personal satire seems to have absorbed
everything, and while much of the caricature is admirable, especially in
the detail of witty and trenchantly satirical dialogue, the central idea
of a fountain of self-love is not very well carried out, and the persons
revert at times to abstractions, the action to allegory. It adds to our
wonder that this difficult drama should have been acted by the Children
of Queen Elizabeth's Chapel, among them Nathaniel Field with whom Jonson
read Horace and Martial, and whom he taught later how to make plays. Another of these precocious little actors was Salathiel Pavy, who died
before he was thirteen, already famed for taking the parts of old men. Him Jonson immortalised in one of the sweetest of his epitaphs. An
interesting sidelight is this on the character of this redoubtable
and rugged satirist, that he should thus have befriended and tenderly
remembered these little theatrical waifs, some of whom (as we know) had
been literally kidnapped to be pressed into the service of the theatre
and whipped to the conning of their difficult parts. To the caricature
of Daniel and Munday in "Cynthia's Revels" must be added Anaides
(impudence), here assuredly Marston, and Asotus (the prodigal),
interpreted as Lodge or, more perilously, Raleigh. Crites, like
Asper-Macilente in "Every Man Out of His Humour," is Jonson's
self-complaisant portrait of himself, the just, wholly admirable, and
judicious scholar, holding his head high above the pack of the yelping
curs of envy and detraction, but careless of their puny attacks on his
perfections with only too mindful a neglect. The third and last of the "comical satires" is "Poetaster," acted, once
more, by the Children of the Chapel in 1601, and Jonson's only avowed
contribution to the fray. According to the author's own account, this
play was written in fifteen weeks on a report that his enemies had
entrusted to Dekker the preparation of "Satiromastix, the Untrussing of
the Humorous Poet," a dramatic attack upon himself. In this attempt to
forestall his enemies Jonson succeeded, and "Poetaster" was an immediate
and deserved success. While hardly more closely knit in structure than
its earlier companion pieces, "Poetaster" is planned to lead up to
the ludicrous final scene in which, after a device borrowed from the
"Lexiphanes" of Lucian, the offending poetaster, Marston-Crispinus, is
made to throw up the difficult words with which he had overburdened his
stomach as well as overlarded his vocabulary. In the end Crispinus with
his fellow, Dekker-Demetrius, is bound over to keep the peace and never
thenceforward "malign, traduce, or detract the person or writings of
Quintus Horatius Flaccus [Jonson] or any other eminent man transcending
you in merit." One of the most diverting personages in Jonson's comedy
is Captain Tucca. "His peculiarity" has been well described by Ward as
"a buoyant blackguardism which recovers itself instantaneously from the
most complete exposure, and a picturesqueness of speech like that of a
walking dictionary of slang." It was this character, Captain Tucca, that Dekker hit upon in his reply,
"Satiromastix," and he amplified him, turning his abusive vocabulary
back upon Jonson and adding "An immodesty to his dialogue that did not
enter into Jonson's conception." It has been held, altogether plausibly,
that when Dekker was engaged professionally, so to speak, to write
a dramatic reply to Jonson, he was at work on a species of chronicle
history, dealing with the story of Walter Terill in the reign of William
Rufus. This he hurriedly adapted to include the satirical characters
suggested by "Poetaster," and fashioned to convey the satire of his
reply. The absurdity of placing Horace in the court of a Norman king is
the result. But Dekker's play is not without its palpable hits at the
arrogance, the literary pride, and self-righteousness of Jonson-Horace,
whose "ningle" or pal, the absurd Asinius Bubo, has recently been shown
to figure forth, in all likelihood, Jonson's friend, the poet Drayton. Slight and hastily adapted as is "Satiromastix," especially in a
comparison with the better wrought and more significant satire of
"Poetaster," the town awarded the palm to Dekker, not to Jonson; and
Jonson gave over in consequence his practice of "comical satire." Though
Jonson was cited to appear before the Lord Chief Justice to answer
certain charges to the effect that he had attacked lawyers and soldiers
in "Poetaster," nothing came of this complaint. It may be suspected that
much of this furious clatter and give-and-take was pure playing to the
gallery. The town was agog with the strife, and on no less an authority
than Shakespeare ("Hamlet," ii. 2), we learn that the children's company
(acting the plays of Jonson) did "so berattle the common stages...that
many, wearing rapiers, are afraid of goose-quills, and dare scarce come
thither." Several other plays have been thought to bear a greater or less part
in the war of the theatres. Among them the most important is a college
play, entitled "The Return from Parnassus," dating 1601-02. In it a
much-quoted passage makes Burbage, as a character, declare: "Why here's
our fellow Shakespeare puts them all down; aye and Ben Jonson, too. O
that Ben Jonson is a pestilent fellow; he brought up Horace, giving the
poets a pill, but our fellow Shakespeare hath given him a purge that
made him bewray his credit." Was Shakespeare then concerned in this
war of the stages? And what could have been the nature of this "purge"? Among several suggestions, "Troilus and Cressida" has been thought by
some to be the play in which Shakespeare thus "put down" his friend,
Jonson. A wiser interpretation finds the "purge" in "Satiromastix,"
which, though not written by Shakespeare, was staged by his company,
and therefore with his approval and under his direction as one of the
leaders of that company. The last years of the reign of Elizabeth thus saw Jonson recognised as
a dramatist second only to Shakespeare, and not second even to him as
a dramatic satirist. But Jonson now turned his talents to new fields. Plays on subjects derived from classical story and myth had held the
stage from the beginning of the drama, so that Shakespeare was making
no new departure when he wrote his "Julius Caesar" about 1600. Therefore when Jonson staged "Sejanus," three years later and with
Shakespeare'scompany once more, he was only following in the elder
dramatist's footsteps. But Jonson's idea of a play on classical history,
on the one hand, and Shakespeare's and the elder popular dramatists, on
the other, were very different. Heywood some years before had put five
straggling plays on the stage in quick succession, all derived from
stories in Ovid and dramatised with little taste or discrimination. Shakespeare had a finer conception of form, but even he was contented
to take all his ancient history from North's translation of Plutarch and
dramatise his subject without further inquiry. Jonson was a scholar and
a classical antiquarian. He reprobated this slipshod amateurishness,
and wrote his "Sejanus" like a scholar, reading Tacitus, Suetonius,
and other authorities, to be certain of his facts, his setting, and
his atmosphere, and somewhat pedantically noting his authorities in the
margin when he came to print. "Sejanus" is a tragedy of genuine dramatic
power in which is told with discriminating taste the story of the
haughty favourite of Tiberius with his tragical overthrow. Our drama
presents no truer nor more painstaking representation of ancient
Roman life than may be found in Jonson's "Sejanus" and "Catiline his
Conspiracy," which followed in 1611. A passage in the address of the
former play to the reader, in which Jonson refers to a collaboration
in an earlier version, has led to the surmise that Shakespeare may have
been that "worthier pen." There is no evidence to determine the matter. In 1605, we find Jonson in active collaboration with Chapman and Marston
in the admirable comedy of London life entitled "Eastward Hoe." In
the previous year, Marston had dedicated his "Malcontent," in terms
of fervid admiration, to Jonson; so that the wounds of the war of the
theatres must have been long since healed. Between Jonson and Chapman
there was the kinship of similar scholarly ideals. The two continued
friends throughout life. "Eastward Hoe" achieved the extraordinary
popularity represented in a demand for three issues in one year. But
this was not due entirely to the merits of the play. In its earliest
version a passage which an irritable courtier conceived to be derogatory
to his nation, the Scots, sent both Chapman and Jonson to jail; but the
matter was soon patched up, for by this time Jonson had influence at
court. With the accession of King James, Jonson began his long and successful
career as a writer of masques. He wrote more masques than all his
competitors together, and they are of an extraordinary variety
and poetic excellence. Jonson did not invent the masque; for such
premeditated devices to set and frame, so to speak, a court ball had
been known and practised in varying degrees of elaboration long before
his time. But Jonson gave dramatic value to the masque, especially in
his invention of the antimasque, a comedy or farcical element of relief,
entrusted to professional players or dancers. He enhanced, as well, the
beauty and dignity of those portions of the masque in which noble lords
and ladies took their parts to create, by their gorgeous costumes and
artistic grouping and evolutions, a sumptuous show. On the mechanical
and scenic side Jonson had an inventive and ingenious partner in
Inigo Jones, the royal architect, who more than any one man raised
the standard of stage representation in the England of his day. Jonson
continued active in the service of the court in the writing of masques
and other entertainments far into the reign of King Charles; but,
towards the end, a quarrel with Jones embittered his life, and the two
testy old men appear to have become not only a constant irritation to
each other, but intolerable bores at court. In "Hymenaei," "The Masque
of Queens," "Love Freed from Ignorance," "Lovers made Men," "Pleasure
Reconciled to Virtue," and many more will be found Jonson's aptitude,
his taste, his poetry and inventiveness in these by-forms of the drama;
while in "The Masque of Christmas," and "The Gipsies Metamorphosed"
especially, is discoverable that power of broad comedy which, at court as
well as in the city, was not the least element of Jonson's contemporary
popularity. But Jonson had by no means given up the popular stage when he turned to
the amusement of King James. In 1605 "Volpone" was produced, "The Silent
Woman" in 1609, "The Alchemist" in the following year. These comedies,
with "Bartholomew Fair," 1614, represent Jonson at his height, and for
constructive cleverness, character successfully conceived in the manner
of caricature, wit and brilliancy of dialogue, they stand alone in
English drama. "Volpone, or the Fox," is, in a sense, a transition play
from the dramatic satires of the war of the theatres to the purer comedy
represented in the plays named above. Its subject is a struggle of
wit applied to chicanery; for among its 'dramatis personae', from
the villainous Fox himself, his rascally servant Mosca, Voltore (the
vulture), Corbaccio and Corvino (the big and the little raven), to Sir
Politic Would-be and the rest, there is scarcely a virtuous character in
the play. Question has been raised as to whether a story so forbidding
can be considered a comedy, for, although the plot ends in the
discomfiture and imprisonment of the most vicious, it involves no moral
catastrophe. But Jonson was on sound historical ground, for "Volpone"
is conceived far more logically on the lines of the ancients' theory
of comedy than was ever the romantic drama of Shakespeare, however
repulsive we may find a philosophy of life that facilely divides the
world into the rogues and their dupes, and, identifying brains
with roguery and innocence with folly, admires the former while
inconsistently punishing them. "The Silent Woman" is a gigantic farce of the most ingenious
construction. The whole comedy hinges on a huge joke, played by a
heartless nephew on his misanthropic uncle, who is induced to take to
himself a wife, young, fair, and warranted silent, but who, in the end,
turns out neither silent nor a woman at all. In "The Alchemist," again,
we have the utmost cleverness in construction, the whole fabric building
climax on climax, witty, ingenious, and so plausibly presented that we
forget its departures from the possibilities of life. In "The Alchemist"
Jonson represented, none the less to the life, certain sharpers of
the metropolis, revelling in their shrewdness and rascality and in the
variety of the stupidity and wickedness of their victims. We may object
to the fact that the only person in the play possessed of a scruple
of honesty is discomfited, and that the greatest scoundrel of all is
approved in the end and rewarded. The comedy is so admirably written and
contrived, the personages stand out with such lifelike distinctness
in their several kinds, and the whole is animated with such verve and
resourcefulness that "The Alchemist" is a new marvel every time it is
read. Lastly of this group comes the tremendous comedy, "Bartholomew
Fair," less clear cut, less definite, and less structurally worthy
of praise than its three predecessors, but full of the keenest and
cleverest of satire and inventive to a degree beyond any English comedy
save some other of Jonson's own. It is in "Bartholomew Fair" that we are
presented to the immortal caricature of the Puritan, Zeal-in-the-Land
Busy, and the Littlewits that group about him, and it is in this
extraordinary comedy that the humour of Jonson, always open to this
danger, loosens into the Rabelaisian mode that so delighted King James
in "The Gipsies Metamorphosed." Another comedy of less merit is "The
Devil is an Ass," acted in 1616. It was the failure of this play that
caused Jonson to give over writing for the public stage for a period of
nearly ten years. "Volpone" was laid as to scene in Venice. Whether because of the success
of "Eastward Hoe" or for other reasons, the other three comedies declare
in the words of the prologue to "The Alchemist":

"Our scene is London, 'cause we would make known No country's mirth is
better than our own." Indeed Jonson went further when he came to revise his plays for
collected publication in his folio of 1616, he transferred the scene
of "Every Man in His Humou r" from Florence to London also, converting
Signior Lorenzo di Pazzi to Old Kno'well, Prospero to Master Welborn,
and Hesperida to Dame Kitely "dwelling i' the Old Jewry." In his comedies of London life, despite his trend towards caricature,
Jonson has shown himself a genuine realist, drawing from the life about
him with an experience and insight rare in any generation. A happy
comparison has been suggested between Ben Jonson and Charles Dickens. Both were men of the people, lowly born and hardly bred. Each knew
the London of his time as few men knew it; and each represented it
intimately and in elaborate detail. Both men were at heart moralists,
seeking the truth by the exaggerated methods of humour and caricature;
perverse, even wrong-headed at times, but possessed of a true pathos and
largeness of heart, and when all has been said--though the Elizabethan
ran to satire, the Victorian to sentimentality--leaving the world better
for the art that they practised in it. In 1616, the year of the death of Shakespeare, Jonson collected his
plays, his poetry, and his masques for publication in a collective
edition. This was an unusual thing at the time and had been attempted
by no dramatist before Jonson. This volume published, in a carefully
revised text, all the plays thus far mentioned, excepting "The Case is
Altered," which Jonson did not acknowledge, "Bartholomew Fair," and "The
Devil is an Ass," which was written too late. It included likewise a
book of some hundred and thirty odd 'Epigrams', in which form of brief
and pungent writing Jonson was an acknowledged master; "The Forest," a
smaller collection of lyric and occasional verse and some ten 'Masques'
and 'Entertainments'. In this same year Jonson was made poet laureate
with a pension of one hundred marks a year. This, with his fees and
returns from several noblemen, and the small earnings of his plays
must have formed the bulk of his income. The poet appears to have done
certain literary hack-work for others, as, for example, parts of the
Punic Wars contributed to Raleigh's 'History of the World'. We know
from a story, little to the credit of either, that Jonson accompanied
Raleigh's son abroad in the capacity of a tutor. In 1618 Jonson was
granted the reversion of the office of Master of the Revels, a post
for which he was peculiarly fitted; but he did not live to enjoy its
perquisites. Jonson was honoured with degrees by both universities,
though when and under what circumstances is not known. It has been said
that he narrowly escaped the honour of knighthood, which the satirists
of the day averred King James was wont to lavish with an indiscriminate
hand. Worse men were made knights in his day than worthy Ben Jonson. From 1616 to the close of the reign of King James, Jonson produced
nothing for the stage. But he "prosecuted" what he calls "his wonted
studies" with such assiduity that he became in reality, as by report,
one of the most learned men of his time. Jonson's theory of authorship
involved a wide acquaintance with books and "an ability," as he put it,
"to convert the substance or riches of another poet to his own use." Accordingly Jonson read not only the Greek and Latin classics down to
the lesser writers, but he acquainted himself especially with the Latin
writings of his learned contemporaries, their prose as well as their
poetry, their antiquities and curious lore as well as their more solid
learning. Though a poor man, Jonson was an indefatigable collector of
books. He told Drummond that "the Earl of Pembroke sent him 20 pounds
every first day of the new year to buy new books." Unhappily, in 1623,
his library was destroyed by fire, an accident serio-comically described
in his witty poem, "An Execration upon Vulcan." Yet even now a book
turns up from time to time in which is inscribed, in fair large Italian
lettering, the name, Ben Jonson. With respect to Jonson's use of his
material, Dryden said memorably of him: "[He] was not only a professed
imitator of Horace, but a learned plagiary of all the others; you track
him everywhere in their snow. ... But he has done his robberies so
openly that one sees he fears not to be taxed by any law. He invades
authors like a monarch, and what would be theft in other poets is
only victory in him." And yet it is but fair to say that Jonson prided
himself, and justly, on his originality. In "Catiline," he not only uses
Sallust's account of the conspiracy, but he models some of the speeches
of Cicero on the Roman orator's actual words. In "Poetaster," he lifts
a whole satire out of Horace and dramatises it effectively for his
purposes. The sophist Libanius suggests the situation of "The Silent
Woman"; a Latin comedy of Giordano Bruno, "Il Candelaio," the relation
of the dupes and the sharpers in "The Alchemist," the "Mostellaria" of
Plautus, its admirable opening scene. But Jonson commonly bettered his
sources, and putting the stamp of his sovereignty on whatever bullion he
borrowed made it thenceforward to all time current and his own. The lyric and especially the occasional poetry of Jonson has a peculiar
merit. His theory demanded design and the perfection of literary finish. He was furthest from the rhapsodist and the careless singer of an
idle day; and he believed that Apollo could only be worthily served in
singing robes and laurel crowned. And yet many of Jonson's lyrics will
live as long as the language. Who does not know "Queen and huntress,
chaste and fair." "Drink to me only with thine eyes," or "Still to be
neat, still to be dressed"? Beautiful in form, deft and graceful in
expression, with not a word too much or one that bears not its part
in the total effect, there is yet about the lyrics of Jonson a
certain stiffness and formality, a suspicion that they were not quite
spontaneous and unbidden, but that they were carved, so to speak,
with disproportionate labour by a potent man of letters whose habitual
thought is on greater things. It is for these reasons that Jonson is
even better in the epigram and in occasional verse where rhetorical
finish and pointed wit less interfere with the spontaneity and emotion
which we usually associate with lyrical poetry. There are no such
epitaphs as Ben Jonson's, witness the charming ones on his own children,
on Salathiel Pavy, the child-actor, and many more; and this even though
the rigid law of mine and thine must now restore to William Browne of
Tavistock the famous lines beginning: "Underneath this sable hearse." Jonson is unsurpassed, too, in the difficult poetry of compliment,
seldom falling into fulsome praise and disproportionate similtude, yet
showing again and again a generous appreciation of worth in others, a
discriminating taste and a generous personal regard. There was no man in
England of his rank so well known and universally beloved as Ben Jonson. The list of his friends, of those to whom he had written verses, and
those who had written verses to him, includes the name of every man of
prominence in the England of King James. And the tone of many of these
productions discloses an affectionate familiarity that speaks for the
amiable personality and sound worth of the laureate. In 1619, growing
unwieldy through inactivity, Jonson hit upon the heroic remedy of a
journey afoot to Scotland. On his way thither and back he was hospitably
received at the houses of many friends and by those to whom his friends
had recommended him. When he arrived in Edinburgh, the burgesses met to
grant him the freedom of the city, and Drummond, foremost of Scottish
poets, was proud to entertain him for weeks as his guest at Hawthornden. Some of the noblest of Jonson's poems were inspired by friendship. Such is the fine "Ode to the memory of Sir Lucius Cary and Sir Henry
Moryson," and that admirable piece of critical insight and filial
affection, prefixed to the first Shakespeare folio, "To the memory of
my beloved master, William Shakespeare, and what he hath left us." to
mention only these. Nor can the earlier "Epode," beginning "Not to know
vice at all," be matchedin stately gravity and gnomic wisdom in its own
wise and stately age. But if Jonson had deserted the stage after the publication of his folio
and up to the end of the reign of King James, he was far from inactive;
for year after year his inexhaustible inventiveness continued to
contribute to the masquing and entertainment at court. In "The Golden
Age Restored," Pallas turns from the Iron Age with its attendant
evils into statues which sink out of sight; in "Pleasure Reconciled to
Virtue," Atlas figures represented as an old man, his shoulders covered
with snow, and Comus, "the god of cheer or the belly," is one of the
characters, a circumstance which an imaginative boy of ten, named John
Milton, was not to forget. "Pan's Anniversary," late in the reign
of James, proclaimed that Jonson had not yet forgotten how to write
exquisite lyrics, and "The Gipsies Metamorphosed" displayed the old
drollery and broad humorous stroke still unimpaired and unmatchable. These, too, and the earlier years of Charles were the days of the Apollo
Room of the Devil Tavern where Jonson presided, the absolute monarch of
English literary Bohemia. We hear of a room blazoned about with Jonson's
own judicious 'Leges Convivales' in letters of gold, of a company made
up of the choicest spirits of the time, devotedly attached to their
veteran dictator, his reminiscences, opinions, affections, and enmities. And we hear, too, of valorous potations; but in the words of Herrick
addressed to his master, Jonson, at the Devil Tavern, as at the Dog, the
Triple Tun, and at the Mermaid,

    "We such clusters had
     As made us nobly wild, not mad,
     And yet each verse of thine
     Outdid the meat, outdid the frolic wine." But the patronage of the court failed in the days of King Charles,
though Jonson was not without royal favours; and the old poet returned
to the stage, producing, between 1625 and 1633, "The Staple of News,"
"The New Inn," "The Magnetic Lady," and "The Tale of a Tub," the last
doubtless revised from a much earlier comedy. None of these plays met
with any marked success, although the scathing generalisation of Dryden
that designated them "Jonson's dotages" is unfair to their genuine
merits. Thus the idea of an office for the gathering, proper dressing,
and promulgation of news (wild flight of the fancy in its time) was
an excellent subject for satire on the existing absurdities among the
newsmongers; although as much can hardly be said for "The Magnetic
Lady," who, in her bounty, draws to her personages of differing humours
to reconcile them in the end according to the alternative title, or
"Humours Reconciled." These last plays of the old dramatist revert to
caricature and the hard lines of allegory; the moralist is more than
ever present, the satire degenerates into personal lampoon, especially
of his sometime friend, Inigo Jones, who appears unworthily to have used
his influence at court against the broken-down old poet. And now disease
claimed Jonson, and he was bedridden for months. He had succeeded
Middleton in 1628 as Chronologer to the City of London, but lost the
post for not fulfilling its duties. King Charles befriended him, and
even commissioned him to write still for the entertainment of the court;
and he was not without the sustaining hand of noble patrons and devoted
friends among the younger poets who were proud to be "sealed of the
tribe of Ben." Jonson died, August 6, 1637, and a second folio of his works, which
he had been some time gathering, was printed in 1640, bearing in its
various parts dates ranging from 1630 to 1642. It included all the plays
mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs, excepting "The Case is Altered;"
the masques, some fifteen, that date between 1617 and 1630; another
collection of lyrics and occasional poetry called "Underwoods, including
some further entertainments"; a translation of "Horace's Art of Poetry"
(also published in a vicesimo quarto in 1640), and certain fragments and
ingatherings which the poet would hardly have included himself. These
last comprise the fragment (less than seventy lines) of a tragedy called
"Mortimer his Fall," and three acts of a pastoral drama of much beauty
and poetic spirit, "The Sad Shepherd." There is also the exceedingly
interesting 'English Grammar' "made by Ben Jonson for the benefit of all
strangers out of his observation of the English language now spoken and
in use," in Latin and English; and 'Timber, or discoveries' "made upon
men and matter as they have flowed out of his daily reading, or had
their reflux to his peculiar notion of the times." The 'Discoveries',
as it is usually called, is a commonplace book such as many literary
men have kept, in which their reading was chronicled, passages that took
their fancy translated or transcribed, and their passing opinions noted. Many passage of Jonson's 'Discoveries' are literal translations from the
authors he chanced to be reading, with the reference, noted or not, as
the accident of the moment prescribed. At times he follows the line
of Macchiavelli's argument as to the nature and conduct of princes; at
others he clarifies his own conception of poetry and poets by recourse
to Aristotle. He finds a choice paragraph on eloquence in Seneca the
elder and applies it to his own recollection of Bacon's power as an
orator; and another on facile and ready genius, and translates it,
adapting it to his recollection of his fellow-playwright,
Shakespeare. To call such passages--which Jonson never intended for
publication--plagiarism, is to obscure the significance of words. To disparage his memory by citing them is a preposterous use of
scholarship. Jonson's prose, both in his dramas, in the descriptive
comments of his masques, and in the 'Discoveries', is characterised by
clarity and vigorous directness, nor is it wanting in a fine sense of
form or in the subtler graces of diction. When Jonson died there was a project for a handsome monument to his
memory. But the Civil War was at hand, and the project failed. A
memorial, not insufficient, was carved on the stone covering his grave
in one of the aisles of Westminster Abbey:

"O rare Ben Jonson." FELIX E. SCHELLING. THE COLLEGE, PHILADELPHIA, U.S.A. The following is a complete list of his published works:--

DRAMAS. --

    Every Man in his Humour, 4to, 1601;
    The Case is Altered, 4to, 1609;
    Every Man out of his Humour, 4to, 1600;
    Cynthia's Revels, 4to, 1601;
    Poetaster, 4to, 1602;
    Sejanus, 4to, 1605;
    Eastward Ho (with Chapman and Marston), 4to, 1605;
    Volpone, 4to, 1607;
    Epicoene, or the Silent Woman, 4to, 1609 (? ), fol., 1616;
    The Alchemist, 4to, 1612;
    Catiline, his Conspiracy, 4to, 1611;
    Bartholomew Fayre, 4to, 1614 (? ), fol., 1631;
    The Divell is an Asse, fol., 1631;
    The Staple of Newes, fol., 1631;
    The New Sun, 8vo, 1631, fol., 1692;
    The Magnetic Lady, or Humours Reconcild, fol., 1640;
    A Tale of a Tub, fol., 1640;
    The Sad Shepherd, or a Tale of Robin Hood, fol., 1641;
    Mortimer his Fall (fragment), fol., 1640. To Jonson have also been attributed additions to Kyd's Jeronymo, and
collaboration in The Widow with Fletcher and Middleton, and in the
Bloody Brother with Fletcher. POEMS. --

    Epigrams, The Forrest, Underwoods, published in fols., 1616,
       1640;
    Selections:  Execration against Vulcan, and Epigrams, 1640;
    G. Hor. Flaccus his art of Poetry, Englished by Ben Jonson,
       1640;
    Leges Convivialis, fol., 1692. Other minor poems first appeared in Gifford's edition of Works. PROSE. --

   Timber, or Discoveries made upon Men and Matter, fol., 1641;
   The English Grammar, made by Ben Jonson for the benefit of
      Strangers, fol., 1640. Masques and Entertainments were published in the early folios. WORKS. --

    Fol., 1616, vol. 2, 1640 (1631-41);
    fol., 1692, 1716-19, 1729;
       edited by P. Whalley, 7 vols., 1756;
       by Gifford (with Memoir), 9 vols., 1816, 1846;
       re-edited by F. Cunningham, 3 vols., 1871;
          in 9 vols., 1875;
    by Barry Cornwall (with Memoir), 1838;
    by B. Nicholson (Mermaid Series),
       with Introduction by C. H. Herford, 1893, etc. ;
    Nine Plays, 1904; ed. H. C. Hart (Standard Library), 1906, etc;
    Plays and Poems, with Introduction by H. Morley (Universal
       Library), 1885;
    Plays (7) and Poems (Newnes), 1905;
    Poems, with Memoir by H. Bennett (Carlton Classics), 1907;
    Masques and Entertainments, ed. by H. Morley, 1890. SELECTIONS. --

    J. A. Symonds, with Biographical and Critical Essay,
       (Canterbury Poets), 1886;
    Grosart, Brave Translunary Things, 1895;
    Arber, Jonson Anthology, 1901;
    Underwoods, Cambridge University Press, 1905;
    Lyrics (Jonson, Beaumont and Fletcher), the Chap Books,
       No. 4, 1906;
    Songs (from Plays, Masques, etc. ), with earliest known setting,
       Eragny Press, 1906. LIFE. --

   See Memoirs affixed to Works;
   J. A. Symonds (English Worthies), 1886;
   Notes of Ben Jonson Conversations with Drummond of Hawthornden;
       Shakespeare Society, 1842;
   ed. with Introduction and Notes by P. Sidney, 1906;
   Swinburne, A Study of Ben Jonson, 1889. EVERY MAN IN HIS HUMOUR


TO THE MOST LEARNED, AND MY HONOURED FRIEND

MASTER CAMDEN

CLARENCIEUX


SIR,--There are, no doubt, a supercilious race in the world, who will
esteem all office, done you in this kind, an injury; so solemn a vice it
is with them to use the authority of their ignorance, to the crying down
of Poetry, or the professors: but my gratitude must not leave to correct
their error; since I am none of those that can suffer the benefits
conferred upon my youth to perish with my age. It is a frail memory
that remember s but present things: and, had the favour of the times so
conspired with my disposition, as it could have brought forth other, or
better, you had had the same proportion, and number of the fruits,
the first. Now I pray you to accept this; such wherein neither the
confession of my manners shall make you blush; nor of my studies,
repent you to have been the instructor: and for the profession of my
thankfulness, I am sure it will, with good men, find either praise or
excuse. Your true lover,

                                            BEN JONSON. DRAMATIS PERSONAE
 KNOWELL, an old Gentleman:          OLIVER COB, a Water-bearer. EDWARD KNOWELL, his Son. JUSTICE CLEMENT, an old merry
 BRAINWORM, the Father's Man                 Magistrate. GEORGE DOWNRIGHT, a plain Squire. ROGER FORMAL, his Clerk. WELLBRED, his Half-Brother. Wellbred's Servant
 KITELY, a merchant. DAME KITELY, KITELY'S Wife. CAPTAIN BOBADILL, a Paul's Man. MRS. BRIDGET his Sister. MASTER STEPHEN, a Country Gull. TIB Cob's Wife
 MASTER MATHEW, the Town Gull. THOMAS CASH, KITELY'S Cashier. Servants, etc. SCENE,---LONDON
                           PROLOGUE. Though need make many poets, and some such
   As art and nature have not better'd much;
   Yet ours for want hath not so loved the stage,
   As he dare serve the ill customs of the age,
   Or purchase your delight at such a rate,
   As, for it, he himself must justly hate:
   To make a child now swaddled, to proceed
   Man, and then shoot up, in one beard and weed,
   Past threescore years; or, with three rusty swords,
   And help of some few foot and half-foot words,
   Fight over York and Lancaster's king jars,
   And in the tyring-house bring wounds to scars. He rather prays you will be pleas'd to see
   One such to-day, as other plays should be;
   Where neither chorus wafts you o'er the seas,
   Nor creaking throne comes down the boys to please;
   Nor nimble squib is seen to make afeard
   The gentlewomen; nor roll'd bullet heard
   To say, it thunders; nor tempestuous drum
   Rumbles, to tell you when the storm doth come;
   But deeds, and language, such as men do use,
   And persons, such as comedy would choose,
   When she would shew an image of the times,
   And sport with human follies, not with crimes. Except we make them such, by loving still
   Our popular errors, when we know they're ill. I mean such errors as you'll all confess,
   By laughing at them, they deserve no less:
   Which when you heartily do, there's hope left then,
   You, that have so grac'd monsters, may like men. ACT I

                             SCENE I.---A Street. Enter KNOWELL, at the door of his house. Know. A goodly day toward, and a fresh morning.--Brainworm! Enter Brainworm. Call up your young master: bid him rise, sir. Tell him, I have some business to employ him. Brai. I will, sir, presently. Know. But hear you, sirrah,
     If he be at his book, disturb him not. Brai. Very good, sir. Know. How happy yet should I esteem myself,
     Could I, by any practice, wean the boy
     From one vain course of study he affects. He is a scholar, if a man may trust
     The liberal voice of fame in her report,
     Of good account in both our Universities,
     Either of which hath favoured him with graces:
     But their indulgence must not spring in me
     A fond opinion that he cannot err. Myself was once a student, and indeed,
     Fed with the self-same humour he is now,
     Dreaming on nought but idle poetry,
     That fruitless and unprofitable art,
     Good unto none, but least to the professors;
     Which then I thought the mistress of all knowledge:
     But since, time and the truth have waked my judgment. And reason taught me better to distinguish T
     he vain from the useful learnings. Enter Master STEPHEN. Cousin Stephen, What news with you, that you are here so early? Step. Nothing, but e'en come to see how you do, unclo. Know. That's kindly done; you are welcome, coz. Step. Ay, I know that, sir; I would not have come else. How does my cousin Edward, uncle? Know. O, well, coz; go in and see; I doubt he be scarce stirring yet. Step. Uncle, afore I go in, can you tell me, an he have e'er a book
  of the science of hawking and hunting; I would fain borrow it. Know. Why, I hope you will not a hawking now, will you? Step. No, wusse; but I'll practise against next year, uncle. I have
  bought me a hawk, and a hood, and bells and all; I lack nothing
  but a book to keep it by. Know. Oh, most ridiculous! Step. Nay, look you now, you are angry, uncle:--Why, you know an a
  man have not skill in the hawking and hunting languages now-a-days,
  I'll not give a rush for him: they are more studied than the Greek,
  or the Latin. He is for no gallant's company without them; and by
  gadslid I scorn it, I, so I do, to be a consort for every humdrum:
  hang them, scroyles! there's nothing in them i' the world. What do
  you talk on it? Because I dwell at Hogsden, I shall keep company
  with none but the archers of Finsbury, or the citizens that come a
  ducking to Islington ponds! A fine jest, i' faith! 'Slid, a
  gentleman mun shew himself like a gentleman. Uncle, I pray you be
  not angry; I know what I have to do, I trow. I am no novice. Know. You are a prodigal, absurd coxcomb, go to! Nay, never look at me, 'tis I that speak;
     Take't as you will, sir, I'll not flatter you. Have you not yet found means enow to waste
     That which your friends have left you, but you must
     Go cast away your money on a buzzard,
     And know not how to keep it, when you have done? O, it is comely! this will make you a gentleman! Well, cousin, well, I see you are e'en past hope
     Of all reclaim:---ay, so; now you are told on't,
     You look another way. Step. What would you ha' me do? Know. What would I have you do? I'll tell you, kinsman;
     Learn to be wise, and practise how to thrive;
     That would I have you do: and not to spend
     Your coin on every bauble that you fancy,
     Or every foolish brain that humours you. I would not have you to invade each place,
     Nor thrust yourself on all societies,
     Till men's affections, or your own desert,
     Should worthily invite you to your rank. He that is so respectless in his courses,
     Oft sells his reputation at cheap market. Nor would I, you should melt away yourself
     In flashing bravery, lest, while you affect
     To make a blaze of gentry to the world,
     A little puff of scorn extinguish it;
     And you be left like an unsavoury snuff,
     Whose property is only to offend. I'd have you sober, and contain yourself,
     Not that your sail be bigger than your boat;
     But moderate your expenses now, at first,
     As you may keep the same proportion still:
     Nor stand so much on your gentility,
     Which is an airy and mere borrow'd thing,
     From dead men's dust and bones; and none of yours,
     Except you make, or hold it. Enter a Servant. Who comes here? Serv. Save you, gentlemen! Step. Nay, we do not stand much on our gentility, friend; yet you
  are welcome: and I assure you mine uncle here is a man of a
  thousand a year, Middlesex land. He has but one son in all the
  world, I am his next heir, at the common law, master Stephen, as
  simple as I stand here, if my cousin die, as there's hope he will:
  I have a pretty living O' mine own too, beside, hard by here. Serv. In good time, sir. Step. In good time, sir! why, and in very good time, sir! You  do
  not flout, friend, do you? Servo Not I, sir. Step. Not you, sir! you were best not, sir; an you should; here be
  them can perceive it, and that quickly too; go to: and they can
  give it again soundly too, an need be. Servo Why, sir, let this satisfy you; good faith, I had no such
  intent. Step. Sir, an I thought you had, I would talk with you, and that
  presently. Serv. Good master Stephen, so you may, sir, at your pleasure. Step. And so I would, sir, good my saucy companion! an you were out
  O' mine uncle's ground, I can tell you; though I do not stand upon
  my gentility neither, in't. Know. Cousin, cousin, will this ne'er be left? Step. Whoreson, basefellow! a mechanical serving-man! By this
  cudgel, an 'twere not for shame, I would--

  Know. What would you do, you peremptory gull? If you cannot be quiet, get you hence. You see the honest man demeans himself
     Modestly tow'rds you, giving no reply
     To your unseason'd, quarrelling, rude fashion;
     And still you huff it, with a kind of carriage
     As void of wit, as of humanity. Go, get you in; 'fore heaven, I am ashamed
     Thou hast a kinsman's interest in me. [Exit Master Stephen. Serv. I pray, sir, is this master Knowell's house? Know. Yes, marry is it, sir. Serv. I should inquire for a gentleman here, one master Edward
  Knowell; do you know any such, sir, I pray you? Know. I should forget myself else, sir. Serv. Are you the gentleman? cry you mercy, sir: I was required by
  a gentleman in the city, as I rode out at this end O' the town, to
  deliver you this letter, sir. Know. To me, sir! What do you mean? pray you remember your
  court'sy. [Reads.] To his most selected friend, master Edward
  Knowell. What might the gentleman's name be, sir, that sent it? Nay, pray you be covered. Serv. One master Wellbred, sir. Know. Master Wellbred! a young gentleman, is he not? Serv. The same, sir; master Kitely married his sister; the rich
  merchant in the Old Jewry. Know. You say very true.---Brainworm! [Enter Brainworm. Brai. Sir. Know. Make this honest friend drink here: pray you, go in. [Exeunt Brainworm and Servant. This letter is directed to my son;
     Yet I am Edward Knowell too, and may,
     With the safe conscience of good manners, use
     The fellow's error to my satisfaction. Well, I will break it ope (old men are curious),
     Be it but for the style's sake and the phrase;
     To see if both do answer my son's praises,
     Who is almost grown the idolater
     Of this young Wellbred. What have we here? What's this? [Reads]

  Why, Ned, I beseech thee, hast thou forsworn all thy friends in the
  Old Jewry? or dost thou think us all Jews that inhabit there? yet,
  if thou dost, come over, and but see our frippery; change an old
  shirt for a whole smock with us: do not conceive that antipathy
  between  us and Hogsden, as was between Jews and hogs-flesh. Leave
  thy vigilant father alone, to number over his green apricots,
  evening and morning, on the north-west wall: an I had been his son,
  I had saved him the labour long since, if taking in all the young
  wenches that pass by at the back-door, and codling every kernel of
  the fruit for them, would have served, But, pr'ythee, come over to
  me quickly this morning; I have such a present for thee!--our
  Turkey company never sent the like to the Grand Signior. One is a rhymer, sir, of your own batch, your own leaven;
  but doth think himself poet-major of the town, willing to be shewn,
  and worthy to be seen. The other--I will not venture his
  description with you, till you come, because I would have you make
  hither with an appetite. If the worst of 'em be not worth your
  journey draw your bill of charges, as unconscionable as any
  Guildhall verdict will give it you, and you shall be allowed your
  viaticum. From the Windmill. From the Bordello it might come as well,
     The Spittle, or Pict-hatch. Is this the man
     My son hath sung so, for the happiest wit,
     The choicest brain, the times have sent us forth! I know not what he may be in the arts,
     Nor what in schools; but, surely, for his manners,
     I judge him a profane and dissolute wretch;
     Worse by possession of such great good gifts,
     Being the master of so loose a spirit. Why, what unhallowed ruffian would have writ
     In such a scurrilous manner to a friend! Why should he think I tell my apricots,
     Or play the Hesperian dragon with my fruit,
     To watch it? Well, my son, I had thought you
     Had had more judgment to have made election
     Of your companions, than t' have ta'en on trust
     Such petulant, jeering gamesters, that can spare
     No argument or subject from their jest. But I perceive affection makes a fool
     Of any man too much the father.---Brainworm! Enter BRAINWORM. Brai. Sir. Know. Is the fellow gone that brought this letter? Brai. Yea, sir, a pretty while since. Know. And where is your young master? Brai. In his chamber, sir. Know. He spake not with the fellow, did he? Brai. No, sir, he saw him not. Know. Take you this letter, and deliver it my son;
     but with no notice that I have opened it, on your life. Brai. O Lord, sir! that were a jest indeed. [Exit. Know. I am resolved I will not stop his journey,
     Nor practise any violent means to stay
     The unbridled course of youth in him; for that
     Restrain'd, grows more impatient; and in kind
     Like to the eager, but the generous greyhound,
     Who ne'er so little from his game withheld,
     Turns head, and leaps up at his holder's throat. There is a way of winning more by love,
     And urging of tho modesty, than fear:
     Force works on servile natures, not the free. He that's compell'd to goodness may be good,
     But 'tis but for that fit; where others, drawn
     By softness and example, get a habit. Then, if they stray, but warn them, and the same
     They should for virtue have done, they'll do for shame. [Exit. SCENE II.-A Room in KNOWELL. 'S House. Enter E. KNOWELL, with a letter in his hand, followed by
                              BRAINWORM. E. Know. Did he open it, say'st thou? Brai. Yes, O' my word, sir, and read the contents. E. Know. That scarce contents me. What countenance, prithee, made
  he in the reading of it? was he angry, or pleased? Brai. Nay, sir, I saw him not read it, nor open it, I assure your
  worship. E. Know. No! how know'st thou then that he did either? Brai. Marry, sir, because he charged me, on my life, to tell nobody
  that he open'd it; which, unless he had done, he would never fear
  to have it revealed. E. Know. That's true: well, I thank thee, Brainworm. Enter STEPHEN. Step. O, Brainworm, didst thou not see a fellow here in
  what-sha-call-him doublet? he brought mine uncle a letter e'en now. Brai. Yes, master Stephen; what of him? Step. O, I have such a mind to beat him--where is he, canst thou
  tell? Brai. Faith, he is not of that mind: he is gone, master Stephen. Step. Gone! which way? when went he? how long since? Brai. He is rid hence; he took horse at the street-door. Step. And I staid in the fields! Whoreson scanderbag rogue! O that
  I had but a horse to fetch him back again! Brai. Why, you may have my master's gelding, to save your longing,
  sir. Step. But I have no boots, that's the spite on't. Brai. Why, a fine wisp of hay, roll'd hard, master Stephen. Step. No, faith, it's no boot to follow him now: let him e'en go
  and hang. Prithee, help to truss me a little: he does so vex me--

  Brai. You'll be worse vexed when you are trussed, master Stephen. Best keep unbraced, and walk yourself till you be cold; your choler
  may founder you else. Step. By my faith, and so I will, now thou tell'st me on't: how
  dost thou like my leg, Brainworm? Brai. A very good leg, master Stephen; but the woollen stocking
  does not commend it so well. Step. Foh! the stockings be good enough, now summer is coming on,
  for the dust: I'll have a pair of silk against winter, that I go to
  dwell in the town. I think my leg would shew in a silk hose--

  Brai. Believe me, master Stephen, rarely well. Step. In sadness, I think it would: I have a reasonable good leg. Brai. You have an excellent good leg, master Stephen; but I can not
  stay to praise it longer now, and I am very sorry for it. [Exit. Step. Another time will serve, Brainworm. Gramercy for this. E. Know. Ha, ha, ha. Step. 'Slid, I hope he laughs not at me; an he do--

  E. Know. Here was a letter indeed, to be intercepted by a man's
  father, and do him good with him! He cannot but think most
  virtuously, both of me, and the sender, sure, that make the careful
  costermonger of him in our familiar epistles. Well, if he read this
  with patience I'll be gelt, and troll ballads for master John
  Trundle yonder, the rest of my mortality. It is true, and likely,
  my father may have as much patience as another man, for he takes
  much physic; and oft taking physic makes a man very patient. But
  would your packet, master Wellbred, had arrived at him in such a
  minute of his patience! then we had known the end of it, which now
  is doubtful, and threatens--[Sees Master Stephen.] What, my wise
  cousin! nay, then I'll furnish our feast with one gull more toward
  the mess. He writes to me of a brace, and here's one, that's three:
  oh, for a fourth, Fortune, if ever thou' It use thine eyes, I
  entreat thee--

  Step. Oh, now I see who he laughed at: he laughed at somebody in
  that letter. By this good light, an he had laughed at me--

  E. Know. How now, cousin Stephen, melancholy? Step. Yes, a little: I thought you had laughed at me, cousin. E. Know. Why, what an I had, coz? what would you have done? Step. By this light, I would have told mine uncle. E. Know. Nay, if you would have told your uncle, I did laugh at
  you, coz. Step. Did you, indeed? E. Know. Yes, indeed. Step. Why then

  E. Know. What then? Step. I am satisfied; it is sufficient. E. Know. Why, be so, gentle coz: and, I pray you, let me entreat a
  courtesy of you. I am sent for this morning by a friend in the Old
  Jewry, to come to him; it is but crossing over the fields to
  Moorgate: Will you bear me company? I protest it is not to draw you
  into bond or any plot against the state, coz. Step. Sir, that's all one an it were; you shall command me twice so
  far as Moorgate, to do you good in such a matter. Do you think I
  would leave you? I protest--

  E. Know. No, no, you shall not protest, coz. Step. By my fackings, but I will, by your leave:--I'll protest more
  to my friend, than I'll speak of at this time. E. Know. You speak very well, coz. Step. Nay, not so neither, you shall pardon me: but I speak to
  serve my turn. E. Know. Your turn, coz! do you know what you say? A gentleman
  of your sorts, parts, carriage, and estimation, to talk of your
  turn in this company, and to me alone, like a tankard-bearer
  at a conduit! fie! A wight that, hitherto, his every step
  hath left the stamp of a great foot behind him, as every word
  the savour of a strong spirit, and he! this man! so graced, gilded,
  or, to use a more fit metaphor, so tenfold by nature, as not ten
  housewives' pewter, again a good time, shews more bright to the
  world than he! and he! (as I said last, so I say again, and still
  shall say it) this man! to conceal such real ornaments as these,
  and shadow their glory, as a milliner's wife does her wrought
  stomacher, with a smoaky lawn, or a black cyprus! O, coz! it cannot
  be answered; go not about it: Drake's old ship at Deptford may
  sooner circle the world again. Come, wrong not the quality of your
  desert, with looking downward, coz; but hold up your head, so: and
  let the idea of what you are be portrayed in your face, that men
  may read in your physnomy, here within this place is to be seen the
  true, rare, and accomplished monster, or miracle of nature, which
  is all one. What think you of this, coz? Step. Why, I do think of it: and I will be more proud, and
  melancholy, and gentlemanlike, than I have been, I'll insure you. E. Know. Why, that's resolute, master Stephen!--Now, if I can but
  hold him up to his height, as it is happily begun, it will do well
  for a suburb humour: we may hap have a match with the city, and
  play him for forty pound.--Come, coz. Step. I'll follow you. E. Know. Follow me! you must go before. Step. Nay, an I must, I will. Pray you shew me, good cousin. [Exeunt. SCENE III.-The Lane before Cob's House. Enter Master MATHEW:


  Mat. I think this be the house: what ho! Enter COB. Cob. Who's there? O, master Mathew! give your worship good morrow. Mat. What, Cob! how dost thou, good Cob? dost thou inhabit here,
  Cob? Cob. Ay, sir, I and my lineage have kept a poor house here, in Our
  days. Mat. Thy lineage, monsieur Cob! what lineage, what lineage? Cob. Why, sir, an ancient lineage, and a princely. Mine ance'try
  came from a king's belly, no worse man; and yet no man either, by
  your worship's leave, I did lie in that, but herring, the king of
  fish (from his belly I proceed), one of the monarchs of the world,
  I assure you. The first red herring that was broiled in Adam and
  Eve's kitchen, do I fetch my pedigree from, by the harrot's book. His cob was my great, great, mighty great grandfather. Mat. Why mighty, why mighty, I pray thee? Cob. O, it was a mighty while ago, sir, and a mighty great cob. Mat. How know'st thou that? Cob. How know I! why, I smell his ghost ever and anon. Mat. Smell a ghost! O unsavoury jest! and the ghost of a herring
  cob? Cob. Ay, sir: With favour of your worship's nose, master Mathew,
  why not the ghost of a herring cob, as well as the ghost of Rasher
  Bacon? Mat. Roger Bacon, thou would'st say. Cob. I say Rasher Bacon. They were both broiled on the coals; and a
  man may smell broiled meat, I hope! you are a scholar, upsolve me
  that now. Mat. O raw ignorance!--Cob, canst thou shew me of a gentleman, one
  captain Bobadill, where his lodging is? Cob. O, my guest, sir, you mean. Mat. Thy guest! alas, ha, ha, ha! Cob. Why do you laugh, sir? do you not mean captain Bobadill? Mat. Cob, pray thee advise thyself well; do not wrong the
  gentleman, and thyself too. I dare be sworn, he scorns thy house;
  he! he lodge in such a base obscure place as thy house! Tut, I know
  his disposition so well, he would not lie in thy bed if thou'dst
  give it him. Cob. I will not give it him though, sir. Mass, I thought somewhat
  was in it, we could not get him to bed all night: Well, sir, though
  he lie not on my bed, he lies on my bench: an't please you to go
  up, sir, you shall find him with two cushions under his head, and
  his cloak wrapped about him, as though he had neither won nor lost,
  and yet, I warrant, he ne'er cast better in his life, than he has
  done to-night. Mat. Why, was he drunk? Cob. Drunk, sir! you hear not me say so: perhaps he swallowed a
  tavern-token, or some such device, sir, I have nothing to do
  withal. I deal with water and not with wine--Give me my tankard
  there, ho!--God be wi' you, sir. It's six o'clock: I should have
  carried two turns by this. What ho! my stopple! come. Enter Tib with a water-tankard. Mat. Lie in a water-bearer's house! a gentleman of his havings! Well, I'll tell him my mind. Cob. What, Tib; shew this gentleman up to the captain. [Exit Tib
  with Master Mathew.] Oh, an my house were the Brazen-head now! faith it would e'en speak Moe fools yet. You should have some now
  would take this master Mathew to be a gentleman, at the least. His
  father's an honest man, a worshipful fishmonger, and so forth; and
  now does he creep and wriggle into acquaintance with all the brave
  gallants about the town, such as my guest is (O, my guest is a fine
  man! ), and they flout him invincibly. He useth every day to a
  merchant's house where I serve water, one master Kitely's, in the
  Old Jewry; and here's the jest, he is in love with
  my master's sister, Mrs. Bridget, and calls her mistress; and there
  he will sit you a whole afternoon sometimes, reading of these same
  abominable, vile (a pox on 'em! I cannot abide them), rascally
  verses, poetrie, poetrie, and speaking of interludes; 'twill make a
  man burst to hear him. And the wenches, they do so jeer, and ti-he
  at him--Well, should they do so much to me, I'd forswear them all,
  by the foot of Pharaoh! There's an oath! How many water-bearers
  shall you hear swear such an oath? O, I have a guest--he teaches
  me-he does swear the legiblest of any man christened: By St.
  George! the foot of Pharaoh! the body of me! as I am a gentleman
  and a soldier! such dainty oaths! and withal he does take this same
  filthy roguish tobacco, the finest and cleanliest! it would do a
  man good to see the fumes come forth at's tonnels.--Well, he owes
  me forty shillings, my wife lent him out of her purse, by sixpence
  at a time, besides his lodging: I would I had it! I shall have it,
  he says, the next action. Helterskelter, hang sorrow, care'll kill
  a cat, up-tails all, and a louse for the hangman. [Exit. SCENE IV.-A Room in COB'S House. BOBADILL discoved lying on a bench. Bob. Hostess, hostess! Enter TIB. Tib. What say you, sir? Bob. A cup of thy small beer, sweet hostess. Tib. Sir, there's a gentleman below would speak with you. Bob. A gentleman! 'odso, I am not within. Tib. My husband told him you were, sir. Bob. What a plague-what meant he? Mat. [below.] Captain Bobadill! Bob. Who's there!-Take away the bason, good hostess;--Come up, sir. Tib. He would desire you to come up, cleanly house, here! Enter MATHEW. Mat. Save you, sir; save you, captain! Bob. Gentle master Mathew! Is it you, sir? down. Mat. Thank you, good captain; you may see I am somewhat audacious. Bob. Not so, sir. I was requested to supper last night by a sort of
  gallants, where you were wished for, and drunk to, I assure you. Mat. Vouchsafe me, by whom, good captain? Bob. Marry, by young Wellbred, and others.--Why, hostess, stool
  here for this gentleman. Mat. No haste, sir, 'tis very well. Bob. Body O' me! it was so late ere we parted last night, I can
  scarce open my eyes yet; I was but new risen, as you came; how
  passes the day abroad, sir? you can tell. Mat. Faith, some half hour to seven; Now, trust me, you have an
  exceeding fine lodging here, very neat, and private. Bob. Ay, sir: sit down, I pray you. Master Mathew, in any case
  possess no gentlemen of our acquaintance with notice of my lodging. Mat. Who? I, sir; no. Bob. Not that I need to care who know it, for the cabin is
  convenient; but in regard I would not be too popular, and generally
  visited, as some are. Mat. True, captain, I conceive you. Bob. For, do you see, sir, by the heart of valour in me, except it
  be to some peculiar and choice spirits, to whom I am
  extraordinarily engaged, as yourself, or so, I could not extend
  thus far. Mat. O Lord, sir! I resolve so. Bob. I confess I love a cleanly and quiet privacy, above all the
  tumult and roar of fortune. What new book have you there? What! Go
  by, Hieronymo? Mat. Ay: did you ever see it acted? Is't not well penned? [While Master Mathew reads, Bobadill makes himself ready. Bob. Well penned! I would fain see all the poets of these times pen
  such another play as that was: they'll prate and swagger, and keep
  a stir of art and devices, when, as I am a gentleman, read 'em,
  they are the most shallow, pitiful, barren fellows, that live upon
  the: face of the earth again. Mat. Indeed here are a number of fine speeches in this book. O
  eyes, no eyes, but fountains fraught with tears! there's a conceit! fountains fraught with tears! O life, no life, but lively form of
  death! another. O world, no world, but mass of public wrongs! a
  third. Confused and fill'd with murder and misdeeds! a fourth. O,
  the muses! Is't not excellent? Is't not simply the best that ever
  you heard, captain? Ha! how do you like it? Bob. 'Tis good. Mat. To thee, the purest object to my sense,
           The most refined essence heaven covers,
        Send I these lines, wherein I do commence
           The happy state of turtle-billing lovers. If they prove rough, unpolish'd, harsh, and rude,
           Haste made the waste: thus mildly I conclude. Bob. Nay, proceed, proceed. Where's this? Mat. This, sir! a toy of mine own, in my non-age; the infancy of my
  muses. But when will you come and see my study? good faith, I can
  shew you some very good things I have done of late.--That boot
  becomes your leg passing well, captain, methinks. Bob. So, so; it's the fashion gentlemen now use. Mat. Troth, captain, and now you speak of the fashion, master
  Wellbred's elder brother and I are fallen out exceedingly: This
  other day, I happened to enter into some discourse of a hanger,
  which, I assure you, both for fashion and workmanship, was most
  peremptory beautiful and gentlemanlike: yet he condemned, and cried
  it down for the most pied and ridiculous that ever he saw. Bob. Squire Downright, the half brother, was't not? Mat. Ay, sir, he. Bob. Hang him, rook! he! why he-has no more judgment than a malt
  horse: By St. George, I wonder you'd lose a thought upon such an
  animal; the most peremptory absurd clown of Christendom, this day,
  he is holden. I protest to you, as I am a gentleman and a soldier,
  I ne'er changed with his like. By his discourse, he should eat
  nothing but hay; he was born for the manger, pannier, or
  pack-saddle. He has not so much as a good phrase in his belly, but
  all old iron and rusty proverbs: a good commodity for some smith to
  make hob-nails of. Mat. Ay, and he thinks to carry it away with his manhood still,
  where he comes: he brags he will give me the bastinado, as I hear. Bob. How! he the bastinado! how came he by that word, trow? Mat. Nay, indeed, he said cudgel me; I termed it so, for my more
  grace. Bob. That may be: for I was sure it was none of his word; but when,
  when said he so? Mat. Faith, yesterday, they say; a young gallant, a friend of mine,
  told me so. Bob. By the foot of Pharaoh, an 'twere my case now, I should send
  him a chartel presently. The bastinado! a most proper and
  sufficient dependence, warranted by the great Caranza. Come hither,
  you shall chartel him; I'll shew you a trick or two you shall kill
  him with at pleasure; the first stoccata, if you will, by this air. Mat. Indeed, you have absolute knowledge in the mystery, I have
  heard, sir. Bob. Of whom, of whom, have you heard it, I beseech you? Mat. Troth, I have heard it spoken of divers, that you have very
  rare, and un-in-one-breath-utterable skill, sir. Bob. By heaven, no, not I; no skill in the earth; some small
  rudiments in the science, as to know my time, distance, or so. I
  have professed it more for noblemen and gentlemen's use, than mine
  own practice, I assure you.--Hostess, accommodate us with another
  bed-staff here quickly. Lend us another bed-staff--the woman does
  not understand the words of action.--Look you, sir: exalt not your
  point above this state, at any hand, and let your poniard maintain
  your defence, thus:--give it the gentleman, and leave us. [Exit Tib.] So, sir. Come on: O, twine your body more about, that you may
  fall to a more sweet, comely, gentlemanlike guard; so! indifferent:
  hollow your body more, sir, thus: now, stand fast O' your left leg,
  note your distance, keep your due proportion of time--oh, you
  disorder your point most i rregularly. Mat. How is the bearing of it now, sir? Bob. O, out of measure ill: a well-experienced hand would pass upon
  you at pleasure. Mat. How mean you, sir, pass upon me? Bob. Why, thus, sir,--make a thrust at me--[Master Mathew pushes at
  Bobadill] come in upon the answer, control your point, and make a
  full career at the body: The best-practised gallants of the time
  name it the passado; a most desperate thrust, believe it. Mat. Well, come, sir. Bob. Why, you do not manage your weapon with any facility or grace
  to invite me. I have no spirit to play with you; your dearth of
  judgment renders you tedious. Mat. But one venue, sir. Bob. Venue! fie; the most gross denomination as ever I heard: O,
  the stoccata, while you live, sir; note that.--Come, put on your
  cloke, and we'll go to some private place where you are acquainted;
  some tavern, or so--and have a bit. I'll send for one of these
  fencers, and he shall breathe you, by my direction; and then I will
  teach you your trick: you shall kill him with it at the first, if
  you please. Why, I will learn you, by the true judgment of the eye,
  hand, and foot, to control any enemy's point in the world. Should
  your adversary confront you with a pistol, 'twere nothing, by this
  hand! you should, by the same rule, control his bullet, in a line,
  except it were hail shot, and spread. What money have you about
  you, master Mathew? Mat. Faith, I have not past a two shilling or so. Bob. 'Tis somewhat with the least; but come; we will have a bunch
  of radish and salt to taste our wine, and a pipe of tobacco to
  close the orifice of the stomach: and then we'll call upon young
  Wellbred: perhaps we shall meet the Corydon his brother there, and
  put him to the question. ACT II


          SCENE I.-The Old Jewry. A Hall in KITELY'S House. Enter KITELY, CASH, and DOWNRIGHT. Kit. Thomas, come hither. There lies a note within upon my desk;
     Here take my key: it is no matter neither.---
     Where is the boy? Cash. Within, sir, in the warehouse. Kit. Let him tell over straight that Spanish gold,
     And weigh it, with the pieces of eight. Do you
     See the delivery of those silver stuffs
     To Master Lucar: tell him, if he will,
     He shall have the grograns, at the rate I told him,
     And I. will meet him on the Exchange anon. Cash. Good, sir. [Exit. Kit. Do you see that fellow, brother Downright? Dow. Ay, what of him? Kit. He is a jewel, brother. I took him of a child up at my door,
     And christen'd him, gave him mine own name, Thomas:
     Since bred him at the Hospital; where proving
     A toward imp, I call'd him home, and taught him
     So much, as I have made him my cashier,
     And giv'n him, who had none, a surname, Cash:
     And find him in his place so full of faith,
     That I durst trust my life into his hands. Dow. So would not I in any bastard's, brother,
     As it is like he is, although I knew
     Myself his father. But you said you had somewhat
     To tell me, gentle brother: what is't, what is't? Kit. Faith, I am very loath to utter it,
     As fearing it may hurt your patience:
     But that I know your judgment is of strength,
     Against the nearness of affection---

  Dow. What need this circumstance? pray you, be direct. Kit. I will not say how much I do ascribe
     Unto your friendship, nor in what regard
     I hold your love; but let my past behaviour,
     And usage of your sister, [both] confirm
     How well I have been affected to your---

  Dow. You are too tedious; come to the matter, the matter. Kit. Then, without further ceremony, thus. My brother Wellbred, sir, I know not how,
     Of late is much declined in what he was,
     And greatly alter'd in his disposition. When he came first to lodge here in my house,
     Ne'er trust me if I were not proud of him:
     Methought he bare himself in such a fashion,
     So full of man, and sweetness in his carriage,
     And what was chief, it shew'd not borrow'd in him,
     But all he did became him as his own,
     And seem'd as perfect, proper, and possest,
     As breath with life, or colour with the blood. But now, his course is so irregular,
     So loose, affected, and deprived of grace,
     And he himself withal so far fallen off
     From that first place, as scarce no note remains,
     To tell men's judgments where he lately stood. He's grown a stranger to all due respect,
     Forgetful of his friends; and not content
     To stale himself in all societies,
     He makes my house here common as a mart,
     A theatre, a public receptacle
     For giddy humour, and deceased riot;
     And here, as in a tavern or a stews,
     He and his wild associates spend their hours,
     In repetition of lascivious jests,
     Swear, leap, drink, dance, and revel night by night,
     Control my servants; and, indeed, what not? Dow. 'Sdeins, I know not what I should say to him, in the whole
  world! He values me at a crack'd three-farthings, for aught I  see. It will never out of the flesh that's bred in the bone. I have
  told him enough, one would think, if that would serve;  but counsel
  to him is as good as a shoulder of mutton to a  sick horse. Well! he knows what to trust to, for George: let  him spend, and spend,
  and domineer, till his heart ake; an he  think to be relieved by
  me, when he is got into one O' your  city pounds, the counters, he
  has the wrong sow by the ear,  i'faith; and claps his dish at the
  wrong man's door: I'll  lay my hand on my halfpenny, ere I part
  with it to fetch  him out, I'll assure him.' Kit. Nay, good brother, let it not trouble you thus. Dow. 'Sdeath! he mads me; I could eat my very spur leathers  for
  anger! But, why are you so tame? why do you not speak to  him, and
  tell him how he disquiets your house? Kit. O, there are divers reasons to dissuade me. But, would yourself vouchsafe to travail in it
     (Though but with plain and easy circumstance),
     It would both come much better to his sense,
     And savour less of stomach, or of passion. You are his elder brother, and that title
     Both gives and warrants your authority,
     Which, by your presence seconded, must breed
     A kind of duty in him, and regard:
     Whereas, if I should intimate the least,
     It would but add contempt to his neglect,
     Heap worse on ill, make up a pile of hatred,
     That in the rearing would come tottering down,
     And in the ruin bury all our love. Nay, more than this, brother; if I should speak,
     He would be ready, from his heat of humour,
     And overflowing of the vapour in him,
     To blow the ears of his familiars
     With the false breath of telling what disgraces,
     And low disparagement's, I had put upon him. Whilst they, sir, to relieve him in the fable,
     Make their loose comments upon every word,
     Gesture, or look, I use; mock me all over,
     From my flat cap unto my shining shoes;
     And, out of their impetuous rioting phant'sies,
     Beget some slander that shall dwell with me. And what would that be, think you? marry, this:
     They would give out, because my wife is fair,
     Myself but lately married; and my sister '. Here sojourning a virgin in my house,
     That I were jealous I---nay, as sure as death,
     That they would say: and, how that I had quarrell'd,
     My brother purposely, thereby to find
     An apt pretext to banish them my house. Dow. 