


Produced by David Widger





DR. JONATHAN

By Winston Churchill


A Play in Three Acts





PREFACE


This play was written during the war. But owing to the fact that several
managers politely declined to produce it, it has not appeared on any
stage. Now, perhaps, its theme is more timely, more likely to receive
the attention it deserves, when the smoke of battle has somewhat
cleared. Even when the struggle with Germany and her allies was in
progress it was quite apparent to the discerning that the true issue
of the conflict was one quite familiar to American thought, of
self-determination. On returning from abroad toward the end of 1917
I ventured into print with the statement that the great war had every
aspect of a race with revolution. Subliminal desires, subliminal fears,
when they break down the censor of law, are apt to inspire fanatical
creeds, to wind about their victims the flaming flag of a false
martyrdom. Today it is on the knees of the gods whether the
insuppressible impulses for human freedom that come roaring up from the
subliminal chaos, fanned by hunger and hate, are to thrash themselves
out in anarchy and insanity, or to take an ordered, intelligent and
conscious course. Of the Twentieth Century, industrial democracy is
the watchword, even as political democracy was the watchword of the two
centuries that preceded it. Economic power is at last realized to be
political power. No man owns himself, no woman owns herself if the
individual is not economically free. Perhaps the most encouraging omen
of the day is the fact that many of our modern employers, and even our
modern financiers and bankers seem to be recognizing this truth, to
be growing aware of the danger to civilization of its continued
suppression. Educators and sociologists may supply the theories; but by
experiment, by trial and error,--yes, and by prayer,--the solution must
be found in the practical domain of industry. DR. JONATHAN




ACT I

SCENE:   The library of ASHER PINDAR'S house in Foxon Falls, a New England
   village of some three thousand souls, over the destinies of which
   the Pindars for three generations have presided. It is a large,
   dignified room, built early in the nineteenth century, with white
   doors and gloss woodwork. At the rear of the stage,--which is the
   front of the house,--are three high windows with small, square panes
   of glass, and embrasures into which are fitted white inside
   shutters. These windows reach to within a foot or so of the floor;
   a person walking on the lawn or the sidewalk just beyond it may be
   seen through them. The trees bordering the Common are also seen
   through these windows, and through a gap in the foliage a glimpse of
   the terraced steeple of the Pindar Church, the architecture of which
   is of the same period as the house. Upper right, at the end of the
   wall, is a glass door looking out on the lawn. There is another
   door, lower right, and a door, lower left, leading into ASHER
   PINDAR'S study. A marble mantel, which holds a clock and certain
   ornaments, is just beyond this door. The wall spaces on the right
   and left are occupied by high bookcases filled with respectable
   volumes in calf and dark cloth bindings. Over the mantel is an
   oil painting of the Bierstadt school, cherished by ASHER as an
   inheritance from his father, a huge landscape with a self-conscious
   sky, mountains, plains, rivers and waterfalls, and two small figures
   of Indians--who seem to have been talking to a missionary. In the
   spaces between the windows are two steel engravings, "The Death of
   Wolfe on the Plains of Abraham" and "Washington Crossing the
   Delaware!" The furniture, with the exception of a few heirlooms,
   such as the stiff sofa, is mostly of the Richardson period of the
   '80s and '90s. On a table, middle rear, are neatly spread out
   several conservative magazines and periodicals, including a
   religious publication. TIME: A bright morning in October, 1917,


   GEORGE PINDAR, in the uniform of a first lieutenant of the army,
   enters by the doorway, upper right. He is a well set up young man
   of about twenty-seven, bronzed from his life in a training camp, of
   an adventurous and social nature. He glances about the room, and
   then lights a cigarette. ASHER PINDAR, his father, enters, lower right. He is a tall,
   strongly built man of about sixty, with iron grey hair and beard. His eyes are keen, shadowed by bushy brows, and his New England
   features bear the stamp of inflexible "character." He wears a black
   "cutaway" coat and dark striped trousers; his voice is strong and
   resonant. But he is evidently preoccupied and worried, though he
   smiles with affection as he perceives GEORGE. GEORGE'S fondness for
   him is equally apparent. GEORGE. Hello, dad. ASHER. Oh, you're here, George. GEORGE (looking, at ASHER). Something troubling you? ASHER (attempting dissimulation). Well, you're going off to France,
they've only given you two days' leave, and I've scarcely seen anything
of you. Isn't that enough? GEORGE. I know how busy you've been with that government contract on
your hands. I wish I could help. ASHER. You're in the army now, my boy. You can help me again when you
come back. GEORGE. I want to get time to go down to the shops and say goodbye to
some of the men. ASHER. No, I shouldn't do that, George. GEORGE (surprised). Why not? I used to be pretty chummy with them, you
know,--smoke a pipe with them occasionally in the noon hour. ASHER. I know. But it doesn't do for an employer to be too familiar with
the hands in these days. GEORGE. I guess I've got a vulgar streak in me somewhere, I get along
with the common people. There'll be lots of them in the trenches, dad. ASHER. Under military discipline. GEORGE (laughing). We're supposed to be fighting a war for democracy. I
was talking to old Bains yesterday,--he's still able to run a lathe, and
he was in the Civil War, you know. He was telling me how the boys in his
regiment stopped to pick blackberries on the way to the battle of Bull
Run. ASHER. That's democracy! It's what we're doing right now--stopping to
pick blackberries. This country's been in the war six months, since
April, and no guns, no munitions, a handful of men in France--while the
world's burning! GEORGE. Well, we won't sell Uncle Sam short yet. Something is bothering
you, dad. ASHER. No--no, but the people in Washington change my specifications
every week, and Jonathan's arriving today, of all days. GEORGE. Has Dr. Jonathan turned up? ASHER. I haven't seen him yet. It seems he got here this morning. No
telegram, nothing. And he had his house fixed up without consulting me. He must be queer, like his father, your great uncle, Henry Pindar. GEORGE. Tell me about Dr. Jonathan. A scientist,--isn't he? Suddenly
decided to come back to live in the old homestead. ASHER. On account of his health. He was delicate as a boy. He must have
been about eight or nine years old when Uncle Henry left Foxon Falls for
the west,--that was before you were born. Uncle Henry died somewhere in
Iowa. He and my father never got along. Uncle Henry had as much as
your grandfather to begin with, and let it slip through his fingers. He
managed to send Jonathan to a medical school, and it seems that he's had
some sort of a position at Johns Hopkins's--research work. I don't know
what he's got to live on. GEORGE. Uncle Henry must have been a philanthropist. ASHER. It's all very well to be a philanthropist when you make more than
you give away. Otherwise you're a sentimentalist. GEORGE. Or a Christian. ASHER. We can't take Christianity too literally. GEORGE (smiling). That's its great advantage, as a religion. ASHER. George, I don't like to say anything just as you're going
to fight for your country, my boy, but your attitude of religious
skepticism has troubled me, as well as your habit of intimacy with the
shop hands. I confess to you that I've been a little afraid at times
that you'd take after Jonathan's father. He never went to church, he
forgot that he owed something to his position as a Pindar. He used to
have that house of his overrun with all sorts of people, and the yard
full of dirty children eating his fruit and picking his flowers. There's
such a thing as being too democratic. I hope I'm as good an American as
anybody, I believe that any man with brains, who has thrift, ought to
rise--but wait until they do rise. You're going to command men, and when
you come back here into the business again you'll be in a position of
authority. Remember what I say, if you give these working people an
inch, they'll take all you have. GEORGE (laying his hand on ASHER's shoulder). Something is worrying you,
dad. We've always been pretty good pals, haven't we? ASHER. Yes, ever since you were a little shaver. Well, George, I didn't
want to bother you with it--today. It seems there's trouble in the
shops,--in our shops, of all places,--it's been going on for some time,
grumbling, dissatisfaction, and they're getting higher wages than ever
before--ruinous wages. They want me to recognize the union. GEORGE. Well, that beats me. I thought we were above the labour-trouble
line, away up here in New England. ASHER (grimly). Oh, I can handle them. GEORGE. I'll bet you can. You're a regular old war horse when you get
started. It's your capital, it's your business, you've put it all at the
disposal of the government. What right have they to kick up a row now,
with this war on? I must say I haven't any sympathy with that. ASHER (proudly). I guess you're a real Pindar after all, George. (Enter an elderly maid, lower right.) MAID. Timothy Farrell, the foreman's here. (Enter, lower right, TIMOTHY, a big Irishman of about sixty, in
   working clothes.) TIMOTHY. Here I am, sir. They're after sending word you wanted me. GEORGE (going up to TIMOTHY and shaking his hand warmly). Old Timothy! I'm glad to get sight of you before I go. TIMOTHY. And it's glad I am to see you, Mr. George, before you leave. And he an officer now! Sure, I mind him as a baby being wheeled up and
down under the trees out there. My boy Bert was saying only this morning
how we'd missed the sight of him in the shops this summer. You have a
way with the men, Mr. George, of getting into their hearts, like. I was
thinking just now, if Mr. George had only been home, in the shops, maybe
we wouldn't be having all this complaint and trouble. GEORGE. Who's at the bottom of this, Timothy? Rench? Hillman? I thought
so. Well, they're not bad chaps when you get under their skins. (He glances at his wrist watch)

Let me go down and talk with them, dad,--I've got time, my train doesn't
leave until one thirty. ASHER (impatiently, almost savagely). No, I'll settle this, George, this
is my job. I won't have any humoring. Come into my study, Timothy. TIMOTHY, shaking his head, follows ASHER out of the door, left. After a moment GEORGE goes over to the extreme left hand corner of
   the room, where several articles are piled. He drags out a kit bag,
   then some necessary wearing apparel, underclothes, socks, a sweater,
   etc., then a large and rather luxurious lunch kit, a pin cushion. with his monogram, a small travelling pillow with his monogram, a
   linen toilet case embroidered in blue, to hang on the wall--these
   last evidently presents from admiring lady friends. Finally he
   brings forth a large rubber life preserving suit. He makes a show
   of putting all these things in the bag, including the life-
   preserving suit; and reveals a certain sentiment, not too deep, for
   the pillow, the pincushion and the toilet case. At length he strews
   everything over the floor, and is surveying the litter with mock
   despair when a girl appears on the lawn outside, through one of the
   windows. She throws into the room a small parcel wrapped in tissue
   paper, and disappears. GEORGE picks up the parcel and looks
   surprised, and suddenly runs out of the door, upper right. He
   presently returns, dragging the girl by the wrists, she resisting. MINNIE FARRELL is about twenty one, with black hair and an abundant
   vitality. Her costume is a not wholly ineffective imitation of
   those bought at a great price at certain metropolitan
   establishments. A string of imitation pearls gleams against her
   ruddy skin. MINNIE. Cut it out, George! (Glancing around apprehensively.) Say,
if your mother was to find me here she'd want to send me up to the
reformatory (she frees herself). GEORGE. Where the deuce did you blow in from? (Regarding her with
admiration.) Is this the little Minnie Farrell who left Foxon Falls two
years ago? Gee whiz! aren't we smart! MINNIE. Do you like me? I'm making good money, since the war. GEORGE. Do I like you? What are you doing here? MINNIE. My brother Bert's out there--he ain't working today. Mr. Pindar
sent for father, and we walked up here with him. Where is he? GEORGE (nodding toward the study). In there. But what are you doing,
back in Foxon Falls? MINNIE. Oh, visiting the scenes of my childhood. GEORGE (tearing open the tissue paper from the parcel). Did you make
these for me? (He holds up a pair of grey woollen wristlets.) MINNIE. Well, I wanted to do something for a soldier, and when I heard
you was going to France I thought you might as well have 'em. GEORGE. How did you hear I was going? MINNIE. Bert told me when I came home yesterday. They say it's cold in
the trenches, and nothing keeps the hands so warm as wristlets. I know,
because I've had 'em on winter mornings, early, when I was going to
work. Will you wear 'em, George? GEORGE. Will I wear them! (He puts then on his wrists.) I'll never take
them off till the war's over. MINNIE (pleased). You always were a josher! GEORGE. Tell me, Minnie, why did you run away from me two years ago? MINNIE. Run away from you! I left because I couldn't stand this village
any longer. It was too quiet for me. GEORGE. You're a josher! You went off while I was away, without telling
me you were going. And then, when I found out where you were and hustled
over to Newcastle in my car, you turned me down hard. MINNIE. You didn't have a mortgage on me. There were plenty of girls of
your own kind at that house party you went to. I guess you made love to
them, too. GEORGE. They weren't in the same class with you. You've got the ginger. MINNIE. I've still got the ginger, all right. GEORGE. I thought you cared for me. MINNIE. You always had the nerve, George. GEORGE. You acted as if you did. MINNIE. I'm a good actor. Say, what was there in it for me?--packing
tools in the Pindar shops, and you the son of my boss? You didn't want
nothing from me except what all men want, and you wouldn't have wanted
that long. GEORGE. I was crazy about you. MINNIE (her eyes falling on the travelling pillow and the pincushion;
picking theron: up in turn). I guess you told them that, too. GEORGE (embarrassed). Oh, I'm popular enough when I'm going away. They
don't care anything about me. MINNIE (indicating the wristlets). You don't want them,--I'll give 'em
to Bert. GEORGE. No, you won't. MINNIE. I was silly. But we had a good time while it lasted,--didn't we,
George? (She evades him deftly, and picks up the life-preserving suit.) What's this?--a full dress uniform? GEORGE. When a submarine gets you, all you've got to do is to jump
overboard and blow this--

   (He draws the siren from the pocket and starts to blow it, but she
   seizes his hand.) --and float around until a destroyer picks you up. (Takes from another pocket a metal lunch box.) This is for pate de foie gras sandwiches, and there's room in here--

   (Indicating another pocket.) --for a bottle of fizz. Come along with me, Minnie, ship as a Red Cross
nurse, and I'll buy you one. The Atlantic wouldn't be such a bad place,
with you,--and we wouldn't be in a hurry to blow the siren. You'd look
like a peach in a white costume, too. MINNIE. Don't you like me in this? GEORGE. Sure, but I'd like that better. MINNIE. I'd make a good nurse, if I do say it myself. And I'd take good
care of you, George,--as good as any of them. (She nods toward the pillow and pincushion.) GEORGE. Better! (He seizes her hands and attempts to draw her toward him.) You used to let me! MINNIE. That ain't any reason. GEORGE. Just once, Minnie,--I'm going away. MINNIE. No. I didn't mean to come in here--I just wanted to see what you
looked like in your uniform. (She draws away from him, just as Dr. JONATHAN appears in the
   doorway, lower right.) Goodbye, George. (She goes out through the doorway, upper right.) (DR. JONATHAN may be almost any age,--in reality about thirty five. His head is that of the thinker, high above the eyes. His face
   bears evidence in its lines of years of labour and service, as well
   as of a triumphant struggle against ill health. In his eyes is a
   thoughtful yet illuminating smile, now directed toward GEORGE who,
   when he perceives him, is taken aback,)

DR. JONATHAN. Hello! I was told to come in here,--I hope I'm not
intruding. GEORGE. Not at all. How--how long have you been here? DR. JONATHAN. Just long enough to get my bearings. I came this morning. GEORGE. Oh! Are you--are you Dr. Jonathan? DR. JONATHAN. I'm Jonathan. And you're George, I suppose. GEORGE. Yes. (He goes to him and shakes hands.) I'm sorry to be leaving
just as you come. DR. JONATHAN. I'll be here when you return. GEORGE. I hope so (a pause). You won't find Foxon Falls a bad old town. DR. JONATHAN. And it will be a better one when you come back. GEORGE. Why do you say that? DR. JONATHAN (smiling). It seems a safe conjecture. (Dr. JONATHAN is looking at the heap of articles on the floor.) GEORGE (grinning, and not quite at ease). You might imagine I was
embarking in the gent's furnishing business, instead of going to war. (He picks up the life-preserving suit.) Some friend of mother's told her
about this, and she insisted upon sending for it. I don't want to hurt
her feelings, but I can't take it, of course. (He rolls it up and thrusts it under the sofa, upper left.) You won't give me away? DR. JONATHAN. Never! GEORGE. Dad ought to be here in a minute, he's in there with old Timothy
Farrell, the moulder foreman. It seems that things are in a mess at the
shops. Rotten of the men to make trouble now--don't you think?--when the
country's at war! Darned unpatriotic, I say. DR. JONATHAN. I saw a good many stars in your service flag as I passed
the office door this morning. GEORGE. Yes. Over four hundred of our men have enlisted. I don't
understand it. DR. JONATHAN. Perhaps you will, George, when you come home. GEORGE. You mean--

   (GEORGE is interrupted by the entrance, lower right, of his mother,
   AUGUSTA PINDAR. She is now in the fifties, and her hair is turning
   grey. Her uneventful, provincial existence as ASHER'S wife has
   confirmed and crystallized her traditional New England views, her
   conviction that her mission is to direct for good the lives of the
   less fortunate by whom she is surrounded. She carries her knitting
   in her hand,--a pair of socks for GEORGE. And she goes at once to
   DR. JONATHAN.) AUGUSTA. So you are Jonathan. They told me you'd arrived--why didn't
you come to us? Do you think it's wise to live in that old house of your
father's before it's been thoroughly heated for a few days? DR. JONATHAN (taking her hand). Oh, I'm going to live with the doors and
windows open. AUGUSTA. Dear me! I understand you've been quite ill, and you were never
very strong as a child. I made it my business to go through the house
yesterday, and I must say it looks comfortable. But the carpenters and
plumbers have ruined the parlour, with that bench, and the sink in the
corner. What are you going to do there? DR. JONATHAN. I'm having it made into a sort of laboratory. AUGUSTA. You don't mean to say you intend to do any work! DR. JONATHAN. Work ought to cure me, in this climate. AUGUSTA. You mean to practise medicine? You ought to have consulted us. I'm afraid you won't find it remunerative, Jonathan,--but your father
was impractical, too. Foxon Falls is still a small place, in spite of
the fact that the shops have grown. Workmen's families can't afford to
pay big fees, you know. DR. JONATHAN (smiling). I know. AUGUSTA. And we already have an excellent physician here, Dr. Senn. DR. JONATHAN. I shan't interfere with Dr. Senn. GEORGE (laying his hand on AUGUSTA's shoulder: apologetically). Mother
feels personally responsible for every man, woman and child in Foxon
Falls. I shouldn't worry about Dr. Jonathan if I were you, mother, I've
got a notion he can take care of himself. AUGUSTA (a little baffled by DR. JONATHAN's self-command, sits down and
begins to knit). I must get these socks finished for you to take with
you, my dear. (To DR. JONATHAN) I can't realize he's going! (To GEORGE)
You haven't got all your things in your bag! Where's the life-preserving
suit I sent for? GEORGE (glancing at DR. JONATHAN). Oh that's gone, mother. AUGUSTA. He always took cold so easily, and that will keep him warm and
dry, if those terrible Germans sink his ship. But your presents, George! (To DR. JONATHAN:) Made for him by sisters of his college friends. GEORGE (amused but embarrassed). I can't fit up a section of the
trenches as a boudoir. AUGUSTA. Such nice girls! I wish he'd marry one of them. Who made you
the wristlets? I hadn't seen them. GEORGE (taking of the wristlets and putting them in his bag). Oh, I
can't give her away. I was--just trying them on, to see if they fitted. AUGUSTA. When did they come? GEORGE (glancing at DR. JONATHAN). Er--this morning. (Enter ASHER and TIMOTHY from the study, left. ASHER is evidently
   wrought up from his talk with TIMOTHY.) ASHER. Remember, Timothy, I rely on sensible men like you to put a stop
to this nonsense. AUGUSTA. Asher, here's Jonathan. ASHER. Oh! (He goes up to DR. JONATHAN and takes his hand, though it is
quite evident that his mind is still on the trouble in the shops). Glad
to see you back in Foxon Falls, Jonathan. I heard you'd arrived, and
would have dropped in on you, but things are in a muddle here just now. DR. JONATHAN. Not only here, but everywhere. ASHER. You're right. The country's going to the dogs. I don't know what
will straighten it out. DR. JONATHAN. Intelligence, open-mindedness, cooperation, Asher. ASHER (arrested: looking at him). Hum! DR. JONATHAN (leaving him and going up to TIMOTHY). You don't remember
me, Timothy? TIMOTHY. Sure and I do, sir,--though you were only a little lad. You
mind me of your father,--your smile, like. He was the grand, simple man! It's happy I am to see you back in Foxon Falls. DR. JONATHAN. Yes, I've been ordered to the rear. TIMOTHY. The rear, is it? I'm thinking we'll be fighting this war in
Foxon Falls, too. DR. JONATHAN. Yes, much of it will be fought behind the battle lines. AUGUSTA. You think the Germans will come over here? DR. JONATHAN. No, but the issue is over here already. (DR. JONATHAN picks up her ball of wool, which has fallen to the
   floor.) AUGUSTA (looking at him apprehensively: puzzled). Thank you, Jonathan. (She turns to TIMOTHY, who has started toward the door, lower right)

Wait a moment, Timothy, I want to ask you about your children. What
do you hear from Minnie? I always took an interest in her, you
know,--especially when she was in the tool packing department of the
shops, and I had her in my Bible class. I appreciated your letting her
come,--an Irishman and a Catholic as you are. TIMOTHY. The Church has given me up as a heathen, ma'am, when I married
your cook, and she a Protestant. AUGUSTA. I've been worried about Minnie since she went to Newcastle. She
has so much vitality, and I'm afraid she's pleasure loving though she
seemed to take to religion with her whole soul. And where's Jamesy? TIMOTHY. Jamesy, is it? It's gone to the bad entirely he is, with the
drink. He left the shops when the twelve-hour shifts began--wherever
he's at now. It's home Minnie came from Newcastle yesterday, ma'am, for
a visit,--she's outside there now, with Bert,--they walked along with
me. AUGUSTA. Bring them in, I want to see them,--especially Minnie. I must
say I'm surprised she should have come home without calling on me. TIMOTHY. I'll get them, ma'am. (He goes out of the door, upper right. GEORGE, who has been
   palpably ill at ease during this conversation, now makes for the
   door, lower right.) AUGUSTA. Where are you going, my dear? GEORGE (halting). I thought I'd look around and see if I'd forgotten
anything, mother. AUGUSTA. Stay with us,--there's plenty of time. (TIMOTHY returns through the doorway, upper right, with BERT, but
   without MINNIE.) TIMOTHY. It's disappeared entirely she is, ma'am,--here one minute and
there the next, the way with young people nowadays. And she's going back
to Newcastle this afternoon, to her job at the Wire Works. AUGUSTA. I must see her before she goes. I feel in a measure responsible
for her. You'll tell her? TIMOTHY. I'll tell her. AUGUSTA. How are you getting along, Bert? BERT. Very well, thank you, Mrs. Pindar. (The MAID enters, lower right.) MAID. Miss Thorpe wishes to speak with you, ma'am. AUGUSTA (gathering up her knitting). It's about the wool for the Red
Cross. (Exit, lower right.) GEORGE (shaking hands with BERT). Hello, Bert,--how goes it? BERT. All right, thank you, lieutenant. GEORGE. Oh, cut out the title. (BERT FARRELL is about twenty three. He wears a brown flannel shirt
   and a blue four-in-hand tie, and a good ready-made suit. He holds
   his hat in front of him. He is a self-respecting, able young Irish
   American of the blue-eyed type that have died by thousands on the
   battle fields of France, and whose pictures may be seen in our
   newspapers.) ASHER. You're not working today, Bert? BERT. I've left the shops, Mr. Pindar,--I got through last night. ASHER. Left the shops! You didn't say anything about this, Timothy! TIMOTHY. No, sir,--you have trouble enough today. ASHER (to BERT). Why did you leave? BERT. I'm going to enlist, Mr. Pindar,--with the Marines. From what I've
heard of that corps, I think I'd like to join it. ASHER (exasperated). But why do you do a thing like this when you
must know I need every man here to help turn out these machines? And
especially young men like you, good mechanics! If you wanted to
serve your country, you were better off where you were. I got you
exempted--(catching himself) I mean, you were exempted from the draft. BERT. I didn't want to be exempted, sir. More than four hundred of
the boys have gone from the shops, as well as Mr. George here, and I
couldn't stand it no longer. ASHER. What's Mr. George got to do with it? The cases are different. BERT (stoutly). I don't see that, Mr. Pindar. Every man, no matter who
he is, has to decide a thing like this for himself. GEORGE. Bert's right, dad. ASHER. You say he's right, when you know that I need every hand I can
get to carry out this contract? GEORGE. He's going to make a contract, too. He's giving up all he has. ASHER. And you approve of this, Timothy? TIMOTHY. Sure, I couldn't stop him, Mr. Pindar! And it's proud I am
of him, the same as you are of Mr. George, that he'd be fighting for
America and liberty. ASHER. Liberty! License is what we're getting now! The workman thinks he
can do as he pleases. And after all I've done for my workmen,--building
them a club house with a piano in it, and a library and a billiard
table, trying to do my best to make them comfortable and contented. I
pay them enough to buy pianos and billiard tables for themselves, and
you tell me they want still higher wages. TIMOTHY. They're saying they can go down to the shipyards, where they'd
be getting five dollars and thirty cents a day. ASHER. Let them go to the shipyards, if they haven't any sense of
gratitude! What else do they say? TIMOTHY. That you have a contract, sir, and making millions out of it. ASHER. What can they know about my profits? TIMOTHY. It's just that, sir,--they know nothing at all. But they're
saying they ought to know, since things is different now, and they're
working for the war and the country, the same as yourself. ASHER. Haven't I established a system of bonuses, to share my profits
with the efficient and the industrious? TIMOTHY. They don't understand the bonuses,--how you come by them. Autocracy is the word they use. And they say you put up a notice sudden
like, without asking them, that there'd be two long shifts instead of
three eight-hour ones. They're willing to work twelve hours on end, for
the war, they say, but they'd want to be consulted. ASHER. What business is it of theirs? TIMOTHY. Well, it's them that has to do the hard work, sir. There was a
meeting last night, I understand, with Rench and Hillman and a delegate
come from Newcastle making speeches, the only way they'd get their
rights would be for you to recognize the union. ASHER. I'll never recognize a union! I won't have any outsiders,
meddlers and crooks dictating my business to me. TIMOTHY. I've been with you thirty years, come December, Mr. Pindar,
and you've been a good employer to me. I don't hold with the unions--you
know it well, sir, or you wouldn't be asking me advice. I'm telling you
what they're saying. ASHER. I didn't mean to accuse you,--you've been a good and loyal
employee--that's why I sent for you. Find out what their game is, and
let me know. TIMOTHY. It's not a detective I am, Mr. Pindar. I'm a workman meself. That's another thing they're saying, that you'd pay detectives to go
among them, like workingmen. ASHER (impatiently). I'm not asking you to be a detective,--I only want
you to give me warning if we are to have a strike. TIMOTHY. I've warned you, sir,--if it's only for the sake of beating the
Germans, the dirty devils. GEORGE (turning to BERT). Well, here's wishing you luck, Bert, and
hoping we'll meet over there. I know how you feel,--you want to be in
it, just as I do. ASHER (turning). Perhaps I said more than I meant to, Bert. I've got to
turn out these machines in order that our soldiers may have shrapnel
to fight with, and what with enlistments and the determination of
unscrupulous workmen to take advantage of the situation, I'm pretty hard
pressed. I can't very well spare steady young men like you, who have
too much sense and too much patriotism to mix yourselves up with trouble
makers. But I, too, can understand your feeling,--I'd like to be going
myself. You might have consulted me, but your place will be ready for
you when you come back. BERT. Thank you, sir. (He turns his hat over in his hands.) Maybe it
would be fair to tell you, Mr. Pindar, that I've got a union card in my
pocket. ASHER. You, Timothy Farrell's son! TIMOTHY. What's that? And never a word to me! BERT (to TIMOTHY). Why wouldn't I join the union? I took out the card
this morning, when I see that that's the only way we'll get what's
coming to us. We ain't got a chance against the employers without the
union. TIMOTHY. God help me, to think my son would join the union,--and he
going to be a soldier! BERT (glancing at GEORGE). I guess there'll be other union men in the
trenches besides me. ASHER. Soldier or no soldier, I'll never employ any man again who's
joined a union. GEORGE (perturbed). Hold on, dad! ASHER. I mean what I say, I don't care who he is. BERT (who retains his self-possession). Excuse me, Mr. Pindar, but I'd
like to ask you a question--I've heard the men talking about this in
the shops. You don't like it if we go off to--fight, but if we join the
union you fire us, no matter how short-handed you are. ASHER. It's a principle with me,--I won't have any outside agency
dictating to me. BERT. But if it came to recognizing the union, or shutting down? ASHER. I'd shut down tomorrow. (GEORGE, who sees the point, makes a gesture as if about to
   interrupt.) BERT. That's what I'm getting at, Mr. Pindar. You say you'd shut down
for a principle, whether the government gets the machines or not. And the men say they'd join the union for a principle, whether the
government gets the machines or not. It looks to me as if both was
hindering the war for a principle, and the question is, which principle
is it that agrees best with what we're fighting for? ASHER. No man joins a union for a principle, but for extortion. I can't
discuss it,--I won't! BERT. I'm sorry, sir. (He turns to go out, lower right.) GEORGE (overtaking him and grasping his hand). So long, Bert. I'll look
you up, over there! BERT (gazing at him). All right, Mr. George. GEORGE. Goodbye, Timothy. Don't worry about the boy. TIMOTHY. It's proud I am to have him go. Mr. George,--but I can't think
why he'd be joining the union, and never telling me. (He stands for a moment troubled, glancing at ASHER, torn between
   loyalty to his employer and affection for his son. Then he goes out
   slowly, upper right. All the while DR. JONATHAN has stood in the
   rear of the room, occasionally glancing at GEORGE. He now comes
   forward, unobtrusively, yet withal impressively.) ASHER. I never expected to hear such talk from a son of Timothy
Farrell,--a boy I thought was level-headed. (To DR. JONATHAN) What do
you think of that? You heard it. DR. JONATHAN. Well, he stated the issue, Asher. ASHER. The issue of what? DR. JONATHAN. Of the new century. GEORGE. The issue of the new century

ASHER. You're right, we've got to put these people down. After the war
they'll come to heel,--we'll have a cheap labour market then. DR. JONATHAN. Humanity has always been cheap, but we're spending it
rather lavishly just now. ASHER, You mean that there will be a scarcity of labour? And that they
can continue to blackmail us into paying these outrageous wages? DR. JONATHAN. When you pay a man wages, Asher, you own him,--until he is
turned over to somebody else. ASHER (puzzled, a little suspicious for the first time). I own his
labour, of course. DR. JONATHAN. Then you own his body, and his soul. Perhaps he resents
being regarded as a commodity. ASHER. What else is labour? DR. JONATHAN. How would you like to be a commodity? ASHER. I? I don't see what that has to do with it. These men have no
consideration, no gratitude, after the way I've treated them. DR. JONATHAN. Isn't that what they object to? ASHER. What? DR. JONATHAN. To being treated. ASHER. Object to kindness? DR. JONATHAN. To benevolence. ASHER. Well, what's the difference? DR. JONATHAN. The difference between self-respect and dependence. ASHER. Are--are you a Socialist? DR. JONATHAN. NO, I'm a scientist. (ASHER is standing staring at him when the MAID enters, lower
   right.) MAID. Your long distance call to Washington, sir. ASHER. Very well. (As he starts to go out he halts and looks at DR. JONATHAN again,
   and then abruptly leaves the room, lower right, following the MAID.) GEORGE (who has been regarding DR. JONATHAN: after a moment's
hesitation). You seem to think there's something to be said for the
workman's attitude, Dr. Jonathan. DR. JONATHAN. What is his attitude, George? GEORGE. Well, you heard Bert just now. I thought he had poor old dad
on the hip when he accused the employer of holding up the war, too. But
after all, what labour is after is more money, isn't it? and they're
taking advantage of a critical situation to get it. And when they get
money, most of them blow it in on sprees. DR. JONATHAN. George, what are you going to France to fight for? GEORGE. Germany's insulted our flag, murdered our people on the high
seas and wants to boss the world. DR. JONATHAN (smiling). The issue, then, is human freedom. GEORGE. Sure thing! DR. JONATHAN. And you think every man and woman in this country is
reasonably free? GEORGE. Every man can rise if he has the ability. DR. JONATHAN. What do you mean by rise? GEORGE. He can make money, set up for himself and be his own boss. DR. JONATHAN. In other words, he can become free. GEORGE (grinning). I suppose that's one way of putting it. DR. JONATHAN. Money gives him freedom, doesn't it? Money gave you
yours,--to go to school and college until you were twenty four, and get
an education,--such as it was. GEORGE. Such as it was! DR. JONATHAN. Money gave you the choice of engaging in an occupation
in which you could take an interest and a pride, and enabled you
occasionally to go on a spree, if you ever went on a spree, George. GEORGE. Once in awhile. DR. JONATHAN. But this craving for amusement, for excitement and
adventure isn't peculiar to you and me. Workingmen have it too,--and
working girls. GEORGE. You're a wise guy, I guess. DR. JONATHAN. Oh no,--not that! But I've found out that you and I are
not so very different from Timothy Farrell and his children,--Bert and
Jamesy and--Minnie. GEORGE (startled, and looking around to follow DR. JONATHAN'S glance
toward the windows). What do you know about them? DR. JONATHAN. Oh, nothing at first hand. But I can see why Bert's going
to the war, and why Jamesy took to drink, and why Minnie left Foxon
Falls. GEORGE. The deuce you can! DR. JONATHAN. And so can you, George. When you get back from France you
will know what you have been fighting for. GEORGE. And what's that? DR. JONATHAN. Economic freedom, without which political freedom is a
farce. Industrial democracy. GEORGE. Industrial democracy! Well, it wasn't included in my education
at Harvard. DR. JONATHAN. Our education begins, unfortunately, after we leave
Harvard,--with Bert and Jamesy and Minnie. And here's Minnie, now! GEORGE (hastily). I'll beat it! Mother wants to talk to her. DR. JONATHAN (his hand on GEORGE'S arm). No,--wait. (Enter, lower right, AUGUSTA, followed by MINNIE FARRELL. MINNIE,
   AUGUSTA'S back being turned toward her, gives GEORGE a wink, which
   he acknowledges, and then glances toward DR. JONATHAN. AUGUSTA,
   with her knitting, seats herself in an armchair. Her attitude is
   somewhat inquisitorial; her tone, as she addresses MINNIE, non-
   committal. She is clearly offended by MINNIE'S poise and good-
   natured self-assertion.) AUGUSTA. You remember Mr. Pindar, Minnie. MINNIE (demurely). Glad to meet you again, Mr. Pindar. I hear you're
going off to the war. Well, that's great. GEORGE (squeezing her hand; she winces a little). Oh, yes,-I remember
Minnie. AUGUSTA. And this is Dr. Jonathan Pindar. MINNIE (who has been eyeing DR. JONATHAN as a possible enemy; with
reserve). Glad to meet you, I'm sure. DR. JONATHAN (smiling at her as he takes her hand). The pleasure
is--mutual. MINNIE (puzzled, but somewhat reassured). Glad to meet you. DR. JONATHAN. I've come to live in Foxon Falls. I hope we'll be friends. MINNIE. I hope so. I'm going back to Newcastle this afternoon, there's
nothing doing here. DR. JONATHAN. Would you stay, if there were something doing? MINNIE. I--I don't know. What would I be doing here? AUGUSTA (disapprovingly, surveying, MINNIE'S costume). I don't think I
should have recognized you, Minnie. MINNIE. City life agrees with me, Mrs. Pindar. But I needed a little
rest cure, and I came to see what the village looked like. DR. JONATHAN. A sort of sentimental journey, Minnie. MINNIE (flashing a look at GEORGE, and another at DR. JONATHAN). Well,
you might call it that. I get you. AUGUSTA. Minnie, what church do you attend in Newcastle? MINNIE. Well, I haven't got a seat in any particular church, Mrs.
Pindar. AUGUSTA. I didn't expect you to go to the expense of getting a seat. I
hope you delivered the letter our minister gave you to the minister of
the First Church in Newcastle. MINNIE. No, I didn't, Mrs. Pindar, and that's the truth. I never went
near a church. AUGUSTA (drily). It's a pity you ever went to Newcastle, I think. MINNIE. It's some town! Every time you ride into it you see a big sign,
"Welcome to Newcastle, population one hundred and six thousand, and
growing every day. Goodbye, and thank you!" AUGUSTA (knitting). You drive about in automobiles! MINNIE. Oh, sometimes I get a joy ride. AUGUSTA. It grieves me to hear you talk in this way. I knew you were
pleasure loving, I thought I saw certain tendencies in you, yet you
seemed to realize the grace of religion when you were in my Bible class. Your brother Jamesy took to drink--

MINNIE. And I took to religion. You meant to be kind, Mrs. Pindar, and I
thank you. But now I know why Jamesy took to drink--it was for the same
reason I took to religion. AUGUSTA (scandalized). Minnie! MINNIE. We were both trying to be free, to escape. AUGUSTA. To escape? From what? MINNIE (with a gesture indicating futility). I guess it would be pretty
hard to get it across to you, Mrs. Pindar. But I was working ten hours
a day packing tools in your shops, and all you gave me when the whistle
blew was--Jesus. (A pause: GEORGE takes a step toward her.) Jamesy took to drink, and I took to Jesus. I'm not saying anything
against Him. He had His life, but I wanted mine. Maybe He would have
understood. (Turning impulsively toward DR. JONATHAN.) I've got a hunch that you understand. AUGUSTA. Minnie, I can't let you talk about religion in this way in my
presence. MINNIE. I'm sorry, Mrs. Pindar, I knew it wasn't no use to come and see
you,--I told father so. AUGUSTA. I suppose, if you're determined to continue this life of--(she
catches herself) I can't stop you. MINNIE (flaring up). What life? Don't worry about me, Mrs. Pindar,--I
get twenty five dollars a week at the Shale Works making barb wire to
trip up the Huns with,--enough to get nice clothes--(she glances down at
her dress) and buy good food, and have a good time on the side. AUGUSTA (whose conceptions of what she believes to be MINNIE's kind are
completely upset). You still work? MINNIE. Work! Sure I work. I wouldn't let any man get a strangle hold on
me. And I don't kick at a little overtime, neither. I'm working for what
he's going to fight for--(indicating GEORGE) it ain't for myself only,
but for everybody that ain't been free, all over the world. (To
DR. JONATHAN.) Ain't that right? (She does not wait for his nod of
approval.) I was just saying this morning--(she looks toward GEORGE and
catches herself)--I've been wishing all along I could do more--go as a
nurse for some of the boys. AUGUSTA. A nurse! MINNIE (to DR. JONATHAN). If I was a man, I'd have been a doctor, like
you. Sick people don't bother me, I give myself to 'em. Before mother
died, when she was sick, she always said I'd ought to have been a nurse. (A pause.) Well, I guess I'll go along. The foreman only give me a
couple of days off to see the old home town. GEORGE. Hold on, Minnie. MINNIE. What is it? GEORGE (to AUGUSTA). Minnie and I are old friends, mother. AUGUSTA. Old friends? GEORGE. Yes. I knew her--very well before she went away from Foxon
Falls, and I went to Newcastle and took her out for a drive in my car. MINNIE (vehemently). No, you never. GEORGE. Why do you deny it? MINNIE. There's nothing to it. AUGUSTA (aghast). George! GEORGE. Well, it's true. I'm not ashamed of it, though Minnie appears to
be. MINNIE (on the verge of tears). If you wasn't ashamed, why didn't you
tell, her before? I'm not ashamed of it, neither. It was natural. AUGUSTA (after a pause, with a supreme effort to meet the situation). Well, I suppose men are different. But there's no excuse for you, after
all I tried to do for you. MINNIE. Thank God men are different! (AUGUSTA rises. The ball of wool drops to the floor again, and DR.
   JONATHAN picks it up.) GEORGE. Mother, I'd like to tell you about it. You don't understand. AUGUSTA. I'm afraid I do understand, dear. (As she leaves the room, with dignity, GEORGE glances appealingly at
   DR. JONATHAN.) DR. JONATHAN (going up to MINNIE and taking her hand). Do you think
you'd have time to drop in to see me, Minnie, before your train goes? MINNIE (gazing at him; after a moment). Sure! I guess I'd like to talk
to you. DR. JONATHAN. It's the little white house across the Common. MINNIE. Oh, I know, that's been shut up all these years. DR. JONATHAN. And is open now again. (He goes out, lower right, and there is a brief silence as the two
   look after him.) MINNIE. Say, who is he? GEORGE. Why, he's a cousin of mine--

MINNIE. I don't mean that. He's somebody, ain't he? GEORGE. By jingo, I'm beginning to think he is! (They stand gazing at one another.) MINNIE (remembering her grievance: passionately). Now you've gone and
done it--telling your mother we were friends. GEORGE. But we are--aren't we? You couldn't expect me to keep quiet,
under the circumstances. MINNIE. She thinks I'm not fit to talk to you. Not that I care, except
that I was fond of her, she's been good to me in her way, and I felt
real bad when I went off to Newcastle with the letter to the minister I
never laid eyes on. She'll believe--you know what she'll believe,--it'll
trouble her. She's your mother, and you're going away. You might have
kept still. GEORGE. I couldn't keep still. What would you have thought of me? MINNIE. 