



Produced by Tapio Riikonen and David Widger





               WILHELM TELL. By Frederich Schiller


       Translated by Theodore Martin




DRAMATIS PERSONAE. HERMANN GESSLER, Governor of Schwytz and Uri. WERNER, Baron of Attinghausen, free noble of Switzerland. ULRICH VON RUDENZ, his Nephew. WERNER STAUFFACHER, |
CONRAD HUNN,        |
HANS AUF DER MAUER, |
JORG IM HOFE,       | People of Schwytz. ULRICH DER SCHMIDT, |
JOST VON WEILER,    |
ITEL REDING,        |

WALTER FURST,           |
WILHELM TELL,           |
ROSSELMANN, the Priest, |
PETERMANN, Sacristan,   | People of Uri. KUONI, Herdsman,        |
WERNI, Huntsman,        |
RUODI, Fisherman,       |

ARNOLD OF MELCHTHAL,   |
CONRAD BAUMGARTEN,     |
MEYER VON SARNEN,      |
STRUTH VON WINKELRIED, | People of Unterwald. KLAUS VON DER FLUE,    |
BURKHART AM BUHEL,     |
ARNOLD VON SEWA,       |

PFEIFFER OF LUCERNE. KUNZ OF GERSAU. JENNI, Fisherman's Son. SEPPI, Herdsman's Son. GERTRUDE, Stauffacher's Wife. HEDWIG, Wife of Tell, daughter of Furst. BERTHA OF BRUNECK, a rich heiress. ARMGART,   |
MECHTHILD, | Peasant women. ELSBETH,   |
HILDEGARD, |

WALTER,  | Tell's sons. WILHELM, |

FRIESSHARDT, | Soldiers. LEUTHOLD,    |

RUDOLPH DER HARRAS, Gessler's master of the horse. JOHANNES PARRICIDA, Duke of Suabia. STUSSI, Overseer. THE MAYOR OF URI. A COURIER. MASTER STONEMASON, COMPANIONS, AND WORKMEN. TASKMASTER. A CRIER. MONKS OF THE ORDER OF CHARITY. HORSEMEN OF GESSLER AND LANDENBERG. MANY PEASANTS; MEN AND WOMEN FROM THE WALDSTETTEN. WILHELM TELL. ACT I. SCENE I. A high, rocky shore of the lake of Lucerne opposite Schwytz. The lake makes a bend into the land; a hut stands at a short
   distance from the shore; the fisher boy is rowing about in his
   boat. Beyond the lake are seen the green meadows, the hamlets,
   and arms of Schwytz, lying in the clear sunshine. On the left
   are observed the peaks of the Hacken, surrounded with clouds; to
   the right, and in the remote distance, appear the Glaciers. The
   Ranz des Vaches, and the tinkling of cattle-bells, continue for
   some time after the rising of the curtain. FISHER BOY (sings in his boat). Melody of the Ranz des Vaches. The clear, smiling lake wooed to bathe in its deep,
   A boy on its green shore had laid him to sleep;
        Then heard he a melody
         Flowing and soft,
        And sweet, as when angels
         Are singing aloft. And as thrilling with pleasure he wakes from his rest,
   The waters are murmuring over his breast;
        And a voice from the deep cries,
         "With me thou must go,
        I charm the young shepherd,
         I lure him below." HERDSMAN (on the mountains). Air.--Variation of the Ranz des Vaches. Farewell, ye green meadows,
         Farewell, sunny shore,
        The herdsman must leave you,
         The summer is o'er. We go to the hills, but you'll see us again,
    When the cuckoo is calling, and wood-notes are gay,
   When flowerets are blooming in dingle and plain,
    And the brooks sparkle up in the sunshine of May. Farewell, ye green meadows,
         Farewell, sunny shore,
        The herdsman must leave you,
         The summer is o'er. CHAMOIS HUNTER (appearing on the top of a cliff). Second Variation of the Ranz des Vaches. On the heights peals the thunder, and trembles the bridge,
   The huntsman bounds on by the dizzying ridge,
        Undaunted he hies him
         O'er ice-covered wild,
        Where leaf never budded,
         Nor spring ever smiled;
   And beneath him an ocean of mist, where his eye
   No longer the dwellings of man can espy;
        Through the parting clouds only
         The earth can be seen,
        Far down 'neath the vapor
         The meadows of green. [A change comes over the landscape. A rumbling, cracking
   noise is heard among the mountains. Shadows of clouds sweep
   across the scene. [RUODI, the fisherman, comes out of his cottage. WERNI, the
   huntsman, descends from the rocks. KUONI, the shepherd, enters,
   with a milk pail on his shoulders, followed by SERPI, his assistant. RUODI. Bestir thee, Jenni, haul the boat on shore. The grizzly Vale-king [1] comes, the glaciers moan,
The lofty Mytenstein [2] draws on his hood,
And from the Stormcleft chilly blows the wind;
The storm will burst before we are prepared. KUONI. 'Twill rain ere long; my sheep browse eagerly,
And Watcher there is scraping up the earth. WERNI. The fish are leaping, and the water-hen
Dives up and down. A storm is coming on. KUONI (to his boy). Look, Seppi, if the cattle are not straying. SEPPI. There goes brown Liesel, I can hear her bells. KUONI. Then all are safe; she ever ranges farthest. RUODI. You've a fine yoke of bells there, master herdsman. WERNI. And likely cattle, too. Are they your own? KUONI. I'm not so rich. They are the noble lord's
Of Attinghaus, and trusted to my care. RUODI. How gracefully yon heifer bears her ribbon! KUONI. Ay, well she knows she's leader of the herd,
And, take it from her, she'd refuse to feed. RUODI. You're joking now. A beast devoid of reason. WERNI. That's easy said. But beasts have reason too--
And that we know, we men that hunt the chamois. They never turn to feed--sagacious creatures! Till they have placed a sentinel ahead,
Who pricks his ears whenever we approach,
And gives alarm with clear and piercing pipe. RUODI (to the shepherd). Are you for home? KUONI. The Alp is grazed quite bare. WERNI. A safe return, my friend! KUONI. The same to you? Men come not always back from tracks like yours. RUODI. But who comes here, running at topmost speed? WERNI. I know the man; 'tis Baumgart of Alzellen. CONRAD BAUMGARTEN (rushing in breathless). For God's sake, ferryman, your boat! RUODI. How now? Why all this haste? BAUMGARTEN. Cast off! My life's at stake! Set me across! KUONI. Why, what's the matter, friend? WERNI. Who are pursuing you? First tell us that. BAUMGARTEN (to the fisherman). Quick, quick, even now they're close upon my heels! The viceroy's horsemen are in hot pursuit! I'm a lost man should they lay hands upon me. RUODI. Why are the troopers in pursuit of you? BAUMGARTEN. First save my life and then I'll tell you all. WERNI. There's blood upon your garments--how is this? BAUMGARTEN. The imperial seneschal, who dwelt at Rossberg. KUONI. How! What! The Wolfshot? [3] Is it he pursues you? BAUMGARTEN. He'll ne'er hunt man again; I've settled him. ALL (starting back). Now, God forgive you, what is this you've done! BAUMGARTEN. What every free man in my place had done. I have but used mine own good household right
'Gainst him that would have wronged my wife--my honor. KUONI. And has he wronged you in your honor, then? BAUMGARTEN. That he did not fulfil his foul desire
Is due to God and to my trusty axe. WERNI. You've cleft his skull, then, have you, with your axe? KUONI. Oh, tell us all! You've time enough, before
The boat can be unfastened from its moorings. BAUMGARTEN. When I was in the forest, felling timber,
My wife came running out in mortal fear:
"The seneschal," she said, "was in my house,
Had ordered her to get a bath prepared,
And thereupon had taken unseemly freedoms,
From which she rid herself and flew to me." Armed as I was I sought him, and my axe
Has given his bath a bloody benediction. WERNI. And you did well; no man can blame the deed. KUONI. The tyrant! Now he has his just reward! We men of Unterwald have owed it long. BAUMGARTEN. The deed got wind, and now they're in pursuit. Heavens! whilst we speak, the time is flying fast. [It begins to thunder. KUONI. Quick, ferrymen, and set the good man over. RUODI. Impossible! a storm is close at hand,
Wait till it pass! You must. BAUMGARTEN. Almighty heavens! I cannot wait; the least delay is death. KUONI (to the fisherman). Push out. God with you! We should help our neighbors;
The like misfortune may betide us all. [Thunder and the roaring of the wind. RUODI. The south wind's up! [4] See how the lake is rising! I cannot steer against both storm and wave. BAUMGARTEN (clasping him by the knees). God so help you, as now you pity me! WERNI. His life's at stake. Have pity on him, man! KUONI. He is a father: has a wife and children. [Repeated peals of thunder. RUODI. What! and have I not, then, a life to lose,
A wife and child at home as well as he? See, how the breakers foam, and toss, and whirl,
And the lake eddies up from all its depths! Right gladly would I save the worthy man,
But 'tis impossible, as you must see. BAUMGARTEN (still kneeling). Then must I fall into the tyrant's hands,
And with the port of safety close in sight! Yonder it lies! My eyes can measure it,
My very voice can echo to its shores. There is the boat to carry me across,
Yet must I lie here helpless and forlorn. KUONI. Look! who comes here? RUODI. 'Tis Tell, brave Tell, of Buerglen. [5]

   [Enter TELL, with a crossbow. TELL. Who is the man that here implores for aid? KUONI. He is from Alzellen, and to guard his honor
From touch of foulest shame, has slain the Wolfshot! The imperial seneschal, who dwelt at Rossberg. The viceroy's troopers are upon his heels;
He begs the boatman here to take him over,
But he, in terror of the storm, refuses. RUODI. Well, there is Tell can steer as well as I. He'll be my judge, if it be possible. [Violent peals of thunder--the lake becomes more tempestuous. Am I to plunge into the jaws of hell? I should be mad to dare the desperate act. TELL. The brave man thinks upon himself the last. Put trust in God, and help him in his need! RUODI. Safe in the port, 'tis easy to advise. There is the boat, and there the lake! Try you! TELL. The lake may pity, but the viceroy will not. Come, venture, man! SHEPHERD and HUNTSMAN. Oh, save him! save him! save him! RUODI. Though 'twere my brother, or my darling child,
I would not go. It is St. Simon's day,
The lake is up, and calling for its victim. TELL. Naught's to be done with idle talking here. Time presses on--the man must be assisted. Say, boatman, will you venture? RUODI. No; not I. TELL. In God's name, then, give me the boat! I will
With my poor strength, see what is to be done! KUONI. Ha, noble Tell! WERNI. That's like a gallant huntsman! BAUMGARTEN. You are my angel, my preserver, Tell. TELL. I may preserve you from the viceroy's power
But from the tempest's rage another must. Yet you had better fall into God's hands,
Than into those of men. [To the herdsman. Herdsman, do thou
Console my wife, should aught of ill befall me. I do but what I may not leave undone. [He leaps into the boat. KUONI (to the fisherman). A pretty man to be a boatman, truly! What Tell could risk you dared not venture on. RUODI. Far better men than I would not ape Tell. There does not live his fellow 'mong the mountains. WERNI (who has ascended a rock). He pushes off. God help thee now, brave sailor! Look how his bark is reeling on the waves! KUONI (on the shore). The surge has swept clean over it. And now
'Tis out of sight. Yet stay, there 'tis again
Stoutly he stems the breakers, noble fellow! SEPPI. Here come the troopers hard as they can ride! KUONI. Heavens! so they do! Why, that was help, indeed. [Enter a troop of horsemen. FIRST HORSEMAN. Give up the murderer! You have him here! SECOND HORSEMAN. This way he came! 'Tis useless to conceal him! RUODI and KUONI. Whom do you mean? FIRST HORSEMAN (discovering the boat). The devil! What do I see? WERNI (from above). Is't he in yonder boat ye seek? Ride on,
If you lay to, you may o'ertake him yet. SECOND HORSEMAN. Curse on you, he's escaped! FIRST HORSEMAN (to the shepherd and fisherman). You helped him off,
And you shall pay for it. Fall on their herds! Down with the cottage! burn it! beat it down! [They rush off. SEPPI (hurrying after them). Oh, my poor lambs! KUONI (following him). Unhappy me, my herds! WERNI. The tyrants! RUODI (wringing his hands). Righteous Heaven! Oh, when will come
Deliverance to this devoted land? [Exeunt severally. SCENE II. A lime-tree in front of STAUFFACHER'S house at Steinen,
   in Schwytz, upon the public road, near a bridge. WERNER STAUFFACHER and PFEIFFER, of Lucerne, enter into
   conversation. PFEIFFER. Ay, ay, friend Stauffacher, as I have said,
Swear not to Austria, if you can help it. Hold by the empire stoutly as of yore,
And God preserve you in your ancient freedom! [Presses his hand warmly and is going. STAUFFACHER. Wait till my mistress comes. Now do! You are
My guest in Schwytz--I in Lucerne am yours. PFEIFFER. Thanks! thanks! But I must reach Gersau to-day. Whatever grievances your rulers' pride
And grasping avarice may yet inflict,
Bear them in patience--soon a change may come. Another emperor may mount the throne. But Austria's once, and you are hers forever. [Exit. [STAUFEACHER sits down sorrowfully upon a bench
   under the lime tree. Gertrude, his wife, enters,
   and finds him in this posture. She places herself
   near him, and looks at him for some time in silence. GERTRUDE. So sad, my love! I scarcely know thee now. For many a day in silence I have marked
A moody sorrow furrowing thy brow. Some silent grief is weighing on thy heart;
Trust it to me. I am thy faithful wife,
And I demand my half of all thy cares. [STAUFFACHER gives her his hand and is silent. Tell me what can oppress thy spirits thus? Thy toil is blest--the world goes well with thee--
Our barns are full--our cattle many a score;
Our handsome team of sleek and well-fed steeds,
Brought from the mountain pastures safely home,
To winter in their comfortable stalls. There stands thy house--no nobleman's more fair! 'Tis newly built with timber of the best,
All grooved and fitted with the nicest skill;
Its many glistening windows tell of comfort! 'Tis quartered o'er with scutcheons of all hues,
And proverbs sage, which passing travellers
Linger to read, and ponder o'er their meaning. STAUFFACHER. The house is strongly built, and handsomely,
But, ah! the ground on which we built it totters. GERTRUDE. Tell me, dear Werner, what you mean by that? STAUFFACHER. No later since than yesterday, I sat
Beneath this linden, thinking with delight,
How fairly all was finished, when from Kuessnacht
The viceroy and his men came riding by. Before this house he halted in surprise:
At once I rose, and, as beseemed his rank,
Advanced respectfully to greet the lord,
To whom the emperor delegates his power,
As judge supreme within our Canton here. "Who is the owner of this house?" he asked,
With mischief in his thoughts, for well he knew. With prompt decision, thus I answered him:
"The emperor, your grace--my lord and yours,
And held by one in fief." On this he answered,
"I am the emperor's viceregent here,
And will not that each peasant churl should build
At his own pleasure, bearing him as freely
As though he were the master in the land. I shall make bold to put a stop to this!" So saying he, with menaces, rode off,
And left me musing, with a heavy heart,
On the fell purpose that his words betrayed. GERTRUDE. Mine own dear lord and husband! Wilt thou take
A word of honest counsel from thy wife? I boast to be the noble Iberg's child,
A man of wide experience. Many a time,
As we sat spinning in the winter nights,
My sisters and myself, the people's chiefs
Were wont to gather round our father's hearth,
To read the old imperial charters, and
To hold sage converse on the country's weal. Then heedfully I listened, marking well
What or the wise men thought, or good man wished,
And garnered up their wisdom in my heart. Hear then, and mark me well; for thou wilt see,
I long have known the grief that weighs thee down. The viceroy hates thee, fain would injure thee,
For thou hast crossed his wish to bend the Swiss
In homage to this upstart house of princes,
And kept them stanch, like their good sires of old,
In true allegiance to the empire. Say. Is't not so, Werner? Tell nee, am I wrong? STAUFFACHER. 'Tis even so. For this doth Gessler hate me. GERTRUDE. He burns with envy, too, to see thee living
Happy and free on thy inheritance,
For he has none. From the emperor himself
Thou holdest in fief the lands thy fathers left thee. There's not a prince in the empire that can show
A better title to his heritage;
For thou hast over thee no lord but one,
And he the mightiest of all Christian kings. Gessler, we know, is but a younger son,
His only wealth the knightly cloak he wears;
He therefore views an honest man's good fortune
With a malignant and a jealous eye. Long has he sworn to compass thy destruction
As yet thou art uninjured. Wilt thou wait
Till he may safely give his malice scope? A wise man would anticipate the blow. STAUFFACHER. What's to be done? GERTRUDE. Now hear what I advise. Thou knowest well, how here with us in Schwytz,
All worthy men are groaning underneath
This Gessler's grasping, grinding tyranny. Doubt not the men of Unterwald as well,
And Uri, too, are chafing like ourselves,
At this oppressive and heart-wearying yoke. For there, across the lake, the Landenberg
Wields the same iron rule as Gessler here--
No fishing-boat comes over to our side
But brings the tidings of some new encroachment,
Some outrage fresh, more grievous than the last. Then it were well that some of you--true men--
Men sound at heart, should secretly devise
How best to shake this hateful thraldom off. Well do I know that God would not desert you,
But lend his favor to the righteous cause. Hast thou no friend in Uri, say, to whom
Thou frankly may'st unbosom all thy thoughts? STAUFFACHER. I know full many a gallant fellow there,
And nobles, too,--great men, of high repute,
In whom I can repose unbounded trust. [Rising. Wife! What a storm of wild and perilous thoughts
Hast thou stirred up within my tranquil breast? The darkest musings of my bosom thou
Hast dragged to light, and placed them full before me,
And what I scarce dared harbor e'en in thought,
Thou speakest plainly out, with fearless tongue. But hast thou weighed well what thou urgest thus? Discord will come, and the fierce clang of arms,
To scare this valley's long unbroken peace,
If we, a feeble shepherd race, shall dare
Him to the fight that lords it o'er the world. Even now they only wait some fair pretext
For setting loose their savage warrior hordes,
To scourge and ravage this devoted land,
To lord it o'er us with the victor's rights,
And 'neath the show of lawful chastisement,
Despoil us of our chartered liberties. GERTRUDE. You, too, are men; can wield a battle-axe
As well as they. God ne'er deserts the brave. STAUFFACHER. Oh wife! a horrid, ruthless fiend is war,
That strikes at once the shepherd and his flock. GERTRUDE. Whate'er great heaven inflicts we must endure;
No heart of noble temper brooks injustice. STAUFFACHER. This house--thy pride--war, unrelenting war,
Will burn it down. GERTRUDE. And did I think this heart
Enslaved and fettered to the things of earth,
With my own hand I'd hurl the kindling torch. STAUFFACHER. Thou hast faith in human kindness, wife; but war
Spares not the tender infant in its cradle. GERTRUDE. There is a friend to innocence in heaven
Look forward, Werner--not behind you, now! STAUFFACHER. We men may perish bravely, sword in hand;
But oh, what fate, my Gertrude, may be thine? GERTRUDE. None are so weak, but one last choice is left. A spring from yonder bridge, and I am free! STAUFFACHER (embracing her). Well may he fight for hearth and home that clasps
A heart so rare as thine against his own! What are the hosts of emperors to him! Gertrude, farewell! I will to Uri straight. There lives my worthy comrade, Walter Furst,
His thoughts and mine upon these times are one. There, too, resides the noble Banneret
Of Attinghaus. High though of blood he be,
He loves the people, honors their old customs. With both of these I will take counsel how
To rid us bravely of our country's foe. Farewell! and while I am away, bear thou
A watchful eye in management at home. The pilgrim journeying to the house of God,
And pious monk, collecting for his cloister,
To these give liberally from purse and garner. Stauffacher's house would not be hid. Right out
Upon the public way it stands, and offers
To all that pass an hospitable roof. [While they are retiring, TELL enters with BAUMGARTEN. TELL. Now, then, you have no further need of me. Enter yon house. 'Tis Werner Stauffacher's,
A man that is a father to distress. See, there he is himself! Come, follow me. [They retire up. Scene changes. SCENE III. A common near Altdorf. On an eminence in the background a castle
   in progress of erection, and so far advanced that the outline of the
   whole may be distinguished. The back part is finished; men are
   working at the front. Scaffolding, on which the workmen are going
   up and down. A slater is seen upon the highest part of the roof.--
   All is bustle and activity. TASKMASTER, MASON, WORKMEN, and LABORERS. TASKMASTER (with a stick, urging on the workmen). Up, up! You've rested long enough. To work! The stones here, now the mortar, and the lime! And let his lordship see the work advanced
When next he comes. These fellows crawl like snails! [To two laborers with loads. What! call ye that a load? Go, double it. Is this the way ye earn your wages, laggards? FIRST WORKMAN. 'Tis very hard that we must bear the stones,
To make a keep and dungeon for ourselves! TASKMASTER. What's that you mutter? 'Tis a worthless race,
And fit for nothing but to milk their cows,
And saunter idly up and down the mountains. OLD MAN (sinks down exhausted). I can no more. TASKMASTER (shaking him). Up, up, old man, to work! FIRST WORKMAN. Have you no bowels of compassion, thus
To press so hard upon a poor old man,
That scarce can drag his feeble limbs along? MASTER MASON and WORKMEN. Shame, shame upon you--shame! It cries to heaven! TASKMASTER. Mind your own business. I but do my duty. FIRST WORKMAN. Pray, master, what's to be the name of this
Same castle when 'tis built? TASKMASTER. The keep of Uri;
For by it we shall keep you in subjection. WORKMEN. The keep of Uri. TASKMASTER. Well, why laugh at that? SECOND WORKMAN. So you'll keep Uri with this paltry place! FIRST WORKMAN. How many molehills such as that must first
Be piled above each other ere you make
A mountain equal to the least in Uri? [TASKMASTER retires up the stage. MASTER MASON. I'll drown the mallet in the deepest lake,
That served my hand on this accursed pile. [Enter TELL and STAUFFACHER. STAUFFACHER. Oh, that I had not lived to see this sight! TELL. Here 'tis not good to be. Let us proceed. STAUFFACHER. Am I in Uri, in the land of freedom? MASTER MASON. Oh, sir, if you could only see the vaults
Beneath these towers. The man that tenants them
Will never hear the cock crow more. STAUFFACHER. O God! MASTER MASON. Look at these ramparts and these buttresses,
That seem as they were built to last forever. TELL. Hands can destroy whatever hands have reared. [Pointing to the mountains. That house of freedom God hath built for us. [A drum is heard. People enter bearing a cap upon a
   pole, followed by a crier. Women and children thronging
   tumultuously after them. FIRST WORKMAN. What means the drum? Give heed! MASTER MASON. Why here's a mumming! And look, the cap,--what can they mean by that? CRIER. In the emperor's name, give ear! WORKMEN. Hush! silence! hush! CRIER. Ye men of Uri, ye do see this cap! It will be set upon a lofty pole
In Altdorf, in the market-place: and this
Is the lord governor's good will and pleasure,
The cap shall have like honor as himself,
And all shall reverence it with bended knee,
And head uncovered; thus the king will know
Who are his true and loyal subjects here:
His life and goods are forfeit to the crown,
That shall refuse obedience to the order. [The people burst out into laughter. The drum beats,
   and the procession passes on. FIRST WORKMAN. A strange device to fall upon, indeed! Do reverence to a cap! a pretty farce! Heard ever mortal anything like this? MASTER MASON. Down to a cap on bended knee, forsooth! Rare jesting this with men of sober sense! FIRST WORKMAN. Nay, were it but the imperial crown, indeed! But 'tis the cap of Austria! I've seen it
Hanging above the throne in Gessler's hall. MASTER MASON. The cap of Austria! Mark that! A snare
To get us into Austria's power, by heaven! WORKMEN. No freeborn man will stoop to such disgrace. MASTER MASON. Come--to our comrades, and advise with them! [They retire up. TELL (to STAUFFACHER). You see how matters stand: Farewell, my friend! STAUFFACHER. Whither away? Oh, leave us not so soon. TELL. They look for me at home. So fare ye well. STAUFFACHER. My heart's so full, and has so much to tell you. TELL. Words will not make a heart that's heavy light. STAUFFACHER. Yet words may possibly conduct to deeds. TELL. All we can do is to endure in silence. STAUFFACHER. But shall we bear what is not to be borne? TELL. Impetuous rulers have the shortest reigns. When the fierce south wind rises from his chasms,
Men cover up their fires, the ships in haste
Make for the harbor, and the mighty spirit
Sweeps o'er the earth, and leaves no trace behind. Let every man live quietly at home;
Peace to the peaceful rarely is denied. STAUFFACHER. And is it thus you view our grievances? TELL. The serpent stings not till it is provoked. Let them alone; they'll weary of themselves,
Whene'er they see we are not to be roused. STAUFFACHER. Much might be done--did we stand fast together. TELL. When the ship founders, he will best escape
Who seeks no other's safety but his own. STAUFFACHER. And you desert the common cause so coldly? TELL. A man can safely count but on himself! STAUFFACHER. Nay, even the weak grow strong by union. TELL. But the strong man is the strongest when alone. STAUFFACHER. Your country, then, cannot rely on you
If in despair she rise against her foes. TELL. Tell rescues the lost sheep from yawning gulfs:
Is he a man, then, to desert his friends? Yet, whatsoe'er you do, spare me from council! I was not born to ponder and select;
But when your course of action is resolved,
Then call on Tell; you shall not find him fail. [Exeunt severally. A sudden tumult is heard around the scaffolding. MASTER MASON (running in). What's wrong? FIRST WORKMAN (running forward). The slater's fallen from the roof. BERTHA (rushing in). Is he dashed to pieces? Run--save him, help! If help be possible, save him! Here is gold. [Throws her trinkets among the people. MASTER MASON. Hence with your gold,--your universal charm,
And remedy for ill! When you have torn
Fathers from children, husbands from their wives,
And scattered woe and wail throughout the land,
You think with gold to compensate for all. Hence! Till we saw you we were happy men;
With you came misery and dark despair. BERTHA (to the TASKMASTER, who has returned). Lives he? [TASKMASTER shakes his head. Ill-fated towers, with curses built,
And doomed with curses to be tenanted! [Exit. SCENE IV. The House of WALTER FURST. WALTER FURST and ARNOLD
   VON MELCHTHAL enter simultaneously at different sides. MELCHTHAL. Good Walter Furst. FURST. If we should be surprised! Stay where you are. We are beset with spies. MELCHTHAL. Have you no news for me from Unterwald? What of my father? 'Tis not to be borne,
Thus to be pent up like a felon here! What have I done of such a heinous stamp,
To skulk and hide me like a murderer? I only laid my staff across the fingers
Of the pert varlet, when before my eyes,
By order of the governor, he tried
To drive away my handsome team of oxen. FURST. You are too rash by far. He did no more
Than what the governor had ordered him. You had transgressed, and therefore should have paid
The penalty, however hard, in silence. MELCHTHAL. Was I to brook the fellow's saucy words? "That if the peasant must have bread to eat;
Why, let him go and draw the plough himself!" It cut me to the very soul to see
My oxen, noble creatures, when the knave
Unyoked them from the plough. As though they felt
The wrong, they lowed and butted with their horns. On this I could contain myself no longer,
And, overcome by passion, struck him down. FURST. Oh, we old men can scarce command ourselves! And can we wonder youth shall break its bounds? MELCHTHAL. I'm only sorry for my father's sake! To be away from him, that needs so much
My fostering care! The governor detests him,
Because he hath, whene'er occasion served,
Stood stoutly up for right and liberty. Therefore they'll bear him hard--the poor old man! And there is none to shield him from their gripe. Come what come may, I must go home again. FURST. Compose yourself, and wait in patience till
We get some tidings o'er from Unterwald. Away! away! I hear a knock! Perhaps
A message from the viceroy! Get thee in! You are not safe from Landenberger's [6] arm
In Uri, for these tyrants pull together. MELCHTHAL. They teach us Switzers what we ought to do. FURST. Away! I'll call you when the coast is clear. [MELCHTHAL retires. Unhappy youth! I dare not tell him all
The evil that my boding heart predicts! Who's there? The door ne'er opens but I look
For tidings of mishap. Suspicion lurks
With darkling treachery in every nook. Even to our inmost rooms they force their way,
These myrmidons of power; and soon we'll need
To fasten bolts and bars upon our doors. [He opens the door and steps back in surprise as
   WERNER STAUFFACHER enters. What do I see? You, Werner? Now, by Heaven! A valued guest, indeed. No man e'er set
His foot across this threshold more esteemed. Welcome! thrice welcome, Werner, to my roof! What brings you here? What seek you here in Uri? STAUFFACHER (shakes FURST by the hand). The olden times and olden Switzerland. FURST. You bring them with you. See how I'm rejoiced,
My heart leaps at the very sight of you. Sit down--sit down, and tell me how you left
Your charming wife, fair Gertrude? Iberg's child,
And clever as her father. Not a man,
That wends from Germany, by Meinrad's Cell, [7]
To Italy, but praises far and wide
Your house's hospitality. But say,
Have you come here direct from Flueelen,
And have you noticed nothing on your way,
Before you halted at my door? STAUFFACHER (sits down). I saw
A work in progress, as I came along,
I little thought to see--that likes me ill.

FURST. O friend! you've lighted on my thought at once. STAUFFACHER. Such things in Uri ne'er were known before. Never was prison here in man's remembrance,
Nor ever any stronghold but the grave. FURST. You name it well. It is the grave of freedom. STAUFFACHER. Friend, Walter Furst, I will be plain with you. No idle curiosity it is
That brings me here, but heavy cares. I left
Thraldom at home, and thraldom meets me here. Our wrongs, e'en now, are more than we can bear. And who shall tell us where they are to end? From eldest time the Switzer has been free,
Accustomed only to the mildest rule. Such things as now we suffer ne'er were known
Since herdsmen first drove cattle to the hills. FURST. Yes, our oppressions are unparalleled! Why, even our own good lord of Attinghaus,
Who lived in olden times, himself declares
They are no longer to be tamely borne. STAUFFACHER. In Unterwalden yonder 'tis the same;
And bloody has the retribution been. The imperial seneschal, the Wolfshot, who
At Rossberg dwelt, longed for forbidden fruits--
Baumgarten's wife, that lives at Alzellen,
He wished to overcome in shameful sort,
On which the husband slew him with his axe. FURST. Oh, Heaven is just in all its judgments still! Baumgarten, say you? A most worthy man. Has he escaped, and is he safely hid? STAUFFACHER. Your son-in-law conveyed him o'er the lake,
And he lies hidden in my house at Steinen. He brought the tidings with him of a thing
That has been done at Sarnen, worse than all,
A thing to make the very heart run blood! FURST (attentively). Say on. What is it? STAUFFACHER. There dwells in Melchthal, then,
Just as you enter by the road from Kearns,
An upright man, named Henry of the Halden,
A man of weight and influence in the Diet. FURST. Who knows him not? But what of him? Proceed. STAUFFACHER. The Landenberg, to punish some offence,
Committed by the old man's son, it seems,
Had given command to take the youth's best pair
Of oxen from his plough: on which the lad
Struck down the messenger and took to flight. FURST. But the old father--tell me, what of him? STAUFFACHER. The Landenberg sent for him, and required
He should produce his son upon the spot;
And when the old man protested, and with truth,
That he knew nothing of the fugitive,
The tyrant called his torturers. FURST (springs up and tries to lead him to the other side). Hush, no more! STAUFFACHER (with increasing warmth). "And though thy son," he cried, "Has escaped me now,
I have thee fast, and thou shalt feel my vengeance." With that they flung the old man to the earth,
And plunged the pointed steel into his eyes. FURST. Merciful heavens! MELCHTHAL (rushing out). Into his eyes, his eyes? STAUFFACHER (addresses himself in astonishment to WALTER FURST). Who is this youth? MELCHTHAL (grasping him convulsively). Into his eyes? Speak, speak! FURST. Oh, miserable hour! STAUFFACHER. Who is it, tell me? [STAUFFACHER makes a sign to him. It is his son! All righteous heaven! MELCHTHAL. And I
Must be from thence! What! into both his eyes? FURST. Be calm, be calm; and bear it like a man! MELCHTHAL. And all for me--for my mad wilful folly! Blind, did you say? Quite blind--and both his eyes? STAUFFACHER. Even so. The fountain of his sight's dried up. He ne'er will see the blessed sunshine more. FURST. Oh, spare his anguish! MELCHTHAL. Never, never more! [Presses his hands upon his eyes and is silent for some
   moments; then turning from one to the other, speaks in a
   subdued tone, broken by sobs. O the eye's light, of all the gifts of heaven,
The dearest, best! From light all beings live--
Each fair created thing--the very plants
Turn with a joyful transport to the light,
And he--he must drag on through all his days
In endless darkness! Never more for him
The sunny meads shall glow, the flowerets bloom;
Nor shall he more behold the roseate tints
Of the iced mountain top! To die is nothing,
But to have life, and not have sight--oh, that
Is misery indeed! Why do you look
So piteously at me? I have two eyes,
Yet to my poor blind father can give neither! No, not one gleam of that great sea of light,
That with its dazzling splendor floods my gaze. STAUFFACHER. Ah, I must swell the measure of your grief,
Instead of soothing it. The worst, alas! Remains to tell. They've stripped him of his all;
Naught have they left him, save his staff, on which,
Blind and in rags, he moves from door to door. MELCHTHAL. Naught but his staff to the old eyeless man! Stripped of his all--even of the light of day,
The common blessing of the meanest wretch. Tell me no more of patience, of concealment! Oh, what a base and coward thing am I,
That on mine own security I thought
And took no care of thine! Thy precious head
Left as a pledge within the tyrant's grasp! Hence, craven-hearted prudence, hence! And all
My thoughts be vengeance, and the despot's blood! I'll seek him straight--no power shall stay me now--
And at his hands demand my father's eyes. I'll beard him 'mid a thousand myrmidons! What's life to me, if in his heart's best blood
I cool the fever of this mighty anguish. [He is going. FURST. Stay, this is madness, Melchthal! What avails
Your single arm against his power? He sits
At Sarnen high within his lordly keep,
And, safe within its battlemented walls,
May laugh to scorn your unavailing rage. MELCHTHAL. And though he sat within the icy domes
Of yon far Schreckhorn--ay, or higher, where
Veiled since eternity, the Jungfrau soars,
Still to the tyrant would I make my way;
With twenty comrades minded like myself,
I'd lay his fastness level with the earth! And if none follow me, and if you all,
In terror for your homesteads and your herds,
Bow in submission to the tyrant's yoke,
I'll call the herdsmen on the hills around me,
And there beneath heaven's free and boundless roof,
Where men still feel as men, and hearts are true
Proclaim aloud this foul enormity! STAUFFACHER (to FURST). 'Tis at its height--and are we then to wait
Till some extremity----

MELCHTHAL. What extremity
Remains for apprehension, where men's eyes
Have ceased to be secure within their sockets? Are we defenceless? Wherefore did we learn
To bend the crossbow--wield the battle-axe? What living creature, but in its despair,
Finds for itself a weapon of defence? The baited stag will turn, and with the show
Of his dread antlers hold the hounds at bay;
The chamois drags the huntsman down the abyss;
The very ox, the partner of man's toil,
The sharer of his roof, that meekly bends
The strength of his huge neck beneath the yoke,
Springs up, if he's provoked, whets his strong horn,
And tosses his tormenter to the clouds. FURST. If the three Cantons thought as we three do,
Something might, then, be done, with good effect. STAUFFACHER. When Uri calls, when Unterwald replies,
Schwytz will be mindful of her ancient league. [8]

MELCHTHAL. I've many friends in Unterwald, and none
That would not gladly venture life and limb
If fairly backed and aided by the rest. Oh, sage and reverend fathers of this land,
Here do I stand before your riper years,
An unskilled youth whose voice must in the Diet
Still be subdued into respectful silence. Do not, because that I am young and want
Experience, slight my counsel and my words. 'Tis not the wantonness of youthful blood
That fires my spirit; but a pang so deep
That even the flinty rocks must pity me. You, too, are fathers, heads of families,
And you must wish to have a virtuous son
To reverence your gray hairs and shield your eyes
With pious and affectionate regard. Do not, I pray, because in limb and fortune
You still are unassailed, and still your eyes
Revolve undimmed and sparkling in their spheres;
Oh, do not, therefore, disregard our wrongs! Above you, too, doth hang the tyrant's sword. You, too, have striven to alienate the land
From Austria. This was all my father's crime:
You share his guilt and may his punishment. STAUFFACHER (to FURST). Do then resolve! I am prepared to follow. FURST. First let us learn what steps the noble lords
Von Sillinen and Attinghaus propose. Their names would rally thousands in the cause. MELCHTHAL. Is there a name within the Forest Mountains
That carries more respect than thine--and thine? To names like these the people cling for help
With confidence--such names are household words. Rich was your heritage of manly virtue,
And richly have you added to its stores. What need of nobles? Let us do the work
Ourselves. Although we stood alone, methinks
We should be able to maintain our rights. STAUFFACHER. The nobles' wrongs are not so great as ours. The torrent that lays waste the lower grounds
Hath not ascended to the uplands yet. But let them see the country once in arms
They'll not refuse to lend a helping hand. FURST. Were there an umpire 'twixt ourselves and Austria,
Justice and law might then decide our quarrel. But our oppressor is our emperor, too,
And judge supreme. 'Tis God must help us, then,
And our own arm! Be yours the task to rouse
The men of Schwytz; I'll rally friends in Uri. But whom are we to send to Unterwald? MELCHTHAL. Thither send me. Whom should it more concern? FURST. No, Melchthal, no; thou art my guest, and I
Must answer for thy safety. MELCHTHAL. Let me go. I know each forest track and mountain pass;
Friends too I'll find, be sure, on every hand,
To give me willing shelter from the foe. STAUFFACHER. Nay, let him go; no traitors harbor there:
For tyranny is so abhorred in Unterwald
No minions can be found to work her will. In the low valleys, too, the Alzeller
Will gain confederates and rouse the country. MELCHTHAL. But how shall we communicate, and not
Awaken the suspicion of the tyrants? STAUFFACHER. Might we not meet at Brunnen or at Treib,
Hard by the spot where merchant-vessels land? FURST. We must not go so openly to work. Hear my opinion. On the lake's left bank,
As we sail hence to Brunnen, right against
The Mytenstein, deep-hidden in the wood
A meadow lies, by shepherds called the Rootli,
Because the wood has been uprooted there. 'Tis where our Canton boundaries verge on yours;--

   [To MELCHTHAL. Your boat will carry you across from Schwytz. [To STAUFFACHER. Thither by lonely by-paths let us wend
At midnight and deliberate o'er our plans. Let each bring with him there ten trusty men,
All one at heart with us; and then we may
Consult together for the general weal,
And, with God's guidance, fix our onward course. STAUFFACHER. So let it be. And now your true right hand! Yours, too, young man! and as we now three men
Among ourselves thus knit our hands together
In all sincerity and truth, e'en so
Shall we three Cantons, too, together stand
In victory and defeat, in life and death. FURST and MELCHTHAL. In life and death. [They hold their hands clasped together for some moments in silence. MELCHTHAL. Alas, my old blind father! Thou canst no more behold the day of freedom;
But thou shalt hear it. When from Alp to Alp
The beacon-fires throw up their flaming signs,
And the proud castles of the tyrants fall,
Into thy cottage shall the Switzer burst,
Bear the glad tidings to thine ear, and o'er
Thy darkened way shall Freedom's radiance pour. ACT II. SCENE I. The Mansion of the BARON OF ATTINGHAUSEN. A Gothic hall,
   decorated with escutcheons and helmets. The BARON, a
   gray-headed man, eighty-five years old, tall, and of a
   commanding mien, clad in a furred pelisse, and leaning
   on a staff tipped with chamois horn. KUONI and six hinds
   standing round him, with rakes and scythes. ULRICH OF RUDENZ
   enters in the costume of a knight. RUDENZ. Uncle, I'm here! Your will? ATTINGHAUSEN. First let me share,
After the ancient custom of our house,
The morning-cup with these my faithful servants! [He drinks from a cup, which is then passed round. Time was I stood myself in field and wood,
With mine own eyes directing all their toil,
Even as my banner led them in the fight,
Now I am only fit to play the steward;
And, if the genial sun come not to me,
I can no longer seek it on the mountains. Thus slowly, in an ever-narrowing sphere,
I move on to the narrowest and the last,
Where all life's pulses cease. I now am but
The shadow of my former self, and that
Is fading fast--'twill soon be but a name. KUONI (offering RUDENZ the cup). A pledge, young master! [RUDENZ hesitates to take the cup. Nay, sir, drink it off! One cup, one heart! You know our proverb, sir! ATTINGHAUSEN. Go, children, and at eve, when work is done,
We'll meet and talk the country's business over. [Exeunt Servants. Belted and plumed, and all thy bravery on! Thou art for Altdorf--for the castle, boy? RUDENZ. Yes, uncle. Longer may I not delay----

ATTINGHAUSEN (sitting down). Why in such haste? Say, are thy youthful hours
Doled in such niggard measure that thou must
Be chary of then to thy aged uncle? RUDENZ. I see, my presence is not needed here,
I am but as a stranger in this house. ATTINGHAUSEN (gazes fixedly at him for a considerable time). Alas, thou art indeed! Alas, that home
To thee has grown so strange! Oh, Uly! Uly! I scarce do know thee now, thus decked in silks,
The peacock's feather [9] flaunting in thy cap,
And purple mantle round thy shoulders flung;
Thou lookest upon the peasant with disdain,
And takest with a blush his honest greeting. RUDENZ. All honor due to him I gladly pay,
But must deny the right he would usurp. ATTINGHAUSEN. The sore displeasure of the king is resting
Upon the land, and every true man's heart
Is full of sadness for the grievous wrongs
We suffer from our tyrants. Thou alone
Art all unmoved amid the general grief. Abandoning thy friends, thou takest thy stand
Beside thy country's foes, and, as in scorn
Of our distress, pursuest giddy joys,
Courting the smiles of princes, all the while
Thy country bleeds beneath their cruel scourge. RUDENZ. The land is sore oppressed; I know it, uncle. But why? Who plunged it into this distress? A word, one little easy word, might buy
Instant deliverance from such dire oppression,
And win the good-will of the emperor. Woe unto those who seal the people's eyes,
And make them adverse to their country's good;
The men who, for their own vile, selfish ends,
Are seeking to prevent the Forest States
From swearing fealty to Austria's house,
As all the countries round about have done. It fits their humor well, to take their seats
Amid the nobles on the Herrenbank; [10]
They'll have the Caesar for their lord, forsooth,
That is to say, they'll have no lord at all. ATTINGHAUSEN. Must I hear this, and from thy lips, rash boy! RUDENZ. You urged me to this answer. Hear me out. What, uncle, is the character you've stooped
To fill contentedly through life? Have you
No higher pride, than in these lonely wilds
To be the Landamman or Banneret, [11]
The petty chieftain of a shepherd race? How! Were it not a far more glorious choice
To bend in homage to our royal lord,
And swell the princely splendors of his court,
Than sit at home, the peer of your own vassals,
And share the judgment-seat with vulgar clowns? ATTINGHAUSEN. Ah, Uly, Uly; all too well I see,
The tempter's voice has caught thy willing ear,
And poured its subtle poison in thy heart. RUDENZ. Yes, I conceal it not. It doth offend
My inmost soul to hear the stranger's gibes,
That taunt us with the name of "Peasant Nobles." Think you the heart that's stirring here can brook,
While all the young nobility around
Are reaping honor under Hapsburg's banner,
That I should loiter, in inglorious ease,
Here on the heritage my fathers left,
And, in the dull routine of vulgar toil,
Lose all life's glorious spring? In other lands
Deeds are achieved. A world of fair renown
Beyond these mountains stirs in martial pomp. My helm and shield are rusting in the hall;
The martial trumpet's spirit-stirring blast,
The herald's call, inviting to the lists,
Rouse not the echoes of these vales, where naught
Save cowherd's horn and cattle-bell is heard,
In one unvarying, dull monotony. ATTINGHAUSEN. Deluded boy, seduced by empty show! Despise the land that gave thee birth! Ashamed
Of the good ancient customs of thy sires! The day will come, when thou, with burning tears,
Wilt long for home, and for thy native hills,
And that dear melody of tuneful herds,
Which now, in proud disgust, thou dost despise! A day when thou wilt drink its tones in sadness,
Hearing their music in a foreign land. Oh! potent is the spell that binds to home! No, no, the cold, false world is not for thee. At the proud court, with thy true heart thou wilt
Forever feel a stranger among strangers. The world asks virtues of far other stamp
Than thou hast learned within these simple vales. But go--go thither; barter thy free soul,
Take land in fief, become a prince's vassal,
Where thou might'st be lord paramount, and prince
Of all thine own unburdened heritage! O, Uly, Uly, stay among thy people! Go not to Altdorf. Oh, abandon not
The sacred cause of thy wronged native land! I am the last of all my race. My name
Ends with me. Yonder hang my helm and shield;
They will be buried with me in the grave. [12]
And must I think, when yielding up my breath,
That thou but wait'st the closing of mine eyes,
To stoop thy knee to this new feudal court,
And take in vassalage from Austria's hands
The noble lands, which I from God received
Free and unfettered as the mountain air! RUDENZ. 'Tis vain for us to strive against the king. The world pertains to him:--shall we alone,
In mad, presumptuous obstinacy strive
To break that mighty chain of lands, which he
Hath drawn around us with his giant grasp. His are the markets, his the courts; his too
The highways; nay, the very carrier's horse,
That traffics on the Gotthardt, pays him toll. By his dominions, as within a net,
We are enclosed, and girded round about. --And will the empire shield us? Say, can it
Protect itself 'gainst Austria's growing power? To God, and not to emperors, must we look! What store can on their promises be placed,
When they, to meet their own necessities,
Can pawn, and even alienate the towns
That flee for shelter 'neath the eagle's wings? [13]
No, uncle. It is wise and wholesome prudence,
In times like these, when faction's all abroad,
To own attachment to some mighty chief. The imperial crown's transferred from line to line, [14]
It has no memory for faithful service:
But to secure the favor of these great
Hereditary masters, were to sow
Seed for a future harvest. ATTINGHAUSEN. Art so wise? Wilt thou see clearer than thy noble sires,
Who battled for fair freedom's costly gem,
With life, and fortune, and heroic arm? Sail down the lake to Lucerne, there inquire,
How Austria's rule doth weigh the Cantons down. Soon she will come to count our sheep, our cattle,
To portion out the Alps, e'en to their summits,
And in our own free woods to hinder us
From striking down the eagle or the stag;
To set her tolls on every bridge and gate,
Impoverish us to swell her lust of sway,
And drain our dearest blood to feed her wars. 