



Produced by Nicole Apostola





MASTER OLOF

A DRAMA IN FIVE ACTS


By August Strindberg




INTRODUCTION

The original prose version of Master Olof, which is here presented for
the first time in English form, was written between June 8 and August
8, 1872, while Strindberg, then only twenty-three years old, was living
with two friends on one of the numerous little islands that lie between
Stockholm and the open sea. Up to that time he had produced half-a-dozen plays, one of which had
been performed at the Royal Theatre of Stockholm and had won him the
good-will and financial support of King Carl XV. Thus he had been able
to return to the University of Upsala, whence he had been driven a year
earlier by poverty as well as by spiritual revolt. During his second
term of study at the old university Strindberg wrote some plays that
he subsequently destroyed. In the same period he not only conceived the
idea later developed in Master Olof, but he also acquired the historical
data underlying the play and actually began to put it into dialogue. During that same winter of 1871-72 he read extensively, although his
reading probably had slight reference to the university curriculum. The
two works that seem to have taken the lion's share of his attention were
Goethe's youthful drama Goetz von Berlichingen and Buckle's History of
Civilization in England. Both impressed him deeply, and both became in
his mind logically connected with an external event which, perhaps, had
touched his supersensitive soul more keenly than anything else: an event
concerning which he says in the third volume of The Bondwoman's Son,
that "he had just discovered that the men of the Paris Commune merely
put into action what Buckle preached." Such were the main influences at work on his mind when, early in
1872, his royal protector died, and Strindberg found himself once more
dependent on his own resources. To continue at the university was out
of the question, and he seems to have taken his final departure from it
without the least feeling of regret. Unwise as he may have been in other
respects, he was wise enough to realize that, whatever his goal, the
road to it must be of his own making. Returning to Stockholm, he groped
around for a while as he had done a year earlier, what he even tried to
eke out a living as the editor of a trade journal. Yet the seeds sown
within him during the previous winter were sprouting. An irresistible
impulse urged him to continue the work of Buckle. History and philosophy
were the ultimate ends tempting his mind, but first of all he was
impelled to express himself in terms of concrete life, and the way had
been shown him by Goethe. Moved by Goethe's example, he felt himself
obliged to break through the stifling forms of classical drama. "No verse, no eloquence, no unity of place," was the resolution he
formulated straightway. [Note: See again The Bondwoman's Son, vol. iii:
In the Red Room.] Having armed himself with a liberal supply of writing-paper, he joined
his two friends in the little island of Kymmendoe. Of money he had so
little that, but for the generosity of one of his friends, he would have
had to leave the island in the autumn without settling the small debt
he owed for board and lodging. Yet those months were happy indeed--above
all because he felt himself moved by an inspiration more authentic than
he had ever before experienced. Thus page was added to page, and act to
act, until at last, in the surprisingly brief time of two months, the
whole play was ready--mighty in bulk and spirit, as became the true
firstling of a young Titan. Strindberg had first meant to name his play "What Is Truth?" For a while
he did call it "The Renegade," but in the end he thought both titles
smacked too much of tendency and decided instead, with reasoned
conventionalism, to use the title of Master Olof after its central
figure, the Luther of Sweden. From a dramatic point of view it would have been hard to pick a more
promising period than the one he had chosen as a setting for his play. The early reign of Gustaf Vasa, the founder of modern Sweden, was marked
by three parallel conflicts of equal intensity and interest: between
Swedish and Danish nationalism; between Catholicism and Protestantism;
and, finally, between feudalism and a monarchism based more or less on
the consent of the governed. Its background was the long struggle for
independent national existence in which the country had become involved
by its voluntary federation with Denmark and Norway about the end of the
fourteenth century. That Struggle--made necessary by the insistence of
one sovereign after another on regarding Sweden as a Danish province
rather than as an autonomous part of a united Scandinavia--had reached a
sort of climax, a final moment of utter blackness just before the dawn,
when, at Stockholm in 1520, the Danish king, known ever afterward as
Christian the Tyrant, commanded the arbitrary execution of about eighty
of Sweden's most representative men. Until within a few months of that event, named by the horror-stricken
people "the blood-bath of Stockholm," the young Gustaf Eriksson Vasa had
been a prisoner in Denmark, sent there as a hostage of Swedish loyalty. Having obtained his freedom by flight, he made his way to the inland
province of Dalecarlia, where most of the previous movements on behalf
of national liberty had originated, and having cleared the country of
foreign invaders, chiefly by the help of an aroused peasantry that had
never known the yoke of serfdom, he was elected king at a Riksdag held
in the little city of Straengnaes, not far from Stockholm, in 1523. Straengnaes was a cathedral city and had for several years previous been
notorious for the Lutheran leanings of its clergy. After the death of
its bishop as one of the victims of King; Christian, its temporary head
had been the archdeacon, the ambitious and learned Lars Andersson--or
Laurentius Andreae, as, in accordance with the Latinizing tendency
of the time, he was more frequently named. One of its canons was Olof
Pedersson--also known as Olaus Petri, and more commonly as Master Olof
(Master being the vernacular for Magister, which was the equivalent
of our modern Doctor)--who, during two years spent in studies at the
University of Wittenberg, had been in personal contact with Luther, and
who had become fired with an aspiration to carry the Reformation into
his native country. By recent historians Master Olof has been described
as of a "naively humble nature," rather melancholy in temperament,
but endowed with a gift for irony, and capable of fiery outbursts when
deeply stirred. At Straengnaes he had been preaching the new faith more
openly and more effectively than any one else, and he had found a pupil
as well as a protector in the temporary head of the diocese. Immediately after his election, the new King called Lars Andersson from
Straengnaes to become his first chancellor. Later on, he pressed Olof,
too, into his service, making him Secretary to the City Corporation
of Stockholm--which meant that Olof practically became the chief
civil administrator of the capital, having to act as both clerk and
magistrate, while at the same time he was continuing his reformatory
propaganda as one of the preachers in the city's principal edifice,
officially named after St. Nicolaus, but commonly spoken of as
Greatchurch. As if this were not sufficient for one man, he plunged also
into a feverish literary activity, doing most of the work on the Swedish
translations of the New and Old Testaments, and paving the way for the
new faith by a series of vigorous polemical writings, the style of which
proclaims him the founder of modern Swedish prose. Centuries passed
before the effective simplicity and homely picturesqueness of his style
were surpassed. He became, furthermore, Sweden's first dramatist. The
Comedy of Tobit, from which Strindberg uses a few passages in slightly
modernized form at the beginning of his play, is now generally
recognized as an authentic product of Olof's pen, although it was not
written until a much later period. Strindberg's drama starts at Straengnaes, at the very moment when Olof has
been goaded into open revolt against the abuses of the Church, and when
he is saved from the consequences of that revolt only by the unexpected
arrival of King Gustaf and his own appointment as City Secretary. From
the slightly strained, but not improbable, coincidence of that start
to the striking climax of the last act, the play follows, on the whole,
pretty closely the actual course of events recorded in history. To
understand this course, with its gradually intensified conflict between
the King and Olof, it is above all necessary to bear in mind that the
former regarded the Reformation principally as a means toward that
political reorganization and material upbuilding of the country which
formed his main task; while to Olof the religious reconstruction assumed
supreme importance. This fundamental divergence of purpose is clearly
indicated and effectively used by Strindberg, and we have reason to
believe that he has pictured not only Gustaf Vasa and Master Olof, but
also the other historical characters, in close accordance with what
history has to tell us about them. Among the chief figures there is only
one--Gert the Printer--who is not known to history, and one--the wife of
Olof--who is so little known that the playwright has been at liberty to
create it almost wholly out of his own imagination. At the juncture represented by the initial scenes of the play, Olof was
in reality thirty-one years old, but he is made to appear still younger. The King should be, and is, about twenty-seven, while Lars Andersson is
about fifty-four, and Bishop Brask about seventy. Gert must be thought a
man of about sixty, while Christine must be about twenty. The action
of the play lasts from 1524 to 1540, but Strindberg has contracted the
general perspective, so to speak, giving us the impression that the
entire action takes place within a couple of years. I have tried to work
out a complete chronology, and think it fairly safe to date the several
parts of the play as follows:

The first act takes place on Whitsun Eve, 1524, which means that the
exact date must fall between May 10 and June 13 of that year, and
probably about June 1. The first scene of the second act occurs in the early evening of a
Saturday in the summer--probably in June--of 1524. The second scene is
fixed at midnight of the same day, and the third scene on the following
morning, which, in view of the fact that Olof is to preach, we may
assume to be a Sunday. The first scene of the third act seems to take place four days later,
but Olof was not married until February, 1525,--to "Christine, a maiden
of good family,"--and it was only during the winter of 1526-27 that the
Church reformers were given free rein by the King, and Olof himself was
despatched to the University of Upsala for the purpose of challenging
Peder Galle, the noted Catholic theologian, to a joint discussion. This
was also the time when the first Swedish version of the New Testament
was completed by Olof and Lars Andersson--an event referred to in the
scene in question. The exact date of the second scene of the third act is St. John's
Eve, or June 24, 1527, at which time occurred the important Riksdag at
Vesteras, where the King broke the final resistance of the nobility and
the Catholic clergy by threatening to abdicate. The debate between Olof
and Peder Galle took place at the Riksdag, Galle having evaded it as
long as he could. The date of the fourth act is very uncertain, but it seems safe to place
it in the summer of 1539, when Stockholm was ravaged by an epidemic of a
virulent disease known as "the English sweat." The first scene of the fifth act is laid on New Year's Eve, 1539, when
Olof and Lars Andersson were arrested and charged with high treason for
not having informed the proper authorities of a plot against the King's
life. This plot was an old story, having been exposed and punished
in 1536. Their defence was that they had learned of it through secret
confession, which they as ministers had no right to reveal. The trial
took only two days, and on January 2, 1540, both were sentenced to
death. The second scene of the final act must be laid in the spring of 1540, as
the ceremony of confirmation has generally taken place about Easter ever
since the Swedish church became Lutheran. While, in the main, Strindberg made the events of his play accord
with what was accepted as historical fact when he wrote, there are
anachronisms and inaccuracies to be noted, although to none of them
can be attached much importance. When, in the first and second acts, he
represents the Anabaptist leaders, Rink and Knipperdollink, as then
in Stockholm and actually introduces one of them on the stage, he has
merely availed himself of a legend which had been accepted as truth
for centuries, and which has been exploded only by recent historical
research. We know now that Rink and Knipperdollink could never have been
in Sweden, but we know also that a German lay preacher named Melchior
Hofman appeared at Stockholm about the time indicated in the play, and
that, in 1529, another such preacher, named Tilemann, made Olof himself
the object of his fierce invectives. These instances serve, in fact, to
prove how skilfully Strindberg handled his historical material. He is
never rigid as to fact, but as a rule he is accurate in spirit. Another
instance of this kind is found in the references in the first act to the
use of Swedish for purposes of worship. It is recorded--and by himself,
I think--that Olof once asked his mother whether she really understood
the Latin prayers, since she was so very fond of them. She answered:
"No, I don't understand them, but when I hear them I pray devoutly to
God that they may please Him, which I don't doubt they do." On the other hand, what maybe regarded as rather an awkward slip is
found in the first scene of the fifth act, where Gert cries exultantly
to Olof: "You don't know that Thomas Muenster has established a new
spiritual kingdom at Muehlhausen." The name of the great Anabaptist
"prophet" was Thomas Muenzer, and the place where he established his
brief reign was Muenster. Strindberg's habit was to fill his head with
the facts to be used, and then to rely on his memory. Marvellous as his
memory was, it sometimes deceived him, and checking off names or dates
seems to have been utterly beyond him. Thus it is quite probable that
the passage in question represents an unconscious error. At the same
time it is barely possible that the mistake may have been purposely laid
in the mouth of a fanatic, from whom exactness of statement could hardly
be expected. Thus, in the first act, Gert remarks that "Luther is
dead." We understand, of course, that this expression is metaphorical,
signifying that Luther has done all that can be expected of him, but it
is nevertheless characteristically ambiguous. The second scene of the third act is apparently laid in Olof's house
at Stockholm, although the location of the building is not definitely
indicated. We find him waiting for a messenger who is to announce the
results of the Riksdag then in session. But the Riksdag was held at
Vesteras, and we know that Olof was one of two delegates sent by the
burghers and the peasants to the King, whom they implored "on their
knees and with tears" to withdraw his abdication. The Courtier's
reference to Olof's debate with Galle renders it still more uncertain
whether we are in Stockholm or in Vesteras. The Courtier also informs
Olof of his appointment as pastor of Greatchurch, the facts being that
Olof was not ordained until 1539 and received his appointment a year
after the events described in the last act of the play. In the metrical
version, Strindberg makes his most radical departure from the historical
course of events by letting Luther's marriage precede and influence
that of Olof, although in reality Olof's anticipated that of Luther by
several months. The complaints of the Man from Smaland in the first scene of the second
act could scarcely have been warranted in 1524, when that act takes
place. The hold of the young King was far too precarious at that
early date to permit any regulations of the kind referred to. The
establishment of a maximum price on oxen does not seem to have occurred
until 1532, and a prohibition against the shooting of deer by the
peasants was actually issued in 1538, both measures helping to provoke
the widespread uprising that broke out in Smaland in 1541. It was named
the "Dacke feud" after its principal leader, the peasant-chieftain
Nils Dacke, to whom the Sexton refers in the second scene of the last
act--also a little prematurely. Whether these be conscious or unconscious anachronisms, they matter very
little when the general accuracy of the play is considered. From the
moment the Danes had been driven out of the country, one of the most
serious problems confronting the King was the financial chaos into which
the country had fallen, and his efforts, first of all to raise enough
means for ordinary administrative purposes, and secondly to reorganize
trade and agriculture, brought him almost immediately into conflict with
the peasants, who, during the long struggle for national independence,
had become accustomed to do pretty much as they pleased. The utterances
of the Man from Smaland are typical of the sentiments that prevailed
among the peasants throughout the country, not least when he speaks of
the King's intention to "take away their priests and friars," for
the majority of the Swedish people were at that time still intensely
Catholic, and remained so to a large extent long after the Reformation
officially had placed Sweden among Protestant countries. Much more serious than any liberties taken with dates or facts, I deem
certain linguistic anachronisms, of which Strindberg not rarely becomes
guilty. Thus, for instance, he makes the King ask Bishop Brask: "What
kind of phenomenon is this?" The phrase is palpably out of place, and
yet it has been used so deliberately that nothing was left for me to
do but to translate it literally. The truth is that Strindberg was not
striving to reproduce the actual language of the Period--a language of
which we get a glimpse in the quotations from The Comedy of Tobit. Here
and there he used archaic expressions (which I have sometimes reproduced
and sometimes disregarded, as the exigencies of the new medium happened
to require). At other times he did not hesitate to employ modern
colloquialisms (most of which have been "toned down"). He did not regard
local color or historical atmosphere as a supreme desideratum. He wanted
to express certain ideas, and he wanted to bring home the essential
humanity of historical figures which, through the operations of
legendary history, had assumed a strange, unhuman aspect. The methods
he employed for these purposes have since been made familiar to the
English-speaking public by the historical plays of Bernard Shaw and the
short stories and novels of Anatole France. In his eagerness, however, to express what was burning for utterance in
his own breast, the second purpose was sometimes lost sight of; and at
such times Strindberg hesitated as little to pass the bounds imposed
by an historical period as to break through the much more important
limitations of class and personal antecedents. Thus, for example,
the remarks of Olof's mother are at one moment characterized by the
simplicity to be expected from the aged widow of a small city tradesman
in the early part of the sixteenth century, while in the next--under
the pressure of the author's passion for personal expression--they
grow improbably sophisticated. Yet each figure, when seen in proper
perspective, appears correctly drawn and strikingly consistent with
the part assigned to it in the play. In his very indifference to minor
accuracies, Strindberg sometimes approaches more closely to the larger
truth than men more scrupulous in regard to details. How true he can be
in his delineation of a given type is perhaps best shown by the figure
of Gert. The world's literature holds few portrayals of the anarchistic
temperament that can vie with it in psychological exactness, and it is
as true to-day as it was in 1524 or in 1872. This verisimilitude on a universal rather than a specific plane assumes
still greater significance if we consider it in the light of what
Strindberg has told us about his purpose with the main characters of his
first great play. As I have already said, those characters were meant
to be both mouthpieces of the author and revived historical figures, but
they were also meant--and primarily, I suspect--to be something else:
embodiments of the contradictory phases of a single individual, namely
the author himself. "The author meant to hide his own self behind the historical
characters," Strindberg tells us, apropos of this very play. [Note: In
one of his biographical novels, The Bondwoman's Son, vol. iii: In
the Red Room.] "As an idealist he was to be represented by Olof; as a
realist by Gustaf; and as a communist by Gert." Farther on in the same
work, he continues his revelation as follows: "The King and his shadow,
the shrewd Constable, represented himself [the author] as he wished to
be; Gert, as he was in moments of aroused passion; and Olof, as, after
years of self-scrutiny, he had come to know himself: ambitious and
weak-willed; unscrupulous when something was at stake, and yielding
at other times; possessed of great self-confidence, mixed with a deep
melancholy; balanced and irrational; hard and gentle." Finally, he gives us this illuminating exposition of his own views on
the moral validity of the main characters, thus disposing once for all
of the one-sided interpretations made by persons anxious to use this
or that aspect of the play in support of their own political or social
idiosyncrasies: "All the chief characters are, relatively speaking, in
the right. The Constable, from the standpoint of his own day, is right
in asking Olof to keep calm and go on preaching; Olof is right in
admitting that he had gone too far; the scholar, Vilhelm, is right when,
in the name of youth, he demands the evolution of a new truth; and Gert
is right in calling Olof a renegade. The individual must always become
a renegade--forced by the necessity of natural laws; by fatigue; by
inability to develop indefinitely, as the brain ceases to grow about the
age of forty-five; and by the claims of actual life, which demand that
even a reformer must live as man, mate, head of a family, and
citizen. But those who crave that the individual continue his progress
indefinitely are the shortsighted--particularly those who think that the
cause must perish because the individual deserts it.... It is an open
question, for that matter, whether Olof did not have a better chance to
advance his cause from the pulpit of the reformed Greatchurch than he
would have had in low-class taverns." These passages were written by Strindberg fourteen years after the
completion of the play to which they refer. We have other evidence,
however, that, while he might have seen things more clearly in
retrospect, he had not been lured by the lapse of time into placing his
characters in a light different from that in which they were conceived. On the list of characters forming part of the original handwritten
manuscript of the first version of Master Olof, now preserved in the
Public Library of Gothenburg, Sweden, the author has jotted down certain
very significant notes opposite the more important names. Thus he has
written opposite the name of the King: "To accomplish something in this
world, one has to risk morality and conscience;" opposite the name
of Olof: "He who strives to realize an idea develops greatness of
personality--he accomplishes good by his personal example, but he is
doomed to perish;" opposite that of Bishop Brask: "There is movement in
whatever exists--whatever stands still must be crushed;" and opposite
that of Gert: "He who wills more than his reason can grasp must go mad." Such was the play with which the young Strindberg returned to the
Swedish capital in the fall of 1872; and let us remember in this
connection, that up to the time in question no dramatic work of similar
importance had ever been produced in Sweden. Its completion was more
epoch-making for Sweden than that of Brand was for Norway in 1865--since
the coming of Ibsen's first really great play was heralded by earlier
works leading up to it, while Master Olof appeared where nobody had any
reason to expect it. This very fact militated against its success, of
course; it was too unexpected, and also too startlingly original, both
in spirit and in form. At the time there was only one stage in Sweden where such a work could
be produced--the Royal Theatre at Stockholm. To the officials of this
state--supported institution Strindberg submitted his work--hopefully,
as we know from his own statement. It was scornfully and ignominiously
rejected, the main criticism being that a serious historical drama
in prose was unthinkable. I shall make no comment whatever on that
judgment, having in mind how several years later Edmund Gosse bewailed
the failure of Ibsen to give a metrical form to his Emperor and
Galilean. Strindberg's next effort concerned publication. In this respect he
was equally unsuccessful, although as a rule it has never been very
difficult in Sweden to find a publisher for any work of reasonable
merit. But the play was not only too original, it was too dangerously
radical for a country where a truly modern form of representative
government had not been achieved until seven years earlier. Strindberg
was at first stunned by this failure. He seriously contemplated
giving up writing altogether. When he had recovered somewhat, he seems
reluctantly to have faced the possibility that the fault might be found
in the play and not in the public. So he set about to re-write it--and he did so not only once but
repeatedly, producing in all six versions that differ more or less from
one another. At first he clung to the prose form. Gradually he began to
introduce verse, until finally, in 1877 or 1878, he completed an almost
new play, where the metrical form predominated without being used
exclusively. This version was actually published in 1878. Originally, an
epilogue was appended to it, but this was dropped from all but a small
part of the first edition. It is supposed to take place a number of
years later than the fifth act, and shows Olof with his two sons
outside the city walls of Stockholm, where they witness a miracle-play
introducing God as the principle of darkness and Lucifer as the
overthrown but never conquered principle of light. The bitter
generalizations of this afterthought explain Sufficiently why it
was excluded. To the later Strindberg--the man who wrote Advent, for
instance--it must have seemed one of his most unforgivable offences. Although Strindberg's main object in working over his play undoubtedly
was to obtain its production, the metrical version was not put on the
stage until 1890, when, however, it was performed at the Royal Theatre,
toward which its author had looked so longingly and so vainly eighteen
years earlier. The prose version, on the other hand, was produced as
early as 1881, at the New Theatre in Stockholm, but was not published
until the same year, when it appeared in book form grouped with a number
of other writings from Strindberg's earliest period. Of the five unprinted versions connecting the original prose drama
of 1872 with the final metrical form of 1878, more or less complete
manuscripts have been preserved, and these are now being examined in
detail by the Swedish literary historian, Professor Karl Warburg. A
summary analysis by Dr. John Landquist is appended to the second
volume of the definitive edition of Strindberg's complete works (Albert
Bonnier, Stockholm), where the epilogue to the metrical version is also
reprinted after so many years of oblivion. "Of all the manuscripts preceding the final metrical version," says Dr.
Landquist, "the original one, written when Strindberg was twenty-three,
is the masterpiece. There everything is consistent; there the dialogue
has a power and an incisiveness to which it does not attain in any of
the unprinted manuscripts. On the contrary, these seem more youthful
than the original, producing at times an impression of immaturity and
uncertainty on the part of the author. Even when some isolated phrase
strikes one as fortunate, it does not tend to strengthen the drama as
a whole. The later versions lack that sense of inner unity and that
audacious touch which lend fascination and power to the original
manuscript. "Not until we reach the first metrical version (of 1876) does the full
power of the playwright begin to reassert itself in such fashion that
out of his untiring labors at last springs a new work, the mood of which
differs essentially from that of the first prose version. These two
versions--the first and the final--are the results of diametrically
opposed methods of work. The first was written with a certainty and
swiftness of inspiration that raised the young poet far above the
productive powers generally characteristic of his years. The subsequent
modifications prove merely how futile are the efforts of reason to
improve what intuition has inspired. But gradually it seems to have
dawned on the poet that he was about to evolve a wholly new work--that
what he had come to aim at was quite distinct from what he had been
aiming at in the beginning, and from that moment his artistic reasoning
carried him onward until at last a new inspiration brought the work to
its completion." Concerning the final metrical version, I can give only a few outstanding
and rather superficial facts, hoping that I may some time have the
opportunity of presenting it entire to the American public. Like the
prose version, it has five acts, but these are not subdivided into
scenes. It is briefer, more concentrated both in spirit and in form,
and may be said to display a greater unity of purpose. It is more human,
too, and less titanic. The change shows itself strikingly in a figure
like that of Marten, who in the metrical version has become softened
into an unconscionable but rather lovable rapscallion. The last remark
but one made by Marten when driven from Dame Christine's deathbed by
Olof is: "Talk to your mother, son--the two of you have so much to
forgive each other." In strength and passion and daring, on the other hand, the final version
falls far short of the original one, and the very fact that it is more
logical, more carefully reasoned, tends at times to render it less
psychologically true. Each version has its own merits and its own
faults, and in their appeal they are so radically different that
a choice between them must always remain meaningless except on
temperamental grounds. At one point, however--and an important one at
that--the metrical version seems to me the happier by far. That cry of "renegade," which, echoing from the dim recesses of the
church, makes the prose version end on a note of perplexing irony, may
be theatrically effective, but it can hardly be called logical. Gert has
been disposed of. His sudden return out of the clutches of the soldiers
is inexplicable and unwarranted. Worse still, he has only a short
while previous been urging Olof to live on for his work. If Olof be
a renegade, he is so upon the advice of Gert himself, and to call the
concession made by Olof for the saving of his own life far-reaching
enough to explain Gert's sudden change of attitude approaches
dangerously near to quibbling. In the metrical version, on the other
hand, the same cry of "renegade" is quite logically and suitably
wrung from the lips of Vilhelm, the scholar who is still dreaming of
uncompromised ideals. But it is not the final word. This comes from
Olof, and takes the form of a brief apostrophe to the fleeing Vilhelm,
which I think ranks with the finest passages produced by Strindberg. Apologetically, I offer this English version of it as a fitting close to
my Introduction:

 Olof. Oh, what a word! But though it shook the air,
      These columns did not stir, nor fell the dome,
      And I stand calm upon this lonely shore,
      Where I was dropped by the receding waves--
      For, after all, I am ashore. And now
      A last "good luck upon the road" I send
      To speed the daring sailor who will give
      No ear to one that just has come to grief. With sails hauled close, steer for the open sea
      And for the far-off goal your soul desires! Ere long you must fall off like all the rest,
      Although a star your guiding landmark be
      For in due time the stars themselves must fall! EDWIN BJORKMAN MAY 15, 1915




MASTER OLOF


DRAMATIS PERSONAE

   OLOF PEDERSSON (Olaus Petri), generally known as MASTER OLOF. GERT THE PRINTER. GUSTAF ERIKSSON VASA, King of Sweden. HANS BRASK, Bishop of Linkoeping. MANS SOMMAR, Bishop of Straengnaes. LARS SIGGESON, Lord High Constable. LARS ANDERSSON (Laurentius Andreae), Lord High Chancellor. LARS PEDERSSON (Laurentius Petri), brother of Master Olof. HANS WINDRANK, a Master Mariner. A Man from Smaland. A German. A Dane. MARTEN and NILS, Black Friars. A Tavern-keeper. A Burier. First Scholar. Second Scholar. The Sexton at St. Nicolaus (or Greatchurch). A Servant of the Palace. An Overseer. A Townsman. A Courtier. DAME CHRISTINE, Olof's mother. CHRISTINE, daughter of Gert the Printer. A Harlot. A Woman. The Sexton's Wife. The Abbess of St. Clara. Headsman, Townsfolk, Laborers, etc. ACT I: At Straengnaes. ACTS II, III, IV, AND V: At Stockholm. ACT I

(A Cloister opening upon a Convent Close planted with groups of trees. The convent church forms the right side of the quadrangle. A brick wall
runs along the rear. Fruit trees in blossom appear above the wall. Olof is seated on a stone bench. Before him stand two scholars, who are
reading their respective parts out of "The Comedy of Tobit.") First Scholar. Now have our enemies trapped us full well. Woe unto us, poor children of Israel! Second Scholar. Yea, brother, good cause you have to make such plaint! Now certes we have come upon days of great lament--
     Our land is taken away, and so's our increase,
     And ne'er we may look for any help or surcease. It must be, as long I have both dreamt and said,
     That the promise to Abram has been long mislaid. [Enter Lars Andersson.] Lars Andersson. What are you doing? Olof. I am playing. Lars. Playing--you? Olof. I am playing a little comedy about the children of Israel and the
Babylonian captivity. Lars. Have you nothing better to do? Bigger work is waiting for you. Olof. I am too young. Lars. Do not say you are too young. Olof. No, for there are plenty of others who say it. Lars (takes out a roll of paper, which he opens; for a while he stands
looking at Olof; then he begins to read) "Then the word of the Lord
came unto Jeremiah: 'Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee;
and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I
ordained thee a prophet unto the nations.' "Then said Jeremiah: 'Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak, for I am a
child.' "But the Lord said: 'Say not, I am a child; for thou shalt go to all
that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak. For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron
pillar, and brazen walls against the whole land, against the kings of
Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and
against the people of the land. And they shall fight against thee; but
they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee,' saith the
Lord, 'to deliver thee.'" Olof (leaping to his feet). Did the Lord say that? Lars. "Thou therefore gird up thy loins and arise, and speak unto them
all that I command thee." Olof. Why do not you go? Lars. I am too old. Olof. You are afraid! Lars. I am, for I have not the strength; but you have--and now may the
Lord give you the faith also. Olof. Oh, once I did have the flame of faith, and it burned wondrously,
but the monkish gang smothered it with their holy water when they were
trying to read the devil out of my body. Lars. That was a fire of straw which had to flicker out; but now
the Lord will light you a fire of logs by which the offspring of the
Philistines shall be consumed. Do you know your own will, Olof? Olof. No, but I feel myself choking when I think of these poor
people who yearn for salvation. They are crying for water--for living
water--but there is no one who can give it to them. Lars. Tear down the crumbling old house first, you can do that. Then the
Lord Himself will build them a new one. Olof. Then they will be without a roof over their heads for a time. Lars. They will at least get fresh air. Olof. But to rob a whole nation of its faith--they will despair. Lars. Yes, they will despair. Olof. But they will decry me, and revile me, and drag me before the
elders. Lars. Are you afraid? Olof. No--but the offence--

Lars. You were born to give offence, Olof; you were born to smite. The
Lord will heal. Olof. I can feel the pull of the current; I am still clinging to the
sluice-gate, but if I let go, I shall be swept away. Lars. Let go! There are more than enough who hold back. Olof. Reach out your hand to me, Lars, if I get too far into the
whirlpool. Lars. That is not in my power, and into the whirlpool you must go, even
if it be to perish. Olof. What storms you have raised in my soul! A moment ago I sat here
and played in the shadow of the trees, and it was Whitsun Eve, and it
was spring, and all was peace. And now--how can the trees be still, and
why is there no darkness in the sky? Put your hand on my forehead,
feel the blood surging! Do not abandon me, Lars! I see an angel coming
towards me with a cup--she is walking across the evening sky--her path
is blood-red, and in her hand she is carrying a cross--No, it is more
than I avail! I will return to my peaceful valley. Let others fight; I
will look on--No, I will follow in their wake and heal the wounded and
whisper words of peace into the ears of the dying--Peace!--No, I want to
fight with the rest, but in the last ranks--Why should I lead? Lars. Because you are the boldest. Olof. Not the strongest? Lars. The strong will come after you: and the strongest of all is by
your side; it is He who summons you to battle. Olof. Help me, O Lord! I go. Lars. Amen! Olof. And will you come with me? Lars. You must go alone--with God! Olof. Why do you turn back? Lars. I was not born to be a warrior: your armorer is all that I can
be. Your weapon is the pure Word of God, and with that you must arm
the people. For the doors to the popish armory have been broken open at
last, and hereafter every one calling himself a man must fight for the
freedom of his own spirit. Olof. But where is the enemy? I am burning for battle, yet see no one to
fight against. Lars. No need to summon them; they will come! Farewell! You may begin
whenever you are ready, and may God be with you! Olof. Don't go. I have much more to talk with you about. Lars. Here comes the vanguard now--to arms! [Exit Lars.] (A crowd of townsmen with their women and children pass across the stage
to the church door at the right. They stop in front of it, bare their
heads, and make the sign of the cross.) Gert the Printer (disguised as a townsman). It's Whitsun Eve, and nobody
has rung the vesper bell--that's very strange. A Townsman. The church door is closed. Maybe the priest is sick. Gert. Or not yet out of bed. Townsman. What do you mean? Gert. Only that he might be sick abed. Townsman. But there are a lot of acolytes, and one of them might be
saying a mass for us in his place. Gert. They are probably too busy. Townsman. With what? Gert. That's hard to tell. Townsman. Take care, my good man! You seem to have a leaning towards
Lutherism. Bishop Hans of Linkoeping is here, and so's the King. Gert. Is Brask in town? Townsman. Indeed he is. But I suppose we had better try the church door
to see if it be really closed. Gert (runs up the steps and beats the church door with his fist).The
house of God is closed this Whitsun Eve. The reverend clergy will grant
no audience with the Lord to-day, and so the worshipful commonalty will
have to go home and go to bed without any mass. Look here, good folk! Here you have a door--mere wood, of course, but that matters little, as
it is lined with copper. Just take a look at this door! If I say that
the Lord is living within--this being His house; and if I say that the
bishop's diaconus, or secretarius, or canonicus, or some other fellow
ending in 'us'--for it's only these clerical gentlemen that end in 'us';
and if I say that some fellow of that kind has the key hanging on a nail
in his bedroom: then I don't mean to say that he has locked up the Lord
and put the key on a nail in his bedroom: but all I mean to say is
that we can't get in, and that there will be no divine service for its
to-night--for us who have toiled six days making shoes and coats--who
have spent the whole week brewing and baking and butchering for the
reverend clergy in order that the said clergy might have strength enough
on the seventh day to celebrate divine service for its. Of course, I am
not at all saying this in reproach of the right reverend members of this
Chapter; for they, too, are nothing but human beings, you know, and it
was only the Lord who could stand working six days and be satisfied with
resting on the seventh. Townsman. You're blaspheming God, master townsman! Gert. Well, He can't hear it when the door is closed. A Woman. Jesu Maria! He's an Antichrist! Gert (beating at the door). Do you hear how hollow it sounds?--It is
writ in the Bible that once upon a time the veil before the Holiest of
Holies was rent in twain, and it must be true--but nothing is said in
the Bible about the clerical gentlemen having sewed the veil together
again, which, of course, is no reason why it shouldn't have been done. (The crowd makes a rush at Gert; the children begin to cry.) Townsman. Out on you, Luther! For that's what you are. We have sinned,
and for that reason the Lord has closed His house. Can't you hear that
the very children cry out at the sight of you, unclean spirit that you
are? Gert. Naturally, when you step on their toes, my dear friends--

Woman. Don't go near him! He has a devil! Townsman. Down with him! Down with him! Gert. Don't touch me, for here I am under the protection of the Lord. Townsman. The Lord will not protect the angel that was cast out. Gert. If the Lord won't, the Holy Church will, and I am now within her
consecrated walls. Townsman. Get him away from the church wall! Gert. If you don't fear God, you must at least fear the ban of the Holy
Father. Woman. Drag him away from that door! It is his unclean spirit that has
cast a spell on the church. Townsman. That's it! The Lord won't open His church to the Devil. (The crowd is rushing at Gert again, when the Bishop's Secretary enters,
preceded by a verger, who calls upon the people to attend.) Secretary (reading). "Whereas our cathedral city has failed in the
payment of its tithes to this See, and whereas it continues refractory
in regard to such payments, the Chapter has deemed it necessary, in
accordance with its vested rights and the sanction granted by the Holy
Curia, to close the doors of the church and to discontinue all masses
and sacrifices until the aforesaid dereliction shall have been
duly remedied; failure to observe which shall be at the risk of our
displeasure. Datum vigilia assumptionis Mariae. Chapter of Straengnaes." [Exit.] Gert. What do you say to that, good folk? Townsman. No mass on Whitsun Eve? That's a shame! Gert. Take care! Say nothing evil of the priests; maybe they're not to
blame. Townsman. Who is to blame, then? Gert. The Church! That invisible and omnipotent something! It is the
Church, you see, that has closed the church. (The crowd gives evidence
of disapproval.) Olof (who in the meantime has come forward, seizes a rope hanging
from the bell tower, and begins to ring vespers). If your worship be
seriously meant, I'll say mass for you. Townsman. Many thanks, Master Olof, but are you aware of what that may
lead to? Olof. Let us fear the Lord more than men! (The crowd kneels.) Dear
friends! Brothers and sisters in Christ Jesus! As we are now come
together here--

Townsman. Master Olof--

Olof. What is it? Townsman. We want a real mass, and not any new inventions of men. Gert. It has to be in Latin, my dear Master Olof, or we can't understand
what you say. Townsman. It has to be in the sacred tongue--or anybody might say mass. Olof. And so you shall! Everyone for himself, with God! Crowd. A Luther! A Luther! Antichrist! Townsman. Well, well, Master Olof, have you, too, so young and zealous,
become tainted by the German devil? I am an old man, who has seen much
of the world, and I mean well by you--Turn back while you are still
young!--Do as we ask you and give us the old mass. Olof. No, there must be an end to that mummery. Ye shall pray in spirit
and in truth, and not in words ye do not understand. Townsman. Don't you think, my young friend, that the Lord understands
Latin? Gert. But Swedish He doesn't understand at all! Townsman. Master Olof, are you going to let the people depart from you
without a word to edify them? Can't you see how they are yearning for
their God? Make a sacrifice of your own sinful will, and don't let the
people go from you like sheep that have no shepherd. Olof. You call my will sinful? Townsman. You are a hard man! Olof. Say not so! Do you know what the ringing of this bell will cost
me? Townsman. Your vanity. Gert. And your peace! For it was the alarum bell that rang in the
battle. Hey-ho, this is the start! Soon the bells of Stockholm will
respond, and then the blood of Hus, and of Ziska, and of all the
thousands of peasants will be on the heads of the princes and the
papists. Woman. Woe unto us! What is he raving about? Townsman. Do you know this man, Master Olof? Olof. No. Gert. Yes, Olof, you know me. Deny me not! Are you afraid of these
miserable creatures who do not want their own welfare--and who have
never heard the word "freedom"? Olof. What is your name? Gert. If I told, you would all tremble. Yet you must tremble in order
that you may wake out of your sleep. I am named the angel that was
cast out and that is to come again ten thousand times; I am named the
liberator that came too early; I am named Satan because I love you more
than my own life; I have been named Luther; I have been named Hus. Now I
am named Anabaptist! Crowd (shrink back and begin to cross themselves). Anabaptist! Gert (removing his disguise and revealing himself as much older than he
had seemed). Do you know me now, Olof? Olof. Father Gert! Townsman. He calls him father! Crowd (drawing back from Olof and Gert). Anabaptist! Anabaptist! Woman. Don't you see, it's he who was put under the ban--

Townsman. Gert the Printer--the bishop's printer--

Another Townsman. The man who printed Luther! Woman. Woe unto us and to our city! Woe to our priests when they bear
company with Antichrist! Townsman. He denies the holy baptism! Woman. He denies God. (The crowd disperses.) Olof. That was dangerous talk, Father Gert. Gert. You really think it was dangerous, Olof? Bless you for those
words! Olof. Dangerous for you, I mean. Gert. Not for any one else? Olof. Let us hope not. Gert. You have known Luther? Olof. Indeed, I have! And now I want to carry out his work in my own
country. Gert. Is that all? Olof. What do you mean? Gert. It is not enough! Luther is dead. He made a beginning, we have to
go on. Olof. Whither do you want to lead me? Gert. Far, Olof, very far! Olof. I am afraid of you, Father Gert. Gert. Yes, and will be more so; for I shall take you up on a high
mountain, and from there you shall overlook the whole world. You see,
Olof, it is now Whitsuntide; it was at this time the Holy Ghost came
down and filled the Apostles--nay, all humanity. The spirit of the Lord
has descended upon me. I feel it, and for that reason they shut me up
like one demented. But now I am free again, and now I shall speak the
word; for now, Olof, we are standing on the mountain. Behold the people
crawling on their knees before those two men seated on their thrones. The taller holds two keys in one hand and a thunderbolt in the other. That is the Pope. Now he hurls his thunderbolt, and a thousand souls
pass into perdition, while the rest kiss his foot and sing Gloria
Deo--but he who is seated on the throne turns about and smiles. Now
behold his companion. He has a sword and at sceptre. Bow down before
the sceptre, lest the sword smite you. When he knits his brows all the
people tremble. (He turns toward the man on the other throne, and both
smile.) They are two pillars of Baal. Then is heard a sound out of
heaven as of a host muttering. "Who is grumbling?" exclaims the Pope,
shaking his thunderbolt. "Who is muttering?" --and the Emperor shakes
his sword. Nobody answers, but still there is grumbling in the air, and
roaring, and a cry of "Think!" The Pope cowers, and the Emperor, turning
pale, demands: "Who was it that cried 'Think'? Bring him here, and I
will take his life!" The Pope shouts: "Bring him here, and I will take
his soul!" The cry came out of heaven, and was uttered by no one. But
still the sound of it rises; a storm wind springs up; it sweeps over the
Alps and goes roaring across Fichtelgebirge; it stirs up the Baltic and
echoes from the shores, and the cry is repeated a thousand times all
over the world: "Freedom, freedom!" The Pope throws his keys into the
sea, and the Emperor sheathes his sword, for against that cry they
avail nothing.--Oh, Olof, you wish to smite the Pope, but you forget the
Emperor--the Emperor, who is killing his people without counting them
because they dare to sigh when he tramples on their chests. You want to
smite the Pope at Rome, but, like Luther, you want to give them a new
pope in Holy Writ. Listen! Listen! Bind not the spirits with any fetters
whatsoever! Forget not the great Whitsunday! Forget not your great goal:
spiritual life and spiritual freedom! Listen not to the cry of death:
"And behold, it is all good!" For then the millennium, the kingdom of
liberty, will never arrive--and it is that which is now beginning. (Olof
remains silent.) Does it make you dizzy? Olof. You go too far, Gert. Gert. The day shall come when they will call me papist. Aim at the sky,
and you will hit the forest line ahead of you. Olof. Turn back, Gert! You'll bring disaster on yourself and on the
realm. Can't you see how the country is still shivering with the
wound-fever caused by the last war? And you wish to sow the seeds of
civil war. It is a godless deed! Gert. No, the knife is in the flesh now. Cut away, and the body may be
saved. Olof. I'll denounce you as a traitor to your country. Gert. You had better not, seeing that to-day you have offended the
Church beyond repair. Besides--

Olof. Speak out, Gert. Just now you look like Satan himself! Gert. You shall have my secret: deal with it to suit yourself. The
King leaves for Malmoe to-day, and the day after to-morrow, perchance,
Stockholm may be in open revolt. Olof. What are you talking about? Gert. Do you know Rink and Knipperdollink? Olof (alarmed). The Anabaptists! Gert. Yes. What's so startling in that? They are nothing but a couple
of lubberly tradesmen. A furrier and a grocer, who deny the use of
baptizing unconscious children, and who are simple-minded enough to
oppose the forcing of irrational creatures into deliberate perjury. Olof. That is not all. Gert. What is it, then? Olof. They are possessed. Gert. Of the spirit, yes. It is the storm wind that is crying through
them. Beware, if you get into its path! Olof. This must be stopped. I am going to the King. Gert. We should be friends, Olof. Your mother is living in Stockholm,
isn't she? Olof. You know it, then? Gert. Do you know that my daughter Christine is with your mother? Olof. Christine? Gert. Yes, for the present. If we win, your mother will be protected
for my daughter's sake; and if the Catholics win, my daughter will
be protected for your mother's sake. You are a little concerned about
Christine, are you not? Olof. Gert, Gert, what made you so wise? Gert. The madhouse. Olof. Go away from me! You'll lead me into disaster. Gert. Yes, if you call it a disaster to be robbed of all earthly
happiness, to be dragged into prison, to suffer poverty, to be scorned
and reviled fur the sake of truth. If so, you are not worthy of such a
splendid disaster. I thought you would understand me, I counted on your
help, for in you the fire is still burning, but I see that the world is
tempting you. Well, follow the stream and be happy! Olof. How could a man make over the age in which he is living? Gert. That's what Luther has done. Olof. How can one man check a stream? Gert. Guide it, you fool--for we are the stream. The old are stagnant
mudpools, you don't need to check them, but don't let them rot away or
dry up; give them an outlet, and they'll flow with the stream, too. Olof. Yes, I understand you! You have bred a thought in my soul, but
that thought must be strangled in its birth, or it will kill me. Gert. Believe me, you will be a Daniel, and you will speak the truth
unto princes, and they will conspire to take your life; but the Lord
will protect you.--Now I can safely leave, for I see lightnings flash
from your eyes and tongues of fire flickering over your head. (As he is
leaving.) There comes the Lord of Flies: don't let him defile your pure
soul also. Olof. Jesus help me! [Enter Bishop Brask and Bishop Sommar. Sommar approaches Olof, while
Brask remains behind, studying the surroundings.] Sommar. Who rang vespers, Canonicus? Olof (calmly but firmly). I did. Sommar. Didn't you know the order? Olof. I was aware of the prohibition. Sommar. And you dared to defy it? Olof. Yes, when the people were let go like sheep without a shepherd, I
wanted to keep them together. Sommar. You seem to be finding fault with our actions. That's impudence
indeed. Olof. Truth is always impudent. Sommar. I believe, young man, that you want to play the part of an
apostle of truth. It will bring you no thanks. Olof. All I ask is ingratitude. Sommar. Save your truths. They don't retain their value in the market
very long. Olof (impetuously). That's advice worthy of the Father of
Lies!--(Mildly.) I ask your pardon! Sommar. Do you know to whom you are talking? Olof (heatedly). To servus servi servorum Mans Sommar! Brask (stepping forward). Who is this man? Sommar. One of the attendants in the church. Brask. What's his name? Sommar. Olof Pedersson, alias Olaus Petri. Brask (staring hard at Olof). So you are Master Olof? (Olof bows
and looks fixedly at Brask.) I like you. Would you care to become my
secretary? Olof. Many thanks, Your Grace, but I have no recommendations. Brask. What have you to say, Bishop Mans? Sommar. He is said to have found much favor with Dr. Luther. Brask. So I've heard. Nothing but youthful spirits. We'll train him. Olof. I fear it is too late! Brask. A sapling can be bent. Sommar. It is not wise to raise vipers, Your Grace. Our canonicus here
has strong leanings toward heresy, and to-day he has dared to defy our
orders. Brask. Is that so? Sommar. On fully legal grounds we have proclaimed an interdict, and this
man has ventured to say mass--worse than that, he has said a Lutheran
mass, and thus stirred up the people. Brask. Take care, young man! Don't you know that the ban will fall on
anybody who proclaims Luther? Olof. I know it, but I fear no other god than God. Brask. Consider your words. I mean well by you, and you repel me. Olof. You want to purchase my ability for the doctoring of your sick
cause, and I am shameless enough not to sell myself. Brask. By Saint George, I think you are out of your senses! Olof. If so, don't give me the same treatment as Gert the Printer. You
put him in a madhouse, and it made him too wise, I fear. Brask (to Bishop Sommar). Do you know Gert? Sommar. No, Your Grace. Brask. He's a lunatic who used my press to print Lutheran writings in
place of the anti-Lutheran stuff I put into his hands. Moreover, he was
dreaming of the Apocalypse and the Millennium. (To Olof.) Have you seen
him? Olof. He was here awhile ago, and you can expect but little good of him. Brask. Is he at large? Olof. He'll be in Stockholm soon, and from there you'll hear of him, I
think. Take care, my Lord Bishop! Brask. Ho, there is nothing to fear yet. Olof. The Anabaptists are in Stockholm. Brask. What do you say? Olof. The Anabaptists are in Stockholm! Brask. The Anabaptists? [Enter Gustaf Vasa suddenly.] Gustaf. What's up? The city is in a tumult, the people are marching
through the streets crying for the mass. What's the meaning of all this? Brask. Mischief, Your Highness. Gustaf. Bishop Mans! Sommar. The city has failed to pay its tithes. Gustaf. And for that reason you refuse to hold divine service? 'Sdeath! Brask. Your Highness ought to remember--

Gustaf. Answer me, Bishop Malls! Sommar. Your Highness ought to remember that matters like these, which
fall within the jurisdiction of the Church--

Gustaf. I command you to attend to your duties! Brask. The Bishops of Sweden take no orders except from their superiors,
the Pope and the Canon Law. Gustaf (checked). I know, but if the Pope cannot always keep an eye on
them? Brask. That's our concern. Gustaf (flares up, but controls himself at once). Your Grace is right. It will remain your concern. Brask. To change the subject--Stockholm is about to rise in rebellion. Gustaf. Who says so? Sommar. Our canonicus here. Gustaf. Your schoolmaster? Where is he? Oh, is it you? What's your name? Olof. Olof Pedersson. Gustaf. Master Olof! They tell the you are a heretic, and that you are
scheming against Holy Church! That's a perilous venture! Brask. This very day he has dropped his mask by daring to show open
defiance of the Chapter's prohibition against services, and for that
reason we demand that Your Highness consent to have him duly punished. Gustaf. That's a matter for the Chapter and does not concern me. (To
Olof.) But what was that you had to say about a rebellion at Stockholm? Olof. The Anabaptists! Gustaf. Is that all? Brask. Does not Your Highness know how those madmen have been carrying
on in Germany? We suggest that Your Highness return to the city in
person with your armed force. Gustaf. That's a matter in which I suit myself! Brask. But civil war--

Gustaf. That's _my_ concern! (To Olof.) Olof, I appoint you to the
clerkship of our court-house at Stockholm. Get over there at once. Speak
to the people. I put my trust in you! Brask. For the country's sake I ask Your Highness to consider the
futility of wasting speech on madmen. Gustaf. Souls are not controlled by swords. Bear that in mind, Your
Lordships. Brask. The Church has never--

Gustaf. Nor by keys! (To Olof.) Go to my chancellor, and he will give
you your appointment. Brask. You had better wait a moment, canonicus. Gustaf. Our secretary will not put your orders ahead of mine. Brask. The rights of the Church must be assured first of all. Olof
Pedersson--

Gustaf (correcting him). Secretary--

Brask. Secretary Olof Pedersson cannot leave this city until the Chapter
has pronounced its verdict. Gustaf. The Chapter must try the case before it can pronounce a verdict. Brask. That's our concern. Gustaf. It is not your concern, Bishop Brask. The Bishop of Linkoeping
cannot sit in judgment on a canonicus at Straengnaes. Speak for yourself,
Bishop Sommar. Sommar. After what has just occurred--h'm! Brask. All further arguments would seem superfluous. Gustaf. You had better be silent, Bishop Brask, or leave us, as I am
talking privately to Bishop Sommar--privately!--Well, speak up, Bishop
Mans! Sommar. I cannot see but--that--as His Grace, the Bishop of Linkoeping--

Gustaf. We are talking of Master Olof now. Your Lordships will have to
postpone the trial. Be kind enough to leave us. [Exeunt Bishops.] Gustaf (to Olof). Will you be my man? Olof. Your Highness' secretary? Gustaf. No, my right hand--on the condition that for the present the
left hand shall not know what the right is doing. Go to Stockholm. Olof. The Chapter will demand my surrender and ban me. Gustaf. Before they get to that point you may fall back on me, but until
then--stand on your own feet as far as you can. Olof. What is Your Highness' will? Gustaf. Talk to those fanatics in Stockholm. Olof. And then? Gustaf. Oh, that's a long way off. I don't dare to think so far
yet.--Let them preach. It can't hurt those sottish spirits to hear a
new word, even if it be not all true. But there must be no violence; for
then the sword will join in the game. Farewell, Olof! [Exit.] Olof (alone). So the Emperor won't be friends with the Pope! (The two scholars, who have been waiting among the trees in the
background, come forward.) First Scholar. Shall we go on with the play, Master Olof? Olof. No, children, there will be no more playing. First Scholar. Are you going to leave us, Master Olof? Olof. Yes, and probably forever. First Scholar. Can't you stay over Whitsuntide, so that we can perform
our comedy? Second Scholar. And so that I can play the Angel Gabriel? First Scholar. Please do as we ask you, Master Olof! You are the only
one who has been nice to us and spared us those terrible fasts. Second Scholar. Oh, don't go away from us, Master Olof! Olof. You don't know what you are asking, children. The day will come
when you shall thank the Lord that I did go away from you.--Oh, no,
I hope such a day will never come!--But let us make our leave-taking
brief. Good-bye, Nils! Good-bye, Vilhelm! (He embraces them, and they kiss his hand. In the meantime Lars
Andersson has entered and is watching the group closely.) First Scholar. Won't you ever come back, Master Olof? Lars (coming forward). Are you ready to start now? Olof (to the scholars). No, I shall never come back. Scholars (as they go out). Good-bye, Master Olof, and don't forget us! (Olof stands looking after them.) Lars. I have seen the King. Olof (absent-mindedly). Have you? Lars. Do you know what he said? Olof. No. Lars. "I have got a harrier to raise the game; now it remains to be seen
whether he will come back when I whistle for him!" Olof. Look at them--playing there among the graves, and picking flowers,
and singing the songs of Whitsuntide. Lars (taking hold of Olof's arm). Child! Olof (with a start). What did you say? Lars. I thought you had laid your hand so firmly on the plough handle
to-day that there could be no question of looking back. (Olof waves his
hand to the scholars.) Are you still dreaming? Olof. It was the last bright morning dream that passed away from me. Pardon me--I am awake now! [Exeunt toward the right. Then they are nearly out, Olof turns for a
last look at the scholars. These have disappeared in the meantime, and
in their place appear the two Black Friars, Marten and Nils. On seeing
them, Olof utters a startled cry and puts one hand to his forehead. Lars
drags him out.] ACT II

SCENE 1

(A Room in the Foundation Wall of the Church of St. Nicolaus at
Stockholm (generally known as Greatchurch), used as a beer-shop. A bar
full of pots and mugs occupies the background. To the right of the bar
stands a table, back of which appears an iron door. Two disguised friars
(Marten and Nils) are seated at this table drinking beer. The other
tables are surrounded by German mercenaries, peasants, and sailors. 