

E-text prepared by Bill Keir, Susan Woodring, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team and revised by Jeannie Howse



      +------------------------------------------------------+
      | Transcriber's Note:                                  |
      |                                                      |
      | Inconsistent hyphenation and unusual spelling in the |
      | original document have been preserved. |
      |                                                      |
      +------------------------------------------------------+





DRACULA'S GUEST

by

BRAM STOKER

First published 1914







To

MY SON




CONTENTS


     Dracula's Guest                                  9
     The Judge's House                               26
     The Squaw                                       50
     The Secret of the Growing Gold                  67
     The Gipsy Prophecy                              84
     The Coming of Abel Behenna                      96
     The Burial of the Rats                         120
     A Dream of Red Hands                           152
     Crooken Sands                                  165




PREFACE


A few months before the lamented death of my husband--I might say even
as the shadow of death was over him--he planned three series of short
stories for publication, and the present volume is one of them. To his
original list of stories in this book, I have added an hitherto
unpublished episode from _Dracula_. It was originally excised owing to
the length of the book, and may prove of interest to the many readers
of what is considered my husband's most remarkable work. The other
stories have already been published in English and American
periodicals. Had my husband lived longer, he might have seen fit to
revise this work, which is mainly from the earlier years of his
strenuous life. But, as fate has entrusted to me the issuing of it, I
consider it fitting and proper to let it go forth practically as it
was left by him. FLORENCE BRAM STOKER




Dracula's Guest


When we started for our drive the sun was shining brightly on Munich,
and the air was full of the joyousness of early summer. Just as we
were about to depart, Herr Delbrueck (the maitre d'hotel of the Quatre
Saisons, where I was staying) came down, bareheaded, to the carriage
and, after wishing me a pleasant drive, said to the coachman, still
holding his hand on the handle of the carriage door:

'Remember you are back by nightfall. The sky looks bright but there is
a shiver in the north wind that says there may be a sudden storm. But
I am sure you will not be late.' Here he smiled, and added, 'for you
know what night it is.' Johann answered with an emphatic, 'Ja, mein Herr,' and, touching his
hat, drove off quickly. When we had cleared the town, I said, after
signalling to him to stop:

'Tell me, Johann, what is tonight?' He crossed himself, as he answered laconically: 'Walpurgis nacht.' Then he took out his watch, a great, old-fashioned German silver thing
as big as a turnip, and looked at it, with his eyebrows gathered
together and a little impatient shrug of his shoulders. I realised
that this was his way of respectfully protesting against the
unnecessary delay, and sank back in the carriage, merely motioning
him to proceed. He started off rapidly, as if to make up for lost
time. Every now and then the horses seemed to throw up their heads and
sniffed the air suspiciously. On such occasions I often looked round
in alarm. The road was pretty bleak, for we were traversing a sort of
high, wind-swept plateau. As we drove, I saw a road that looked but
little used, and which seemed to dip through a little, winding valley. It looked so inviting that, even at the risk of offending him, I
called Johann to stop--and when he had pulled up, I told him I would
like to drive down that road. He made all sorts of excuses, and
frequently crossed himself as he spoke. This somewhat piqued my
curiosity, so I asked him various questions. He answered fencingly,
and repeatedly looked at his watch in protest. Finally I said:

'Well, Johann, I want to go down this road. I shall not ask you to
come unless you like; but tell me why you do not like to go, that is
all I ask.' For answer he seemed to throw himself off the box, so
quickly did he reach the ground. Then he stretched out his hands
appealingly to me, and implored me not to go. There was just enough of
English mixed with the German for me to understand the drift of his
talk. He seemed always just about to tell me something--the very idea
of which evidently frightened him; but each time he pulled himself up,
saying, as he crossed himself: 'Walpurgis-Nacht!' I tried to argue with him, but it was difficult to argue with a man
when I did not know his language. The advantage certainly rested with
him, for although he began to speak in English, of a very crude and
broken kind, he always got excited and broke into his native
tongue--and every time he did so, he looked at his watch. Then the
horses became restless and sniffed the air. At this he grew very pale,
and, looking around in a frightened way, he suddenly jumped forward,
took them by the bridles and led them on some twenty feet. I followed,
and asked why he had done this. For answer he crossed himself, pointed
to the spot we had left and drew his carriage in the direction of the
other road, indicating a cross, and said, first in German, then in
English: 'Buried him--him what killed themselves.' I remembered the old custom of burying suicides at cross-roads: 'Ah! I
see, a suicide. How interesting!' But for the life of me I could not
make out why the horses were frightened. Whilst we were talking, we heard a sort of sound between a yelp and a
bark. It was far away; but the horses got very restless, and it took
Johann all his time to quiet them. He was pale, and said, 'It sounds
like a wolf--but yet there are no wolves here now.' 'No?' I said, questioning him; 'isn't it long since the wolves were so
near the city?' 'Long, long,' he answered, 'in the spring and summer; but with the
snow the wolves have been here not so long.' Whilst he was petting the horses and trying to quiet them, dark clouds
drifted rapidly across the sky. The sunshine passed away, and a breath
of cold wind seemed to drift past us. It was only a breath, however,
and more in the nature of a warning than a fact, for the sun came out
brightly again. Johann looked under his lifted hand at the horizon and
said:

'The storm of snow, he comes before long time.' Then he looked at his
watch again, and, straightway holding his reins firmly--for the horses
were still pawing the ground restlessly and shaking their heads--he
climbed to his box as though the time had come for proceeding on our
journey. I felt a little obstinate and did not at once get into the carriage. 'Tell me,' I said, 'about this place where the road leads,' and I
pointed down. Again he crossed himself and mumbled a prayer, before he answered, 'It
is unholy.' 'What is unholy?' I enquired. 'The village.' 'Then there is a village?' 'No, no. No one lives there hundreds of years.' My curiosity was
piqued, 'But you said there was a village.' 'There was.' 'Where is it now?' Whereupon he burst out into a long story in German and English, so
mixed up that I could not quite understand exactly what he said, but
roughly I gathered that long ago, hundreds of years, men had died
there and been buried in their graves; and sounds were heard under the
clay, and when the graves were opened, men and women were found rosy
with life, and their mouths red with blood. And so, in haste to save
their lives (aye, and their souls!--and here he crossed himself) those
who were left fled away to other places, where the living lived, and
the dead were dead and not--not something. He was evidently afraid to
speak the last words. As he proceeded with his narration, he grew more
and more excited. It seemed as if his imagination had got hold of him,
and he ended in a perfect paroxysm of fear--white-faced, perspiring,
trembling and looking round him, as if expecting that some dreadful
presence would manifest itself there in the bright sunshine on the
open plain. Finally, in an agony of desperation, he cried:

'Walpurgis nacht!' and pointed to the carriage for me to get in. All
my English blood rose at this, and, standing back, I said:

'You are afraid, Johann--you are afraid. Go home; I shall return
alone; the walk will do me good.' The carriage door was open. I took
from the seat my oak walking-stick--which I always carry on my holiday
excursions--and closed the door, pointing back to Munich, and said,
'Go home, Johann--Walpurgis-nacht doesn't concern Englishmen.' The horses were now more restive than ever, and Johann was trying to
hold them in, while excitedly imploring me not to do anything so
foolish. I pitied the poor fellow, he was deeply in earnest; but all
the same I could not help laughing. His English was quite gone now. In
his anxiety he had forgotten that his only means of making me
understand was to talk my language, so he jabbered away in his native
German. It began to be a little tedious. After giving the direction,
'Home!' I turned to go down the cross-road into the valley. With a despairing gesture, Johann turned his horses towards Munich. I
leaned on my stick and looked after him. He went slowly along the road
for a while: then there came over the crest of the hill a man tall and
thin. I could see so much in the distance. When he drew near the
horses, they began to jump and kick about, then to scream with terror. Johann could not hold them in; they bolted down the road, running away
madly. I watched them out of sight, then looked for the stranger, but
I found that he, too, was gone. With a light heart I turned down the side road through the deepening
valley to which Johann had objected. There was not the slightest
reason, that I could see, for his objection; and I daresay I tramped
for a couple of hours without thinking of time or distance, and
certainly without seeing a person or a house. So far as the place was
concerned, it was desolation itself. But I did not notice this
particularly till, on turning a bend in the road, I came upon a
scattered fringe of wood; then I recognised that I had been impressed
unconsciously by the desolation of the region through which I had
passed. I sat down to rest myself, and began to look around. It struck me that
it was considerably colder than it had been at the commencement of my
walk--a sort of sighing sound seemed to be around me, with, now and
then, high overhead, a sort of muffled roar. Looking upwards I noticed
that great thick clouds were drifting rapidly across the sky from
North to South at a great height. There were signs of coming storm in
some lofty stratum of the air. I was a little chilly, and, thinking
that it was the sitting still after the exercise of walking, I resumed
my journey. The ground I passed over was now much more picturesque. There were no
striking objects that the eye might single out; but in all there was a
charm of beauty. I took little heed of time and it was only when the
deepening twilight forced itself upon me that I began to think of how
I should find my way home. The brightness of the day had gone. The air
was cold, and the drifting of clouds high overhead was more marked. They were accompanied by a sort of far-away rushing sound, through
which seemed to come at intervals that mysterious cry which the driver
had said came from a wolf. For a while I hesitated. I had said I would
see the deserted village, so on I went, and presently came on a wide
stretch of open country, shut in by hills all around. Their sides were
covered with trees which spread down to the plain, dotting, in clumps,
the gentler slopes and hollows which showed here and there. I followed
with my eye the winding of the road, and saw that it curved close to
one of the densest of these clumps and was lost behind it. As I looked there came a cold shiver in the air, and the snow began to
fall. I thought of the miles and miles of bleak country I had passed,
and then hurried on to seek the shelter of the wood in front. Darker
and darker grew the sky, and faster and heavier fell the snow, till
the earth before and around me was a glistening white carpet the
further edge of which was lost in misty vagueness. The road was here
but crude, and when on the level its boundaries were not so marked, as
when it passed through the cuttings; and in a little while I found
that I must have strayed from it, for I missed underfoot the hard
surface, and my feet sank deeper in the grass and moss. Then the wind
grew stronger and blew with ever increasing force, till I was fain to
run before it. The air became icy-cold, and in spite of my exercise I
began to suffer. The snow was now falling so thickly and whirling
around me in such rapid eddies that I could hardly keep my eyes open. Every now and then the heavens were torn asunder by vivid lightning,
and in the flashes I could see ahead of me a great mass of trees,
chiefly yew and cypress all heavily coated with snow. I was soon amongst the shelter of the trees, and there, in comparative
silence, I could hear the rush of the wind high overhead. Presently
the blackness of the storm had become merged in the darkness of the
night. By-and-by the storm seemed to be passing away: it now only came
in fierce puffs or blasts. At such moments the weird sound of the
wolf appeared to be echoed by many similar sounds around me. Now and again, through the black mass of drifting cloud, came a
straggling ray of moonlight, which lit up the expanse, and showed me
that I was at the edge of a dense mass of cypress and yew trees. As
the snow had ceased to fall, I walked out from the shelter and began
to investigate more closely. It appeared to me that, amongst so many
old foundations as I had passed, there might be still standing a house
in which, though in ruins, I could find some sort of shelter for a
while. As I skirted the edge of the copse, I found that a low wall
encircled it, and following this I presently found an opening. Here
the cypresses formed an alley leading up to a square mass of some kind
of building. Just as I caught sight of this, however, the drifting
clouds obscured the moon, and I passed up the path in darkness. The
wind must have grown colder, for I felt myself shiver as I walked; but
there was hope of shelter, and I groped my way blindly on. I stopped, for there was a sudden stillness. The storm had passed;
and, perhaps in sympathy with nature's silence, my heart seemed to
cease to beat. But this was only momentarily; for suddenly the
moonlight broke through the clouds, showing me that I was in a
graveyard, and that the square object before me was a great massive
tomb of marble, as white as the snow that lay on and all around it. With the moonlight there came a fierce sigh of the storm, which
appeared to resume its course with a long, low howl, as of many dogs
or wolves. I was awed and shocked, and felt the cold perceptibly grow
upon me till it seemed to grip me by the heart. Then while the flood
of moonlight still fell on the marble tomb, the storm gave further
evidence of renewing, as though it was returning on its track. Impelled by some sort of fascination, I approached the sepulchre to
see what it was, and why such a thing stood alone in such a place. I
walked around it, and read, over the Doric door, in German:

               COUNTESS DOLINGEN OF GRATZ
                        IN STYRIA
                 SOUGHT AND FOUND DEATH
                          1801

On the top of the tomb, seemingly driven through the solid marble--for
the structure was composed of a few vast blocks of stone--was a great
iron spike or stake. On going to the back I saw, graven in great
Russian letters:

          'The dead travel fast.' There was something so weird and uncanny about the whole thing that it
gave me a turn and made me feel quite faint. I began to wish, for the
first time, that I had taken Johann's advice. Here a thought struck
me, which came under almost mysterious circumstances and with a
terrible shock. This was Walpurgis Night! Walpurgis Night, when, according to the belief of millions of people,
the devil was abroad--when the graves were opened and the dead came
forth and walked. When all evil things of earth and air and water held
revel. This very place the driver had specially shunned. This was the
depopulated village of centuries ago. This was where the suicide lay;
and this was the place where I was alone--unmanned, shivering with
cold in a shroud of snow with a wild storm gathering again upon me! It
took all my philosophy, all the religion I had been taught, all my
courage, not to collapse in a paroxysm of fright. And now a perfect tornado burst upon me. The ground shook as though
thousands of horses thundered across it; and this time the storm bore
on its icy wings, not snow, but great hailstones which drove with such
violence that they might have come from the thongs of Balearic
slingers--hailstones that beat down leaf and branch and made the
shelter of the cypresses of no more avail than though their stems were
standing-corn. At the first I had rushed to the nearest tree; but I
was soon fain to leave it and seek the only spot that seemed to afford
refuge, the deep Doric doorway of the marble tomb. There, crouching
against the massive bronze door, I gained a certain amount of
protection from the beating of the hailstones, for now they only drove
against me as they ricocheted from the ground and the side of the
marble. As I leaned against the door, it moved slightly and opened inwards. The shelter of even a tomb was welcome in that pitiless tempest, and I
was about to enter it when there came a flash of forked-lightning that
lit up the whole expanse of the heavens. In the instant, as I am a
living man, I saw, as my eyes were turned into the darkness of the
tomb, a beautiful woman, with rounded cheeks and red lips, seemingly
sleeping on a bier. As the thunder broke overhead, I was grasped as by
the hand of a giant and hurled out into the storm. The whole thing was
so sudden that, before I could realise the shock, moral as well as
physical, I found the hailstones beating me down. At the same time I
had a strange, dominating feeling that I was not alone. I looked
towards the tomb. Just then there came another blinding flash, which
seemed to strike the iron stake that surmounted the tomb and to pour
through to the earth, blasting and crumbling the marble, as in a burst
of flame. The dead woman rose for a moment of agony, while she was
lapped in the flame, and her bitter scream of pain was drowned in the
thundercrash. The last thing I heard was this mingling of dreadful
sound, as again I was seized in the giant-grasp and dragged away,
while the hailstones beat on me, and the air around seemed reverberant
with the howling of wolves. The last sight that I remembered was a
vague, white, moving mass, as if all the graves around me had sent out
the phantoms of their sheeted-dead, and that they were closing in on
me through the white cloudiness of the driving hail. *       *       *       *       *

Gradually there came a sort of vague beginning of consciousness; then
a sense of weariness that was dreadful. For a time I remembered
nothing; but slowly my senses returned. My feet seemed positively
racked with pain, yet I could not move them. They seemed to be numbed. There was an icy feeling at the back of my neck and all down my spine,
and my ears, like my feet, were dead, yet in torment; but there was in
my breast a sense of warmth which was, by comparison, delicious. It
was as a nightmare--a physical nightmare, if one may use such an
expression; for some heavy weight on my chest made it difficult for me
to breathe. This period of semi-lethargy seemed to remain a long time, and as it
faded away I must have slept or swooned. Then came a sort of loathing,
like the first stage of sea-sickness, and a wild desire to be free
from something--I knew not what. A vast stillness enveloped me, as
though all the world were asleep or dead--only broken by the low
panting as of some animal close to me. I felt a warm rasping at my
throat, then came a consciousness of the awful truth, which chilled me
to the heart and sent the blood surging up through my brain. Some
great animal was lying on me and now licking my throat. I feared to
stir, for some instinct of prudence bade me lie still; but the brute
seemed to realise that there was now some change in me, for it raised
its head. Through my eyelashes I saw above me the two great flaming
eyes of a gigantic wolf. Its sharp white teeth gleamed in the gaping
red mouth, and I could feel its hot breath fierce and acrid upon me. For another spell of time I remembered no more. Then I became
conscious of a low growl, followed by a yelp, renewed again and again. Then, seemingly very far away, I heard a 'Holloa! holloa!' as of many
voices calling in unison. Cautiously I raised my head and looked in
the direction whence the sound came; but the cemetery blocked my view. The wolf still continued to yelp in a strange way, and a red glare
began to move round the grove of cypresses, as though following the
sound. As the voices drew closer, the wolf yelped faster and louder. I
feared to make either sound or motion. Nearer came the red glow, over
the white pall which stretched into the darkness around me. Then all
at once from beyond the trees there came at a trot a troop of horsemen
bearing torches. The wolf rose from my breast and made for the
cemetery. I saw one of the horsemen (soldiers by their caps and their
long military cloaks) raise his carbine and take aim. A companion
knocked up his arm, and I heard the ball whizz over my head. He had
evidently taken my body for that of the wolf. Another sighted the
animal as it slunk away, and a shot followed. Then, at a gallop, the
troop rode forward--some towards me, others following the wolf as it
disappeared amongst the snow-clad cypresses. As they drew nearer I tried to move, but was powerless, although I
could see and hear all that went on around me. Two or three of the
soldiers jumped from their horses and knelt beside me. One of them
raised my head, and placed his hand over my heart. 'Good news, comrades!' he cried. 'His heart still beats!' Then some brandy was poured down my throat; it put vigour into me, and
I was able to open my eyes fully and look around. Lights and shadows
were moving among the trees, and I heard men call to one another. They
drew together, uttering frightened exclamations; and the lights
flashed as the others came pouring out of the cemetery pell-mell, like
men possessed. When the further ones came close to us, those who were
around me asked them eagerly:

'Well, have you found him?' The reply rang out hurriedly:

'No! no! Come away quick--quick! This is no place to stay, and on this
of all nights!' 'What was it?' was the question, asked in all manner of keys. The
answer came variously and all indefinitely as though the men were
moved by some common impulse to speak, yet were restrained by some
common fear from giving their thoughts. 'It--it--indeed!' gibbered one, whose wits had plainly given out for
the moment. 'A wolf--and yet not a wolf!' another put in shudderingly. 'No use trying for him without the sacred bullet,' a third remarked in
a more ordinary manner. 'Serve us right for coming out on this night! Truly we have earned
our thousand marks!' were the ejaculations of a fourth. 'There was blood on the broken marble,' another said after a
pause--'the lightning never brought that there. And for him--is he
safe? Look at his throat! See, comrades, the wolf has been lying on
him and keeping his blood warm.' The officer looked at my throat and replied:

'He is all right; the skin is not pierced. What does it all mean? We
should never have found him but for the yelping of the wolf.' 'What became of it?' asked the man who was holding up my head, and who
seemed the least panic-stricken of the party, for his hands were
steady and without tremor. On his sleeve was the chevron of a petty
officer. 'It went to its home,' answered the man, whose long face was pallid,
and who actually shook with terror as he glanced around him fearfully. 'There are graves enough there in which it may lie. Come,
comrades--come quickly! Let us leave this cursed spot.' The officer raised me to a sitting posture, as he uttered a word of
command; then several men placed me upon a horse. He sprang to the
saddle behind me, took me in his arms, gave the word to advance; and,
turning our faces away from the cypresses, we rode away in swift,
military order. As yet my tongue refused its office, and I was perforce silent. I must
have fallen asleep; for the next thing I remembered was finding myself
standing up, supported by a soldier on each side of me. It was almost
broad daylight, and to the north a red streak of sunlight was
reflected, like a path of blood, over the waste of snow. The officer
was telling the men to say nothing of what they had seen, except that
they found an English stranger, guarded by a large dog. 'Dog! that was no dog,' cut in the man who had exhibited such fear. 'I
think I know a wolf when I see one.' The young officer answered calmly: 'I said a dog.' 'Dog!' reiterated the other ironically. It was evident that his
courage was rising with the sun; and, pointing to me, he said, 'Look
at his throat. Is that the work of a dog, master?' Instinctively I raised my hand to my throat, and as I touched it I
cried out in pain. The men crowded round to look, some stooping down
from their saddles; and again there came the calm voice of the young
officer:

'A dog, as I said. If aught else were said we should only be laughed
at.' I was then mounted behind a trooper, and we rode on into the suburbs
of Munich. Here we came across a stray carriage, into which I was
lifted, and it was driven off to the Quatre Saisons--the young officer
accompanying me, whilst a trooper followed with his horse, and the
others rode off to their barracks. When we arrived, Herr Delbrueck rushed so quickly down the steps to
meet me, that it was apparent he had been watching within. Taking me
by both hands he solicitously led me in. The officer saluted me and
was turning to withdraw, when I recognised his purpose, and insisted
that he should come to my rooms. Over a glass of wine I warmly thanked
him and his brave comrades for saving me. He replied simply that he
was more than glad, and that Herr Delbrueck had at the first taken
steps to make all the searching party pleased; at which ambiguous
utterance the maitre d'hotel smiled, while the officer pleaded duty
and withdrew. 'But Herr Delbrueck,' I enquired, 'how and why was it that the soldiers
searched for me?' He shrugged his shoulders, as if in depreciation of his own deed, as
he replied:

'I was so fortunate as to obtain leave from the commander of the
regiment in which I served, to ask for volunteers.' 'But how did you know I was lost?' I asked. 'The driver came hither with the remains of his carriage, which had
been upset when the horses ran away.' 'But surely you would not send a search-party of soldiers merely on
this account?' 'Oh, no!' he answered; 'but even before the coachman arrived, I had
this telegram from the Boyar whose guest you are,' and he took from
his pocket a telegram which he handed to me, and I read:


                                                 _Bistritz_. Be careful of my guest--his safety is most precious to me. Should aught happen to him, or if he be missed, spare nothing
     to find him and ensure his safety. He is English and therefore
     adventurous. There are often dangers from snow and wolves and
     night. Lose not a moment if you suspect harm to him. I answer
     your zeal with my fortune.--_Dracula_. As I held the telegram in my hand, the room seemed to whirl around me;
and, if the attentive maitre d'hotel had not caught me, I think I
should have fallen. There was something so strange in all this,
something so weird and impossible to imagine, that there grew on me a
sense of my being in some way the sport of opposite forces--the mere
vague idea of which seemed in a way to paralyse me. I was certainly
under some form of mysterious protection. From a distant country had
come, in the very nick of time, a message that took me out of the
danger of the snow-sleep and the jaws of the wolf. The Judge's House


When the time for his examination drew near Malcolm Malcolmson made up
his mind to go somewhere to read by himself. He feared the attractions
of the seaside, and also he feared completely rural isolation, for of
old he knew it charms, and so he determined to find some unpretentious
little town where there would be nothing to distract him. He refrained
from asking suggestions from any of his friends, for he argued that
each would recommend some place of which he had knowledge, and where
he had already acquaintances. As Malcolmson wished to avoid friends he
had no wish to encumber himself with the attention of friends'
friends, and so he determined to look out for a place for himself. He
packed a portmanteau with some clothes and all the books he required,
and then took ticket for the first name on the local time-table which
he did not know. When at the end of three hours' journey he alighted at Benchurch, he
felt satisfied that he had so far obliterated his tracks as to be sure
of having a peaceful opportunity of pursuing his studies. He went
straight to the one inn which the sleepy little place contained, and
put up for the night. Benchurch was a market town, and once in three
weeks was crowded to excess, but for the remainder of the twenty-one
days it was as attractive as a desert, Malcolmson looked around the
day after his arrival to try to find quarters more isolated than even
so quiet an inn as 'The Good Traveller' afforded. There was only one
place which took his fancy, and it certainly satisfied his wildest
ideas regarding quiet; in fact, quiet was not the proper word to apply
to it--desolation was the only term conveying any suitable idea of its
isolation. It was an old rambling, heavy-built house of the Jacobean
style, with heavy gables and windows, unusually small, and set higher
than was customary in such houses, and was surrounded with a high
brick wall massively built. Indeed, on examination, it looked more
like a fortified house than an ordinary dwelling. But all these things
pleased Malcolmson. 'Here,' he thought, 'is the very spot I have been
looking for, and if I can get opportunity of using it I shall be
happy.' His joy was increased when he realised beyond doubt that it
was not at present inhabited. From the post-office he got the name of the agent, who was rarely
surprised at the application to rent a part of the old house. Mr.
Carnford, the local lawyer and agent, was a genial old gentleman, and
frankly confessed his delight at anyone being willing to live in the
house. 'To tell you the truth,' said he, 'I should be only too happy, on
behalf of the owners, to let anyone have the house rent free for a
term of years if only to accustom the people here to see it inhabited. It has been so long empty that some kind of absurd prejudice has grown
up about it, and this can be best put down by its occupation--if
only,' he added with a sly glance at Malcolmson, 'by a scholar like
yourself, who wants its quiet for a time.' Malcolmson thought it needless to ask the agent about the 'absurd
prejudice'; he knew he would get more information, if he should
require it, on that subject from other quarters. He paid his three
months' rent, got a receipt, and the name of an old woman who would
probably undertake to 'do' for him, and came away with the keys in his
pocket. He then went to the landlady of the inn, who was a cheerful
and most kindly person, and asked her advice as to such stores and
provisions as he would be likely to require. She threw up her hands in
amazement when he told her where he was going to settle himself. 'Not in the Judge's House!' she said, and grew pale as she spoke. He
explained the locality of the house, saying that he did not know its
name. When he had finished she answered:

'Aye, sure enough--sure enough the very place! It is the Judge's House
sure enough.' He asked her to tell him about the place, why so called,
and what there was against it. She told him that it was so called
locally because it had been many years before--how long she could not
say, as she was herself from another part of the country, but she
thought it must have been a hundred years or more--the abode of a
judge who was held in great terror on account of his harsh sentences
and his hostility to prisoners at Assizes. As to what there was
against the house itself she could not tell. She had often asked, but
no one could inform her; but there was a general feeling that there
was _something_, and for her own part she would not take all the money
in Drinkwater's Bank and stay in the house an hour by herself. Then
she apologised to Malcolmson for her disturbing talk. 'It is too bad of me, sir, and you--and a young gentlemen, too--if you
will pardon me saying it, going to live there all alone. If you were
my boy--and you'll excuse me for saying it--you wouldn't sleep there a
night, not if I had to go there myself and pull the big alarm bell
that's on the roof!' The good creature was so manifestly in earnest,
and was so kindly in her intentions, that Malcolmson, although amused,
was touched. He told her kindly how much he appreciated her interest
in him, and added:

'But, my dear Mrs. Witham, indeed you need not be concerned about me! A man who is reading for the Mathematical Tripos has too much to think
of to be disturbed by any of these mysterious "somethings", and his
work is of too exact and prosaic a kind to allow of his having any
corner in his mind for mysteries of any kind. Harmonical Progression,
Permutations and Combinations, and Elliptic Functions have sufficient
mysteries for me!' Mrs. Witham kindly undertook to see after his
commissions, and he went himself to look for the old woman who had
been recommended to him. When he returned to the Judge's House with
her, after an interval of a couple of hours, he found Mrs. Witham
herself waiting with several men and boys carrying parcels, and an
upholsterer's man with a bed in a car, for she said, though tables and
chairs might be all very well, a bed that hadn't been aired for mayhap
fifty years was not proper for young bones to lie on. She was
evidently curious to see the inside of the house; and though
manifestly so afraid of the 'somethings' that at the slightest sound
she clutched on to Malcolmson, whom she never left for a moment, went
over the whole place. After his examination of the house, Malcolmson decided to take up his
abode in the great dining-room, which was big enough to serve for all
his requirements; and Mrs. Witham, with the aid of the charwoman,
Mrs. Dempster, proceeded to arrange matters. When the hampers were
brought in and unpacked, Malcolmson saw that with much kind
forethought she had sent from her own kitchen sufficient provisions to
last for a few days. Before going she expressed all sorts of kind
wishes; and at the door turned and said:

'And perhaps, sir, as the room is big and draughty it might be well to
have one of those big screens put round your bed at night--though,
truth to tell, I would die myself if I were to be so shut in with all
kinds of--of "things", that put their heads round the sides, or over
the top, and look on me!' The image which she had called up was too
much for her nerves, and she fled incontinently. Mrs. Dempster sniffed in a superior manner as the landlady
disappeared, and remarked that for her own part she wasn't afraid of
all the bogies in the kingdom. 'I'll tell you what it is, sir,' she said; 'bogies is all kinds and
sorts of things--except bogies! Rats and mice, and beetles; and creaky
doors, and loose slates, and broken panes, and stiff drawer handles,
that stay out when you pull them and then fall down in the middle of
the night. Look at the wainscot of the room! It is old--hundreds of
years old! Do you think there's no rats and beetles there! And do you
imagine, sir, that you won't see none of them? Rats is bogies, I tell
you, and bogies is rats; and don't you get to think anything else!' 'Mrs. Dempster,' said Malcolmson gravely, making her a polite bow,
'you know more than a Senior Wrangler! And let me say, that, as a mark
of esteem for your indubitable soundness of head and heart, I shall,
when I go, give you possession of this house, and let you stay here by
yourself for the last two months of my tenancy, for four weeks will
serve my purpose.' 'Thank you kindly, sir!' she answered, 'but I couldn't sleep away
from home a night. I am in Greenhow's Charity, and if I slept a night
away from my rooms I should lose all I have got to live on. The rules
is very strict; and there's too many watching for a vacancy for me to
run any risks in the matter. Only for that, sir, I'd gladly come here
and attend on you altogether during your stay.' 'My good woman,' said Malcolmson hastily, 'I have come here on purpose
to obtain solitude; and believe me that I am grateful to the late
Greenhow for having so organised his admirable charity--whatever it
is--that I am perforce denied the opportunity of suffering from such a
form of temptation! Saint Anthony himself could not be more rigid on
the point!' The old woman laughed harshly. 'Ah, you young gentlemen,' she said,
'you don't fear for naught; and belike you'll get all the solitude you
want here.' She set to work with her cleaning; and by nightfall, when
Malcolmson returned from his walk--he always had one of his books to
study as he walked--he found the room swept and tidied, a fire burning
in the old hearth, the lamp lit, and the table spread for supper with
Mrs. Witham's excellent fare. 'This is comfort, indeed,' he said, as
he rubbed his hands. When he had finished his supper, and lifted the tray to the other end
of the great oak dining-table, he got out his books again, put fresh
wood on the fire, trimmed his lamp, and set himself down to a spell of
real hard work. He went on without pause till about eleven o'clock,
when he knocked off for a bit to fix his fire and lamp, and to make
himself a cup of tea. He had always been a tea-drinker, and during his
college life had sat late at work and had taken tea late. The rest
was a great luxury to him, and he enjoyed it with a sense of
delicious, voluptuous ease. The renewed fire leaped and sparkled, and
threw quaint shadows through the great old room; and as he sipped his
hot tea he revelled in the sense of isolation from his kind. Then it
was that he began to notice for the first time what a noise the rats
were making. 'Surely,' he thought, 'they cannot have been at it all the time I was
reading. Had they been, I must have noticed it!' Presently, when the
noise increased, he satisfied himself that it was really new. It was
evident that at first the rats had been frightened at the presence of
a stranger, and the light of fire and lamp; but that as the time went
on they had grown bolder and were now disporting themselves as was
their wont. How busy they were! and hark to the strange noises! Up and down behind
the old wainscot, over the ceiling and under the floor they raced, and
gnawed, and scratched! Malcolmson smiled to himself as he recalled to
mind the saying of Mrs. Dempster, 'Bogies is rats, and rats is
bogies!' The tea began to have its effect of intellectual and nervous
stimulus, he saw with joy another long spell of work to be done before
the night was past, and in the sense of security which it gave him, he
allowed himself the luxury of a good look round the room. He took his
lamp in one hand, and went all around, wondering that so quaint and
beautiful an old house had been so long neglected. The carving of the
oak on the panels of the wainscot was fine, and on and round the doors
and windows it was beautiful and of rare merit. There were some old
pictures on the walls, but they were coated so thick with dust and
dirt that he could not distinguish any detail of them, though he held
his lamp as high as he could over his head. Here and there as he went
round he saw some crack or hole blocked for a moment by the face of a
rat with its bright eyes glittering in the light, but in an instant it
was gone, and a squeak and a scamper followed. The thing that most
struck him, however, was the rope of the great alarm bell on the roof,
which hung down in a corner of the room on the right-hand side of the
fireplace. He pulled up close to the hearth a great high-backed carved
oak chair, and sat down to his last cup of tea. When this was done he
made up the fire, and went back to his work, sitting at the corner of
the table, having the fire to his left. For a little while the rats
disturbed him somewhat with their perpetual scampering, but he got
accustomed to the noise as one does to the ticking of a clock or to
the roar of moving water; and he became so immersed in his work that
everything in the world, except the problem which he was trying to
solve, passed away from him. He suddenly looked up, his problem was still unsolved, and there was
in the air that sense of the hour before the dawn, which is so dread
to doubtful life. The noise of the rats had ceased. Indeed it seemed
to him that it must have ceased but lately and that it was the sudden
cessation which had disturbed him. The fire had fallen low, but still
it threw out a deep red glow. As he looked he started in spite of his
_sang froid_. There on the great high-backed carved oak chair by the right side of
the fireplace sat an enormous rat, steadily glaring at him with
baleful eyes. He made a motion to it as though to hunt it away, but it
did not stir. Then he made the motion of throwing something. Still it
did not stir, but showed its great white teeth angrily, and its cruel
eyes shone in the lamplight with an added vindictiveness. Malcolmson felt amazed, and seizing the poker from the hearth ran at
it to kill it. Before, however, he could strike it, the rat, with a
squeak that sounded like the concentration of hate, jumped upon the
floor, and, running up the rope of the alarm bell, disappeared in the
darkness beyond the range of the green-shaded lamp. Instantly, strange
to say, the noisy scampering of the rats in the wainscot began again. By this time Malcolmson's mind was quite off the problem; and as a
shrill cock-crow outside told him of the approach of morning, he went
to bed and to sleep. He slept so sound that he was not even waked by Mrs. Dempster coming
in to make up his room. It was only when she had tidied up the place
and got his breakfast ready and tapped on the screen which closed in
his bed that he woke. He was a little tired still after his night's
hard work, but a strong cup of tea soon freshened him up and, taking
his book, he went out for his morning walk, bringing with him a few
sandwiches lest he should not care to return till dinner time. He
found a quiet walk between high elms some way outside the town, and
here he spent the greater part of the day studying his Laplace. On his
return he looked in to see Mrs. Witham and to thank her for her
kindness. When she saw him coming through the diamond-paned bay window
of her sanctum she came out to meet him and asked him in. She looked
at him searchingly and shook her head as she said:

'You must not overdo it, sir. You are paler this morning than you
should be. Too late hours and too hard work on the brain isn't good
for any man! But tell me, sir, how did you pass the night? Well, I
hope? But my heart! sir, I was glad when Mrs. Dempster told me this
morning that you were all right and sleeping sound when she went in.' 'Oh, I was all right,' he answered smiling, 'the "somethings" didn't
worry me, as yet. Only the rats; and they had a circus, I tell you,
all over the place. There was one wicked looking old devil that sat up
on my own chair by the fire, and wouldn't go till I took the poker to
him, and then he ran up the rope of the alarm bell and got to
somewhere up the wall or the ceiling--I couldn't see where, it was so
dark.' 'Mercy on us,' said Mrs. Witham, 'an old devil, and sitting on a chair
by the fireside! Take care, sir! take care! There's many a true word
spoken in jest.' 'How do you mean? Pon my word I don't understand.' 'An old devil! The old devil, perhaps. There! sir, you needn't laugh,'
for Malcolmson had broken into a hearty peal. 'You young folks thinks
it easy to laugh at things that makes older ones shudder. Never mind,
sir! never mind! Please God, you'll laugh all the time. It's what I
wish you myself!' and the good lady beamed all over in sympathy with
his enjoyment, her fears gone for a moment. 'Oh, forgive me!' said Malcolmson presently. 'Don't think me rude; but
the idea was too much for me--that the old devil himself was on the
chair last night!' And at the thought he laughed again. Then he went
home to dinner. This evening the scampering of the rats began earlier; indeed it had
been going on before his arrival, and only ceased whilst his presence
by its freshness disturbed them. After dinner he sat by the fire for a
while and had a smoke; and then, having cleared his table, began to
work as before. Tonight the rats disturbed him more than they had done
on the previous night. How they scampered up and down and under and
over! How they squeaked, and scratched, and gnawed! How they, getting
bolder by degrees, came to the mouths of their holes and to the chinks
and cracks and crannies in the wainscoting till their eyes shone like
tiny lamps as the firelight rose and fell. But to him, now doubtless
accustomed to them, their eyes were not wicked; only their playfulness
touched him. Sometimes the boldest of them made sallies out on the
floor or along the mouldings of the wainscot. Now and again as they
disturbed him Malcolmson made a sound to frighten them, smiting the
table with his hand or giving a fierce 'Hsh, hsh,' so that they fled
straightway to their holes. And so the early part of the night wore on; and despite the noise
Malcolmson got more and more immersed in his work. All at once he stopped, as on the previous night, being overcome by a
sudden sense of silence. There was not the faintest sound of gnaw, or
scratch, or squeak. The silence was as of the grave. He remembered the
odd occurrence of the previous night, and instinctively he looked at
the chair standing close by the fireside. And then a very odd
sensation thrilled through him. There, on the great old high-backed carved oak chair beside the
fireplace sat the same enormous rat, steadily glaring at him with
baleful eyes. Instinctively he took the nearest thing to his hand, a book of
logarithms, and flung it at it. The book was badly aimed and the rat
did not stir, so again the poker performance of the previous night was
repeated; and again the rat, being closely pursued, fled up the rope
of the alarm bell. Strangely too, the departure of this rat was
instantly followed by the renewal of the noise made by the general rat
community. On this occasion, as on the previous one, Malcolmson could
not see at what part of the room the rat disappeared, for the green
shade of his lamp left the upper part of the room in darkness, and the
fire had burned low. On looking at his watch he found it was close on midnight; and, not
sorry for the _divertissement_, he made up his fire and made himself
his nightly pot of tea. He had got through a good spell of work, and
thought himself entitled to a cigarette; and so he sat on the great
oak chair before the fire and enjoyed it. Whilst smoking he began to
think that he would like to know where the rat disappeared to, for he
had certain ideas for the morrow not entirely disconnected with a
rat-trap. Accordingly he lit another lamp and placed it so that it
would shine well into the right-hand corner of the wall by the
fireplace. Then he got all the books he had with him, and placed them
handy to throw at the vermin. Finally he lifted the rope of the alarm
bell and placed the end of it on the table, fixing the extreme end
under the lamp. As he handled it he could not help noticing how
pliable it was, especially for so strong a rope, and one not in use. 'You could hang a man with it,' he thought to himself. When his
preparations were made he looked around, and said complacently:

'There now, my friend, I think we shall learn something of you this
time!' He began his work again, and though as before somewhat
disturbed at first by the noise of the rats, soon lost himself in his
propositions and problems. Again he was called to his immediate surroundings suddenly. This time
it might not have been the sudden silence only which took his
attention; there was a slight movement of the rope, and the lamp
moved. Without stirring, he looked to see if his pile of books was
within range, and then cast his eye along the rope. As he looked he
saw the great rat drop from the rope on the oak arm-chair and sit
there glaring at him. He raised a book in his right hand, and taking
careful aim, flung it at the rat. The latter, with a quick movement,
sprang aside and dodged the missile. He then took another book, and a
third, and flung them one after another at the rat, but each time
unsuccessfully. At last, as he stood with a book poised in his hand to
throw, the rat squeaked and seemed afraid. This made Malcolmson more
than ever eager to strike, and the book flew and struck the rat a
resounding blow. It gave a terrified squeak, and turning on his
pursuer a look of terrible malevolence, ran up the chair-back and made
a great jump to the rope of the alarm bell and ran up it like
lightning. The lamp rocked under the sudden strain, but it was a heavy
one and did not topple over. Malcolmson kept his eyes on the rat, and
saw it by the light of the second lamp leap to a moulding of the
wainscot and disappear through a hole in one of the great pictures
which hung on the wall, obscured and invisible through its coating of
dirt and dust. 'I shall look up my friend's habitation in the morning,' said the
student, as he went over to collect his books. 'The third picture from
the fireplace; I shall not forget.' He picked up the books one by one,
commenting on them as he lifted them. '_Conic Sections_ he does not
mind, nor _Cycloidal Oscillations_, nor the _Principia_, nor
_Quaternions_, nor _Thermodynamics_. Now for the book that fetched
him!' Malcolmson took it up and looked at it. As he did so he started,
and a sudden pallor overspread his face. He looked round uneasily and
shivered slightly, as he murmured to himself:

'The Bible my mother gave me! What an odd coincidence.' He sat down to
work again, and the rats in the wainscot renewed their gambols. They
did not disturb him, however; somehow their presence gave him a sense
of companionship. But he could not attend to his work, and after
striving to master the subject on which he was engaged gave it up in
despair, and went to bed as the first streak of dawn stole in through
the eastern window. He slept heavily but uneasily, and dreamed much; and when Mrs.
Dempster woke him late in the morning he seemed ill at ease, and for a
few minutes did not seem to realise exactly where he was. His first
request rather surprised the servant. 'Mrs. Dempster, when I am out to-day I wish you would get the steps
and dust or wash those pictures--specially that one the third from the
fireplace--I want to see what they are.' Late in the afternoon Malcolmson worked at his books in the shaded
walk, and the cheerfulness of the previous day came back to him as the
day wore on, and he found that his reading was progressing well. He
had worked out to a satisfactory conclusion all the problems which had
as yet baffled him, and it was in a state of jubilation that he paid a
visit to Mrs. Witham at 'The Good Traveller'. He found a stranger in
the cosy sitting-room with the landlady, who was introduced to him as
Dr. Thornhill. She was not quite at ease, and this, combined with the
doctor's plunging at once into a series of questions, made Malcolmson
come to the conclusion that his presence was not an accident, so
without preliminary he said:

'Dr. Thornhill, I shall with pleasure answer you any question you may
choose to ask me if you will answer me one question first.' The doctor seemed surprised, but he smiled and answered at once,
'Done! What is it?' 'Did Mrs. Witham ask you to come here and see me and advise me?' Dr. Thornhill for a moment was taken aback, and Mrs. Witham got fiery
red and turned away; but the doctor was a frank and ready man, and he
answered at once and openly. 'She did: but she didn't intend you to know it. I suppose it was my
clumsy haste that made you suspect. She told me that she did not like
the idea of your being in that house all by yourself, and that she
thought you took too much strong tea. In fact, she wants me to advise
you if possible to give up the tea and the very late hours. I was a
keen student in my time, so I suppose I may take the liberty of a
college man, and without offence, advise you not quite as a stranger.' Malcolmson with a bright smile held out his hand. 'Shake! as they say
in America,' he said. 'I must thank you for your kindness and Mrs.
Witham too, and your kindness deserves a return on my part. I promise
to take no more strong tea--no tea at all till you let me--and I shall
go to bed tonight at one o'clock at latest. Will that do?' 'Capital,' said the doctor. 'Now tell us all that you noticed in the
old house,' and so Malcolmson then and there told in minute detail all
that had happened in the last two nights. He was interrupted every now
and then by some exclamation from Mrs. Witham, till finally when he
told of the episode of the Bible the landlady's pent-up emotions found
vent in a shriek; and it was not till a stiff glass of brandy and
water had been administered that she grew composed again. Dr.
Thornhill listened with a face of growing gravity, and when the
narrative was complete and Mrs. Witham had been restored he asked:

'The rat always went up the rope of the alarm bell?' 'Always.' 'I suppose you know,' said the Doctor after a pause, 'what the rope
is?' 'No!' 'It is,' said the Doctor slowly, 'the very rope which the hangman used
for all the victims of the Judge's judicial rancour!' Here he was
interrupted by another scream from Mrs. Witham, and steps had to be
taken for her recovery. Malcolmson having looked at his watch, and
found that it was close to his dinner hour, had gone home before her
complete recovery. When Mrs. Witham was herself again she almost assailed the Doctor with
angry questions as to what he meant by putting such horrible ideas
into the poor young man's mind. 'He has quite enough there already to
upset him,' she added. Dr. Thornhill replied:

'My dear madam, I had a distinct purpose in it! I wanted to draw his
attention to the bell rope, and to fix it there. It may be that he is
in a highly overwrought state, and has been studying too much,
although I am bound to say that he seems as sound and healthy a young
man, mentally and bodily, as ever I saw--but then the rats--and that
suggestion of the devil.' The doctor shook his head and went on. 'I
would have offered to go and stay the first night with him but that I
felt sure it would have been a cause of offence. He may get in the
night some strange fright or hallucination; and if he does I want him
to pull that rope. All alone as he is it will give us warning, and we
may reach him in time to be of service. I shall be sitting up pretty
late tonight and shall keep my ears open. Do not be alarmed if
Benchurch gets a surprise before morning.' 'Oh, Doctor, what do you mean? What do you mean?' 'I mean this; that possibly--nay, more probably--we shall hear the
great alarm bell from the Judge's House tonight,' and the Doctor made
about as effective an exit as could be thought of. When Malcolmson arrived home he found that it was a little after his
usual time, and Mrs. Dempster had gone away--the rules of Greenhow's
Charity were not to be neglected. He was glad to see that the place
was bright and tidy with a cheerful fire and a well-trimmed lamp. The
evening was colder than might have been expected in April, and a heavy
wind was blowing with such rapidly-increasing strength that there was
every promise of a storm during the night. For a few minutes after his
entrance the noise of the rats ceased; but so soon as they became
accustomed to his presence they began again. He was glad to hear them,
for he felt once more the feeling of companionship in their noise, and
his mind ran back to the strange fact that they only ceased to
manifest themselves when that other--the great rat with the baleful
eyes--came upon the scene. The reading-lamp only was lit and its green
shade kept the ceiling and the upper part of the room in darkness, so
that the cheerful light from the hearth spreading over the floor and
shining on the white cloth laid over the end of the table was warm and
cheery. Malcolmson sat down to his dinner with a good appetite and a
buoyant spirit. After his dinner and a cigarette he sat steadily down
to work, determined not to let anything disturb him, for he remembered
his promise to the doctor, and made up his mind to make the best of
the time at his disposal. For an hour or so he worked all right, and then his thoughts began to
wander from his books. The actual circumstances around him, the calls
on his physical attention, and his nervous susceptibility were not to
be denied. By this time the wind had become a gale, and the gale a
storm. The old house, solid though it was, seemed to shake to its
foundations, and the storm roared and raged through its many chimneys
and its queer old gables, producing strange, unearthly sounds in the
empty rooms and corridors. Even the great alarm bell on the roof must
have felt the force of the wind, for the rope rose and fell slightly,
as though the bell were moved a little from time to time and the
limber rope fell on the oak floor with a hard and hollow sound. As Malcolmson listened to it he bethought himself of the doctor's
words, 'It is the rope which the hangman used for the victims of the
Judge's judicial rancour,' and he went over to the corner of the
fireplace and took it in his hand to look at it. There seemed a sort
of deadly interest in it, and as he stood there he lost himself for a
moment in speculation as to who these victims were, and the grim wish
of the Judge to have such a ghastly relic ever under his eyes. As he
stood there the swaying of the bell on the roof still lifted the rope
now and again; but presently there came a new sensation--a sort of
tremor in the rope, as though something was moving along it. Looking up instinctively Malcolmson saw the great rat coming slowly
down towards him, glaring at him steadily. He dropped the rope and
started back with a muttered curse, and the rat turning ran up the
rope again and disappeared, and at the same instant Malcolmson became
conscious that the noise of the rats, which had ceased for a while,
began again. All this set him thinking, and it occurred to him that he had not
investigated the lair of the rat or looked at the pictures, as he had
intended. He lit the other lamp without the shade, and, holding it up
went and stood opposite the third picture from the fireplace on the
right-hand side where he had seen the rat disappear on the previous
night. At the first glance he started back so suddenly that he almost dropped
the lamp, and a deadly pallor overspread his face. His knees shook,
and heavy drops of sweat came on his forehead, and he trembled like an
aspen. But he was young and plucky, and pulled himself together, and
after the pause of a few seconds stepped forward again, raised the
lamp, and examined the picture which had been dusted and washed, and
now stood out clearly. It was of a judge dressed in his robes of scarlet and ermine. His face
was strong and merciless, evil, crafty, and vindictive, with a sensual
mouth, hooked nose of ruddy colour, and shaped like the beak of a bird
of prey. The rest of the face was of a cadaverous colour. The eyes
were of peculiar brilliance and with a terribly malignant expression. As he looked at them, Malcolmson grew cold, for he saw there the very
counterpart of the eyes of the great rat. The lamp almost fell from
his hand, he saw the rat with its baleful eyes peering out through the
hole in the corner of the picture, and noted the sudden cessation of
the noise of the other rats. However, he pulled himself together, and
went on with his examination of the picture. The Judge was seated in a great high-backed carved oak chair, on the
right-hand side of a great stone fireplace where, in the corner, a
rope hung down from the ceiling, its end lying coiled on the floor. With a feeling of something like horror, Malcolmson recognised the
scene of the room as it stood, and gazed around him in an awestruck
manner as though he expected to find some strange presence behind him. Then he looked over to the corner of the fireplace--and with a loud
cry he let the lamp fall from his hand. There, in the Judge's arm-chair, with the rope hanging behind, sat the
rat with the Judge's baleful eyes, now intensified and with a fiendish
leer. Save for the howling of the storm without there was silence. The fallen lamp recalled Malcolmson to himself. Fortunately it was of
metal, and so the oil was not spilt. However, the practical need of
attending to it settled at once his nervous apprehensions. When he had
turned it out, he wiped his brow and thought for a moment. 'This will not do,' he said to himself. 'If I go on like this I shall
become a crazy fool. This must stop! I promised the doctor I would not
take tea. Faith, he was pretty right! My nerves must have been getting
into a queer state. Funny I did not notice it. I never felt better in
my life. However, it is all right now, and I shall not be such a fool
again.' Then he mixed himself a good stiff glass of brandy and water and
resolutely sat down to his work. It was nearly an hour when he looked up from his book, disturbed by
the sudden stillness. Without, the wind howled and roared louder than
ever, and the rain drove in sheets against the windows, beating like
hail on the glass; but within there was no sound whatever save the
echo of the wind as it roared in the great chimney, and now and then a
hiss as a few raindrops found their way down the chimney in a lull of
the storm. The fire had fallen low and had ceased to flame, though it
threw out a red glow. Malcolmson listened attentively, and presently
heard a thin, squeaking noise, very faint. It came from the corner of
the room where the rope hung down, and he thought it was the creaking
of the rope on the floor as the swaying of the bell raised and lowered
it. Looking up, however, he saw in the dim light the great rat
clinging to the rope and gnawing it. The rope was already nearly
gnawed through--he could see the lighter colour where the strands were
laid bare. As he looked the job was completed, and the severed end of
the rope fell clattering on the oaken floor, whilst for an instant the
great rat remained like a knob or tassel at the end of the rope, which
now began to sway to and fro. Malcolmson felt for a moment another
pang of terror as he thought that now the possibility of calling the
outer world to his assistance was cut off, but an intense anger took
its place, and seizing the book he was reading he hurled it at the
rat. The blow was well aimed, but before the missile could reach him
the rat dropped off and struck the floor with a soft thud. Malcolmson
instantly rushed over towards him, but it darted away and disappeared
in the darkness of the shadows of the room. Malcolmson felt that his
work was over for the night, and determined then and there to vary the
monotony of the proceedings by a hunt for the rat, and took off the
green shade of the lamp so as to insure a wider spreading light. As he
did so the gloom of the upper part of the room was relieved, and in
the new flood of light, great by comparison with the previous
darkness, the pictures on the wall stood out boldly. From where he
stood, Malcolmson saw right opposite to him the third picture on the
wall from the right of the fireplace. He rubbed his eyes in surprise,
and then a great fear began to come upon him. In the centre of the picture was a great irregular patch of brown
canvas, as fresh as when it was stretched on the frame. The background
was as before, with chair and chimney-corner and rope, but the figure
of the Judge had disappeared. Malcolmson, almost in a chill of horror, turned slowly round, and then
he began to shake and tremble like a man in a palsy. His strength
seemed to have left him, and he was incapable of action or movement,
hardly even of thought. He could only see and hear. There, on the great high-backed carved oak chair sat the Judge in his
robes of scarlet and ermine, with his baleful eyes glaring
vindictively, and a smile of triumph on the resolute, cruel mouth, as
he lifted with his hands a _black cap_. Malcolmson felt as if the
blood was running from his heart, as one does in moments of prolonged
suspense. There was a singing in his ears. Without, he could hear the
roar and howl of the tempest, and through it, swept on the storm, came
the striking of midnight by the great chimes in the market place. He
stood for a space of time that seemed to him endless still as a
statue, and with wide-open, horror-struck eyes, breathless. As the
clock struck, so the smile of triumph on the Judge's face intensified,
and at the last stroke of midnight he placed the black cap on his
head. Slowly and deliberately the Judge rose from his chair and picked up
the piece of the rope of the alarm bell which lay on the floor, drew
it through his hands as if he enjoyed its touch, and then deliberately
began to knot one end of it, fashioning it into a noose. This he
tightened and tested with his foot, pulling hard at it till he was
satisfied and then making a running noose of it, which he held in his
hand. Then he began to move along the table on the opposite side to
Malcolmson keeping his eyes on him until he had passed him, when with
a quick movement he stood in front of the door. Malcolmson then began
to feel that he was trapped, and tried to think of what he should do. There was some fascination in the Judge's eyes, which he never took
off him, and he had, perforce, to look. He saw the Judge
approach--still keeping between him and the door--and raise the noose
and throw it towards him as if to entangle him. With a great effort he
made a quick movement to one side, and saw the rope fall beside him,
and heard it strike the oaken floor. Again the Judge raised the noose
and tried to ensnare him, ever keeping his baleful eyes fixed on him,
and each time by a mighty effort the student just managed to evade it. So this went on for many times, the Judge seeming never discouraged
nor discomposed at failure, but playing as a cat does with a mouse. At
last in despair, which had reached its climax, Malcolmson cast a quick
glance round him. The lamp seemed to have blazed up, and there was a
fairly good light in the room. At the many rat-holes and in the chinks
and crannies of the wainscot he saw the rats' eyes; and this aspect,
that was purely physical, gave him a gleam of comfort. He looked
around and saw that the rope of the great alarm bell was laden with
rats. Every inch of it was covered with them, and more and more were
pouring through the small circular hole in the ceiling whence it
emerged, so that with their weight the bell was beginning to sway. Hark! it had swayed till the clapper had touched the bell. The sound
was but a tiny one, but the bell was only beginning to sway, and it
would increase. At the sound the Judge, who had been keeping his eyes fixed on
Malcolmson, looked up, and a scowl of diabolical anger overspread his
face. His eyes fairly glowed like hot coals, and he stamped his foot
with a sound that seemed to make the house shake. A dreadful peal of
thunder broke overhead as he raised the rope again, whilst the rats
kept running up and down the rope as though working against time. This
time, instead of throwing it, he drew close to his victim, and held
open the noose as he approached. As he came closer there seemed
something paralysing in his very presence, and Malcolmson stood rigid
as a corpse. He felt the Judge's icy fingers touch his throat as he
adjusted the rope. The noose tightened--tightened. Then the Judge,
taking the rigid form of the student in his arms, carried him over and
placed him standing in the oak chair, and stepping up beside him, put
his hand up and caught the end of the swaying rope of the alarm bell. As he raised his hand the rats fled squeaking, and disappeared through
the hole in the ceiling. Taking the end of the noose which was round
Malcolmson's neck he tied it to the hanging-bell rope, and then
descending pulled away the chair. *       *       *       *       *

When the alarm bell of the Judge's House began to sound a crowd soon
assembled. Lights and torches of various kinds appeared, and soon a
silent crowd was hurrying to the spot. They knocked loudly at the
door, but there was no reply. Then they burst in the door, and poured
into the great dining-room, the doctor at the head. There at the end of the rope of the great alarm bell hung the body of
the student, and on the face of the Judge in the picture was a
malignant smile. The Squaw


Nurnberg at the time was not so much exploited as it has been since
then. Irving had not been playing _Faust_, and the very name of the
old town was hardly known to the great bulk of the travelling public. My wife and I being in the second week of our honeymoon, naturally
wanted someone else to join our party, so that when the cheery
stranger, Elias P. Hutcheson, hailing from Isthmian City, Bleeding
Gulch, Maple Tree County, Neb. turned up at the station at Frankfort,
and casually remarked that he was going on to see the most all-fired
old Methuselah of a town in Yurrup, and that he guessed that so much
travelling alone was enough to send an intelligent, active citizen
into the melancholy ward of a daft house, we took the pretty broad
hint and suggested that we should join forces. We found, on comparing
notes afterwards, that we had each intended to speak with some
diffidence or hesitation so as not to appear too eager, such not being
a good compliment to the success of our married life; but the effect
was entirely marred by our both beginning to speak at the same
instant--stopping simultaneously and then going on together again. Anyhow, no matter how, it was done; and Elias P. Hutcheson became one
of our party. Straightway Amelia and I found the pleasant benefit;
instead of quarrelling, as we had been doing, we found that the
restraining influence of a third party was such that we now took every
opportunity of spooning in odd corners. Amelia declares that ever
since she has, as the result of that experience, advised all her
friends to take a friend on the honeymoon. Well, we 'did' Nurnberg
together, and much enjoyed the racy remarks of our Transatlantic
friend, who, from his quaint speech and his wonderful stock of
adventures, might have stepped out of a novel. We kept for the last
object of interest in the city to be visited the Burg, and on the day
appointed for the visit strolled round the outer wall of the city by
the eastern side. The Burg is seated on a rock dominating the town and an immensely deep
fosse guards it on the northern side. Nurnberg has been happy in that
it was never sacked; had it been it would certainly not be so spick
and span perfect as it is at present. The ditch has not been used for
centuries, and now its base is spread with tea-gardens and orchards,
of which some of the trees are of quite respectable growth. As we
wandered round the wall, dawdling in the hot July sunshine, we often
paused to admire the views spread before us, and in especial the great
plain covered with towns and villages and bounded with a blue line of
hills, like a landscape of Claude Lorraine. From this we always turned
with new delight to the city itself, with its myriad of quaint old
gables and acre-wide red roofs dotted with dormer windows, tier upon
tier. A little to our right rose the towers of the Burg, and nearer
still, standing grim, the Torture Tower, which was, and is, perhaps,
the most interesting place in the city. For centuries the tradition of
the Iron Virgin of Nurnberg has been handed down as an instance of
the horrors of cruelty of which man is capable; we had long looked
forward to seeing it; and here at last was its home. In one of our pauses we leaned over the wall of the moat and looked
down. The garden seemed quite fifty or sixty feet below us, and the
sun pouring into it with an intense, moveless heat like that of an
oven. Beyond rose the grey, grim wall seemingly of endless height, and
losing itself right and left in the angles of bastion and
counterscarp. Trees and bushes crowned the wall, and above again
towered the lofty houses on whose massive beauty Time has only set the
hand of approval. The sun was hot and we were lazy; time was our own,
and we lingered, leaning on the wall. Just below us was a pretty
sight--a great black cat lying stretched in the sun, whilst round her
gambolled prettily a tiny black kitten. The mother would wave her tail
for the kitten to play with, or would raise her feet and push away the
little one as an encouragement to further play. They were just at the
foot of the wall, and Elias P. Hutcheson, in order to help the play,
stooped and took from the walk a moderate sized pebble. 'See!' he said, 'I will drop it near the kitten, and they will both
wonder where it came from.' 'Oh, be careful,' said my wife; 'you might hit the dear little thing!' 'Not me, ma'am,' said Elias P. 'Why, I'm as tender as a Maine
cherry-tree. Lor, bless ye. I wouldn't hurt the poor pooty little
critter more'n I'd scalp a baby. An' you may bet your variegated socks
on that! See, I'll drop it fur away on the outside so's not to go near
her!' Thus saying, he leaned over and held his arm out at full length
and dropped the stone. It may be that there is some attractive force
which draws lesser matters to greater; or more probably that the wall
was not plump but sloped to its base--we not noticing the inclination
from above; but the stone fell with a sickening thud that came up to
us through the hot air, right on the kitten's head, and shattered out
its little brains then and there. The black cat cast a swift upward
glance, and we saw her eyes like green fire fixed an instant on Elias
P. Hutcheson; and then her attention was given to the kitten, which
lay still with just a quiver of her tiny limbs, whilst a thin red
stream trickled from a gaping wound. With a muffled cry, such as a
human being might give, she bent over the kitten licking its wounds
and moaning. Suddenly she seemed to realise that it was dead, and
again threw her eyes up at us. I shall never forget the sight, for she
looked the perfect incarnation of hate. Her green eyes blazed with
lurid fire, and the white, sharp teeth seemed to almost shine through
the blood which dabbled her mouth and whiskers. She gnashed her teeth,
and her claws stood out stark and at full length on every paw. Then
she made a wild rush up the wall as if to reach us, but when the
momentum ended fell back, and further added to her horrible appearance
for she fell on the kitten, and rose with her black fur smeared with
its brains and blood. Amelia turned quite faint, and I had to lift her
back from the wall. There was a seat close by in shade of a spreading
plane-tree, and here I placed her whilst she composed herself. Then I
went back to Hutcheson, who stood without moving, looking down on the
angry cat below. As I joined him, he said:

'Wall, I guess that air the savagest beast I ever see--'cept once when
an Apache squaw had an edge on a half-breed what they nicknamed
"Splinters" 'cos of the way he fixed up her papoose which he stole on
a raid just to show that he appreciated the way they had given his
mother the fire torture. She got that kinder look so set on her face
that it jest seemed to grow there. She followed Splinters mor'n three
year till at last the braves got him and handed him over to her. They
did say that no man, white or Injun, had ever been so long a-dying
under the tortures of the Apaches. The only time I ever see her smile
was when I wiped her out. I kem on the camp just in time to see
Splinters pass in his checks, and he wasn't sorry to go either. He was
a hard citizen, and though I never could shake with him after that
papoose business--for it was bitter bad, and he should have been a
white man, for he looked like one--I see he had got paid out in full. Durn me, but I took a piece of his hide from one of his skinnin' posts
an' had it made into a pocket-book. It's here now!' and he slapped the
breast pocket of his coat. Whilst he was speaking the cat was continuing her frantic efforts to
get up the wall. She would take a run back and then charge up,
sometimes reaching an incredible height. She did not seem to mind the
heavy fall which she get each time but started with renewed vigour;
and at every tumble her appearance became more horrible. Hutcheson was
a kind-hearted man--my wife and I had both noticed little acts of
kindness to animals as well as to persons--and he seemed concerned at
the state of fury to which the cat had wrought herself. 'Wall, now!' he said, 'I du declare that that poor critter seems quite
desperate. There! there! poor thing, it was all an accident--though
that won't bring back your little one to you. Say! I wouldn't have had
such a thing happen for a thousand! Just shows what a clumsy fool of a
man can do when he tries to play! Seems I'm too darned slipperhanded
to even play with a cat. Say Colonel!' it was a pleasant way he had to
bestow titles freely--'I hope your wife don't hold no grudge against
me on account of this unpleasantness? Why, I wouldn't have had it
occur on no account.' He came over to Amelia and apologised profusely, and she with her
usual kindness of heart hastened to assure him that she quite
understood that it was an accident. Then we all went again to the wall
and looked over. The cat missing Hutcheson's face had drawn back across the moat, and
was sitting on her haunches as though ready to spring. Indeed, the
very instant she saw him she did spring, and with a blind unreasoning
fury, which would have been grotesque, only that it was so frightfully
real. She did not try to run up the wall, but simply launched herself
at him as though hate and fury could lend her wings to pass straight
through the great distance between them. Amelia, womanlike, got quite
concerned, and said to Elias P. in a warning voice:

'Oh! you must be very careful. That animal would try to kill you if
she were here; her eyes look like positive murder.' He laughed out jovially. 'Excuse me, ma'am,' he said, 'but I can't
help laughin'. Fancy a man that has fought grizzlies an' Injuns bein'
careful of bein' murdered by a cat!' When the cat heard him laugh, her whole demeanour seemed to change. She no longer tried to jump or run up the wall, but went quietly over,
and sitting again beside the dead kitten began to lick and fondle it
as though it were alive. 'See!' said I, 'the effect of a really strong man. Even that animal
in the midst of her fury recognises the voice of a master, and bows to
him!' 'Like a squaw!' was the only comment of Elias P. Hutcheson, as we
moved on our way round the city fosse. Every now and then we looked
over the wall and each time saw the cat following us. At first she had
kept going back to the dead kitten, and then as the distance grew
greater took it in her mouth and so followed. After a while, however,
she abandoned this, for we saw her following all alone; she had
evidently hidden the body somewhere. Amelia's alarm grew at the cat's
persistence, and more than once she repeated her warning; but the
American always laughed with amusement, till finally, seeing that she
was beginning to be worried, he said:

'I say, ma'am, you needn't be skeered over that cat. I go heeled, I
du!' Here he slapped his pistol pocket at the back of his lumbar
region. 'Why sooner'n have you worried, I'll shoot the critter, right
here, an' risk the police interferin' with a citizen of the United
States for carryin' arms contrairy to reg'lations!' As he spoke he
looked over the wall, but the cat on seeing him, retreated, with a
growl, into a bed of tall flowers, and was hidden. He went on: 'Blest
if that ar critter ain't got more sense of what's good for her than
most Christians. I guess we've seen the last of her! You bet, she'll
go back now to that busted kitten and have a private funeral of it,
all to herself!' Amelia did not like to say more, lest he might, in mistaken kindness
to her, fulfil his threat of shooting the cat: and so we went on and
crossed the little wooden bridge leading to the gateway whence ran the
steep paved roadway between the Burg and the pentagonal Torture Tower. As we crossed the bridge we saw the cat again down below us. When she
saw us her fury seemed to return, and she made frantic efforts to get
up the steep wall. Hutcheson laughed as he looked down at her, and
said:

'Goodbye, old girl. Sorry I injured your feelin's, but you'll get over
it in time! So long!' And then we passed through the long, dim archway
and came to the gate of the Burg. When we came out again after our survey of this most beautiful old
place which not even the well-intentioned efforts of the Gothic
restorers of forty years ago have been able to spoil--though their
restoration was then glaring white--we seemed to have quite forgotten
the unpleasant episode of the morning. The old lime tree with its
great trunk gnarled with the passing of nearly nine centuries, the
deep well cut through the heart of the rock by those captives of old,
and the lovely view from the city wall whence we heard, spread over
almost a full quarter of an hour, the multitudinous chimes of the
city, had all helped to wipe out from our minds the incident of the
slain kitten. We were the only visitors who had entered the Torture Tower that
morning--so at least said the old custodian--and as we had the place
all to ourselves were able to make a minute and more satisfactory
survey than would have otherwise been possible. The custodian, looking
to us as the sole source of his gains for the day, was willing to meet
our wishes in any way. The Torture Tower is truly a grim place, even
now when many thousands of visitors have sent a stream of life, and
the joy that follows life, into the place; but at the time I mention
it wore its grimmest and most gruesome aspect. The dust of ages seemed
to have settled on it, and the darkness and the horror of its memories
seem to have become sentient in a way that would have satisfied the
Pantheistic souls of Philo or Spinoza. The lower chamber where we
entered was seemingly, in its normal state, filled with incarnate
darkness; even the hot sunlight streaming in through the door seemed
to be lost in the vast thickness of the walls, and only showed the
masonry rough as when the builder's scaffolding had come down, but
coated with dust and marked here and there with patches of dark stain
which, if walls could speak, could have given their own dread memories
of fear and pain. We were glad to pass up the dusty wooden staircase,
the custodian leaving the outer door open to light us somewhat on our
way; for to our eyes the one long-wick'd, evil-smelling candle stuck
in a sconce on the wall gave an inadequate light. When we came up
through the open trap in the corner of the chamber overhead, Amelia
held on to me so tightly that I could actually feel her heart beat. I
must say for my own part that I was not surprised at her fear, for
this room was even more gruesome than that below. Here there was
certainly more light, but only just sufficient to realise the horrible
surroundings of the place. The builders of the tower had evidently
intended that only they who should gain the top should have any of the
joys of light and prospect. There, as we had noticed from below, were
ranges of windows, albeit of mediaeval smallness, but elsewhere in the
tower were only a very few narrow slits such as were habitual in
places of mediaeval defence. A few of these only lit the chamber, and
these so high up in the wall that from no part could the sky be seen
through the thickness of the walls. In racks, and leaning in disorder
against the walls, were a number of headsmen's swords, great
double-handed weapons with broad blade and keen edge. Hard by were
several blocks whereon the necks of the victims had lain, with here
and there deep notches where the steel had bitten through the guard of
flesh and shored into the wood. Round the chamber, placed in all sorts
of irregular ways, were many implements of torture which made one's
heart ache to see--chairs full of spikes which gave instant and
excruciating pain; chairs and couches with dull knobs whose torture
was seemingly less, but which, though slower, were equally
efficacious; racks, belts, boots, gloves, collars, all made for
compressing at will; steel baskets in which the head could be slowly
crushed into a pulp if necessary; watchmen's hooks with long handle
and knife that cut at resistance--this a speciality of the old
Nurnberg police system; and many, many other devices for man's injury
to man. Amelia grew quite pale with the horror of the things, but
fortunately did not faint, for being a little overcome she sat down on
a torture chair, but jumped up again with a shriek, all tendency to
faint gone. We both pretended that it was the injury done to her dress
by the dust of the chair, and the rusty spikes which had upset her,
and Mr. Hutcheson acquiesced in accepting the explanation with a
kind-hearted laugh. But the central object in the whole of this chamber of horrors was the
engine known as the Iron Virgin, which stood near the centre of the
room. It was a rudely-shaped figure of a woman, something of the bell
order, or, to make a closer comparison, of the figure of Mrs. Noah in
the children's Ark, but without that slimness of waist and perfect
_rondeur_ of hip which marks the aesthetic type of the Noah family. One would hardly have recognised it as intended for a human figure at
all had not the founder shaped on the forehead a rude semblance of a
woman's face. This machine was coated with rust without, and covered
with dust; a rope was fastened to a ring in the front of the figure,
about where the waist should have been, and was drawn through a
pulley, fastened on the wooden pillar which sustained the flooring
above. The custodian pulling this rope showed that a section of the
front was hinged like a door at one side; we then saw that the engine
was of considerable thickness, leaving just room enough inside for a
man to be placed. The door was of equal thickness and of great weight,
for it took the custodian all his strength, aided though he was by the
contrivance of the pulley, to open it. This weight was partly due to
the fact that the door was of manifest purpose hung so as to throw its
weight downwards, so that it might shut of its own accord when the
strain was released. The inside was honeycombed with rust--nay more,
the rust alone that comes through time would hardly have eaten so deep
into the iron walls; the rust of the cruel stains was deep indeed! It
was only, however, when we came to look at the inside of the door that
the diabolical intention was manifest to the full. Here were several
long spikes, square and massive, broad at the base and sharp at the
points, placed in such a position that when the door should close the
upper ones would pierce the eyes of the victim, and the lower ones his
heart and vitals. The sight was too much for poor Amelia, and this
time she fainted dead off, and I had to carry her down the stairs, and
place her on a bench outside till she recovered. That she felt it to
the quick was afterwards shown by the fact that my eldest son bears to
this day a rude birthmark on his breast, which has, by family
consent, been accepted as representing the Nurnberg Virgin. When we got back to the chamber we found Hutcheson still opposite the
Iron Virgin; he had been evidently philosophising, and now gave us the
benefit of his thought in the shape of a sort of exordium. 'Wall, I guess I've been learnin' somethin' here while madam has been
gettin' over her faint. 'Pears to me that we're a long way behind the
times on our side of the big drink. We uster think out on the plains
that the Injun could give us points in tryin' to make a man
uncomfortable; but I guess your old mediaeval law-and-order party
could raise him every time. Splinters was pretty good in his bluff on
the squaw, but this here young miss held a straight flush all high on
him. The points of them spikes air sharp enough still, though even the
edges air eaten out by what uster be on them. It'd be a good thing for
our Indian section to get some specimens of this here play-toy to send
round to the Reservations jest to knock the stuffin' out of the bucks,
and the squaws too, by showing them as how old civilisation lays over
them at their best. Guess but I'll get in that box a minute jest to
see how it feels!' 'Oh no! no!' said Amelia. 'It is too terrible!' 'Guess, ma'am, nothin's too terrible to the explorin' mind. I've been
in some queer places in my time. Spent a night inside a dead horse
while a prairie fire swept over me in Montana Territory--an' another
time slept inside a dead buffler when the Comanches was on the war
path an' I didn't keer to leave my kyard on them. I've been two days
in a caved-in tunnel in the Billy Broncho gold mine in New Mexico, an'
was one of the four shut up for three parts of a day in the caisson
what slid over on her side when we was settin' the foundations of the
Buffalo Bridge. I've not funked an odd experience yet, an' I don't
propose to begin now!' We saw that he was set on the experiment, so I said: 'Well, hurry up,
old man, and get through it quick!' 'All right, General,' said he, 'but I calculate we ain't quite ready
yet. The gentlemen, my predecessors, what stood in that thar canister,
didn't volunteer for the office--not much! And I guess there was some
ornamental tyin' up before the big stroke was made. I want to go into
this thing fair and square, so I must get fixed up proper first. I
dare say this old galoot can rise some string and tie me up accordin'
to sample?' This was said interrogatively to the old custodian, but the latter,
who understood the drift of his speech, though perhaps not
appreciating to the full the niceties of dialect and imagery, shook
his head. His protest was, however, only formal and made to be
overcome. The American thrust a gold piece into his hand, saying:
'Take it, pard! it's your pot; and don't be skeer'd. This ain't no
necktie party that you're asked to assist in!' He produced some thin
frayed rope and proceeded to bind our companion with sufficient
strictness for the purpose. When the upper part of his body was bound,
Hutcheson said:

'Hold on a moment, Judge. Guess I'm too heavy for you to tote into the
canister. You jest let me walk in, and then you can wash up regardin'
my legs!' Whilst speaking he had backed himself into the opening which was just
enough to hold him. It was a close fit and no mistake. Amelia looked
on with fear in her eyes, but she evidently did not like to say
anything. Then the custodian completed his task by tying the
American's feet together so that he was now absolutely helpless and
fixed in his voluntary prison. He seemed to really enjoy it, and the
incipient smile which was habitual to his face blossomed into
actuality as he said:

'Guess this here Eve was made out of the rib of a dwarf! There ain't
much room for a full-grown citizen of the United States to hustle. We
uster make our coffins more roomier in Idaho territory. Now, Judge,
you jest begin to let this door down, slow, on to me. I want to feel
the same pleasure as the other jays had when those spikes began to
move toward their eyes!' 'Oh no! no! no!' broke in Amelia hysterically. 'It is too terrible! I
can't bear to see it!--I can't! I can't!' But the American was
obdurate. 'Say, Colonel,' said he, 'why not take Madame for a little
promenade? I wouldn't hurt her feelin's for the world; but now that I
am here, havin' kem eight thousand miles, wouldn't it be too hard to
give up the very experience I've been pinin' an' pantin' fur? A man
can't get to feel like canned goods every time! Me and the Judge
here'll fix up this thing in no time, an' then you'll come back, an'
we'll all laugh together!' Once more the resolution that is born of curiosity triumphed, and
Amelia stayed holding tight to my arm and shivering whilst the
custodian began to slacken slowly inch by inch the rope that held back
the iron door. Hutcheson's face was positively radiant as his eyes
followed the first movement of the spikes. 'Wall!' he said, 'I guess I've not had enjoyment like this since I
left Noo York. Bar a scrap with a French sailor at Wapping--an' that
warn't much of a picnic neither--I've not had a show fur real pleasure
in this dod-rotted Continent, where there ain't no b'ars nor no
Injuns, an' wheer nary man goes heeled. Slow there, Judge! Don't you
rush this business! I want a show for my money this game--I du!' The custodian must have had in him some of the blood of his
predecessors in that ghastly tower, for he worked the engine with a
deliberate and excruciating slowness which after five minutes, in
which the outer edge of the door had not moved half as many inches,
began to overcome Amelia. I saw her lips whiten, and felt her hold
upon my arm relax. I looked around an instant for a place whereon to
lay her, and when I looked at her again found that her eye had become
fixed on the side of the Virgin. Following its direction I saw the
black cat crouching out of sight. Her green eyes shone like danger
lamps in the gloom of the place, and their colour was heightened by
the blood which still smeared her coat and reddened her mouth. I cried
out:

'The cat! look out for the cat!' for even then she sprang out before
the engine. At this moment she looked like a triumphant demon. Her
eyes blazed with ferocity, her hair bristled out till she seemed twice
her normal size, and her tail lashed about as does a tiger's when the
quarry is before it. Elias P. Hutcheson when he saw her was amused,
and his eyes positively sparkled with fun as he said:

'Darned if the squaw hain't got on all her war paint! Jest give her a
shove off if she comes any of her tricks on me, for I'm so fixed
everlastingly by the boss, that durn my skin if I can keep my eyes
from her if she wants them! Easy there, Judge! don't you slack that ar
rope or I'm euchered!' At this moment Amelia completed her faint, and I had to clutch hold of
her round the waist or she would have fallen to the floor. Whilst
attending to her I saw the black cat crouching for a spring, and
jumped up to turn the creature out. But at that instant, with a sort of hellish scream, she hurled
herself, not as we expected at Hutcheson, but straight at the face of
the custodian. Her claws seemed to be tearing wildly as one sees in
the Chinese drawings of the dragon rampant, and as I looked I saw one
of them light on the poor man's eye, and actually tear through it and
down his cheek, leaving a wide band of red where the blood seemed to
spurt from every vein. With a yell of sheer terror which came quicker than even his sense of
pain, the man leaped back, dropping as he did so the rope which held
back the iron door. I jumped for it, but was too late, for the cord
ran like lightning through the pulley-block, and the heavy mass fell
forward from its own weight. As the door closed I caught a glimpse of our poor companion's face. He
seemed frozen with terror. His eyes stared with a horrible anguish as
if dazed, and no sound came from his lips. And then the spikes did their work. Happily the end was quick, for
when I wrenched open the door they had pierced so deep that they had
locked in the bones of the skull through which they had crushed, and
actually tore him--it--out of his iron prison till, bound as he was,
he fell at full length with a sickly thud upon the floor, the face
turning upward as he fell. I rushed to my wife, lifted her up and carried her out, for I feared
for her very reason if she should wake from her faint to such a scene. I laid her on the bench outside and ran back. Leaning against the
wooden column was the custodian moaning in pain whilst he held his
reddening handkerchief to his eyes. And sitting on the head of the
poor American was the cat, purring loudly as she licked the blood
which trickled through the gashed socket of his eyes. I think no one will call me cruel because I seized one of the old
executioner's swords and shore her in two as she sat. The Secret of the Growing Gold


When Margaret Delandre went to live at Brent's Rock the whole
neighbourhood awoke to the pleasure of an entirely new scandal. Scandals in connection with either the Delandre family or the Brents
of Brent's Rock, were not few; and if the secret history of the county
had been written in full both names would have been found well
represented. It is true that the status of each was so different that
they might have belonged to different continents--or to different
worlds for the matter of that--for hitherto their orbits had never
crossed. The Brents were accorded by the whole section of the country
a unique social dominance, and had ever held themselves as high above
the yeoman class to which Margaret Delandre belonged, as a
blue-blooded Spanish hidalgo out-tops his peasant tenantry. The Delandres had an ancient record and were proud of it in their way
as the Brents were of theirs. But the family had never risen above
yeomanry; and although they had been once well-to-do in the good old
times of foreign wars and protection, their fortunes had withered
under the scorching of the free trade sun and the 'piping times of
peace.' They had, as the elder members used to assert, 'stuck to the
land', with the result that they had taken root in it, body and soul. In fact, they, having chosen the life of vegetables, had flourished
as vegetation does--blossomed and thrived in the good season and
suffered in the bad. Their holding, Dander's Croft, seemed to have
been worked out, and to be typical of the family which had inhabited
it. The latter had declined generation after generation, sending out
now and again some abortive shoot of unsatisfied energy in the shape
of a soldier or sailor, who had worked his way to the minor grades of
the services and had there stopped, cut short either from unheeding
gallantry in action or from that destroying cause to men without
breeding or youthful care--the recognition of a position above them
which they feel unfitted to fill. So, little by little, the family
dropped lower and lower, the men brooding and dissatisfied, and
drinking themselves into the grave, the women drudging at home, or
marrying beneath them--or worse. In process of time all disappeared,
leaving only two in the Croft, Wykham Delandre and his sister
Margaret. The man and woman seemed to have inherited in masculine and
feminine form respectively the evil tendency of their race, sharing in
common the principles, though manifesting them in different ways, of
sullen passion, voluptuousness and recklessness. The history of the Brents had been something similar, but showing the
causes of decadence in their aristocratic and not their plebeian
forms. They, too, had sent their shoots to the wars; but their
positions had been different and they had often attained honour--for
without flaw they were gallant, and brave deeds were done by them
before the selfish dissipation which marked them had sapped their
vigour. The present head of the family--if family it could now be called when
one remained of the direct line--was Geoffrey Brent. He was almost a
type of worn out race, manifesting in some ways its most brilliant
qualities, and in others its utter degradation. He might be fairly
compared with some of those antique Italian nobles whom the painters
have preserved to us with their courage, their unscrupulousness, their
refinement of lust and cruelty--the voluptuary actual with the fiend
potential. He was certainly handsome, with that dark, aquiline,
commanding beauty which women so generally recognise as dominant. With
men he was distant and cold; but such a bearing never deters
womankind. The inscrutable laws of sex have so arranged that even a
timid woman is not afraid of a fierce and haughty man. And so it was
that there was hardly a woman of any kind or degree, who lived within
view of Brent's Rock, who did not cherish some form of secret
admiration for the handsome wastrel. The category was a wide one, for
Brent's Rock rose up steeply from the midst of a level region and for
a circuit of a hundred miles it lay on the horizon, with its high old
towers and steep roofs cutting the level edge of wood and hamlet, and
far-scattered mansions. So long as Geoffrey Brent confined his dissipations to London and
Paris and Vienna--anywhere out of sight and sound of his home--opinion
was silent. It is easy to listen to far off echoes unmoved, and we can
treat them with disbelief, or scorn, or disdain, or whatever attitude
of coldness may suit our purpose. But when the scandal came close home
it was another matter; and the feelings of independence and integrity
which is in people of every community which is not utterly spoiled,
asserted itself and demanded that condemnation should be expressed. Still there was a certain reticence in all, and no more notice was
taken of the existing facts than was absolutely necessary. Margaret
Delandre bore herself so fearlessly and so openly--she accepted her
position as the justified companion of Geoffrey Brent so naturally
that people came to believe that she was secretly married to him, and
therefore thought it wiser to hold their tongues lest time should
justify her and also make her an active enemy. The one person who, by his interference, could have settled all doubts
was debarred by circumstances from interfering in the matter. Wykham
Delandre had quarrelled with his sister--or perhaps it was that she
had quarrelled with him--and they were on terms not merely of armed
neutrality but of bitter hatred. The quarrel had been antecedent to
Margaret going to Brent's Rock. She and Wykham had almost come to
blows. There had certainly been threats on one side and on the other;
and in the end Wykham, overcome with passion, had ordered his sister
to leave his house. She had risen straightway, and, without waiting to
pack up even her own personal belongings, had walked out of the house. On the threshold she had paused for a moment to hurl a bitter threat
at Wykham that he would rue in shame and despair to the last hour of
his life his act of that day. Some weeks had since passed; and it was
understood in the neighbourhood that Margaret had gone to London, when
she suddenly appeared driving out with Geoffrey Brent, and the entire
neighbourhood knew before nightfall that she had taken up her abode at
the Rock. It was no subject of surprise that Brent had come back
unexpectedly, for such was his usual custom. Even his own servants
never knew when to expect him, for there was a private door, of which
he alone had the key, by which he sometimes entered without anyone in
the house being aware of his coming. This was his usual method of
appearing after a long absence. Wykham Delandre was furious at the news. He vowed vengeance--and to
keep his mind level with his passion drank deeper than ever. He tried
several times to see his sister, but she contemptuously refused to
meet him. He tried to have an interview with Brent and was refused by
him also. Then he tried to stop him in the road, but without avail,
for Geoffrey was not a man to be stopped against his will. Several
actual encounters took place between the two men, and many more were
threatened and avoided. At last Wykham Delandre settled down to a
morose, vengeful acceptance of the situation. Neither Margaret nor Geoffrey was of a pacific temperament, and it was
not long before there began to be quarrels between them. One thing
would lead to another, and wine flowed freely at Brent's Rock. Now and
again the quarrels would assume a bitter aspect, and threats would be
exchanged in uncompromising language that fairly awed the listening
servants. But such quarrels generally ended where domestic
altercations do, in reconciliation, and in a mutual respect for the
fighting qualities proportionate to their manifestation. Fighting for
its own sake is found by a certain class of persons, all the world
over, to be a matter of absorbing interest, and there is no reason to
believe that domestic conditions minimise its potency. Geoffrey and
Margaret made occasional absences from Brent's Rock, and on each of
these occasions Wykham Delandre also absented himself; but as he
generally heard of the absence too late to be of any service, he
returned home each time in a more bitter and discontented frame of
mind than before. At last there came a time when the absence from Brent's Rock became
longer than before. Only a few days earlier there had been a quarrel,
exceeding in bitterness anything which had gone before; but this, too,
had been made up, and a trip on the Continent had been mentioned
before the servants. After a few days Wykham Delandre also went away,
and it was some weeks before he returned. It was noticed that he was
full of some new importance--satisfaction, exaltation--they hardly
knew how to call it. He went straightway to Brent's Rock, and demanded
to see Geoffrey Brent, and on being told that he had not yet returned,
said, with a grim decision which the servants noted:

'I shall come again. My news is solid--it can wait!' and turned away. Week after week went by, and month after month; and then there came a
rumour, certified later on, that an accident had occurred in the
Zermatt valley. Whilst crossing a dangerous pass the carriage
containing an English lady and the driver had fallen over a precipice,
the gentleman of the party, Mr. Geoffrey Brent, having been
fortunately saved as he had been walking up the hill to ease the
horses. He gave information, and search was made. The broken rail, the
excoriated roadway, the marks where the horses had struggled on the
decline before finally pitching over into the torrent--all told the
sad tale. It was a wet season, and there had been much snow in the
winter, so that the river was swollen beyond its usual volume, and the
eddies of the stream were packed with ice. All search was made, and
finally the wreck of the carriage and the body of one horse were found
in an eddy of the river. Later on the body of the driver was found on
the sandy, torrent-swept waste near Taesch; but the body of the lady,
like that of the other horse, had quite disappeared, and was--what
was left of it by that time--whirling amongst the eddies of the Rhone
on its way down to the Lake of Geneva. Wykham Delandre made all the enquiries possible, but could not find
any trace of the missing woman. He found, however, in the books of the
various hotels the name of 'Mr. and Mrs. Geoffrey Brent'. And he had a
stone erected at Zermatt to his sister's memory, under her married
name, and a tablet put up in the church at Bretten, the parish in
which both Brent's Rock and Dander's Croft were situated. There was a lapse of nearly a year, after the excitement of the matter
had worn away, and the whole neighbourhood had gone on its accustomed
way. Brent was still absent, and Delandre more drunken, more morose,
and more revengeful than before. Then there was a new excitement. Brent's Rock was being made ready for
a new mistress. It was officially announced by Geoffrey himself in a
letter to the Vicar, that he had been married some months before to an
Italian lady, and that they were then on their way home. Then a small
army of workmen invaded the house; and hammer and plane sounded, and a
general air of size and paint pervaded the atmosphere. One wing of the
old house, the south, was entirely re-done; and then the great body of
the workmen departed, leaving only materials for the doing of the old
hall when Geoffrey Brent should have returned, for he had directed
that the decoration was only to be done under his own eyes. He had
brought with him accurate drawings of a hall in the house of his
bride's father, for he wished to reproduce for her the place to which
she had been accustomed. As the moulding had all to be re-done, some
scaffolding poles and boards were brought in and laid on one side of
the great hall, and also a great wooden tank or box for mixing the
lime, which was laid in bags beside it. When the new mistress of Brent's Rock arrived the bells of the church
rang out, and there was a general jubilation. She was a beautiful
creature, full of the poetry and fire and passion of the South; and
the few English words which she had learned were spoken in such a
sweet and pretty broken way that she won the hearts of the people
almost as much by the music of her voice as by the melting beauty of
her dark eyes. Geoffrey Brent seemed more happy than he had ever before appeared; but
there was a dark, anxious look on his face that was new to those who
knew him of old, and he started at times as though at some noise that
was unheard by others. And so months passed and the whisper grew that at last Brent's Rock
was to have an heir. Geoffrey was very tender to his wife, and the new
bond between them seemed to soften him. He took more interest in his
tenants and their needs than he had ever done; and works of charity on
his part as well as on his sweet young wife's were not lacking. He
seemed to have set all his hopes on the child that was coming, and as
he looked deeper into the future the dark shadow that had come over
his face seemed to die gradually away. All the time Wykham Delandre nursed his revenge. Deep in his heart had
grown up a purpose of vengeance which only waited an opportunity to
crystallise and take a definite shape. His vague idea was somehow
centred in the wife of Brent, for he knew that he could strike him
best through those he loved, and the coming time seemed to hold in its
womb the opportunity for which he longed. One night he sat alone in
the living-room of his house. It had once been a handsome room in its
way, but time and neglect had done their work and it was now little
better than a ruin, without dignity or picturesqueness of any kind. He
had been drinking heavily for some time and was more than half
stupefied. He thought he heard a noise as of someone at the door and
looked up. Then he called half savagely to come in; but there was no
response. With a muttered blasphemy he renewed his potations. Presently he forgot all around him, sank into a daze, but suddenly
awoke to see standing before him someone or something like a battered,
ghostly edition of his sister. For a few moments there came upon him a
sort of fear. The woman before him, with distorted features and
burning eyes seemed hardly human, and the only thing that seemed a
reality of his sister, as she had been, was her wealth of golden hair,
and this was now streaked with grey. She eyed her brother with a long,
cold stare; and he, too, as he looked and began to realise the
actuality of her presence, found the hatred of her which he had had,
once again surging up in his heart. All the brooding passion of the
past year seemed to find a voice at once as he asked her:

'Why are you here? You're dead and buried.' 'I am here, Wykham Delandre, for no love of you, but because I hate
another even more than I do you!' A great passion blazed in her eyes. 'Him?' he asked, in so fierce a whisper that even the woman was for an
instant startled till she regained her calm. 'Yes, him!' she answered. 'But make no mistake, my revenge is my own;
and I merely use you to help me to it.' Wykham asked suddenly:

'Did he marry you?' The woman's distorted face broadened out in a ghastly attempt at a
smile. It was a hideous mockery, for the broken features and seamed
scars took strange shapes and strange colours, and queer lines of
white showed out as the straining muscles pressed on the old
cicatrices. 'So you would like to know! It would please your pride to feel that
your sister was truly married! Well, you shall not know. That was my
revenge on you, and I do not mean to change it by a hair's breadth. I
have come here tonight simply to let you know that I am alive, so that
if any violence be done me where I am going there may be a witness.' 'Where are you going?' demanded her brother. 'That is my affair! and I have not the least intention of letting you
know!' Wykham stood up, but the drink was on him and he reeled and
fell. As he lay on the floor he announced his intention of following
his sister; and with an outburst of splenetic humour told her that he
would follow her through the darkness by the light of her hair, and of
her beauty. At this she turned on him, and said that there were others
beside him that would rue her hair and her beauty too. 'As he will,'
she hissed; 'for the hair remains though the beauty be gone. When he
withdrew the lynch-pin and sent us over the precipice into the
torrent, he had little thought of my beauty. Perhaps his beauty would
be scarred like mine were he whirled, as I was, among the rocks of the
Visp, and frozen on the ice pack in the drift of the river. But let
him beware! His time is coming!' and with a fierce gesture she flung
open the door and passed out into the night. *       *       *       *       *

Later on that night, Mrs. Brent, who was but half-asleep, became
suddenly awake and spoke to her husband:

'Geoffrey, was not that the click of a lock somewhere below our
window?' But Geoffrey--though she thought that he, too, had started at the
noise--seemed sound asleep, and breathed heavily. Again Mrs. Brent
dozed; but this time awoke to the fact that her husband had arisen and
was partially dressed. He was deadly pale, and when the light of the
lamp which he had in his hand fell on his face, she was frightened at
the look in his eyes. 'What is it, Geoffrey? What dost thou?' she asked. 'Hush! little one,' he answered, in a strange, hoarse voice. 'Go to
sleep. I am restless, and wish to finish some work I left undone.' 'Bring it here, my husband,' she said; 'I am lonely and I fear when
thou art away.' For reply he merely kissed her and went out, closing the door behind
him. She lay awake for awhile, and then nature asserted itself, and
she slept. Suddenly she started broad awake with the memory in her ears of a
smothered cry from somewhere not far off. She jumped up and ran to the
door and listened, but there was no sound. She grew alarmed for her
husband, and called out: 'Geoffrey! Geoffrey!' After a few moments the door of the great hall opened, and Geoffrey
appeared at it, but without his lamp. 